Monsig.r fate voi. OR A DISCOVERY OF THE DALMATIAN APOSTATA, M. ANTONIUS DE
DOMINIS, AND HIS BOOKS.

By C.A. to his friend P.R. Student of the Laws in the Middle Temple.

elaborate fleur-de-lis

Matthew. 10 verse. 8. Gratis accepistis, gratis date.

Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XVII.

TO THE READER.
CHRISTIAN discreet Reader, by example of this Apostata, thou may perceive
how easy a thing it is for any man, of the meanest capacity, to build many
wind-mills and Castles in the air alone with himself: and how impossible to
discover but one of the^ to the judgment of others, without inconveniences. For
things not found in truth, fall of themselves and often oppress the builders:
but howsoever, they cannot stand, if they be duly oppugned.

I had compassion of this poor man's simplicity, reading the Book which he
published for excuse of his flight, fraught with so many disaduantages against
himself, which we should not have known, if he had been so wise as to have
kept his own counsel. They are so many, as they would require a greater
volume to handle them all at large: but some of the chiefest thou shall find
examined in this Treatise.

And because we may expect the like workmanship from the same workman in the
other ten Books which he promises, if he be not helped by others, better
masters of Art then himself: to ease the labor of further censure hereafter,
if he be so bold as to publish them; I have thought good to preoccupate the
answer of whatsoever he has already written, or his friends may say for him
hereafter, under his name, upon the same subject: And to give thee at once,
aforehand, sufficient principles of Catholic truth, wherewith, by thy self,
thou may easily confute his errors, and without further help overthrow the
fantastical Tower of Babel which he has imagined. For the Level laid to a
crooked work (without any more) discovers what is out of order, as the
Philosopher teaches, Quod rectum est index sui and curui. And with this
forewarning, I betake thee to our Savior. This 10. of November 1617.

THE TABLE OF THE Sections.
SECTION I. The Bishop his first Reason turned against himself: And from
thence are deduced three arguments, which do plainly prove, that he was deluded
by the Devil. page 7. SECTION II. The three former Arguments, enforced by
three other Circumstances. page 17. SECTION III. The Bishop his second Negative
Argument is discussed. page 22. SECTION IIII. Of the Bishop his Affirmative
proofs: and in particular of those things, that disposed his mind to make
mutation of Religion. page 30. SECTION V. The Bishops Motives to change his
Religion are discussed: and the arguments of the ten books he promised are all
reduces to one question alone, of the Popes Supremacy. page 43. SECTION VI.
Concerning the Popes Supremacy: The state of the question is proposed, and S.
Peter's Supremacy is proved by Scripture. page 52. SECTION VII. The former
Expositions of the two places aforesaid, together with S. Peter's Supremacy in
dignity, doctrine, and gouerement, are proved out of the testimonies of the
ancient Fathers. page 58. SECTION VIII. The conclusion of the first point of
this Controversy: which is also further confirmed by the Confession of the
Protestants themselves. page 70. SECTION IX. The continuance of S. Peter's
authority is proved by Scripture, and by the Fathers, and by the confession of
many Protestants: and thereof is inferred the succession of the Pope to S.
Peter. page 74. SECTION X. The Supremacy of the Pope and his succession to S.
Peter, is proved by the titles of his supreme dignity, in the ancient Fathers;
and by the four first general Counsels. page 78. SECTION XI. The Popes
Supremacy is proved out of the point of the infallibility of his doctrine, by
the Authorityes of the ancient Fathers. page 87. SECTION XII. The Popes
Supremacy is proved by his being privileged from error in doctrine of Faith;
out of the Authorityes of the Popes themselves. page 99. SECTION XIII. The
Popes supremacy in Judicial authority is proved out of the testimonies of the
Popes theselus. p. 104 SECTION XIIII. The Popes Supremacy is proved by the
ancient, and continual practice thereof, in the Catholic Church. page 107.
SECTION XV. The Conclusion of this discourse, of the Popes Supremacy. page 115.
SECTION XVI. The absurd and pernicious grounds of the Bishops ten Books, and
his Christian Commonwealth, are further discovered, and confuted. page 119.
SECTION XVII. The substance of the Bishops ten books being thus confuted, the
main paynt of this other Book, which he makes the ground of his Conversion,
That the doctrine of the Protestants differs little or nothing from the
doctrine of the ancient Fathers, is disproued, by sundry general reasons, and
by the Fathers themselves, condemning the Protestants opinions for no less
then Heresies. page 130. SECTION XVIII. The dissent of the Protestants from the
Fathers, is proved out of the Protestants themselves, condemning the Fathers.
page 141. SECTION XIX. That the Protestants dissent very much from the doctrine
of the Church, is proved out of the Protestants themselves, condemning one
another. page 145. SECTION XX. The conclusion of this Tract, concerning the
Bishops motives, by occasion whereof the nature of a Motive is declared; and the
first Catholic motive, of the holiness, and sanctity of Catholic doctrine is
propounded. p. 152. SECTION XXI. The former motive is confirmed: and by
occasion thereof the necessity of keeping the Commaundments to obtain
Salvation, is declared. page 164. SECTION XXII. The force of the second Motive
signified by the word Catholic, in the Creed of the Apostles, is declared.
page 176. SECTION XXIII. The force of the former Motive, is further declared,
out of the authorityes of S. Augustine, and out of the effect, of the contrary
doctrine. page 181. SECTION XXIIII Four other particular motives, of the
Conversion of Nations, of the Miracles of the Martyrdoms, and of the union of
the members of the Catholic Church, are briefly propounded. page 194. SECTION
XXV. Of the authority of the Catholic Church in general. page 202. SECTION
XXVI. The same authority, and the grounds of Christian Faith are further
declared. page 217. SECTION XXVII. Wherein two motives, that is to say, Fear
of danger, and the Instigation of a certain spirit, which induced the Bishop
to change the place of his abode, are propounded, and examined. page 232.
SECTION XXVIII. Wherein the Bishop his zeal, and desire to try which is the
last Motive, that induced him to forsake his Country, is discussed. page 240.
SECTION XXIX. The first objection of the Bishop against himself, is discussed:
Wherein he affirms, That albeit the King ought to be feared, and may not be
reprehended: yet the Pope is not to be feared page 247. SECTION XXX. Of
Schism, which is the last objection of the Bishop against himself, wherein he
is proved to be not only a Schismatike, but also a manifest Heretik. p. 253.
SECTION XXXI. Wherein is showed, that the authority and example of S. Cyprian,
alleged by the Bishop against the Pope, ^^erthroweth the principal grounds
of the Protestant Religion page 259. SECTION XXXII. Wherein is declared how the
Bishop, in all a^ging the example of S. Cyprian, and S. Stephen, falsifieth the
truth of the story against himself, p. 264. SECTION XXXIII. Wherein the Bishop
is manifestly convinced of Schism, out of the Authority, and example of S.
Cyprian alleged by himself: and the same authority, for as much as it
seems to concern the Pope, is sufficiently answered. page 269. SECTION
XXXIIII. Many testimonies and plain places are produced out of S. Cyprian,
whereby the Bishop is evidently convinced, both of Schism and Heresy p. 274.
SECTION XXXV. The conclusion of the Bishops book, together with a short
Conclusion of the whole Treatise. p. 277.
THE DALMATIAN BISHOP DISCOVERED.
By C. A. to his Friend P. R. Student of the Laws in the Middle Temple.
WORTHY SIR,
I have received your Letter, The Occasion of this Treatise.
together with a little Lattin Book, or rather a Preface to our fugitive
Bishop dated at Venice, and printed in London. In my mind you will be able to
make no other use of him, but only to show him for a time up and down the
streets: and after that, he may serve you for a stale to publish more Books in
his name. For giving him his diet, and some other small contentment, you may do
with him what you please. In which respect, I think he may be fitly surnamed
Monsignor fate voi: whereof every one that has been in Italy may be able to
give you the reason, by recounting unto you the Original story of this
application. But if you suffer him to write himself, or that the Book he
promises, come forth as it came from him; though it were as big as the horse
of Troy, co^tayning in it an innumerable number of our errors, besides the
Confutation of them, as he pretends: and though it were longer a making, Page
4.14.21.
then the war of Tray endured, as himself confesses: yet in my opinion, as
he has shamed himself already, by leaving his Country; so will he shame you
also by his coming thither. Which I am bold to say, because in this his first
piece, which he has exposed to your view like a green Bush, for the sale of
his new wine, every body may easily see the Devil sitting. And in those few
degrees, which he makes of the course of his Conversion, he discovers so
many vices, that it cannot be denied, the way he took could no more bring him
to the knowledge of the truth, then the fall of Lucifer could end in heaven.
Which, to give you some taste of the man's wine, and some knowledge of that which
hereafter may be expected from him, I will take the pains to show unto you,
out of his own words, and out of the several passages of the book you sent
me, which for this time I will suppose to be his own, without any addition or
alteration, by such a special privilege, as now a days is not usually given
or permitted in that Kingdom.

His meaning therefore, and scope therein, is only to prove (as he professes)
that his sudden flight from Venice, which he calls his Profection, The
argument of the Bishops book.
and change of place in going for England, was undoubtedly the vocation of
Almighty God: intending by this discourse to prevent, in time, those storms of
false imputations (as he says) that are like to come upon him: Not that he
fears any thing (if ye will believe him) but least it might hinder the fruit
of good edification in some, and occasion some others to take scandal thereat.
Wherefore he is now pleased to reveal the Secrets of his Counsels, and writes
this book to justify the same; and to make it so manifest unto the world that
God himself was the Author of it, as that no indifferent Reader shall be able
to doubt thereof; and they that will presume to write against it, being so fully
answered before hand, shall be wholly confounded by this Apology.

The old Proverb says, it is good to expect the lame Post, and the last news
are ever truest. In the mean time, the Bishop excusing himself before he be
accused, which is an ill sign; and setting that good face upon the matter
which you have seen; and knowing, as he says, that we ought not to believe
every spirit, but that spirits must be tried according to S. John; he puts
himself to the trial of his spirit, 1. Joan. 4.
and seems to prove his Vocation and Profection to have proceeded from the
Spirit of God. First Negatiuely, because it could not proceed from any other.
And secondly Affirmatively, by some other reason. His Negative proofs are two.
The first begineth in his probationibus page 4. and ends with Curergo page 5.
And briefly it is this in effect. Continuing in this probation and trial of
spirit full ten years together, I never advised nor spoke with any mortal
man about it; nor ever read any Author against the Roman doctrine, whom I
detested all that while (supra modum) above measure: and therefore this change
of mind never came from man. But on the other side during all this long space
of time, I governed my thoughts, by those rules of spirit, which the holy Ghost
has set down in Scripture, and by the Fathers: Therefore I have no cause to
suspect it came from an evil spirit: And therefore it came from the spirit of
God. I will not stand to show the insufficiency of the consequence. But I would
have you begin to observe, how contrary to that which he pretended, he seems
now altogether to neglect his Reader, who should have been edified: and as you
will perceive more plainly anon, he labors as it were to satify himself:
And which is a strange thing, seems to have published a Book to persuade
himself alone of the truth of the matter. Mark therefore, I beseech you, how
with this first argument of his, consisting of 2. parts as he sets it down, he
so concludes, as he leaves his Reader altogether a stranger to the truth of
either. For who knows but himself with whom he spoke, what he read, and
what rules he observed? And if the rest of his proofs be such as these, surely
in my opinion, it had been better for him, that men should have trusted him
still, with their courteous construction of the cause of his coming, rather
then by means of this Book, first to bring the matter in question, and
afterward for justification thereof to take up in great, all that he says,
upon the courtesy of his Readers credit: and to set the truth of this whole
book upon his score of Trust. But especially in the latter part of his
argument he was much to blame; wherein he proves that his change proceeded from
the spirit of God, because he observed those rules for the trial of spirit
which the holy Ghost has left in Scripture. For if his proof be not all one,
it is at the least no less uncertain then the thing he proves even to
himself, as every Reader may easily perceive. And therefore to persuade his
friends, that he himself at the least is well persuaded of it, he should have
declared, what rules of Scripture they were that he observed, which perchance
would have troubled him more, then his great book with the 10. horns, which
was no less then 10. whole years a making. But this man, having lost his
credit at home, and being new come into a strange Country, takes up all upon
trust without pawn, or surety; which is another point wherein he also
resembles Monsignor fate voi. And in the end withal his borrowing like unto
his predecessor, he may chance, though in another kind, to be well beaten for
his labor.

And now I might here dispute, how improbable the story is which he tells,
and how gross the invention which he seeks to put upon you; That having no
knowledge of your doctrine either by Speech, or Reading any of your books, he
should fall just upon your Parlamentall Religion. For first both Geneua, and
Saxony were in his way; and supposing that the English Angels might have more
power with him, then the poor Guardian spirits of those other Countries.
Secondly, I might object his vehement suspicion (whereof he speaks page 8.)
That Catholic Authors did not faithfully deliver the opinions of the
Protestants against whom they wrote: Which if it be true, no man can tell, how
possibly he should know, what points they held, either in England, or in any
other Country against the Church of Rome. Whereof it would follow, that at his
coming from Venice, he could only be persuaded, that the Roman Religion was
false, and that all other were sufficiently true; and that thereupon he
resolved to carry his sheres with him, and to cut out his Religion, according
to the fashion of the Country where he came. In the mean time forsaking his
former faith, which though never so white, his own pride and malice against
the Pope made him think to be black, and bedecking himself with the
party-colored feathers of all other modern Religions, to be the better
welcome in all places; Page 15.
we shall pluck him anon like Esops crow, and show him to be naked without
any religion at all; as you will see hereafter. But for the present, letting
his strange conversion pass for a Protestant Miracle, that which I lay hold on
at this time, and whereupon I must insist a little, before I go any further, is
the first part of his Argument, wherein he calls God and his conscience to
witness; That the persuasion of no mortal man, of any sort, came ever to his
eaves, which might move him to this determination; That no man at any time, did
ever inuit him to it; That he used the counsel of none at all, nor ever
conferred or spoke with any man about it; Page 4.
That he never read any Protestant book; And that if any Roman Prelate
detested such books, he detested them above measure. For if this be true,
then, say I, that hereof it will evidently follow, that he was deluded by the
Devil, and was not directed by the spirit of God, as he pretends. And so
without any more ado, as our Savior said of the wicked servant, Out of his
own mouth you may condemn him. For the first part of his argument
overthrows not only the second, but also the principal conclusion of his
whole book, and shows that the alteration he has made, could not proceed
from God. Which now I will prove unto you by three arguments, very plain, and
in my opinion most conuincing.

SECTION I. The Bishop his first Reason turned against himself: And from
thence are deduced three arguments, which do plainly prove, that he was deluded
by the Devil.
BUT first you must note, that being in Venice, if he had listed to confer,
he could not have wanted sufficient means, and choice of men, with whom he
might have treated most securely. For besides al Catholic Deuines, with whom
he might have dealt in Confession, and under the seal of secresy, there were
others enough of his own hair, both Italians and strangers, and some also of
our own Nation, Qui se putant aliquid esse, by whose acquaintance also, he
might have procured books of al your Authors, out of Germany, France, and
England. And perchance in those declining parts, under the State of Venice,
there be too many of such books already. Supposing therefore (which cannot be
denied) that he might easily have gotten both men and books, if he would (as
they say) but have wished for them; out of his own mouth against himself, and
against the spirit that brought him thither, I reason thus:

The spirit of God is the spirit of wisdom, in which respect Goodness in
Scripture is termed the Wisdom of God, as Vice on the contrary is called
Folly: And therefore such as are governed by the spirit of God, Prou. 8.12.
are governed by wisdom, and by the rules of wisdom set down in Scripture.
But Wisdom dwells in Counsel, according whereunto it was prophesied of our
Savior, who is the wisdom of his Father, Esa. 9.6.
that his name should be called Admirable, Counselor, Esa. 11.2.
and that the Spirit of Counsel should rest upon him; with which agrees that
which he said, where two, or three be gathered together in my name, I am there
in the midst of them. Matthew. 18.20.
And who knows not, that one of the principal gifts of his Holy Spirit is
called Donum Consilij? Which is nothing else, but a certain effect of his grace
in the hearts of al his children, whereby they are aptly disposed to receive
spiritual advice, and wholesome counsel. Whereof it follows, that the
Bishop, who so much despised all kind of counsel, in this his probation of
spirit, could not be governed by the spirit of God, nor by the rules of
wisdom set down in Scripture. For further proof whereof you may remember, how
in the books of Wisdom, there is nothing more reco^mended unto us, Prou. 2.12.
then to order our affairs by counsel. Counsel shall keep thee, that thou
may be delivered from the evil way, and from the man that speaks
peruersly: That is to say, from the way of perdition, and from the Devil; from
whom the Bishop admitting no counsel, had no means to be delivered. Again;
Eccles. 38.27.
Confer thy buysines with thy friend. My Son, do nothing without counsel,
and of thy doing thou shall never repent thee. Which the Bishop in this weighty
business of his soul not forseeing, may be sure that the scourge of repentance
will follow after him. Prou. 15.22.
Again: Where there is no counsel, there is distraction, or dissipation of
thoughts: But where there are many Counselors, cogitations are confirmed. Now
the thoughts of the Bishop in this case, wanting Counselors to confirm them,
could therefore tend to no other end, but only to that dissipation and
division, which is found in Heresy. Many more places there be which you know
full well, Prou. 20.12.
and therefore it shall suffice me to alleadg the least part. Have thou seen a
man wise in his own conceit? Prou. 28.26.17.12.
There is more hope of a fool then of him. He that confideth in his own heart:
(that is to say, advises with himself in secret) is a fool, but he that
walks wisely shall be saved. Prou. 12.15.
The way of a fool is right in his own cyes, but the wise man hears
counsel. Which places I will in modesty forbear to apply to the Bishop in
particular; only it shall suffice me, to have produced sentence of judgment
against him, from the mouth of Solomon. Wherefore I will leave it unto the same
spirit to be the executioner that was his deceiuer; which I pray God he may
foresee and prevent. But by this it appears sufficiently, that he has not
followed those rules of discerning spirits, which with a little humility he
might have learned in Scripture. And therefore, where he does ask, why he
should suspect that he was carried away, or misled with a wicked spirit? I
answer, that only because he is misled, he does not see it.

And now, because Pride is nothing else, but a vice of the mind, whereby one
presumes of himself more then he ought, and magnifying himself dispiseth
others; and that the greatest Pride of all, consists in an ouerwening conceit
of ones own understanding, proper wit, and private Judgment; therefore the
Bishop in his own words, condemns himself deeply of the sin of pride;
which as it is the root of other vices in general, so has it ever been the
very Mother, and Dam of Heresy in particular. For besides the impertiment
narrations of his learned Lectures, and labourious life among the Jesuits: of
his advancement to be made a Bishop, an Archbishop, and Primate of 2. straung
Kingdoms: of his Ecclesiastical Common wealth, which he paynteth out in many
pages of his Pamphet (wherein he thinks to excel all other Protestant
writers, whom he vouchsafes not the reading, and which he hops, like
another Leutathan, shall be able to drink up Jordan, and to overthrow the
Popes Supremacy:) Of his pretense to be sent from God to judge, to reform, and
to reunite the christian world. I say, besides all this, which comes in,
little to the purpose, and whereby he seems to sound a triumph before the
victory; to let pass likewise how finally he likeneth himself to Abraham, in
leaving at the voice of God, his house, his parentage, and his country:
Wherein he would give us to understand, that as Abraham prevented with his
heroyicall act, that excellent saying of the heathen, Sequere Deum; so he in
this our age, has notably revived the same: Forsaking Dalmatia his noble
Country, to live here in England amongst barbarous people, for so I must
needs understand him page 27. where he confideth, that as God rewarded Abraham
with the preservation of the Chastity of his beautiful wife in the hands of
Pharao: so also he will preserve the beauty of his good name untouched and
unspotted, even in the hands of barbarous people, to edidifie them, and not to
suffer them to be scandalized thereby. To omit all this, and likewise to let
pass, how familiarly he compares himself with S. Paul, in his former zeal
against the true religion (as he says:) in the manner of his conversion
miraculously effected: in receiving his Gospel, as he would have it seem not
from man, but imediatly from God: in being an universal Apostle, as he
pretends, and sent to preach to al Nations: And lastly, in that high degree
of Charity, whereby he offers himself to be made anathema for his brethren,
which the Fathers so much admired, but could not imitate: permitting I say all
these impertine^t insinuations of his own excellency, which for the most part
are brought in by head and shoulders, and serve nothing to the purpose; I come
to the point which I have in hand. Wherein let any man be judge, whether it
were not a strange kind of arrogance, and exorbitant Pride in him, that wavering
in his Faith for more then ten years space, and all that while studying
controversies, and intending to turn Protetestant, as he did, he never
vouchsafed to read any one Protestant author, or to confer with any mortal
man about it.

Wherefore having made his own pride so manifest, and notorious to all the
world, I frame my second argument against the spirit that moved him to change
Religion in this manner. The spirit that gives true faith, is the spirit of
Humility. Which is testified by our Savior, where he says: unless you become
little children, Matt. 18.3. Gal. 4.1.
who differ nothing from servants, but are under masters, and tutours
(according to S. Paul) you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. 1. Cor.
3.18.
And to the same purpose S. Paul does also admonish, that if any man think
himself wise, he should become a fool, that he might be made wise. And
again, not to pretend the knowledge of high things, Romans 11.20.12.16.
for the which others might admire us, but to agree and confer with the
humble, forbidding us also, to be wise in our own conceit. But the spirit
that moved the Bishop to change his religion, was no spirit of Humility, as
has by a showed; nor regenerated him to become like a child, subiecting
himself to others, as to new spiritual parents: nor advised him to confess
his own ignorance that he might be made wise: nor brought him to confer with
humble men, and simple people for his instruction. Therefore the spirit that
moved the Bishop to turn his Faith and chang religion, could not be the spirit
of God.

Which Argument, to make the matter more evident, may be framed in this manner.
The spirit of pride, not permitting a man to subject his understanding to he
taught by others, is the spirit of Heresy: And the reason is, because Faith is
the knowledge of those things, which do far surpass all humane understanding;
and therefore before we come to believe, we must acknowledge our own ignorance,
and captiuate our own judgment, submitting the same, to obey those that are
appointed to instruct us. For which reason our Savior told the Jews that they
could not believe, because they sought glory one of another: That is to say,
Joan. 5.44.
because desiring the chief praise of knowledge above others, they could not
submit themselves to believe another. 1. Cor. 8.1.2.
And S. Paul having said; that scientia inflat, adds thereunto, that if any
man think he knows something (as from himself without a teacher) be has not
yet understood how he ought to know: That is to say, he has not yet learned,
which is the way to come to knowledge. And therefore else where describing an
Heretic, he affirms that he is proud and knows nothing: meaning that he
knew nothing, 1. Tim. 6.4.
because he was proud So that you see, in what sense it may be truly said, that
the spirit of Pride is the spirit of Heresy. And as it blinds the
understanding, and withholds the same from confessing his own ignorance,
and from submitting it self to believe Gods word, as it is taught by others:
so it exposes and puts men forth to teach, and to make profession of that
which they never learned. 1. Tim. 1.17.
They will be Doctors of the law (says S. Paul) neither understanding what
they say; nor whereof they affirm. In which sense one said very well of
Heretics, that Fulbertus Carnotensis Epist. 1.
while they refuse to become disciples or scholars of the truth, they make
themselves the masters of error. And that which Optatus wrote of Victor may be
also affirmed of other Heretics, Opt. l. 1.
That they are sons without fathers, soldiers without captains, disciples
without masters etc. Because they do not acknowledge that any have the
authority to bring them up, to lead, and instruct them in such manner, as that
they are bound to obey and believe them.

No marvel therefore, that the Bishop seeming unto himself to be a man of so
great and perfect understanding, as not to need the help of others, could not
penetrate the divine misteryes contained in Scripture. For Almighty God is so
far from revealing to such as are proud the secrets of his grace, that he is
plainly said to oppose himself against them. Iac. 4.6.
And our Savior thanketh his Father for co^cealing his secrets from them: Luc.
10.21.
I thank thee Father (says he) that thou have hidden these things from the
wise and prudent (in their one conceit) and have revealed them to little ones
(such as will be content to be instructed.) Yea though his first coming were in
all mercy: Joan. 9.39.40, 41.
yet against such kind of persons, he affirms that he came to judgment,
saying: I came into this world to do judgment, that such as see not (confessing
their own ignorance) might see and understand: and that those who see
(presuming upon their own private understanding) might be made blind with
their own folly. And when the Jews asked him thereupon, whether they were
blind, or no, he answered unto them: If you were blind (acknowledging your own
blindness) you should have no sin, because your blyndnes should have been
forgiven you. Apoc. 3.17
But now saying that you see, (not acknowledging him that he sent to teach you)
your sin remains.

By all which it is more then manifest, That the spirit of Pride, blinding a
man's judgment from penetrating the sense of Scripture, and imboldning him like
another Bayard to expound the same to others, is most properly the spirit of
heresy. But now it cannot be denied, that the Fayry which led away your Bishop
was the spirit of pride, as appears by those effects which it produced in
him, and especially in telling him, that he was rich, and neded no body to
assist him, making him appear so prudent, circumspect, and all sufficient in
his own conceyt; as that he neded not the advice of any, persuading him to
write books of those things, which no mortal man had ever taught him, and to
profess himself an universal Doctor, sent from God to teach the world;
having never been any man's Scholar from whom he might receive his doctrine;
Therefore the spirit that moved him hereunto, could be no other then the spirit
of heresy. Whereby you see, that the vain man, did not try his spirit by the
rules of Scripture, as he ought to have done, but that he believed his spirit
before he tried him; and suffered himself very easily to be deluded by him. And
thus much of my second Argument, taken out of himself against himself; and out
of his own words, against his own conclusion. From whence, I also draw my
third, and last argument, and briefly thus I propound it:

The spirit of true Faith is never given but by means of a Preacher or
Teacher, Romans 10.14.
which is all one. And therefore according to S. Paul, no man can truly
believe without a lawful Preacher, because preaching is the means which God
has ordained to convert those that shall be saved. And so we read, that (to show
the necessity thereof) S. Paul himself being converted by Christ, who appeared
to him in his way to Damascus, was sent for his further instruction to Ananias.
Act. 9.6.
Rise (says the text) and go into the City, and it shall be told thee what thou
ought to do. And the Centurion of the Italian Band, albeit he deserved that
an Angel should appear unto him: Act. 10.1.3.5.
yet he was commanded to send for such a man in such a house, in such a City,
which man should tell him what he ought to do. So likewise the Eunuch of Queen
Candaces, Act. 8.27. etc.
could not be converted without a Preacher, because Almighty God being a lover
of order, would in no case dispense or break this ordinance of his own
Decree. And therefore S. Philip was sent to instruct this potent Eunuch,
although he were as it seems very wise and very virtuous, and wanted neither
a Bible (which he had in his Coach with him) nor Gods holy Angel to assist
him. Who when S. Philip had done his office rapuit eum (says the text) carried
him suddenly out of sight, thereby to confirm the Eunuch so much the more, in
that faith which he had received.

But this new Ghospeller as himself boasts, never conferred with any mortal
man, nor never read any Author of this his new Religion, before he was fully
resolved to be a perfect English Protestant; from whence it may also be
inferred, that he never came in the air, nor that any body else was
myraculously transported thither to instruct him, least any man should imagine
the contrary. And therefore it is most certain, that he could never receive the
spirit of true faith, which comes only by a lawful Preacher: and that he did
not observe the rules set down for the receiving of it, in holy Scripture,
which is against the true trial of spirits, that he pretends: and which,
though he would make you believe yet he never proves, and his own words, as I
have showed by 3. most manifest, and most conuincing reasons, do evidently
disprove him.

SECTION II. The three former Arguments enforced by three other Circumstances.
WHICH three Arguments have the more force against him, in respect of three
other circumstances, very worthy your good consideration. For first, having
been so long a Religions man as he reports, he must needs have learned, that
there is no vice whereby the Devil takes such hold to draw a man headlong on,
and to bring him perforce to everlasting ruin, as by persuading him to neglect
the counsel of others, and to confide in his own wit and private
understanding. The Devil is fitly compared to a dishonest lover, who, as long
as the maiden or matrone whom he soliciteth is content to keep his counsel, so
long he pursues his wicked purpose. But if once he understand, that she does
communicate the matter with her Father or Husband, he presently knows his suit
is could; and fearing a worse matter, he not only forbeareth to molest her, but
also auoydeth her sight, and flies her company. When a doubtful thought of
good or evil, arises in our mind, if we neglect to take advice, and contemn
spiritual counsel, it is an evident sign, that our Ghostly enemy either has
already, or that he will deceive us very shortly. For the suggestions of the
Devil have force, and power so long upon us, as we cover, and hyde them within
us. On the other side, no sooner are those co^motions, and imbroylements
discovered wherewith the Devil laboreth to ensnare us: but being ashamed of
his own works, like a serpent brought to that light which he cannot endure,
he flies out of his den wherein he lurked, and is forced to seek another
habitation. For confirmation whereof, I have hard it observed often times by
very many, both Catholics and Protestants, that more are brought to mischrefe,
and compelled to murder themselves in England, by the instigation of the
Devil then in all Christendom besides that is Catholic, put together:
Because say they in other Catholic Countries, there be many always ready and
daily exposed in their Churches, unto whom such, as find themselves in great
anguish and affliction of mind, may open their hearts under seal of confession,
with as much secrecy, and security as they can desire. Whereas in England, there
being none unto whom men in such cases are accustomed to have recourse, their
affliction boyleth more and more within them, upon the fire which the Devil
increases, until at last they be enforced (like the swyne of the Gerasens) to
cast themselves headlong down into the sea, Mat. 8.32.
of desperation. Which observation of theirs seems to be grounded not only
upon experience, but also to stand with great reason. For God and Nature has
so ordained, that not only for the wants of our bodies, but also for our
necessityes and vexations of mind, we should crave the help and assistance one
of another; to the end that by this means, we might be the more obliged to
keep respective company, association and mutual love together. For as a
vehement burning fever is no way to be cured but with opening a vein, whereat
the infected blood having vent, may carry away with it the putrified matter
that did molest the body: so, against any strong temptation or affliction of
the mind, there is no remedy more secure, then to open the heart unto a
spiritual friend, whereby, our unquiet Cogitations breaking forth, they leave
our mind cased of those raging passions, that did before molest our soul. And
therefore our Savior out of his infinite Wisdom and goodness toward us, has
so recommended unto us the uttering of our griefs, and the manifestation of
our conscience unto others, that he has gruen his benediction, with the
effects of unspeakable grace unto it; whereby he has also made it a Sacrament,
Mat. 18.18.
inioyning all men that will have Absolution of their sins at his hands, to
the Religious use and practice of it. And further he gave advice to such as
would be perfect: That selling all they had and giving it to the poor, and
taking up their Cross, they should follow him, renouncing their own wills, in
perfect obedience to those whom he should send to direct them. Whereby, obyeing
their Superior, they obayed him; and might be sure by this means, that the
Devil himself should not deceive them. Wherefore the Bishop having been a
Religious man, and having understood the necessity of this doctrine, and the
conformity thereof to the light both of Grace and Nature, and having tied
himself by vow to the practice of it; in rejecting and co^temning the same, he
has offended most grievously, not only against his Vow, but also against the
rule of Faith: and which is worst of all, against the light of Nature, and
common sense of humane Understanding.

The second circumstance that did aggrauate his Fault is this; that he knew
right well the business he had in hand to be full of danger, both temporal and
eternal; and also to surpass the deepest reach of the wit of man. And
therefore he might also have known that the holy Scripture could never be well
expounded by any particular Sense, or private interpretation. All which
respects did oblige him so much the more to read other men's opinions, and to
confer with others. For all Heresies are grounded, though falsely, upon the
Scripture: and all Heretics deceased are justly damnd, for having confided
over much in their own private judgment, the suggestions whereof they beheued
undoubtedly to be the meaning of the holy Ghost, in their false exposuions
which they framed to themselves of Holy Scripture.

Thirdly, his Fault is much more augmented, because as himself confesses, he
never knew what the Protestants held. For he says as you have heard, that he
never spoke with any of them: that he detested to read their books: and that
he doubted most vehemently, that the Catholic Doctors did not deliver
faithfully the Protestants opinions. Wherefore in all these circumstances, not
to learn, not to consult, not to read, not to confer, not to ask one
question, in a business which he debated with himself for the space of ten
years, so important as is the matter of Religion, so obscure, so dangerous, and
whereof he was ignorant by his own confession: and therewith all to forsake his
Country, and to make profession of a Religion which he knew not, contrary to
that which he had taught unto more then two whole Kingdoms for so many years
together; besides too much Folly and madness, shows a mind no less proud and
arrogant, and consident in his own wit, then is fit for the spirit of he^esy,
and for the chair of Satan; exalting his seat above the stars of God; that
is to say, above all other spiritual and learned men; and setting himself
down upon the mount of the Teslamons (old and new) in the side of the North.
Esa. 14.13.
What though the English were no better then Barbarous people, in the sight of
this Sclaue? Yet I can see no reason, why being in his case, he should then
have scorned their Counsel, more then now he contemmeth their money, their
meat, and their company. And if all the Tramontani, by this man's Logic, were
to be put in the same predicament of Barbarism with the English Nation: yet,
he neither wanted Ven^tians, nor Dalmatians nor Italians, both Catholics,
Protestants, and Newters, with whom he might have dolt in this important
affayre. What though he be not sicut ceteri hominum, but one that has read
Logic among the Jesuits, a Primate of two strange Kingdoms, to be compared
with Abraham, and with S. Paul? What of all this? is he therefore in so high
estate, as that he should debase and discredit himself by admitting any little
instruction, advice, or counsel, and that in a matter whereof he is ignorant?
being to go into a strange Country, would he not ask the way? being to sail,
and not knowing the are of navigations, would he not care for a Pilot? Much more
madness is it, to choose a Religion which he knows not, and not to take advice,
nor to ask so much as one question about it.

And thus much concerning his first Argument. Wherein you see, how in despite
of the spirit that brought him thither; it has pleased God for the good of
others, that his own tale should betray him, and that his own mouth should
give sentence against him.

SECTION III. The Bishop his second Negative Argument is discussed.
Now therefore let us come to examine his second negative Argument, which
begins, A qua me illud. page 5. and ends with, Non igitur. The substance
whereof is this. I protest before God that I did never respect any worldly end,
and therefore no evil spirit could deceive me. Which consequence, he goes
about to prove in this manner. I did not seek any ecclesiastical dignity,
being then a Primate, and might easily have gotten more preferment, both in
Rome (but that I abhorred the manners of that Court) and also in Venice, where
my In betraying of the Scocchi.
deserts were great. Nor did I respect any tomporall means, possessing
sufficient for a moderate mind, which I have always carried, God be thanked
for it. But in this my change I have for saken, both honor and goods, and
therefore no worldly and, no unbridled affection no temporal necessity, no
soday ne event or sharp misfortune, which are wont to carry men away, did
compel me to leave my country. But what it was, without fraud or deceit, I
will tell you sincerely. Thus he in effect.

In which discourse, as in his former Argument, so here, I would have you
observe, that he takes up all upon trust, and gives no other security, but
only his bare word, to content the Reader. For my part, I do verily think that
he was once a Primate, but yet I must needs say, that boasting and craking of
his own worth in every lease, saying much and proving nothing, he resembles
more then a little such a counterfaire Prelate as Monsignor fate not is
supposed to be. For who was ever in his conscience to see the truth of what he
protests? Who knows what dignity he might have had in the Court of Rome?
What his merits were in Venice, what wealth, what moderate mind he had, and
what he has lost by his coming thither? Which particulers before I go any
further, I think good to touch a little, as I pass along.

And first to omit that he knows not himself, and that he must needs be
ignorant of his own conscience, being so much blinded, and so strongly deluded
by the deceiuer himself, as I have proved, and therefore, that in no case he
should be trusted: letting this pass, I say, it is most ridiculous which he
says; that he estranged himself from Rome, because he ever abhorred the
manners of that court. For first there have lived in his time as many worthy
Popes, and Cardinals in the court of Rome, as have flourished in many aget
before them. For there have reigned Popes, Paulus 5. Clemens 8. Si^^^^ 5
Gregorius 14. Gregorius 13. Pius 5. Pius 4. Paulus 4. and others. All which,
although some of their names are not very grateful to our Kingdom, yet are
most renowned for their virtues in all Christian countries. And as for
Cardinals, there has lived famous Horromaeus, who since his death was
canonized for a Saint, Paliottus, Caraffa, Baronius, Tarugius, most exemplar
for their pastoral life, and for the rare sanctity of their domeanour. To
speak nothing of Bellarmine, the mirror of Christendom at this day,
Sfondratus, de Monte, Borromaus, Peronius, Roofacautius, and others now alive.
Besides a great many more of his time, not to be accounted inferior to these,
as Comus, Verona, Moronius, San-Seuerinus, Sirlettus, Toletus, Alanus,
Alciatus, Hosius, Mellinus, Aragonius, Ara-calius, and others too many to be
named, men most famous to the better part of the world, for their learning
piety, wisdom and splendor in all kind of virtue. All which notable men, were
so far from the abhorring of the Court of Rome, or taking any hurt thereby,
that they increased the spiritual Tallents which they brought with them, and
arrived to the fullnes of their perfection, by frequenting the same, and living
in it. And to speak of them all in general at this day, their Courts are
meruailously well governed, and cannot be touched with any crime of apparent
scandal, which may easily be belequed by all that please to consider their
great occupations, which exclude idleness, the mother of all corruption of
manners in Princes houses. For the Cardinals in Rome are not only the
protectours of Colleges, Religiour Ordere, and whole Nations, which does cost
them much lubour, but have also the government of the temporal estate, in the
Popes possession, and of the whole Church of God under his Holiness: and are
therefore divided into many Co^gregations, to he are, and examine, and refer
to the Pope, and afterward to determine of all kind of business. And befides
this, to say nothing of their Visitations, as well of one another, as also of
the Ambassadors which come thither from all Catholic Countries, according as
Ciuility Charity, and the custom of that place requires. They cannot omit to
frequent the Consistoryes, and the solemnityes of the Popes chapel, places of
devotion, of Statio^s, of the prayer of 40 hours, of sermons, of the meetings
of learned men, and of disputations; to al which they are daily invited. And as
for women, who joined with idleness are the 2. capital heads of all scandal
and disorder in Princes palaces, their Courts are so free from them, that
their own kinswomen do not lodge in their houses; nor do women at any time
resort to their palaces, but upon special business, accompanied with their
husbands, or other near kinsmen, which also is done very seldom. Their
familyes for the most part, confesselland communicate once a month. There is
no disorder of gaming for much money, no excess in drinking, no riot, no
mortal quarrels, nor open contention to be noted in their houses. But the
^^desty, ciuility, and good government of their courtiers, and servants, in
apparel, speech, and exterior behavior is such, as it gives great
edification to all stranges resorting thither. For proof where coft I might
appeal to the report of many English Gentleman, who on my knowledge having
obtained the heanes to see it, have admirred at it In so much as without
disgrace of other Princes any man may justly affirm, that there is no count in
Christendom, which for virtue, piety, and ciuility may be compared with it.

And therefore, in that the absurd nicenes of this Dalmatian, abhorred the
Court of Rome, it does not argue any evil in the place, but disconereth a
corrupt stomache in him, who (like the prodigal child when he was at worst)
loathing the bread of his Fathers house, took such delight in Swynes meat,
that it seems he can receive no other nourishment. And to say nothing that
the queasy stomach of this holy man, can now so well digest the manners and
examples of our Court, City and Country, which by your leave (speaking of the
die^ of the soul) is a sign, that he has not been used a long time to any
clean, and wholesome feeding; it cannot be denied, but that for a Prelate to
abhor the Court of Rome, and to god well in Venice for edification, is no
less ridiculous (saving the honor of many Noble, Gentle, and Worthy Citizens
therein) then if he should have gone from some College of the Jesuits,
wherein he lived, unto some handsome stews for his recollection. For besides
that has been said before, in Rome the law is most severe against Wantonness,
and Licentiousnes in the Clergy, which is punished not only with degradation
and perpetual infamy, but also with the strappado at least. And in my time a
Priest of good exterior quality, being taken in a vineyard-house with a
naughty woman, his coach and horses were confiscate, she was whipped, and he
himself was sent to the Galleys. But in Venice (the more is the pity) there
is no punishment at all for those crimes, but that Prelates, and Religious men,
if they should be so affected, without public rebuke, or any great note of
infamy, might frequent dishonest houses at their pleasure, which perchance made
the Bishop like the better of the service, or rather of the freedom of that
City.

And now as touching his merits with the Venetians, whereof he speaks in the
next place, I fear they are no better then may well be compared to the merits
of Judas with the Sinagogue: For as i^ appears by his own discourse a little
after, he joined with the^ in the time of the Interdict against the Pope his
Lord and Master. And albeit among other his good offices, he wrote those
Books in their defense, whereof now he vaunteth: yet he went so far, and
discovered so much Heresy in them, as the Venetians themselves, could not choose
but be ashamed of them. And therefore he could not expect at their hands any
recompense for such a labor. What riches he had, I know not, nor whether or no
they were sufficient for that moderate mind which God had given him. But
considering that he left the Jesuits, where he wanted nothing, and thereupon
sought am bitiously one preferment after another; Page 7.10.11.
considering also how he was in strife, and suite of law with his own
Suffragans, wherein he was ouerthrownas it should seem by his own relation;
Page 14.
it had been better perchance that he had knock his breast with the Publican,
craving pardon for his unbridled passion, then with the Pharisy, to have pray
sed God for the moderate mind he gave him.

As concerning that, which in this case he says he has left for Gods sake:
You must understand, that although he were a Primate, yet the rents of his
Bishopric might be somewhat less then the fruits of a good benefice are
there with you. And I have heard it very credibly reported, that they scarsly
amount to the value of two hundred pounds per annum. And though they were more,
yet I dare say, that having leave to come for England, he never thought that he
should loose much by the bargain, especially imagining himself a much greater
and worthyer man, then Isaac Casaubon was, whom the Clergy of England was
enforced to pay sweetly, and to reward so bountifully as the world knows for
his coming thither. But the truth is (and so you will find it) that at his
coming away, he was neither Primate, nor had any Bishopric at all: for long
before he had resigned the same to his Nephew, reserving a pension to himself,
of three hundred crowns a year, or there about, which not sufficing to
maintain his fat paunch, it is most probable that he came into England for the
same cause amongst other, that the prodigal child went to feed Swyne: that is
to say, for mere want, as not having sufficient to fill his belly

Lastly therefore, before I make an end with his second reason, because he
says, that he has read Logic amongst his Fathers of the Society; do but
mark a little I pray you, the conclusion of his argument, wherein you must
needs see, that the sum of his account is a great deal more then the
particulers of his reckoning. For having said, that neither Ambition, nor
Avarice did draw him from his country, he concludes that no unbridled
affection, no temporal necessity, no strange event, nor grievous mischance did
compel him to depart: which you see is a great deal more then these two
particulers alone, of the absence of Ambition and Avarice, can excuse him from.
But it is no marvel the old man should have forgot the Art of reason, whom
Pride, and coffeehouse have made to forget in great part even reason it
self. The half whereof which concerns his Pride, I have showed already, and
the other half concerning his coffeehouse (if I be not deceived) you shall
hear him confess himself anon; for he says, he will tell us sincerely,
without fraud or guile, what it was that moved him to this departure.

SECTION IIII. Of the Bishop his Affirmative proofs: and in particular of
those things, that disposed his mind to make mutation of Religion.
AND with this he begins (page 7.) those his proofs of spirit, which I call
affirmative, and which (reducing them into three heads) I will briely set down
unto you, that you may see the substance of his book, and afterward I shall
examine them as I shall have occasion. In the first rank he sets down
certain dispositions (as I take it) which might prepare his mind to this
change. In the second, he lays down the reasons that moned him to alter his
Religion. In the third he produces those considerations, that enforced him to
leave his Country, and so showing how much he confided in the providence of
God that conducted him he labors to defend himself from Schism, accusing
the Pope, as the author thereof, and concludes his whole book, inuiting the
Pope to accept of the conditions he offers, and to come to agreement with him.

Beginning therefore with those things, that somewhat a far off might dispose
his mind to change Religion, he says first, page 7. That from a boy he was
much troubled with a vehement suspicion, that the Roman doctrine was not true,
which suspicion he ever resisted. Secondly, he says page 8. and 9. That this
suspicion was much increased in him, because he saw, that neither students were
permitted to read such writers, as were contrary to the doctrine of Rome, being
enforced to believe, that the opinions of those writers were truly delivered
unto them by their Masters: nor such as had heard their deuinity, and were
preferred to Ecclesiastical dignity could be allowed to read any such
authors. Thirdly he says, that from the first year of his Clergy, he had
nourished in himself, an inborne desire of the union of al Christian Churches,
inquyring what might be the cause of their Schism, which did excruciate and
torment his mind, and does still consume and wast him (as you may perceive by
looking upon him) with such grief and sorrow as is wonderful. Fourthly,
telling you under hand, page 11. That leaving the Society of Jesus where he had
read Mathematickes, Rethoricke, Logic, and Philosophy, preached often, and
done them other domestical service, for the which they were very sorry to leave
him, he says, Fifthly, page 11. and 12. That being made a Bishop, and falling
to read books of printted Sermons; Quadragesimalls, and others, for the
exercise of his Episcopal function in preaching, he found great abuse of
Scripture in them, apocriphall, and ridiculous examples, inventions of Avarice,
and Ambition, not without superstition, wherewith the people were deluded.
Sixthly he says, page 13. That in reading the Fathers he observed that his
masters had taught him many things against them, and that the Ecclesiastical
discipline of our time did differ very much from the ancient practice thereof.

These considerations I have called dispositions which somewhat prepared his
mind to make mutation of Religion, because (as he says) they made him to see,
as it were a far off, that matters went not well, and because all this while
he did not fully consent, but made some kind of resistance unto them. Wherein
before we pass any further, not to confound you with too much matter
together, let us consider, whether that which he has brought be of any moment
to persuade his Reader that his new belief proceeded from God.

And to begin with his vehement suspicion, which was the first seed, from
whence his vocation sprung (wherein, and in the other three assertions which
follow, I will be content to do him that courtesy, which he refused to show unto
his Masters, and to suppose he cyteth the book of his conscience aright,
though none but himself can look into it) it appears evidently thereby,
that this new seed of suspicion, was nothing else but the worst kind of cockle,
which our enemy and his, the Father of Heresy, is wont to sow upon the good
Corn of Christ. For suspicion is nothing else, but an opinion of evil without
any just or sufficient ground, as the Rhetoritians, S. Thom. 2.2. q. 60. art.
3.4.
Philosophers, and Deuines define it. And therefore it always imports some
fault, and some injury done to the party who is thereby wronged, because
unjustly suspected; whereof I marvel, how your learned Bishop could be
ignorant. Wherefore to suspect, and concerue an ill opinion of so many as he
did, in a matter of such importance, without any reason or sufficient cause,
was a sin, and that a great one; especially in him, who at that time thought
himself bound in conscience, to believe entirely the whole doctrine of the
Church of Rome.

For if to doubt of any article of Faith without inclyning to either side, be
an act of Heresy (as all Deuines do affirm) then much more to suspect, which
is to inclyne, and to give some consent to any motion contrary to the very
ground of Faith, must needs be Heresy. But you will say, the Bishop made
resistance thereunto, and therefore he did not sin against his conscience. To
which I answer. If when the thought thereof came first to his mind, he did
repel it, that then in that case it never grew to be any suspicion: but if
once it came to be suspicion, as he affirms it was; then having conceived an
opinion of so great evil upon slight occasion (or rather no occasion at all)
it cannot be denied, but that he sinned in admitting the same, though he might
do well afterward in changing his mind, and in opposing himself against it.
And therefore this suspicion being so great a sin, it could not be inspired
into him from God Almighty. So as it can no way be denied, but that this first
motion arising in the Bishops mind against the Catholic Religion, was the bad
seed sown by the Devil, which sprung up out of his own Malice, Pride,
Leuity, and Inconstancy; from whence neither a good tree, nor good fruit can
be expected. For as you know, Paruus error in principio, magnus in fine: and if
the light it self, wherewith he began to work, be darkness, then the works
themselves, that proceeded from it, must needs be the works of extreme darkness.

Let us now proceed to the increase of this his strong and vehement suspicion
(as he terms it) occasioned (as he says) by the strict prohibition of such
books as are contrary to the Roman doctrine. Which likewise we shall find, that
as it begun without reason so was it augmented upon a very false and frivolous
reason; and as it sprung out of pride and leuity, so was it fed and nourished
with pride and curiosity. And therefore the new strength or force which it
received, could not proceed from the spirit of God. For supposing (as all
Catholics do, and as he then did) that such kind of books are full fraught
with the poison of Heresy, which is the most damnable vice of all other; it
stands with great reason, that they should in no case, admit such dangerous
wars amongst them: for such books being once admitted, they easily pass
from masters and learned men, to the hands, not only of Scholars, but also of
other simple people; who not knowing what they are, but feeding of all the
bread that comes from the Baker, and of all the dishes that are set before
them, instead of wholesome meat should fall upon poison; for whose souls their
negligent pastors should answer to God at the day of Judgment. For I pray you,
if some unquiet and ambitious spirit in other Countries, should make claim to
the Crown of England, and call in question the Kings title, though never so
clear with us; do you think that the Pleas, and Process of such a man,
should be remitted to the reading of every young student, or Counselor at Law
in the Ins of Court? especially if this Claymer, or Pretender had got some
Lawyers to be of his side, and had made a party which followed him, and sought
to set footing in England? Much more is it necessary for those that have the
government of souls to be jealous of their safty, and to be vigilant for the
preservation of peace amongst them. But you will say unto me, why then are
Catholic Latin writers permitted to be read by our ministers and others here
in England? to which I answer; that the case is far different.

For first England was never yet fully Protestant, the Catholic number
remaining still very great: and therefore the state of England in this respect,
might do well to follow the example of the primitive Church, wherein, after
that the Christian Religion was publicly professed, because a great part of
the Gentills were not then converted, not only their books and writings were
tolerated, but their religion it self, although it were most gross Idolatry,
was permitted. Besides in England, the Catholics being many, wise, and
learned, do not cease, by alleging most pregnant proofs, important reasons,
and authentical testimonies, to mayntaine the truth of their cause, and to
draw others to embrace their doctrine.

In which regard it stands the Protestants upon, and especially the
Ministers, to read their books, thereby to defend themselves and others, as
well as they can from the force of the Catholic arguments brought against
them. And for the same cause in France, and in Germany, and in all other
Countries where many religions are allowed; the Catholic Students, and other
secular men are usually permitted to read all kind of books, the better thereby
to refute their errors. Which this good Bishop thought good to conceal for
his own advantage. But in those other Catholic Countries, which were never
yet infected with Heresy; and where there is no occasion to impugn it: there
it imports that the Pastors be very vigilant to keep it out. For Heresy
being once gotten in, it crepeth like a canker, and at last breaks out like a
raging fire; and burns so dreadfully, that whole Cittyes, and Kingdoms, and
Nations have been consumed with it in a very short space, as may appear in
Greece, in Asia, in Africa, and other Countries. And therefore in all ages, not
only the Fathers, Doctors and Prelates, but also Men, Women, and Children of
the Catholic Church, have ever concurred with all speed, and with might and
main, to quench and ex inguish the least spark thereof. By which means it is
wonderful to consider, in how short a time the books and writings of all the
ancient Heretics in former ages have been consumed, and abolished by the zeal
of Catholics. In so much, as of so many millions of their Volumes, there is
not at this day one left remaining.

But this good man, the Bishop, is of another mind, who if it were possible,
would dig those authors out of hell again, to see whether they were truly
cited by chose that wrote against them. And for the present he would permit,
without any occasion, such men's works to be familiarly read, whom the Apostle
forbids to be saluted. Our mother Eve, out of a vain curiosity, conferring
with the serpent, whom she might think to be an Angel, Genesis 3.2.
fell into Heresy: but this man out of a curiosity more then monstrous, Joan.
10.3.5
would persuade the sheep of Christ to hear the voice of a stranger; and to
confer with that serpent whom they know and confess to be the Devil.
Wherefore this spirit of his, being so contrary to the spirit of the Church, to
the spirit of the Apostle, to the spirit of Christ himself, and in fine
contrary to the light of reason in the Government both of Church and Common
Wealth; you may easily indge from whence it comes, and to what end it
tends. Whereby you will also conjecture what union, and conjunction may be of
the East and of the West, of the North and South; with the desire whereof this
good Bishop is so much tormented. For it can be nothing else, but a horrible
confusion of them all, and the utter overthrow of Christian Religion, as we
shall see hereafter.

In the mean time, that you may the better perceive, his natural and inborne
desire of unity, wherewith his poor heart is so much tormented, he will make it
known himself you unto by the effects thereof. For presently after he tells
you, that he divided himself from the union of that Society whereunto he was
vowed, and separated himself from the body of that order whereof he was a
member, like a branch from his vine; from the which being once cut of, it was
likely he could be good for nothing but to be cast into the fire. The great
comendations he gives of his own learned and laborious life, whiles he was in
Religion, I can hardly believe. For writing this book as he does to no other
end, but only to blaze his own praises, you need not doubt, but that every
where he speaks the most of himself, or more then the most. And supposing it
to be true, it amounts (God he knows) but to a very small matter;
especially being done for humane praise, wherewith he pays himself instead
of others that should reward him for it. It may be, that in respect of his
proud and unquiet spirit, his Superiors were enforced to prove him in many
things, to see what good they might make of him. But in the end, it should
seem by his going forth (which was like to be upon some coffeehouse) that
they found him fit for nothing.

The Order of the Society of Jesus may fittly be compared to the sea, that
casts forth the dead bodies, or to a vessel of new wine, which purges all
the trash and corrupt matter that is mingled with it, and therefore they easily
permit such as be not fit for them, to depart from them, least by staying
amongst them, being stopped up close like corruption together with the pure
wine, they should break the vessel it self wherein they are enclosed. And
albeit for this cause, it be more easy for such as are ill disposed to quit
themselves of the Society, then for any other Religious men to be freed from
other Orders: yet the dreadful judgments of God have been so many, and so
wonderful upon those, that have wrought themselves out of their Company, that
an honest and a pious mind, should be more terrified therewith, then with the
prisons and fetters of other Orders. Whereby also God himself has made
manifest to the world, that the dispensation which is sometime given to those
that are dismissed the Society does acquit them of their vows, according to
the cause of their departure; which if it be good and sufficient, it takes
away the whole obligation, but if it be not (as I fear me this man's was not)
they are not discharged before God and their conscience, but they remain still
in the laps, and in the state of Apostasy from their Religion.

But you will say, he wanted not sufficient cause to depart: for he that
desires to be made a Bishop, desires a good work, and this man went forth to
be made a Bishop. To which I answer, that the work of a Bishop is good, but
not the desire to be made a Bishop. Chry. hom. 3. in oper. imperf ho^. 3. in
Matt.
To desire Primacy in the Church (according to S. Chrysostom,) is neither
just, nor profitable. And Primacy (says he) desires those that desire it not,
and abhors those that desire it. And the reason is, because the work of a
Bishop, is a calling of such perfection, and such dignity, and also danger
joined with it, that whosoever he be, that thinks himself so sufficient for
it, and so worthy of it, as to sue and seek after it, shows to have so much
pride and self-conceit; as is sufficient to make him unworthy. Besides that,
it is a thing expressly and directly against the institute of the Society,
wherein this man lived, to seek and hunt for preferment. Every man in the
vocation, whereunto he is called, let him remain (says S. Paul). 1. Cor. 7.20.
And our Savior. He that puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is
not fit for the Kingdom of God. Luc. 9.61.
according whereunto such as are professed in any Religious Order, being
afterward made Bishops, are bound to the observation of their vows, so far
forth, as the exercise of their digdity and function will permit. But this man,
though forsaking Gods plough, whereunto his hand was consecrated, and though
breaking his first vows, for the which according to S. Paul, he should fear
to be damned, does thereby think to have made himself fit to be made a
governor in Gods kingdom, which is the Church of Christ; truly suspecting, as
he did, the Catholic doctrine to be false and fraudulent, he might better have
suspected, that being in this case, he was no fit man to be made a Bishop,
whose office it is, to maintain and defend it. And I marvel knowing himself
to be a dog, Page 24.
that began to take part with the wolves more then with the sheep, not thinking
it fit that they should trust their shepherds, but rather desiring that they
might hear what the wolves could say for themselves, and hand to hand debate
their reasons with them: I marvel I say, with what good conscience, such a
dog could think himself fit to be made a shepherd.

To that which he says of printed Sermons, and his Masters dictates: I
answer first, that although it were true, yet because they be no rules of
faith, and that the Catholics are not bound to defend in all things, either
the one, or the other, as himself knows well enough; therefore such scandalls
as these, should not have moved him to depart from the unity of the Church of
God. Secondly I say, that if it were not altogether false, it should have
been proved by him one way or other; something would had been alleged out
of those Sermonaries, whom he so much reuyleth; and some one point or other
would have been urged for an instance, wherein his Masters did contradict the
Fathers. Unless he thought his Readers to be so many Pots without couers, that
should receive any thing by infusion, which he pleases to power, or let fall
into them. Or unless you will excuse him by saying, that as when he was
converted to your Religion he disdayned to hear reason: so now intending to
convert others, he scorneth as much to affoard any reason for that he says.
Wherein he does wisely in one respect; for bringing no proof in partiduler, he
saw, that albeit no man could in reason believe him, yet it should be hard for
any man to disprove him. But notwithstanding all his policy, to put something
more in the balance of your judgment, besides his yea, and my no, for the
deciding of this matter betwixt us, I will give you the testimony of Sir Edwyn
Sands, Sir Edwin Sands relation of relig. Sect. 6.
a man as I hear much esteemed in England, in his own words which are these:
In their Sermons much matter of faith and piety is eloquently delivered, by men
surely of wonderful zeal and spirit. And for your better information herein,
I pray you do but inquyre of others, that have been in those parts, and are men
of understanding, what kind of preachers there are: and inquire likewise of
your Scholars at home, what they think of those Schoole-deuines whose books
are brought from thence, and are commonly sold and much read in England. For
it is very probable, that never in any age since Christian Religion began to
flourish in the world, there have been so many (I say so many) the like
excellent Preachers, and profound Deuines in the Catholic Church, as we have
seen and heard in this age of ours.

And thus much may suffice to have observed in the first kind of those his
proofs, which I called Affirmative, alleged by him as undoubted signs to
show that God was the author of his coming thither. Wherein notwithstanding
you see, how the serpent having found him to have but a weak head of his own,
with a giddy spirit, and a shallow unconstant brain, first deluded him with
vain surmyses, and false suspicions that the truth was error, and afterward
thrust him out of his Order which protected him, that thereby he might have the
more force upon him. And lastly set him up to be seen aloft, as it were upon
the pinnacle of the Temple, where he knew, that in respect of his giddynes and
Pride, he was not able to stand, to the end that his own victory might be the
more glorious, and the Bishops fall more famous.

SECTION V. The Bishops Motives to change his Religion are discussed: and the
arguments of the ten books he promised are all reduced to one question alone,
of the Popes Supremacy.
HITHERTO you have heard of those things that did somewhat prepare him to
change Religion, and hitherto (as he says) he resisted in himself more or
less, these motions or suggestions that were contrary to his former faith. It
follows now to consider, what moved him directly to this strange mutation,
which must needs be very well worth the consideration: For you may easily
imagine, that being a man of his quality, learning, and experience, he will say
what may be said, and lay down such prudent motives, sound reasons, and well
grounded proofs, if any such may be found, as the truth of them shall be so
apparent and conuincing, that no indifferent, or well disposed mind shall be able
to resist them.

He begins therefore and says; that of a Bishop, being made an Archbishop,
two accidents fell out, that compelled him to study these matters more
earnestly, and more eagerly then before he did, and made him to overthrow, or
to ouerturne, or turn over (as you please to expound him) more then once or
twice the Fathers, the Canons, the Counsels, and ancient Records of the
Catholic Church.

The first occasion was, that the Court of Rome and his Suffragan Bishops that
were under him began to perturbe his Metropolitan rights. The second, that a
little after the Interdict of Venice, there came books from Rome, taxing the
Bishops of the Venetian State who did not obey, to be but sheepish, rude, and
ignorant men, without courage or conscience; in which second passage, he
discovers not only his pride and contentious spirit in seeking to supprese
his own Suffragans, and in resisting the public authority of the Court of
Rome in the Interdict, and in maintayning the sheep against the shepherd,
which is far against the unity which he pretends: but also he does manifest
so much hatred, malice, and envy against the Pope, because he opposed himself
to his unjust pretenses, and defended his Suffragans against him, as was no
less then sufficient to make a man in his state, and of his opinion become a
formal Heretic. This therefore I take to be the last disposition that made
him a fit instrument for the spirit of Heresy: and whereby his enemy intred
into him, as he entered into Judas, and took full possession of him. To the
which I am rather induced, because a man may easily see, that his overthrow in
his Suite against his Suffragans sticks deeply in his mind, and moves him to
seek revenge, by the overthrow of that authority which stood against him. For
afterward, page 22. he makes it one of the principal causes of his departure,
and complains with no less untruth, then malicious spirit, and extreme
bitterness of heart; that Bishops now a days under the Pope, have but the name
of Bishops: that al their Jurisdiction is taken from the^: that they are become
vile, contemptible and miserable: subject not only to the Pope, but also to
Cardinals, Congregations, Legates, Inquisitors, and innumerable Orders of
Religious men, who now have greater facultyes then Bishops, and drown their
authority. Where also he says, that the Pope is now a temporal Monarch, and
that the Church is become a vineyard, to make him drunk, and a flock to feed
him with her own blood. All which considered, I do think verily, that they
who intend to write against him, and to accuse and calumniate (as he says) his
departure from them, will hardly be able to produce more pregnant and vehement
arguments, to show that he was expulsed and driven forth by the Devil; then he
himself has derected in his own discourse, which he makes to prove that he
was sent away by God Almighty.

For besides his leuity and inconstancy, without any cause, suspecting the
Catholic Church to be erroneous his disobedience and Apostasy in forsaking his
Order, his a^bition in seeking one preferment after another, being most
unworthy of any, and his unjust contention with those that were under him, he
paynteth out his own malice and euny against the Pope, together with the
occasions thereof in such manner, as if he desired the whole world should take
notice of it. Whereunto if we add his extreme pride which he discovers in
the manner of his conversion, disdayning to read any book, or to speak with
any man about it, and in all the passages of his former natration: and also in
that which follows where he says, that he has no Superior above him,
making himself equal with the Pope in spiritual matters, and in authority to
reprehend and amend all other Bishops. What can be imagined that his
adversaries will bring against him, which himself under the pretense of his own
praise has not here confessed? Tatianus the author of the Encratite Heresy
(as Nicephorus reports) being blown great with the swelling opinion of much
learning, Niceph. l. 4. hist. c. 4.
as Superior to others in knowledge, began to promulgate a particular
doctrine. This man contemning the counsel or help of others, protests to
promulgate that doctrine, which he never received of any. Thebutes, one of the
seven first Archheretikes, depraved the virginity of the Church, Eusebius. l. 5.
cap 5.
as Eusebius reports, because he had the repulse in his suit for a
Bishopric. This man seeks to defame the Church, because he was overthrown
in his suit against the Bishops that were under him. Nouatus, Valentine,
Niceph. l. 5. cap. 4.
and Aerius, separated themselves from the Church, Tertull. and Epiphan. her.
75.
because they could not obtain to be Bishops of Rome, as Nicephorus,
Tertullian, and Epiphanius do record. And this man deuydeth himself from the
same Church, because he would not be subject to the Bishop of Rome.

Now therefore to go forward: this zealous man by those two occasions of
coffeehouse coming to read the Fathers, and other records of the Catholic
Church, with those spectacles of Pride, Ambition, Malice, and the rest, whereof
I have spoken before, let us see what he finds in them. For now he says,
that his eyes were opened, and that he saw easily, plainly, and perfectly that
the Churches, whom Rome had made her enemies, (which are very many, says he)
did differ little or nothing from the pure doctrine of the ancient Church. That
in Rome there are coined every day innumerable articles of Faith, without any
foundation, with extreme violence. That Rome has pulled out the eyes of the
Church of Christ, by suppressing the sacred Counsels. That the Catholic
Church, is now confined to be made the Court of Rome. That in it, nay in the
Pope alone, the whole spirit of Christ promised to the Catholic Church, is
believed to reside. That whatsoever has been spoken heertofore in honor of
the universal Church, is now most wrongfully enforced upon the Court of Rome
alone, whereof it follows, that the souls of men being thereby miserably
deceived, and blinded, they fall together with their blind guydes into the pit
of perdition. Thus he, and these are the principal causes which he sets
down for the chang of his religion. But what proof, what evidence, what
instance, what reason or probability does he allege to persuade his reader of
the truth of these things, or any of them? truly none at all, but only this;
that himself says it. A man altogether a stranger to you, no way
recommended, either for wisdom, honesty, or learning: but rather if not
justly to be suspected of worse, yet at the least, to be justly condemned of
that extreme Malice, Pride, and Vanity of heart, which himself, discovers.

If any man be made of such rotten earth, as to suffer this Ignoramus to set in
him such leekes as these, without any other stick, but with his finger: or to
show himself such an uncovered pot (as I said before) as to receive what
liquor soever this strange Bishop should please to infuse into him; such a one
is worthy to be guld indeed by this Dalmatian. But he that is wise, should
consider at least with what false eyes he found these things, if it be true,
that he has read any part of the Fathers, the Canons, and the Counsels, as
himself reports. For he that considers this, will no more believe him
(though he should speak as he thinks, which I think he does not) then he
will believe the Father of lies that does delude him. If the question had been,
whether or no he would have said as much as here he does, he had indeed
convinced his reader, and confounded all those that should have writ against
him. But the question being, not what he could say, but what he could prove;
and whether it be true that he says; and intending as he does to arm his
reader, against the accusations that are like to come against him, to make it
manifest that his spirit is from God; and in fine to edify all the world with
his narration; you must needs grant that he shows extreme weakness in making
no better defense no less poverty of means and matter in buylding without a
foundation, and as much want of proof to persuade, in giving you nothing but
words instead of other substance. But you will reply; whatsoever he says
here, he promises to prove, and pursue hereafter, in his Book of
Ecclesiastical Common Wealth I pray you, were it fit, that when a soldier
comes into the field to fight, he should come without weapons, and should
think either to overcome his adversary, or to satisfy the beholders of his
prowess, by saying, that he has an excellent sword a making? Were it not
absurd, that a Scholar coming to dispute of any Problem, should think to
satisfy the arguments of his adversary, or to persuade his auditors, that the
truth were of his side, by affirming that he would, or that he had composed a
great volume of that matter? This book being made by the Bishop to prove his
spirit, to disprove his adversaries, and to approve his change of Religion, to
all those that should here thereof; now was the time to use his Weapons, to
show his Wisdom, and to bring forth his evidence. And therefore if he sail
of his proofs, it is an evident sign, that he is altogether destitute and
unprovided of them.

Neither is it true which he says: That when his work comes forth,
whatsoever he has here affirmed shall be there proved. For how will he prove,
that Rome has coined, not a 100. or a 1000. new articles of Faith in one day,
but as he says innumerable, and that every day? How will he prove that the
Church of Rome suppresseth the Counsels? Does it not make them a rule of
Faith? has it not always preserved them? does it not maintain, and defend
them from the calumniations and contradictions which the Heretics of these
days oppose against them? How will he prove, that we believe the whole spirit
of Christ to remain in the Pope alone? and that all which has been said
heretofore, in the honor of the universal Church, must be applied to the
Court and Palace of the Pope alone? Do we believe that to be Catholic, one,
holy, visible, to have converted Nations and Kingdoms, which are some of the
supernatural praises, and excellencyes of the Catholic Church, whereby she
shyneth like the sun in the Firmament, above all other Congregations or
assemblyes? Do we believe I say, as an article of our Faith, that these things
agree to the Pope and his Palace alone? That the Pope or his Court is extended
over all the world? That the Unity, Holiness, Visibility, and Miracles of the
Church, and of the Pastors and Saints thereof, are only to be found in the Pope
and his Palace? and that all other Catholic Nations, and Kingdoms, are
excluded from the participation of these graces? can this be proved think you?
And can it stand with the gravity, and reverent authority of a Bishop to
affirm these things, with promise to confirm them, making them also the
ground of his conversion? Could any ignorant shameless Minister, whose
learning were nothing else but lying: Could any Zani, or Counterfeit that had
been hired to rail against the Pope, have spoken more fondly, more
intemperatly, or more absurdly?

The innumerable new articles whereof he speaks, and the whole doctrine of so
many Churches, impugned by the Church of Rome, which he undertakes to defend,
can surely contain no less then all the points in Controversy between you,
and us; which are so far from being decided in his Ecclesiastical common
Wealth, that for the greater part of them, they cannot be so much as mentioned
therein. For as it appears by his own description thereof, the 4. first books
prove only in effect, that all Bishops and their Churches by the Law of God are
equal. And that neither S. Peter, nor the Pope, nor the Roman Clergy, should
have any Primacy, or Papacy, or Prehemynence above the rest. In his 5. and 6.
Book, he takes away all kind of jurisdiction from the whole Church, not only
in temporal, but also in Ecclesiastical matters. In his 7. book he disputes
of the rule of Faith. In the rest that follow he speaks of nothing else, but
only of the temporalityes, and immunityes of the Church. In the 8. he
considers the external government of the Church, by Laws and Canons, which
if he affirm to be lawful, it is directly contrary to his 5. and 6. book,
wherein he rejects all kind of Jurisdiction from the Church of Christ. So
that this great book whereof he braggeth so much, contains in effect but one
Controversy alone. And he that should prove the Popes Primacy and Supreme
Jurisdiction over the Church of God, should overthrow the substance of this
whole Volume. For thereof it would follow directly; that the government of
Christ's church upon earth, is Monarchical, against his first and second book;
that the governors of the Church are not equal in authority by the Law of
God, against his third book. That the Pope and Church of Rome has
pre-eminence over other Churches, against his fourth book. That the Church of
God has Jurisdiction, both Ecclesiastical directly, and temporal indirectly,
the latter being necessary for the maintaynance of the former, against his 5.
and 6. book. That the decree of the Pope as Head of the Church in a general
Council is a sufficient rule of Faith against his 7. book. The resolution
also of the matters contained in his 3. other books, is of no great
importance, and may easily be deduced from the former conclusion.

Wherefore, if he think to discharge himself of all other points in
Controuesy, by handling the titles of these books alone, he shall behave
himself like a Banquerupt, who instead of the whole debt, should scarce make
payment of one in the hundred.

SECTION VI. Concerning the Popes Supremacy: The state of the question is
proposed, and S. Peter's Supremacy is proved by Scripture.
BUT now, as oftentimes it falls out, that under the fair shows of
Banquerupt Merchants, under their goodly inscriptions of many rich commodityes,
and dissembling text letters, upon pots, packs, and boxes, there is nothing to
be found, except perhaps some poor refused brockage that is not salable: so to
make it manifest that under these glorious titles of the ten Books which the
Bishop promises, there is nothing contained, but false wares, and idle
tryfles, lapt up in so many bundles of wast paper. And to give you withal,
some satisfaction in this one point of Controversy, of the Popes Supremacy, the
occasion being so fit, the labor not great, and the way so well beaten by
others; I will briefly set you down, some of those evident proofs wherewith
the Catholics are wont to demonstrate the Popes Supremacy in spiritual
matters. Whereby also it will appear, how well the Bishop has spent his 10.
years in reading of the Fathers, and whether he have more attended to his
study, or to his belly.

For the greater breuity, and more perspicuity in handling this ample, and
copious matter; I will reduce all that I have to say into one argument alone,
which I frame in this manner. S. Peter the Apostle had Supremacy over the whole
Church of Christ: but the Pope of Rome is only the true Successor of S. Peter:
therefore the Pope of Rome, in the place of S. Peter, has also Supremacy over
the whole Church of Christ. Out of which argument you may observe, that the
state of this Controversy consists in the proof of two points. The first of
S. Peter's Supremacy, and the second of the Popes succession to S. Peter.

For probation of the first point, out of almost twenty places of Scripture
alleged by Bellarmine, together with the exposition of the holy Fathers
thereupon, acknowledging therein the Primacy, or Principality of S. Peter, in
the government of the Church of God; I will produce but two places alone. The
first out of the sixten of S. Matthew. Matt. 10.17.
where the same was promised in these words. And Jesus answering, said unto
him: Blessed art thou Simon Bariona, because flesh and bioud has not revealed
it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And I say to thee, that thou
art Peter (that is to say a Rock) and upon this rock will I build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not preuatle against it. And I will give to thee
the keys of the kingdom of Heaven. And whatsoever thou shall bind on earth,
it shall be bound also in the heavens. And whatsoever thou shall loose on
earth, it shall be loosed also in the Heavens. Concerning which words, there
are three things which I find to be questionable. The first, what our Savior
promised under those terms of a Rock, or Foundation, of the keys of the
kingdom of Heaven, and of binding and loosing in earth and heaven. Which,
because the foundation is the rule and strength of the whole buylding, and that
the keys command the whole City, opening and shutting the gates thereof, and
that the sentence of a Supreme judge, does bind and loose upon earth; It
seems to be manifest that nothing else can be meant thereby, but only the
rule, the command, and the government of the Church, as it is compared to a
building, or to a City, and as it is called the kingdom of God in Scripture.
In which sense, our Savior himself, who of himself is the supreme King,
Head, and governor of the whole Church, is many times called a Rock therein.
And he is also said to bear the key of David, and to have the key of Hell. And
he himself affirms, Da. 2.34. 1. Cor. 10.4. 1. Pet. 28 Esa. 22.22. Apoc.
1.18.3.7. Matt. 11.30.
the yoke which he imposes to be sweet, and the burden, which he byndeth
upon us, to easy. And in the same sense all the ancient Fathers have ever
understood this text of Scripture, without any difference or variation between
them.

The second thing which may be questionable herein, is the person to whom
these things were promised, which being described to be S. Peter, with so many
circumstances of his Name, and Syrname, and the Name of his Father, of the
praise of his former speech, and Christ's answer thereunto, and so many
particles applyable only to S. Peter, as Jesus answering, said to Him, blessed
art Thou, flesh and blood has not revealed to Thee, and I say to Thee; Thou
art Peter, and upon this Rock (which according to the original is this in
English: Thou art Peter, and upon this Peter, or thou art Rock, and upon this
Rock I will build my Church). And again, unto Thee will I give the keys etc.
Whatsoever Thou shall bind etc. whatsoever Thou shall loose etc. I say, if all
these things considered, and the person of S. Peter being thus particulerly
described, doubt may be made unto whom the Government was promised, then we
may well say, that nothing is plain, but that all things are most ambiguous
in holy Scripture. Wherefore in this also, the Fathers do all agree, and all of
them do gather out of this place, that the government of Gods Church was given
to S. Peter. Only S. Augustine who makes no question to whom the keys, and
the authority of binding and loosing, was given in this place, expounds
sometimes the word Rock, to be meant of Christ, whom S. Peter confessed:
Because (says he) our Savior said not, tu es Petra, but tu es Petrus, wherein
he was deceived (as all men acknowledge) not understanding the Syriack tongue,
which makes no more difference between the Masculine and Feminine, then does
our English. Aug. lib. 1. Retract. cap. 21.
And S. Augustine himself also having oftentimes expounded the word Rock to
be meant of S. Peter, leaves both these expositio^s to the choice of the
Reader, without condemning either of them. The rest of the Fathers out of this
place, do all affirm the Church to be built both upon Peter, and upon the
Faith of Peter, or upon Peter in respect of his faith, which is al one. For
which faith our Savior promised to reward him, by building his Church upon
him, and by giving such solidity and stability thereunto, that the gates of
Hell should not prenayle against it. Lastly, because the Fathers do oftentimes
affirm, that S. Peter received this power and authority, in the person of the
Church, and for the benefit of the Church, the last thing questionable
concerning these words is this. Whether he received the same as a Procter, or
substitute alone, or as the head and chief of all the Apostles. For in both of
these respects, one man may represent the persons of many, as in it self it is
manifest. But it seems also, that this is a question of that, whereof no
question can be made. For all the Apostles being present, there was no necessity
nor appearance, neither why, nor how they should make S. Peter their attorney.
And our Savior naming S. Peter in particular, Simon Bariona, commending him in
particular, Blessed art thou, and confirming unto him the name of Rock in
particular; it must needs be understood that to him in particular these
promises were made of the regiment of Gods Church, and of founding the same
upon him, in such manner, as that the gates of Hell should not prevail against
it. And in this also, the Fathers do generally agree, as you will perceive, by
those testimonies which shall be produced thereby.

The second place of Scripture, which I will allege for the proof of S.
Peter's supreme authority is in the second of S. John: Joan. 21.15.
for what was promised in the 16. of S. Matthew, was there performed. For
calling him by the name of Simon, and by the name of Peter, and by the name of
Simon the son of Iona, to signify that he applied his speech to himself
alone, and asking him first, whether he loved our Savior more then the rest,
and twice more, whether he loved him, whereby our Savior would signify, that
he commended to his love, the thing that was most dear unto him; he commanded
him twice to feed his lambs, and the third time to feed his sheep, whereby he
made him the Pastor of his flock. And for a conclusion, to keep him in
Humility, he gave him warning, that as he was to follow him in his place, so
also he should imitate him in his death; signifying what death he should dye.
That is to say, the death of the Cross. In the exposition of which place,
there is no diversity of opinion amongst the Fathers, neither do they make any
doubt or question, but that our Saviors speech in this place was directed only
to S. Peter, that by the word Sheep, the whole flock of Christ was recommended
unto him, for the rest of the Apostles themselves were not excepted. And that
by the word Feed, he was commanded not only to teach, but also to govern the
Church of Christ, so far forth, as should be necessary for the conduction of
the members thereof, unto their supernatural end, which is life everlasting.
And therefore, albeit all the Apostles, in respect of their Apostolic power,
which was extraordinary, and dyed with them, had equal Jurisdiction over the
rest of the Church; yet were they not equal amongst themselves, but S. Peter
in respect of his supreme Episcopal, and ordinary authority, was the chief and
head of them all; and especially as they were Bishops, or capable of
Bishoprics, wherein others might succeed them, they were all subject to S.
Peter. And for this cause albeit the Church is said to be built upon the other
Apostles in general, and that they are also called the Pastors thereof; yet
you shall never find, that any of them in particular, as for example S. John,
or S. James, is termed the foundation, or the Pastor of the Church, without
any other limitation, but that these titles, and the like are given by the
Fathers to S. Peter alone, in respect of the excellency of his dignity, and
plenarity of ordinary power over the Church of Christ.

SECTION VII. The former Expositions of the two places aforesaid, together
with S. Peter's Supremacy in dignity, doctrine, and government, are proved out
of the testimonies of the ancient Fathers.
FOR manifestation whereof, and for the more evident proof, that the
expositio^s which I have delivered of those two places of Scripture aforesaid,
are conformable to the doctrine of the Fathers; I will allege some of their
authorityes, as briefly and succinctly as possible I can. And first, the same
is proved by those titles, with the Fathers have given to S. Peter alone. By
the Council of Chalcedon Act. 1.
therefore he is styled, the Rock, and Top of the Church. By Origin hom. 5. in
exodus
the most solid Rock. By Cyrill Lib. 2. c. 2. in Ioa^.
the Rock, and Stone most firm. By Euthymius. In cap. 16. Matt.
the foundation of the believers. By Ambrose. Lib. 4. de fide c. 3.
the firmament of the Church. By Hilary In cap. 16. Matt.
the happy foundation of the Church, and blessed porter of heaven. By Augustine
Ser. 15. de Sanctis.
the foundation of the Church, which the Church does worthily worship. By
Damascen Orat. de Transsig.
the key-bearer of the kingdom of heaven. By Chrysostom Hom. in psalm. 50.1.
part.
the basis, or bearing-stone of faith. By S. Hierome Lib. 1. cont. Iouin.
the Rock of Christ.

Out of which titles, or appellations given to none of the Apostles, but only
to S. Peter; it must needs be gathered that the words of our Savior in the 16.
of S. Matthew, are to be understood of him alone; and that, as he was the
foundation of the whole buylding; so (which is all one) that he was also the
head of the whole body: which may be further declared, and more expressly proved
if need be, out of the Fathers. For therefore, S. Cyril Lib. 12. in Joan. cap.
64.
does call him, the Prince, and head of the rest. S. Hierome Lib. 1. cont.
Iouin.
the head of the Apostles. S. Augustine Sermon. 124. de tempore.
Verticem, the Crown. Optatus Lib. 2. and 7. cont. Parmen.
Apicem, the top, or highest perfection of the Apostles. Euthymius Inc. vlt.
Joan.
the Master of the whole world. Epiphanius Epiph. haeres. 51.
Ducem, the Captain, or Leader of the disciples. Ambrose lib. 10. in Luc. sc.
24.
the vicar of the love of Christ toward us. S. Cyprian Lib. de unit. Eccl.
says that, the Primacy was given to Peter. S. Leo Sermon. 2. de SS. Pet. and
Paul,
that he (Peter) who was the first in confession, was the first in Apostolical
dignity. S. Athanasius Epist. au Pelic.
That upon the foundation of Peter, the Pillars of the Church, that is to say
the Bishops, are set, or confirmed. S. Ambrose Ser. 47.
that he was the immovable Rock, containing the whole Pyle, and Iuncture of
the whole Christian work or buylding. S. Basil Ser. de neditio Dei.
that he was happy, in being preferted before the rest of the Disciples, to
whom the keys of the kingdom of heaven were committed. S. Augustine Lib 2,
de Baptis.
has these words: Lo, where Cyprian relates, that which we also have learned
in the Scriptures, that the Apostle Peter, in whom the Primacy of the Apostles
appeared aloft, with such an excellent grace, was corrected by Paul, a later
Apostle. And again Sermon. 29. de SS.
he alone among the Apostles deserved to here: Thou art Peter etc. Truly a man,
worthy to be a stone for foundation, a Pillar for sustentation, a key of the
kingdom unto the people which were to be built up in the house of God. To which
purpose S. Ambrose In cap. vlt. Luc.
said, therefore because he alone professed of all the rest, he alone is
preferred before all the rest. And why, says S. Chrysostom Hom. 87. in loa^.
omitting the rest, does he speak of these things to Peter alone? He was the
mouth of the Apostles, the prince and top of that company, therefore Paul
ascended to visit him before the rest. Among the most blessed Apostles, says
Leo Ep 85. ad An ast.
there was a certain distinction of power, and though the election of all was
equal, yet unto one, it was after given, to excel above the rest. S. Cyprian
Ep. ad Iubaia.
says; that the Church is one, founded upon one, who received the keys
thereof by the word of our Lord.

The prerogatives also of the three first Chayres, that is to say, of Rome,
Alexandria, and Antioch, the Bishops whereof, were anciently the three first
Patriarcks, and are so acknowledged in the first general Council of Nice, do
evidently prove the Supremacy of S. Peter, whereof S. Gregory writes in this
manner: Albeit there were many Apostles, Greg. l 6. epist. 37. ad Eulogium
Alexan.
yet the only seat of the prince of the Apostles prevailed in authority of
principality, which was of one man in three places: For he advanced the seat
wherein he was pleased to rest, and to end this present life (that is to say
Rome.) He honored the seat, to the which he sent his disciple the Evangelist
(that is to say, the seat of Alexandria) whither he sent S. Mark. He confirmed
the seat wherein he sat six years before he left it, (that is to say wherein
he left Euodius to succeed him.) Thus S. Gregory. And as S. Peter, S. Mark,
and Euodius, were in Order, one above another, so also the seat, wherein S.
Peter dyed, was the first, that of S. Mark was the second, and the other of
Euodius was the third. And each of the three having been some ways the seat of
Peter, was in respect thereof preferred in honor and authority, before all the
other seats of the rest of the Apostles. Epist. 3. Epist. 53 ad Anatholiu^.
Of this also do make mention S. Anacletus, and S. Leo. And in particular, in
the honor of the seat of Rome, the Church did anciently celebrate a feastiual
day, called the Feast of the Chair of Peter, which also has been ever since
observed. August. sermon. 15. de SS.
Whereof S. Augustine says, in one of his sermons; the institution of this
days solemnity, by our Elders, took the name of the Chair etc. Worthily
therefore, do the Churches celebrate, the original day of that Chair, which
the Apostles under took for the welfare, or safty of the Churches.

Unto these testimonies, which are more then sufficient, I will add some other
authorityes, which make mention of government, to declare what manner of
superiority it was, that was conferred to S. Peter. Eusebius Eusebius. sermon. de S.
Joan. Eua^.
Emissenus calls him, the Pastor of Pastors. S. Augustine In cap. 21. Joan.
says, he committed to Peter his sheep to be fed, that is, to be taught and
governed. S. Chrysostom In cap. 21. Joan.
Others omitted, he speaks to Peter alone, to whom he committed the care of
his brethren etc. and the care of the world. S. Ambrose Sermon. 48. detem. pore.
He (Peter) was assumed to be the Pastor, and received the others to be
governed. And again ad Gallatas 1.
unto him among the Apostles, our Savior delegated the care of Churches. And
again Lib. 4. de fide. c. 3.
Could he not confirm his faith (Peter's) to whom with proper authority he
gave a kingdom? S. Cyprian De vnitat. Eccl.
upon him alone, he built his Church, and commanded him to feed his sheep: and
although he gave all his Apostles etc. equal power, yet that he might show
unity, he appointed one Chair alone, where also he calls him, the head, the
well, and the root of the Church. S. Chrysostom Ho. 11. in Matt.
he made Peter the Pastor of the Church to come, and after; God only can
grant, that among so many, and so great flowds breaking in with fury, the
Church to come may remain immovable, whose Pastor and head, is but a poor
fisher, and ignoble. And again, God the Father did set Hieremy over one Nation
alone, but him (Peter) Christ has set over the whole world. Theophilact In
cap. vlt. Joan.
dinner being ended, he commended to Peter the Prefectship of the sheep of all
the world: not unto another, but unto him he gave it. And again In cap. 22.
Luc.
S. Peter after his denial, was to receive the Primacy of all men, and the
Prefectship of the world. Damascene Orat. de transfig.
as Prclate he received the stern or gouernemeut of the whole Church. S.
Maximus Ser. 3. de Apost.
of how great merit was S. Peter with our Lord, that unto him after the Oar or
guidance of a little boat, the stern, or government of the whole Church
should be delivered. Leo Ser. 3. de an. assu^.
out of the whole world, Peter alone was chosen, who was set over the vocation
of al Nations, and over all the Apostles, and all the Fathers of the Church;
that there being in the people of God, many Priests, and many Pastors Peter
might properly govern all, whom Christ also does principally govern.
Eusebius Emissenus vbi supra.
He (Peter) governs subjects and Prelates, therefore he is the Pastor of all,
because, besides lambs and sheep, there is nothing in the Church. Bernardus
Lib. 2. de confid.
Thou alone art the Pastor of all, not only of the sheep alone, but also of
the Pastors. You will ask me how I prove it out of the words of our Lord, (to
which) I do not say of the Bishops alone, but also of the Apostles, were all
the sheep committed so absolutely, and without distinction? feed my sheep says
he: to whom is it not plain, that he designed not some, but assigned all?
Nothing is excepted, where nothing is distinguished. And not to cloy you with
over many testimonies, in a matter so evident, I will conclude with our
Country man S. Bid Hom. in vigil. 3. Andreae.
Therefore (says he) did S. Peter specially receive the keys of the kingdom
of heaven, and the principality of Judicial power, that all the faithful
through the world might understand, that no such, as separate themselves, any
kind of way, from the unity of his faith, and society can be absolved from the
bands of their sins, nor enter into the gate of the kingdom of Heaven.

Out of that which has been so copiously alleged, if you please to reflect
a little thereupon, you may gather the reason and ground of this institution,
of one Supreme herd in the Church of God Which also because it does more
confirm the truth of that which has been said, I will open a little, and
briefly declare unto you. First then; there is no question to be made, but that
our Savior Christ, whose works are perfect, did therefore ordain his Spouse,
the Church, to be governed by one alone, in his own place upon earth, because
this is the most excellent, and most perfect kind of Government, as Bellarmine
proves at large, out of all the ancient Fathers, and Philosophers. And
therefore the government of the Church, and Commonwealth of the Jews, in the
old Testament, being ordained by God himself, was Monarchical, or of one in
chief. Which was also a Type and figure of the same kind of government of the
Church of Christ, to be established in the new Testament. The original cause
therefore and formal reason of this kind of government, and institution in the
Church of Christ, was the perfect unity of the members thereof, which our
Savior specially intended: For the which also he prayed, Joan. 17.21.22. Joan.
13.35. Lib. 1. ep. 8.
and would that his Disciples might be known thereby, from the rest of the
world. God is one (says S. Cyprian) and Christ is one, and the Church is but
one, and the Chair (thereof) but one, founded upon Peter by the voice of our
Lord. Where he shows, that as Christ is one with God; so the Church being
founded upon S. Peter, is one with Christ; and according to the prayer of our
Savior to his Father saying, That they may be one, as we are one. And then
follows in S. Cyprian: No other Altar or Priesthood can be established:
whosoever gathers else where, scatters. Lib. de past. c. 13.
To which purpose, S. Augustine also has these words: For Peter himself, to
whom he commended his sheep, as one man should do to another; he (our Savior)
made one with himself, that so he might commend his sheep unto him (that is to
say, as to the other part of himself,) that as one was the head, the other
might bear the figure of the body, to wit, of the Church; and that like the
Brydegrome and the Bryde, they might be two in one flesh. Whereby he means,
that S. Peter representing the whole Church, as the head under Christ, was made
one with Christ, the Supreme head thereof; according to his own words in other
places saying: That Peter the Apostle, in respect of the Primacy of his
Apostleship, did bear the person of the Church, by a figurative generality.
And again, Tract. vlt. in Joan.
he is acknowledged to bear the person of the Church, in respect of his
Primacy, and as holding the principality of the Apostleship. More expressly, In
psalm. 108. Ser de verbis Dom. Ser. 2. de an. assum.
S. Leo declares this unity, saying: For so he (Peter) was ordinated before
the rest, as while he is called a Rock, whil he is pronounced to be the
foundation, while he is constituted the Porter of the kingdom of Heaven, we
might understand, by the misteryes of these appellations, the society which he
had with Christ. And yet more fully else where: Sermon. 3. de an. assump.
As my Father manifested unto thee my divinity, so also I make known unto thee,
thy excellency, for thou art Peter, that is, though I be the Rock inviolable,
the stone of the corner which makes both to be one, I the foundation, besides
which no man can lay another: yet thou also art the Rock, because by my virtue
thou art made solid, to the end that those things which by my power are
proper to me, by participation with thee, might be made common with thee, and
me. By which words these holy Fathers labor to declare the unspeakable unity
of Christ and his Church, teaching how the head thereof in earth, is made one
by Gods divine grace in name, in place, and dignity with the head in heaven.

For the further explication whereof you shall understand, that the unity which
the Church possesses by this means, does especially consist in 3. things: the
first, is unity of Jurisdiction, or Judicial power, which that it depends
wholly of one head upon earth, and of the authority given to S. Peter, is
manifestly proved out of those places of the Fathers, wherein he is
acknowledged to have the Primacy, to be the head Pastor and governor of the
universal world, which also shall be further confirmed when we come to speak of
the Popes succession to S. Peter. The second is unity, and consent in faith,
for the mantainance whereof, that solidity and strength, was given to the faith
of Peter, upon which the Fathers, according to the Scripture, do aknowledg the
Church of Christ to be built so strongly, as that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. And therefore S. Cyprian in his book de vaitate Ecclesiae,
having declared, that the Devil to diminish the great mulutude of the
believers increasing so fast, had denised Schisms and Heresies whereby many
were blinded and carried away, discovers the cause thereof, in these words:
This is done says he, beloved brethren) because men have not recourse to the
origin of the truth, neither seeking the head, nor following the doctrine of
their celestial master. And then expounding himself, he adds: Our Lord
speaks unto Peter: I say unto thee, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock etc.
And again, after his resurrection he said unto him: Feed my sheep. In which
words this glorious Martyr shows, that according to the doctrine of Christ
our master, for the finding out of the truth, we must have recourse to Peter,
the foundation of the Church, and the Pastor thereof. And thereof he
concludes, that albeit the Apostles were all equal in honor and power (that
is to say of Apostleship) yet the Primacy was given to Peter, that there might
be one Church, and one Chair, and one flock fed by many Pastors, with one mind
and consent.

The like words he also uses in his epistle to Pope Cornelius, where he says:
Lib. 1. ep. 3. ad Cornel.
For neither from any other cause do Heresies come up, or Schisms do arise,
but only from this, that obedience is not given to the Priest of God; and that
one Priest for the time, or one Judge for the time, is not acknowlelged in the
Church, in the place of Christ. Whom, if according to the divine documents of
their Master, the whole fraternity obeyed, no man would (or could) move any
thing at all against the college of Priests, that is to say, collected and
united under one Priest, and one Judge upon earth in the place of Christ.
Epist. 46. inter epist. Cypriani.
And Pope Cornelius himself writing to S. Cyprian signifies, that some being
repentant of their Schism, which ignorantly they had made against him;
confessed their errors in these words. We know that Cornelius was elected by
God almighty, and by Christ our Lord, to be the Bishop of the holy Catholic
Church etc. Our mind was always in the Catholic Church. For we are not
ignorant, that there is one God, one Christ, one holy Ghost, and that in the
Catholic Church there ought to be one Bishop so they. which is the same in
effect, with the doctrine related out of S. Cyprian himself, with which
confession of theirs, Cornelius says, that he was much moved, and willed S.
Cyprian, to send his letters of the relation thereof to other Churches. And to
conclude this point, the saying of S. Hierome is common in every book of
Controversy. Among the twelve one was chose^, that an head being established,
the occasion of schism might be taken away.

Thirdly therefore, the unity of the Church is increased and perfected, by the
unity in power of Ecclesiastical Order, which as it depends of one alone to
be rightly conferred: so it is more then probable, that our Savior ordained,
it should descend from onealone: Epist. 1.
and so I understand, with Bellarmine, those words of Anacletus, that, in the
new Testament after Christ, the Sacerdotall Order came from Peter: by which he
must mean, not the order of Priests, who were ordained by our Savior himself
in his last supper, but of Bishops, who, according to Anacletus, received their
Episcopal ordination from Peter, as Peter received the same from Christ. Which
Innocentius does signify more expressly saying: Innocent. epist. 91. and ep. 93.
inter epist. August.
From whom (Peter) ipse Episcopatus, the Episcopal power it self, and all
the authority of this name proceeded. And again, whenever any matter of
faith is called in question; I think all our brethren and fellow-Bishops
should defer the same to none but to Peter, that is, to the author of their
name and honor. The like words has Julius the first, in his first epist. to
the Bishops of the East. Which fault you should not have incurred, if from
whence you received the honor of consecration, from thence you had taken the
law of all observance. And, the seat of the blessed Apostle S. Peter, which is
the mother unto us of sacerdotall dignity, was also the Mistress of
Ecclesiastical discipline. Which is further confirmed by S. Leo, Leo ser. 3. de
assump.
saying: If his will were, that any thing should be common with Peter, and the
rest of the Princes (meaning the Apostles) he never gave but by him, whatsoever
he denied not to others. And again, Epist. 89.
Our Lord would, that the sacrament of this function, should so appertain to
the office of all the Apostles, that in the most blessed Peter, Hom. vlt. in
illud sequere me.
the chief of all the Apostles, it should be principally placed, to the end
that his gifts might be diffused from him, as it were from the head to all the
body. With these also notably agrees S. Cyprian saying: Ep. 27.
Our Lord disposing the manner or form of his Church, speaks in the Gospel
and says to Peter: I say unto thee, that thou art Peter etc. And a little
after, from thence, with the changes of times, and successions, the ordination
of Bishops, and the state or form of the Church does follow. If any body ask
me, says S. Chrysostom, how James got the seat of Jerusalem? I answer, that
Peter the Master of the whole world did set him therein.

These three points of unity, in government, in faith, and in the ordination of
Bishops, are further confirmed out of S. Cyprian Lib. de unit. Eccle.
by his comparisons of the Church to many sun beams, many bows, and many
brooks proceeding from the same sun, the same tree, and the same fountain.
For so says he, that albeit the Church have many beams, and many branches,
and many riulets diffused through the world, yet there is but one head, one
origin, and one mother of all this fecundity. Likewise, out of the author of
the question of the old and new Testament, amongst the works of S. Apud S.
Thomam opusc. 1. cont. err. Grec. c. 23.. Habetur.
Augustine, saying, As in our Savior were all the causes of maistership, so
also after our Savior, they were all contained in Peter. Also out of S.
Cyrill, who doubted not to say, that as Christ received most full power from
his Father, so also most fully, he committed the same to Peter, and his
Successors. And again, unto no other then unto Peter, but to him alone he
gave, quod suum est plenum, fully that which was his. And briefly the same is
gathered out of the unspeakable union which the Fathers acknowledge in the
Church of Christ, with their head on earth, and of her head on earth, with her
head in Heaven.

SECTION VIII. The conclusion of the first point of this Controversy: which is
also further confirmed by the Confession of the Protestants themselves.
AND thus much may suffice for the first point of this Controversy, wherein I
have showed, how the Catholics demonstrate the Primacy of S. Peter by two
especial places of holy Scripture, and by the uniform consent and exposition
of the holy Fathers, who thereupon do give such titles, and appellations to
Peter, as are given to no other Apostle in particular, but were only
communicated by Christ to S. Peter alone, who do also expressly teach out of the
former places, that he was the head, the Prince, and the supreme governor of
the Church of Christ, and that to him alone in particular manner, was committed
the care of his brethen, of the Churches, and of all the faithful throughout
the world. And lastly they agree, that the cause of the institution of this
kind of government in the Church of Christ, was for the mantainance and
preservation of perfect unity therein, as well among the members, as also of
all the members with the head thereof, from whence it deriueth that uniformity
of Faith, and that singular unity, both of Judicial power, and Episcopal
order, wherewith it shyneth like the Sun throughout the world.

A thing so evident, that albeit the Bishop could not find it in the Fathers,
because he looked another way, and never saw them, or never understood them:
yet the greatest part of the Protestant writers, being ashamed to deny a matter
so manifest, have thought it better to accuse them, then to belly them. And
namely they reprehend S. Hierome, Conturiatores.
S. Hilary, S. Gregory Nozianz^n, S. Cyprian, Origin, and in one word many
Fathers, for affirming the Church to be built upon Peter: reproving also
others, for calling him the head of the Apostles; M. Fulk.
and affirming that in these points, the Church then in those pure times, was
corrupted, bewitched, and made blind with error. That many of the ancient
Fathers were deceived (and in particular, S. Leo, and S. Gregory, of whom the
last lived about the year 590.) with the long contynuance of this error. And
that the mystery of iniquity wrought in the seat of Rome, near 500. or 600.
years before them. And many Protestants proceed so far, as that they do not
only confess, but also defend the same, as does M. Doctor Whitegift saying;
Whitegift
Among the Apostles there was one chief etc. that had chief authority over
the rest, that Schisms might be compounded. Calvin.
Who also cites Calvin, affirming, that the twelve Apostles had one among
them, to govern the rest: Musculus.
and Musculus in these words, the celestial Spirits are not equal, the
Apostles themselves were not equal, Peter is found in many places to have
been chief among the rest, which we deny not.

Master Doctor Couell likewise, Couel.
does not only defend it, but also lays down the general received reason
thereof. If this (says he) were the prin ipall means, to prevent Schisms, and
dissentions in the Primitive Church, when the graces of God were far more
abundant and eminent then now they are: Nay, if the twelve were not like to
agree, except there had been one chief among them: For says Hyerome, among
the twelve one was therefore chosen, that a chief being appointed, occasion of
dissension might be prevented etc. So he. And again, how can they think
(says he of the Puritans) that equality would keep all the Pastors in the
world in peace and unity etc. For in all societyes, authority (which cannot be
where all are equal) must procure unity and obedience. Thus Doctor Couell, who
goes further and says. If it concern all persons and ages, in the Church of
Christ (as surely it does) the government must not cease with the Apostles,
but so much of that authority must remain to them, who from time to time
supply that charge etc. Which also is the doctrine of Melancthon, who further
confesses, Melantho^.
that, as certain Bishops are president over many Churches, so the Bishop of
Rome is President over all Bishops. Luther.
And Luther himself is enforced to acknowledge, that for the unity of the
Catholic Church, consisting of al Nations, with infinite diversity of ma^ners
and conditions, it was necessary that one should be chosen, unto whom, and his
Successors, the whole world being made one fold, might belong or pertayne. Cart
wright.
M. Cartwright likewise urges the Protestant Doctors with their own argument
saying, that the peace of the whole Church, requires as well a Pope over all
Archbishops, as one Archbishop over all Bishops in a Realm. Jacob.
And to conclue, M. Jacob another Puritan says; if a visible Catholic Church
be once aknowledged, there is no place in all the world so likely as Rome, to
be the visible and spring head of the government thereof. Protestant Apology.
See the Protestants Apology, tract. 1. sect. 3. subdiu. 10. And thus appears
the force of this truth, which God almighty has caused to be justified, even
by the mouths of our adversaries themselves.

And now by the resolution of this first point alone, having clearly over
thrown, and disproued whatsoever the Bishop can say, in the five first books
of his Commonwealth, against the Monarchy, Primacy, and Papacy of the Church of
Rome, the succession thereof, the subjection of other Bishops theru^to, and in
fine, against all Jurisdictions of the Church of Christ; I come to the
explication and proof of the second point, concerning the succession of the
Bishop of Rome to S. Peter, wherein the folly, and impudency of this man willbe
more discovered, and his whole Volume of Ecclesiastical Commonwealth, either
extant, or not extant willbe sufficiently answered.

SECTION IX. The continuance of S. Peter's authority is proved by Scripture, and
by the Fathers, and by the confession of many Protestants: and thereof is
inferred the succession of the Pope to S. Peter.
IN the beginning of the former point, concerning S. Peter's authority, I showed
how the Catholics considered, and distinguished a double power in the Apostles
of Christ, the one extraordinary and Apostolical, whereby they had equal
Jurisdiction over the Church of Christ, which is therefore called Extraordinary,
because it dyed with them; for if others had succeeded them therein, their
successors also by virtue thereof, had been all Apostles: The other ordinary,
and Episcopal, wherein others were to succeed them for the government of the
Church, and which in S. Peter alone, was supreme, absolute, and independent,
but in the rest, it was limited to particular places: and therefore albeit, as
Apostles, they had all equal authority over the rest of the Church, yet they
were not equal amongst themselves, but S. Peter, by virtue of his supreme
Episcopal authority, was the chief Pastor and head of the rest. And now
likewise for your greater light, in the handling of this second point, we must
distinguish in S. Peter, a double Episcopal power, the one in particular, and
proper to the diocese of Rome, whereof he was the immediate Bishop, the other
universal over the whole Church of Christ, whereby albeit he be not the
immediate Bishop of the particular Churches, yet is he the universal and
supreme Pastor over them all. As the Bishop of Canterbury for example,
although he be the immediate Bishop of Canterbury alone, yet as he is
Archbishop, he has the care of those other Churches, and Bishoprics of our
Nation, which are under his charge.

This distinction therefore being granted, first there is no question to be
made, but that the Bishop of Rome does succeed unto S. Peter as he was the
immediate Bishop of that Diocese. For this is evident, not only by the
catalogue of the Bishops of Rome, and tradition of the Church: but also by the
testimony of all Historiographers and ancient Fathers, and in particular of S.
Irenaeus, Tertullian, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, Optatus, and others, as we shall
see anon. Which being commonly granted by all the learned Protestants, because
if the supreme authority of S. Peter, did not dye with him, as the general
power of the Apostles over the whole Church did cease with them, but remained
and continued in the Church after his death; thereof it would follow, that the
Pope who succeeded him in the one, should succeed him also in the other, as he
who is made Bishop of Canterbury is thereby also made Archbishop and Primate of
all the kingdom. For this cause diverse Protestants have affirmed, that albeit
the Pope do succeed to S. Peter, as he was Bishop of Rome, yet they deny, that
he succeeded him in his universal Pastoral function, because they say, it
dyed with him. And therefore on the other side, if the Catholics can show,
that the Primacy of S. Peter does still remain in the Church; that being
proved, there willbe no difficulty, but that the Pope does succeed to S. Peter,
as well in his Primacy over the whole Church, as in his particular authority
over the Church of Rome, especially no other Bishop having ever pretended, or
made claim to that Succession, but only the Bishop of Rome.

Wherefore, that the Primacy of S. Peter, was to descend and remain to his
successors, is proved by these two places of Scripture, Matt. 16. Joan. 21.
alleged for the proof of his Supremacy. For in the first place, our Savior
promised, that he would make him the foundation, and build his Church upon him
in such manner, as the gates of Hell should not prevail against it. Whereby as
he signifies, that the Church was to remain and endure perpetually; so much
more he promised, that the Foundation thereof was likewise to remain, from
whence the Church it self was to receive her perpetual strength, and
duration. origin. in 16. Matt.
Which Origin considering, said very well; that it was manifest, albeit not
expressed, that the gates of Hell cannot prevail neither against Peter, nor
against the Church, for if they prevailed against the Rock, whereon the Church
is founded, they should also prevail against the Church it self.

The like also may be easily inferred out of the second place, where S. Peter
was made the universal Pastor of the sheep of Christ, and by consequence the
sheep of all ages were commended unto him; and therefore, not only to him in
person, but also to his seat, and to his successors represented, and contained
in him, as in their seed and foundation. In which respect, S. Augustine said,
Aug. l. de pasto. c. 13.
as you have heard; that S. Peter received his authority in the person of the
Church, (that is to say) present, and to come, for himself and his successors.
And in the same sense he teaches else where, that all good Pastors, are in one
Pastor. And S. Cyprian affirmed, as I have alleged, Cyp. ep. 4^. and 55.
that in the Church, there is one God, one Christ, one Chair, founded upon
Peter, one Priest, one Judge for the time, in the place of Christ. Which is
also confirmed by the words of our Savior, where he says, There should be one
sheepfold, and one Pastor. Joan. 10.16.
For as we gather thereof, that the fold must always be one: so also the
Pastor thereof being One, who was S. Peter, must always remain One in his
successors; and our Savior would thereby signify, that the unity of the fold,
depended of the unity of that one Pastor, to whom he meant to give the charge,
and to commend the feeding of it. Which also, the Fathers demonstrate to be
most necessary, for the avoiding and extinguishing of Schisms and Heresies in
the Church of God, as you have seen before. And some of the Protestants
themselves; as Whitgift, Protestant Apology vbi supra.
Melancthon, Luther, and others do willingly confess it: and especially
Doctor Couell, who affirms that, the Church should be in far worse case then
the meanest common Wealth, nay almost, then a den of thieves without it. I
cannot omit his reason, which is also the common reason of the Catholics: That
if this Superiority, were necessary amongst the Apostles, much more was it
necessary among other Bishops after their decease; neither will I omit, that it
belonged unto the charge and Pastoral Office of S. Peter, to provide that the
sheep of Christ after his death, might not be scattered and divided for the
want of one common and universal Pastor. Wherefore by this it is evident, that
the Pastoral function of S. Peter, was to remain in the Church of God. And
therefore it descended to the Bishop of Rome his only successor, which is a
most strong argument in it self, and may serve us withal for a good step or
degree to the rest of the proofs that follow.

SECTION X. The Supremacy of the Pope and his succession to S. Peter, is proved
by the titles of his supreme dignity, in the ancient Fathers; and by the four
first general Counsels.
WHEREIN we will begin with those titles and appellations, which have been
given by the Counsels and ancient Fathers to the Bishops of Rome, being the
same that were given to S. Peter alone, with many others equiuale^t thereunto.
For as in the Commonwealth, none can have the title of Caesar, but he that
succedeth unto Caesar: so also in the Church, if the Pope inherit the same
titles that were proper to S. Peter, in respect of his supreme dignity; it must
needs be granted, that he succedeth likewise in the place of the same dignity
to S. Peter.

First therefore, he is called the head of the Church, Chalcedon. act. 1
which title the whole Council of Chalcedon (for example) being one of the
four first, and received in England by act of Parliament, gave to S. Leo,
Bishop of Rome, in their Epistle to him; where also the Church of Rome is
called the head of all Churches. Secondly, Epist. ad Dam.
S. Hierome calls Pope Damasus, the foundation and Rock of the Church; and
said, that he knew the Church to be buylt upon him. S. Augustine likewise
terms the sea of Rome, the Rock of the Church. Thirdly, S. Ambrose intitleth
Pope Siricius, the Pastor of the flock of our Lord. Fourthly, Epist. 81. ad
Cyril.
he is termed the Apostolical man, his seat the Apostolical Seat, his Office
Apostleship, and his dignity Apostolical sanctity, as you may easily observe
in the authorityes that follow; which words, without any other addition of
place, or person, cannot be given to any, but to him alone. For, the like
supreme authority and Jurisdiction unto his, over the whole Church, having
been granted only to the Apostles, and after there decease, being derived from
S. Peter the Prince of the Apostles, unto the Pope alone; in these two respects
the excellency of his universal authority, descending from the Prince of the
Apostles, is properly called Apostolical; which term, by it self alone,
without limitation, cannot therefore be given to any other. Fifthly, in the
Council of Chalcedon, he was entitled, the universal Archbishop, and
Patriarch of great Rome; which style, albeit S. Gregory refused, in the sense
as it was used by John Bishop of Constantinople, and that to abate his pride,
S. Gregory began to write himself neither Patriarch, nor Bishop, but Seruus
seruorum Dei: yet he admitted the Council of Chalcedon, Joan Diac. in eius
vita l. 2. cap. 1.
in the particular use of this term, signifying, that the Pope was Bishop of
the universal Church; as also many of S. Gregoryes Predecessors had entitled
themselves before him. Sixthly, Greg. l. 4. epist. 32. Bern. l. 2. de consid.
S. Bernard among others, called the Pope, the Vicar of Christ. Stephen,
Archbishop of Carthage, writing to Pope Damasus, in the name of three Affrican
Counsels, directs his Epistle, To the most Blessed Lord, advanced with
Apostolical dignity, Apostolico culmine sublimato, the holy Father of Fathers,
Damasus, Pope and chief Bishop of all Prelates. Lastly, to be short, the word
Pope, without any addition, is given only to the Pope. In which sense we read
in the Chalcedon Council, The most blessed and Apostolical Man, the Pope
gives us this in charge: where also he is called, Act. 16.
Pope of the universal Church. And in the Breuiary of Liberatus we read, that
none is Pope over the Church of the whole world, but only the Roman Bishop.

Thirdly, the succession of the Pope to S. Peter and the supreme authority of
the Roman Church in regard thereof, is proved by the Counsels; whereof a long
treatise might be made, but for breuityes sake, because the Protestants seem
to respect and reverence, with S Gregory the great, the four first general
Counsels, as the four Evangelists; and that they are also received by act of
Parliament anno 10. of Queen Elizabeth, I will allege no other but those,
and out of them so much alone, as may be sufficient to establish the Popes
Supremacy: and to let you see, That if the Catholics might be admitted, to any
kind of just and equal try all; how easily it were for them to claim
Toleration, and to justify the Religion even by the statutes at the common Law,
which are now in force in England.

The sixth Canon therefore, of the first Council of Nice, begins in this
manner: The Roman Church has always had Primacy: and, lot the ancient custom
continue in Egypt, or Lybia, and Pentapolis; that the Bishop of Alexandria,
have power over them all, whereof (the reason follows) quoniam quidem and
Episcopo Romano parilis mos est, which Bellarmine shows very well, that it
can bear no other sense, but only this; That the Bishop of Alexandria ought to
govern those provinces, because the Roman Bishop has been so accustomed; that
is to say, because the Roman Bishop before this time, has always permitted
the Bishop of Alexandria to govern those Countries, or because he has
always used to govern them by the Bishop of Alexandria. And so Nicolas the
first, in his Epistle to Michael, understood the same. Upon the reading of
which Canon of the Council of Nice, the Judges in the Calcedon Council began
and said: That they had well considered (perpendimus) all Primacy and chief
honor to be consirued according to the Canons, unto the most beloved of God,
the Archbishop of old Rome. Where you see the Primacy of the Pope acknowledged,
not only in the Nicen, but also in the Calcedon Counsels; which was another of
the four first, wherein this Canon was recyted, and allowed as has been said.

Also in the third book of the Nicen Council, in the three first Canons,
taken out of the Epistle of Pope Julius the first, are found these words:
Counsels ought not to be celebrated, Con^. Nic. l. 3. Socra. l. 2. c. 13.
Zozom. l. 3. cap 9. Nicepho. l. 9. cap. 5. Synod. Alexand.
without the sentence of the Roman Bishop. And again: Bishops in more weighty
causes may freely appedle to the Apostolic Sea, and sly thereunto, as to their
Mother. And lastly: While the Bishop of the Apostolic Sea does judge again
(that is to say upon appeal) the cause of any Bishop, no other may be ordained
in his place, that is then upon his trial. And the reason is given, because it
is not permitted to end, or define such causes, before the Roman Bishop be
consulted withal. For our Lord said unto Peter: whatsoever thou shall bynd
etc. By which words you see, that the Pope is acknowledged to be the head of
all Counsels; without whose sentence, they cannot be celebrated or confirmed;
and that he is the supreme head of the Church, unto whom it is lawful for
all other Bishops to make their appeals.

Which last point of appellation is also more fully expressed and confirmed in
the foruth and seventh Canon of the general Council of Sardis, which was
celebrated a very short time after the Nicen Council, and is accounted to be
as one therewith, because the same Fathers for the most part were present in
both, and nothing concerning Faith, was added of new in the latter. And
therefore, not only Sozimus, but also Julius, Innocentius, and Leo, seem to
cite these Canons, under the name of the Canons of the Nicen Council. Lastly,
in the 39. Canon of those of Nice, translated out of Greek and Arabic, it is
said in this manor: A Patriarch is so above al those that are under his power,
as he that holds the Sea of Rome, is head and Prince of all Patriarchs;
because he is the first, as Peter was, to whom was given power over all
Christian Princes, and over all their people, as he that is the Vicar of Christ
our Lord, over all people, and the universal Christian Church. And whosoever
shall co^tradict it, is excommunicated by the Synod. See the notes upon this
Canon, in the first Tome of the Counsels, especially in Binnius. And so much
for the Nicen Counsel.

The second Council was that of Constantinople, where in the 3. alias 5.
Canon, it is said, that the Bishop of Constantinople should have the Primacy of
honor after the Roman Bishop: whereby it is supposed as a thing most certain,
and a thing out of question; that the Roman Bishop had the Primacy, not only in
honor, but also in Government and Jurisdiction, whereof the Council speaks in
that place, as appears out of the second Canon next preceding. The other part
of this Canon, was not received for many hundred years after, because it was
not confirmed by the Bishop of Rome (which also proves his Primacy) until at
last the Roman Church consented, and then it began to take offect, as is
manifest in the Counsel of Lateran. Theod. l. 5. hist. c. 9.
Also the same Council in their Epistle to Pope Damasus, which is extant in
Theodoret, do say; that they met together at Constantinople, by the
commandment of the Popes letters sent unto them by the Emperor, wherein they
further acknowledge the Roman Church, to be the head, and they the members.

The third general Council was that of Ephesus, the Fathers whereof in their
Epistle to Pope Celestine, acknowledge the Popes care of them, for fincerity in
matter of Faith, to be most grateful and pleasing unto the Savior of all. And
say; that they imbrare it with all a miration and reverence: and that it was
the custom of those, in that high place (Vobis tam eximijs in more positum) to
be renowned in all things, and to moke their studdyes, the solid stays, and
grounds of Churches. Wherein also they said, that necessity required they
should declare to his Holiness, all things which had passed in that Council,
showing thereby their dependence of the Roman Bishop. And when the whole
Council had applauded the Popes letters, and followed his instructions, and
that the Legates, coming in afterward, had understood the same, one of them,
Tomo. 2. cap. 15.
called Philip, thanked them; that with there pious voices and acclamations,
they had submitted themselves, as holy members, to their holy head. For, says
he; your happynes is not ignorant, that the Blessed Apostle Peter, was the head
of the whole Faith, and of all the rest of the Apostles. And further he says,
that Peter was the Vicar of Christ, constituted by him, and that he yet lived
in his successor: and that, his successor and holy Vicar was the Roman Bishop:
which speeches, the sacred Synod, was so far from detesting, that showing
conformity in the same faith, they subscribed with them. Euag. lib. 1. hist. c.
4.
Also the same Council, as Euagrius records, affirmed, that it deposed
Nestorius (ex mandato) by a commandment of the Popes letters. And the Fathers
thereof in their Epistle to the Pope do write: that they presumed not to
determine the cause of John Patriarch of Antioch, which was more doubtful then
the cause of Nestorius, but that they reserved the same to the Pope himself.

The fourth general Council was that of Chalcedon, which confirmed the sixth
Canon of the Council of Nice, concerning the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, as
you have heard. The superscriptions of the letters, or petitions to the
Council (all or many) were in this form: To the most holy, and the most
Bl^ssed, the universal Archbishop, and Patriarch of great Rome, Leo; whereby
he was acknowledged the head of the Council: and those superscriptions were
recorded by the Notaries, together with the acts of the said Council. In the
beginning whereof Paschasius said in this manner: we have in our hands the
precepts of the most Blessed, and most Apostolic man, the Pope of Rome, who is
head of all Churches, whereby his Apostleship has pleased to command, that
Dioscorus the Archbishop of the Alexandrians, should not sit in the Council,
and all the Council obayed. And afterward the letters of Pope Leo being read,
Act. 2.
all the Fathers of the Council said, so we believe; Peter has spoken so by
Leo. And in the third action, Leo is often called universal Patriarch, and
universal Archbishop. And Iutianus one of the Bishops, said unto one of the
Popes Legates: that they held the Primacy of the most holy Leo, and desired
them, as holding his place, to give sentence against Dioscorus, whereunto the
Council consented, and sentence was given accordingly in the Popes name
against him. In which Council also Theodoretus, who was deposed by a Synod of
Ephesus, being restored by the Pope, was admitted to enter with these words:
Let the most reverend B. Theodoret come in, and be made partaker of the
Council, because the most holy Archbishop Leo has restored his Bishopric
unto him. S. Thomas of Aquin recitoth out of the same Council, the
confirmation of appeals, of all Bishops accused of any great crime to the Pope
of Rome, and that other things defined by him should be held or received, as
from the Vicar of the Apostolic Throne: and that the whole Council made this
acclamation to Pope Leo; Let the most holy. Apostolic, and universal
Patriarch live many years. Lastly, the same Counsel in their Epistle to Leo,
confess him to be their head, and they the members; and speaking of the
wickedness of Eutiches; after all this, say they, over and above, he extended
his madness, even against him, to whom the custody of the vineyard was committed
by our Savior (that is) against thy Apostolical Holiness: and he thought to
excommunicate thee, that do hasten to unite the body of the Church. And in
conclusion with many fair words, they desire him to grant unto them, that the
Church of Constantinople, might have the second place, after the Apostolic
Sea: which notwithstanding he would not grant them, nor was it granted by his
successors, for a long time after.

And thus much of the four first general Cou^cells, which they that receive
them according to the Statute, must needs grant, that the Pope has always had
Primacy; that he is the successor to S. Peter, the head of the whole faith, and
of all the rest of the Apostles, and the vicar of Christ, and the like: That
his care and study, is the ground and foundation of the Church; that he is the
universal Archbishop and head of the Church; that no Counsels ought to be
celebrated without his sentence; that it is necessary the Counsels should
declare unto him what passed in them; that whatsoever he defined, should be
received, as from the vicar of Christ; That causes of great difficulty must be
referred unto him; that all Bishops may appeal unto him, and to the Church of
Rome, as to their Mother; that he commands in Counsels; that he may depose
Patriarchs, and restore them that be deposed. And lastly, that the decrees of
Counsels take no effect, without his confent and confirmation.

SECTION XI. The Popes Supremacy is proved out of the point of the
infallibility of his doctrine, by the Authorityes of the ancient Fathers.
FOURTHLY therefore, the Catholics in defense of this doctrine of the Popes
Supremacy, produce the authorityes of all the ancient Fathers, nubem testium, a
bright and great cloud of witnesses to inlighten the obscurity of faith, in
this vale of darkness. Which if I should go about to set down at large, I
should be infinite. Wherefore to contract this copious matter, I will alleadg
some of those who teach, that the authority of the Pope of Rome, and the Church
of Rome, as united with the Pope, ought to be received in matters of Faith;
whereof it must needs follow, that the Pope succeeds S. Peter, and that, as
upon S. Peter, in respect of his faith, so also in his place upon the Pope the
Church is so built in such manner, as that the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it.

But before I begin, I would have you observe, that it is all one to affirm
the sea of Rome, to be the Rock of the Church, or the Pope to succeed S. Peter
in his Pastoral Office, or to give unto the Pope any of those titles, which
are proper to S. Peter, as to say expressly, that neither the one, nor the other
can fail in teaching the true faith, because these former assertions, and the
like do imply, that the promise made unto S. Peter, does belong also to the
Pope and his seat, and that the faith or doctrine, which the Pope teaches, can
suffer no defect, because, according to the words of our Savior, the stability
and duration of the Church depends of it. And therefore it is manifest, that
the Fathers do signify thereby, that the Church of Rome, was not only the true
Church in their days, or that the Pope did not teach any false doctrine in
their times, as some Protestants seem to understand them; but also that the
truth was always to continue therein, and that the Pope could never err in
matter of Faith, grounding themselves, as I have said, upon the promise of
Christ to S. Peter: and that you may not doubt of this, I thought good to prove
the supremacy of the Pope out of the infalibility of doctrine, which the
Fathers acknowledge to be inseparable from the Pope, and sea of Rome.

The first that I think fit to produce in this matter is the great Athanasius,
who withstood himself alone, the force and fury of four Emperors, and
sustained the persecution of all the Arian heretics, and (a man may say) of
all the Eastern world against him. He was Patriarch of Alexandria, at that
time the second seat after Rome, and was a principal man both in the Council
of Nice, and also in that of Sardis. In which sacred Schools in respect of his
excellent virtues, it might perchance be truly said, that he deserved the place
of a master. But it is praise sufficient, that he showed himself a most
renowned scholar of those renowned masters. He therefore that had received the
spirit of the Nicen Council, and wrote according to the sense and doctrine of
the Fathers thereof, saluted Mark the Bishop of Rome in this manner: Athan. ep.
ad Marc.
To our most holy Lord venerable with Apostolical dignity, Mark, the Father
of the holy, Roman, and Apostolical seat, and of the universal Church,
Athanasius and the Bishops of East health, and afterward in his letters, he
acknowledges the Roman Church, to be the Mother of all Churches; and uses
also these words: We are yours, and unto you, with all those committed to our
charge, we are obedient, and ever will be. And in his epistle to Felix the
second, he with the other Bishops of Aegipt do say, In tom. 1. Council.
that they suggest to his holy Apostleship, that it would please him, according
to his custom to have care of them; that they and theirancestors had received
help from his holy Apostolic seat; that according to the decrees of the
Canons, they beseech the said Apostolic, and highest seat, to give them help,
from whence their Predecessors had received ordinations, rules of doctrine,
and other helps; that they have recourse unto the Roman Church, as to their
Mother; that he was Peter, and upon his foundation the pillars of the Church,
that is the Bishops (say they) are set and confirmed, that they presume not
without his counsel to define any matter of faith, the Canons commanding,
that without the Roman Bishop, in the more weighty causes, nothing ought to be
determined; that the judgment of all Bishops is committed to his seat. And they
expound the place of Matthew 16. of the Primacy thereof, and confirm all that
they say with the authority of the Nicen Council: whereupon you must needs
grant, that none can write a better comment, then those excellent men, that
were present at it.

After Athanasius, shall follow those other Fathers, who have recorded the
succession of the Popes of Rome to S. Peter, and thereupon compare the faith of
the one, with the faith of other, and the faith of the Catholic Church, with
that of Rome, in regard of the Popes person, in whom the immediate government
of that sea, and the supremacy of S. Peter are both united. Ireneaeus lib. 3.
cap. 3.
Ancient Irenaeus, scholar to Policarp the disciple of S. John teaches, that
the Church of Rome, is the greatest, and the most ancient; that it is known to
all men, founded and established by the two glorious Apostles Peter, and Paul;
and that the Catholics showing the tradition, which it received from the
Apostles, and that faith which was delivered to all, coming down by
succession of the Bishops thereof, even unto their time, they did thereby
confound all those that gathered otherwise then they ought, by self conceit,
or vain glory, or blindness, or false knowledge. Wherein you see, he supposes
the true faith to be preserved in the Roman seat, by means of the succession
of the Bishop thereof, to S. Peter, and S. Paul, and that all those are
confounded thereby, that do hold any contrary doctrine; whereof immediately
after he gives the reason, saying: For necessarily every Church, must have
recourse and accord with the Church of Rome, in respect of her more powerful
principality: So that all those that do not accord therewith, having their
principality from the Apostles, are utterly confounded by it. And a little
after: The blessed Apostles (says he) founding and instructing the Church,
delivered the Episcopal care of the government thereof to Linus, setting down
successively the names of all the Popes until his time. Where I would have you
note, that he makes no difference between the Roman Church, and the Church in
general, which he says, the Apostles instructed and left to Linus.

Epiphanius also relating exactly the same succession of the Popes to S. Peter,
Epiphan. har. 27.
adds that no man should marvel, why the same is so particulerly recounted.
For, says he, by those things (that is to say, In ancorat. circaprinc.
by this particular succession) clarity is always showed, meaning that the
knowledge of this succession, was necessary for the clarity, and knowledge of
the Catholic doctrine. And therefore else where he says, that his succession
is the firm Rock, upon the which the Church is built, and that the gates of
hell, which are Heretics, and Arch-heretikes, shall not prevail against it.
For absolutely, the faith is firmed in him, that received the keys, and
loses in earth, and binds in Heaven. So Epiphanius, who teaches plainly as
you see, that the true Faith cannot be separated from the Seat of S. Peter.

S. Hierome likewise Lib. de praescript. Eccles. in Clemen.
briefly declares this succession, and notably Epist. ad Dam.
delivers his sentence concerning his doctrine. Although (says he to Pope
Damasus) thy greatness does fear me, yet thy humanity does inuit me; being a
sheep, I crave the help of my Shepherd. I speak with the successor of the
Fisher, and with the disciple of the Cross. I following no chief but Christ,
do associate my self with the communion of thy Beatitude, that is, of the
Chair of Peter. Upon that Rock, I know the Church to be buylt: whosoever out
of this house shall eat the lamb, he is profane: whosoever is not found in
the Ark of Noah, shall perish with the flood. And a little after, he that
gathers not with thee, scatters, that is, he that is not of Christ, is of
Antichrist. Where most evidently, he calls the Chair of the Pope, the Chair
of Peter, and the Rock of that Church, out of which there is no salvation; and
that he, who gathers not with the Pope, is not of Christ, but of Antichrist.
Yea so much he grounded him self upon the authority of the Pope, that he
affirmed he would not be affrayd to say, that there were three hypostases in
the Trinity, if the Pope should bid him. And again, in the end of his
exposition of the Creed to Pope Damasus. This is the Catholic faith (says he)
most blessed Pope, which we have learned of the Catholic Church, wherein if
any thing be less skillfully, or less warily set down, we desire that it may
be corrected by thee, that do hold the faith, and the seat of Peter. But if
this our confession shall be approved by thy Apostleship, whosoever will accuse
me, shall show himself, either to be ignorant, or maleuolous, or perchance no
Catholic, but me to be an heretic he shall not prove. Where he fignifyeth,
that none can be heretics, Lib. 1. appol cont. Ruff.
who suffer themselves to be corrected by the Popes authority. And concerning
the Roman Church, speaking against Ruffinus he says: What faith is that, which
he calls his? If he answer, the Roman faith: ergo, Catholici sumus, then are
we both Catholics; where he teaches plainly the Catholic and the Roman faith
to be the same. Lib. 3. appol. cont. Ruff.
And in the same treatise, know (says he) that the Roman faith praised by the
voice of the Apostles, does not receive any such illusions, although an Angel
should teach otherwise, then has been once preached.

With S. Hierome must go accompanied S. Augustine, who in his answer to the
letters of a certain Donatist, urging the perpetual duration of the Catholic
Church, built upon Peter according to the promise of our Savior, recounteth
above forty Popes, deducing them successively from S. Peter to Anastasius, who
was Pope at that time, and then concludes; that in all that order of
succession, Epist. 165.
no Donatist Bishop could be found: by which discourse he would prove, that the
Donatists were not the true Church, because no Pope, or head of the Church was
ever Donatist. Which in the same place he further confirms, by answering a
secret objection, that the Pope might err, because a wicked man might be Pope:
For (says he) though some traitor or Judas should have entered into that rank
or order, yet this could nothing prejudice the Church, nor the innocent
Christians, or believers, for whom our Lord had provided by saying of evil
governors, do what they say, but do not what they do, for they say, and do
not; to the end, that the assured hope of the faithful relying it self not
upon man, but upon God (or upon the word of our Savior) they might never be
divided by tempest of sacrilegious Schism. Where he proves, that no evil Pope
can err, because if that could be, the innocent Christians following our
Saviors commaundment, should be thereby deceived, Cont. ep. Fundame^ti cap. 4.
and divided in Schism. And therefore he also professes, that the succession
of Priests from the seat of Peter unto the Bishop living in his time, held him
in the Catholic Church; making that an argument of the true doctrine thereof.
And comparing the communion of the Apostolic head, with the members, to the
union of the mystical vine with the branches; In psalm. cont. part. Donat.
he exhorts the Donatists thereunto in these words. Come brethren, if you
please, that you may be grafted in the vine: It is a grief unto us, when we see
you to lie thus cut off. Number the Priests even from the very seat of Peter,
and in that order of Fathers, see who, and to whom each one succeeded. That
seat is the Rock, which the proud gates of Hell do not overcome, under
standing thereby, that they who were cut off from the communion of that seat
and succession, were also cut off from the Church of Christ; and that according
to the promise of our Savior, neither they, nor their errors should be able
to prouayle against it. Lib. 2. co^t. duas epist. Pelag. Lib. 1. cont. lu^li.
cap. 4.
And affirming against the Pelagians, that the antiquity of the Catholic
faith, was clearly known, by the letters of venerable Innocentius the Pope, he
infers; that to depart from his sentence, was to straggle from the Roman
Church; making it by this inferrence a certain sign of departure from the
Church of Christ. And rebuking a certain Pelagian: Me thinks (says he) that
part of the world should suffice thee (meaning for his belief in matters of
faith) wherein our Lord would that the chief of his Apostles, should be
crowned with a most glorious Martyrdom; unto the President of which Church,
being the blessed Innocentius, if thou would have given care, long since in
the dangerous time of thy youth, thou had freed thy self from the snares of
Pelagians. For what could that holy man answer to the Affrican Countells, but
that which the Apostolic seat, and the Roman Church does anciently hold with
other? Wherein he teaches, that the definition of the Pope ought to suffice
us, and that he cannot determine otherwise then according to the ancient Faith.

Optatus likewise, recounteth the lyneall succession of the Popes, and
begins the same in this manner. Therefore the Chair is united, which is the
first of her gists: therein Peter sat the first, to whom succeeded Linus etc.
numbering the rest unto Siricius, who lived in his time. And a little before he
says, it ought to be seen, who sat first in the Chair, and where he sat.
And afterward; tho^ can not deny; but thou know that the Episcopal
Chair was given first to S. Peter, in the City of Rome, wherein Peter the head
of all the Apostles sat: in which one Chair, unity ought to be kept of all
men: Signifying thereby, that Peter the head of all the Apostles, sat first
therein, to show that all those, that are members of the Church, are bound to
unite themselves unto it.

Tertullian is also one of those, that describes the Catalogue of the Roman
Bishops, which he composeth in verse, beginning with S. Peter, and ending with
Higinius, Pius, Anicetus. And in his book of Prescriptions he says: thou have
Rome, whose authority unto us also is ready at hand; so giving his reader to
understand, that the authority of Rome was an argument ever ready to confute an
heretic. And the^ follows, A Church happy in her state, to who^ the Apostles
powered forth (or gave abundantly) their whole doctrine, together with their
blood; meaning no doubt, that they powered forth their whole doctrine into it,
to be preserved therein for ever, in respect whereof he terms it happy per
excellentiam, which Irenaeus does more fully express, when he says, that we
must not go to others to seek the truth, which we may easily have from the
Church, Irenaeus l. 3. cap 3.
wherein the Apostles, as it were in a most rich treasure, have laid together
all those things, which are of truth, that from thence, every one who will may
receive the same. And thus much of those Fathers that do not only set down the
Popes succession to S. Peter, Tom. 1. Council. ante Council. Calced.
but also plainly teach, that his faith cannot fail, because he holds the
place of Peter, wherein none of the other Fathers disagree, or dissent from
the^. Petrus Chrysologus in his epistle to Euthiches the Heretic, condemned
afterward in the Calcedon Council, exhorts him in this manner. We exhort
the^e venerable brother, to attend attentively unto those things which are
written from the most blessed Pope of the City of Rome. For blessed Peter
living and governing in that his proper seat, gave the truth of faith, to all
those that secke it: which may serve for a clear exposition of the words of
Tertullian, and Irenaeus before said.

Prosper, S. Augustines Scholar, infers as most absurd, Prosp. co^t.
Collit. cap. 20.
that according to the ce^sure of his adversary, Pope Innocentius should have
erred, a man (says he) most worthy of the Seat of Peter. And likewise, that
the holy Seat of Blessed Peter should have erred, which spoke unto the whole
world, by the mouth of Pope Sozimus. Cap. 41.
And again; that Pope Innocentius strock the heads of wicked error, with the
Apostolical dagger. And that Pope Sozimus with his sentence gave force to the
Affrican Counsels: and armed the hands of all the Fathers with the sword of
Peter, to the cutting off, of the wicked. And that Rome by the principality of
Apostolical Preisthood, De vocat. gentium lib. 2.
was made greater by the Arc of Religion, then by the Throne of secular power.

S. Ambrose says, Ambros. cap. 3 1. ad Tim.
that though all the world be of God, yet his house is said to be the Church,
whereof at this day Damasus is the Rector. And else where. He demanded the
Bishop (says he) whether he agreed with the Catholic Bishops; that is,
whether he agreed with the Roman Church. Orat. in Satyrum.
In which words he makes it all one, to agree with the Church of Rome, and
with the Catholic Church. And again he says, Lib. 1. ep. 4. ad Imperatores.
that the clemency of the Pope should be entreated, not to suffer the head of
the whole Reman world, the Roman Church and that inviolable Faith of the
Apostles to be disquieted, because from thence did flow the Laws of venerable
communion unto all.

Saint Cyprian, besides that he teaches as you have heard, the cause of an
Heresy and Schism to be, Epist. 55. ad Cornel. Epist. 40. Ib. lib. 4. epist. 8.
for that one Priest, and one Judge for the time, is not acknowledged in the
Church of God: And that there is one chair, buylt by the voice of our Lord,
upon S. Peter, that whosoever gathers else where scatters, which S. Hierome
expounds (as you have heard) not to be with Christ, but with Antichrist;
being to signify unto the Pope, that one to whom he wrote, did communicate
with the Pope, expounding himself he says: Epist. 52.
that is, with the Catholic Church. Where he also makes it all one, to
communicate with the Pope, and to accord with the Catholic Church. And
complaining of certain Heretics, he uses these words: Epist. 55. ad
Cornelium.
They are so bold as to sail unto the chair of Peter, and to the principal
Church, from whence Priestly unity does proceed: not considering that they are
Romans, whose Faith is praised by the preaching of the Apostle; unto whom, no
falsehood can have access. Giving thereby to understand, that it was in vain
for Heretics to imagine that the Sea of Peter, or the Roman Church could be
deceived by them.

S. Cyril desired to know of Pope Celestine, Cyril. ep. 18. and tom. 1. Council.
Ephesians. cap. 10. and cap. 14.
whether he would communicate any longer with Nestorius the Heretic, for that
he presumed not to separate himself from him, without the Popes knowledge:
unto whom Pope Celessine answered: that with the authority of his Sea (the
Popes) and with the power of his place, as his Vicar, he should with all
diligence execute the sentence of excommunication etc. Whereunto S. Cyril
obayed. Who also, in his book, called the book of Treasury, as S. Thomas does
allege him, has these words: as Christ received most full power from his
Father; Opusc. 1. cont. err. Graec. cap. 32.. Habetur.
so also most fully he committed the same to S. Peter and his Successors.
Again, unto no other then unto Peter, but unto him alone, he gave; quod suum
est plenum, the fulness of his power. And again, D. Thom. in catena. Matt. 16.
according to this promise of our Lord (meaning that of the 16. of S. Matthew)
the Apostolic Church of Peter, does remain immaculate from all seduction, and
Heretical circumuention, in the Bishops thereof, in the most full Faith and
authority of Peter, over all the Primates of the Churches, and their people.
Again, D. Tho. op. co^t. Graec.
all according to the divine law bow down their heads to Peter, and the
Primates of the world obayed him as our Lord Jesus Christ himself. And S.
Thomas says further, that it is necessary to salvation to be under the Roman
Bishop: proving the same out of other words of S. Cyril in the same book,
saying. Therefore brethren, if we follow Christ, let us hear his voice as his
sheep, remaining in the Church of Peter: which testimonies, albeit now they are
not found in that volume of S. Cyrils, because (as it is known) many books
thereof have perished; yet in respect of the authority of S. Thomas, no
question can be made of the true allegation of them.

Lastly, not to be over tedious, I will conclude with the testimony of S.
Bernard, who imploring the Popes authority against a new Heresy then arising,
says: All dangers and scandalls arising in the Kingdom of God, especially
which concern Faith, ought to be referred to your Apostleship. For I think it
convenient, that the domages of the Faith, should there especially be amended,
where Faith can feel no defect. For this is the prerogative of that sea etc.

SECTION XII. The Popes Supremacy is proved by his being privileged from
error in doctrine of Faith; out of the Authorityes of the Popes themselves.
HAVING thus proved the Popes Supremacy, by the four first general Counsels,
and by the testimonies of the Fathers, not only in general: but also in the
particular point of their infallible doctrine, which is most in Controversy
between you and us; according as your patience and the straitnes of a letter
will permit: It is now expedient in this place, to show how the Catholics
demonstrate the same, by the authorityes of the Popes themselves. For how much
less the protestants esteem of them, so much the more, the holy Fathers as you
have seen, do magnify and extol them: submitting themselves no less to their
decrees, then to the sentences, and definitions of general Counsels. Suarez
in his answer to the Kings book, alleges the authorityes of more then
forty Popes within the first 600. years, for the power, dignity, and
succession of their Supremacy. Who being men, chosen by the spirit of God, and
of the primitive Church, in respect of their wisdom, and excellent gifts for
the government thereof: and the most of them being declared and acknowledged for
Saints and Martyrs, by the whole Christian world; I cannot tell with what face
any man that bears but the name of a Christian, can deny their authority. For
breuities sake omitting the most and greatest part, I will first produce some
of those Popes, that challenge to themselves the like stability in Faith and
doctrine, as the Fathers grant unto them, according to the word and promise of
our Savior made to S. Peter their predecessor: and afterward, I will
likewise prove their Supremacy in government, and Judicial power over the
Church of Christ.

Fabianus, acknowledges, that he was bound by the divine precepts and
Apostolical ordinations, to watch over the state of all Churches. Epist. 1.
That others were bound to know the sacred rites of the Roman Church, which was
called their Mother. Epist. 3. ad Hilarium.
And that he was advanced to that Priestly height, to forbid those things which
were unlawful, and to teach those things that were to be followed.

Lucius the first, in his Epistle to the Bishops of Spain, and France, says;
Epist. 1.
that the Roman Church is Apostolic, and the Mother of all Churches, which was
proved never to have erred from the path of the Apostolic tradition, nor to
have been depraved with Heretical nouelty: according to the promise of our
Lord, saying: I have prayed for thee etc. which promise you know can never
fail; and therefore the Roman Church can never err, as being united to S.
Peter and his successors, to whom the promise was made.

Felix the first, likewise says, that as the Roman Church, received in the
beginning, Epist. ad Benignu^.
the rule of Christian Faith, from her authors, or founders, the Princes of
Christ's Apostles; so it remains untouched, according to that, I have prayed
for thee etc.

Agatho likewise, in his Epistle to the Emperor Constantine, which was read
and and approved in the 6 general Council, says. This is the rule of the
true Faith, which the Apostolic Church of Christ, both in prosperity and
adversity has lively held etc. because, it was said to Peter, I have prayed
etc. here our Lord promised, that the Faith of Peter should not fail; and
admonished him to confirm his brethren, which the Apostolic Bishops, the
predecessors of my littleness, as all men know, have always fulfilled.

Simplicius, Epist. 1.
in his Epistle to Zeno the Emperor calling him son, and exhorting him to
defend the Faith, he says; for the same rule of Apostolical doctrine does
abide fast in his successors (speaking of Pope Leo) to whom our Lord inloyned
the care of his whole flock: where you see, he acknowledges tho doctrine of
the Pope to be a rule of Faith, which was to remain according to the
institution of our Savior. And else where he says notably as follows. The
doctrine of the holy memory of our Predecessors being extant (against the which
it is not lawful to dispute) whosoever does seem to be rightly wise, has no
need of new instructions.

Eusebius, in his Epistle to the Bishops of Tuscany and Campania says, Epist.
3.
that the sentence of our Lord Jesus Christ, cannot be pretermitted, which
says, thou art Peter etc. And those words which were then spoken, are proved
true, by the effects of things; because in the Apostolic sea, the Catholic
religion has always been kept without spot.

Gelasius likewise says: That the Apostolical sea is very careful, not to be
stained with any contagion of prauity, or false doctrine, because the glorious
confession of the Apostle (Peter) is the root. For, says he: If any such
thing should happen, Epist. ad Anastas. August.
which we assure our selves can never be, how should we presume to resist any
error etc. Where you see he proves, that the Apostolic seat, is privileged
from error; being grounded upon the confession of S. Peter, whereunto our
Savior promised that stability, which is fit for the root, and rock of truth.

Felix the 2. in his answer to Athanasius, and to the Egyptian Bishops,
understands likewise the words of Christ, Matthew 16.23. to be meant of the
Roman Sea. Lib. 4. ep. 32. cont. Joan. Ep. Constant.


Gregory the Great says: That it is manifest to all that know the Gospel,
that unto S. Peter the prince of the Apostles, the care of the whole Church was
committed, to whom it was said, Feed my sheep; Lib. 6. indict. 15. c. 37.
alias 201.
I have prayed for thee etc. thou art Peter etc. And else where he relate than
epistle of Enlogius the Patriarch of Alexandria, acknowledging the Chair of
Peter to be the sea of Rome, and then he adds: Who is it, Lib. 7. ep. 125.
that knows not, the holy Church to be founded on the solidity of the prince
of the Apostles? For the which cause he teaches also, that those things, Lib.
3. ep. 41.
which have been once decreed, by the authority of the Apostolic sea, do need
no other confirmation. And he admonishes Bonifacius, in one of his epistles,
to take heed that his soul be not found divided from the Church (...) Blessed
Peter, least he being despised here in this worth should shut the gate of life
against him in the next.

And to add one or two more of some what latter times, Nicolaus 1. in his
epistle to Michael the Emperor says: The privileges of that (...) the Roman)
are perpetually rooted, and planned by God; they may be thrust at, they cannot
be transferred; they may be pulled, they cannot be placked up. The same which
were before your reign, remain, God be thanked, hither to untouched, and
shall remain after you, and as long as the name of Christ is preached, they
shall not leave to subsist.

To conclude, Leo the 9. avouches: That by the sea of the Prince of the
Apostles, the Roman Church, and as well by S. Peter himself, as by his
successors, the devices of all Heretics have been reproved, convicted, and
beaten down, and the hearts of the brethren have been confirmed in the faith
of Peter, which hitherto has not failed, nor shall ever sail hereafter.

SECTION XIII. The Popes supremacy in Judicial authority is proved out of the
testimonies of the Popes themselves.
THVS far we have alleged the authority of the Popes themselves for their
supremacy, in matters of Faith, and for the infallibility of their doctrine. It
follows now to produce the like restimonyes of Popes for their Supremacy, in
some special points of Jurisdiction and government over the Church of God
^^rst therefore, concerning their authority, in calling and confirming of
Counsels, besides that which has been said already; out of the first four
general Counsels; Marcel.
Marcellus, who dyed about the year of Christ 310. in his epistle to the
Bishops of the province of Antioch affirms, that ^o Synod, or Council can be
lawfully made, without authority of the Roman sea. Julius.
Julius the first, in his epistle ad Orientales, calling the Roman sea the
first, says, That unto it, belongs the right of assembling Synodes, of
judging Bishops, and of reserving the greater causes unto it self, because it
is preferred before the rest, not only by the decrees of Canons and holy
Fathers, but also by the voice of our Lord and Saniour. Leo. Epist. 47.
Leo the first, in his epistle to the Calcedon Council, signified; that it was
the will of the Emperor, that the Council should be assembled, saving the
right and honor of the most blessed Peter the Apostle. And further he says:
That by his vicar, he was the President thereof. And in his epistle to Putcheria
the Empress, speaking of the decrees of that Synod, concerning the honor of
the second seat to be given to the Church of Constantinople, he says, that by
the authority of Blessed Peter the Apostle, with a general definition, he did
utterly disanull them, and make them void. Gelasius likewise, Gelasius.
in his epistle ad Dardanos, does avouch, that the Apostolical seat confirmed
all Synods, and that no Bishop can avoid his judgment.

More in particular concerning the Jurisdiction of the Roman sea over Bishops,
and in greater causes, Anicetus in his Epistle does say: Anicetus.
That it belongs to him, to determine the judgments of all Bishops. The like
has Elcutherius in his epist. cap. 2. Eleutherius. Victor.
And Victor in his epistle to Theophilus says, that to do the contrary, is
nothing else, but to transgress the bounds of the Apostles, and their
successors, and to violate their decrees. Felix likewise said, Felix. ep. 1.
that the greater causes of the whole Church, were reserved unto him.

Melchiades in his epistle to the Bishops of Spain saying, that it appertayned
unto him to judge of Bishops, adds these words following: Melchiades.
For these (meaning Bishops) our Lord reserved to his own judgment, and this
privilege he committed alone to the Blessed key-bearer Peter in his place;
which prerogative does justly accrue to his sea, to hold and inherit the same,
in all future times; because even among the Apostles, there was some
distinction of power. Bonifacius in his 2. epistle to the Bishops of France,
Bonifacius.
speaking of the judgment of Bishops, In Apol. 2. pro Athans.
in weighty causes, concludes thus: It is necessary, that they be confirmed by
our authority. Julius the first, in his epistle ad Orientales, in the cause of
Athanasius the Patriarch of Alexandria, Julius.
asks them, whether they were ignorant that it was the custom to write unto
his Church; if any Bishop were called in question of suspicion, that from
thence, that which was just, might be defined? And a little after he says
thereof: Those things, which we received from the blessed Peter the Apostle, we
fignify unto you, which I would not have written, imagining that they were
known unto you, unless the facts themselves had troubled you.

Gelasius in his epistle to the Bishops of Dardania says: Gelasius.
That the Church of Rome, has the knowledge of all things through the world,
because the sea of the Blessed Peter the Apostle, has authority to dissolve
whatsoever has been bound by the sentence of any other Bishops as unto whom
it belongs to judge of all Churches; neither is it lawful for any other to
judge of her judgment. Sixtus 2. Epist. 1.
Sixtus 2. pronounces, that it is lawful for Bishops to appeal, unto the
Apostolic sea, to whose disposition the ancient authority of the Apostles, and
their successors, and of the Canons, has reserved all the greater
Ecclesiastical causes, and the judgment of Bishops, because Bishops are
blamed, that deal otherwise with their brethren, then is pleasing to the Pope
of that seat. Damasus Theod. lib. 5. hist. c. 1
Damasus, in his epistle to the Bishops of Numidia, admonishes them, that they
should not permit, to defer unto him, as their head, all things which might
be subject to disputation, or question, as the custom (says he) has always
been. Lastly, concerning the ordination of Bishops, Leo. Epist. 82.
Leo, writing to his vicar in the East, the Bishop of Thessalonia, commands,
that the Metropolitan should certify his vicar of the person of the Bishop that
was to be consecrated, and of the consent of the clergy, and of the people,
that with his authority, the ordination which was duly celebrated, might be
confirmed. And S. Gregory, in his epistle to Constantia the Empress, Gregorius
aduertising her, that the Bishop of Salonae (a Predecessor of this our
fugitive Bishop; who is now with you) was ordained without his knowledge, or
the priuity of his vicar, or legate (Responsalis) adds concerning the same,
and facta res est; and such a thing is done, as never happened under any of our
former Princes.

SECTION XIIII. The Popes Supremacy is proved by the ancient and continual
practice thereof, in the Catholic Church.
THVS having proved the Supremacy of the Pope, as well in matter of faith, as
in jurisdiction and government, by the sentences of so many Popes, which
according to the doctrine of the Fathers, are above all exceptions, and permit
no answer from any man that would be accounted a Catholic: It remains for
the conclusion, and most full and absolute proof of this matter to confirm
the same, by the received practice thereof, and approved execution of this
authority in the Church of God, which I will do very briefly, because I
consider, that I have dwelt too long in this, matter already. Wherefore
concerning Counsels, it shall be sufficient to say; that such as have resisted
the Pope, or his Legates in their definitions, have always erred, as the
second Council of Ephesus, and the Council of Constantinople, in the time of
Nicolaus the first, and that such Counsels as were rejected by the Pope, have
had no authority in the Church of Christ. Whereof Gelasius the Pope gives many
examples in his book (de Anathemate) and in his epistle to the Bishops of
Dardania. And in particular, Theodoretus speaking of the Council of Ariminum
says: That it ought not to have any force, the Bishop of Rome, whose sentence
before all other was to be expected, not consenting thereunto. And in the
Council of Chalcedon, Dioscorus the Patriarch of Alexandria, was commanded
not to sit amongst the Bishops, because he presumed to call a Council without
the authority of the Apostolic seat: Epist. ad Solitar.
Quod numquam licuit, numquam factum est, which (say they) was never lawful,
was never done. And the famous Athanasius speaking of Constantius the Arian
Emperor, who took upon him to be president in a Council which he assembled
at Millane: Who (says he) seeing him to make himself Prince of Bishops in
their decrees and president in their Ecclesiastical judgment, may not worthily
say, that he is the same abomination of desolation, which was fortold by the
Prophet Daniel?

And as for the sentence of the Pope, always received in matter of faith,
that may suffice, which Bellarmine says: That if for the extinguishing of 7.
Heresies, the first seven general Counsels were called, above a 100.
heresies have been extinguished by the Apostolic sea alone, with the help of
particular Counsels; yet I cannot omit to confirm the same by some few
examples. A Co^trouersy being risen about the dignity of the holy Ghost,
Zozomenus records: That the Bishop of Rome, Lib. 6. cap. 22.
being advertised thereof, wrote his letters to the Bishops of the East, that
they should believe, together with the Bishops and Priests of the West, the
Blessed Trinity to be consubstantiall, and equal in glory: Which being done
(says he) and the matter being judged by the Roman Church, all men were quiet:
and so that Co^trouersy seemed to have an end. Prosper. co^t. Collat. cap. 41.
S. Prosper says, that Innocentius of blessed memory, stroke upon the head of
the wicked Pelagian heresy, with his Apostolical dagger: and that Celestine
delivered our Country from that disease. And a little after, that by his care
Scotland was made Christian.

In the second age or Century of the Church, in the time of those horrible
persecutions, the Controversy of rebaptizing those that were baptized by
heretics, began to grow hot, and the tempest was so great, that if it did not
cast down some principal bulwarks of the Church, it made the strongest
Towers to shake. At which time, in hatred of Heretics, Firmilianus an
excellent man; with the other Bishops of the East decreed rebaptization in the
case aforesaid, and that those were to be punished, that doubted thereof. In
Africa S. Cyprian, and very many other Bishops joining with him, in sundry
Counsels declared their opinions in favor thereof, though they would not
condemn the rest of the world, that practiced the contrary. In Aegipt also
Dionisius Patriarch of Alexandria, any other singular ornament of that age,
inclyned to the opinion of S. Cyprian But then the authority of S. Peter, in
his successor Pope Steven, did well appear, who with no other arms, but with
the tradition of his Predecessors sustavned the brunt of so many most famous,
both Oriental, and Occidentall Bishops, who excommunicating those that had
made a decree against the ancient custom of the Church, and threatening the
rest, that taught rebaptization to be lawful, prevailed so much, that all the
Oriental Churches conspyring together moan mind, as Dionysius said, Eusebius. l.
7.
and changing their opinions, were reunited again with the band of peace. And
Dionysius himself, changing also his opinion, became so scrupulous, that he
refused to baptize one that had not been sufficiently baptized of the
Heretics, retourning to the Catholic Church, before he had made the Pope
acquainted with it. And the Bishops of Africa likewise, that had followed S.
Cypria^, made a new decree to the contrary, as witnesses S. Hierome. And S.
Augustine says: Hier. co^t. Luciferia^. August. epist. 48.
that it is very probable, that S. Cypria^ also corrected himself, and that
his change in opinion was suppressed by the Heretics. And truly, who can
imagine; that such a man as he, tendering so much the peace of the Church as he
did, should remain obstinate alone in his own opinion? See this more at large
in Baronius, Vin. cont. Lyrin. c. 9.
in the year of our Lord 158. and 159. And Vincentius Lirinensis, who notably
descrybeth the success of this victory.

Lastly Pope Pius the first, having made a decree, that the Feast of Easter,
should be celebrated only upon Sunday, against those, Eusebius l. 5. cap. 24.
that pretended the example and tradition of S. John to the contrary; and 3. of
his successors forbearing to compel them for quietness sake, Tertul. de
praescrip. cap. 53. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 14.
by Ecclesiastical censure thereunto; Pope Victor succeding, and perceiving
them to be much confirmed in their opinion, called a Council in Italy, and
caused others to be assembled in France, and also in other Countries. And
Theophilus Bishop of Cesarea, and Palestina, Beda de equinoctiali in verno.
receiving his command (as Bede our Countreyman records) assembled Bishops,
not only out of his own Province, but also out of diverse other countries: and
showed the authority, that Pope Victor had sent him, and declared, quid sibi
operis fuit iniunctum: and in all the Eastern Counsels, it being determined,
that the Feast of Easter should be kept upon Sunday, according to the custom
of the Roman Church, Eusebius. l. 5. cap. 24. Niceph. l. 4. c. 38.39.
Pope Victor denounced excommunication against all the Churches of Asia, that
would not conform themselves thereunto. Whereupon (though some did think it
rigourously done) not only the greatest part of the Churches of Asia did yield
therein: but also as Nicephorus testifyeth it was decreed throughout the world,
that the Feast of Easter should be kept upon Sunday: and they that refused so
to do, were holden for Heretakes, and called Quartadecimani.

The same Controversy being grown very great in Britany, August. haeres. 29.
Beda lib. 3. hist. cap. 2.
between the English that mantayned the custom of Rome, and the Scottish that
stood out in schism: and the matter being debated in the presence of King
Oswy, Colomannus with the Scottish Clergy relied upon the authority of
Anatolins and Columba his predecessors. Wilfrid on the other side answered;
That Columba, albeit a holy man, could not be preferred before Peter, to whom
our Lord said, thou art Peter, and upon this Rock etc. King Oswy, that had
been infected with the Scottish schism, asked Colomannus, whether he could
prove the like authority to have been given to Columba, as was given to Peter,
who answering no: Nay then quoth the King merrily, I assure you, I will not in
any thing contradict that Porter; but to my knowledge and power I will obey his
comaundements. Whereupon, all that were present (says S. Bid) allowed thereof,
and yielded to receive the Catholic custom of keeping Easter on the Sunday.

And now to go forward with the received practice, and execution of the Popes
authority in other Judicial matters, Leo. Ep. 89.
Pope Leo writing unto the Bishops of France, bids them, remember and
acknowledge with him, that the Priests of their Province, had consulted with
the Apostolic sea, in innumerable matters, and according to the diversity of
their causes and appeals, their former Judgments had been retracted, or
confirmed. As touching deposition of Bishops, you have already hard of the
deposition of Dioscorus in the fourth general Council, by the Popes Legates,
which was done in these formal words: Conc. Chal. act. 3.
Leo, the most holy and Blessed Pope, and head of the universal Church, endued
with the dignity of Peter the Apostle, who is entitled the foundation of the
Church, the Rock of Faith, and the doore-keper of the Kingdom of Heaven: By us
his Legates, the holy Synod consenting, has depryued Dioscorus of Episcopal
dignity, and excluded him from all Priestly function. Cypr. lib. 5. epist. 13.
S. Cyprian wrote to Pope Stephen, to excommunicate and depose Marcian the
Bishop of Arles in France, and to advertise him who should succeed him; that he
and the Bishops of Afric might know to whom to direct their letters. Peter
the Patriarch of Alexandria, Soc. lib. 4. hist. cap. 3.
as Socrates relates, returning with the letters of Damasus the Roman Bishop,
the people confiding in them, Nicol. ep. ad Micha.
expelled Lucius, and received Peter into his place. Nicolaus the first,
writing to Michael the Emperor, reckons up 8. Patriarchs of that Church,
deposed by the Bishops of Rome before his time. Theod. l. 5. hist. c. 23. Soc.
lib. 5. hist. c. 15. Sozom. l. 8. cap. 3.
Flauianus Patriarch of Antioch was deposed by Pope Damasus: and both S.
Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople, and Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria
were intercessors for him to the Pope. And to conclude, Polichronius Patriarch
of Jerusalem, was deposed by Sixtus the 3. Tom. 2. Council. in actis 60.
So that you see, the exercise of the Popes authority in the deposition of many
of the four principal Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and
Jerusalem.

And as for those, that appealed to the Sea Apostolic, and were restored by
the same, the examples are infinite. Let it suffice, that Athanasius the great
Patriarch of Alexandria, Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, Marcellus Bishop of
Ancyra, Asclepas Bishop of Gaza, and Lucianus Bishop of Adrianopolis, Sozom. l.
3. hist. c. 8. Tripart. hist. l. 4. cap 15.
were all at Rome, at one time, iniustly deposed and expelled by the Oriental
Synod: And that Pope Julius, as Sozomeus has recorded, understanding whereof
they were accused, received them into his communion: and that (the care of all
belonging unto him in respect of the dignity of his sea) he restored to every
one of them their Churches; and wrote to the Bishops of the East, blaming them,
and gave commandment, that some in the name of the rest should appear before
him, at a day prefixed, Many other excellent men and great Saints of God
appealed to the Pope, as S. Chrysostom and Flauianus, Christ. ep. ad Innoc.
Theod. ep. ad Leon.
Bishops of Constantinople. So did Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus, who was also
restored by him, as testy fieth the great Council of Chalcedon saying: The
most holy Archbishop Leo restores to him his Bishopric. And Gregory the
great, Gregor. l. 2. cap. 6.
did excommunicate a B. of Greece called John, for that he had presumed to
judge another Bishop, that had appealed to the sea Apostolic. To this might be
added their censures, and excommunications of Kings and Emperous. In a word
Philip, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 25.
the first Christian Emperor, was excluded from the Communion of the Sacrament
of the Altar, upon Easter day, for some public sins of his, Niceph l. 3.
cap. 34.
by Pope Fabianus; neither could he be admitted before he had purged himself,
by Confession and Penance. Innoc, ep. 17. ad Arcad. Imp.
Innocentius the first, having hard of the death of S. Chrysastome,
excommunicated the Emperor Arcadius, and his Wife Eudoxia, for not permitting
S. Chrysostom to be restored to his seat, as Innocentius commanded: which he
did in these words: I, the least, and a sinner, to whom the Throne of the great
Apostle Peter is commended in charge, do segregate thee, and her, from
receiving the immaculate Misteryes of Christ our God etc.

The exercise of the Popes authority, is yet more confirmed, and evidently
proved by the authority of the Common Laws, which for the most part are
nothing else but the decrees of Popes, and of Counsels confirmed by the Pope,
which having been always received and practiced among all Catholic Nations,
professing the name of Christ, do make an invincible argument for the Popes
Supremacy: and which is most especially to be noted, in all ages since Christ,
there cannot be found one Catholic Doctor, or Deuyne, that ever opposed
himself, either against the doctrine, or against the practice of this
authority, as unlawful, or usurped by the Popes of Rome. In so much, that
albeit the Popes have been sometimes admonished, and accused to have proceeded
with much rigor, Cypr. l. 1. ep. 3. and 4. Eusebius. l. 5. hist. c. 24.
or with too little information in their censures, as by S. Cyprian for
example, and S. Irenaeus, and others: yet none have ever doubted of the
lawfulnes of their authority. And as you have heard, Epist. ad Martian. and
Vale^t. Imp. and ep. ad Leone^. Con. Chal. act. 3.
in the Calcedon Council, it was accounted no less their fury and madness of
presumption in Eutiches, that attempted to call a general Council, and to
excommunicate the Pope thereby.

SECTION XV. The Conclusion of this discourse of the Popes Supremacy.
I Have showed unto you as orderly, as clearly, and as briefly as I could some
of those evident proofs, which the Catholics are wont to bring for the Popes
Supremacy, deducing the same from manifest places of Scripture, which convince
the continuance and perpetual duration thereof in the Church of God; from the
lineall descent thereof, upon those that succeeded S. Peter in the Church of
Rome, abundantly testified by tradition, and by the Fathers; from the
definitions of the four first general Counsels; from the authorityes of the
ancient Fathers in the point of the Popes infallable doctrine, grounded upon
the words and promises of our Saniour; from the sentences of the Popes
themselves justly clayming their Supremacy, not only in teaching and
admonishing, but also in ruling and governing the Church of God; and lastly
from the ancient, continual, and uncontrolled practice of their authority,
which, whether you respect the divine Law, or the vtility, and necessity of the
matter it self, or the opinions of Lawyers, and Sages; or the auouchement of
most lawful witnesses; or the sentences of most venerable Judges; or the
Judgment of Supreme Judicial Courts; or the practice, experience, and custom
of the whole world; make the evidence so strong, the proof so full, and the
demonstration so clear, as the like in no sort can ever be brought before any
Judicial Bench, for the proof of any matter whatsoever may come in question.
And therefore no doubt, all those shallbe inexcusable before God, that
continuing obstinate in their own opinions, do either reject or contemn it.

And truly, if it might be permitted unto us, to plead the statute of the first
year of Queen Elizabeth, whereby the four first general Counsels were
approved, and made to be Law: and that we might upon those points of learning
contained in them which I have before recited, confirming them not only by the
opinions of the Fathers, which are the Doctors and Advocates, but also by so
many decrees and sentences of the Popes, which are the judges of the Church;
concluding, and bynding all those proofs aforsayd, with the practice and
custom of the Church, time out of mind, which is the best interpreter of all
Laws, both humane and divine: And if we might be suffered withal to plead the
Statute of Magna Charta, for the exemption of Priests from temporal
jurisdiction, which is the most ancient written Law of England, and continues
still in force, and unrepealed: and to omit, that King Henry the 8. is now
commonly reputed a Tyrant, as is testyfied in your own historyes, which is
sufficient to make all his acts and Laws unlawful, that concern not the
interest of particular persons: If we might show, that those branches of the
statutes made against us in the first year of the Queen, are of no force or
validity, being enacted by the Lords temporal alone, against the ancient for
me of Parliament, and the privileges of our Kingdom, and therefore, that the
confirmation of them in the time of our gracious King that now reigns, ought
to be of no effect.

And lastly, if our complaints might be heard, that in the execution of those
bloody Laws against us, so many ways unjust in themselves, no form of
Justice is observed, the Judges condemning us without any sufficient witnesses
produced against us, that can affirm, according to the words of the statute
whereupon we are indicted, that we are Priests, and that we were made Priests in
the Seminaryes beyond the seas, whereby so much innocent blood has been so
unchristianly shed under the cloak of Justice, in our peaceful Country. I
say, if we might be permitted to plead all this, though it were in West minster
Hall, before the Judges themselves that are so cruelly bent against us, and in
the audience of those Puritan Lawyers, and common Justices, who as being most
ignorant of our cause, are more our enemies then the Ministers themselves: and
that we might set before their eyes, how ungently, dishonourably, uncivilly,
and unnaturally, they have persecuted many times, their own blood, their
friends, and nearest kynred, to whom in virtue and piety they were not
comparable, and against whom no other crime could be proved, but the ancient
religion of Christendom, commonly either justified, or not condemned, even in
the consciences of those that apprehended them, and prosecuted, and executed
the former laws upon them: and if we might show unto them, how by this means,
they have crucified our Savior, not once, or twice, but again and again for
so many years together in his holy members; I cannot but think, that
representing these things unto them, in virtue of that Word, which deuideth
between the soul and the spirit, the ioints and the marrow, awaking in them
the guilt of their own consciences, and the fear of Gods iugments, we should
enforce them to knock their breasts with the Jews, converted at the Sermon of
S. Peter, and to cry out unto us with tears of repentance, Act. 2.17.
Quid faciemus viri fratres? men and brethren what shall we do?

SECTION XVI. The absurd and pernicious grounds of the Bishops 10. Books, and
his Christian Commonwealth, are further discovered and confuted.
AND now to return to our Bishop, I think by this time you perceive, that
albeit this little book of his, be great bellyed like the Father, yet his
other ten books conceived therein, are but like so many bladders full of wind,
which if ever they come forth, are like to shame, not only himself, but you
also: Not only because the former proofs of the Popes Supremacy are in
themselves unanswerable, especially admitting as he does, the authority of the
Counsels, Canons, and Fathers of the Church; but also in respect of that most
absurd, and most pernicious Position, which he makes the argument of his fifth
book, and is indeed the very foundation of his Christian Commonwealth, and the
main ground of his Divinity, wherein he professes to hold, that there is no
Jurisdiction in the Church of Christ: Iurisdictionem omnem ab Ecclesia procul
reijcio: all Jurisdiction (says he) I cast far away from the Church; that is
to say, all power and authority to command, or to make spiritual laws, or to
impose any punishment for the transgression of them. A miserable devise, no
less furious, then dangerous, and no more repugnant to the Popes Supremacy,
then directly contrary to the Counsels and Fathers, and to the practice of the
Primitive Church, in making laws and Canons, and imposing censures upon
transgressors; directly contrary as well to the institution of Christ, in the
authority which he gave to S. Peter, as you have seen, as also to the doctrine
and proceeding of the Apostles themselves, whereof no man that can read the
Scriptures should be ignorant: Let every soul be subject to the higher powers
(says S. Paul) for there is no power, Romans 13.1.
but of God etc. Therefore he that resists the power, resists the ordinance
of God; and they that resist, purchase to themselves damnation. Romans 13.5.
And a little after: Therefore be ye subject of necessity, not only for
avoiding wrath, but also for Conscience sake.

Out of which place, we may argue thus. The Church has received power and
authority from God, and therefore they that resist the same, resist, and
disobey the ordinance of God, and purchased to themselves damnation. That the
Church has received power and authority to govern from Almighty God, is to
too manifest; for so all the Fathers expound the words of our Savior to S.
Peter, Whatsoever thou shall bind etc. and to the Apostles, Matt. 16.19. Matt.
18.18.
whatsoever you shall bind etc. And that binding signifies the imposing of
some law or commaundment, we find in the 23. Matt. 23.4.
of S. Matthew: They bind (says our Savior) burdens heavy and importable upon
the shoulders of men, but they with their finger will not move them; and in the
same manner the Fathers expound those other words, Joan. 21.11.16.17.
feed my sheep. of the government of Christ's sheep, as you have heard. And our
Savior signifying, how much we are bound in conscience to obey our Prelates,
said unto them: Luc. 1^.16.
He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me. And
again, as my Father sent me, Ioa^. 20.21.
so send I you, and he that will not hear the Church, let him be to thee, as
an heathen, and Publican. Act. 16.4.
According whereunto it is said of S. Paul, and S. Timothy, that passing
through the Gittyes, they delivered unto them to keep the precept of the
Apostles, and of the Elders. 1. These. 2.23.
And to the Thessalonians he says: You know what commaundments I have given
unto you; he that despises them, despises not man, but God that gave his holy
spirit unto us: and if any do not obey our word, note him by an epistle, 1.
Tim. 5.
and do not accompany with him, that he may be confounded. So he writes to
Timothy, not to receive my accusation against a Priest, under 2. or 3.
witnesses. And to the Corinthians, the weapons of our warrefare says he, are
not carnal; but mighty to God, 1. Cor. 10.7.
unto the destruction of munitions, destroying Counsels, and all loftynes
extolling it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
all understanding, unto the obedience of Christ, Act. 15.20.
and having in a readynesse to revenge all disobedience etc. And in the first
Counsel the Church of Jerusalem made this Decree: It seems good to the holy
Ghost and to us, not to impose any other burden upon you, but only these
necessary things, to abstain from meats offered to Idols from strangled
meats, from blood, Can. Apost. Can. 62.
and fornication. And the punishment of those that did eat blood, or strangled
meat, afterward was so great in the Primitive Church, as that Clarks were
deposed, and lay men were excommunicated for the same.

Neither is this most pestilent assertion of the Bishop contrary to Scripture
alone, and to the Fathers and Counsels, as has been showed, but also to the
practice and doctrine of the Church of England. For I would ask this wild
Bishop, whether the authority the English Bishops, in their spiritual Courts
be from God or no? If it be, then according to S. Paul, all men are bound to
obey them, in that which is just, upon pain of damnation. If it be not, then
it is no small usurpation in them, to take upon them such authority: whereof
the Bishop should do well, to admonish them as his friends, before he go about
to reform the Catholic Bishops, whom he supposes to be his enemies. In
conclusion, the necessity of Jurisdiction is so evident in it self, and the
institution thereof so palpable in Scripture, that the Puritans themselves, who
deny the same to Bishops, are enforced notwithstanding to challenge so much to
themselves, as may suffice to excommunicate all those, who are obstinatly
disobedient in their Congregations. And therefore I think there is none but
himself so drunk at this day with heresy in Christendom, as to deny the
lawfullnes of all Jurisdiction in the Church of God.

And as this position is most pernicious to all kind of Churches, or spiritual
Co^gregations whatsoever they be, in taking away al obligation of obedience
from them; so also, it is most dangerous to kingdoms and commonwealthes: for
such as in our time, have opposed themselves to the Jurisdiction of the Church,
have likewise for the most part denied their band of obedience to all temporal
government. And their principal ground or reason is the same in both: For no
man, say they, that sees not another man's conscience, can bind the conscience
of his brother: And that all being made free by Baptism, ought to enjoy the
liberty of the Gospel. Whereof it follows, that neither sons, nor
servants, nor wives, nor subjects, are bound to obey their Superiors for
conscience sake, but only, and at the most, either for fear, or else for the
avoiding of some public scandal: which doctrine, if it were once received,
would in short space make Christians worse then Heathens.

And therefore, I marvel how your English Bishops, could let such doctrine
pass, being no less contrary to their authority, then to the Popes Supremacy,
and no less perilous to themselves, then to the government of the whole
kingdom; unless perhaps, finding their case to be desperate, they desire more
to offend their enemy, then to defend themselves, and would be content their
heresy should sink, so the Catholic Religion might be drowned with it. But
the Bishop being reputed to have gotten some learning, when he was young, and
not being yet so old as to dote for age; above all it is to be marueiled, how
he could suster himself to be so much deceived by the Devil, as to ground his
10. years studyes, (the 10. books of his Christian commonwealth, and in a word
his whole religion, and the salvation of his soul) upon an absurdity so
gross, so foul, enormous, and dangerous to Church and Commonwealth as this
is: and the strangenes of his illusion, is so much the greater, because he was
so blinded therewith, that he saw not how manifestly he was enforced to
contradict himself, not only in other places of this his book, where he
gra^teth that Christian Princes have power to do many things in the Church,
and challenges unto himself I know not what authority over Bishops in some
cases (which should make the Bishop of Canterbury to look about him:) but also
in the very title of his Book, which he calls his Ecclesiastical
Commonwealth, because it does inuolue a manifest contradiction, to this his
strange position. For unless it be merely a dream, and much more fantastical,
then Platoes Idaea, no man can imagine, how any Commonwealth should be framed,
or est ablished without some Jurisdiction or power of government given
thereunto.

If he had contained himself within any reasonable bounds, and relied his
proofs upon the Scripture alone, interpreting the same according to his own
sense, how strange soever; he might perhaps have made some shift therewith for a
while, as his fellows have done before him. But to pretend and contend, as he
does, that according to the Fathers, Counsels, and Canons, there is neither
superiority of government in the head, nor power of Jurisdiction in the body of
Christ's Church, is an evident sign, that as he has forsaken God, so also God
in his justice, has not only forsaken him, but also in great part has taken
his wits and reason from him. For as S. Augustine says of the Prophesyes of
the Church, that they are more clear in Scripture, then the prophesyes of
Christ himself, because the trial of all other Controuersyes, depends: upon
the knowledge of the Church: so also for the same reason, God Almighty in his
providence has so ordained, that the Jurisdiction of the Church, and the
authority of the head thereof, should be more expressly taught, and abundantly
proved by the Doctors, Pastors, and ancient Fathers, then any other point in
Controversy. So that he might better have gone about to prove and maintain out
of the Fathers Canons, or Counsels, that the Son is not equal with the
Father, or the holy Ghost not equal to the Son, or not proceeding from the
Father and the Son, or that our Blessed Lady ought not to be called the
Mother of God, or some other of those anciently condemned and rotten heresies;
then to prove, that there is no Jurisdiction in the Church, nor any inequality
of government amongst the Pastors thereof. And therefore, as most impudently
he denies the latter, so it is much to be feared, that he faltereth also in
the former, whereof he gives many shrewd signs, and apparent tokens in this
little book; and much more is it likely he will bewray himself in the greater
when it comes forth. For being borne upon the confines of Turkey, and Greece,
in which Country those ancient heresies have tirannized heretofore, and worse
succeeded them in latter ages; the suspicions wherewith (as he professes) he
was troubled when he was young, by all reason were more in favor of the
Eastern heresies, which he knew, then of these of the West, which he knew not.
And the books of the Arian and Greciin heresies, being no less forbidden in
Italy, then the heretical writers of these western parts, whereby his
suspicions were much more increased, it is very probable, that they swayed his
mind more to that side, then to this.

His masters also, do commonly dispute more against them, then against these,
whom they are content to pretermit, in these parts, there being no use of the
knowledge of them. And therefore by all likelihood his suspicions increased most
in favor of those opinions, whereunto he was naturally most affected, and
wherewith he had more to do, and which did more belong unto him to know, then
the other did. And besides all this, that which he makes his chief quarrel
against the Pope, is only the excommunication and condemnation of those
opinions for heresies, which he says are not sufficiently condemned by the
Church; although it be manifest, and he denies it not, that they have been
condemned by general Counsels. And that inborne desire of peace, Page 35.
and unity, which he pretends of the East and West, seems to consist in
nothing else, but only in permitting every Bishop, at the least, to abound in
his own sense, and to hold what he list, as long as he does not separate
himself from the rest, nor condemn their opinions.

And lastly, to return to the matter, which we have in hand, by taking away
all Jurisdiction from the Church of God, he makes void and repealeth the
Anathema, and excommunication of all former heretics: and by condemning the
Fathers and Counsels, for condemning them without judicial authority, he
restores them all to their first pretended pleas, and old forged titles, And
the renewing of these ancient censures and condemnations of Heretics by the
Church of Rome at this day, I take to be some part of those innumerable
heresies, whereof he accuses the Sea of Rome, to be every day an author; for
otherwise that monstrous Hyperbole of his could have no proportion: and within
the number of those other very many Churches, which here he says, that Rome
has unjustly made her adversaries, must be contained, not only those of the
West, which are but two or three notoriously known, but also the other of the
East, that is to say, the Grecians and Arians at the least, if the Turks and
Jews do not also come in, to make up the reckoning of so great a number.

The fury of Heresy being now ouerblowne, wherewith it entered first into our
miserable Country, and the Kingdom having been a long time settled in a
reposed kind of government, many strangers of good judgment, and well affected
to our Nation, do wonder to see, that it receives with triumph, all kind of
Fugitives, and Apostata Friars, that come running thither, of what life, or
what religion soever they be, so long as they profess themselves enemies to
the Church of Rome; which many wise men, our friends, who are lookers on,
esteem and affirm, to be no less dishonorable then dangerous to any well
ordered, and well governed society. And in very deed, what reputation I pray
you, can it give unto you, in the eye of your Neighbor Countries, to see the
scumme, and vomit of other Nations, and their Religious Orders to be so much
esteemed and magnifyed among you? or what conceit can they make either of your
zeal in religion, or wisdom in government; that open your arms to every
Sectary, and your pulpits to every renegate pretending to preach, although his
conversation, his intention, his private opinions, or the cause of his coming,
be never so much unknown unto you? And at this time, I pray God it prove not
too true, that in the shape of a Bishop, you have received a most venomous, and
pestiferous serpent into your bosom. For albert as yet he does not show his
head by discovering his opinions in all the particular points of Christian
Religion (making demonstration of malice against the Pope alone:) yet in the
windings and turnings of this little book (as I have showed) and especially in
destroying all jurisdiction, in arrogating to his own judgment above measure,
and in challenging liberty to abound in his own sense, he discovers a most
fearful and deformed body. For, if this which he pretends, may be permitted
to himself and others, there is no point of Religion, which will not presently
be called in question: every thing will be made a quodlibet; and as the
Academikes in Philosophy, so you also in Divinity, must hold all things
probable, and problematicall: whereof it will shortly follow, that as all the
wisdom of the Academy, was summed in this one sentence, Hoc tantum scio, quod
nihil scio; so the Religion of England will be wholly reduced to this one article,
hoc tantum credo, quod nihil credo.

And the danger hereof is the greater at this time, because as I understand it
is an opinion growing into fashion among you, that a man may be saved in any
Religion, so he believe in Christ: and I have seen one of your principal
Doctors cyted, D. Morton in his treatise of the kingdom of Israel. page 94.
who durst to publish in prynt; that an Arian might be saved, because albeit he
deny the Deumity of Christ, yet he confesses Christ to be the true Messies:
which your Doctor thinks sufficient for salvation. From whence, every man
being permitted to abound in his own sense, as the Bishop would have it, your
self may judge, how easy a matter it is to pass a little further, and to
think that it may suffice to hold, that Christ was a great Prophet, as the
Turks do, or that it is indifferent to believe whether he be come or no, which
disposes to Iudaisme; or that a moral life may be sufficient to save us in
any Religion, which is plain Gentility. And if this be the union of the East
and West, and of the North and South, which the Bishop so much desires to
establish in his Ecclesiastical Common Wealth; I am sure, that none but the
Devil can be the head thereof: and to satisfy the man's ambition, if it were to
do him good, I should be contented for my part, that he himself should be made
the Vicar. But thus you see, how such as once fall from the Catholic Church,
which is the body, do easily contemn the head thereof, who is Christ himself,
and come to loose not only their dewine faith, which none can have but they
that believe the true Church: but also to renounce their moral belief, and
former persuasion of that truth of Christianity, wherein they were bred; which
hitherto God be thanked, has been constantly mayntained in our Country.

SECTION XVII. The substance of the Bishops 10. books being thus confuted, the
main point of this other Book, which he makes the ground of his Conversion,
That the doctrine of the Protestants differs little or nothing from the
doctrine of the ancient Fathers, is disproued, by sundry general reasons, and
by the Fathers themselves, codemning the Protestants opinions for no less then
Heresies.
FOR this important consideration, and to meet with the danger of Neutrality
in Religion, so fast increasing in our Country; as I find it most easy, so I
think it most necessary, in these desperate times, to make some co^futation of
these idle dreams and sottish illusions of the Devil, by showing plainly out
of the rule of Faith, and according to the ground of natural reason, that no
man can be saved without the perfect love of God: which requires perfect
obedience, both of the understanding in believing the Catholic Church, whom
God has appointed to teach us; and also of the will in keeping Gods Precepts,
and Commandments. Which indeed were a medicyne most appropriate to the
diseases of the time, and a hatchet laid to that root, from whence the Bishops
tree is already sprung, and which spreads a pace, in the hearts, not only of
the idle youth, which I fear, but also of those that take themselves to be the
wisest men in our Country.

But because, I am loath to be over troublesome at this time, and that this
Treatise requires some have, which growing in my hand from a letter to a
book, should have been dispatched long since, not only to give just
contentment to your self expecting my answer to your letter: but also to
satisfy others, who having hard: the Bishops tale, keep one ear open all this
while to hear the reply of the contrary party; I will reserve the handling of
this matter for a fresher pen, and for this time I will coment my self with
those authorityes which I have a leady produced out of the Fathers, pronouncing
such, as are not united with the Pope, it be confounded with the succession of
his seat, built upon the premise of our Saniour, to be propbane, to be out of
the Arc, Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. Hier. epist. ad Dam. Aug. in psalm. cont. part.
Don.
not to gather, but to seatter, not to be of Christ, but of Antichrist, to be
branches cut off from the byne, and members denided from the body, that in the
next life, the gate of heaven shall be shut against them, and the like. For the
which I reserre me to the 14. and 15. Section of this treatise. Whereunto shall
be added more anon, when by occasion of these frivolous motions and illusions,
which made the Bishop to forsake his religion, we come to propound some of
those solid, and substantial motives, which are sufficient to induce any man,
that is not wilfully obstinate, to become a Gatholike. And for the present,
because he seems to set down the main ground of his peruorsion, or
conversion (as you please to term it) in those words especially, where he
says, That reading the Fathers, and perusing the Counsels, and ancient
customs of the Church, with great labor and busy diligence, for so many
years together, he plainly saw at the length, that the doctrine of those
Churches, being very many in number, which Rome has made her adversaries, do
little, or nothing differ from the ancient doctrine of the pure Church; the
discussion hereof will also fall out to be very fit for our present purpose,
wherein you shall hear the Fathers utterly to condemn the Religion now
commonly professed in England, and the Protestants themselves not only to
reject the Fathers, but also most spitefully to inueigh, and most grievously to
censure one the other. For that man, whom neither the Authority of the
Fathers, nor the testy-monyes of his own Doctors, can move or persuade,
neither if one should be sent from the dead toaffright him, would be thereby
converted.

Wherefore, that you may as yet more fully perceive the vanity and impudency of
this man, in affirming that all the Fathers are directly for him, albeit he
prove nothing: I will take the pains to show you by some general arguments,
that the Fathers do manifestly make against him. First therefore you must know,
that the Catholics prefesse the general Consent of the Fathers, or the
doctrine of a few not contradicted by the rest, to be a rule of faith; and that
all men are bound upon pain of damnation to believe it: whose authority, as
the Protestants will not receive, so the Catholics would not admit in such
absolute manner, if they were not fully persuaded that their religion were all
one with the faith of the Pathers. In confirmation whereof, some industrious and
zealous men amongst us, have made certain books of common places, under the
titles of the points in Controversy betwixt us and them, wherein they hade
recorded the sayings of the Fathers, in approbation of our doctrine. And
therefore they call them the Confessions of the ancient Fathers. So have you
the confession of S. Augustine in one volume; of S. Hierome in another. So
likewise of S. Basil, S. Bernard, and others, which it is impossible for any
Protestant to see, but he must needs confess, that the Fathers were all
Papists; and that they have said so much in the proof and defense of our
opinions, as all that we can bring, is but taken from them.

And if the Bishop had but made the sign of the Cross to drive away the
Devil, that blinded him before he had turned over the Fathers works, he must
needs have seen, even by their titles, and the argument of there several
treatises how much they make against him. S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzen, and
S. Chrysostom have written most excellent Sermons of the Lent, and of other
days to be fasted upon pain of great sin, by the custom and commandment
of the Catholic Church. S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Hierome, and S. Augustine
have written books of the institute and rule of Monks, and of their virtues.
S. Chrysostom in particular, wrote a book against the disgracers of
Monastical life. And S. Augustine again, has written three books of
Free Will: whereunto Luther opposing himself wrote a book, de seruo arbitrio,
of slavish will. S. Augustine wrote also a whole book of the Care of the dead,
and a long Chapter besides other sermons of Miracles wrought at the memories
and monuments of Martyrs. Optatus, whom S. Augustine compares with S.
Ambrose, and S. Cyprian, confuted the Donatists out of the Catholic Communion,
reprehended their wickedness out of the decree of Pope Melchiades, refuted their
heresy out of the succession of the Roman Bishops, made known their madness in
contaminating chrisme, and the holy Eucharist, abhorred their sacrilege in
breaking down of Altars, whereupon says he, the me^bots of Christ were born,
and in polluting Chalices, which he affirms to have held the blood of Christ,
S. Athanasius wrote a curious book in the praise of S. Antony the Aegiptian
Eremit: and in an epistle which he wrote in the name of the whole Synod of
Alexandria, whereof he was the Patriarch, he appealed to the judgment of the
Apostolical sea, and of S. Peter. Prudentius every where in his Hymns, at the
ashes and bones of Martyrs, adoreth the king of Martyrs S. Hierome. has
written against Vigilantius in defense of relics, and honor due to Saints.
He has written also against Iouinian, for the state and vows of virginity. S.
Ambrose did honor his Patrons S. Geruasius and S. Protasius with a most famous
solemnity, whose fact it pleased God to commend with more then one prodigy. And
therefore to omit the rest, if it were not manifest by the Bishops leanesse,
how much he has consumed his body with his ten years study of the Fathers and
Counsels; by these contrary devises which he says he has found in them, a
man might well imagine that he had never seen them.

Amongst other books of Controversy very learned and profitable, set forth in
our English tongue, by the direction of Gods holy spirit, wherewith so many
have been converted to the Catholic faith, there is no one that I would rather
commend to the reading of a judicious Protestant, then the book entitled the
Protestants Apology for the Roman Chruch. In which author I cannot tell,
whether I should more commend the substance of the matter, or the labor, or
the method, or the breuity, or the perspicuity, or the fidelity, or in fine,
the modesty of the manner wherewith it is written, and wherein you in
particular of the Innes of Court have a special interest: For as in the
beginning it is in tytled to the King, so in the end it is reco^mended to the
examination and consure of the learned Sages of our Common law, wherein you
shall find three Chapters amongst the rest, which do especially make for our
present purpose. The first, folio 74. and sequentibus, where he shows, by the
confession of the Protestants themselves, that the Catholic Roman Religion,
which is now professed, in very many the most important matters in Controversy
between you and us, was, the professed doctrine of the ancient Fathers, in the
first 500. years after Christ: and consequently, out of those rules, which the
Protestants admit for current and authentical, he proves, that it was
likewise taught, in the most Apostolical times. The second fol. 207. where he
shows, that the Protestants do not deny, very many of their opinions to have
been condemned for heresies, within the aforsayd time, by the ancient Fathers.
The third, fol. 127. where he alleges the Protestants condemning the
Fathers. Out of which places also, to save you a labor, if need should be, I
will serve my self of many things, in the points that follow.

You shall therefore understand, that the Fathers of the Church, being those
Pastors, and Doctors of whom S. Paul speaks, Ephesians. 4.11.12.13. Esa. ^6.6.
Ephesians. 4.14.
who were to continue by suecession for ever, and must not be silent, but to
the end we be not carried away, with every wind of new doctrine,
norcircumuented with the malice of men, and craft of error, they must always
resist every new and false opinion arising in the Church of God: and as
hitherto they have withstood the innouations of the Valentinians, Tacians,
Manicheans, Arians, Pelagians, Nestorians, Donatists etc. so while the Church
was pure by the Protestants own confession, that is to say, within the space
of the first 500. years after Christ, they impugned also diverse others, for
attempting to bring in sundry points of doctrine, which are now professed by
the Protestants, whom for the same cause they have not spared to record for
Heretics.

In Aerius therefore, they condemned the denial of prayer, Aug. haer. 53.
Epiph. haer. 75. Hier. cont. Vigil. c. 2. Aug. eccl. dog. c. 73.
and of offering sacrifice for the dead, and the denial of appointed fasts. In
Vigilantius they reprehend in like manner, the denial of prayer to Saints, and
of worshipping Saints relics: whereof S. Augustine speaks thus: The bodies of
Saints, and especially of blessed Martyrs, are most sincerely to be ^^^^^ed, as
the members of Christ: whosoever goes against this semece, is believed not to
be a Christian, but an Eunomian, and Vigilantian. In Xenaias, they condemn the
denial of Images, which Nicephorus records in this manner: This Kenaias was
the first (o audacious soul, and face impudent!) who vemited forth that voice,
Nieeph. bist. lib. 16. cap. 27.
that the Images of Christ, and of those that were pleasing to him, ought not
to be worshipped.

In Vigilantius and others they condemned the denial of voluntary poverty, and
monastical profession; against whom S. Hierome writing, Hier. cont. vigil
prope finem.
uses these words amongst many other. Neither are Monks to be terrified by
thee, from their good purpose, of whom using thy viperous tongue, and biting
most fiercely, thou disputest, saying: If all should shut themselves up, or
abide in the desert, who should frequent the Churches? And S. Augustine,
reproving Petilian for the same error, says thus of him: From hence, Aug.
cont. literas Fetil. lib. 3. c. 40.
he did put himself foward with a foul speaking mouth, in disgrace of Monks
and Monasteryes.

In the Nouatians, they condemned the denial of the power of Priests, to remit
sins, of whom S. Ambrose writes thus: But they affirm that they give due
honor unto God, to whom alone they reserve power of remitting sins: Nay
(says he) none do greater injury unto him, then such as go about to repeal
his commaundments, for when our Savior himself had said in his Gospel,
Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins you forgive, they are forgiven etc. And a
little after he concludes: Who therefore is he, that does most honor him, he
who ^yeth his commaundment, Amb. lib. 1. de paeniten. cap 2. and 7.
or he that does resist him? (...) the 7. Chapter, why do you baptize, if it be
not lawful to forgive sins? Pacian. in ep. ad Simtho^. Noua.
For in Baptism all sins are forgiven. What matter is it whether the Priests
do challenge this power to be given unto them, either by prunince or by
Baptism, Soc. in hist. tripart. l. 2. cap. 23.
in both which there is the some mystery? And Pacianus writing to a Nouatian
heretic, uses these words This thou will say God alone can do: it is true,
but that which he does by his Priests, is his own power. For what is that
which to the Apostles he says, that which ye bind in earth etc. And Socrates
reports, that when Acetius affirmed, that hope of remission was not to be
expected from Priests, but from God alone: the Emperor Constantine reproved
him merrily, and said. O Acetius, set up a ladder if thou can, and clibme
alone to Heaven, meaning that he could not climb thither unless the Priest
unbound him.

In the Manichees Hier in Symbol. Aug, de fide cont. Mantch. cap. 9. Whitaker l
10. cont. Duraetem page 883.
they condemned the denial of free will, and of remission of sins, and of
grace conferred in Baptism. The affirming of God to be the author of sin,
in Simon Magus Vincent. Iren. August ad artic. sibi falso. art. 10.
and others. The denial of the necessity of childrens Baptism, in the Aug.
haeres. 88. Cyril. ad Calosyr.
Pelagians. The denial of the reservation of the blessed Sacrament, in the
Anthropomorphites, for the which S. Cyrill says, they were mad: for that
(says he) the virtue of the blessing, and the lively grace (given unto it) do
always remain in it. They condemned the impugning of vowed Chastity, in Hier.
co^t Vigil. cap. 1.
Iouinian. The denial of the vowed, and unmarried life of Priests, in Hier l.
1. co^t. Iou. and ad Pamach. Apol. c. 8.
Vigilantius, Iouinian, and others. The denial of enjoined times of penance,
in the heretics called Theod. l 4 haer. fab.
Andiani. The denial of the diversity of merits for the which S. Aug. ser. de
tempore 191.
Augustine says, we condemn the errors of Iouinian. And S. Hier l. 1 co^t.
Iouin. cap. 2.
Hierome reproves him, for teaching, that marriage and virginity were of
equal merit. And Coneil. Te len and reserip. Ambr. all Syric. ib.
S. Ambrose and others do call it, a savage howling speech etc promiscuously
confounding al things thereby etc. and abrogating the degrees of diverse kinds
of merits. In others they condemn the denial of the possibility of keeping
the commaundments. We do execrate or curse, says S. Hierome Hier. expl. Simb.
Aug. ser. detempore 191. Prot. Apol. p. 218. August de nuptijs l. 2. cap. 29.
Epiphan. haer. ^4.
the blasphemy of those, who say, that God has commanded any thing to man,
which is impossible: which are also the very words of S. Augustine. Whereupon
Christopher Hoffman (whom Melancton greatly condemns) asked this question:
Why Hierome should not rather be accursed, who wrote Anathema against those,
who say that God had commanded things impossible? In Iulianus the Pelagian,
they condemned the denial of exercisme, and exsufflation used in Baptism.

In Proclus, they condemned the affirming, that the sioue of Comupiscence was
not taken away by Baptism, but only cast a sleep by Faith. In the Donatiste,
they condemned the ever throwing of Altars, and the easting away of sacred
Chrisme; for what is so sacrilegiaus (says Optatus) as to break, raze;
Optatus l. 6. cont. Donatist.
and remove the Altars of God, wheren on you your selves have some tyms offered
etc. For what is the Altar, but the seat of the body, and bleud of Christ? All
these your fury has razed, or broken, or removed etc. what had Christ offended
you, whese body, and blood as tertayne ordinary times did dwell opens (...)?
What have you offended your serves also, that you should break these Altars
etc? Epiphan. haer. 64. and 70.
In the Origenists, they condemned the affirming that Adam had lost the image
of God, according whereunto he was oreated? In the Nouations, the denial of
Chrisme, or Confirmation to the baptized by a Bishop.

And lastely, Eusebius. hist. lib. 6. c. 35. Theod. l. 4. haer. Pab. Aug. in psalm.
(...). ^o^e. 2.
not to be over tedious with this discourse. In the Donatists and Luciferians,
they condemned the denial of the Churches continuing visible, whereupon S.
Augustine cries out and says: O impudentem vocem! o impudent voice. I omit
that union, and communion with the Pope, and his sea, which the Fathers do
teach to be necessary for salvation, because I have treated thereof in sundry
places before: whereunto I will add one testimony more in this place out of S.
Cyprian, the Bishops great friend, Cypr. de vnitate Eccles.
as he pretends, who teaching as you have heard, that in the Church of God,
there is one Priest, one Priesthood, one Altar, one Judge, one Chair built
upon Peter, that whosoever gathers else where, scattreth (which S. Hierome
expounds, not to be of Christ, but of Antichrist) in his book de vnitate
Ecclesiae, he makes this interrogation: He who keeps not the unity of the
Church, does he think, that he keeps his faith? He that resists and
strives against the Church, he that forsakes the Chair of Peter, upon the
which the Church is founded, does he presume, that he is in the Church? Since
the blessed Apostle S. Paul does teach and show, this Sacrament of unity
sayings one body, one spirit, one hope of our vocation, one Lord, one Faith,
one (...), one God? Where S. Cyprian teaches notably, all these vnityes to be
one and the same with the unity of the Church; and with the Comm^^on of the
Chair of Peter.

Thus the Fathers of the first 500. years: wherein it is also to be noted,
that none of them was impugned or contradicted by the other; whereby it
appears, that it was the general verdict, and sentence of them all, and
therefore you must needs grant, that he is in a very miserable and most
fearful case, who stands so generally cast, and deeply condemned by them.
For of the Fathers of the Catholic Church, the words of our Savior must needs
be specially understood, where he says: He that hears you, hears me, and
he that despises you, Lue. 10.16.
despises me. Wherefore if the sentence of the Fathers, be as the judgment of
Christ himself, Romans 8.33.
then as S. Paul asks, who shall be able to condemn those, whom God does
justify? so give us leave to ask you, who shall justify those, whom God
condemns? They therefore, that tell you all is well, and that your Religion
dissereth little or nothing from the doctrine of the primitive Church, albeit
they may have the name of Bishops, yet are they no better the^ wolves in sheeps
clothing, and so many false Prophets, sent out to sow pillowes under your
elbowes, and to lull you so fast a sleep in sin and heresy, that nothing but
the fire of hell (when it will be too late) shall be able to awake you.

SECTION XVIII. The dissent of the Protestants from the Fathers, is proved out
of the Protestants themselves, condemning the Fathers.
THIS Condemnation and Censure of the Protestant doctrine by the voice of the
Fathers, being of such great force, as well for the gayning of any well meaning
soul, who is not will fully obstinate, but of the number of those that shall be
laued; as also for the eternal confusion of others, who with intolerable pride
of mind, and presumption of spirit condemn the uniform consent of Fathers, to
justify their own opinions; it has pleased God, that it should be so
confirmed, by the testimonies and confessions of the Protestants themselves,
that neither the brazen face of this Bishop, nor of any other, though more
shameless and impudent then the Devil himself, should be able to make doubt
of it, or to call it again into question. Attend therefore, and admire the
Luciferian arrogance of your own Doctors, in condemning the Ancient Fathers
on the one side, and the obdurate impudency of this outcast Bishop, in
affirming that the Fathers dissent not from them, on the other.

And to begin with the most ancient; S. Dionysius Arcopagita, is condemned to
have Luther in Com. ad 1^. and 14. Deuteronomy. and incap. Bab.
written books most like to dreams, and most pernicions, and for Cause. dial.
5. and 11.
a doting old man. S. Ignatius, to have Calvin. inst. l. 1. c. 13. nu^. 29.
deformed moales, and filthy gigs in his epistles. S. Irenaeus, that Cent. 2.
cap. 5.
he set forth a phanaticall, or a furious frantic thing: and the Fathers of
that age Cent. 1. l. cap. 10. and sequen.
to have left blasphemys and monsters to posterity. Tertullian Perkins probl.
page 184.
and Cyprian, for Montanist Heretics, or at least for having erred filthily,
in making Confirmation a Sacrament S. Irenaeus Middleton Papistom. p. 179. and
180.
Hilary, and Epiphanius for Pelagian heretics, in defending Free Will. S.
Siluester Luther in Colloq. mensal. wotton in defense of Perkins p. 402. Beza
in c. 3. ad Roman.
that baptized Constantine, accused to be Antichrist. Origin Cause. dial. 2.
Cartwright in M. Whitgifes defece page 352.
for accursed, and generally condemned, a chosen instrument of the Devil. S.
Augustine Middleton Papistom. p. 136. and 618.
numbered for one among other Fathers, that were doting and foolish men, deuoyd
of the spirit of God, and therefore unworthy, that any man should give them
credit. And that to allow S. Augustines rules, is to bring in all Popery. S.
Cyprian Cause. dial. 8. and 11. Cent. 3. cap. 5.
to be stupide, destitute of God, and a deprauer of penance. Nazianzen Cause.
dial. 6.7.8.
to be a prating fellow, and that he knew not what he said. S. Ambrose, that he
had the Devil dwelling within him: and that for teaching Transubstantiation he
was guilty of presumtuous and desperate blasphemy. S. Hierom Luther in Coloq.
c. de Past. Eccl. Beza ad cap. 13. act. Apost. Cause dial. 6.7.8.
that in his writings, he had not one word of Faith and true Religion: that he
was manifestly blasphemous, impious and intolerable bold in the detorting of
Scriptures: that if he perseuered in his opinions, he was no less damned then
Lucifer. That Cartwrigh in his Reply page 562.
Damasus spoke in the Dragons voice. That Perkin Probl. p. 93.94.
Paulinus, Fortunatus, Fulgentius, Petrus Damianus were stained with sin, and
guilty of Sacrilege. That Whitaker de Cone. co^t. Bell. p. 37. Beza in confess.
Geneuen. c. 7. sect. 11. Perkins vbi supra.
S. Leo was a great Archeretike of the antichristian kingdom: that he
breaths out the arrogance of the Antichristian Roman sea. That Luther in
Colloq. men's. c. de patr. Eccl.
S. Basil was of no worth, and was wholly a Monk. Luther in Colloq. Germ. p.
499. Melauth. in cap. 14. ad Romans
That S Gregory was grossly deceiuedly the Devil, and he that fell into open
impiety and tyranny.

And of the Fathers in general Schastianus Franeus In epist. de abrogandis in
vniuersu^ omnibus statis Ecclesiasticis.
concludes, that presently after the Apostles time, all things were turned up
side down etc. and that for certain, through the work of Antichrist, the
external Church, together with the faith and Sacraments, vanished clean away
pre^e^tly after the Apostles departure. D. Downham Down. treatise of Antichrist
(...) 2. c. 2.
affirms, that the general defection of the visible Church foretold (2.
Thessal. 2.) began to work in the Apostles time. M. Fulke Fulk. answer to a
Counterfeit Catholic. page 35.
auerreth, that the true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles time.
Luther Luther l. de seruo arbitrio. VVitemb. page 434.
presumed to say, that unless the Fathers repented and amended, they were
neither Saints, nor Members of the Church. Calvin Lib. 3. inst. cap. 3. number. 10.
says, that the Fathers were carried away with error. Peter Martyr De votis
page 476.
refrained not to say, as long as we do insist upon the Counsels and Fathers,
we shall always be conversant in the same errors. Beza In his preface to the
new testament dedicated to the Pr. of Condy.
affirms, that in the best times Satan was president, even in their
assemblyes and Counsels. Cartwright Cartwright l. 1. p. 5.13. and 154.
affirms, that seeking in the Fathers writings, is a raking in ditches, a
moving, and sommoning of hell, a mensuring of truth, by the crooked yard of
time. Whitaker Cont. Duraeum l. 6. p. 423.
avouches, the Popish religion to be apatched couerlet of the Fathers errors
sowed together. Doctor Hu^ph. in vita lewel. p. 212.
Humfrey, did grievously reprehend M. Jewel, for his so bold appealing to the
Fathers, affirming, that M. Jewel herein gave the Papists too large a scope,
was injurious to himself, and after a manner spoiled himself and the Church.
And M. Fulk Pulk Reioynder page 4. Aug. co^t. Iul. l. 1. c. 2. De verbis
Apostol. sermon. 14. lib. 2. cout. Iul. 6.10.
being charged with M. Jewels confession, in his reioynder to M. Bristowes
reply, says; I answer, if he charge me with the contynuing of the Church in
incorruption for 600. years next after Christ, he lies in his throat.

Thus as S. Augustine says, they persecute those with hostility whom they
should follow with fidelity: which we cannot impute to their ignorance, but to
their impudency. Alas they kick against they prick, and as he says again;
they push against that wall which will break them to pieces: what the Fathers
delivered, that they received: and therefore as Tertullian notes very well,
Tert de praesc. c. 28.
to condemn them, is nothing else, but to condemn the Apostles, and Christ
himself that taught them.

SECTION XIX. That the Protestants dissent very much from the doctrine of the
pure Church, is proved out of the Protestants themselves, condemning one
another.
LIKE as a piece of earth deuyding it self from a high Mountain, and falling
down, is again divided into many pieces whereunto it breaks: or, as the
Kingdom of this world, which was given by God to our Father Adam, being
separated by him from the obedience, and from the Kingdom of God, fell preent;
thereupon into many factions, and was afflicted with many contrarietyes, of
Angels, and men, and beasts, and Elements, and the four humors of the body,
and of sense, and reason, one against the other, so it fares with those that
divide themselves from the unity of the City, set upon the mountain, and from
the Kingdom of God, which is the Church of Christ. For now being destitute of
that public and invincible authority, which Christ has ordained, to keep the
members of his body in which they must needs deuyde themselves one from
another, every man abounding in his own sense, and in the self pleasing love
of his own judgment. The examples whereof, have been such in this miserable
age; as nothing is more to be admyred or lamented, then to see so many Sects,
and diuersityes of opinions in these times, as perchance do surmount the number
of all the heresies of former ages put together. The most notorious here with
us, are the Lutherans, the Protestants the Puritans, and the Brownists.
Protest. Apology. page 502.503 504.684.
The Lutherans differ from other Protestants, in 33. several articles, whereof
in particular have written Schlusselburg, Osiander, and Samuel Haberus. The
Lutherans are again subdeuided into very many sects: and the Protestants into
more then seauenty several opinions of most important matters, the most of
them set down by M. Doctor Willet, in his meditation upon the 122. Psalm.
printed anno 1603. page 91.

Wherefore, as sin is punished with it self: so it is the nature of falsehood
to overthrow and confound it self. Which as it appears to be true, in the
infinite contrariety and confusion of doctrine, among the Protestants
themselves: so alse, it will be manifest in the bold assertion of this vain man,
which we have now in hand. And therefore having showed already that to be most
contrary to the Fathers which he says he has found in the Fathers, and that
both by the testimony of the Fathers, condemning the Protestants doctrine for
heresy, and also by the Protestants themselves, who spare not to reuyle, and
blaspheme the Fathers; before I conclude this whole matter, you shall also
hear both him and them condemned out of their own mouths.

Wherefore, supposing that our Bishop is now a perfect English Protestant: and
that he belieueth his own words to be true, affirming those Charches, which
Rome has made her adversaries, to differ little or nothing from the ancient,
pure, and true doctrine of the Church of Christ, I argue in this manner.

The Church, which follows Luthers doctrine, Luth. tom. Witemb. f. 381.382.
differs little or nothing from the pure doctrine of Christ: But Luther and
his disciples teach, that all Sacramentaries, or such as deny, Christ to be
taken with the mouth in the blessed Sacrament, are Heretics, alienated from
the Church of God, who drive away, and kill the sheep of Chritt: that their
error, Joan. Schutz in 50. Cans. in praefat. Tigurni in prafat. Apol. Tig.
tract. 3. cont. supremam Luth. confess. p. 61.
is a blasphemous defense of many horrible heresies; an abnegation of the power
and truth of Christ, and a preparation to Nestorianisme, Arianisme, and
Turcisme. That their breast is insathanized, supersathanized, and
persathanized, that their mouth is oueruled by Satan, being infused, perfused,
and transfused into the same. Therefore it differs little or nothing from the
pure doctrine of Christ, to hold the Bishop and is fellows, who are
Sacramentaryes to be heretics, alienated from God, deceivers and killers of the
sheep of Christ etc.

Secondly, I argue in this manner, Calvin. in admonit. vlt. ad Westfalu^ and
cont. Hesshusia^.
according to the doctrine of Calvin, which differs nothing from the purity
of the Gospel. Such as refuse to condimne the opinions of Luther, are
malepers, wicked, furious heretics, and slaves of the Devil. But the Bishop
does not condemn the opinion of Luther, therefore according to that doctrine,
which differs nothing from the purity of the Gospel, the Bishop is a
malepert, wicked, furious heretic etc.

Thirdly in the behalf of the Puritans, I argue thus. The doctrine of the
Puritans according to the Bishop, differs nothing from the purity of the
Gospel. But the Puritans affirm Dangerous positions l. 2. c. 9. and 11.
that the Protestants put no difference betwixt truth and falseshood, Christ
and Antichrist, God and the Devil; that their Clergy are an Antichristian
swynish rabble, and the enemies of the Gospel. Therefore it differs nothing
from the purity of the Gospel, to affirm, that the Bishop being a
Protestant, puts no difference betwixt truth and falsehood, Christ and
Antichrist, God and the Devil etc.

To be short, Bernard Minister of VVorsop in his book of the Separists Schism
p. 71.
in the behalf of the Brownists, his other younger brethren, I argue thus. The
Brownists according to the Bishop, do not dissent from the purity of the
Ghospel: But the Brownists affirm, that the Ministers of the Church of
England, are Aegiptian inchanters, lymms of the Devil, Sycophants, Angels of
hell, an Antichristian Clergy. Therefore it differs little or nothing from the
purity of the Gospel, to affirm; that the Bishop, being now a Minister of
the Church of England, is an Aegiptian inchanter, a limme of the Devil, a
Sicophant etc.

Lastly, in the behalf of the Protestants against the Puritans, I argue thus.
The Protestants doctrine according to the Bishop, differs little or nothing
from the purity of the Gospel. But the Protestants affirm, Ormerode dis
ouery of Puritan Papisme dial. 1. f. 5.
that the Puritans, who are the Bishops brothers in Christ, and make one Church
with him, have joined themselves with the Pharisees, Apostolikes, Aerians,
Pepuzians, Petrobusians, Florinia^s, Cerinthians, Nazarens, Begardines,
Ebionists, Catabaptides, Euthusiests, Donatists, Iouinians, and Catharists.
Therefore the Bishop is a Pharisy, Aerian etc.

Neither are these the dissentions of private men alone, whose quarells the
Bishop has undertaken, Protest. Apology page 505.
but of whole bodies, Countries, and Societyes, who have mutually opposed
themselves with such rage and fury, as that they not only condemned, but also
banished each other for heretics, from their several Dominions, prohibiting
books, making articles of Inquisition, examining, imprisoning entering into
open arms one against another, and the Lutherans in particular using cruelty,
even to the dead corpse of the Caluinists.

The Church of England has decreed, as you know: that Whosoever shall affirm
any of the 39. Articles agreed upon in the year of our Lord 1562. to be in any
part erroneous, or such as may not with a good conscience be subscribed unto,
is ipso facto excommunicated, and not to be restored, but after repentance, and
public reuocation of his wicked error: whereunto it is evident, that the
Lutherans will never subscribe, Luth. tom. 7. Wite^b. f. 382. Luth. de coena
Domini Tom. 2. Germ. fol. 174.
their Father Luther having laid a curse upon all Charity and Concord with the
Sacramentaryes for ever, and ever, to all eternity And a little before his
death he protested, that having now one of his feet in the grave, he would
carry this testimony and glory to the Trybunall of God, That he did contemn,
and eschew the Sacramentayes with all his heart: and that he would not have any
familiarity with them, neither by letters, nor by words, nor deeds, accordingly
as the Lord had commounded. And Eccard a Lutheran says, it is manifest,
Eccard. in fasciculo Cont. in praefat. ad Duce^ Sax.
that the divinity of the Lutherans and Caluinists can never be reconciled: and
that none but a most light Epicure, can affirm that the differences between
them are but light. For (says he) they are most weighty, and concern the
foundation both of Churth and faith. Schlussch. l. 2. Theol. Caluinist. art. 8.
And Schlusselburge has the like with others.

The like may be said of the Puritans in Genena, France, Flaunders, and other
places, who do all oppose themselves against the Supremacy of the King in
spiritual matters, and against the Episcopal Hierarchy of the Clergy of
England. Whom also the Puritans of England have entitled the Reformed Church,
and prepose them to the Parliament for example of imitation. Two of the chief
articles of the Scottish Purita^s be these: first, Bishops and Archbishops have
no authority, their very names he antichristian, and diabolical. Secondly, it
is Heresy for any Prince to call himself head of the Church: T. C. reply p.
144.
but he may be excommunicated, and deposed by his Ministers. Thomas Cartwright
says, that the English Puritans are bound to defend their doctrine, with loss
of as many lives, as they have hayres on their heads. And that Princes must
submit their Scepters, and throw down their Crownet, and lick the dust of
their feet. Our English Puritans in their admonition to the Parliament,
Admonit. tract. 2.3.
complain, that there is no right religion, nor so much as the outward face of
a Church, rightly reformed in England. That the titles of Bishops were devised
by Antichrist, and plainly forbiden in Gods word. And at last they conclude,
desiring God to confound all them, who will not allow of their admonitions and
holy Eldership. That (say they) his peace may be upon Israel, Tract. 23.
and his saving health upon this Nation. So that you see, into what straytes
this Protheus is brought; Into what form of religion soever he shift himself,
of those which he defends, Lutheran, Protestant, Caluinist, or Puritant he is
every where taken, reviled, rejected, and condomned.

Wherefore, that from hence forward, you may know this man to be one of those,
of whom S. Paul speaks; who taking upon them to be Doctors of the Law, do
not understand neither what they speak, nor of what they affirm: Let us
suppose it were true, that his eyes were opened as he says, and that he saw
manifestly and clearly, in the Fathers, Canons, and Counsels, those so many
Churches, whom Rome has made her adversaries, do differ little or nothing
from the ancient and pare doctrine of the pure Church: What other thing I pray
you did he see, with his eyes broad open, so plainly, but only this; that he is
alienated from the Church of God: a deceiuer and a killer of the sheep of
Christ's a blasphemous defender of many horrible Heresies; a disposer to
Arianisme and Turcisme, insathanized, and (...) etc. according to the purity of
the Lutheran Gospel. That he is amalepert wicked, furious herecike, and a
slane of the Devil, in defenthing Luther, according to the purity of Caluins
doctrine. That he puts no difference between truth and falshould, Christ and
Antichrist, God and the Devil, but it one of the Antichristian Swyntsh rabble,
according to the purity of the Puritants themselves. And lastly, that he is
excommunicated and guilty of a wicked error, according to the purity of the
Protestants, for defending most impurely, that all these Sects together, do
differ little or nothing from the purity of the Gospel.

SECTION XX. The conclusion of this Tract concerning the Bishops motives, by
occasion whereof the nature of a motive is declared; and the first Catholic
motive, of the holiness, and sanctity of Catholic doctrine is propounded.
AND this much concerning the Bishops Motives, and the formal Reasons of his
conversion; which I have showed, that being in themselves, not only strange but
also incredible, he neither goes about to prove in this place, nor can
possibly prove them in his other books hereafter: because in them he does not
descend to those particular points which are in Controversy between us, as is
manifest by the titles of his books themselves. And this one Controversy
alone, of the Popes Supremacy, according to the doctrine of the ancient Church
I which is the substance of all the books he promises, is found (as I have
showed) to he most extreme against him: and that which he makes the ground
thereof, has been also discovered to be a most absurd, and most pernicious
position, as much contrary to the authority of your Bishops, and to the Puritan
Eldership, and to the title of his own book, as to the Popes Supremacy: and
if all were true which he pretends to prove in his Common wealth, it might
show perhaps, the Catholic Religion to be false, but yours to be the right it
could not prove.

I have also made it evident unto you, that the Bishops motives as they are
here set down in his little book, are as monstrous untruths as can be
devised: and albeit he may save them from broad lies perchance, under the title
of some rhetorical figure, whereof he has been a Master: yet too much of one
thing is good for nothing, and he cannot deny, but that it is a great disgrace,
even to the Art of lying to use this one figure of manifest untruth so often.

By this also that has been said concerning this matter, you will further
perceive (the Bishop being a man so deeply learned, and after ten years study,
having produced such reasons as these for the proof of your Religion) how
hard, or rather how impossible it is, for any man whatsoever, to give any
sound, or good reason for it. Wherein also by the way it will be worthy your
knowledge to consider, that such reasons as may induce a man to be of any
Religion, are of two sorts. For either they prove every point of Religion in
particular to be true, or else they open, and declare the evidence of certain
general principles, which being once received, draw after them the consent of
the mind to all those things in special, which are taught or practiced in
that Religion. Unto the first kind do belong all those books, which treat of
particular Controuersyes, as of the Mass; of prayer for the dead; of prayer to
Saints; Purgatory; and the like, which indeed to a man that has but little
will, or little leisure to read, is a wearisome course, and tedious way to
trial. Unto the other does belong those shorter discourses which some have
termed motives, and for the Catholic party, may be seen in such as have
handled the notes of the Church, in Canipian his ten Reasons, in the book of
the Three Conuersions of England, in Bristow, and others. Whereunto besides,
that they must be general reasons as I have showed, two things again are
necessary. The one, that the truth of them be more evident then the truth of
other particulers, which depend upon them. The other, that they induce almen
Heathens, or Christians, of what belief soever they be, to change opinion, and
to submit their iugdments to the obedience of that Religion, for which they are
produced.

This being seen, if you please but to examine a little all those Protestants
books, which have been published in this kind, you shall not find any one
argument in them, which may be called a general reason, or an universal
motive for the truth of your Religion: but either they are no less obscure,
then the Religion it self; as that the word of God is truly preached, and the
Sacraments rightly administered amongst you: or most improbable; as that the
Protestants have been always the most visible Congregation of all other
Christian Churches: or that your religion accords with the doctrine of the
ancient Fathers, as here the Bishop pretends: or el; they concern some
particular point in Controversy, and commonly are not only most improbable, as
that the Mass is Idolatry, that the Pope is Antichrist, and the like; but also
most palbably false, as that we hope to be saved without the merits of Christ,
that we worship stocks and stones, that for nication is a venial sin, and
such other injuries of like nature, as it pleases your unlearned Ministers for
want of knowledge, or of better matter, to lay upon us.

Whereas on the other side, every Catholic, whether learned or unlearned, wise
or simple, is able to give you such a reason of his faith, as may be sufficient
to move any indifferent mind, of what belief soever, to like and embrace it.
For Almighty God, not enforcing man against his will, but drawing him according
to his Nature, and demanding a reasonable obedience of him, has ordained in
the sweetness of his providence, that all Christians should make profession of
some principal motives of their faith, wherein many others are vertually
conrayned, saying in their Creed: I believe the holy Church Catholic: Not only
to move others thereby, but also more and more to confirm themselves in their
belief. For albeit matter of divine faith, be infinitely above the knowledge of
natural reason, which is not able to comprehend it: yet is it not contrary
unto reason, but so agreeable thereunto, that it makes us evidently to see, and
confess how much we are bound in conscience to embrace it, and to captiuate
our understanding unto the obedience of it. And therefore it is further to be
considered, that the ponderations and inducements which make men Catholics, are
commonly the same with those that make men Christians. In which respect, as all
Christians are bound to know them more or less, according to their capacity:
so none can re^ect or condemn them, without contempt of Christianity, being of
such importance thereunto, as that Christian Religion cannot stand without them.
Wherefore that you may the better conceive, what difference there is, between
shows and substance, truth and error, light and darkness, having examined the
Bishops grounds, published in favor of your Religion, I will here propound,
and declare unto you, some general motives in the befalfe of our Catholic
doctrine.

The first thing therefore that we will consider, shall be the holiness, and
sanctity of the Catholic Church, which laying a sound foundation of obedience
and Humility in the hearts of her children, and teaching them before all
things, to captiuate their understanding, and to subject their will, in
matters concerning their soul, to their spiritual Pastors, goes forward
with them, prescribing them other lessons; first of Contrition, which
consists in the love of God above all things that are to be beloved, and in
the hatred of their own sins, with sorrow for them above all things that are
to be hated; Secondly, of confession, calling themselves to a strict account
for all their sins past, in the bitterness of their soul, remembering every
sin in particular, and accusing themselves intierly of them to their
spiritual Father; Thirdly of satisfaction, in doing penance for their
offenses against the Majesty of God, in making amends for iniuryes done to
others, and in restitution of other men's good name, whom they may have defamed,
or goods which they have wrongfully taken or detayned. By which means, having
reobtayned the favor, and love, and grace of God, and thereby being enabled
and strengthened to do his will, and to keep his Commandments; they are
afterward exercised in all kind of virtue. And lastly, such as will be perfect,
the Catholic faith leads further on, and gives them yet a higher lesson,
teaching them to renounce the riches; the pleasures, and the vain glory of
this world, and to offer themselves up a perfect Holocaust, or Sacrifice to
Almighty God, by consecrating themselves wholly to his service; in the state of
Chastity, voluntary Poverty, and perpetual Obedience, under the will of their
Superior.

From which heavenly doctrine, delivered unto them by Christ himself, have
proceeded those excellent effects of Godly life, which the Protestants
themselves have commended in them. Centur. 7. cap. 7. colum. 181.
As the bestowing of almost the whole day inprayer: their obedience to the
Magistrate: their amity and concord: easily remitting iniuryes: careful to
spend their time in honest vocation and labor: courteous and liberal to the
poor, and to strangers: and in their judgments and contracts most true and
faithful. Upon the same foundations, also have been raised all those notable
and famous works of mercy, which some Protestants, otherwise no friends of
ours, have observed in our Country, and propounded them to their Protestant
brethren, for example of Imitation: their memorable buildings, and ancient
Monuments, Churches, Chappells, and other Religious houses; numbers of goodly
Bridges: Almes-houses, Hospitalls and Spittles: High ways, Pauements, and
Cawseys: Famous Colleges, Halls, Universities, Schools and Free-scholes. Thus
M. Stubs, who was such an enemy to Catholics, that railing against them in
very many places, among other opprobrious speeches, he terms them
Blasphemers, and sacrilegious Papists.

From this doctrine also has proceeded the in finite number of those that
forsake all they have, abandoning the world, and entering into religion? and
many amongst them, have left their large possessions, offices, and dignityes,
Crowns, and Septers, to take up their Cross, and follow Christ. Hence has
proceeded that austerity of life above the course of nature, which the world
admyreth in many of them, and could not be otherwise supported but only by the
unspeakable consolations, and infinite joys, wherewith it pleases God to (...)
and require them for there extraordinary service. And to omit their excellent
books of piety and devotion and perfect kind of knowledge in all kind of
learning, hence also proceeds that great zeal of the salvation of others,
forsaking their Countries, enduring great labors, and exposing themselves to
all kind of imminent dangers, in the conversion of other Countries, though
never so far remote, never so cruel, fierce on barbarous. To conclude, out of
this School, have proceeded those infinite numbers of Saints and Martyrs, among
whom we reckon above fourscore of the blood Royal of England, besides infinite
numbers of our own Nation. And this age of ours has not failed to bring forth
great plenty of the same fruits, in our own, and in forrayne Countries, whose
imminent virtues, it has pleased God to reco^mend to the world with his
Letters Pattents, and broad Seal of supernatural effects, and the ostension
of many miracles.

These virtues therefore of Humility, Obedience, Penance, Prayer, Amity,
Liberality, Justice, Chastity, Poverty, Patience, Holinshed last Edit. part. 1.
page 100.
Austerity upon there own bodies, Charity and Zeal in the conversion of
others, were the arguments wherewith S. Augustine the Monk, conuerred our an
cestours; and wherewith as the Apostles in the Primitive Church, so now the
Jesuits and other Religious men of this time, do overcome the ignorance of the
barbarous, the fallacies of Heretics, the pollicyes, pride and ostentation of
worldly wisdom, in the conversion of sundry Nations to the Faith of Christ.
For being sent by the ordinary means which God himself has appointed in his
Church, and out of obedience to their superiors to preach the Ghospel. (which
in effect is nothing else but this good news, that all men of what state or
condition soever, rich, or poor whole or sick, at liberty or in thraldom, may
easily attain unto perfect felicity, having grace abound antly offered unto
them, through the Faith and meries of Jesus Christ to become the sons of God in
this life, by loving him, and keeping his Commandments, and to enjoy him in
the next, by seeing him eternally as he is, the absolute perfection of infinite
virtue in himself, and the indeficient fountay no of infynit goodness to those
that behold him)) all men, that hear and see such Preachers, may easily know
them to be sent from God, and as the Propher said of them, to be the seed whom
God has blessed, by the works of God which they do, and by that most divine
doctrine of theirs, and most Angelical perfection of life, which they teach
and practice.

And now to turn over the leaf, and to consider the manners of the
Protestants; they on the other side, begin with Pride, which is the root of all
vice, as the Catholics begin with Humility which is the mother of all virtue.
For they teach their followers, not to submit themselves to the judgment of
others in matters of Faith, nor to any authority upon earth, of Church or
Council: but rather to confide in the sense of their own understanding,
though they be never so simple, which is the greatest, and highest kind of
pride that can be imagined, next to the pride of Lucifer. For as he would have
made himself equal to God, so every Protestant, if he follow his own
grounds, compares, or rather prefers himself in knowledge of the truth,
before the Church, which is the Spouse of God, infallibly assisted by his holy
spirit, as hereafter shall be proved.

Neither can they show one act of Christian humility, or of those other
supernatural virtues above mentioned, exercised or practiced in any degree
amongst them: nor can they name any other commendable action of theirs, wherein
the heathens and such as are no Christians, do not equalize, and (at least
heretofore) have not much excelled them.

Many other points of doctrine also they teach, which no virtuous mind, or well
disposed nature amongst them would not be a shamed to follow, being utterly to
be condemned, by the very light of nature. For they teach, that we have no free
will to do well or ill, which together with their doctrine of reprobation,
does not only take away all means of doing well, but also makes it impossible
to avoid any sin, whereunto they affirm, that men are compelled, by the
irresistable power of God: as in their opinion, by the same necessity all men
that do well, are likewise impelled to virtue. They teach also, that it is
impossible to keep the Commandments, and that Christians are delivered from
the obedience of them. That Chastity is not to be vowed, because it is not in
our power: Whitaker. cont. Camp. rat. 8. p. 153
from whence it follows that it is not in the power of a man, to be without a
woman, nor of a woman to be without a man; which is a wholesome doctrine for
young unmarried men and women, Iacobus Andraeas Cont. 4. in cap. 22. Lucae.
Luther de captiu. Babylon. Perkins reformed Cath. pa. 9. M. Fulk. against the.
Rem. Test. fol. 447. willet Synop. p. 560
and for such as are married whose partners are sick or absent from the^. They
contemn voluntary poverty, obedience, set days of Easting, Order of holy
disciplyne, and other good works: which as a pryme Protestant affirms, is
censured as new Papistry, and new Monachisme amongst them. They teach likewise,
that menare instified by only faith: that they cannot loose their salvation
unless they will not believe: that he that does once believe can never loose
his faith, by Adultery, or any other sin: that sin is not hurtful to him
that actually belieueth: that unto the faithful professors all sins are
venial, and unto others all sins are mortal.

By which you see, what a wide gate they set open to all kind of sin and
sensuality; the fruits whereof the Protestants themselves, Luther in poliella
cone. 1. Dom. Aduent.
have not been ashamed to confess, nor spared to publish, that the seventh
head Devil, had invaded the most part (of their Ghospellers) and made them
worse then they were under the Pope, that now every man is possessed with seven
Devils, whereas before (to wit under the Pope) they were but possessed with
one. That in the Papacy, men were religious in their error, every man did
willingly follow good works: Now in the light of the known truth, they are
more profane, then the sons of the world. Look upon this cuangelicall
people (says Erasmus) bring me forth one, Prot. Apol. page 414.415.
whom this Gospel of a gormandizer has made sober, of lewd chaste: I will
show thee many, who are become worse then they were before. And again, those
whom before I have known pure, sincere, and void of dissimulation, having
afterward given themselves to this Gospel, they began to talk of wenches,
to become dycers, to cast away their prayers, most impatient, reuengers of
every injury, vain, vypers in their manners, and to have clean put off the
nature of men. I speak what I have found by experience. So far Erasmus. You
shall hear also how Musculus describes his own Lutherans: Andraeas Muscul.
Dominica pruna Aduentus.
With us Lutherans (says he) at this present, thus stands the case: That if
any be desirous to see a great rabble of knaves, of persons turbulent,
deceitful, coseners, and usurers, let him go to any City where the Gospel
is purely preached, and he shall find them there by multitudes: For it is more
manifest then the day light, that there were never among the Ethnicks, Turks,
and other Infidels more unbridled, unruly persons, with whom all virtue and
honesty is quite extinct, then are amongst the professors of the Gospel.

The like description Castalio makes unto you, Castalio apud Rescium p. 54.
of them of Geneua, who dwelled long among them, and was a most particular
friend of Beza: They are praud (says he) pufft up with glory and revenge,
their life is infamous and villainous, they are Masters of Art in reproaches,
lies, cruelty, treason, and insupportable arrogance. They name their Geneua,
the holy City, and their assemblyes Jerusalem: but in very truth, we should
call it; O Babylon, Babylon! o most infamous Sodomy, and children of Gomorrha!
Calvin lib. de scand. p. 118.127.
Whereunto Calvin himself gives sufficient testimony, where he asks, what
other intention had the most that betook themselves to the Gospel, but only,
the yoke of superstitiont being shaken off (solutius in omnem lasciuia^
diffluerent) that with more liberty they might flow abroad, and run out into
all lasciuiousnes.

And to come nearer to you, I must entreat you to be content, to hear what
some other good Protestants of our Nation, have written of the manners of our
own Country. For first, of your Puritan preachers, M. Sutcliffe writes thus:
Sutcliffs answer to a ubell supplicatory page 89.
Their pride (says he) malice, cruelty, covetousness, usury, glutony, and
chamber cheer, which they call fasting, and color with terms of godly
exercises, do notoriously convince them. Neither yet (says he further) do I
tell all: for other matters I have thought good to keep for a rare banquet etc.
And concerning the rest, M. Stubs having told of his travel, in compassing the
whole Realm about with a long and wearisom journey, says thus thereof: As
concerning the people, Stubs in motives to good works, in the epistle ante med.
I have found them in most places dissolute, proud, envious, malicious,
disdaynefull, covetous, ambitious, careless of good works, a general decay
of good works, or rather a plain defection and falling away from God; and the
ancient monuments, Churches, Schools etc. either quite dissolved, or else so
ruined and decayed, as if the first founders were now living, they could not
take them for their own: Which general terms, M. Geffreyes returning from
his trauells in foreign Countries, does explicate more in particular, in his
Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, where it is like he spoke the truth, for the
testimony and perpetual memory, whereof it was afterward put in print. His
words are these: I may freely speak what I have plainly seen, in the course
of some traucils, Geffrey in his sermon. preached 1604. printed 1605. page 31.
and observations of some courses: That in Flaunders was never more drunkenness:
In Italy more wantonness: In Jury more hypocrisy: In Turkey more impiety: In
Tartary more iniquity, then is practiced generally in England, particulerly in
London.

SECTION XXI. The former Motive is confirmed: and by occasion thereof the
necessity of keeping the Commaundments to obtain Salvation is declared.
CONSIDERING with no little grief of mind the great dissolution of life, and
corruption of manners in our Country, which your own writers have published
to the world, as has been said; we comfort our selves somewhat in this, that it
cannot be imputed to the evil disposition of the people, who are known for the
most part, to be of a nature as much inclynod to virtue, as any other people of
Christendom whatsoever, but the fault of all must be laid where it is, upon
the Masters, and first Apostles of this new Gospel. Who as they were most
vicious themselves, so they left that pestilent seed of their doctrine before
mentioned, to their posterity, from whence no better fruit can be expected
Which doctrine of theirs, as I know, that your self and many other civil
Gentlemen, do utterly detest: so I doubt not, but that you are free from the
guilt of those crimes, whereof you are so deeply accused by your own masters.
Neither do I think, that any honest moral man, whatsoever he say with his
lips, can deny in his heart, his own freewill, whereof he has daily experience
in all his actions and operations, or that he can be brought to think, that
God does either command, or counsel any thing, which he gives no grace to
perform: or that he can believe in his conscience to be saved by faith alone,
though he dyelin sin; 1. Cor. 5.10.
but rather I presume he believes according to the Apostle, that we must all
appear before the tribunal of God, where every one shall receive according as
he has done in his life time, good or evil.

Wherein to give you some further light, and to say something here by way, as
I have promised else where, of the necessity of keeping Gods Co^maundments, if
we mean to be saved; I shall pray you to understand, and to take notice here
with me, that the Commaundments may be considered two manner of ways, either
simply and materially, as they are the law of God, or more fully and formally,
according to the end for which they were given, including in them the love of
God: according whereunto it is said, that the love of God is the first and
greatest Commaundment: and that he who loves God, has fullfilled the law.
Which love and friendship with God, because all kind of sin does not break
or extinguish: therefore according to the holy Fathers, Tertul. l. de anima. c.
17 S. Chrysostom. bom. 24. in Matthew. S. Hier. lib. 2. cont. Iouin.
some sins are called great crimes, and some others little, small, or daily
offenses. Great sins, are said to be against the Co^maundme^ts, as they include
the love of God, because great crimes deprive us of it. Little and small
offenses, are said in the same sense, not to be against, but besides the
Commaundments, because they may stand with the love and friendship of God: and
though they be never so many, yet they do not deserve, that Almighty God, in
respect of them alone, should take his grace and favor from us. Matthew. 7.3.
Mat. 23.24 2. Cor. 3.11. Mat. 5.22.23.24.
And so in Scripture, some sins are compared to motes in the eye, some to
great beams, some to gnats in the throat, and some to Cammells, some enter
into the building of God (which is of gould and silver) like unto hay, and
stubble, which shallbe purged with fire, and some overthrow the whole building,
which shall burn eternally: Some are in danger of Judgment, Iac. 1.15.
or of a Council, and some are to be punished with the fire of Hell: some are
imperfect, because no perfect consent is given unto them, and some are
consumated which engender death.

Those that are little in their own Nature, and do not deprive us of the
friendship of God, but deserve to be pardoned with some kind of punishment in
this life, Aug. l. de Natura and gratiac. 22
or in the next; S. Augustine does exemplify in Abel the just, who perchance
(says he) did laugh a little immoderatly, or did jest too much, or coueted
some little thing intemperatly, or pluck some fruit over greedily; for the
which no man of understanding can imagine, that God who loved him so deerly,
would damn him: for they are so little, either in respect of the smalnes of
the matter, or of the imperfect consent of the will, which is given to them,
that (with some temporal punishment) of their own Nature they deserve to be
pardoned. In which respect S. Augustine does call them Venial sins: whereas
the other that extinguish the love of God in us, which is the life of the
soul, are therefore called Mortal, or deadly sins. And from S. Augustine,
August. Enchirid. lib. c. 1.22.
the Church has borrowed these terms of the distinction of sins, and teach
that some are Venial, and some are Mortal. Of Venial sins therefore, these
places of Scripture are to be understood, where it is said, For this (or for
the forgiveness of this sin) every Saint shall pray unto thee: The just man
shall fall seven times a day. Where you see, Psalm. 31.6. Iac. 3.2. 1. Joan.
1.8. Romans 6.23. Ezech. 18.4.
that there are some sins, which do not exclude sanctity, and may stand with
justice. In which sense it is also said: In many things we do all offend: if we
shall say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth of God is
not in us. Of Mortal sin, these other places must needs be meant where it is
written, the rewards of sin is death, 1. Joan. 3.8. Iac. 2.10. Deuteronomy. 17.26
Ezech. 18.24.
the sting of death is sin, that is to say, the instrument wherewith it
kills: the soul that sins, she shall dye: he that sins is of the
Devil: he that offends in one is guilty of all; accursed be he, that does
not remain in all these words of the law, and does not fulfill them in his
work. If the just man turn away from his justice etc. shall he live? All the
justice which he has done, shall not be remembered: in the prcuarication
wherein he has strayed, and in the sin wherein he has sinned, in them shall
he dye.

This distinction therefore of Mortal and Venyal sin being thus declared, it
will be an easy matter to understand, or rather it is impossible for any man to
be ignorant, that whosoever commits Mortal sin, becomes an enemy of God:
and that no man loves God above all things, who hates not sin above all
things, and keeps not his Commaundments, wherein the love of God is
included. For conscience being nothing else, but the light of reason, either
accusing, or excusing our actions, the fountain of which light, is the image
of God within us, and the very essence of our humanity, to justify our selves
in doing ill, by the external justice of Christ; what is it but to be
delivered over into a reprobate sense, seeking as Luther did, to become
senseless of sin, to put out the light of the soul, to murder conscience, to
deface Gods image, and to pervert the very essence of our human Nature? And sin
again, being nothing else, but the consent of the will, to some thing against
the rule of reason, and especially of the reason of God, which gives a rule
and a law to all things, and being therefore contrary to God himself, as it is
impossible that God should not hate it, or that he should hate any thing but
it, being goodness itself; so is it impossible, that he should not hate the
author, or the doer of it. God does equally hate the sinner, and his sin: his
eyes are clear that they may not see evil, Sap. 14.9. Habac. 1. and 13.
and they cannot look favorably upon iniquity. And therefore to abuse the mercy
and goodness of God so much, as to think that he may be corrupted to love us
remaining in sin, or not hating the same above all things to be hated, is one
of the greatest blasphemies, and injuries that can be done against God, and the
most unnatural, sottish, and diabolical presumption in our selves, that can
be thought or devised.

The difference also between the law, and the Gospel, does yet further
discover the monstrous profaneness of this blasphemous opinion. For being borne
in sin, which is the greatest evil of any other without comparison, alother
evils being good in their own Nature, and proceeding from God, either as the
just punishment of sin, or as the means to make us better; the law was given
unto us, that we might know sins and offenses more perfectly thereby, then
otherwise we could, by the obscure light of our own corrupted nature. Whereby
also not being able to observe it, our wicked Nature takes occasion to be more
perverse, and to hate the law, and to oppose it self against it. Romans 7.9.11.
I lived without the law sometime (that is to say, without the perfect
knowledge of sin, which I received by the law) but when the Commaundment was
come, sin reuided (it grew stronger, and had more force upon me) for sin
(that is the concupiscence of our wicked nature) taking occasion, by the
Commaundment, seduced me, and by it killed me. Wherefore the law was so far
from the justifying of us, or delivering us from the bands of syn, that it was
an occasion to increase the same, and to augment all those other miseryes,
which do follow of it. But by the Gospel, that is to say, by faith in Christ,
through the merits of his Passion, we receive not only light to know our sins,
but also abundant grace, to avoid and overcome them. And therefore, being thus
redeemed from the bondage, as well of sin, as also of the law, as it was an
occasion of sin, and the just punisher thereof, we are likewise delivered from
the malice of all our other miseries, which (sin being taken away from whence
it proceeded) can hurt us no longer, except we list our selves, but they turn
to our greater good in this life, and in the next to our greater glory.
Wherefore to hold, that our Savior Christ has not obtained sufficient grace
for all those, that sincerely demand it, whereby to over come sin, and to
keep the Commaundments of God; what is it, but to confess, that we are still
subject to the curse of the law? What is it, but to make void the power of the
Gospel to salvation? What it is, but to affirm that Christ dyed in vain,
and to deny him to be our Redeemer? who not being able to deliver us from the
bondage of sin in this life, can less deliver us from the pains thereof in
the next, because it is impossible, but that God in his own nature should hate
it: and therefore it must needs be granted, that he will also punish it as long
as it remains in us, or we in it; that is to say, eternally, according to the
Protestants doctrine and practice, in whose Church is no remedy to cleanse us of
deadly sins, committed after Baptism, nor to wash out of our souls the
malice and filth of sin, which remaining, as it must needs with them, being
once committed, it is but a poor shift to tell us, that it shall not be
imputed unto us.

To conclude, what is the Scripture it self, but a deed of Covenant between
God and man, for the punishment of sin, and for the reward of virtue, with
temporal afflictions, and benedictions in this life, which are especially
contained in the old Testament, and with eternal pain, or endless felicity
in the next, which is especially declared in the new, whereunto are adjoined
many historyes, examples and counsels, exhortations, encouragements and
praises, disuasions, repronements and disprayses in the hatred of the one, and
in the favor of the other? Wherefore to hold, that we are justified by faith
alone, though we live in sin; what is it, but to overthrow the whole Bible,
together with the truth, the mercy, and the justice of God? And in a word, to
make a hell of heaven, and a heaven of hell? And therefore no marvel, that S.
Hierome, Hier. in expl. Sim. Aug. ser. de tempore 191.
and S. Augustine, do call this heresy execrable blasphemy. We do execrate, or
curse (say they) the blasphemy of those, who say: that God has commanded any
thing to a man, which as impossible.

Do you not know (says S. Paul) that the wicked shall not inherit the kingdom
of God, as if he should say, 1. Cor. 6.9.
how can ye be ignorant, it being evident by the light of nature? And then
follows, Nolite errare, (as forseeing the monstrous error of Luther, and
Calvin) be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor seruers of Idols, nor
aduouterers, nor effeminate, nor such as sin carnally by themselves alone, nor
the liars with mankind, nor raylers, nor extorsioners, shall possess the
Kingdom of God. Where you see, he joins those other sins with the sin of
Idolatry, and excludes the one, 1. Cor. 5.11.
as well as the other from the kingdom of heaven. And therefore he forbids
us, to keep company, or to eat with such kind of persons, if they be
Christians. And again: Ephesians. 5.6.
For understanding, know ye (as if men of understanding could not be ignorant
of it) that no fornicator, or unclean, or covetous person, has inheritance in
the kingdom of Christ and of God. And the^ follows: Let no man seduce you
with vain words (speaking directly of the seducers of these times) for from
these things come the anger of God upon the children of diffidence; become not
therefore partakers with them etc. In which place he goes further on, speaking
much more to the same purpose. And else where: The works of the flesh are
manifest, which are fornication, uncleanness, Gal. 5.19.
dissensions, sects etc. which I fortell you; as I have fortold you, that they
who do such things, shall not obtain the kingdom of God. All which most
express places, being written to saythfull, and meant of the saythfull, even
in the most pure and sincere times of the Apostolic Church, it is manifest,
that no faith could excuse them, but did rather augment their sin in such
cases, and increase their damnation, according to the sentence of our Savior:
The child that knows the will of his Father, Luc. 12.47. Hebr. 10.26.27.28.29.
and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Which is also confirmed by
S. Paul, where he says: If we sin willingly, after the knowledge of the
truth received, now is there not left an host for sins. Where his meaning is,
that albeit in Baptism, all sins are easily forgiven, yet such as believe,
offending after Baptism, have no such easy means to be forgiven, but must
redeem their sins by penance, and such other hard remedies, Cyril. l. in
10. cap. 17.
as the Church prescribes after Baptism: For if they do not, nothing
remains, but a certain terrible expectation of judgment, and rage of fire,
which shall consume the adversaries, as it follows in the same place. And he
adds immediately: If a man making frustrate the law of Moses, without mercy
dies, how much more think you, does he deserve worse punishments, who has
troaden the Son of God under foot, and esteemed the blood of the testament
polluted, wherein he is sanctified; and has done contumely to the spirit of
grace. Which words, although they be principally spoken of Heresy, and Apostasy
from the Catholic Church, yet must they needs be also understood of all other
Mortal sins, which S. Paul places in the same rank with Idolatry, and
sects, and divisions as you have heard, and do equally exclude the doers of
them from the kingdom of Heaven.

Wherefore to draw to an end, I say with the holy Ghost (whom I beseech to
open the hearts of all those, that with indifferent mind shall read this
Sectio^, Romans 1.2.
to see the truth of this clear doctrine) that as all those are inexcusable
before God, who do not give him thanks, nor glorify him by obeying his
Commaundments, Romans 1.25. Romans 1.^2. Romans 2.1.2.
but dishonor him, preferring the love of the creature, before the love of
God, doing those things, which they know to be worthy of death, which they
condemn in others; and for the which they believe, Romans 5.
that God himself does lastly condemn them, whom they confess to be no
excepter of persons, but to give every one according to his wokes: 1. Joan.
5.3. Matt. 11.30. Romans 8.3.
So there can be no other true ground of our justification, but only the love
of God, ^owred not abound^^tly into out hearts, by the holy Ghost, who is given
unto us, which makes his Commaundments not to be heavy, his yoke sweet, and
his burden easy: For that which was impossible to our weak flesh, the Son of
God taking flesh, aid conquer sin in the flesh, Romans 8.4. Gal. 5.17. Romans
8.6. Romans 8.5.
that the justification, or observation of Gods Commaundment might be
fullfilled is us. Not walking according to the flesh, but according to the
spirit: for the spirit, and the flesh are contrary, lusting and couetting one
against the other. The wisdom, love and pleasure of the flesh is death, but
the wisdom of the spirit, is life and peace; Gal. 5.14. Romans 8.7.
they that live according to the flesh, savor those things, that are pleasing
to the flesh: but they that live according to the spirit, delight in that,
which is pleasing to the spirit, and have crucified their flesh, with her vices
and concupiscences. Romans 8.13.14. Romans 6.11.16.
They that are in the flesh, or give way to the desires thereof, cannot please
God: for the wisdom of the flesh, is an enemy to God; for it is not subject
to his law, nor can be subject, and therefore they that live according to the
flesh, shall dye: but such as are led by the spirit of God, Ro^. 7.20.
are the sons of God, and because by the spirit they mortify the deeds of the
flesh, Apoc. 2.16. Tit. 4.7.
therefore they shall live. If we consent to the motions of the flesh, to obey
the concupiscence thereof, sin reigns in us: For we are the servants of him,
whom we obey either in sin unto death, or of obedience to justice and life
everlasting. But if we consent not, and oppose our wills against it, it is the
outward man that does it, but the inward man will not do it. And therefore
because it is not his work, he shall not be punished for it, but rather shall
be rewarded for his fight against it.

And this is the greatest assurance, which the state of faith can affoard us;
that our consciences do not reprehend us, 1. Joan. 3.21.
but rather give testimony unto us, that we resist, and oppose our selves
constantly against our spiritual enemies; not yiedling at any time unto them,
but evermore observing faithfully the will of God, in keeping his
Commandments; because this conquest being impossible by nature, we may be
sure that we are assisted therein by the holy grace of God, without the which we
could not obtain it. But he that says, he is the son of God, 1 Joan 2.4.
and does not love him; or who says that he knows God, and does not keep his
Commandments, is a liar; and the truth of God is not in him. Joan. 14.23.24.
Who keeps his Commandments, he it is that loves God; and he that loves
him not, keeps not his word. And this is the main, and the great argument,
wherein S. Paul seems to glory, and was not ashamed to preach Christ
Crucified, to the mighty men, both of the Jews, and of the Gentiles: because,
says he, the doctrine thereof, is the virtue and power of God to salvation.
Romans 1.
For it reuealeth unto us, how we should obtain the grace of inward goodness,
and of true inherent justice, at the hand of God, by uniting our selves unto
Christ the son of God; which we cannot do, but by making our selves the
members of his body, which is the Church of God. Out of the which, as all are
concluded under sin: so all remain in their sins; which they may change,
but cannot put of; and the more they strive against them, the more (because of
our corrupted nature) they find themselves subject unto them, and especially
heretics, in whom God punishes one sin with another, by withdrawing from
them more and more, the assistance of his holy grace, to the end that their
Pride, may either be humbled thereby, or else confirmed.

And thus much for the first Catholic motive, expressed in the Creed, under
the signification of the word Holy; which, as I think, you will grant is most
sufficient to persuade any well disposed mind to embrace the Catholic Faith:
by means whereof, all men are enabled to resist sin, to observe the Law, and
to preserve their love and friendship with God. And as all Christians believe,
that very many in former ages, have attained thereby to wonderful sanctity,
holiness, and perfection of life: so none can deny, but that this age of ours,
has affoarded sundry the like examples. Whereas, on the other side, experience
teaches, that through the want thereof, many Christian Countries, and ours
among the rest, have lost their ancient practice of good works, their former
exercises of piety and devotion, and their exemplar disciplyne of Christian
conversation; and instead of these things, changing the liberty of the spirit,
into the liberty of the flesh, they are fallen into such corruption,
dissolution, and prophanes of life and manners, that their own Masters and
Doctors are ashamed of them.

SECTION XXII. The force of the second Motive signified by the word Catholic,
in the Creed of the Apostles, is declared.
IT follows to declare the second Catholic motive, comprehended under the
name Catholic, and contained in the Apostles Creed: which signifies the
universality of the Church, in time and place; and that the Catholic Faith was
to be spread over all the world, and to continue in all ages, until the day of
judgment: which, as in it self, it is sufficient to move any man of judgment
to follow this universal, and eternal Truth: so is it set down so clearly,
and abundantly in the Scriptures themselves, which prophesy thereof, that a
man would wonder (if any blyndenes were to be wondered at, in those that are
obstynate) how it is possible, that such as profess to be much co^uersant in
the reading of them, should not see and discern them. A stone Dan. 2.34.
cut without hands from the Mountain, was made a great Mountain, and filled
the whole earth. All Esa. 2.2.60.5.
nations shall flow into it. Thou Esa. 60.10.11.
shall see and abound, thy heart sha^lbe astonished, and enlarged; because the
multitude of the sea shall be converted unto thee. The Isles expect thee, their
Kings shall minister unto thee; and thy gates shallbe continually open, neither
day nor night shall they be shut, that men may bring to thee the riches of the
Gentiles. Esa. 49.23.
Kings shallbe thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy Mothers. Esa. 54.2.3.
The place is strait for me, give room that I may inhabit. Enlarge the place
of thy tents, spread out the Curtaynes of thy habitation: for thou shall
increase on the right hand and on the left; thy seed shall possess the
Gentiles. These, and infinite others like to these, are the Prophesies of the
extension of Christ's Church universally to all Kingdoms and Nations: according
whereunto our Savior compared his Church to a little Mustard Seed, Matt.
^3.31. Mar. 16.15.16. Acts. 1.8.
which after should come to be a great tree: bidding his disciples to preach to
every creature, to go forth into all the world, to teach all Nations, from
Jerusalem to Samaria, and so forward even to the ends of the earth. The
continuance thereof, was likewise foretold, that their watchmen, or Pastors
should not be silent. Esa. 62.6.
That their Priests should not want to offer Sacrifice all the days: That Gods
Ierem. 33.18.20.22.
covenant with them should be like his covenant with the day and night: that is
to say, to continue forever. That they should be multiplied like the stars of
heaven, and the sand of the sea, which you know can never fail. Ministering
Esa. 66.21.23.
to him even from month to month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath; that is to
say, always. In Dan 2.44.
the days of those Kingdoms, God shall raise the Kingdom of heaven, which
shall never be dispersed, and his Kingdom shall not be given to any other
people, and it shall consume all those other Kingdoms, and it shall stand for
ever from generation to generation. Psalm. 85.30.31.32.3.
Gods Covenant therewith shall not be broken for any offense committed by her
children, but shall continue like the Sun and the Moon for ever. According
whereunto our Sauouir also said, that the Gates of hell should not prevail
against it: and that he himself would be with it to preserve it, all the
days, unto the consummation of the world. From the which, as you see, no time,
nor any one day can be excepted.

From these two propertyes is evidently deduced the visibility of the Church:
for it being so great, as that morally it may be said to fill the earth; and
also of such emynent glory, as to have so many Kingdoms and Nations subject
unto it, according to the former prophesies thereof: no man can be ignorant
where it is, nor what people they are, who are members of it. Also the Priests
thereof being compared by the Prophets for their number and quality to the
stars of heaven, their Sacrifices, their Laws and executions of them, their
Sacraments, and the administration of them, their preachings, and teachings;
and to let pass many other things, their continual, and glorious fight
against heretics, and Infidelles, and wicked Christians, must needs be so well
known, that no man dwelling near the most inhabited, and best part of the
world possessed by them, can be ignorant thereof. For as the Assyrians,
Persians, Grecians, and Romans, in respect of the greatness, force, and fame of
their dominions, were morrally said to have conquered the world, and to have
possessed the Empire thereof, in which respect it can be no less then madness to
affirm, that they were invisible: so also, the Kingdom of Christ, in respect
of the extension, inuincibility, eminent appearance, and great fame which it
has ever enjoyed above any other sects of Religion whatsoever, may be said
more properly, to fill the earth, and to be the only Catholic or universal
Religion, diffused through the world, as you shall hear anon out of S.
Augustine.

And for this cause God himself said; Esa. 61.9.
that he would make an everlasting Covenant with them: that their seed should
be known among the Nations. And that, all who did see them, shall know them to
be the seed which our Lord has blessed. And the prophets having fortold that
it should be a mountain, Matt 5.14
prepared in the top of Mountains, and exalted above other hills; our Savior
accordingly said of it. That being a City placed upon a Mountain, it could
not be hidden. What shall I say more, says S. Augustine upon these words of
our Savior, but that they are blind, who cannot see so great a mountain.

From hence also it does necessarily follow, that the doctrine of the Church is
infallible, and privileged from error. For according to the Protestants
themselus, that only is the true Church, wherein the word of God is truly
preached, and the Sacraments truly administered. And therefore, if the Church
should err, it should cease to be the true Church, and should not continue,
but the Gates of hell should have prevailed against it, Matt. 16.18.
which is directly against the Scriptures. And in particular this privilege
from error, is expressly promised in the old Testament, Esa. 59.21.
in many places; as where the Prophet Esaias speaks thereof in these words:
This is my covenant with them, says our Lord: My spirit which is in thee, and
my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart from thy mouth, nor
from the mouth of thy seed, Oze. 2.19.20.
nor from the mouth of thy seeds seed, from this time forth for evermore. And
where in Oze God says of his Church: I will espouse thee for ever, and I will
espouse thee to me in justice and judgment, in mercy and commiseration; and I
will espouse thee unto me in says for ever: Ephesians. 4.11. Epipha. in A^corato
circa princ. Matt. 16.18. Matt. 17.18. 1. Tim. 3.5. Ioa^. 14.26.
according whereunto, it is also said in the new Testament: That there should
be Pastors, and Doctors in the Church for ever, that we be not carried about,
nor deceived with new doctrine; that the Gates of hell, by which is meant
Heresy, shall not prevail against it: that he who did not believe the Church,
should be compted as a Heathen or Publican: that it is the Pillar and
foundation of truth: that the holy Ghost should teach all things, and suggest
all things to the Pastors thereof: that God would give them the spirit of
truth, Ioa^. 14.16.
to remain with them for ever. In conclusion, if you list to see more of the
largeness of these induments, and of the flourishing greatness of the Church of
Christ, you may read 4. whole Chapters of the Prophesyes thereof in Esaias 60.61.
and 62. and Micheas the 4. which I think no man can read, without the
acknowledgement and admiration of them.

SECTION XXIII. The force of the former Motive, is further declared, out of the
authorityes of S. Augustine, and out of the effects of the contrary Doctrine.
AMONG all the ancient Fathers, as there is none more opposite to the
Protestant Ministers, then S. Augustine: so there is none more respected in
outward show, and more esteemed by them; which is unto us on the other side a
notable argument of the excellency of the one, and of the impudency of the
other. Now therefore if the word of S. Augustine be of force with you, whom in
regard of his antiquity, learning, wit, and virtue, his adversaries themselves
do so much respect; read but the 6. Chapter of the first book of that work,
which is called Confessio Augustiniana: for it cannot be, that relying upon the
says of S. Augustine, which could be no other then the says of the whole
Church, but that your understanding should be wholly convinced by it.

In regard whereof, considering that it would be to long to allege the
testimonies of the rest of the Fathers, and that men now a days, are loath to
seek after that, which they are affrayd to find with some temporal prejudice,
although it be the means of their salvation. I think good to show unto you,
before I go any further, the weight and force of this motive, out of the
judgment, says and persuasion of S. Augustine For this was that which oueruled
him so much, as that he spared not to say: I Aug. cont. epist. Fundam. c. 5.
would not beliue the Gospel, unless the authority of the Catholic Church did
move me thereunto. I cont. Faustum. lib. 15. c. 3.
must needs believe the acts of the Apostles, if I believe the Gospel,
because both those Scriptures, the Catholic authority does equally commend
unto me.

It being of necessity, that one of those books must be falls (speaking of the
acts of the Apostles, and of some other Apocriphy book,) to which do you
think we should rather give credit? either unto it, which the Church, began by
Christ himself, continued by the Apostles with a constant course of
succession, even unto those times, dilated over all the world, does acknowledge
and approve to have been delivered and conserved; or unto that which the same
Church does reject as unknown? Those whom I believed, saying unto me, Believe
the Gospel; why should I not obey saying unto me, believe not Manichaeus?
Choose which thou will: If thou say, Believe the Catholics, they admonish me
not to believe you. Wherefore believing them, it is of necessity, that I believe
not you. If thou say, Believe not the Catholics, thou can not with any reason
compel me to believe Manichaeus, because I believed the Ghospel it self by
the preaching of the Catholics. If thou say, thou did well to believe them
preaching the Gospel, but thou did not well to believe them discommending
Manichaeus; do thou think me such a fool, as (without any reason given) to
believe what thou will have me, and what thou will not, not to believe?

Be not deceived with the name of truth (speaking as to the person of the
Catholic Church:) the truth thou only have in thy milk, and in thy bread. but
in this Church (of the Manichies, or any other, which is not Catholic) there
is the name of truth, but the truth it self is not. And of thy great ones,
thou art secure, I frame my speech to thy little ones, I call to thy tender
issue, that with garrulous curiosity they be not seduced from thee, but rather
let him be accursed of them, who shall preach otherwise, then that which they
have received in thee. Know Conc. ad Cathecum. cap. 20.
beloved, that true says, true peace, and eternal salvation, is only in the
Catholic Faith: For it is not in a Corner, but it is every where: if any man
depart from it, and deliver himself over to the error of Heretics, he shall
be judged (...) fugitive servant, and no adopted son; neither shall he rise
to eternal life, but rather to eternal damnation.

By cort. Faust. l. 13. cap. 13.
what manifest sign therefore, I being yet a little one, or a young scholar,
and not able to discern the pure truth from so many errors: by what manifest
token shall I know the Church of Christ, in whom with so great manifestation
of things fortold, I am compelled to believe? the Prophet follows on, and
having as it were orderly heard the difficulty or doubt of mind of this new
beginner, Hier. 17.
he shows him the Church of Christ, fortold to be the same, which is more
apparent, and more eminent then any other: For she is the seat of glory, our
sanctifycation. And our Savior also providing (an Answer) against such doubts
of little ones, that might be led away from the manifestation of the clarity of
the Church says: A City placed upon a hill cannot be hid; for to this end,
the seat of glory, our sanctify cation is so exalted, that no ear be given to
them who would draw others away, to certain remnants or pieces of religions,
saying, Behold here is Christ, behold there: for by such speeches, behold
here, behold there, they show but some parts; whereas that City stands upon
a hill: what hill? but that which according to the Prophet Daniel, grew, and
was made a great mountain.

Then cont. Cresconiu^ l. 1. c. 33.
we hold and believe the truth of Scripture, when we do that which is pleasing
to the universal Church, whom the Scripture reco^mendeth unto us: whosoever
is affrayd to be deceived by the obscurity of this question (of not rebaptising
Heretics, whereof in Scripture there is no example:) let him inform himself
therein of that Church, whom whithout any ambiguity the Scripture does
demonstrate. But if thou doubt whether the Scripture commend that Church unto
thee, which is dilated over all Nations, with most copious numerosity, I will
load thee with many, and most manifest testimonies out of the same authority.
Epist. 161.
Because we see the Church of God, which is called Catholic, dissused through
the world; me thinks we should not doubt of the most evident fullfilling of
the whole Prophesy thereof. If De ^nitat. Eccl.
the Church of Christ be described by the divine, and most certain testimonies
of Canonical Scripture to be in all Nations; whatsoever they say (Heretics)
whatsoever they bring, let us not believe them. In many Nations, where the
Church is, they are not; where they are, the Church is, which is every where.

How Ep. 48.
do we trust to have received Christ manifested in Scriptures, if from thence
we have not received the Church, which is also manifested therein? As he shall
be accursed, who says, that Christ has not suffered, nor risen again the
third day, because we have learned in the Evangelical truth, that Christ ought
to suffer, and the third day to rise again, from the dead: So likewise he
shall be accursed, who shall teach a Church, beside the communion of all
Nations; because it follows in the same place of truth, that penance and
forgiveness of sins shall be preached in his name to al Nations. The In psalm.
30. Con. 2.
Prophets have spoken more obscurely of Christ then of the Church, I think the
reason was, because they saw in spirit, that men would make parties against the
Church, and not striving so much about Christ, would raise up great contentions
about the Church: Therefore that was more plainly foretold, and more openly
prophesied concerning which the greater strife and contention was after to
ensue. We Ep. 48.
endeavor to demonstrate by this name Catholic, that the Church is in all
Nations, according to the promises of God, and so many, and manifest or a^les
of the truth it self.

Who De vnitat. Eccles.
is so deaf? who it so beside himself? who is so blind-mynded, as to speak
against those most evident tests monyes (alleging in my places for the
universality of the Church) but he that knows not what he speaks? By Quaest
Euang. l. 1. quaest. 38.
the East, and by the West, our Lord would signify the whole world, through the
which his Church was to be diffused, etc. aptly he tea^^eth the Church,
lightning, which is wont to come forth with brightness from the clouds. Therefore
the authority of the Church, being clearly and manifestly established, he
admonishes all that would believe in him, not to believe Schismatickes and
Heretics. That which he says, his coming should be known from the East to the
West, is against those, who are named to be in some part of the world, and say
that Christ is with them that which he says, his coming shall be known, like
unto lightning, is against those, that gather secretly, and are hidden as it
were in secret places, and in the desert; for the name of lightning, does
appertain to the manifestation, and clarity of the Church. There cont. ep.
Parm. cap. 5.
is no security, or assurance of unity, unless, according to the promises of
God, the Church declared to be placed upon a mountain, cannot be hid.

Behold In epist. Ioa^. tract. 1.
thou have the Church over all the world, do not follow false iustifyers and
true distroyers, be in that hill which has filled the world. They ((...))
stumble at this mountain, and when you bid them ascend, they say there is no
mountain, and they sooner break their foreheads against it, then seek to have
their dwelling in it. How In psalm. 47.
great is the hill, whereupon we should pray to be heard of God? so great,
says he, as that it fills the world. Upon In psalm. 44.
that mountain, which has filled the face of the earth, there let him adore,
that will receive: there let him ask, that will be heard: there let him
confess, that will be forgiven. In Epist. 165.
thy seed all Nations shall be blessed: wherefore trusting to these promises, if
an Angel from heaven should say unto thee, leave the Christianity of the whole
world, and follow the part of Donatus, thou should hold him accursed,
because he would separate thee from the whole, and thrust thee into a part, and
aliene thee from the promises of God. Taking In psalm. 56.
a part, and loosing the whole, they will not communicate with the whole world.
Oh heretical madness! thou do believe with me, that which thou see not, and
that which thou see thou denyest. Thou beleeuest with me, that Christ is
exalted above the heavens, which we do not see, and thou denyest his glory to
be over all the earth, which we see.

The De vnitat. Eccles. cap. 2.
Church is one, whom our Ancestors named Catholic, that they might show, out
of the very Name, how she is every where. de vera relig. c. 7.
We must keep the Christian Religion, and Communion with that Church, which is
Catholic, and which is called Catholic, not only by her own, but also by all
her enemies For whether they will or no, the heretics themselves, when they
speak not with their own, but with strangers, they call the Catholic Church,
by no other name, but Catholic. For they cannot be understood unless they
distingnish her by that name, whereby she is known of all the world. In psalm.
57.
Let not certain floods, my brethren, trouble you, which are called torrents;
their water runs away, it makes a noise for a while, and will quickly cease,
they cannot long contunue. Many Heresies, are already dead and gone, they ran
in their brooks as long as they could; they have run themselves out, their
brooks are dry, their memory is scarce to be found, or that they have been. In
psalm. 203. con. 1.
Thou shall always be firm, if thou departest not from this foundation, for
she is the predestined pillar and, foundation of truth. In psalm. 110. con. 1.
It shall not be inclyned from age to age; because it is predestined the
foundation and pillar of truth.

Tyconius co^t ep. Parm. l. 1. cap. 1.
(all the voices of the sacred Leaves, beating about him) awaked; and he saw
tho Church diffused over all the world, as it was foreseen, and foretold, by
the hearts, and mouths of the holy Prophets. Which having perceived he began to
avouch, and to make manifest to his fellows, that no foul sin, or wicked
crime of any man whatsoever, could prevail against the promises of God, nor
effect, that Gods word of the Church to come, and to be diffused even to the
ends of the earth, which was promised to the Fathers, and is now exhibited or
performed, should come to nothing De vnitat. Eccl.
Why do you make void the testament of God, saying, that it is not fullfilled
in all Nations: and that the seed of Abraham has fay led in all those Nations
where it was? In psalm. 47.
But perchance, that City which has possessed all the world, shall one day be
overthrown, God forbid. God has founded it for ever: If therefore, God has
founded it for ever, what do thou fear, least the foundation should fail?
In psalm. 101. conc. 2.
But that Church, which was the Church of all Nations is now no more; it is
perished. So say they, that are not in her. Oh impudent voice. Is not she,
because thou art not in her? Take heed, least for the same cause, thou thy
self be not; for she shallbe though thou art not. This abominable speech,
detestable, full of presumption and falsehood, not supported by any truth, not
enlightened by any wisdom, not seasoned with any salt, vain, temerarious,
headstrong, pernicious; the spirit of God foresaw etc.

Thus S. Augustine, whom perchance you never imagined to have spoken so much;
so plainly, and so vehemently, for the infallible authority, and universal
extension, with equal visibility, and perpetual continuance of the Church of
Christ, as you see he has; and yet this is the least part of that which might
be alleged out of S. Augustine alone to the same purpose. Whereunto, if you
add those former testimonies, for the proof of the Popes Supremacy, which I
have cited in the 11. Section of this Treatise; thereby you may easily judge,
if S. Augustine had been an English man, and were now alive, whether he
deserved not to be hanged at Tyborne, as well as other Priests and Jesuits,
that have been martyred there. That is to say, whether hearing your Ministers
teach, that the Pope, with the whole Catholic Church, have erred, and deceived
the world: or that the Church has failed or remained invisible for more then a
thousand years together; he would not have admyred, as much as we do now at
their deafnes to the voice of the Prophets, at their blyndnes in reading the
Scriptures, at their impudency, temerity, and madness of their abominable, and
detestable doctrine; and whether he would not pronounce them, many times
accursed, as he did the Donatists, and other Heretics of his time, for the
same opinions.

And now that you may the better perceive with what great reason S. Augustine
was so vehement, against this their pernicious doctrine: Let us consider a
little I pray you, the consequence, and effects thereof, in many of the greatest
Masters, and Apostles of the Protestant religion. For this made Sebastian
Castalio in his Preface to the great Latin Bible, dedicated to King Edward the
6. to doubt of those promises of God to his Church, set down in Scripture. See
Prot. Apology p. 106. and sequent.
For if any man, says he, will affirm, that they have been performed, I will
demand of him, when? If he say, in the Apostles times; I will demand how it
chances, that neither then the knowledge of God was altogether perfect: and
afterward, how in so short a time it vanished away, which was promissed, that
at should be eternal, and more abundant, then the floods in the sea? The more
I do peruse the Scriptures, the less do I find the same performed, howsoever
you understand the foresaid Prophesies. And David George, upon the same
grounds, came to deny Jesus our Savior to be Christ. For if that he had been
the true Christ, the Church erected by him, should have continued for ever.
Whereupon also he fell to that madness, that he took to himself, the name and
office of Christ, and secretly drew many to his opinion; for the which he was
taken up, and burned three years after his death, by the Protestants of Basil,
unto whom he fled before, being expelled from the low Countries, for holding the
opinion of the Sacramentaries against the doctrine of Luther, then there
professed. His story was written by them of Basil, about the year 1559.

In like manner Bernardinus Ochinus, a man so renowned amongst the Protestants,
as Calvin demands, whom Italy it self could oppose against him? and John
Bale says of him, That he made England happy with his presence, and miserable
in his absence? This renowned man, as he confesses in the preface of his
dialogues, began to wonder, how it was possible, that the Church which was
founded by the power, wisdom, and goodness of Christ, washed with his blood,
and enriched with his spirit, should be utterly overthrown, whereof he says,
the Popes were the cause: and afterward began to teach Circumcision, and wrote
a book of Poligamy, which Beza says, that the aforsayd Sebastian Castalio
translated out of Italian into Latin, and finally became, as Beza says, an
impure Apostata against the divinity of Christ. Alinianus a learned Swynglian,
for the same cause, came to be of opinion, that the Messiah was not yet come,
and so renouncing Christianity, became a blasphemous Jew.

And to omit Adam Neuserus a learned Caluinist, chief Pastor at Heidelberg,
who in the end turned Turk, and was circumcised at Constantinople, and diverse
other Protestants, as well of foreign Countries, as of our own Nation, who
have at length denied the divinity of Christ; Calvin himself was greatly
suspected thereof, in so much, as Doctor Hunnius public Professor in the
University of Wittemberge, wrote a book called Caluinus Indaizans: and since
that time, there is another book published by a Protestant Lutheran with this
title. A demonstration out of Gods word, that the Caluinists are not
Christians, but only Baptized Jews, and Mahomets, which was also reprinted.
And of this argument you may see sufficient matter, in that learned book of M.
William Reynolds, entitled Caluino-Turcismus: which evidence also, that
according to the Protestants opinion God has failed of his promise, in
advancing and defending his Church according to the Scriptures, must needs have
been one chief cause of those swarms of Athiests in Protestant Countries,
whereof their principal writers do so much complain.

Whereat I wonder nothing at all. For to what end did our Savior come into the
world, but only to espouse his Church in Faith? To what end did he instruct her
with his preaching, redeem her with his death and Passion, and sanctify her
with his holy Spirit, augment and confirm her with the labors of his
Apostles, and with the blood of so many millions of Martyrs, but only to make
her such a glorious Kingdom, even upon earth, according to all the former
Prophesies; so constant, so strong, so imoueable, that she should uphold the
glory of his name, against Princes, and Potentats, against Kings and Emperors,
against Schismatics, Heretics, and wicked Christians, and against all the
force of the world, and on the Devil himself, that would seek withal his
arts, and engines to suppress it. Wherefore, if our Savior be the true
Messiah, whose Name was foretold to be Deusfortis, and Emmanuel, Esa. 9 6. Esa.
7.15.
the strong God, and God with us; and who according to his own speech came
into the world, to bynd the strong man, which is to say, the Devil, that held
all the world in peaceful captivity before his coming: then it must needs
follow, that the Kingdom which he erected shall stand for ever; Matt. 16.18.
and that the Gates of h^ll shall not prevail against it. But on the contrary
side, if it were true which the Protestants affirm, that his Church has
erred, ceasing to be the true Church, or which is all one, that his Kingdom
was destroyed, and that there came one after him stronger then himself, that
is to say, the Devil, who did bynd his body, whereof he was the head, defiled
his Spouse, bereaved him of this Kingdom, Matt. 12.20.
and took his vessels and riches from him: then of necessity it must be
granted, either that the former Prophesies of him were not true, and that the
Scripture is false; or else that our Savior was not the true Messiah, who
contrary to the Prophets, and to his own promises, and protestations, to
maintain his Church for ever, has suffered it to perish, and therefore was not
able to defend it.

This argument therefore of the largnes, glory, contynuance, visibility, and
invincible constancy of the Church, is of great force to induce any man
whatsoever, whether he have the Name, or not so much as the Name of a
Christian, to become a Catholic. For the Scriptures even as they are in the
hands of our enemies the Jews ^i^t full of the Prophesies of those excellent
perfectio^s of the Kingdom of Christ; which according to the present times, and
according to the historyes of all former ages, we show to have been performed
since the death of Christ, in the Catholic Church, that was planted by
himself, and propagated by his holy spirit; which according to his promise,
was given to his Apostles, and their successors after them, to remain with
them for ever. And if it be manifest, that this world, in respect of the beauty
and perfection thereof, Romans 1.
is the work of Gods hand, condemning all those that do not acknowledge him to
be the Creator of it: much more manifest is it, Ephesians. 5.27.
that this glorious Kingdom and Church is the work of God; wherein he shows
the riches of his power, of his wisdom, and of his infynit goodness,
condemning all those that will not acknowledge it, and subject themselves to
the government thereof.

SECTION XXIIII. Four other particular motives, of the Conversion of Nations,
of the Miracles, of the Martyrdoms, and of the union of the members of the
Catholic Church, are briefly propounded.
UNDER these general terms of Holy Catholic Church, are comprised many
other partiticuler gifts and graces; which being all supernatural and divine,
each of them is a sufficient motive, to persuade any man's conscience, that the
Catholic Church, is the only blessed of God, and the elected spouse of Christ
our Savior. Whereof, being entered into this matter of Motives, I think good
to give instance in some few, remitting you for the rest to other Catholic
authors, who have treated more largely of this matter.

Diverse therefore have been induced to believe, that the Catholic Faith, is the
only true Religion, by observing, that all Nations and Countries, which at any
time professed the Name of Christ have been converted by Catholics alone. And
in this last age, since the Protestant religion began, they have reduced and
subjected very many Kingdoms, unto the yoke of Christ, whereof Philippus
Nicolaus, Coment. de reg. Christil. 1. page 315. and p. 52. Sym. Lyth. in
respons. altera ad alteram Gretseri Apol. p. 331. Tertul. de praescrip. c. 42.
a Protestant, numbreth more then 20. In so much, as another Protestant in his
answer to Gretser the Jesuit says: The Jesuits within the space of a few
years etc. have filled Asia, Afric, and America with their Idols. Whereas in
the mean time the Protestants have only sown tares among the wheat:
atte^ding, as Tertullian said of the Heretics of his time, not to convert the
heathen, but to pervert those that were before converted. And although they
have sundry times attempted to convert some heathen, with hope to possess
their Countries: yet no King, or Kingdom, or Country, or Province, Sarauia in
defension. tract. de diuersis gradibus Ministrorum. page 309.
was ever converted by them. And Beza says plainly, that the Protestants may
leave such peregrinatious to those locusts, that believe the Name Jesus. Which
conuersions of so many savage, and barbarous Nations, by the words of a few
poor men, with a little broken language, to embrace a Religion so far above
the reach of Nature, and in respect of the austerity thereof, so contrary to
flesh and blood, and especially to their former intemperate lives, and brutish
customs, as it shewath Gods promises by the Prophets to be daily fullfilled in
them, and proves our Church thereby to be the Church of Christ: So it is most
evident, that their conuerters were supernaturally assisted by the strength of
Gods Arm, which is sufficient to persuade any indifferent man, that the
doctrine they preach can be no other, then the true Gospel, revealed by
Christ to his own Apostles. Which also is a manifest token, that the grounds
of Christianity, and of our Catholic doctrine are the very same. And that the
Protestants for want of them, can never convert any Heathen Nation to Christian
religion, denying as they do, the grounds thereof, which are the same with the
grounds of the Catholic doctrine.

Secondly therefore, many have submitted themselves, to the obedience of the
Catholic Church by consideration of those notorious miracles, which in all
ages have been wrought therein, being such marks of truth, as no man can deny
them to be the seals of God, and the signs of his own hand. If I should
descend to particulers in this kind, I should never make an end, and many
books have been written of the miracles of the B. Sacrament alone, of our B.
Lady in favor of those, that in their necessityes have recommended themselves
to her prayers, of the souls in Purgatory demanding relief of Masses, and
other pious works, or giving thanks for help received by those means, and so
forth, of other miracles, which God has vouchsafed to work by the hands of
his holy servants alive and dead, that were pleasing unto him; not derived from
any Apocriphall or vnapproued writers, whom the Protestants are wont to deride,
but testified either by the ancient Fathers themselves, S. Augustine, S.
Hierome, S. Bernard, S. Bid, and the rest, or by the oaths and depositions of
many lawful witnesses, taken before Bishops, or other secular Magistrates.
Whereunto not to give so much as morrall credit, were to extinguish one chief
part of reason, and to take away all credulity, and so by consequence, all
belief, both human and divine, out of the world.

Thirdly, many have relented, and rendered themselves, beholding or reading the
admirable constancy of Catholic Martyrs. For albeit there have not wanted
those, that have dyed for the maintenance of most ridiculous heresies, and
their own absurd opinions: yet there is a great difference, both in life, and
death, between our Catholic Martyrs, and those other mad men, or malefactors.
For as our Martyrs have for the most part been men of rare perfection, most
exemplar life, and of excellent talents, both of grace and nature: so the
others have been no less scandalous, and infamous for their former lewd
conditions, and commonly very meanly qualified, of no extraordinary parts, but
rather desperate, or sottish, or half besides themselves. And in their deaths,
as our Martyrs have all suffered contrary to the inclination of the pride and
self love of our corrupted nature, in obedience to God, and his Church, for
the same truth, and the same points of doctrine, without any disagreement
between them, which could not be done without the special assistance of Gods
grace: so the others have been justly punished, for the mantaynance of their
own peevish opinions, out of pride, and self love, and ever more have
obstinatly dissented, not only from the common judgment of others, but also
from the private devices of one another. And therefore, as the humility,
modesty, meeknes, discretion, charity, and other virtues of our Martyrs, have
made their passions, or sufferings to be pleasing sacrifices in the eyes, both
of God and men, and their deaths most amyable, and admyrable to the beholders:
so on the other side, the pride, vain glory, arrogance, presumption, fury, and
folly of the others, is sufficient to make their deaths most odious,
detestable, and infamous to all posterity. Which, if you please to read the
examination of Fox his Calendar of Saints, you will easily see, and ingenuously
acknowledge this diversity and difference, which I have noted, between the
Martyrdomes of those Catholics, whom you may have seen to suffer in our time,
and the graceless, and distempered ends of those, which Fox relates.

And to omit the innumerable companyes of those, that have given their lives
for the testimony of the Catholic faith in former ages, which are at least
1000. for one of those that have suffered for heresy, and their own private
opinions: and likewise to omit those excellent men, and women, that have
suffered, from the beginning of the last Queens reign, unto this present in
our unfortunate Country, whom not only virtue, piety, and wisdom, but also
their nobility, dignity, and highest Majesty, have made famous to the world;
what man of judgment is there, that will not be more moved with the death of
By. Fisher, and Sr. Thomas More alone, the two great lights of the Clergy and
Laity of England, then with all the rabblement of Foxes new Martyrs, though they
were ten times so many, as he does falsely make them.

Fourthly, many others observing the obedience of all Catholics through the
world, to one supreme head, and the unity which thereby is preserved amongst
them: and on the other side, being ashamed of the infinite dissentions amongst
the Protestants, every man following his own head, and being the founder of
his own religion; have been induced thereby to forsake the troublesome
inconstancy of the one, and embrace the constant peace of the other. For this
also is so evident on both sides, as the principal Protestants themselves are
enforced to confess it. M. Whitaker says: Whita. de Eccl. cont. 2.9.5. page
327.
That the contentions amongst the Protestants are for Faith and Religion, the
contentions amongst the Papists are vain, and frivolous, as much to say, not
for Religion, but about matters of no moment. The consent and peace of the
Popish Church (says M. Fulk) proves nothing, M. Fulk against Heskins etc. p.
295. Sands relation fol. 8.
but that the Devil then had all things at his will, and therefore might
sleep. More expressly Sir Edwin Sands declares the same in these words: The
Papists have the Pope, as a common Father, aduiser and conducter to reconcile
their iarres, to decyde their differences, to draw their religion by consent of
Counsels into unity etc. whereas on the contrary side, Protestants are as
severed, or rather scattered troops, each drawing a diverse way, without any
means to pacify their quarrels. Who also further observes, That in all this
age, they could not find the means to assemble a general Council on their
side, for the composing of their differences.

Beza also, Beza ep. theol. ad Andr. Duditium.
in an epistle to his great friend Andreas Duditius, whom he esteemed a most
eminent and adorned man, and much respected of him for his piety, learning, and
elegant wit; repeateth the words of his friend, in a letter to him, which make
this point yet more manifest. Although (say you) there are many horrible things
defended in the Roman Church, upon a weak and rotten foundation, yet it is not
divided with so much dissension; and it has the plausible show of venerable
antiquity, ordinary succession, and perpetual consent: and if that be the
truth, which the ancient Fathers did profess, with one mutual consent, it
stands wholly for the Papists. Thus say you of the Papists. But ours at length
what are they? scattered, say you, whirled about with every wynd of doctrine,
and being blown up aloft, are carried sometimes to this part and sometimes to
that: what their opinion of Religion is to day, perchance you may know, but
what it willbe to morrow, you cannot certainly affirm. In what point of
religion do these Churches agree among themselves, that have proclaimed war
against the Church of Rome? If you run them all over from head to foot, you
shall scarce find any thing affirmed of one, but that another will presently
cry, It is impiety. These things you write, my Duditius, in the same words as I
have set them down. Thus far Bexa. Where himself confesses: That he also
was a long time very much troubled with these cogitations.

Melancthon also spared not say: Mela^clhon Co^c. theol. part. 1. p. 249.
Mirror for Martinists page 24. The same has And. Duditius vbi supra. Castal.
in his preface to his Latin Bible. Geor. Ma. orat. de co^fusio. dog. Bull.
Firmam. part. 1. cap. 1. Powell grounds of the new religion part. 2. cap. 1.
Perks ep. dedic. before bis Apology.
That nothing did so much terrify others from the Gospel, as their own
discord, and was wont to complain with others: that they knew whom they
should avoid, meaning the Papists, but whom they might follow, they did not
understand. This, that learned Sebastianus Castalio took for a sign: that the
Protestants being thus divided, were still drowned inextreme darkness, and most
gross ignorance. This (says Georgius Mayor a principal Lutheran) did so much
tempt and trouble the minds of the simple, as they altogether doubted, where
to find the truth, and whether any true Church of God were remaining in the
world. This vehement and implacable dissension (says Bullinger) makes many,
as it were in despair, and to give out, that from hence forward, they will
believe nothing; exclayming, What credit should we give to that faith, which is
distracted into so many factions? Many thereby (says M. Powell) do not call
upon God, but fly from God: many fall into an Epicurean contention of Religion,
and are oppressed with despair. These contentions (says M. Perks) are no
small preparatiues to Atheism etc. in so much, as many are brought to their
wits end, not knowing what to do. Amidst all which miseryes and mischiefs, the
Papists insult and triumph, to see those that profess themselves brethren,
Relation of Rel sect. 45.6. Whitaker defensio. tract. 3. c. 6. p. 278.
to be at such deadly iarres amongst themselves. Sir Edwyn Sands affirms,
that the contentio^s of Protestants, tend maynly to the increase of Atheism
within, and Mahometisme abroad. And D. Whitaker complayneth, that the Church of
England, is replenished with Atheists, whom no doubt since his time are much
increased.

This therefore is a vehement persuasion to draw any man from the Protestant
Religion: and on the contrary side, men of judgment that behold so many sundry
Nations, and people so different, or rather so opposite in many other respects
of clymate, language, complexion, laws, and customs, under so many several
Kings, and Governors, and always in wars more or less, one against the
other, to conspyre in the unity of one Faith, for so many ages together,
subiecting themselves. voluntarily to one head, who has no temporal force to
compel them; and believing so many things, above the reach of human
understanding, so contrary to flesh and blood, and to the vehement motions of
man's perverted Nature, must needs confess and acknowledge, that it is a
supernatural work, and a most miraculous effect of the Spirit of God, who is
the God of peace, and not of contention.

SECTION XXV. Of the authority of the Catholic Church in general.
THE last general argument, which I intend to propound, for the evidence and
truth of the Christian, and, which is al one, of our Catholic religion, shall
be the great authority of the Catholic Church, to the end it may serve, as
well for a further explication and confirmation, as also for a full conclusion
of all the former motives. For the capacity of the best understandings, amongst
us miserable men, being but small and shallow; and there being a greater
difference between man and man, in the parts of the mind, then in the sharpnes
of sense, or strength of body; and the mind of man being of it own nature but
like a fair table, or a lease of white paper, which at the first contains
nothing, and by little and little, receives the pictures, or the writings for
the which it was ordained, more or less, better or worse, according to the
skill and industry of the Paynter, or Writer, and the aptnes of the matter, and
the goodness of the instruments wherewith they work: Hence it is, that as
Nature inclines the poor to depend of the rich, and the weak to defend
themselves by those that are strong, and the blind, or bad sighted to be guided
and directed in discerning, by those that are endued with more perfect sense:
so by the same law and voice of Nature, all men are taught and obliged to rest
their minds, and to rely their understandings upon the authority of those that
are generally most approved for their virtue and wisdom above the rest; and
alwayse (ceteris paribus) other circumstances being equal, the fewer in number
to yield and submit themselves to the judgment; and opinion of the greater
party.

And so in all speculatiue sciences, where our end is nothing else, but the
delightful aspect and fair sight of truth; the authority of Masters, and
skillfull men in those facultyes, is necessarily required for our direction to
teach us, which way we ought to bend, and whereupon to six the eye of our
understanding, to show how to proceed from point to point, and to give us the
print of those marks, whereby we may best discover the form of that truth,
which we seek to find, or labor to conceive or comprehend. And if the sight
of our wit be so short, as that we cannot perfectly discern the same, yet it
is better to see with another man's eye, or as it were by the candle of another,
then altogether either to be ignorant of it, or else, which is far worse, to be
deceived therein. And as this is true in science: so in those arts and
facultyes, where our end is the doing or the attayning of something which is
necessary or profitable for man's life, the benefit of authority is much more
apparent. For in extremity of sickness, or in law matters of great importance,
or in deliberations about the preservation or government of Commonwealths, to
contemn the direction of Physicians, the advice of Lawyers, and the counsel
of men experienced in matter of State, or not to admit thereof in some cases,
nor to suffer our selves to be oueruled thereby; albeit it seem never so much
contrary to the sense, or imagination of our own private judgment, were to be
esteemed rather obstinate madness, then any other error within the degree of
human weakness.

But especially the necessity and vtility of the approbation of other men's
assertions, either of all, or of such as are wise and honest, appears in
those things which we can never know, or make use of, but from the report of
others. As for example historyes of former ages, Relations of the present
state, and condition of forrayne Countries; or constant reports of such things,
as were said or done in our absence; or as S. Augustine notes, that we are the
sons of such Parents, borne in this Country or that (which is the beginning
and foundation of all permanent societyes) and the like. In which respect this
kind of knowledge, is properly called belief, because our judgment gives
consent thereunto, not being moved, by any inward experimental light of our
own reason: but only by giving credit unto others; which, as you see, being as
it were not only the other hand or Canonical eye of reason, but also the
Schole-maister thereunto, is of such necessity, that neither the state of
Church and Common Wealth, nor the life of man can stand without it.

Wherefore, as in all questions and Controuersyes it is a general rule and a
received Maxim, that the judgment of all men, or of the most, or among the
most of the best and wysest, ought always to be followed: so especially, it
must needs have place in the School of Christ; the Learning whereof, being as
it is, not only one kind of belief, and therefore wholly depending of authority:
but also such a practical science, as concerns a matter of no less moment,
then our eternal felicity, and endless misery. And consequently, if wisdom
will that in sickness we should follow the directions of all Physicians, or of
the most, and best learned, rejecting such desperate medicynes, as a few
unskillful Empericks, or Quacksaluers (as they term them) should propound
unto us. Or as in matter of law, or State business of great consequence, all
reason commands us to prefer the judgment of the most ancient Sages, and
grauest Counselors, especially being many in number, before the instigations
of a few Pettyfoggers, or young ambitious heads that aspyre to be Politics: so
in the case of the eternal damnation, or salvation of our souls, it stands us
more upon, most exactly to observe the former principle, as well in relying our
selves upon the doctrine and authority of the most, the best, and the wisest
Deuines, as in flying the new devices of a few disorderly, factious, and
infamous vpstarts, that seek to with draw us from them.

First therefore, that the truth of Catholic Religion is recommended unto us
by the testimony of the most, is evident in it self. The Catholic Church
possessing so many Countries, not only in Europe, but also in Asia, Africa,
and America, both East and West, as the Protestants themselves avouch; and
there being no other Sect of Religion wherein so many do so constantly agree
together, not only the Pagans and Infidells, as is notoriously known, but
also the Heretics being infinitely divided among themselves, as I have showed.
And that, if you respect honesty, virtue, and good life, the Catholics are
also the best, is likewise confessed by their enemies themselves, as has been
declared; and setting all other considerations apart, there being so many
Orders and great Religious bodies among them, following the Counsels of
Christ, in renouncing the riches, the pleasures, and the pride and ambition of
the world, which are the only occasions of sin, submitting themselves to the
direction of those, who by long practice, and tradition, and prayer, and their
own exact obedience, have learned how to command with sweetness, how to defend
their Ghostly children from their spiritual enemies, and how to conduct them
to the highest perfection of all Christian virtues; in which course of
spiritual life, as S. Bernard says very notably, he that willbe his own
Master, shall have a fool to his Scholar: and to conclude, their whole life
being spent in nothing else, but in assisting the Sacrifice of the Church, in
hearing and reading the word of God, in pryuate and public prayer, in
mortification of their senses and natural desires, and in other devout
exercises of religious obedience, of which sort alone, there being many hundred
thousands in the Catholic Church, besides other innumerable secular people
that imitate the lives of Religious persons; it must needs be granted, that in
all human reason, so great a number of the like devout and holy people,
consecrated to the pure service of God, cannot be found by the hundredth part in
all the rest of the world that is not Catholic, being put together.

And lastly, that the Catholics excel (especially speaking of the Clergy) the
rest of the world in all kind of learning, knowledge and wisdom, both human
and divine, may sufficiently appear by the means they have to attain
thereunto before others, and by the effects thereof in their works and
writings. For first, as concerning the means and helps, which God has
provided for them to arrive to the perfection of knowledge, as all the world in
respect of Christendom, is nothing else, but barbarism: so amongst those, that
bear the name of Christians, if any Countries excel the rest, in quicknes of
wit, maturity of judgment, and capacity of great understanding; they are those
that still remain vntaynted, and untouched from the Schisms, and Heresies of
this present time. And besides this known advantage of natural tallents, the
manner, and constant course of study amongst them is such, as that to speak,
for examples sake, of the Jesuits alone, doubtless a mean understanding may
sooner attain, to be an excellent learned man by their education, then an
excellent wit, may come to any mediocrity by the slack and disorderly course
of teaching, which is held in England, or in any other Country that is not
Catholic. Which Sir Francis Bacon in one of his books does acknowledge in
great part, and your self will easily believe by their manner of study in
Philosophy and Deuinity alone, which here I will briefly set down unto you.

First therefore, all their Scholars in these sciences, do write for an hour
in the forenone, and another hour after dinner, two several Lectures, which
their Masters do dictate unto them, repeating their words so leasurely, that
they need not loose one word of their Masters readings. In this manner, they
continue in hearing their Philosophy 3. years together, under one and the
same Master. The first year, is appropriated to Logic, the second to
Phisickes, and the third to the Metaphisicks of Aristotle. In which manner, all
the questions of moment, and profit, as they depend of one another: so likewise
they are methodically, and orderly delivered unto them, together with the
explication of the Text, and meaning of Aristotle where it imports. The
Lecture being ended, and they being divided into many classes, under so many
several repetitors or moderators, appointed to hear them, they repeat for
half an hour their precedent lessons, and dispute upon them one against the
other in the School before they depart, their Master being present. And
afterward, they return to make the like repetitions, and disputations for an
hour together, more exactly then before, at a certain time prefixed every
day, in their several Colleges, and Academyes, and other places of private
meetings: which time being put together makes 4. hours. The rest of the day
is employed in study and prayer; saving that in the year of Phisickes, they
bestow half an hour every day upon Mathematickes, and in the year of
Metaphisickes upon moral Philosophy, which is read unto them by other
Masters. As every day they dispute of the Lectures given them the days
before, so also every week, they have disputations of the matter given them in
that week. And every month, as the 3. Masters of Logic, Physic, and
Metaphisicke can agree, they meet together in the same School, withal their
Scholars, and dispute one against another in the matters of that month,
whereunto, as being more public, other Masters and Doctors are invited. And
besides all this, they have other private exercises, and helps of learning in
their particular Colleges. At the end of the year such as have studied best,
are preferred to defend Conclusions public of the whole year, and they that
have heard their course of three years, and are the most worthy of all their
fellows, defend conclusions of all Philosophy, with great solemnity and
concourse of people. Which course of study breeds such emulation among them,
and draws them on with such delight of their own profit, that their
Superiors have more ado, to keep them from studying too much, then else where
Masters are wont to have, in keeping their scholars from doing nothing.

Their course of Divinity lasts four years. The manner of their Lectures and
disputations is almost the same with the former of the Philosophers; saving
that they have three several Masters, who read every day in several matters,
and explicate the most difficult places of the Scripture and Fathers, as their
former Master did expound Aristotle, and other Philosophers. And instead of
Mathematikes and moral Philosophy, they have other Lectures of Tongues, and of
the Text of Scripture. Besides Philosophy and Divinity, for such as have less
time, or less strength of mind or body, there are two other Lectures every day
of Positive Divinity, which commonly is called Cases of Conscience: a study as
little known to Protestants, as there is little care, or use of Conscience
amongst them. Their course of Philosophy and Divinity being thus ended, such
amongst the Jesuits themselves, as are thought to be most fit for Schools, are
permitted for two years to go over the whole body of their studyes again, by
their own private industry, conferring the same with the doctrine and opinions
of other writers, and afterward they are appointed and made Masters to read
Philosophy, and with time Divinity, if their strength and talents do so
deserve. By this means you see that almost of necessity they must have
excellent Masters, and excellent scholars, and the one is a great help, and a
great encouragment to perfect the other.

Besides all this that has been said of their course of study, it is of great
moment to consider. that all the Masters, and the greatest part of their
scholars, are Religious men, or live religiously, in Seminaryes and Colleges,
where being freed from all kind of worldly care, and occasion of passion,
disorder or temptation, having their set times for prayer, and honest
recreation, and such as be Priests offering daily sacrifice to Almighty God,
and such as are none, confessing and communicating once a week at the least,
they enjoy that quietness of mind and sweet peace of conscience, which together
with Gods benediction is most fit for science. And thus they continue, not only
for a while, as elswher scholars are wont to do, until they marry, or get
preferment; but al their lines long, without any secular distraction, or
deniation whatsoever. And that which I have said of the Jesuits, may be also
affirmed, either wholly, or in great part, of many other secular Doctors, and
almost of all Religious Orders, the Dominicans, Franciscant, Augustines,
Carmelits, Benedictins, Bernardines, and the rest, who for every hour, which
your scholars or Ministers do commonly spend in study, or prayer, they that
study and pray least, spend 2. at the least one with the other, especially
considering the constancy and continuance of ours, in these exercisus for all
their lives, and the great inconstancy and discontinuance of yours, which is
notorious. And therefore if the grounds of all kind of learning being soundly
laid, and constant prayer; and good life, and the study of Scripture be the
fittest means to find out the truth of Religion, and to obtain true wisdom
at the hands of God: It cannot be denied, but that the possession and
perfection thereof must rather be found in the Catholic Clergy, then among the
Ministord of any other sect of Religion in the world.

Whereof our Catholic Deuynes in this present age have also made evident
demonstration by their works and wrytings, For whether you respact their
erudition in the sacred Tongnes, their explications of all arts and scyences,
and especially their readings upon all questions of Divinity, their
commentaryes upon all the parts of Scripture, their treatises, as well of
deuntion, piety, and perfection of Christian life, with the means to attain
thereunto, as also of prayer, both vocal and mental, which is again divided
into meditation, and supernatural contemplation (of which later parts, the
Protestants have neither the practice nor scarce understand the meaning) the
number and the excellency of those books which the Catholics have published
in this age of ours, is so great, and so emiment, that no former ages of the
world, for abundance, and perfection of Science put together, may be compared
with it. Whereas if you will reflect a little; and judge indifferently, you
shall scarce find three books published by the Protestants (unless you will
except those of Poetry printed in vulgar languages, and in respect of the
matter are not worthy to be excepted) which are not already contemned by the
Protestants themselves, and are therefore no way likely to remain unto
posterity.

Thus we have showed the authority of the Catholic professors for the truth
of their Religion, whether you respect their number, or wisdom, or learning,
or perfection of life, to be such as does most evidently, and notoriously
exceed the testimony of any other Church, or Congregation whatsoever. Unto
which authority of the secular Clergy, and Layty, and of all the several
Orders and Religious bodies of the Catholic Church at this time; if you join
the authorityes of all the holy and ancient Fathers, whose natural tallents,
and supernatural gifts of learning, sanctity and wisdom, are above all
comparison: And if unto these again, you join the authorityes of so many
general Counsels, as have been received by the universal Church, wherein so
many times all the learning and wisdom of the whole world have met together:
And lastly unto all this if you add the testimonies of all Christians for a
1000. years together, as the Protestants themselves confess, and of all the
former ages, even from the time of Christ, as we have proved by the Fathers of
those times, utterly co^demning the opinions of the Protestants, and being
mutually condemued by them; they come to be so many worlds of witnesses, as
there has been ages since the time of Christ, and visibly make up that great
Mountain of authority, which fills the world and which all those that will
not ascend to know the truth must needs be crushed by it, if they resist it,
and eternally perish under it, if they contemn it.

This is that great benefit which S. Augustine in his book de vtilitate
Credends, acknowledges, that the world in these latter times, has received of
Almighty God, who of his infinite goodness has provided, that the Catholic
Faith, being so austere to the eye of flesh and blood, so much above reason,
and so contrary as it is, to our corrupted nature, should be recommended unto
us, as it were, by the general consent, and common belief of all people. This
(says S. Augustine) the divine prouydence has brought to pass by the
predictions of the Prophets, by the humanity and doctrine of Christ, by the
trauells of the Apostles, Aug. de vtil. Cred. cap. 7.
by the contumelyes, crosses, blood, and death of Martyrs, by the laudable life
of Saints; and in all these things, by such miracles, as were fit for matters,
and virtues so great as these, according as the opportunity of times required.
Wherefore, seeing the assistance of God to be so great, and so great the fruit
and benefit thereof; shall we doubt to cast our selves, into the lap of his
Church? Considering (that now) even by the confession of mankind it self, she
has received the prohemynence of all authority, from the Apostolic seat by
succession of Bishops: the Heretics in the mean time, having barked about her
all in vain, and partly by the judgment of the people themselves, partly by
the gravity of Counsels, and partly by the Majesty of miracles, having been
all condemned. To which Church not to grant the highest degree of authority, is
either extreme impiety, or precipitate arrogance. For if our, souls have no
certain way to attain true wisdom and salvation, but where faith and
belief prepares, and adorneth our reason: what is it else to resist authority
endued or est abbshed with so great labor, but to be ungrateful to this help
and assistance of Almighty God?

Thus far S. Augustine, of the notable benefit that our faith has received
from the Common consent of so many Nations therein, which he calls the
confession of mankind, and of the wonderful means which God has used for the
procurement of this universal testimony, unto the truth thereof. For albeit,
when the Apostles began first to preach, all rules and principles of humayne
wisdom were enforced to give place unto that divine authority wherewith they
were sent, to their gifts of Tongues to the miracles they wrought, to the power
of that spirit which spoke by them, and to the splendor of those celestial
virtues, which proceeded from them: yet since that time, the sweetness of Gods
providence has so ordained, that both these authorityes Humayne, and Divine,
the wisdom of God, and the wisdom that naturally directs worldly men,
should be joined together; to the end, that all men's wills might be drawn
more easily, gently, and connaturally, to embrace the doctrine of Christ; And
that all understandings, great or small, might either be convinced, or
convicted by it.

The voice of the most, the testimony of those that are true and honest, and
the judgment, example, and practice of the wisest, being the best part of that
light of nature which God has lent us for the direction of our lives; his
infinite goodness, and perfect justice, could never have permitted this authority
of the Catholic Church, to have grown^ to this unmeasurable greatness, nor
could have made it so inuincibly victorious against all those that have opposed
themselves unto it: confirming the same with so many Prophesies of Scripture,
and promises of his own, and not only with the ostension of miracles, and
heroycall constancy of innumerable Martyrs; but also with the glory and
splendor of so many other benedictions of excellent learning, divine wisdom,
admirable unity, piety, and perfection of virtue, as has been showed; unless
it had been so ordained by him, for the recommendation, and preservation of
that Truth which himself descended from heaven to teach the world, and to dye
the death of the Cross, for the eternal memory, and fructification of it. For
if in any thing we should be deceived by the power and greatness of his
authority, we might well say, it was no fault of ours, but rather, as S.
Augustine affirms, it were either extreme impiety, or precipitate arrogance.
Not to be so deceived, what need there any other revelations, or miracles, as
S. Augustine also observes, in a case so clear as this? If so many Nations
have been converted to the obedience of this supernatural faith, and for so
many ages have been preserved in unity thereby, without signs and miracles;
this it self is a most sufficient, apparent, and perpetual miracle for the
testimony of the truth thereof.

SECTION XXVI. The same Authority, and the grounds of Christian Faith are
further declared.
AS the object of reason does far exceed the knowledge of our senses: so the
truth of things supernatural and divine, do no less surmount the light of
reason. And therefore, the end of man, and the means to attain unto it, being
both of them supernatural and divine; as it was necessary that God should
reveal, and deliver the knowledge thereof to his Prophets and Apostles,
obliging all men to believe them: so it was also expedient, that there should
be some certain means ordained and established by Almighty God, whereby we
might infallibly know what it was, that was so revealed unto them. For
otherwise if there be not such supernatural and certain help to attain the
knowledge of those Divine Misteryes, which do so much exceed the power and
faculty of human understanding; to persuade our selves that we shall be able to
arrive to any certain knowledge of them by any human diligence, or natural
endeavor alone, were as wise a matter, as for a man to go about to read in the
dark, or for him that has no eyes to judge of colors. Nay, it were much more
ridiculous: For such a kind of dark reading, or blind judgment might be
practiced or adventured for some little wager, or to make men pastyme: but
Christians that make their belief the rule of their life and death, laying not
only their fortunes, but also their souls upon it, unless they have some Divine
help, and infallible assistance of the spirit of God, to know those things
which they believe to have been revealed to the Apostles, and can no way be
discerned by human reason; they can never be excused from mere madness, and
ridiculous folly.

Upon what grounds the Catholics believe the doctrine and preaching of the
Apostles, which is the Gospel, and the object of their faith to have been
revealed from the mouth of God, and that the Church is perpetually and
infallibly assisted by God himself, in the preservation of the foresaid
doctrine from all stayne, or touch of errors, has been showed already:
Almighty God having so magnified and fortifyed the authority of his Church, as
if the will of man be not too much perverted, it is impossible for his
understanding to resist it. And therefore as S. Augustine said notably: Cont.
epist. Fundam.
That be would not believe the Gospel, except the authority of the Catholic
Church did move him thereunto: so also he says as plainly, August. epist. 18.
that it was most insolent pride, to dispute against it.

And therefore, the mind of man being insatiable of knowledge, for which it was
created, and according to the Philosopher, it being better to know a little of
Divine things, then to have great intelligence of other matters: hence it
follows, that to know so many celestial Misteryes, as the doctrine of Christ
contains, in so short a time, with such great ease, and infallible certainty,
being grounded upon so many conuincing arguments and apparent testimonies of
Divine authority; which doctrine being also that precious stone, that brings
with it all good things, and begins that happynes in this life, which is
perfected, and rewarded with eternal felicity in the next: This I say, must
needs be a wonderful strong and excellent motive to compel all those to enter
into the School and Church of Christ, whose mynds have any dominion over their
bodies, and are not wholly transported with the pride of life, or altogether
drowned in worldly desires, or brutish sensuality.

Whereas the Protestants on the other side, professing to have no other ground
of Faith, but only the bare Scripture, do show therein, that they have neither
sufficient ground to believe that God has revealed his secrets to the world,
nor any Diuino assistance to know, and discern what seerets they are that were
so revealed. For first as concerning Scripture, denying the authority of the
Church as they do, if S. Augustine for example, should deny the Scripture,
which he says plainly, that he would not believe, vnlosse the authority of
the Church did move him thereunto; how I pray you, could they persuade S.
Augustine by Scripture alone, which he would flatly deny, that any thing was
ever revealed by God? or being revealed, that it was truly delivered again?
or that any part of those things, which were revealed, was written by the
spirit of God, and so recommended to posterity? Secondly, the Scripture it
self making mention of many other books of Scripture, that are not extant,
though one should grant, that some part of Gods word was written, which the
Protestants without cause believe, how could they prove, that any part thereof
remains? For if some books are lost, why may not all have perished? Thirdly,
the malice of the Jews, and the fraud of Heretics being so great as they are,
and the diligence of Scribes in writing being no more but humane, and the
copyes of Scripture being very many, and very different one from another: and
the Hebrew Text, having been written a long time without vowells, and the
adding or giving of diverse vowells, making diverse and contrary senses, and the
vowells themselves being but little pricks set under the letters, and the
Characters being so strange, and many of them so like one another as they are,
and therefore, it being not only an easy matter to change them, but also it
seeming almost impossible that they should not have been mistaken among so
many writers, in so many several Countries, for so many years together; all
this considered, though a man should grant, that some books of Scripture were
not lost: how I beseech you, can the Protestants show, that any part thereof is
free from error and foul corruption, especially granting as they do, that
many places of the Originalls are actually corrupted?

Fourthly, supposing the originalls, either to have remained perfect all this
while, or else to be restored by them to their perfection, whereof they can have
no other ground, but their own wilful imagination; considering that all their
interpreters have translated with passion and prejudice in favor of their own
opinions, and in opposition to the Roman Church, and to the ancient vulgar
translation; following therein, See the Protestant Apol. p. 256. 257. 258.
rather the exposition of the Jewish Rabbis, the enemies of Christ, then of
the ancient Fathers: And likewise considering, that as their translatours are
all divided among themselves, every one seeking his own glory; so also, that
they condemn one another, of mangling, dismembring, forging, and of corrupting
the Scripture; with what colorable reason, can the Protestants believe, any of
their Bibles, or particular versions, to be the word of God, and not rather the
word of Tyndall, or Calvin, or Luther, or of some other translatour?

Fifthly, giving unto them, that some things have been revealed by God, and
were truly delivered, and truly written: and that some of those writings have
been preserved by God, and still remain, miraculously uncorrupted: And that
the Caluinists alone, or the Protestants of England alone, have only the true
version, or translation thereof; the Diony. de Eccles. hierar. c. 1. Orig. in
prin. peria. and tract. 23. in Mat. Tertul. in l. praescrip. and l. de corona
Milit. Clemens in ep. Iren. l. 3. cont. haer. c. 2. and 3. Bafil. l. de spiritu
sa^ctoc. 27 and l. cont. Eunom. Epiphan. haeres. 61. Hier. l. co^t. Lueif.
August. ep. 118.119.86. Cypr. l. de card. Chrisoper. c. de ablut. peau^ Theoph
in 2. ad These. 2. Chrysostom. orat. 4. in eandem ep. Theod. ibi.
ancient Fathers of the Church, proving not only by tradition, but also by the
writen-word it self, that the word of God is partly written, and partly
unwritten; what infallible proofs can the Protestants bring out of Scripture,
that we ought to believe nothing, which is not expressly contained in the
Scripture? Especially considering that contrary to their own ground, they
pretend to believe many things which indeed are true, but no where expressly
contained in the Scripture: as that the Scripture it self is the word of God:
that children may be baptized before they believe: That Baptism in rose water,
or any liquour, then natural Elementary water, or in the Name of Christ alone,
is not good and sufficient. That the Baptism of Turks, and Jews, and
Heretics, is good in some cases. That it is always a sin to rebaptize.
That God the Father has no Father, which among many others is one instance of
S. Augustine, against the Heretics of his time, acknowledging no other ground
of their Faith, but only Scripture. That the Sabbath day which is Saturday,
ought not to be publicly observed as holy, which is against the Commandment
of the Law: and that all Christians are obliged to observe the Sunday, whereof
there is not commandment to be found in the written word of the Gospel.
That our Blessed Lady remained, and continued still a Virgin. That Easter day
ought to be kept upon a Sunday. That it is lawful to eat blood, and strangled
meats, contrary to the words of the Decree of the Church, in the Acts of
Apostles, and the like. Many things also they believe, that are merely falls,
and not only not contained in the words of Scripture: but also expressly
contrary thereunto. As, that Ephesians. 5.32.
Matrimony is no Sacrament: that the Matt. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
Joan. 6.51.
Blessed Sacrament of the Altar is not Christ's Body: that men are 1. Cor.
13.2.3. Iacoh. 2.14. etc.
justified by Faith alone: that Iac. 2.21. etc. Eccles. 18. Romans 6.19.
no good works do merit: that the Matt. 11.30.1. Joan. 5.3.3. Reg. 14.4. Reg.
23.
keeping of Gods Commandments is impossible: that we have 3. Rag. 3.5. Eccl.
31.10. Genesis 4.6.7. 1. Cor. 7.37.
no Freewill to do well: that Christ Act. 2.24.2.7. 1. Pet. 3.18.
descended not into Hell: And to be short that the Church of God is See before
Sect. 21.
invisible; that it has erred, and that many true Prophets or preachers have
been sent to reform it: whereas the Scripture only tells of false Prophets to
come, and says expressy, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

Lastly, if you will but bar the Protestants their own expositions and
argumentations upon the Scripture, which they confess themselves to be no part
of the written word, they cannot produce so much as one express place of
Scripture for any of those opinions, so peremptorily defended, and stiffly
objected against us: which me thinks, considering how much they vaunt of
Scripture, is sufficient of it self. to make such as are good amongst them
ashamed of their errors; and shows most evidently, that the first authors
of this new Gospel, have founded the same upon nothing else, but only upon
their own impudency, the malice of the time, and the weakness of their hearers.
By all which considerations, it is more then manifest, that the Protestants
denying the authority of the Church, they overthrow the authority of the
Scripture: and that refusing to receive the same from the Church, they have no
Scripture at all, but that diverse ways contradicting their own grounds,
instead of Scripture they miserably abuse themselves, with their own
translations, and their own imaginations, and have nothing else, but only the
bare name, and outward show of Scripture.

And now to come to the second Stone of their foundation which is the point of
their pryuate spirit First, they can produce no place of Scripture, to prove
either that the Scripture alone is a sufficient ruie of Faith or that God has
promised his holy spirit to every particular man, in expounding the Scripture.
And therefore believing either the one or the other, they overthrow their own
grounds, and believe something more then Scripture, which is not expressly
contained therein. Secondly, this manner of interpreting the Scripture,
according to the private spirit of every particular man, is not only warranted
by the Scripture, but also expressly contrary thereunto. For the Scripture
commands us, for the deciding of controuersyes about the same, to ascend to
the high Priest for the time, Deu. 17.9.12. Matthew. 2.7. Mat. 18.17. Mat. 23.2.
and to obey him upon pain of death: to require the Law from the lips of the
Priests: to hear the Church: and, that such as will not hear it, shall be
accounted as Heathens, and Infidells: to do as they say who shall sit in the
Chair of Moses, and the like. Which places are contrary to that infallible
assistance of every man's private spirit, which the Protestants pretend, and are
further confirmed by the practice, and execution of them, in the primitive
Church, recorded also by the Scripture. For all the Apostles were not
commanded to write, but to preach, Mar. 16.15.
and the world was obliged, not to believe any particular spirit, but the words
and writings proceeding from the spirit of the Apostles. Act. 15.28.
And the question of the observation of the Legal Cerimonyes, was not left to
the arbitrament of every man's private spirit, but was reserved to the common
spirit of the Church. And therefore as the Church was founded not only by
Scripture, but also by the unwritten word of God: so also it must be preserved.
And as the world at that time believed the words and wrytings of the Apostles,
delivered by themselves: so now it must give credit thereunto, being likewise
delivered by their Successors. We have a more firm Prophetical speech,
whereunto you do well to attend (says S. Peter: 2. Petr. 1.20.21.
) and after adioyneth; first understanding this, that no Prophesy of Scripture
is made by private interpretation; for not by man's will was Prophesy brought at
any time, but the holy men of God spoke, inspired with the holy Ghost. Whereof
you see it follows, that the Scripture must be interpreted by the same
spirit, wherewith it was written, and being communicated by the spirit of God
for the public benefit of the Church, with the public authority of those that
wrote it, it must also be expounded by the same spirit for the public weal of
the Church; with the like public authority of those that have the keeping of
it: so understanding this, that no Prophesy of Scripture is made with private
interpretation. The spirit (says S. Paul) deuideth unto all in particular,
according as he will: 1. Cor. 12.17.
All the members of the body, have not the same act, for if the whole body be
ancye, where is the hearing? Where also he denies, that all have the gift of
Prophesy, Matt. 18.17. Hebr. 13.17. 2. These. 2.23. Phil. 4.9. Gal. 1.8. Marc.
7.15.24. Marc. 13.22. 2. Pet. 2.1. 1. Ioa^. 4.1. 2. These. 2.2.
the interpretation of Tongues, discretion to discern of spirit, which is
expressly against the Protestants etc.

In conclusion, as the Scripture exhorts us to hear the Church, to obey our
Pastors and spiritual Superiors, to remain in those things, which we have
heard of them, and not to believe an Angel from heaven, but rather to hold him
accursed that should preach contrary thereunto, and the like, which do signify
the great authority given to the public spirit of the Church; promised to be
sent unto it, and to remain with it for ever: so all those places of
Scripture, which advise us to beware of false Prophets (that is to say) of
Heretics, to try the spirit, not to be terrifyed neither by spirit or speech,
and the like, must needs be understood of those, who out of a private spirit
should oppose themselves against the common doctrine of the Church, or public
authority of the governor thereof, wherein also consists the very essence of
heresy: Aug. ep. 162. deciuit. l 18. c. 51. de Bapt. cont. Don. l. 4. c. 16.
and in this sense S. Paul affirms Tit. 3.11.
that an heretic is subverted and sins, being condemned by his own
judgment: That is to say, opposing his private judgment against the Church, and
so giving sentence against his own soul to his eternal damnation.

And as this Protestant ground is most opposite to Scripture: so also it is no
less contrary to reason it self. For as in a Commonwealth or Kingdom, the
law being public and common to all, the interpretation of the law and the
final sentence of all suits and causes, concerning the law, is likewise
public: for otherwise there could be no peace, nor concord made between
private men, if every one might interpret the law to his own advantage: so
likewise the Catholic Faith, being common and public, propounded to all, and
all men being commanded to agree together in the same faith with unity and
concord; it must needs follow, that the definition and sinall sentence of all
controuersyes and causes of faith be also public. For otherwise there could
be no end of differences, every man obstinatly defending the sense of his own
spirit, and presumptuously condemning all those, Hier cont. Lucif. c. 14.
that oppose themselves against it. If in the Church (says S. Hierome) there
be no imminent power, there will be so many Schisms, as there are Priests. And
among twelve one was chosen, that a head being appointed, Idem cont. Iouin.
the occasion of Schism might be taken away. But of this we have spoken
sufficiently else where, and have also showed by experience, that the
Protestants for want of this public authority, are infinitely divided among
themselves, and censure most terribly, and condemn most extremly the several
opinions of one another.

Wherefore to proceed, and to omit for breuityes sake, that this rule of
private interpretation being once admitted, there would follow nothing else, but
an infinite confusion of little truth, and much falsehood in the Church of God:
And that the members thereof should have no means to discern with whom they
ought to hold communion, as sincere and orthodoxall, nor whom to avoid, as
corrupt and heretical. What can be more contrary to the light of Nature, then
where all have equal means to know the truth, or that some for sundry good
respects may be thought to excel the rest, every particular man, though never
so simple, should more co^fide in his own private understanding, then in the
judgment of the best and wisest? which as it is most absurd in all kind of
knowledge: so especially in the right understanding and interpretation of
Scripture, being in great part most obscure, and every where subject to error,
as you may easily judge by the controuersyes, decrees, and general Counsels
of the Church concerning the same; by the condemnations of so many excellent
wits, and learned men, that have erred therein; and by the explications,
sermons, and co^mentaryes, that without end are made upon them. And truly that
every Protestant, man, woman, and child. plough-man, artificer, or of what
profession soever, learned or unlearned, whether they can read or no, should
take it upon them, and upon their salvation, as they do, and as they are bound
to do, according to the ground of their Religion, to judge infallibly by the
Scripture alone, which books are Scripture, and which not; and to know every
verse, and every line of the Canonical, from that which is not Canonical,
better then the ancient Fathers, or Laodicean Council for example, who doubted
of many of them, and better then that famous Council of Carthage, where at S.
Augustine was present, and is thought to have been the Secretary and penner of
it, which decreed many books to be Scripture that are now contradicted and
rejected by the Protestants; is so strange a madness, as it seems impossible,
that it should sink into any man's heart to imagine, or that the mind of any
sober man could be deluded with it.

And the same we may say of the interpretation of Scripture. For believing as
an article of their Faith, that there is no external means, whereby they may
infallibly know the meaning of Scripture, but by the Scripture; every idle
companion prefers his own private judgment therein, not only before the
judgment of all the Fathers in particular, who have doubted of many points of
Faith, and of the meaning of many places in Scripture, until by a general
Council their doubts were cleared; but also before the sentence of the
universal Church, which every Protestant does imagine to have grossly erred,
believing in the mean time his own opinion to be most infallible. Which is
yet more strange, in that the Protestants persuading themselves to be most
certain, that they have the Scripture, and the true interpretation of
Scripture, they confess notwithstanding the means which they use for the
attayning of this certainty, to be most uncertain: That is to say, the reading
of Scripture, their conference of places, their diligence, prayer, and the like.

Whereof the two last alone are common to all, and every one of these means
being by their own confession but human endeauours, are therefore subject to
the error of our frail Nature, and to the common oversight of man's infirmity.
And as all parties among them condemn each other: so there was never any
Protestant in the world, whom they believe or acknowledge, notwithstanding the
use of all these means, not to have been very much deceived in the
interpretation of the Scripture. And therefore, as the authority of the
Catholic Church, in respect of the clarity and extension thereof is fitly
expounded by S. Augustine, to be that Lightning of the coming of Christ, which
breaking forth out of heaven, is scene from the East to the West, Matthew. 24.27.
and fills the world, enforcing all men to behold it: so it is no great
mystery to understand, that the Protestants shutting their eyes against it,
have chosen to themselves such a ground of their faith, as by it self alone is
not only most uncertain unto them, for diverse and sundry causes; but also in
respect of the formality thereof is most contrary to Scripture, most opposite to
reason, and most evidently overthrowing it self, as has been showed. Whereof
because no man, that is not wilfully blind among you, can be ignorant,
therefore I can blame none of those great numbers, of whom your authors do so
much complain, who prefer the light of sense, or natural reason, before the
faith of the Protestants, and choose rather to believe nothing, then to be so
grossly, and so manifestly deceived. For such a kind faith, as has been
showed, does not perfect the light of natural reason, but abuse it, nor makes
men spiritually wise but rather diabolically contentious, and absurdly foolish.
And the ground thereof being false and frivolous, they who rely the most
thereupon, are the most deceived.

And albeit they may hold many things that are true, yet speaking properly of
divine faith, they have no faith at all, whereof I gave you the reason, in the
beginning of this Section: because to aim at the secrets of God, or to move
any dispute about them, without some infallible means, which himself has
ordained for the preservation, tradition and preaching, or delivery of them, is
no less ridiculous, then for blind men, as I have said, to contend of colors;
or as S. Paul affirms, no better then vain and idle talking; 1. Tim. 1.6.7.
not understanding, neither what is spoken, nor of what to affirm. But as the
Turks, albeit they are persuaded that there is one God, yet receiving it from
their Alcaron which is the ground of their faith, and teaches them many
untruths; their persuasion of the unity of God, is no belief, but error. Or
as the Jews, albeit they receive the old Testament as you know: yet because
they rely upon the interpretation of their Rabbis, which is subject to error,
their ground being deceitful; their faith is nothing but deceit, and
therefore no faith at all. So in like manner the Protestants, albeit they
follow a rule, which according as they use it, does propound unto them many
things that are true: yet propounding likewise very many that are false, and
being thereby deceitful, as has been declared, they believe the truth, it
shows no more then they believe the falsehood, whereof it is manifest they
believe nothing at all. And for this cause the authority of the Church being
the only ordinary means to make us know the rule of faith, Matt. 18.17.
our Savior himself said, that such as would not hear the Church, were no
better then Infidells; because consequently depryuing themselves of the rule of
Faith, they loose all true Faith, and divine fidelity. From whence likewise is
inferred that common principle of Christendom, that out of the Church there is
no salvation: because without Faith, it is impossible to please God, and
without obedience to the Church in matter of belief, there can be no faith at
all. From hence also the Council of Nyce, as witnesses the Creed of
Athanasius, read in your Churches every Sunday, together with the ancient
Fathers, has concluded; that denying one article of the Catholic Faith, or
not believing the same wholly, and inuiolably, no man can be saved. Because he
that obstinatly denies, or doubts of any one point of Faith, denies the
authority of the Church, without which we cannot certainly know the rule of
Faith, and thereby loosing his faith, is no better the^ an Infidel, as our
Savior has declared.

SECTION XXVII. Wherein two Motives, that is to say, Fear of danger, and the
Instigation of a certain spirit, which induced the Bishop to change the place
of his abode, are propounded and examined.
THESE therefore are some of the reasons which every Catholic man, though never
so simple, is able to give of his belief, and are so evident and justified in
themselves, that there is no man having sense of God, if he put them in the
Balance of his Judgment, but he must needs feel their weight in his mind, and
in his will the divine power and virtue of them. Whereas on the other side,
this learned man the Bishop, after 10. years study, writing to edify the world
with his Motives, can bring forth nothing, but that which appears at the
first sight to be false, and as you have heard, has received sentence of
Judgment three times already, being once of old condemned by the ancient
Fathers, and twyce more in our age by the Protestants themselves, who first
condemned the Fathers as being against them, and afterward also condemned the
heretical doctrine of one another.

And this may suffice to have spoken of those dispositions and other
considerations which the Bishop accuses to have been the causes and motives of
his change in religion. It follows now to examine the grounds that induced
him to change the place of his abode. Which albeit he sets down very
confusedly, I find they may be reduced to 3. principal heads. The first
therefore was his danger in staying. The second, his spirit that compelled him
to go. And the third, his zeal (forsooth) of truth and peace, that drew him
on. As concerning his danger, he confesses, that in Rome notice was taken of
his writing against the Roman doctrine, and that more then once he had been
admonished, and reprehended for it by the Popes Nuntio, or Agent, residing in
Venice. In which respect he had just cause to fear, that the Venetians, not to
maintain a manifest heretic in their State, might easily be induced to
deliver him up to the Nuntio, especially at that time, they having need of the
Pope in respect of their wars: and that the Nuntio would have sent him up to
the Holy House in Rome, where he should have been received with such kindness as
was agreeable to his deserts. Whereby it appears upon the matter, that being
entered so far into Heresy, as he could not go back without great infamy, he
sound Italy to hot for his foot, and fled from thencefor no other good
respect, but only because he could stay no longer without the horrible fear of
extreme danger.

By the way of this discourse, he puts himself into a great chafe against
the Pope, and laying aside his disguise of Monsignor fate voi, he shows
himself a plain Italian Facchine, without any truth, ciuility, or modesty.
And like your Collyer of Croydon, being a myte out of Town, he takes his
pleasure of the Pope, and rayleth against him most despiciously. And who is
there that has but soon the state of Germany, Spain, France, or Italy, and
thereby knows, as he must needs, the great reputation and authority of the
Catholic Clergy, and especially of the Bishops the heads of the Clergy, but
will admire at his impudency, to hear him say: That Catholic Bishops, now
adays, have nothing but the name of Bishops: That they are not permitted by
the Pope to have any gouennement of their Churches: That they are vilde and
contemptible: and which is no less untrue, then the former: That they are made
subject to Religious Orders; for Religious men except they be Bishops, or
endued with Episcopal authority, have no exterior jurisdiction at all,
neither over Bishops, nor any secular persons.

To the rest where he says: That the Church of Rome, is wholly become a
temporal Monarchy, a vineyard only to make Noe drunk, a flock whose blood
the Pastors suck, and the like; What shall we say, but that he shows
himself to be far worse, then one of Noe his accursed children, and to be no
better then a wild Boore, that would destroy the vineyard of Christ, or a
ravenous Wolf, that howleth against the Shepherd? Neither (all that went
before being most false) will I grant that to be true, where he says. That
Christ has placed him for a dog in his flock. For the truth is, that he
thrust himself in for a dog, as I have showed long ago. But now at length it
has pleased God to put him out for a Curre, and so he shows himself to be,
in barking against his Master. In the end, making these untruths some color
and occasion of his departure, at length he concludes, that to avoid the Popes
malice, which was so near unto him, and the ordinary effects thereof, which he
says to be poison, and punyards, it was altogether necessary for him to run
away. Leuit. 26.36. Job. 15.21.
An ill conscience fears the sound of a flying leaf: and the noise of fear
is always in his ear, and where peace is, he suspecteth treason. In which
respect, although it be not altogether improbable, that he feared poison and
punyards as he says, and it may very well be, that he had deserved no better
of some private Citizens in the place where he lived: yet it is more likely that
herein he would only show his Rhetorike, thereby to draw the Pope into
suspicion and envy: And that he fears no other poison, but the fire, nor any
other knife, but the sword of the hangman, which I must needs say, setting all
other causes apart, he well deserves for these monstrous slanders and foul
imputations alone, wherewith he charge so worthy a Prince as the Pope, and a
Seat so reverend and sacred as the Church of Rome

Where he says: That now adays, the controversies of the Church are not
committed to the deciding of Deuines or Counsels, but for the defense of Rome,
and from Rome, to Parricides, villains, and murderers; who knows not that
all the points in Controversy at this day, were for many years together
disputed, and discussed in the Council of Trent: and that the learned Deuines
of the Church of Rome, have defended themselves most gloriously, as well by
their excellent writings, as constant sufferings, whereof you need not go far to
seek examples: Not striking others treacherously, as this wolf pretends, but
being stricken unjustly: not giving blows, but receiving blow after blow: not
murdering others, but willingly suffering themselves to be murdered: not
seeking other men's lives, but giving their own lives for the testimony of
their cause, and for the salvation of the souls of others.

The Bishop being thus courageously resolved to run away, with most extreme
fear to be stayed or taken, he tells you of a great conflict between
himself on the one party, and his handmaid Agar with her Son Ismaell on the
other, viz. between the flesh and the spirit. Of what color the spirit was, I
make no question: but what flesh he means, whether his own, or some other
bodies that tempted him to stay, I cannot so easily resolve. For his own flesh
stood in fear of torture and torment, as you have heard, and was already
clothed with the infamy of heresy, that was bruted in him, and therefore by all
reason should take part with his spirit that did so vehemently persuade him to
run away. But the flesh that here he brings into combat, puts him in hope
of ease, of pleasure, and preferment, and in fear of the infamy that might
meet him in his journey. Besides it moves a doubt unto him, whether he were
wiser, then other innumerable Bishops that stayed behind him, which his own
flesh could never have done. For he knew, that he made no question of the
matter, and therefore he never admitted any of them to counsel. as he confessed
before, nor here does he vouchsafe any answer at all to that needless
objection.

On the other side; considering how like his flesh is to the flesh of Agar,
Genesis 16.4.
that despised her Mistress, and being therefore corrected by her, fed from
her, until at length not only her self, but also her son Ismaell were both
cast forth into the desert; as this man despised the Pope his Master, and
being reprehended for it, ran quite away and in the end was thrown forth out of
the family of Christ, into the desert of heresy and infidelity: I say, all this
considered, me thinks by Agar, he should mean no other flesh, but his own.
But whose flesh soever this Agar was, I have reason to think, that when he
came to you, he carried her son Ismaell with him into England. As concerning
the spirit, which pleaded, as he says, against the flesh, and did so much
solicit his hasty departure, unless himself had written it, I should not
have thought, that with any reason, I could have accused the Devil to have
been the author of it. For what should any spirit need to pray him go, that
was already upon running, and nothing else, but a chain could hold him. But now
I see, that his old acquaintance, not content with his readynes, did push, and
drive him healong on: and that as before he had cast him out of his order; so
at this time he was at hand to cast him forth out of the Catholic Church.

This spirit he calls Divine, and says, that with vehement impulsion it did
not permit him to make any longer delay. And that he followed the same, as
Abraham followed the voice of God. Genesis 22.10.
Alas poor man, if he be of any religion (whereof I have great cause to doubt,
for the causes aforesaid) he is not the first, that trusting to his own
judgment, and confiding himself in the pleasing phansy of a private spirit,
instead of God, has adored the Devil: by whose means also he further says,
going from Venice toward England, he hops that his fame or good name, of
what form and beauty soever it be, shall be preserved from all blemish, even in
the hands of the Barbarous. Which new Name of Barbarous (for any thing that I
can see) you must be contented to receive at the hands of your new God father,
instead of a better blessing. And surely, albeit some insolent Italians have
not spared to lay this rude imputation upon other Nations: yet this Dalmatian,
being scarsely an Italian himself, and going to live among them, and to be
mayntained by them, both in discretion and ciuility, should have affoarded them
some better title.

As touching the preservation of his fame, whereof he speaks with great zeal
and no little fear, as it seems, both here and in other places of his
book; I cannot so easily conjecture, what it is he would have, or what it is
he fears. For to be reputed an Heretic in Italy, in respect of his departure
thence, and his going into England, is a thing far off; and being of his
mind, and where he is, a man would think, he should rather glory therein, then
be ashamed thereof. Wherefore it is very probable, that there is some great
matter in the straw, which is not yet discovered; and that either he fears
the works he left behind him, will come after him thither, and claim him for
their Father: or else he is troubled with such passions still, as will quickly
discredit him, if provision be not made, that his infirmityes may either be
cured, or well covered.

And to this purpose perchance, he insinuates the reward of Abraham, whose
beautiful wife was preserved from reproach in the hands of Pharao: and the
saying of S. Ambrose, that neither Country nor Parents, nor wife, nor
children, ought to withdraw us, from the execution of Gods will. For God says
he, gives all things to us (which words I would have you mark) and is able to
preserve that which he gives. Whereby it may be, that his modesty would give
you to understand, that either he has a wife already, which I will not say; or
that he would have one, which is more likely, for the preservation of his same
amongst you. Which if it be so, he need not to have been so much ashamed
thereof, as to conceal it, if he had known in what plain terms some of his
ancestors, whose course he follows, domaunded the like savor.

And that you may the less marvel thereat, if such a thing should happen, I
will set you down part of an Epistle to the Bishop of Constance, written and
subscribed unto by Swinglius, Leo, Jude, Erasmus, and 8. other Ministers, who
all of them cry out for wives therein, and after some intimation made, of the
heavenly doctrine so long hydden, Prot Apol. fol 572. and sequent.
and in their time restored, confess and say: Hitherto we have tried that this
gift of Chastity has been denied unto us, we have burned (O for shame!) so
greatly, that we have committed many things unseemly. To speak freely without
boasting, we are not otherwise of such uncivil manners, that we should be
evil spoken of among the people to us committed, this one point only excepted.
Thus they: Which if you please to see in the Protestants Apology, when you are
at leisure, you shall find also another longer petition to the purpose, that
will either make you laugh or lament at the weakness of your first Apostles. But
thus the Bishop recommending his good name unto you, concludes his 2. first
Motives of change of place, and says: That being admonished by these dangers,
drawn by this vocation, and thus animated therein, he took himself to flight
then most nimbly.

SECTION XXVIII. Wherein the Bishop his zeal, and desire to try which is the
last Motive, that induced him to forsake his Country, is discussed.
HIS third Motive which he seems all this while to have forgotten, he
begins in this manner, page 28. Charuas tamen Christi super omnia vrget me:
but yet the Charity of Christ urges me above all things. Which when I read, I
could not choose but smyle, remembering how one that was troubled with vermyne in
Italy, went shrugging up and down, and singing that verse of Petrarch; S'amor
non e, che dunque e quel ch'to sento? If love it be not, what is that I feel?
For it is very probable that poverty and famine began to pinch him, as not
having sufficient to feed his maw, after he had resigned his poor Bishoprike
to his Nephew, as I have showed: And the Italian might better compare his life
to naughty love, then the Bishop his counterfeit charity to the divine love of
Jesus Christ; so that the one, if he had thought his life to be love, should
have been no less mistaken then the other. This charity (says he) did urge
him to cry. And to get him up to some high place, that his cry might be heard
the further, if you had ever been in Venice, you would imagine him to be
possessed with the spirit of some Montebanck, not only in respect of his mounting
and crying: but also in respect of his discourse. For with a great many
arrogant terms, and boasting words co^fusedly uttered, you would think he
meant to sell the wares of his new book, as Montebancks sell boxes.

But for orders sake, I will reduce all that he says to three heads. For
either he shows what it is that he intends to cry, or what authority he
has to cry, or answers certain objections that might be made against his
crying. I expected judgment, Isa. 5. and 7.
and behold iniquity; and justice, and behold a cry. Me thinks (as S.
Augustine said to a Donatist) that part of the world should suffice him,
wherein our Lord would, that the chief of his Apostles should be crowned with
a most glorious Martyrdom. For what could the President of that Church
answer, but that which the Apostolic Seat, and the Roman Church does
anciently hold with others? or at least, that the authority of Christendom,
which S. Augustine calls the Confession of mankind, might have suffised to
have kept this man in quietness, and obedience: but instead of judgment behold
iniquity; and instead of justice, behold a cry. For this man is so far from
hearing, and obaying the Church, which our Savior has appointed to teach him,
that being worse then an Infidel, he cries against the Church; and with
extreme arrogance would enforce the Church to believe him, and to be obedient
unto him. That which he intends to cry, is the matter of his book of
Christian Common Wealth, whereof he vaunteth, as if thereby the world should
know, Page 28.33.
what a champion the Protestants have gotten for them. For by means thereof,
the errors of Rome must be made manifest, and the purity of the Protestant
doctrine shall be no longer hidden, and a number of their Churches, rejected by
that of Rome, shall be declared Catholic; and the way of making peace and union
over all the world, shall be clearly manifested. And all this, he pretends with
such confidence, and presumption, as if with him the Catholic verity were
turned Protestant: or as if he had gotten a Monopoly of the doctrine of Christ,
and that no part thereof were warrantable, without his mark, or license and
with his approbation, that any Religion might pass for current. Of this book
of his he speaks every where with such admiration, as a man may easily
perceive, it is the Idol that he adoreth; and was doubtless the principal
cause of his fall; and for the love of it, more then any thing else, he was
content to renounce both his Faith and Country. But as Idols are nothing, so
I have showed sufficiently, that this Idol of his contains nothing. And
though it were never so strong and substantial: yet coming once forth, and
falling upon the stone of Peter, which is the Rock of the Church, whereat it
aymeth, it must needs be broken all to pieces.

And considering with my self what the cause might be, that all this while it
is not published, I am persuaded, that the Protestants themselves perceiving
the deformity thereof, and especially the cloven foot of the Devil, I mean
the denial of all Jurisdiction in the Church of God, which is the crutch
whereon it stands, were either affrayed, or ashamed to prynt it: which if it
be true, we shall shortly hear that either he will take the course, that
Achitophel did when his Counsel was contemned, or else that before it be long,
forsaking Kent and Christendom, he will turn himself toward the Turks and
Gentiles. And indeed intending as he does, to take away the occasion of
Schism, not by establishing one head upon earth, as our Savior did, but by
beating down the same: not by order of Jurisdiction, but by the disorder of
licentious liberty, any man may perceive it is a Devilish device, not to bring
forth union, but to breed confusion, nor to gather with Christ, but to scatter
with Antichrist. And therefore the Crier himself, considering the matter a
little better, and being ashamed to discover in plain terms his wicked
meaning, corrects himself afterward, and instead of demonstrating the way of
this union which he promised before, he says afterward, that if he do not open
the same, he will be contented to nod, and point at it with his finger. As for
his defense of the Protestant doctrine, I have sufficiently declared already,
that by taking the same upon him, he is not only 20. times condemned for an
Heretic by the ancient Fathers, but also pronounced to be Insathanized,
supersathanized, a slave of the Devil, one of the Antichristian swynish
Rabble, and a thousand times as bad by the Protestants themselves: wherein, as
in other things, the Bishop himself will needs contend, that you may safely
believe them.

As touching the second point, he shows that being a Bishop, he has
sufficient authority, not only to reprehend the mannets and vices of the time,
for the which no man perchance would have blamed him, if he had done it with
charity and discretion; but also to cry as he does against the errors of the
Roman Church, and of all other Churches united with it. For that the universal
Church, says he, in some cases is committed to the care of every particular
Bishop: whereof will follow this strange position, that it should belong to the
office of every particular Bishop in some occasion to accuse the whole Church
of error, whereunto this Crier himself, according to his own doctrine, must
have thought himself obliged in conscience, if he had been borne in the time
of his Father Luther: of the absurdity whereof I have spoken sufficiently
already.

And no less strange and absurd is the consequence, which he himself
infers, that any Bishop whatsouer has authority to correct and reform any
other Bishop. For example: That the Bishop of Spalato in Dalmatia, has
authority to visit and reform the Bishop of Canterbury, when the Dalmatia^
shall judge and esteem it to be so expedient. But because he thought it might
seem to be some new devise, being no less contrary to the Protestant, then to
the Catholic Religion, Monsignor fate voi having all this while taken up
whatsoever he said, upon the credit of his reader; in this place, as fearing at
length to be discovered for a counterfeit, begins a little to prove his
assertion, and to pay his Reader with such money, as he received of those that
hired him to play the Episcopal Doctor on your side the mountains. But I
think you will easily discern by the false sound, what coin it is, being as
far different from any current proof, as Fate voi, from a reverend Bishop. For
thus he reasons.

All Bishops together have the government of the whole Church of Christ, as he
proves out of the Scripture, out of S. Eleutherius, and S. Cyprian: therefore
every Bishop in particular has the like authority. As if one should say, All
the Officers of the Court do govern the whole Court under the King: therefore
every Officer in particular has authority over the whole Court under the King.
Or thus, All the Britans together are the Lords of great Britany: therefore
every Britan in particular is Lord over all Britany. Which miserable argument
he likewise confirms in this pitiful manner: Every Bishop may counsel,
help, and succor the necessityes of any other Church or Bishopric, as it is
manifest by the example of many ancient Fathers: Therefore every Bishop has
authority over all other Churches. As much as to say, every man may help the
necessityes of his Neighbor, and the servant of his Master: therefore Every
man has authority over his Neighbor, or the servant over his Master.

But letting pass the weakness of his argument, because it is the first, and
because it may be, that for want of use, he has forgotten how to argue; let
him show you, but one ancient Father. that ever reprehe^ded the Bishop of Rome
of any Cathedral doctrine, or erroneous Decree in matter of faith: or any holy
or laudable Bishop, that ever gave sentence against any other of his Colleagues,
deposed, or excommunicated him, or called him iuridically to make his defense,
by virtue of any such general authority, and I will be content you shall
believe this insolent Intruder in all other things, and subject your self unto
him. Besides, though it should be granted, that heretofore he had no less
authority then himself pretends; being now deposed by the Pope that now is,
as Dioscorus, or Eutiches were by the Popes of their times, or as the Bishop of
Arles whom S. Cyprian not presuming to judge, wrote unto the Pope to
excommunicate, and appoint another in his place; I would ask him what he can
pretend, which those Heretics might not likewise allege why he should not
confess, that by sentence of deposition against him, the authority which he
had, is justly taken from him?

Again, quia Episcopatum eius accepit alter, because, as it was said of Judas,
another has received his Bishopric, I would ask him, what authority he has
to cry, being lawfully deposed from his Bishopric, more then the other has,
who did lawfully succeed him? And why we should believe him, being an
excommunicate Heretic, more then the other being an approved Catholic? For if
he pretend either the Scriptures, or the Fathers to be for him; it is no more
then other Heretics have pleaded before him, and we have sufficiently showed,
that most manifestly they make against him.

Wherefore, though he cry never so loud: yet by this it is manifest that he
cries no other ways, then as the Devil did, when he was cast forth by our
Savior. And I hope unless he cry with better reason, then hear he does
allege, he shall sooner burst with crying, then move either your self, or
any other to believe him.

SECTION XXIX. The first objection of the Bishop against himself, is
discussed: VVherin he affirms, tha albeit the King ought to be feared, and
may not be reprehended: yet that the Pope is not to be feared etc.
THE objections which he answers as supposed to be made against himself, are
2. in number. But the first, under the color of an objection is nothing else,
but an egregious piece of flattery, derived from the Turkish Divinity of his
Neighbor Country. The objection may be framed in this manner: The Majesty of
an earthly King is to be feared: and he ought not to be reprehended or
admonished of his fault, but by a Prophet sent from God: Therefore the Majesty
of the Pope, ought likewise to be feared, and ought not to be accused of
Heresy, but by a Prophet raised up by God for that purpose. The Antecedent,
that a King ought not to be rebuked or admonished of his fault, but by a
Prophet sent from heaven, he easily admits, being the point of barbarous
adulation which he intends, and thereby as it seems, would gladly bring in
the Turkish manner of Government into our Country: giving unto the King such
absolute command, and Tyrannical power, over the lives, and fortunes, and
souls of his subjects, that whatsoever he did, or what Heresy or false worship
soever he should profess, no man might reprehend him for his fault, or put him
in mind of his duty. Wherein I am sure, the gracious Majesty of our Prince, is
so far from applauding his Sycophancy, that he detesteth his Divinity. But
this proposition, your Turkish Doctor does not only teach out of the Alcaron:
but also goes about to prove out of the Bible. For King David, says he,
having committed Adultery and Murder, was not rebuked for it by any Priest or
Leuit, but by Nathan the Prophet. From which particular the silly man, not
considering that the sin of David was secret, for the which cause a Prophet
was sent to reprove him, infers a general: That no King ought to be
reproved but by a Prophet. Meaning by all likelihood, that David was not to be
corrected but by the Prophet Nathan, as the Turks believe, that their
Emperors ought to be reformed by no other, but by their Prophet Mahomet, when
he comes. And his argument is as good, as if he should have said; Sarah when
she laughed, was not rebuked by Abraham her husband, but by an Angel:
therefore no married woman when she offends ought to be reprehended by her
husband, but by an Angel. Which argument, if he can make good, he might
perhaps have many followers that would reward him well, for intituling them
with such ancient right to wear the breeches.

Or to come nearer to him, so well he might have argued in this manner: Balaams
Ass was beaten by a Prophet, and therefore no Ass ought to be beaten, but
only by a Prophet. Which if it were true, Monsignor fate voi might have escaped
with fewer blows then he is like to do if his books come forth, there being
so many that stand ready with Bastinadoes in their hands to wayt upon him.
Having granted and proved the Antecedent of his flattering Objection in such
manner as you have heard, he denies the consequence, and says. That the
Majesty of the Pope is not to be feared; and that we must not expect Almighty
God should send any particular messenger to reform him. Our Savior in the
Gospel teaches us, not to fear any man, Mat. 10.28.
that can kill the body, but to fear him, that can kill the soute. Cyp. l 1
ep. 11 Deutr. 17.
And the ancient Fathers, and among the rest Saint Cyprian teaches us: That
while the Circumcision remained carnal, such as would not obey their Priests
and Judges for the time, were slain with the material sword: But now since
the Circumcision began to be spiritual, such as are proud, and obstynate, are
put to death with the spiritual sword, when they are excommunicated, and cast
forth out of the Church of God. Aug. l. 1. co^t. aduersarium legis etc. cap. 17.
Which also S. Augustine affirms to be more grievous, then to perish by the
sword, to be consumed with sire, or to be devoured of wyld beasts: In so much,
as S. Gregory said; that even an unjust excommunication ought to be feared.
Wherefore this Godly man teaching us another lesson, that he is to be feared,
who bears the temporal sword, and that he is to be contemned to whom
especially the spiritual sword belongs, contrary to the doctrine of Christ,
and the ancient Fathers; judge (I pray you) whether the spirit of this man be
of Christ or of Antichrist.

That which he says, We are not to expect, that any Prophet should be sent
from God to reform the Pope: if he meant for professing heresy, or false
doctrine, were most true in one respect. For in the old Law which was
imperfect, we never read that any Prophet was sent to reprove the high Priest
of error; Deuteronomy. 17.8.
but rather, as S. Cyprian observed a little before, such as would not obey
him, in the decision of all Controversies brought before him, were to dye the
death, by the sentence of the Judge: that all the people hearing, might fear;
and that none should swell with pride thence forward. And therefore in the new
Law, which is the perfection of the old, and wherein our Savior Christ himself
has founded his Church upon S. Peter and his successors, with Promise, that
the Gates of hell (which principally are errors and heresies) shall not
prevail against it, as has been showed at large, Mat. 16.18.
through many Sections of this treatise, much less can any such Prophet be
expected, except he be one of those, that shall come clothed like a sheep
without, Mat. 7.15.
but within is a ravening wolf, and must be sent from the Devil to deceive
the world, and to oppose himself against the Church, and against the foundation
of the Church, which is the Chair of Peter. But how, I pray you, does he
prove, that the Pope ought not to be feared, but that he may be corrected of
every Bishop? In truth, as wisely as he proved before, that the King in no case
ought to be told of his fault, or to be reproved by any but a Prophet. For
(says he) all Bishops are brothers, and fellow-seruants. And may not the same
be likewise affirmed of all Christians, that they are brethren and fellow
servants? Wherefore, if no brother be to be feared, it will follow thereof, that
the King himself is not much to be respected. And this is likely to be the
Bishops doctrine in private, howsoever in public, with never so much flattery
and adulation, he pretend the contrary. For his reason to prove, that we ought
not to stand in awe of the Pope, concludes, that we should not dread the King,
as before I have showed; that taking away all spiritual jurisdiction, it
follows upon the same ground, that he must likewise deny the temporal. All
Bishops are brethren indeed, but as they are to reverence our Savior their
Elder brother: so likewise they are to be subject to the successor of S.
Peter, whom our Savior appointed to supply his place, and to feed them as his
sheep in his absence. As all Bishops are brethren, so likewise it is true that
they are fellow servants, but yet notwithstanding one was principally appointed
over the family, Matthew. 24.25.
to give them bread in due season. In an army sent forth by the King to war,
all the soldiers are fellow servants; but yet there is such great difference
between the General, and every private Captain, that they are all obliged
upon pain of death to be obedient unto him.

In a ship set forth by a Merchant Aduenturer, all those that are hired to
conduct the ship, may truly be called fellow servants, but yet it does not
follow thereof, that every Mariner is as good a man as the Master, or that he
may take the government of the ship upon him. And so it is of the Church,
which is sometyms called the ship of Christ, and somtyms an army set in order
of battle, wherein though Bishops be mariners and captains, yet they ought
all to be subject to their Master and General, the head of the Church, as
has been proved. Therefore S. Augustine writing to Pope Bonifacius, Aug. ad
Bonif. l. 1. cap. 1.
forgets not to use terms of due reverence; saying in this manner: Neither
do thou disdain that art not proud, though thou gouernest in a higher place,
to be a friend to these of low condition, and to return love for love. And you
have heard what words of great respect, S. Hierom used to Pope Damasus, Hier.
ad Damasum.
when he said: Although thy greatness does fear me, yet thy humanity does
inuit me; being a sheep, I crave the help of my shepherd etc. And how the
great Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria with the Bishops of the East, thought
it no disgrace to call the Pope, their holy Lord, venerable with Apostolical
dignity, the Father of the universal Church; Athan. ad Marcum. tom. 1. Con.
affirming themselves to be his, and that unto him, with all those committed to
them, they were obedient, and ever would be. Whereof I thought good briefly to
remember you, that you might perceive the difference between the Christian
humility of the ancient Fathers, and the saucy presumption of this new
contentious Heretic.

SECTION XXX. Of Schism, which is the last objection of the Bishop against
himself, wherein he is proved to be not only a Schismatike, but also a
manifest Heretic.
HIS second and last objection, which he makes against himself is this: That
forsaking the Church of Rome, which he calls Babylon, he may seem to have
incurred the crime of Schism, whereunto he answers saying: I will that this
my flight or profectio^, be free from all suspicion of Schism. If Monsignor
fate voy when he fell into the hands of the Merchants, that had been deceived
by him, should have said, I will be free from beating; do you think it would
have served his turn? Truly, both these Monsignors having so well deserved
their fees, as the blows fell upon the one, notwithstanding his good desire to
the contrary: so not only the suspicion, but also the infamy both of Schism
and Heresy, whether he will or will not, must light upon the other. But because
it is manifest, that there is a Schism, or division between the Pope and him,
he would insinuate, that all things considered, not himself, but the Pope must
needs be the Schismatike, which he seems to prove: first by reason, and
secondly by the authority, and example of S. Cyprian. His reason is this in
effect. He that makes new Articles of faith, either contrary, or not contained
in the Scriptures, and ancient Creeds; and admits for Articles of Faith,
such things as are indifferent in themselves, and were never sufficiently
defyned by the Church, and condemns those for heretics, whom the Church has
not sufficiently condemned, he is the Schismaticke. But such is the Pope, who
does these things, and not the Bishop, who detesteth them: Ergo etc. Wherein
what he means, by not being sufficiently defined, or condemned by the Church,
I know not.

But to give you some light heerin, you must understand, that according to the
Catholic doctrine, any Controversy in matter of Faith, may be sufficiently
defyned four manner of ways. That is to say: First by the universal consent
and general belief of all the Faithful: for, as has been proved, it is
impossible the universal Church should err in matter of Faith. Aug. l. de
haeres. in fine.
And therefore S. Augustine says: It is sufficient to know, that the Church
reputeth any doctrine not to be of Faith, that it be not received by any of the
Faithful. Lib 1 cont. Cresc. c. 31. and 33 and ep. 48.99. and in ep. 118. c 5.
l. de v^lit. cred. c. 17.
And you know how he affirms, that to dispute against the doctrine of the
universal Church, is most insolent madness: and that not to give thereunto the
first place of authority, is either extreme impiety, or precipitate ignorance.
Secondly, any thing may be defined to be matter of faith, by the uniform
consent of the Doctors of the Church, who if they should err, the whole
Church being bound to believe them, must fall of necessity into errors with
them. Thirdly by a general Council confirmed by the Pope: or lastly by the
definition of the Pope himself, decreing the same for the direction of the
faithful, and establishment of the peace of the Church, as has been proved at
large in the former Sections of the Popes Supremacy.

And because the question between the Pope and the Bishop in this place
concerns Schism and Heresy, you are further to understand; that Schism
according to the sense of the word, signifies a scissure, or division of
minds, which is opposed to unity, and consequently to Charity, which does unite
the minds of the Faithful. And because the greatest unity in the Church, is
that of the whole body, which proceeds from all the members with the head,
and whereunto the unity and Charity of the particular members among themselves,
is naturally referred, as the part to the whole: from hence it is, that Schism
being taken for such a great dissension, S. Thom. 2.2. quaest. 39. art. c. in
corpore. Hier. in c. 3. ad Tit.
as is most contrary to the unity of the Church, is defined to be a rebellion
against the head of the Church, refusing to communicate with the members
thereof, as they are subject unto him. According whereunto S. Hierome gives us
this doctrine: between Heresy and Schism, says he, we make this difference,
that Heresy holds some perverse opinion, Schism also separateth from the
Church by Episcopal dissension, Epiph. sect. 68. Aug. l de Haer. haer. 69.
and. l 2. cont Crese. c. 4. and 7.
or dissension from the Bishop. So Miletius making a proper congregation
against Peter Bishop of Alexandria his Superior, was accounted a Schismaticke,
and no Heretic: For as Epiphanius says, his faith was never changed from the
Catholic Church. So likewise Cecilian being made Bishop of Carthage, against
the will of Donatus, who objected many crimes unto him, and with his followers
departed from him; the Donatists in the beginning were accounted Schismatiks.

And in the same manner Optatus to prove Parmenian and not Cecilian to be the
Schismatike, argues in this manner. For Cecilian (says he) went not out from
Maiorinus thy predecessor, but Maiorinus from Cecilian: Neither did Cecilian
depart from the Chair of Peter, or of Cyprian, but Maiorinus, in whose chair
thou succeedest, and which before him had no beginning. Wherefore in our case,
it will be an easy matter to find out of these two, the Pope, or this Bishop,
which is the Scismatike. For the Bishop rebelling against the Pope his
Superior, if not by divine, yet at least by human law, as himself will
confess, dissenting from the chief Bishop of the Church of Christ, going out,
and departing from the Chair of Peter, and joining himself unto another
Congregation, most oposite thereunto; it is more absurd for him to accuse the
Pope of schism, then for a subject taking arms against his Prince, or joining
with his enemies, to acuse the Prince himself of rebellion and treason:
Especially charging the Pope, as he does, with false doctrine, which he would
have you believe to be the cause of his schism. For the Pope being the
immouable Rock, and the foundation of true Faith, which Christ himself has
laid; the Bishop in this case fitly resembles one, that launching from the
shore whereupon he fixes his eye, should swear and contest, that the land
departed from the boat, and that the boat it self stood still, or remained
imoueable. In which case, I cannot tell, whether he in the boat should show
himself more ridiculous to the beholders, then the Bishop does manifest
himself by this occasion to his judicious Readers.

And thus much may suffice for the Bishops schism. Heresy is defined by S.
Augustine, August. de vera Rel. c. 5. and 6. and 7.
to be a perverse doctrine, contrary to the rule of truth: which himself does
better expound, where he says: That it is an opinion, declyning from the rule,
and turning men away from the communion of the Catholic Church: where he
understands, the rule of truth, to be no other, then the doctrine of the
Catholic Church: for without this ground all other rules are insufficient, as
has been showed, and the same if it were necessary, might easily be confirmed
out of the rest of the Fathers. Wherefore the doctrine of the Catholic Church,
being made known and manifested unto us, either by the common belief of all
the faithful; or by the uniform consent, and common doctrine of all the
Fathers, or by a general Council, or by the definition of the Pope, as before
I noted, having convinced the Bishop of schism, though much against his will;
let us see how he can clear and shift himself from the imputation of heresy.
For first, it cannot be denied; That whatsoever the Catholics at this day, do
maintain to be the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles against the
Protestants, was the general belief of the universal Church, when Luther
began to broach his new doctrine. And therefore the Bishop condemning the Pope
of many errors in points of Controversy between him and the Protestants, Vbi
supra.
condemns likewise the universal Church of that time, which as S. Augustine
says, is most insolent madness, extreme impiety, and hayre-braynd, or furious
ignorance. Secondly, you have heard, how the ancient Fathers of the primitive
Church, have condemned for heresies, above twenty several opinions of the
Protestants. And therefore the Bishop being now a Protestant, is likewise above
twenty times condemned by them.

And to omit, that other several sects of Protestants, do all condemn him in
like manner; the general Council of Trent, has defined the doctrine of the
Pope against the Protestants to be Orthodoxall, and the contrary opinions to be
likewise heretical. And the Bishop seeming to believe, that a general
Council lawfully called and confirmed, cannot err in matter of faith, as
having the special assistance of the holy Ghost, leading unto all truth,
according to the promise of our Savior; has no more reason to contemn the
Council of Trent, then to reject the Council of Nyce, or any other general
Council. Lastly, having proved by the common doctrine of all the Fathers, that
the Bishop of Rome, being successor of S. Peter, cannot err, in defyning of
Controuersyes that belong to faith, and that the Fathers put no difference,
between the Catholic and the Roman Church, but that the same Church, which is
surmaned Catholic, because it is universal is also called the Roman Church,
because the Roman Church, being founded in the Seat of Peter, is always
conjoined, and united with the Catholic Church: it follows thereof, that the
Bishop being condemned for an Heretic by the Bishop of Rome, successor unto
S. Peter, and by the Church of Rome, founded in the Seat of Peter, according to
the judgment of the ancient Fathers, stands likewise condemned in this
respect also by the whole Church. And therefore having so many dreadful
sentences lying heavily upon him, unless he amend and make peace with his
adversary, Mat. 5.25.
while he is yet upon the way: what can he expect at the day of judgment, but
that Christ himself withal his Saints and Angels, together with the whole
world should condemn him? And with this we will proceed to his second defense,
which is, the authority and example of S. Cyprian, wherein he seems to set up
his rest.

SECTION XXXI. Wherein is showed, that the authority and example of S.
Cyprian, alleged by the Bishop against the Pope, overthrows the principal
grounds of the Protestant Religion.
THE words therefore of S. Cyprian in the Council of Carthage to the Bishops
there assembled, alleged by him, are these that follow. Judging no man (says
S. Cyprian) or depryning no man of our communion, though he shall be of a
contrary opinion. For none of us does make himself Bishop of Bishops, or
compels his followers with tyrannical terror to the necessary of yiedling
to him: whereas every Bishop is to have his own proper judgment, in respect
of the liberty and power which is given unto him; so that he cannot be judged
of another, as he himself cannot judge another. But let us all expect the
judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who only and alone has power to place us in
the government of his Church; and to judge of our actions. The example of S.
Cyprian, he propounds in such manner, as that accusing S. Stephen of
indiscretion; and that with his excommunications he was falling headlong into
the mischief of schism, he says: That S. Cyprian dissenting from the Roman,
and almost from the universal Church about the Baptism of Heretics, and being
strong in his own opinion, and esteeming Stephen the Pope to err vehemently,
and all the rest to be in manifest error; yet notwithstanding, he never
suffered the band of union, and Christian charity, to be broken between them;
but chose to communicate not only with Stephen, being of a contrary opinion,
and endeavor against him; but also with those, whom he reputed to be
altogether impure, being moved thereunto, because Stephen had received them
into communion with him; rather then by schism to make a division in the
Church of God.

By which authority and example of S. Cyprian, he thinks to have clearly
discovered where the fault lies, and to whom the crime of Schism is to be
imputed, and so think I too. And here to curry a little favor with him, or
rather to curry him with some favor, because he has so well deserved it in
this allegation of S. Cyprian; albeit I cannot learn that ever he read, or
heard Rhetorike among the Jesuits, as he himself affirms; yet I will not
deny it, but rather I will acknowledge, that he has not been altogether a
Truant in the School of Eloquence. For though his book be very small, yet he
has been able to deliver little or no matter at all in very many words. And he
seems to cover many untruths, under the color of Rhetorical Hyperboles. And
in this place by way of a friendly exhortation to peace and amendment he
accuses the Pope of many foul crimes, and addresseth his speech unto him, in
this manner. Let us observe the famous saying of S. Cyprian, judging no man,
exco^municating no man: let us imitate Cyprian etc. as if he being free from
all fault himself, he had great compassion of the Popes unjust proceeding,
persuading him with all charity to reform himself; only he has one trick
which I know not how it can stand with the art of Rhetoric, and it is this;
that commonly through all his book he speaks against himself, or produces
such matter, as most easily, and most strongly may be urged against him.
Whether it be his ill luck, or a fault in Nature, or the judgment of God upon
those that falling from the Catholic Religion, attempt to write against it, I
know not But this I dare say, that he never learned this point of Rhetorike
among the Jesuits. First therefore, as in other passages of his book, you have
seen all that he has said, to have been retorted against him: so in the same
manner, we will examyne in this place, how much this allegatio^ of S. Cyprian
does make for his purpose. For the Co^trouersy between S Stephen and S.
Cyprian, being about the baptizing of those that were before baptized by
heretics, which could not be determined by Scripture alone; the decision
thereof, by the tradition of the Church, and the condemnation of S. Cyprians
opinion by the Nicen Counsel, does evidently prove the necessity of tradition
against the Protestants, of whom the Bishop has made himself one: and that
the Scripture alone cannot be in all matters a sufficient Judge of
Co^trouersyes. For as S. Augustine says: that custom which was opposed to
Cyprian, Aug. de bapt. cont. Donat. l. 5. c. 23.
ought to be believed to have taken his beginning from the tradition of the
Apostles; as there are many things, which the universal Church does hold, and
for this cause, are rightly believed to have been commanded by the Apostles,
albeit they be not found to be written. Thus S. Augustine.

Secondly, I would know the reason of this great change and strange conversion
of things, why, as Vincentius says, the authors of the self same opinion,
should be acknowledged for Catholics, and the followers therefore should be
judged Heretics: the Masters should be acquitted, the disciples condemned:
The writers of the same books should be received into heaven, and the
mayntainers of them shut up in hell: For the latter did no more oppose
themselves, against the Scripture, then the former; and both of them seem to
have alleged more Scripture in the defense of their opinions, then the
Catholics that opposed themselves against them. Wherefore no other reason can
be given thereof, but only this: That in the time of S. Cyprian, and his
predecessors, who were the authors of this opinion of rebaptizing Heretics,
the controversy was no way defined; which being afterward determined, the
Donatists that revived the same against the belief of the whole Church, were
justly condemned: and this kind of condemnation being once admitted, the
Protestants that have broached and retained so many opinions, against the
general belief of the universal Church, since the time of Luther, and have
been most authentically condemned by the general Council of Trent; can never
be secured from the infamy of Heresy, which followed the Donatists in this
life, nor from the same eternal punishment which they received in the other.

Thirdly, whereas S. Cyprian said to the rest of the Council, that none amongst
them did make himself the Bishop of Bishops: because Mark Anthony would have
it seem, that he taxed Pope Stephen therein, who subscribed his letters with
that title; it must needs be granted that those words were improuidently
alleged by this Protestant Apologer. For as to have usurped so great a title
had been as great a crime as could be imagined, and such as that all the
Bishops in the world had been bound in conscience to have opposed themselves
against S. Stephen for it, more then against any heresy which those times
produced: so S. Stephen living in the 2. age, and being a man so renowned for
sanctity and martyrdom as he is, by the use of this title, affords us a most
forcible, and invincible argument of the Popes Supremacy. For writing himself
the Bishop of Bishops, he could intend no less, nor be no otherwise
understood, then that he professed himself the head, and the chief of all
other Bishops. Which also may be further confirmed, because he invented not
this title of himself, but received it from his predecessors.

Whereof his zeal in preserving the tradition of antiquity against all kind of
nouelty, may serve for a sufficient argument; and Baronius proves out of
Tertullian, that it was an ancient custom before the time of S. Stephen: which
is also confirmed by other titles given to the Pope by S. Athanasius, and other
Bishops, in the four first general Councels, as has been showed.

SECTION XXXII. Wherein is declared, how the Bishop in alleging the example
of S. Cyprian and S. Stephen, falsfieth the truth of the story, against
himself.
HAVING showed how much the authority and example of S. Cyprian alleged by
the Bishop, does make against his own cause, and overthrows the principal
grounds of all Protestant Religion; that you may the better perceive what a
notable Champion he is like to prove of the Protestant faith: I may not omit to
show you, with what falsehood he relates the story of S. Cyprian and S.
Stephen, and how much to his own disgrace. For first in my opinion, he
wrongeth S. Cyprian not a little, whom he seems so much to extol. For he
makes him so stiff in his own opinion (his words are, propria opinione
firmatus) as to oppose himself, not only against the Roman, but also against
almost the universal Church: and so void of conscience, as both to dissent
almost from all others in matter of faith, and yet to communicate with them.
For with what conscience could he either persevere in his own opinion, wherein
he condemned almost the whole Church of error: or condemning almost all the
members thereof in such manner, as this man says he did, with what conscience,
could he communicate with them?

These things therefore, as they redound very much to the dishonor of S.
Cyprian, so in themselves they are not true, Cyp. ep. 2.
but are most unjustly laid upon him, by this back friend of his, as may easily
be proved. For S. Cyprian was not the first that began to defend the baptism
of heretics to be of no force: but he received this custom from his
predecessor Agrippinus, as himself declares in these words: But with us it
is no now, or sudden matter, that we should think, that they ought to be
baptized which come unto the Church from heretics, there having passed now
many years, and a long age, sithence that under Agrippinus, very many Bishops
agreeing together in one, decreed the same: and from that day to this, so many
thousand Heretics in our Provinces being converted to the Church, have not
thought much, or been unwilling, but rather both reasonably, and willingly have
obtained the grace of baptism. And as this custom had continued a long while
in the Churches of Africa: so in the time of S. Cyprian, it was not only
confirmed by many and sundry Counsels in that Country: Apud Cyp. Epist. 75.
but also in the East, by Firmilianus, a man of most excellent tallents with
the Council of other Bishops: and in Egypt by Dionysius Patriarch of
Alexandria, Hier. de scrip. Eccl. in Dionys. cont. haeres. cap. 9.
another singular ornament of that age: whereof Vincentius Lirinensis writes
thus: But perchance (says he) this new invention wanted defense. Noc (says
he) but so great was the force of wit, which assisted the same: so great the
floods of Eloquence: so great the number of the Professors thereof: so great
the similitude of truth: so many the oracles of the Divine Law, cited for the
same; that in my opinion, such a conspiracy, and consent, could have no way
been distroyed, unless etc. Thus he.

Whereby it appears, that S. Cyprian did neither confide so much in his own
private opinion, nor did oppose himself almost against all others, as in this
place he is falsely calumniated by his dissembling enemy. Nor is it true, that
he was so strongly persuaded, either that S. Stephen, or the rest were in a
manifest error; or that such as had been converted from heresy were
altogether impure, as his audacious censurer would make us believe. For in the
very words alleged by him, S. Cyprian professes to judge of no man: and the
cause of his Anger against Pope Stephen was, because the Pope had written unto
him, that he thought those who rebaptized heretics, were to be condemned of
error. Wherefore, it is evident that S. Cyprian, held it only a matter
indifferent; albeit in hatred of heretics, he thought it best at that time to
baptize all those that were converted from them. So that you see how falsely and
how fondly, this Moisten of Rhetorike charge S. Stephen with no little want
of conscience, and obstinacy in his own opinion, whom he thought to extol
above measure.

Secondly, in this allegation, he discovers such malice against the Popes of
Rome, that it reaches and exrendeth it self, even to the Saints of heaven;
and condemns S Stephen of indiscretion, of importune exco^municating of
others, and of casting himself into extreme peril of schism and division:
and instifyeth S. Cypria^ undertaking a wrong cause, and proceeding more
violently against the Pope, then was convenient, even by the judgment of all
antiquity. For S Stephen the Pope, who lived in the second age after Christ,
governed the Church with great renown, and dyed a glorious Martyr, and behaved
himself in such manner, in this very Controversy of rebaptization, that having
the flower of Christendom, and so many Bishops both of the East and of the
West, of Greece, Egypt, and of Africa in such number against him, in the time
of a most terrible persecution, he brought them all to renounce their opinions,
and to make peace and concord in their several Countries, Eusebius. l. 7. cap.
3.4 Hier. cont. Lucif.
as Dionysius testy fieth of those of the East; and S. Hierome relates of the
Bishops of Africa in these words: To conclude, those very Bishops who had
decreed with S. Cyprian, that heretics ought to be rebaptized, made a new
decree to the contrary.

And S. Augustine speaking of S. Cyprian himself, Aug. Ep. 48.
says, that it is very agreeable, that we should judge of such a man, that he
corrected his opinion. And the reason for it is most apparent. For who can
imagine, that all the rest recanting, and all the world agreeing in one, S.
Cyprian alone, being a man of such emynent virtue, and dying as he did a
glorious Martyr, should obstinatly persist in his own opinion. So that it may
be truly said, that by the care and endeavor of Pope Stephen, this opinion was
universally condemned by the whole Church, before it received sentence in the
Nicen Council, as afterward it did. Whereof the aforesaid Vincentius
Lirinensis writes with great admiration in this manner: Wherefore, as all,
from all parts, began to reclayme against the nouelty of the matter, and that
all Priests every where, each one for his own part, did strive against it: so
Stephen the Pope of blessed memory, the Antistes of the Apostolical Seat, with
the rest of his Colleagues, but yet more then the rest, made resistance
thereunto: Thinking it agreeable, as may be imagined, to go beyond all others in
the devotion of his faith, as he did surpass them in the authority of his
place. To conclude; in his Epistle which was sent into Afric, he made this
solemn Decree: Nothing must be innouated, only that which was delivered must
be conserved. For the holy and prudent man did judge, that nothing was to be
admitted under the color of piety, but that all things should be consigned
with the same faith to the children, with which faith they were received from
the Fathers. And a little after, he concludes. But what was the end of all
those buysnesses? what end could it have, but that which is usual and
accustomed: That is to say, antiquity was retained, and nouelty was rejected.

Thus that famous man Vincentius Li^inensis, of the proceeding of S. Stephen in
this matter, and of the decree it self, which S. Cyprian took so unkindly,
and of the final end of the business; for the which this holy Pope, is so
impiously condemned by the Bishop against all antiquity, as that he deserves
thereby never more to be believed in any matter which may concern the Pope
hereafter. For not only the Latins, but also the Greeks, did annually
celebrate his memory, which is an honor that few Martyrs of the Western
Church have received. And the Donatists themselves who reuyled the opinion of
S. Stephen, did so much respect the eminent authority of his holiness and
wisdom, that as S. Augustine writes and admyreth, they confessed,
Episcopatum illibategessisse. August. de vnic. bapt. cont. Petil. cap. 14.
he could not be touched with any fault in the discharge of his Office. And
therefore, if S. Augustine were now living, much more would he admire the
audacious presumption of this later heretic, in calumniating, and condemning
his proceedings.

And as for S. Cyprian, whose carriage of himself he so much commends in
this cause; albeit his care of peace, in not breaking with the Pope be
laudable: yet S. Augustine could not deny, August. de bapt. cont. Donat. lib.
5. cap. 25.
but that he was too much moved in his anger, commotius indignabatur, and that,
being irritated, he ran out into such terms against Pope Stephen, as S.
Augustine thought not good to touch, quia periculu^ habuerunt perniciosae
dissentionis, because they gave occasion, or did put the Church in danger of
pernicious dissension. But it is no marvel, though his intention were not bad,
that an ill cause should be no better defended; wherein the greatest
commendation of S. Cyprian, in my opinion is this, that (as it is most
credible) he repented himself, both of the matter, and of the manner.

SECTION XXXIII. Wherein the Bishop is manifestly convinced of schism, out of
the Authority and example of S. Cyprian alleged by himself: and the same
authority, for as much as it seems to concern the Pope, is sufficiently
answered.
WHEREFORE this one authority alone produced by the Bishop being almost all the
matter of substance, and almost the only proof which he brings for any thing
he says in his whole book, taking up all things upon trust, as has been
observed: you see notwithstanding, how that out of this one place of S. Cyprian
alleged by him, we have proved the Popes Supremacy, and the necessity not
only of tradition, but also of the judgment of the Church, for the defyning of
matters in Controversy, and for the condemning of heresy. Besides, we have
showed how notoriously he falsifieth the Ecclesiastical history, and how he
condemns not only S Stephen most impiously: but also S. Cyprian most
absurdly, whom he sought most to commend. And now, that you may perceive, how
much this authority of S. Cyprian makes not only against his cause in
general, and his own credit in particular, but also against himself, in the
very point, for the proof and declaration whereof, it is inserted by him; Thus
I argue.

He that without authority, condemns any other Bishop, and refuses to hold
communion with him, according to S. Cyprian, may be judged a Schismatike, or to
give occasion of schism: but Marcus Antonius condemns without authority, not
only his Colleague, but also his Superior the Bishop of Rome; not of one
error, but of inumerable heresies: not of any ordinary fault, but of
suppressing the Counsels, of deprauing the Scriptures, and ancient Fathers: of
usurpation and tyrany over the Church of God, oppressing, pilling, and spoiling
the same, and sucking the blood of the members thereof: And by consequence he
condemns likewise all other Bishops, that communicate with him, and are
subject to him: and calls the universal Church, which is under the obedience
of the Pope, by the name of Babylon that is to say, the City or congregation
of the Devil. Therefore Marcus Antonius is a Schismatike, according to his
own discourse, and according to the words of S. Cyprian: which he fondly
alleges to prove the contrary. Secondly according to the process of his
own discourse, I argue thus. He that goes against the example of S. Cyprian,
proposed to the universal Church, for the avoiding of schism, falls into
the crime of schism: But Marcus Antonius goes directly against the example of
S. Cyprian, propounded by himself, as a rule for the avoiding of schism:
Therefore Marcus Antonius according to his own rule, is fallen into the crime of
schism. That Marcus Antonius, has proceeded against his own rule, and the
example of S Cyprian which he propounds, is a thing most manifest. For,
whereas S. Cyprian notwithstanding that he reputed the Pope and almost all the
universal Church, to be in manifest error; would never depart from the
communion of the Pope, but respected him so much, that he communicated with
those whom he held impure, only because the Pope received them into his
communion: Marcus Antonius in the same case, has not only forsaken the Pope,
but also all those that are united with him, whom otherwise, he thinks not
impur; e only because they do not separate themselves from the Pope, but still
remain in his communion. Wherefore these two arguments produced by himself,
are so conuincing, that there needs nothing else to confound him. So that this
proof of his out of S. Cyprian, being the substance of his book, and being
withal so contrary to his cause, to his credit, and to himself in the point
of Schism, whereof he intended to clear himself thereby, may be sufficient to
give you to understand of what substance, the matter of his other book is like
to be when it shall be printed. For my part I am verily persuaded, if it be well
understood, it will be found, to be more against the Protestants, then the
Catholics, and more contrary to himself, then to either of the other

And now to draw toward an end of this matter in the allegation of this
authority out of S. Cyprian, he is so much the more to be blamed, in that being
of such force against himself, for as much thereof as concerns the Popes
authority, it may full easily be answered. For those words of S. Cyprian, That
none of them made himself the Bishop of Bishops etc. may very well be
understood of those that were present at that Council, and not to conclude, in
that sentence, the Bishop of Rome, who truly may be said to be the Bishop of
Bishops, the Father of Fathers, the Bishop and Father of the universal Church,
and the like, as has been showed. That which he says, A Bishop cannot be
judged but by God alone, as he receives his authority from God alone; ought to
be understood, that he cannot be judged in those things which are doubtful,
obscure, and hidden. Aug. l. 3. de baptis. cap. 3.
For so S. Augustine himself does expound him. For having recited these words
of S. Cyprian: As I take it (says he) he means in those questions, which are
not yet discussed with most clear perspection. And that S. Cyprian believed,
that Bishops in cases of heresy, or schism, Cyp. lib 5. epist. 13.
might be judged and deposed by the Pope is evident, in one of his Epistles to
Pope Stephen, where he exhorts him, that he would command the Bishop of
Arles in France to be deposed, and to appoint another in his place. So that you
see, the childish arrow of this Bishop, as it is shot upward against the Pope,
does not aryue unto him, but returns with greater force, to fall upon his
own head, and wounds him in many places, as has been declared.

But now to do him a pleasure, let us suppose that Cyprian in these words did
glance at S. Stephen, and that he meant to tax him, for proceeding as he
thought too rigorously against him: with what conscience, or with what honesty,
I pray you, can this strange Bishop allege these words of S. Cyprian, spoken
in the defense of a wrong cause, as he knows, and in his co^motion and anger
against the Pope (of the which it is most probable, and according to S.
Augustine we ought to think, that he repented himself) against so many plain
places, and express doctrine of S. Cyprian as I have cyted before, and which
for the full satisfactions of your self and the Reader in this point, I shall be
content to repeat in part at this present.

SECTION XXXIIII. Many testimonies and plain places are produced out of S.
Cyprian, whereby the Bishop is evidently convinced both of Schism and Heresy.
IN the time of S. Cyprian, as the Nouatian Heretics on the one side denied,
that such as were once fallen, Cyp. ep. 55 ad Cornel.
were to be received into the Church again upon any terms whatsoever: so
there were other heretics who affirmed, that all were to be received, without
any penance, or satisfaction for their former sin. For the which cause S.
Cyprian says of them, that they endeauored, that sins might not be redeemed
by just satisfaction and lamentation: that wounds might not be washed by
tears: That weeping and wayling might not be heard to proceed from the breast,
and from the mouth of such as were fallen: that such as were inuolued in
defrauding, and deceyuing, or defiled with adultery, or polluted with the
co^tagion of sacryfiee to Idols might not make confession of their crimes in
the Church; whereby all hope of satisfaction and penance being taken away,
they lost both the sense, and the fruit thereof. Which heresy, whether it be
revived by the Bishop, or by those congregations whereunto he has united
himself, I shall leave to your judgment to consider. But one of those
heretics called Florentius Pupianus, writing unto S. Cyprian in the same
manner, as here the Bishop in the latter end of his book addresseth his
speech to the^ Pope, to give them satisfaction, and to purge himself of his
proceeding against them, S. Cyprian to abate his Pride, and to make him
acknowledge, that it was the cause of the schism and heresy wherinto he was
fallen, uses these words among others, and says. From hence Schisms and
Heresies have risen, and do arise, because the Bishop which is one, and
governs the Church, is condemned by the proud presumption of some: and the
man whom God has vouchsafed to honor, is judged of men to be unworthy. And
after a while he says: There speaks Peter, upon whom the Church was buylt,
showing, and teaching in the name of the Church: That albeit, the proud and
stifnecked multitude of those that would not obey, departed from Christ, yet
the Church departs not: wherefore thou ought to know, says he, that the
Bishop is in the Church, and the Church in the Bishop: And so he who is not
with the Bishop, is not in the Church; whereof he concludes, that such do
flatter themselves in vain, who not having peace with the Priests of God,
think it sufficient to communicate with others.

The like words S. Cyprian uses in his epistle to Pope Cornelius, where he
says: Cyp. lib. 1. epist. 3.
That there is no other cause of Heresies and Schisms, but that the Priest of
God is not obayed: and that one Priest, and one Judge is not acknowledged in
the place of Christ, in the Church for the time. Where also having said as
before, that the Church was built upon Peter, at length speaking of the former
Heretics, that presumed to go, and complain of him to Pope Cornelius, he
says: That they were so audacious, as to sail unto the Chair of Peter, and
to the principal Church, from whence the unity of Priesthood did proceed; not
considering that they were Romans, whose faith was praised by the mouth of the
Apostle, and unto whom perfidiousnes (or error in faith) can have no access.
The like words again he wrote in his Treatise of the unity of the Church,
where he says: That men are transported by the Devil, into Heresy and Schism
out of the Church of God, because they do not return to the origin of truth,
nor seek the head, nor follow the doctrine of their heavenly Master. Which if
they considered, there were no need of any long treatise or argument, but that
the trial of Faith would be very easy. And then showing what was this heavenly
doctrine, and what the head, and origin of truth, which is taught unto us; he
adds immediately: Our Lord said unto Peter, I say unto thee, thou art Peter,
and upon this Rock etc. and unto the same man after his resurrection he said:
Feed my sheep; and so concludes, that our Savior built his Church upon him
alone, and committed unto him his sheep to be fed, and gave him the Primacy,
that there might be one Church etc. And a little after he adds: This unity of
the Church, he that does not keep, does he believe that he keeps the Faith?
He that resists the Church, and strives against the same, he that forsakes
the Chair of Peter, does he confide that he is in the Church? And to the same
purpose else where he says: Epist. 8. ad pleve^ vniuersam.
God is one, and Christ one, and the Church one, and the Chair one, built upon
Enter by the voice of our Lord: any other Altar or new Priesthood, beside one
Altar and one Priesthood cannot be erected and made. Whosoever gathers else
where, scatters.

Out of which places, because it is evident, that our fugitive Bishop with
proud presumption, co^temneth that one Bishop, who has the chief place in the
government of Gods Church, and likewise, that he contemns the Successor of
him, upon whom the Church was built, and who is in the Church, and the Church
in him; because the Chuych is nothing else, but the people united to the Priest,
and the flock adhering to the Pastor. And again, because it is evident, that
he disobeyeth the Priest of God, and does not acknowledge one Priest, and one
judge for the time, in the place of Christ, and forsakes the Chair of Peter,
and the principal Church, from whence the unity of Priesthood proceeds, and
whereunto no falsehood in Faith can have access: that he observes not the
dostrine of our heavenly Master, neither returning to the origin of truth, nor
seeking the head which is S. Peter, upon whom alone our Savior built his
Church, and committed the feeding of his sheep unto him (which course,
according to S. Cyprian is the only cause, and occasion, and only means,
whereby the Devil transporteth men out of the Church into Schism and Heresy) it
cannot be denied, but that your Bishop forsaking the successor of S. Peter, and
the Chayr of Peter, who holds the place of Christ in the Church, forsakes
the Church, and in vain believes to be therein, and gathers not with
Christ, but scatters with Antichrist. And thus much concerning the
objections, which he pleased to frame against himself.

SECTION XXXV. The conclusion of the Bishops book, together with a short
Conclusion of this whole Treatise.
THERE remains only the conclusion of his book; wherein, because I have
wearied my self too much already with sweeping a way the cobwebs of his idle
discourse, whereunto in respect of the sleightnes, and unprofitableness, and
foulnes of the matter, the substance thereof may fitly be compared; I will only
note two or three things unto you very briefly. First therefore, as Judas
saluted Christ and said, Marc. 14.45.
hayle Master, and kissed him, whom a little before be had sold to the Jews
as a false Prophet so the charity of this man is no less to be observed and
admired, in calling the Pope his most holy Father, and the Bishops united with
him, his most blessed Brethren, giving them thereby his kiss of peace, whom
before through all his book, he had sold to the Protestants for blind guydes,
teaching innumerable errors, for corrupters of Gods word, tyrants, oppressors
of the Church, Babylonians, and the like. Which terms, albeit no less
falsely, then impiously, they are applied by him to the Pope and his Bishops,
whether you respect the former, wherein he should show his love, or the later,
wherein he expresses his hatred unto them yet because, as it appears by his
own words, he describes therein his own spiritual kindred, it cannot be
denied, but that he is ready to acknowledge, if need were, the author of lies
himself for his holy Father, and his wickedest children for his most blessed
Brethren. Wherefore considering his zeal, whereof he boasts so much, to be so
large, and the arms of his charity to be so far extended from East to West, as
to embrace the fellowship of Babylon, which is the City of the Devil; it is
manifest that he excludes neither Turks, nor Iufidells from his Communion. And
therefore me thinks, that as no good Protestant can be much delighted with it:
so every good Christian should abhor and detest it.

The second point to be noted in his conclusion is this, that he rather
orders and commands, then advises the Pope to restore peace, and charity
to all those Churches, that profess to receive the essential Creeds of Faith.
By which he must needs mean, the three Creeds, of the Apostles, of the Council
of Nice against Arius, and of the Council of Constantinople against
Macedonius: and therefore supposes all other points of Co^trouersy, not
contained in those Creeds to be matters indifferent, not sufficiently defyned,
and not to be believed as articles of Faith. Which is such a monstrous opinion,
as does evidently show him to be of no Religion at all: and therefore I
marvel, how he could be suffered to publish such wicked doctrine in England.
For if the Pope must have peace, and communion with all those that receive the
Creeds alone, howsoever they please to understand them; thereof it will follow,
that all Counsels, which have been celebrated since the making of those
Creeds, have been the authors of Schism and dissension, in condemning later
Heresies, and that albeit a man should deny al Sacraments, yea and al Scripture
at this day yet according to this Antichristian doctrine, it should be Schism
to refuse him, or to account him no good Christian for the same And how easy a
matter is it, not believing the Scripture, to contemn the Creeds? or rather
how impossible, contemning the one, to believe the other? This therefore may be
another sign to be added unto those, which I have touched before, that the
Bishop being fallen from the Church, is fallen likewise to Neutrality in
Religion, and may be a cause of greater mischief, and of greater dishonor to
our Country, then they that feed him, have yet discovered in him.

I cannot omit his incredible ignorance, which he discovers, where among
other points of idle Counsel, which he pleases to bestow upon the Pope, and
the rest of the Bishops of the Catholic Church (himself being so wise, as to
admit no Counsel at all, neither from them, nor any other) he tells them,
that he will have them believe for certain, that Schism in the Church is a
greater evil then Heresy it self. Wherein it is to be admyred, how he could
presume to teach the whole Church such a notable falsehood, with such arrogant
temerity, as here he does. For as he that has no faith can have no charity:
so Heresy, that destroys Faith, brings also schism with it, which is
opposed to Charity. So that, albeit there may be schism in the Church without
heresy, as faith may remain without charity: yet charity without faith, or
heresy without schism there cannot be. And therefore all Deuines have ever
held, that heresy is far the greater mischief, which bereaueth a man of all
supernatural virtue, and makes him worse then an Infidel.

The rest of his conclusion is much of the same nature, wherein no less
insolently then ignorantly, he takes upon him to school, and to catechize the
Pope and all his Prelates, prescribing unto them what they ought to believe:
and with what terms and conditions they may give him satisfaction, and make
their peace and concord with him. Whereunto, I think no better answer can be
given, in the Popes behalf, then that which S. Cyprian made to Florentius
Pupianus, of whom we have spoken before: for no man can be thought of, so fit
as S. Cyprian to rebuke his Pride, whom a little before under the color of
much respect, he so much abused. And in his arrogant and insolent behavior
toward the Pope, he does so perfectly resemble, the presumptuous demenour of
Pupianus toward S. Cyprian, Cyp. ep. 65.
as that the one seems to have been but the figure of the other: the words
therefore of S. Cyprian are these that follow. What swelling Pride is this?
what arrogance of heart? what inflation of mind? to call unto the trybunall of
thy Judgment the Priests (that is to say the Bishops) and those that are set
over thee? that unless we can purge ourselves to thee, and be absolved by thy
sentence, now for so many years (for more then a thousand) the Fraternity must
be condemned to have had no Bishop, the people no Prelate, the flock no
Pastor, the Church no Governor, Christ no Antistes, and God no Priest. Let
Pupianus (or Marcus Antonius) be pleased to help us, let him give his sentence,
and be contented to make good the judgment of God and of Christ, that so great
a number of faithful people ranged under us, may not be thought to have
departed without hope of salvation: and that so many Nations of new believers,
be not accounted to have received from us no grace at all of the spirit of God:
that the Communion, and reconcilement given by us to so many that have
repented, be not dissolved, and taken from them by the authority of thy decree,
vouchsafe at length to grant our request, give us thy favorable sentence,
confirm us in our place by thy judicial authority, that God and his Christ
may give thee thanks; that by thee their Prelate is restored to their Alter
again, and their Rector to the government of their people. Truly me thinks
these words of S. Cyprian, being so applyable to your Bishop as they are,
should make any man that seems to respect him, even to blush, and to be
ashamed for him.

And as concerning his Virtue of peace and concord, S. Cyprian in the same
place does answer him so fitly, as if he had penned the same directly for
Marcus Antonius, under the name of Florentius Pupianus: For the which cause it
being no way seemly for me, to add any thing thereunto, I will make it the
conclusion of this whole Treatise. Wherefore Brother (says S. Cyprian) if thou will daily consider the Majesty of God, from whom the ordinance of Priests
proceeds: If thou will bear respect unto Christ, who with his holy pleasure
and continual presence governs, both the Prelates themselves, and the Church
with the Prelates; If thou will esteem of the innocence of Priests, not
according to the hatred of man, but according to the judgment of God: If thou will begin at length to repent thy ^merity, and pride, and insolency; If thou
be contented to make a full and perfect satisfaction to God and his Christ,
whom I serve, and unto whom, with a pure and immaculate mouth, I offer
continual sacrifice, both in peace and persecution: upon these terms, we may
be brought to have peace, and communion with thee.

Thus, though I have been much longer, then I thought, yet at length, as I
take it, I have sufficiently confuted, not only the little book you sent me,
and the other great volume, which it threatens; but also the Author himself.
For I have proved out of his own mouth, that in the whole course of his turning
and flying from the Catholic Religion, there was neither wisdom, nor
humility, nor obedience; but only extreme confidence, pride, and presumption in
his own wit, idle suspicions, and injurious surmyses of fraud and falsehood in
his own Masters, great ambition, with great signs of fearful Apostasy from
that Order whereunto he was vowed, strife and contention with his Suffragans,
hatred and malice against the Pope who defended them, extreme ignorance, or
extreme impudency in accusing the Catholics of innumerable errors, and in
affirming the Protestant Religion to be the doctrine of the Fathers,
opprobrious and most intemperate speeches against the Pope his Superior, and
as, himself calls him, his most blessed Father, impious indifferency, and
neutrality in Religion, admiration of himself and his book, hypocrisy under
the cloak of Charity. Turkish sicophancy, and most unchristian adulation,
indiscretion, falsehood, and dishonesty in producing the authority of S.
Cyprian, so much against his own cause, against the truth of the story, against
himself in that point, and against the common and known doctrine of S.
Cyprian to the contrary.

And therefore to omit, that in this maister-peece of work, which he made to
gain himself credit, for the rest of his books that are to follow, he proves
nothing, but every where beggeth the question, and shows to dissent from the
Protestants themselves, whom he takes upon him to defend all his former
virtues, which I have brieflly rehearsed, being put together, I think will be
sufficient to make any thing that shall come from his pen, to be vehemently
suspected, or altogether despised hereafter. And truly these good qualityes of
his, which I may call his praises, because he has no better, do so manifest
themselves, in all the passages of his book, to every judicious Reader, that
there was little need of me, or of any other to have been his Brother.

And now, that according as I affirmed in the beginning, you may perceive the
entrance of this strange Bishop into England, to have been no other, then the
coming of a foul spanell to fawn upon you, who can do no less then beray
you; I frame this Sillogisme. The Devil persuades, or-induceth no man to
forsake the false, or to embrace the true Religion: But as has been showed, it
was no other then the spirit of the Devil, that induced the Bishop to forsake
the Catholic, and to embrace the Protestant Religion: Therefore, neither the
Catholic can be the false, nor the Protestant the true Religion.

If I had meant nothing else, but to discover the spirit of this man, three or
four of the first Sections might have sufficed for the trial thereof. But
because I was desirous, by this occasion, to lay open and approve unto you,
some of the chiefest grounds of the Catholic Religion, by which your selves
might easily refute whatsoever the same author may herafter publish in
prosecution of his purposes, I went forward, and as the matter of his book
required: First, I gave you a full, and evident proof of the Popes Supremacy.
And secondly, I made it appear most manifestly, that the ancient Fathers
taught the same doctrine, which the Catholics now profess; and that they
utterly condemned the Protestants, and were likewise condemned by them. And
lastly I have showed, that as the Protestants of their part, can give no
fundamental reason of their faith, nor show any ground thereof, and therefore
have no faith at all: so on the other side, I have declared, that the motives
of the Catholic and of the Christian Religion, are both the same, and be in
themselves most reasonable, and most forceable to any man's judgment or
understanding, that shall duly consider, or reflect upon them. Which three
points, being so clearly and manifestly proved, do plainly convince, that out
of the Catholic Roman Church there is no salvation. Whereof, in several
places, I have also declared the reasons at large unto you; because that
without obedyence unto the Church, as I have proved, there can neither be true
faith, nor true justice; without both which, it is impossible that God should
be pleased; or the soul of man be saved.

Wherefore considering, how ready and desirous you have always professed your
self to embrace the truth, if ever you came to understand with whom it
remained; I will use no other persuasion, but only for a conclusion of my
former discourse, Iren. l. 4. cont. haer. cap. 25.
I will refer you to the grave Counsel of the most ancient Iraeneus, whose
words being very worthy of most attentive consideration, are these that follow.
Where the gifts and graces of God are bestowed, there we ought to learn the
truth. With whom that succession of the Church, which is from the Apostles
remains, and that which is sound, and irreprouable in conversation, and that
which is undefiled, and incorruptible in doctrine, does still continue. For
these be they, who both keep and preserve our faith, and expound the Scriptures
unto us, without danger.

And now, because this answer to your friendly Letter, is grown to the just
bigness of a book; for your greater ease, and for the benefit of others, it
will be sent to the print. And although by means thereof, it may be very long
before you receive it; yet I imagine that when it comes, it will be somewhat
the better welcome. And because I am verily persuaded, Almighty God has so
ordained, that the fall of this Bishop, shall be the occasion of the rising and
conversion of many, I will hope, in respect of those excellent parts wherewith
I know you are endued, that if you be not the first, you will not be the last,
that must be converted by this means. And so with the remembrance of
ourauncient love, which I beseech Almighty God to make eternal, I rest.

Your friend and servant in Christ Jesus C. A. sufficiently known unto you by
this subscription.

POSTSCRIPTVM.
TRVTH is the daughter of time; and as I observed in the beginning, it is good
to expect the lame post, and the last news is ever truest. Having ended this
my Treatise, there came to my hands, a short information of the life and
manners of this our Dalmatian Bishop (whom before out of his own words I had
sufficiently discovered) taken authentically and iuridically under the oaths
and testimonies of many lawful witnesses.

Whereby it appears, that he had no less cause to fear the manifestation,
and publication of his former lewdness, then he discovers in diverse places
of his book, to be exceeding jealous of such a matter: many of the particulers
related therein, being so foul and abominable, that modesty, and good manners
do not permit me to set them down. For having been lewdly brought vpin his
youth, before he entered into Religion (which it is very probable that he
concealed) after his Apostasy he returned to his vomit again, and his old
gift, according to the words of our Savior, bringing seven more with him,
worse then himself, entered into him, and the last of this man was made far
worse, then his foul beginning. And assure your self that nothing does so
much save his good name (if he have any among you) as the turpitude of his
former life; wherein all men had rather it should be buried still, then defile
their pens, themselves, and the world with the discovery of it, except they
be enforced to it.

But because among other heads of his information, there is a point or two,
which will declare by what means he attained to those titles of
Ecclesiastical dignity, whereof he vaunteth so much, and from whence does flow
all the grace, and particular respect which is given unto him, of those that do
not know him; I thought it expedient to add this short addition, to the end
they be not longer ignorant, what a Saint they have gotten to honor their
cause, and what a pillar he is like to prove to support their Religion.

You shall therefore understand, that Segnia (which was his first Bishopric)
is a little City, but most impregnable, upon the Confines of Germany and
Italy; the people whereof (commonly called Iscocehi) do neither plow nor plant
for their sustenance, nor card nor spin for their clothing, nor trade with
other Nations by way of merchandise, but live altogether upon spoil, either
of the Turks, which is their profession, or else of Christians, when they
please to mistake the one for the other. In which respect, it is easier to find
those that would refuse (if they were either wise or honest) then such as would
willingly accept the Ecclesiastcall government of this Martial people.

Wherefore to come to our purpose; it appears by the information aforsayd,
that the Bishop of Segnia being slain in some enterpize of war, among
certain soldiars of the Emperor, with whom he was in company, Marcus Antonius
de Dominis; who was then a Jesuit in profession, though not in purpose, but
desirous to be at liberty, forged letters from the friends and kindred of the
late Bishop to himself, as to their kinsman (which as it seems he was not)
signifying, that the Bishop was not slain, but taken prisoner, and entreating
him to come to Segnia, from whence he might work some means to set him at
liberty. Upon the credit of which letters, his Superiors (as it should seem)
gave him leave to go thither, where first he obtained to supply the place of
the late desceased Bishop, and afterward to be made Bishop himself. Which
Episcopal function, as he got by forgery, and Apostasy from his own Order so
he behaved himself accordingly, in the administration thereof. For he had his
part (if not his hand) in the prey with the souldiars of that place, became a
pot companion with them, and in how sing and got m^ndi^ing nothing behind them.
Being then their Pastor and spiritual Father, he defrauded them of four or
five hundred Crowns; which beget from them, under pretense of building a Quire
in their Church, but converted the money to his own use.

And taking occasion to go to Venice, he wrote back to the Iscocchi his gostly
children, that he had made their peace with the Venetia^s, and that they might
safely sail in the Venetian seas: upon which assurance forty of them sailing
to wards Turkey, were intrapped, and slain by the Venetian souldiars, at a
certain (...) where they fell into the snare, which their reverend Father in
God had laid for them.

Of which bloody treachery, this audacious Prelate, being come to the
prefoundnes of iniquity, Prou. 1863.
was so little ashamed, as he was accustomed to boast of his service therein
done to the Commonwealth of Venice; saying, that if the Iscocchi could lay
hands of him, they would make a bag of his skin (as they are accustomed to
make of Swines skins, for wine and oil in those countries,) and that he
expected the first good Bishopric, which might fall in the State of Venice,
should be given him for his desert. And so (as it seems) in recompense of
this his service, and expectation of the like when occasion should be offered
for policy of State, the Church of Spalato was given him, which though poor in
reuenews, yet in respect of the Metropolitan dignity, was fit to satisfy his
ambition.

By this you may see, how truly, and literally that saying is verified of the
Church of Segnia under his Cure, which falsely and impudently he applies to
the Church of Christ under the Pope, affirming, that it was become a vinyeard
to make Noe drunk, and a flock which the Pastor did ouermilke, and not only
sheer and sha^e, but also flea and slay; for so it is testified against him (as
you have heard) that he lived a drunken life, and not only fleesed his flock
and imbezelled their money, but betrayed his sheep into the bloody hands of
their enemies. Wherein the greiuousnesses of his sin may be compared to the
sin of Judas Judas betrayed the innocent blood of Christ, under the show of
peace for a little money; this second Judas betrayed in the same manner the
innocent blood of forty Christians his spiritual children, not for money, but
for spiritual preferment, which of all other things being most opposite to the
sheeding of innocent blood, was a far fouler Symony, and more damnable price
thereof, then any money could be. And whereas Judas repented him of his sin,
and threw the money from him: this other Judas did glory in his crime, and as
yet boasts of his dignity, being the unjust reward of so barbarous a
treachery.

This man, notwithstanding his forgery, apostasy, sacrilege, gluttony, murder
in the foulest, and ambition in the highest degree that may be imagined
(besides his other sins not to be named) without any amendment, or
satisfaction to the world for his former life, with incredible hypocrisy and
impudency, Pro. 30.20.
only wiping his mouth with the shamles woman, in Salomons Proverbs, as if he
had done nothing amiss; setting a brazen face upon the matter, and telling
before hand, that he should be calu^niated by his adversaries (thinking by this
device, to make that his purgation and defense, which he had cause to fear, as
the condemnation and punishment of his former wickedness) he dispatched
himself from Venice in the shape of a Saint, See his own book page 10. and 28.
compares himself to Abraham, and to S. Paul, and speaks of his great
zeal, as if it had brought him into a consumption, and of his Charity, as if
it put him in danger to burst with crying. And this he does with such
confidence of his own worth, and with such authority, as one may plainly see,
that he assures himself not only to be able to deceive you in the opinion of
his honesty, but to give rules of belief, and a law of Religion like a new
Prophet sent from God to all the world about you. Wherein you may choose,
whether you will admire his strange impudency and unaccustomed boldness, or
the supposition he brought with him, of your credulity and simplicity in
believing.

But the judgment of God has overtaken him, and that which he feared, is come
upon him. For not only he is become reprobate in sense; but also the little wit
and learning he had, seems to be taken from him. And as in his book he
discovers himself to be nothing else but an arrogant Impostor, and an
irreligious sycophant: so also this other Iuridicall testimony which is brought
against him, being above all exception, and perchance more authentical then
was ever produced against any other Heretic; does set his abominations against
his face in such manner, as (though it be of brass) it cannot defend him from
extreme confusion, according to that of the Psalmist: God has said unto the
sinner, Psalm. 49.26. etc.
why do thou declare my Justice, and take my Testament into thy mouth?
thou have hated discipline (in forsaking thy Order) and thou have cast my words
behind thee (which thou had learned therein.) If thou saw a thief (in
Segnia) thou did run with him: and thou did put thy portion with adulterers
(living in all uncleanness.) Thy mouth abounded with malice (justifying thy
sin) and thy tongue contrived fraud (betraying the innocent blood.) Sitting,
thou did speak against thy brother (writing books against the Catholic
Religion;) and did give scandal to the senne of thy mother (and the Children
of the Church.) These things thou have done, and I have held my peace.
Whereupon, thou did think (o wicked man) that I would become like unto thee
(not punishing thee for thy offenses:) but, I will reprove, or confound thee,
and bring forth thy sins to plead before thy face against thee. Understand
these things you that forget God, least suddenly he take you away. and there
be none to deliver you.

To conclude, considering that such as forsake our Church to come to yours, wax
commonly worse then they were before, which as I have noted, your own Authors
have observed; I doubt not, but this man's life hereafter, if it be looked into
but a little (especially when his new mask of strangeness and gravity, which
he thought good to put on, at his first coming among you; with time and
familiar custom shall be worn away) will make him to be no more known then
hated, and no less contemned then abhorred.

In the mean ^^me, the infamous shipwreck wherinto he is fallen, first of all
Virtue, which is the merchandise, and secondly of Faith, which is the ship of
eternal life, and lastly of all good name and common honesty (without the
which this present life is far worse then any temporal death) has made him
a perpetual, and a most dreadful example for all Religious men, to take heed
how they break their first faith, and depart from their Order, whereby this
miserable man first entered into the way of perdition: and for the whole Clergy
to beware of ambition, which was the morsel wherewith the Devil entered into
him: and for every good Christian of the Catholic Church, that they have care
above all things, to keep a good conscience, which he neglecting made shipwreck
of his Faith, and was therefore given over by Almighty God into impenitency, and
hardness of heart, to heap or store up wrath to himself, against the day of
wrath: and to increase the weight of his own damnation, against the time of
the revelation of Gods just judgment, who shall render unto every man
according to his works.

And thus wishing him no more hurt, then I do to your self, whose good I
specially intend by this discourse: and making my humble prayer unto God, that
once again he may awake out of the infernal slumber in which he now lies,
and receive new grace, to follow the example of the poor Capuchin his
Predecessor (who notwithstanding his former Apostasy from us to you, is lately
returned from you to the Catholic Church again) ^ bid you, as before, most
heartily farewell.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page Line Fault Correction. 3. 30. in his In his 11. 28. permitting
pretermitting 14. 22. one own 54. 27. to easy to be easy 110. 3. any an 116.
8. infallable infallible 120. 19. purchased purchase 122. 6. the English of the
English 126. 5. these those 137. 19. foward forward 149. 25. contemn condemn
Ibid. 29. commounded commanded 38. 30. immi^^nt eminent 179. 12. mortally
morally 195. 19. believe borrow 197. 10. mortal moral 212. 28. ages age 216.
17. his this 216. 20. arrogance. Not arrogance not Ibid. 21. deceived, what
deceived. What 226. 32. imminent eminent 266. 30. S. Stephen S. Cyprian

In the margent page 69. the citation is misplaced.


