THE Divine Echo, OR, Resounding voice from heaven, moralized betwixt a
Christian and his soul, with short and effectual directions how to live and
die well. Whereby the effects of virtue and the defects of vice, mercy with
misery, heavenly felicity with worldly vanity, the joys of heaven with the
torments of hell, are familiarly expressed. Divided into Prayers and
Meditations for the ease and benefit of every Christian. The first part by
John Swift.

Psalm. 27.9. My heart talked of thee O Lord, seek ye my face:

LONDON Printed for R. Bonion, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Flower de Luce. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir EDMUND MORGAINE Knight, deputy Governor of the
famous Town of Garrison of Portesmouth, and the I Will of Porsee, and to the
Worshipful Master JOHN BRVEN Esquire, my especial favorers, all health and
happiness.
RIght Worshipful, if your favorable eyes may vout safe to read what my spare
hours have brought forth: though small in show, yet great in substance; I humbly
entreat you to be my protection; and thought it be but as a little stream in
respect of the whole Ocean of godly books that are gone before; yet therein
when your leisure best serves you, you may refresh and comfort your self, unto
a farther backing on of your worships, godly, vertuos and religious lives.
Psalm. 12.7
The word of God says the Prophet David is pure, Mat. 24.12
even as silver which from the earth is tried and purified seven times in the
fire, which word plainly and plentifully tells us that iniquity shall
abound in the latter days: 1. These. 5.3.
how then should I cross my lips, and cry hush, or peace, seeing that if Gods
book be true, while men cry peace, peace, sudden destruction shall fall upon
them: Mar. 12.30
The rather therefore I thought good to set forth, to the view of the world,
this my Divine Echo, whereby the godly may be comforted and the wicked
converted; I have named it the Divine Echo, for that as your worships may see,
how the Christian soul does suddenly return back and answer like the Echo,
or rather I may say more truly like a voice from heaven, unto what he
demands of her, directly giving the last sound of the word; both soul and
body, heart and hand must agree together to serve the Lord. And if your worship
should ask me why I should write thus phantastically (as you may term it) of
an Echo, which before now was seldom or never heard of; I then must bring
David for my Author and pattern who in his 27. psalm, when the Lord said unto
him seek ye my face, his soul answered like an Echo, thy face Lord will I
seek, seek my face, I seek thy face: and if you ask yet farther, why I should
bring in a second or a Divine Dyogines, it is to show how every man, and
therefore much rather how every Christian, should live contentedly with
Dyogines the Cynicke, not caring for the things of this world, and using it,
with Paul as if he used it not; Let me now entreat your Worships grauities to
accept hereof; as some token of my true and sincere affection. And if this as I
doubt not, be entertained with kind acceptance, I purpose God willing
herafter to present you with a subject of better worth: so leaving your
Worships to the protection of the Almighty, I rest.

Yours in all Christian duties to be commanded. Io. Swift.

The Epistletothe Reader.
CHristian Reader, I have for thy good, set forth to thy view this my divine
Echo, with godly preparations to the practice of repentance; that so thou
may not only meditate, but also imitate, and not only prattle or talk
thereon, but also practice it, the reward of virtue, with the ruin of vice,
the joys of heaven, with the torments of hell, the world and its vanity, with
heaven and its felicity, also most sweet comforts both divine and morrall for
all Christians to increase their knowledge, in true godliness and piety, with a
sound caveat for sinners, and wicked wretches, to hasten speedy repentance,
whereby hels terror may be escaped, and the punishment due for sin, might
likewise be avoided. Farewell.

THE DIVINE ECHO. Or short and godly Meditations, between a second or a
Divine DIOGENES and the Echo, or a Christian and his Soul.
SECT. 1. A Prayer to God the Son the only Physician both of the soul and
body.
O Sweet Jesus, thou doue-eyde lamb of God, o sweet Jesus, the comforter of my
soul; how amiable are thy looks; O how beautiful thy countenance. O my sole
and souls delight, he that finds thee, finds all things, all that man's
soul does want, or that his heart can wish, and he that loses thee, loses
all, for thou my love art all in all; come then and refresh my soul with thy
looks, for she languisheth and pines aaway, because thou do not visit her,
Cant. 2.5.
she is sick of love and much grieves at thy long absence: perhaps Lord
because she has many suitors, thou think that she does not regard thee and
thy company: its true my Lord, she has many indeed, but she finds them false
and dissembling, she likes them not, and will not marry with any of them, 1.
The. 5.21
but with thee only with thee; she has tried all, and now she keeps that
which is best; disdain her not; though now she be troubled with an issue of
tears, for the issue of her sins, but rather come near her, that she may
only touch the hem of thy garment, and her issue shall be dried up; O then
disdain her not. She has touched unclean things, Mar. 5.25 Mat. 8.3.
whereby she is become leprous and scabbed, O come then and touch her, and
only say, I will, be thou clean, and her leprosy shall be cleansed. John 9.7.
Nay she is blind O Lord and can neither see nor yet conceive those things
which are of thy spirit; O come and anoint her eyes, wash them in the poole
and fountain of thy grace, and she shall see again. She is deaf and cannot
hear, charm the charmer never so wisely, come then and put thy fingers in her
ears, Psalm.
and cry but Ephphata and they shall be opened, She is dumb too and cannot
speak, she cannot praise thy name, come then Lord cut that string, Mark 7.32.
touch her tongue and she shall openly glorify thee, she shall say and sing
with Mary, My soul does magnify the Lord and my spirit does rejoice in God my
Savior. Mat. 9.33. Luke 1.46


SECT. 2. The blindness and ignorance of the Atheist.
YEt the Atheist not believing this, utterly contemning and neglecting my Lord,
flies to nature; he can tell thee that all things are thereby governed, but
yet knows not from whence nature her self is; the Sun the Moon and Stars
move by nature: true it seems to be, and true it may be, but most true we
know this to be, that God moves nature, all planets and Stars are but his
Instruments, Genesis 14. Ioh. 38. Mat. 5.34. and 35.
Instruments to move by moving to effect, by effecting to alter and order al
things here below, heaven is his seat and the earth his footstool, who when
we run awry spurns and kickes us with the heel of his wrath, if then the
lowest and meanest part of his body (meanest and weakest too according unto
humane sense) be able to curb in our wandering appetites, what then me thinks
may his hands do, which always holds the bridle? tell me my soul what may
his hands do, which have made both heaven and earth, Act. 4.24.
the sea and land and therein both great and small things. Ecch. All things.

SECT. 3. A terror for Hypocrites and cold professors.
IF then there be a God, why do men still hault between two opinions? 1.
King. 18.21.
says Eliah: why are they creeples, and why walk they on crouches in their
religion: know they not, how that it is a long and hard way to heaven, and
therefore a lame creeple can never be able to reach thither? if the Lord be
God, follow him, but if Baal be he, then go after him: baule after Baal, for
surely all lukewarm professors the Lord will cast and spew out of his mouth,
Deuteronomy 22.
these Linsewolse mungrils glut and overcome the purity of his stomach: is God
then think ye, who is my sweet Lord, my maker and my redeemer, like unto Baal?
or like David's Image? in his 135. Psalm: one that has eyes but cannot see
their wickedness, one that has ears yet cannot hear the cry of their sins,
One that has a throat yet cannot roar after his pray, Amos 3.8.
one that is a sleep and understands not, or one that has hands and cannot
strike? surely God is no Idol nor yet an idle God, but a living God, and if
living, why then does this age think him to be so patient as that he will not
revenge his foes? or so weak, as that he cannot, or so ignorant as that he
knows not how, or so fearful as that he dares not? or else do these wicked
ones think him to be a liar, who says he will punish offenses, and yet will
not? He that says there is no God is guilty of damned Atheism, and he that
thinks in his heart, that there is a GOD, but withal thinks him to be so
patient and merciful, as that he will not revenge in time to come, is guilty
of that horrible sin of presumption, Psalm. ista.
and both fearful, God is patient, and God is just too, for mercy and truth
are met together, righteousness and peace have embraced each other: his mercy
is great we know, it is above all his works, and we find it so, Mich. 7.18.
and 19.
for what says my soul has the Lord showed himself to be, for that so long
on our sins he has even winkt and smilde.

Ecch. Mild.

SECT. 4. The carelesnes of the wicked in serving God.
MAny of the brave lads of this world are now turned Gamster, they think to
obtain Heaven by lot, if it be their fortune to come in, well and good; so it
is, alas poor fools, if their chance be not the better, it may so chance,
that they may all stand without at the door with the five foolish Virgins and
there pipe for cold and gnash their teeth, Mat. 25.10 and 11. Mat. 8.12.
with the fieri-frozen souls in hell; plain casting will not win such golden
price, for if they know not how to help their die, they may there die without
help, and yet never die; but pine in pain with the unskillful sort, heaven is
round I confess yet not like Fortunes wheel, and he that thinks with the
former it is his fortune, if so be that he comes thither, may chance if the
spoakes of his wheel be not stronger, to lie in the mire, thus men play all
their goods, yea and their chiefest good too, at mum-chance, they stake their
Souls at this unfortunate game, and then if chance bear the sway, the
victory must needs be doubtful; but what wiseman would hazard such a precious
price as his soul, at such a base game, and with such a conicatching cogger as
Satan that grand-gamster who can strike a die at pleasure? he has his false
dice and al other shifts that may be, to deceive and blind the eyes of our
understanding, to win the souls of poor doting worldlings.

SECT. 5. A Meditation on the birth of Christ, and the three wisemens offerings,
O Sweet Jesus, O my sweet, who art white and ruddy, Canti. 5.10. Mat. 2.1.2.
etc.
O thou the chiefest of ten thousands, when thou wast borne there came wisemen
from the East even the first fruit of the Gentiles to worship thee, and in
their journey they were guided by a Star, which Star did direct them,
brought them unto thee unto Bethlem, unto that place where thou O pretty
harmless smiling Babe did lie in a cratch: so grant my Lord that thy word
may never vanish from our eyes, that light of lights, that true light, but may
bring us to that place that heavenly Bethlem, which our souls most long after,
even as the Heart desires the water brooks, where we shall see thee not as
these wisemen did, a servant, but a Lord, not to be judged, but to judge, not
to call men to repentance, Mat. 11.2^ Luke 21.27 Esaias 53.3. Mat. 24.42 John
8.15. 1. These. 4.17.
but to punnish the unrepentant, not sitting on an Ass or starueling beast,
but riding on the starrie sky, on the wings of the wind, not lying in a cold
stable in a poor ragged manger, but in state and majesty, in pomp and much
glory; And when these wisemen had worshipped, they opened their treasures and
presented unto thee gifts, even gold and incense and mirhe, and that because
Lord the Persians manner was not to salute Kings without a present grant
therefore that we never come unto thee, Psa. 93.1. and 99.1.
o thou the king of kings, unless we bring a presenttoo, even an heart tried
and purified as gold and silver, an heart of incense and mirhe, devout
prayers, godly Meditations that the savor thereof may ascend up into the
clouds, and be a sweet smelling sacrifice unto thee, my love, my hearts
delight O thou the chiefest of ten thousands.

SECT. 6. True knowledge what it is.
MAny men in these days, think themselves wise because they know and learn
many things, though what they are bound to know, that they know not, that is to
understand and learn the commandments of God, and thereon to meditate day and
night: they have forgot that the wisdom of this world is foolishness with
God; the knowledge of Gods laws makes young men sober, for wherwithall says
the prophet, Psalm. 1.2 Psalm. 119.9.
shall a young man cleanse his way? even by ruling himself after thy
commandments: it does comfort old men, it is wealth to the poor and treasure
to the rich, it feeds the hungry souls, it is a pleasant river to the
thirsty heart, and it makes al men wise and still capeable of further
knowledge, and surely he that wants knowledge, or is ignorant in the will of
God, void of learning, and good education, howsoever then the world may make
account of him, yet he is but the shape of a man and no man, though never so
well beautified with the outward gifts of nature, I say if he wants christian
and godly nurture; he is but the gliding shape of a man and no man; Yet men are
more chary in keeping men's laws, then in keeping of Gods, whereas though Gods
laws yield the greater and the greatest reward that may be being kept, and the
breaking of them the greater yea and the greatest punishment of all. Not to
perform what should be done and what is commanded, nay commanded by the mouth
of god, does betoken negligence, and to do what is forbidden is a sign, if
known, of presumption, if not of ignorance, me thinks I hear my soul
answering me, how a man may offend God, as well as by committing.

Echo Omitting.

SECT. 7. The best knowledge is to know ones self.
BEfore that a man can come to have a true knowledge of any thing, he must
first learn to know himself, and he that well knows himself, esteems
little of himself, considering from whence he came, what he is, and whither
he must, he regards not the vain pleasures of this brittle life, but
highly extolleth the laws of God, and only seeks to live in his fear; but
he that knows not himself, is ignorant of Gods will, wilful in ignorance,
bold in wickedness, most unprofitable in his life, and utterly graceles at the
hour of his death. Learn thou then to know thy self for this is thy duty,
and he that knows not that, which he ought to know, is a brute and
senseless beast amongst men: and he that knows no more then he has need of,
is a man amongst beasts, but he that delights in the knowledge of Gods will,
searches out his works and wonders and thereby knows all that is fitting for
a man to know, is a God amongst men; Learn thou then to forget evil, for
truly this is the best kind of learning and not to know it is the surest
knowledge, in not learning it thou proouest thy self to be a great Scholar
even a Doctor in Christ's School, and in not knowing it thou show thy self
to be the wisest of all men: for when thou art weak then thou art strong,
Paulus ad cor.
when thou art ignorant then art thou expert.

SECT. 8. On good Council what it is.
IS not good council better then gold, Wisd. 7 8.
and more precious then the Emerald, the Dyamond or Onyx stone? me thinks it
is, yet had men rather receive gold and pearl and precious stones then give
them, and can give good Council and will receive none; this then is their
folly, the foolish madness of our time; yet despair not, neither faint, for
thou may think thy self a good Orator if thou can only persuade others
to do as they should, though thou may think thy self a better when as thou
can persuade thy self to do as thou ought, but lastly thou may
think thy self the chiefest of all, the best of all Orators else, when as
thou can persuade both thy self and also them, and so persuade them that
words may leave such a perfect impression in their hearts, so that thy bare and
naked words may be turned into sound and perfect works.

SECT. 9. A Meditation on Christ Jesus borne in a Stable.
OH that I had now a fountain of tears in each eye, that I might night and
day bewail and weep, Luke 2.12.
and bewail the hard-heartednesse of the Jews; oh my love, what my love borne
in a stable? why, there might have been Bears and Wolves which might have
devoured both thee and thy mother too, there might have been wild horses, that
might have kicked out thy brains, or Oxen that might have trod upon thee, and
so destroyed thee? alas my love what my love and Lord both born in a stable?
why the loathsome smell thereof might have choked, or the cold have killed
thee; ah hard-hearted Innekeeper, who did more respect roysting Ruffians, the
brave lads of this world, then my Lord the Lord both of heaven and earth; yet
more hard-hearted was thy wife, for me thinks she being a woman, should have
weighed a woman's case at such a time, Oh that I had a stream of tears still
gushing out of mine eyes, that beholding hear the humility of God, I might
bewail the pride of men; But why should I grieve and thus conceit my self of
wilde-beasts; seeing he that was thy keeper was thy strength and seeing he
that kept thee does neither slumber nor sleep, Psalm. 121
had it been his will that thou should not have been borne there, thou
should not, it should not have been done.

SECT. 10. How the world is even smothered up with sin.
OFtentimes as I have stood on the high mountain of Contemplation, yea even a
tipto on the top thereof, I have much desired that some others would have
likewise amounted up thither unto me to have borne me company in these my
solitary studies; so that there meditating they might turn themselves from
coast to coast, from quarter to quarter, from one part of the earth to another,
and see how the world is besmeared with the fat of sin, with abomination,
and with all uncleanness whatsoever; for I see how one in one part bragges and
boastes in his bags, how another in another quarter tryumpheth in his
braueries, the third in his pelts, and another in his pots; but yet withal let
the first know that his soul is rusty, 1. Cor. 6.10
and therefore has that mighty one promised to scour it in hell fire, if we
will believe God and his word, who will not be mocked; let the other know that
his soul is puffed up and swollen, Luke 18.14
and therefore must it be pressed down, it is exalted and it must be brought
low, let the third know that his soul is all filthy most beastly and
loathsome, Revel. 21.8
and therefore without an earnest repentance it will be cast aside into the
stinking iakes of hell and damnation like to like, Heb. 2.15.
and let the last know how that he has glutted the Lord stomach, how that
the Lord has surfeited with him and the multitude of his companions, and
therefore shall in time to come, carouse the cup of the Lords wrath and
vengeance; oh that men then would once be wise, and not as the wiseman
speaks make but a sport of sin: the fool says pride is but a point of
gentilitie, surfeiting sparks of good fellowship, beastly wantonness, tricks
of youth, nay what says he farther (my soul) is the effect of manhood and
courage.

Ecch. Rage.

SECT. 11. Satan's deceit to catch souls.
Satan that cunning fisher, who knows in what holes the souls of men lie,
has invented many baits to catch them, if he cannot take them through
pleasure, he baiteth beauty on his hook, if not through beauty, honor, if
not through honor riches, if not with riches some vanity else, if one will not
serve, he uses some other means, so that if possibly he may, he will draw
them into his net, unless they swim swiftly under that rock Christ Jesus
whereon the devil is sure to break his tackling; so that by his suggestions
one while we burn in the heat of Desire, another while we are ravished with
the thought of revenge, another while enraged with the desire of dignity, so
that we are never out own until we leave all, until we leave the world;
Eccles. 11.8
And what though a man says Solomon lives many years, and in them all
rejoice, yet he must remember the days of darkness for they are many: well
then let men like resty Iades take the bit in their mouths at liberty, let
them refresh their souls with vanities, let them delight in dignities, let
them possess heaps of riches, let them live pleasantly let them fare daintily,
let them drink lustilie, let the^ lodge softly; but yet withal let them know
that God at length will curb them in; that they must al appear before the
judgment seat of his Majesty, Eccles. 12.^
remember then thy creator in the days of thy youth, for all this is but
vanity; if Solomon had been a fool, who was the wisest of all men, thou
might then have accused him of folly; or if Solomon had not tasted these
vanities (who tasted them al to their full) thou might then have condemned
him of ignorance, in not knowing their swetnesse; if then thou can neither
reprove his wisdom, nor yet reprehend his experience, why will thou not yield
that all is vanity?

SECT. 12. A Meditation on Christ who is the true light.
O Thou bright morning star oh thou bright morning Sun, and son of God, by
thine arising we wretched sinners Prognosticate that the threatening clouds of
thy fathers anger shall flee away, the weather shall be clear and calm, the
air sweet and wholesome if so be that we believe in thee and desire to be
lightened by thy word, Psalm. 119 105.
for thy word O Lord is a Lantern unto my feet and a light unto my paths;
Thou have given us this world for a walk and thy word for a guide, so that we
may easily without stumbling and falling recover the period of our journey,
recover our iourneys end, for when thy word goes forth says David, it gives
light and understanding even unto the simple, this is that light the^ whereby we
must walk, this is that light which must guide our feet, and unless we walk
by this light, we may soon fall into confusion, for here in one place lies
whole quagmires of sin, in another blocks of error and ignorance, in the
third the slipperie ye of deceitful vanities of vain delights, and without
thy light O Christ (who art the true light) and the light of thy word and
Gospel, we may soon stick in these quagmires, we may soon slide and fall
down on this ye; Direct then O Lord our paths that we fall not, who art the
true light and lamp of the world.

SECT. 13. The vanity of worldly things.
DAme Nature, yea one better then nature, even God himself, has put a
division between man and beast, yet man by all means strives to become a
baast, to damme up the course of nature, nay, rather to cross the will of God,
and is not this strange, that men should be so swinish; strange it is indeed,
yet not so strange as true; when as they live and die in sensuality. Men while
they live here in this transitory world, should so delight in the book of God,
that they may leave the name of a good man, I mean the name of a good
Christian behind them when they are dead; and if we leave that it is all we
can leave, nay, it is the greatest of all other things that may be left
behind: and no man will, no man can expect more at our hands; but he that does
not leave this behind him when he is dead, carrying it about with him while he
is alive, surly is no man, but a monster whose estate is far worse then the
dogs, the toades, or any other filthy creature: Amongst the Catalogue of the
wise ma^s fools, the folly of one have I most deeply sounded; let him
therefore bear home the bell, and that is he who namely esteems the world,
which esteems no man, and makes no reckoning of GOD, who so greatly
regards all men, what folly can be greater then this, seeing that the world
is like unto an hostess with whom when a poor trauailer has spent all the
money in his purse, she turns him out of her doors, and there with all
telling him, that she is weary of such troublehouses, so when a man has
spent all time so precious here in this world, he must at last depart out of
it, he must away, he must vanish, and for that he heretofore did not forsake
the world the world will now forsake him; and what think thou, my soul, will
the world do at length by flattering us now with delights, and with pleasures
by feasting us?

Ecch. Sting us.

SECT. 14. The miserable estate of the voluptuous worldling.
TRue it is, that when a man, does not bridle his affections, they carry him
headlong unto all licentious living, which causes him to judge not according
unto reason, but according unto sense, and where men have such a liberty to
offend, how sweet is sin unto the flesh? so that there is no difference
between men and beasts, save that men do exceed beasts in beastliness and
sensuality: oftentimes as I have breathed, I have thought with my self, what
could be most like unto man's breath, and nothing could I find so fit to be
compared unto it, as pleasure, as pleasing beastliness, which vanishes away
so soon as it is seen. I would then that men would cheer up, their lowering
melancholic spirits, with the sweet harmony of the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
and awaken their drowsy souls with the alarm of resolution unto Godliness,
for they must know that there is no greater shame, then for a man to be
resolute in worldly actions, and yet wavering doubtful in the chief points
of their salvation.

SECT. 15. To be constant in the Lords service: and examples thereof.
SVrely Paul was constant, yea and resolute too, in the points of his
salvation: for he does encourage and stir up others, 1. Tim. 6.
to do the like, fight the good fight of faith says he: O noble Souldidier! O
famous conqueror! me thinks no man should refuse to draw the sword of the
spirit aagainst his most deadly enemies the world, the flesh and the devil, and
seeing that against these three tyrannical persecutors, al those that would
be accounted good Christians daily war so long as they are in their earthly
Tabernacles, they know well enough that they have a good Captain even Christ
Jesus, who will give them their full pay, so that they shall loose nothing by
their fight, Mich. 5. verse 2. Mat. 2. v. 6.
and out of Bethleem came this Captain to govern his people Israel. All the
Prophets, Martyrs and holy Saints of God be his Lieutenants, who follow their
captain Christ close at the heels, and will not shrink one jot from him, who
in stead of a feather hung and bedeckt with golden aglets had a crown of
thorns upon his head, beset round about with prickles, and Lieuetenant Paul,
Lieuetenant Peter and all the rest of his Lieutenants in general; in stead of
honor had dishonor, in steed of mirth, mourning, in steed of reverence,
reuilings, and in steed of being made much of, they were made roockes of; Now
the flag or ancient which the Godly bear into the fields, and in which they
triumph and rejoice is the Cross of Christ, whence says one Auncient-bearer
amongst the rest, absit, God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing, but in
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6.14.
whereby the world is crucified unto me and I unto the world; Cant. 5.
our Captains colors are the red cross in a white field, white and red,
white in respect of his innocent pureness or pure innocence, red in respect
of his passion, when drops of blood issued from him, and came trickling down
his cheeks: who koweth not then my well-beloved, my welbelooued is white and
ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousands; the drummers and Trumpeters of this army
are the Ministers of Gods word, who lift up: Esai. 85.
their voices like trumpets to show Gods people their sins, and the house of
Iaacob their transgressio^s, to batter down the walls of the spiritual Ierico:
the common soldiers of this band are all the elect and faithful servants of
God in general; lastly the place where this Captain, these Lieutenants, these
Ancient-bearers, Cant 5.1.
these Drummers, Trumpiters, Common Soldiers, do march and meet together is
the church of God, there we must keep our randeuow, there we must eat and
drink, and make our selves merry, there must be our court of guard, for says
our Captain, where two or three are gathered together in my name, 1. These. 5.
there am I in the midst of them, there, there does he teach us how to fight,
there, there does he train us up; there does he place us in battle rue, and
teach us how to put on the brestplate of righteousness, the sword of the
spirit, and the hope of salvation for an helmet; O let us not suffer then our
armor to rust, for if it rust, our Captain and Savior, Jesus Christ, when
he shall come at that great day of muster, at the day of judgment, when as
all souls shall be mustered up together, he will think us to be but idle and
slothful servants; O therefore come fellow soldiers, let us march on still,
stand your ground, yield not the bucklers, be resolute and courageous, for we
have received presse-money in our baptism, there, there have we vowed to be
the soldiers of Christ; stand to it then stoutly, yield not unto the vain
pleasures of the world; come I say let us march on; for hear ye not how the
holy Ghost sounds out the drum of comfort, of triumph, of joy, of peace, and
all happiness; crying, Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee
a crown of life, and hear ye not the merry sluit and pipe, playing most
sweetly and singing in the air. Revel. 2.10
To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my kingdom.

o.

SECT. 1. A meditation on Christ's riding to Jerusalem on an ass.
O Bountiful Jesus, whose head is as fine gold, whose locks are curled, Cant
5.11. Math. 21.7
and black as a raven, thou entredst Jerusalem fitting on an ass. O low and
humble mind of so great a king! thou wast poor too sweet Lord when thou
entredst in the city, for thou borrowedst garments to cover thine harmeles
body; though thou wast owner of all, both in heaven and earth, thou wast poor
indeed, for thou had not whereon, or wherein to rest thine head, thou wast
borne poor, thou liuedst poor, and thou diedst poor, poor and naked, here
me thinks my Lord does condemn our pride, and the pride of those that were
heirs of David's kingdom, to see how magnifically in what pomp and state, with
how many vain glorious plaudits of the people, and riding in Chariots al
glittering with gold, they entered in that city Jerusalem, and to see now, how
my Lord rides in upon an ass, without any furniture, only his disciples
threadbare coats being cast upon her. And what is my Lord indeed rode before
into the ^^^e? well then I will lackie after, let us make haste unto the gates
of the city, and there knock while they may be opened unto us: Let us run a
pace, I say, least that we be answered with the foolish virgins, Abite enim,
nescio vos, Go away for I know you not.

SECT. 17. How a man must be considered.
IN what state things temporal and transitory stand, even in the same does
man; Senccae Epist. 77.
that ship is called good and fortunate, not she which is painted out with
precious colors, nor she whose ancor is made either of gold or silver, or
whose cable is made of fine twisted-silke, nor yet she that is fraught with a
princes revenues, nor yet with the whole wealth of a kingdom; but she that is
stable and firm, whose joints are close and found, swift in her journey, and
long living on the seas foming waves; that sword is called good, not that whose
hilts are gilded, or whose sheath is beset with pearls, but that sword, which
has a sharp and well seasoned edge, able to cut whatsoever it shall be put
unto; the carpenter commends not his rule for the beauty thereof, but for
the true measure and straightness of it, and in man it avails nothing, how
many acres of ground he ploweth, how many he foweth, how much money he puts
sorth to use, of how many he is saluted and called master, how soft the bed be
that he lies in, or how precious the cup be that he drinks in, and the
like; but how good and virtuous he be; how sharp the edge of his zeal is to
cut down sin, and how straight his feet walk in the ways of the Lord; We
see then that whosoever is a mighty man, is not thereby a good man, but he that
is good is thereby a mighty man, yea and presently mighty, as heat is
inseperable from fire, so is might from goodness; none of these whom riches
only raise to honor, are to be called great men, why then do we call them
great? a dwarffe if thou shall measure his basis or foundation, will not prove
a tall man, though he stand on a mountain, and a Church pillar will keep its
height though it stand in a pit-hole; and this is our faults, for that we never
esteem a man as he is, but we ad unto him transitory and ourward things, but
if then thou will truly consider the worth, and worthiness of a man, behold him
bare and naked, only behold the good parts and qualities of his mind.

SECT. 18. The praise of virtue.
OFrentimes have I seen fools, yea and vicious livers too, to get many
salutations with cap and knee, but what may they thank for it, their weed not
their wit, their garments and not their deserts, their vestures and not their
virtues, yet howsoever he be descended, I am sure, that he boasts in vain
of his great lineage and parentage; that having no good quality in himfelse,
seeks to be esteemed for the Nobility of his ancestors, There is nothing
on earth more like to God then a man perfectly virtuous, who does so much
excel others, as GOD excels him; and as far as the mind exceedes the body in
dignity, so far does he that is a Gentleman by his deserts and good
qualities exceed the other, that is called master only through his many Lands
and Lordships.

SECT. 19. For what men are esteemed in these days.
But now the world is come to such an untowardness that an Dines sit omnes
quarimus nemo an bonus, we all ask whether such a man be rich or no; no man
asks whether he be godly and virtuous, neither do we demand or inquire how
he came by his riches, but how much he has, and as his goods increase so is
he esteemed, if a man be rich and therewithal bountiful, though never so
vicious, we account him a good honest man, God save his life, say we, thus
riches are a band to all villainy, a rich man may as soon be acquitted as play
the knave, the Humble Be breaks through the Cob-webbe, when as the poor
silly Fly is catched, and it is a thing worthy of note to see how men flock
to the place of execution, and thrung together to see an offender loose his
life, or some naughty pack carted; Strange it is indeed, and I wonder
thereat, and worth the noting if they may be noted, when as some of these
lookers on, have stolen twice as much, and has murdered twice as many as he
has that is executed; and again when as some of these gazers have played the
strumpet five times for her once, that is now punished, and thus tormented by
the decree of the Law: yet if he that dies for his offense has stolen thrice
as much as thou have and in the mean space thou art not seen, or being seen
art winked on, or rather nodded at, tell me which of you two, may challenge
the degree happinsse? surely me thinks that friend which labors to case up
any heinous fact in a guilty person, knows not what he does, for the one is
the Butcher, and the other the knife, and both seek to rippe up the bowels of
their own souls, without the greater grace of God, and greater repentance: the
butcher is the murderer, and therefore to be condemned, the knife is the
instrument of murder, and therefore to be contemned, and farther there is a
third party to be arraigned at the bar of Gods Justice, and that is the
Judge, when the faulty is freed, when the guilty is acquitted, for tell me my
soul, how are most of those malefactors hearts, after that by the unjust
bribe-taking Judge, they are openly pardoned?

Ecch. Hardoned.

SECT. 20. A Meditation on Christ's going unto the mount of Olives.
OMercisull Jesus, Cantic. 5.
Oh sweet Christ, my love, my dove my dear, whose eyes are like doves upon
the rivers of the waters, which are washed with milk and remain by the full
vessels: he is dou-eyde indeed truly dou-eyde, he is like unto Noah's dove,
Gens. 8.10.
which Noah when as the Deluge was over all the world, sent forth our of the
Ark, and the dove came to him in the evening, and lo in her mouth was an Olive
leaf which she had plucked, whereby Noah knew that the waters were abated from
off the earth: And when the world was drowned with sin God the father sent
forth from the Arc of heaven his Son Christ, which pretty harmless dove
returned with an olive branch in his mouth too, whereby we may all know that
the waves of Gods wrath are abated from off the earth, for in this dove he was
well pleased, this was he in whom he delighted: again we read in the Gospel
that this innocent dove, John.
came unto the mount of Olives, Matthew. 21.1.
when as he was about, by his death to save our souls, the souls of men, he
came thither; First, to the mount of Olives, for he came to make peace
between God and man, and the Olive tree does betoken peace, it is the
character of peace, as the Olive branch in the pigeous mouth, and Christ has
brought this Olive into the world, Ephesians. 2.14.
for he is our peace, which has made both one, and has broken down the stop
of the partition wall; As in old time, Omes. 8.9.
before that the floods were diminished from off the earth, the dove had not
whereon to rest the soles of her feet, and we before that the roaring streams
of Gods wrath were gone (through Christ's merits) from off the world, had not
likewife whereon to rest the feet of our souls.

SECT. 21. Good and bad must not be mixed together.
MAny men there are who have liberty, in their lives, and what may be the
cause of this but want of grace? some again there are who have liberty in
their hands, and this is a sign of theft, some also have liberty in their
tongues, and this betokens folly; and many again there be, who have liberty in
their minds, and this warranteth their goodness, and no man lives truly at
liberty, but he that lives godly, who so is virtuous, who so is freed from
the bondage of sin; learn thou then not only to live, but to know how to
live, for the first of these each beast does covet, but the latter becomes a
Christian; seek then to purify thy soul in the fountain of grace, thy soul
and heart both must be clesed, Matthew. 12.
for such as the tree is such is the fruit; a good tree, says Christ, cannot
bring forth bad fruit, neither can a bad tree bring forth good fruit: art thou
a bad man, and does a good sentence proceed from thy mouth, surely thou
disgracest the sentence, for we know that thou art but a Crab-tree stock, and
therefore thy fruit must needs relish very sower, art thou a good man, and
does bad words and come out of thy lips? thou make thy words not the
better, but thy self the worse, thy filthy words are as fruit that is blited,
this makes men to curse the stock though thou in thy self may come of the
right kind, in any case suffer not what is good to be mingled with what is
naught for a bad word will sooner disgrace a good man, then a good man can
grace what we know to be bad, what is good may be stained with what is naught,
before that which is naught may be made good.

SECT. 22. A Meditation on the loss of Christ when he was but twelve years
old.
COmfort my soul oh Lord, stretch forth thine hands of compassion, and reach
unto me ever lasting life, Cant. 5.
whose hands are as rings of Gold, set with the crysolite, whose belly like
white Iuorie covered with Saphirs; whom Mary and Joseph sought sorrowing, but
could not find him until the third day, Luke ^^.
they sought my Lord in the City, and in the Country, within the walls, and
without the walls, in Jerusalem and abroad among his kinsfolks, but could not
find him, and they sorrowed the more for that they lost their Son, when as
he was but twelve years old: O sweet child, where wast? where did hide thy
self? who gave thee house-roome? who gave thee meat and drink? who plucked off
thy hozen and shun? De omnibus inquit Bernard: Coniicere vel opinari aliquid
libet, affirma re autem temere non licet. Mark 10
who made clean thy coats? what company did thou use? whether in heaven
or earth, or in any house in the mean time did thou remain? surely thou
wast in some secret place, with some of thy young and tender years, teaching
them the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, according to thine own words in
the Gospel: suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, but
what was the cause my sweet Lord, that thou had no compassion on thy poor
mother seeking thee, grieuing for thee, sighing and sobbing and pouring out
whole streams of tears for loss of thee; And why Mary did thou seek the
child so earnestly whom thou knew to be God directly; did thou fear
least that he was starued with hunger or vexed with cold, or least that he
should be wronged by some Children playing in the streets? what is not this
he who defends all men, who feeds all things, who nourishes all creatures
living, who does array and cloth the grass of the field, which grows now
and a non is cast into the oven, and makes them more glorious, then Solomon in
all his royalties?

SECT. 23. On the same.
We see here with what sighing and sobbing, with what lamenting, with how
great sorrowing, grieuing and groaning they sought the babe, and specially Mary
his mother; and how great this was who is able to express? every word she
spoake was shut up with a tear, tears made full stops yet were her words
never fully ended, every line she uttered had a parenthesis with wringing and
wrefling of the hands, and crying as Ruben did, when he sought his brother
Joseph, Genesis 37.30
and could not find him. The Child is not here, and I, whether shall I go?
and Mary when she sought her son and could not find him, cried likewise the
child is not here, and I, whither shall I go? the child is not here, oh
the child is not here, and I whither shall I go? and we therefore, who have
lost this child Joseph, this babe Christ; through sin, must seek him again
by repentance, with much grieuing and sorrowing as Mary did, if we cannot find
him in one prayer, we must go unto another, and never cease crying with Rubin,
and I whither shall I go?

SECT. 24. On death, how it is our greatest friend.
IT is the manner and fashion of men in this age, to salute those whom they
meet, to salute and embrace all their friends and acquaintance; yet is there
one whom we daily meet, and our greatest friend too, but we take no notice of
him, death I mean who is our friend, yea and our chiefest friend, for by him
we pass over the seas of misery, unto the blessed land of rest and true
felicity, we meet him daily, yet we think not on him, the longer we live the
more inwardly we are acquainted together, and the nearer we come unto him:
Hieronimus
quotidie morimur says one father, and quotidie commutamur, we die daily and
we are daily and hourly changed, yet are our souls immortal, and heereon
hangs the Christians joy: death then is such a friend that without the which
the godly cannot live, for it is transitus a passage unto life everlasting, and
thereon do the Godly Meditate both night and day; Cicero.
and without the which the wicked must not live, it keeps down their proud
hearts, it keeps them in awe, and seruill fear, for if it were otherwise,
they would even scorn God to his face, and bid him do what he durst do; if
the godly be desirous to live, it is a token that they are bent to do some
good, but on the contrary, if the wicked would live it is to do some
mischief; yet in the end neither good nor bad can withstand death; some die at
first, some at last, so that all die at length: death surely to the godly
minded man is life, whose meditation is on divine matters, and whose hope is
the joys of heaven, none indeed do fear death, save those that have
committed so much iniquity, as after death deserves damnation: for hell is
reserved of old for the disobedient, but where are the godly, Revel. 21.
what says thy soul Dyogines?

Ecch. In ease.

SECT. 25. On the suddenness thereof and uncertainty.
THe world says that a merry heart lives long, but I say a joyful soul
lives for ever, it is not the death that destroys the soul but a bad life;
therefore God has hid the time of our departure from our eyes, because we
should make have to amend, for if we now knowing how that death comes suddenly
are careless of Gods service, what would we do if we did know it to be
delayed for some long time: August. in libr. de Scrip. Christian.
Augustine says, Latet vltimus dies, vt obseruentur omnes dies, our last day
is not known unto us, because we should still be so prepared, as if the next
day still following were the appointed time of our departure, we see if a man
loose a thing of any price, Luke 15.8.
he will seek for it foot after foot: yea and light a candle too, as the
gospel speaks, whereby he may be assured not to ouerslip what he lost. So
we if we mean to find heaven, must beg of God by earnest prayer, to
illighten our feet with the lamp of his holy spirit, and so make conscience
of all our ways, and examine every step, until we have found what we
sought, a thing of great praise and prise: be sure then to step charily, for O
man says Bernard, it is cetaine that thou must die, but uncertain where, how
or when. Because then that death does look for thee, in every place and at
all times, do thou then also if thou art wise, look for it every where too,
and this me thinks is the best way to match subtle death. But men in these
days who have not this knowledge, do most shamefully complain upon God for
the shortness of their lives, when as they as short as it is, do through
ryoting, surfeiting, drinking, and bowsing, and through malice and murders,
make it more short both in themselves, and also in others, yet me thinks if
men would duly consider, of what molde they are made, they would not be so
careless of their souls health, and of Gods service, one silly flea in the
night will soon break their sleep, one small prick with a thorn or pin,
will even force tears to issue from their eyes: if thy body were brass or
steel, then O man thou might have some cause to triumph and glory in thy
self, thou might have some cause to think thy self able to resist all
misfortune, and to withstand all putrefaction, but mark I pray thee the
frailty of thy flesh, which if it lie in the grave but only three or four
days, thy derest friend that thou leauest behind thee, will not be able by
reason of the noisome smell of thy dead carcass to come near it, or yet once
endure the sight thereof: Remember now that thou art but dust and worms meat,
and bear therefore about thee the Anatomy of thy faults, search into the
botome of every particular fin, and go into the house of fasting and not into
the house of feasting, for where sorrowing for sins and sadness is, there is
the heart of wisemen, but where mirth is, there is the heart of fools.

SECT. 26. The frailty of our bodies.
MAny times have I thought with my self, how that it may one day so come to
pass, that this earthly body of ours, now pampered up, and kept from the
wind and weather, now honored and much respected, may one day serve to make
up a mud-wall: for a time may happen, when some building may be made near
unto the grave (be it never so gay and sumptuous) and that they might dig
for some earth out of the same to make mortar for a wall, Omnes morimur et
sicut aqua labimur, in terram. Eccl.
and so shall thy feely body, being now changed into earth, become afterward
an earthen wall: although it be at this present, the most noble body (and most
delicately cherished) of all bodies in the world; and how many bodies of Kings
and Emperors (I wonder) have come already to these promotions.

Echo Ocyons.

SECT. 27. On the same.
O The baseness and beastliness of the body, when as the soul is departed
out of it, and O the continual moving and wasting of our life, and hastening
unto this baseness; what minute of an hour passes but that we go one step
forward toward our death? what other thing think ye is the moving of the
Heavens, but as it were a very swift wheel, which is continually spinning and
winding up our lives, for like as a roll of wool, says one father, is spunne
upon a wheel, of the which, at every turning about, some part is wound up, at
the first turn a little, at the second a little more, and so forth at every
turn until all be ended: so does the wheel of the heavens continually spinne
and windc up our life, in that at every turning round that it makes a piece
of our life is spunne and wound up; and therefore holy Job says, Job. 9.25.
that his days were more swift then one that rides in post: for he that
rides in post, though his message requires never so much haste, yet sometimes
necessity causes him to stay: but our life never staieth, neither will it give
us so much liberty, as the space of one hour of rest.

SECT. 28. Why God will not have us to have knowledge of things to come.
IN this, as in all other things the wisdom of God is infinite, who will not
have, nor yet suffer men to have knowledge of future things, of things to come,
for if they had aprescience or foreknowledge of their prosperity they would
be careless and negligent toward God their maker, and again understanding of
their adversity, they would be senceles, as a male-factor, who commonly is
half dead, so soon as the rope is cast about his neck; man therefore has
only knowledge of things present and past, of things present for that he may at
all times behold the works of God and presently betake himself unto a new and
holy life, unto heavenly meditations; often past, for that he may give God glory
for his good deeds, James.
seeling that every good and perfect gift comes from above, and be sorry for
his bad, his corrupt and evil life.

SECT. 29. What a good conscience is, and the praise thereof.
THe best way for a man, to promise his soul everlasting life, after death, is
to make much of a good conscience while he lives; surely the wisest of kings,
king Solomon had thoroughly tasted the delicacie of this dainty dish, in that he
calls it a continual feast, a meat wherewith he could never be glutted: by it
the innocent smileth, before the furiousnes of the fearful judge, when as in
the mean space, Prou. 15.13. and 17.22.
the guilty by inward gripings discovers his offense, though all men seem
to wink at it, nay before he be suspected of any: It is a bad conscience that
pursues his master at the heels, and knows how to take vengeance in due
time, he will not cease to post after him, until he has pind him to the
bar, for let him be girded about with Iro^, guarded with soldiers, attended on
by counselors, shut up with walls of brass, in strong holds and castles, yet
will he be in a woeful case, in a perplexed misery, seeing that there is no
salve for a sick conscience; surely it is like unto those mice which devoured
one Hatto a merciles bishop of Germany, Munster in Cosmo.
for if he sail out upon the seas, it will swim after the ship, yea and be
ready to drown the puppe, if he place himself in the center of a fietie
circle, it will leap over unto him, if he ascend up unto the top of a castle
it will climb up unto him by the walls, if he descend down into the earth, it
will dig him up again, if he sleeps he shall have fear for his bedfellow,
if he awaketh and walks abroad, he shall have care for his companion, and
always the sting of conscience for his torment, there is no way to prevent it
but by death, and this also is uncertain, which makes it the more grievous,
for either he shall be presently healed or more grievously hated.

SECT. 30. We must make speed to amend.
THerefore when thou go from home ponder with thy self, what thou will do
abroad, and when thou returnest home, call to mind what thou have done there,
when thou arisest in the morning, determine to pass the day following, as if at
night they bed should be thy grave, and when thou lie down so commit and
commend thy spirit to God the father that thou may arise with his son
Christ, then care not so much for the health and welfare of thy body, that
thereby thou may have a long life hear on earth, as for the safety of the
soul, how thou may live for ever. Me thinks I see time sit laughing, and
why? for that she runs swiftly, and mocketh men for their slownesse, for
slacking their duty toward God: our proverb is, he that is before hand
need not run, be not thou slow then in thy repentance; behold thy face in Gods
Bible, that clear looking-glass and if thou appearest fair and beautiful do
such things as become thy beauty, but if thou seem foul, full of spots and
ill-favored, then study to attain unto that decency or comeliness which thy
face lacks; labor diligently to correct those deformed blemishes that are
seen in thee.

SECT. 31. On flatterers and dissemblers.
WE ought to beware of those praises which proceed out of the mouths of wicked
men, when as their hearts are most insyncere and dissembling: for we our selves
know this, that when we would kill a sow, we use to clay-pole with her, we
scratch and tickle her sides and throat, and this causes her to lie down,
Senec. de Doct. prine.
so that we thereby do with her what we list; such men's throats does Gods
prophet liken unto open sepulcres, for that they are very glorious without, but
very loathsome within, Romans 3.13.
for many of these under the show of a steadfast friend cloak the malice of a
mortal foe, the typ of the tongue sounds not always the depth of the heart;
It is better then, I think, to fall among a sort of ravens, then amongst
flattering companions, in that the ravens never eat a man until he be dead,
but these Sycophants, will not spare to devour him, even while he is alive,
well then, they may seem gold, tho they be but Indian brass; and what
think thou, Arist. de me morab.
my soul, they may prove, when as the depth of their hearts shall be sounded,
though now they sound more shril then the purest Latin.

Ecch. Tin.

SECT. 32. On the same.
THe Chamelion changes the color of his skin into the color of its object,
and this is the cause why they are so seldom caught, or yet espied, for run
they on the grass they seem green, run they on the lately plowed ground they
appear like a molehill, run they on chalkie ground, they seem white, nay
run they on what ground they will, they seem that whereon they run; then
let flatterers be like Camelions, who are drunkards with the drunkard, swearers
with the swearer, Atheists with the Atheist, Papists with the Papists, and yet
good Christian Protestants with the truly religious Protestant; these base
abiectes are apt for all objects, capable of all colors, they cloak hate under
the habit of holiness, craft puts on him the attire of policy, malice the
shape of courage, rashness the title of valor, and superstition the zealous
appearance of religion, thus abominable vices walk along the streets masked
in the habit of virtues, and fair complezions have oftentimes filthy
conditions; alas poor tel-troth, alas poor truth, how art thou beset with
secret enemies, none (some say) tells truth, but either children or fools,
well then be thou a child in the kingdom of heaven, Mar. 10. 1. cor. 1.20.
be thou a fool in the wisdom of this world; alas poor truth what will
become of thee? thou art a virtue indeed, but yet not guarded with any one
friend, nor regarded of any, for what alack, says my soul, that these
hypocrites do in their hearts, whenas they seem to love her, and thus
outwardly to feign and flatter?

Ecch. Hate her.

SECT. 33. On the same.
THe world now is come to such a pass, that every mechanical fellow, that
every trads-man has his words of Art, his fine painted speeches, gards of
eloquence, brave illusions and a thousand more liptrickes only to nyme, cosen,
and deceive; his words shall be smooth yet not plain, to draw on their false
purposes, therefore seeing that their speeches are only feined words of Art,
we will exclude them out of the true predicament of substance; what should a man
say to such dissemblers, such catiffe counterfeits, whenas they shall use the
words of a good Christian, by answering in truth, yes verily, in very deed it
cost me so much; or it is so, when as if the truth were known, a lie were
manifest; help me then good Echo, second me O my soul, and tell me how thou
would answer such a one, whenas he should most falsely, and most shamefully
protest, and say most impudently, it cost me so much, or it is so in very
deed its so truly,

Echo. You lie.

SECT. 34. The reward of a liar with a sound terror for the hypocrite.
INdeed as I remember, one Philosopher says, that a man cannot better reward a
liar then in not believing what he speaks, yet De virtute loqui minimum est,
virtutibus vti, hic labor hoc opus est, It is a very easy matter to speak
well, but a very difficult thing to do well; thrice happy then are they, (let
the world esteem them as it list) whose lives are corespondent to their lines,
and whose works answer their words, but these halfe-faced Christians, these
dissembling Neuters, are most loathsome and abominable in the Church of God,
Paul tells us, that God is not mocked, let them take heed then, for surely if
they make a jest and laughing stock, Psalm. 2.4.
of his service, the Lord will pay them home, the Lord will laugh them also to
skorne and have them in everlasting derision; he will recompense all their
deeds, and with what measure they meat unto him, even with the same will he
meat unto them again, yea it shall be pressed down and run over.

SECT. 35. Man's neglect in Gods service is severely punished.
IF God would not have man to have served him in true holiness, he would not
have made him in his own image, but rather in the shape and form of a toad,
of a snake, or of some other monstrous creature; and surely he is not served of
us as he requires, he would have our lusty days, to be used to his glory,
but we put over our old and withered age to adore and magnify him; when me
thinks our youthful days are fittest, and our old years most unapt; the
wine that is first drawn out of the hogshead we see is pure and fresh, but at
length nothing else comes forth but grouns and dregs, Senec. Epi. 109.
thus the world draws out the best of our days and we reserve the scurffe and
garbage for the Lord; and why are our youthful days best? for that it is
uncertain whither we shall live to be old or no; and for that then our minds
are most tractable unto goodness; again if it seem hard unto us in our
youthful days, to betake our selves unto Gods service, then to fast and pray,
then to curb in their rebellious appetites, how shall we do it in our old
doting years, when as our bodies shall have more need of cherishing then of
chastening, more need of feasts then of fasts; if we find it unpleasant now to
grub up the root of sin after two or three years groth, how more hard and
unpleasant will it be for us, when twenty years more shall be adjoined unto
them: I it not a part of folly in that man who shall lead a score of lusti
horses in his hand, and ride him self on some poor, thin, and carinous
jade, scarce able to uphold her self, and yet suffer all those strong ones to
go empty, and surely no less foolish and unreasonable is he who passes over
idly the lusty time of his life, and reserueth all the labor for feeble old
age; yet this is the course and custom almost of all sorts of people, to
desire company, for to pass the time away, when as there is nothing so sure
as this, that is, how that we must all answer for every moment of time which
is vainly past, and what (says Gods book) my soul is reserved for him, who
spends his days idly, and does not pass his time well?

Ecch. Hell.

SECT. 36. A meditation on Christ's miracle, which he wrought in Cana of Galiley.
O Merciful Lord and Savior, uphold me that I fall not, whose legs are as
pillars of marble set upon sockets of fine gold, Cant. 5.
whose countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars, the first miracle
which thou wroughtest was at a marriage in Cana of Galile, John. 2.
when thou there did turn six stone pots filled up to the brim with
water into wine, when the wine failed; so vvotke in my heart, O Lord, that
all my vveak and vvaterish prayers, wherein is no strength or force, may by
thy holy spirit be turned into such as may pearse the clouds, and that the
strong savor thereof may ascend up into thy nostrils, and be a svveete smelling
sacrifice unto thee, O thou may strength and my redeemer. And as Lord thou
did keep the best wine until the last, so grant that we likewise wax
better and better. O that we grow up from grace to grace, and not wax worse
and worse, that we live not more civil and sober in our tender years then in
our old age: that we keep not the worst of our service until the last, but
still covet to please thee every day better and better, even from the day of
our Birth, unto the hour of death.

SECT. 37. To be content.
I See that the Devil does still follow his old trade of iuggling, he has
cast a glozing figure to dazel our eyes, and with hay pas and repas he has
deceived us all, for he is not a stout and valiant man who strikes first, but
rather he who when he is struck, strikes not again, and takes all blows
patiently, until just occasion of revenge shall be offered him: He is not a
wiseman, whose mouth is filled with prittle prattele, who rowles out
reproachful quips and jests, but rather he who loves silence, that
pythy-pythigoricall and excellent institution, and he is not a rich and
wealthy man, whose trunkes are filled with gold, whose grounds are stuffed up
with cattle, whose lands are laden with corn (except he be therewith
content) but rather he who lives all the week contentedly (through meare
poverty) with a mess of water gruel: a dinner of green herbs says Solomon
with content, Pro. 15.17.
is better then a stalled Ox, what shall riches profit a man? August. in 3.
lib. de lib. Arbit.
nothing, for therein hangs covetousness, which is Insatiabilis cupido, an
insatiable lusting or an unquenchable thirsting afterriches. If this be so the^
amongst al other men, I solie wonder at the covetous: yet not because they be
couetus, not because they me^ be but because they be monsters and why monsters?
for that they have more then ever nature gave them. I see then that the Devil
will help nature at a pinch, yea, and pinch nature at a help too, if at one
time he strokes thin head, besure at some other time he will strike thy
back; what though he seems to play with thee now, be bold he will pay thee
home anon.

SECT. 38. The covetousness of this age.
WE all play the Arithmeticians, we use to set down the figure of one with
three naughts and that say we stands for a thousand: if we do one good deed
with three bad nay with an hundred bad, we think we have done a thousand good
deeds, and that we have deserved heaven with our good works. The covetous
man's nature is such, Seneca Epist. 73.
that when as God does cast them down a blessing from heaven, they swallow it
down with open chaps, without taking any delight or pleasure at all therewith:
and are as ready like greedy dogs to receive a second morsel, as if they
had left the former: Let me then give them a little council by the way, that
is to tell them this, that he that eats and drinks too much, and therewith
surfeits sends to the Physicians with all speed, asking them what disease it
is, what grief it is, and how the pain may be mittigated, the Physician
presently returns backward, and bids them vomit, telling him that he shall
find that to be the best, and withal a very present remedy: and what would
not the Physician of the soul think ye, in like manner give the same
Council, unto that man who is sick with covetousness, by bidding him cast
up, Eccle. 11.1.
and cast upon the waters that money wherewith he did surfeit and take his
sickness.

Ecch. Yes.

SECT. 39. The reward of the covetous.
SVch men little regard to shorten their lives, so that they may augment their
riches, but me thinks goods purchased with an evil name are great loss,
truly they are the bait of fin, and the snare of the soul: under these golden
pills is hid most deadlye poison, though they perceive it not. Again, such
men as these are good for no man, and worse friends to themselves; and why? for
that in stealing from others, they robb themselves, nay their own souls of
eternal happiness.

SECT. 40. The miserable estate of misers.
OFtentimes have I seen a man wanting money, yet never saw I money destitute
of a master, surely we may not argue with the will of GOD, for gold serves
sometimes to raise a man up to honor, and again sometimes to sink down his
soul in the bottomless pit of hell; for if it may be lawful, a little while
to set Gods decree aside, then according unto man's reason riches are ill
bestowed upon a covetous minded man; let him be a cold he is never the warmer
clothed, if he be hungry he is neither the better fed, if he be harbourlesse
he is neither the better lodged, nor yet in any show the more wealthyer for
them; what then though thou have much land and many Lordships, yet we cannot
say that thou have riches, no more then we can say this man has an ague, for
truly as the fever is said to hold and rule that man, who is therewith sick,
so are riches said to govern that man that possesses them, riches has him,
he has not them: he is still a Subject slave to their beck.

SECT. 41 The little respect that worldly gluttons have to learning in these
days.
THus I see again, that we are al of us welwillers to Arithmetike, in that we
all desire to learn the golden number, or rather I think to number gold, but
I tell you, that before we come to hear this rule perfect we must first
learn Substraction and Division as well as Addition and Multiplication, for
without them we cannot well handle any question, and especially this one which
our Master Christ Jesus shall propound unto us saying, Ought not thou also
to have had pity on thy fellow, Mat. 18.33
even as I had pity on thee? But alas though we be expert and excellent in
the latter two rules, yet in the former we are very dunces, for say now a poor
man never so well beautified with good qualities and learning, comes unto a
gluttonous Dives gate, he shall find it shut, Luke 16.
he may knock often though no man answer, yet perhaps the dogs may feign
upon him and lick his sores, and bewail his sorrows when as if Dives himself
were there, he would churlishly ask what art? what would thou have? and
if then this poor man should answer crumbs, and that he is a poor Philosopher,
a welwiller to learning, then would he deride and laugh him to scorn and cry
Ipse licet venias musis comitatus Homere, cum nihil attuleris ibis etc. A lack
poor Homer, alack poor distressed soul, most inhuman and unnatural are men
in these days when as they are servants, nay, bondslaues unto filthy dirt and
dung, Phil. 3.8.
for so the Apostle Paul thinks, and they are unsavory and most loathsome
dunghils, as I think, whereupon the earths garbage is cast. Tell me then
plainly O my soul what reward or dignity, what love amity can he find
there; or what is it else tell me in one word, that he does purchase at each
curmuggins gate?

Ecch. Hate.

SECT. 42. A comfort learning in that behalf.
THerefore seeing that envy always associates virtue, envied shall be the
haven, wherein we will ariue at ease and land at pleasure al their slanderous
mockes and reproaches, reproaches and mockes in this kind are not so much as
sparkels to the one, but coals to the other, for though they do ill in
mocking us, we may do well in laughing them to scorn, and though they only
think Scholars to be but fools, Scholars yet know them to be but asses,
their days, nay, their years have been long in this land, so that now they
wink and kick against their keepers, against their Pastors and Preachers, Act.
9.5.
although it be hard for them to kick against the pricks: what have I spoke
truth my soul? yet me thinks that they should not for shame despise an Artist
or a Scholar, surely they will bid such a one welcome, what will they not?
tell me then what they will say to one that is skillful in each Art and
Science.

Echo. Hence.

SECT. 43. Worth is respected before worthiness now adays.
INdeed for Scholars to speak learnedly unto such as are ignorant and
illiterate, 1. Cor. 1.20. and 3.18. Matthew. 7.6.
though neuersomuch worldly wise, is to cast pearls amongst swine, and for
Preachers to instruct those who regard it not, is to give holy things unto
dogs. What hence with learning, what hence with liberal Arts and Sciences, why
then belike they respect naught but money: I hope, my soul, they will do
somewhat upon favor, more then for lucre, tell me, for suppose a friend of
mine do want a living (what says my soul unto him) shall not he by favor or
friendship come by it?

Ecch. Buy it.

SECT. 44. What the covetous most of all desire.
ALas poor Philosopher, what cannot thy poverty move them to pity thee?
no; nor yet thy complaints; no, me thinks then, that thy learning should much
move them: no, no; must the scholar buy his living? alas, have they no respect
of him, if he be poor and in misery, tell the world then, O my soul, what
these greedy men of the world most desire, for what they hold up their hand,
and still cry most unsatiably, come, come again, come again.

Ecch. Gain.

SECT. 45. God rewards the liberal giver to the poor.
HE then who intends to give, must not be dismayed for the loss of one
benefit, but rather let him be like the Archer, who when he has lost one
arrow, sends forth another to find the former, but if this second will not
prevail, he sends forth a third, and still shoots on, until at length
finding what he sought, retourneth home with joy; One good turn will not
return so soon into our bosom as we expect; One good turn, one benefit
must bring in another, and therefore if we cast our bread upon the waters with
Solomon, we shall find it at length cast up upon the shore with him, where
every man shall have his share, according to his works in this life whether
they be good or evil; 2. Cor. 5.
if good he shall find them increased, his bread shall be swollen thrice as
big, as it was when it was first cast on, when a cup of cold water shall not
loose his reward, this then is the best usury of all.

SECT. 46. The praise of liberality.
Verily I have thought with my self oftentimes, that man has been far worse
then the bruit beast or senseless creature, for the moon gives that light
unto the world, which she receives of the Sun: yet men will not bestow part
of those blessings received of God, unto the benefit of their poor distressed
brethren: But alas they consider not, that the deeds of the liberal do more
profit the giver then benefit the receiver: he that receives, receives only a
temporal benefit, when as he that gives, receives for his gift an eternal
blessing, to do good unto poor men is a threefold sacrifice, the first to
God, the second to the man impouerished, and the last and greatest unto
himself, nay unto his own soul, if done with a true and sincere affection of
the heart, and not meritoriously.

SECT. 47. On the same, with a meditation on the words of Christ where he
says, It is easier for a cable rope to go, etc.
Our Savior Christ says, that it is easier for a cable rope to go through
the eye of a needle then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven:
yet let no rich man despair, for a cable may easily go through the eye of a
needle, but then thus it must be worked, this rope must be vnplatted,
untwisted and divided, and thread must be drawn after thread, until at length
the whole rope be brought through, so likewise the rich man must divide his
subsubstance, and give it to the poor, he must cast here a penny and there a
penny, here a piece of bread, and there a piece of bread, here a loaf upon
this water and there a loase upon that water; for surely there is no virtue
better then liberality, unto the setting forth of Gods glory, and unto the
purchasing of good will among all men; praise and renown do always abide in
the porch of a cheereful giver: here the oppressed is comforted; here the sick
is succored, here the wounded is salued, here the hungry is fed; nay, in
general tell me my soul, how is he here dealt withal, that is any way pained
or diseased?

Ecch. Eased.

SECT. 48. We cannot serve God and riches.
IF we cannot serve two masters, that are of a contrary nature and essence,
Matt. 6.24.
then surely we cannot serve God and Mammon, God and riches; and know we not
that, Arist.
Omne grave tendit deorsum, every heavy body tends and bends downward,
down ward I mean to the center of the earth? then surely if we intend to
arise with Christ, and not be hindered in our aspiring upward, we must cast off
from our hears the love of those earthly bodies, those lumpish earthie things;
and mortify our members which are on the earth, Collos. 3.4.5
which hold and keep us from the true and lively worshipping of God. God in
the beginning made us sound and free, putting nothing before our eyes, which
might entice us unto covetousness, he put gold and silver under our feet,
because we should loath, kick it and tread upon it, he put Iron amongst it,
because we should know that it breeds discord, dissension and discontent; who
then would think that man should find it out, that man should find out his
own destruction, yea and go so far, and seek narrowly for it in the earth,
and thereon set his whole delight, when as he knows not how soon he shall
depart from it, or it be took from him, and seeing that Os homini sublime
dedit etc. he made man's face to look up toward heaven, and only to have his
eyes fixed on celestial things.

SECT. 49. We must leave all behind us.
ME thinks I see here an vrchin or an hedgehog under a crab tree, rolling his
back full of crabs, and yet is not therewith contented, but for covetousness
sake takes one in his mouth too: but now again me thinks, seeing him running
into his hole, wipes them all off, and carries only one with him, and that is
in his mouth, I mean, one poor and naked soul: Naked says Job, came I out
of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return again, what foolish asses then
are they, that will gaul their souls with the carriage of treasures, when as
in the end of their journey, it shall be taken from them, and they themselves
turned off into that cold stable where is nothing else but gnashing of teeth,
nothing shall be left behind with them there, but their gald backs, their
wounded conscience which their heavy packes of gold and silver have made, many
years before, being carried about with them, without ever any unloading of
them, and resting or refreshing of their bruised souls, and what my soul is
not this a great part of follies and of foolish madness?

Ecch. Yes.

SECT. 50. A meditation on Christ's clensing of the leper.
O Pitiful Christ, O sweet Savior, cant. 5.
whose cheeks are as a bed of spices, and as sweet flowers, whose lips are
like lillies dropping down pure mirrhe, he scorned not to take upon him our
infirmities and to bear our sicknesses, he gave sight to the blind, Matthew. 8.
limbs to the lame, and cleanness to the leper, he loathed not to put forth
his hand, for to touch his leprosy, and to tell him, I will, be thou clean:
the Law, my Lord, forbids any one to touch the unclean, why did thou then?
O^ but thou wast above the law, thou made the Law, therefore it was in thine
own power to obey it, or not: he touched not the leper for that he could not
without touching make him clean, but because we faithless souls should see,
that he was not subject to the Law: and that he did not fear the contagion as
mortal men do, and that he could not be stained therewith, who healed
others, he touched the Leaper, that thereby he might teach us humility, and
compassion not despise any, not to abhor any, and not to hold any as
contemptible for any disease of their bodies: My sweet Lord when the Leapers
cried if thou will thou can make me clean, how ready wast thou to answer
him, I will, be thou clean; he returned him an answer, before he had half
uttered his sorrowful request; thou can make me clean, he answered him like
an Echo, be thou clean, I will be thou clean, thou beleeuest well, and
therefore well thou shall be cleansed, thou put no doubt in thy belief; and
I will make no delay to heal thee: thou say unto me, if thou will, behold
I will, thou say thou can make me clean, I say to thee be thou clean: Oh
heavenly answer, an answer of admirable clemency, an answer of wonderful
pity, and no less then of divine virtue and mercy; that he that was pure,
the fountain of all pureness, nay purity it self, should thus touch the
unclean, that he which was omnipotent should thus touch the weak and
impotent.

SECT. 51. Another on the clensing of the ten Leapers, and of their
unthankfulness.
Again we may read in the Gospel by saint Luke, Luk 17.17
how that he healed ten other Leapers whereof nine of them were as
unthankful for their clensing as we poor leprous souls are for any benefit
that we receive at his hands, which made our Savior Christ say thus, there
are ten cleansed, but where are the nine? there are none found that returned to
give God praise, save only this stranger, Leuit. 13.2.3.45.46.
give me leave a little therefore to chide these nine for their
unthankfulness, that so chiding them, we our selves may be ashamed of our
own ingratitude. O unthankful Leapers, I tell you that before you came to
Christ, ye had a covering upon your lips, but now it being put away, and
having free liberty to speak me thinks you should return back and glorify
the name of God; before you came to Christ you were separated from the company
of all men, but now having authority to go where you list, why do you not now
go and fall down at his feet, and give him thanks with that one Samaritan:
and before you came to Christ, you were openly proclaimed unclean, you were
unclean, but now being cleansed me thinks you should sing holy holy, holy,
with a pure, clean, and sanctified soul; O ye unthankful Leapers, had ye
but mollified hearts to conceive, how great your misery was before you came
unto him, how great his mercy was toward you, and now how great your
ingratitude is toward him, in not giving him thanks for his clensing of your
most ugly and filthy bodies, it would cause even fountains of tears to run
down your cheeks, O ye unthankful Leapers, had ye loved God in the third
degree as ye loved Satan, then should he have had three of your hearts,
whereas he had but one, and had you loved God but as well as you loved Satan,
then should he have had five of your hearts, again, had ye but gone to parting
of stakes betwixt God and the Devil, he should have had half of them, half
of them must needs have fallen to his share; and lastly had you considered
your duty toward him, and had don equity and justice with him then should he
have had all, all ten of them, but now it seems to me, me think, so, that you
make a jest of Gods word, as many of us in these days do, and that because in
the law he commands to have the tenth of all fruits offered unto him;
therefore belike you give him now the tenth heart too; a tything heart, and
keep nine for your own use, and for whom you list; thus my sweet Lord we
still gibe at thee and thy word; I pray God then once more that we be not
deceived for I know that thou will not be mocked.

SECT. 24. On the lawless tongue.
He that clippeth the coin of his Prince makes it lighter to be weighed, but
never the worse to be touched, and he that by slanderous reproaches seems to
impair the credit of his friend; may make him lighter among the common sort;
but nothing at all hurts his good name with the wise, who try al gold by
the touchstone: for though slanders may blemish truth for a time, yet be sure
that truth will discover slanders at length: and what is the instrument that
effects this, but the tongue? and what if it be the instrument of all vanity
and villainy, yet is it never punished though it offend never so highly: and
therefore says David speaking of the ungodly, Psalm. 12.4.
with our tongues will we prevail, our tongues are our own, and who is Lord
over us? O lawless tongue, thou still escapest when as the Innocent and
harmless hands, the feet, ears and neck for thee and thine offenses are
punished, tormented and tortured.

SECT. 53. Envy strikes at others but wounds himself.
MEthinkes I see an Archer in the world who has a quiver full of poisoning
shaftes, he shoots at others, and wounds himself, and this is he who
makes himself vicious with other men's virtue, he sorroweth with other men's
plenty, for this is he, Horat.
who Alterius rebus macrescit opimis. The custom of this age is either to envy
or to mock, he that is wise, virtuous and godly is envied, he that is
foolish, indiscreet and vicious, is laughed at, but of these two it is better
for thee, therefore choose rather to be envied for thy knowledge then to be
laughed at for thine ignorance, and if it be so that thou art envied, envy not
again, least that thou envying him and he envying thee, God is angry with you
both; and if thou art likewise cursed curse not again, Psalm. 109. 16. and. 27.
least that thou cursing him and he cursing thee, God curse both and bless
neither.

SECT. 54. The malicious scoffings of these times.
SVch is the scoffing malice of these days, that when men execute their office
throghly; why then forsooth they be very officious, if they be zealous and
devout, they are thought pure and precise, if liberal and do good deeds, then
be they popish, so that the virtuously minded man has naught else given him
here among us, but some ridiculous nickname, and surely it was even so in our
Saviors time, for John came neither eating nor drinking and they the vulgar
sort said that he had a devil, Luke 1.15
and the son of man came eating and drinking both, Mat. 11.18 19.
and they said behold a glutton and a wine-bibber, a friend unto publicans and
sinners. Many there are that delight in this deriding and laughing at their
neighbors: indeed to play the scoffing fool well, is a sign of some wit,
but small wisdom, though some be of opinion, that he which plays the fools
part, is the wisest of all the company; yet my mind is not so: for I know this
that whosoever is maintained by one man to disgrace another, is a seruill
fool, he is a fool and a slave too, but where dwell these carping worms, one
can hardly find them, tell me thou my soul, Io. 3.19.20
what places they inhabit most, that are such reproachful scorners.

Ecch. Corners.

SECT. 55 How the malicious Papists invent mischief and practice it.
INdeed he that does evil, hates the light, least that his deeds should be
reproved, and a pattern of this hidden malice have I espied in those
butcherlikerebels, who thought with themselves, and the devil, not only to
take up with their base and vulgar pawnes, our Knights, our Bishops, and our
most gracious Queen, but also to give our great, our wise and most religious
king, an inevitable checkemate, but God that Ens entium, Arist. in meta. Psalm.
to our great comforts, has took down their edge, the snare is broken, and
we are delivered. But alas my soul, what would have cried still unto
England, if they had obtained their devilish plot at the house of Parliament.

Echo. Lament.

SECT. 56. All treason in time will be discovered.
Whatsoever villainy the heart does think, in process of time, the worm of
conscience will bewray, we see that sparkles raked up in cinders, will at last
begin to glow and manifest flame; and treachery hid in silence, and obscured
for a time, will at length breath forth, and cry for revenge, then if the bead
of my bow be placed aright, I will a little leuel at those who dwell in Pater
noster row; First, me thinks that their religion is most impure, and this may
seem at the first glance to be the reason thereof; for that they live nearer
the Aequinoctiall line then the North pole; they have more heat then cold, and
this causes their rebellion to be flie-blowne, by Beelzebub the prince of
flies, for tell me what these rebellious souls do, in every word for the most
part that they do utter?

Ecch. Err.

SECT. 57. Error, what it is.
TO wander from the truth does betoken ignorance, and to despise the truth,
does show an obstinate heart, and what does my soul account man's greatest
shame, and his souls sharpest terror?

Echo. Error.

SECT. 58. We need not the Popes Bulls.
I Like not well their diriges, their bulls and pardons: if Christ Jesus be
sufficient enough to pardon our sins, let them then drive back again their
Bulls to Rome, for our country, the Lord be praised, will not afford grasing for
such cattle, our pasture is not for them: we need not the horns, nor yet the
hide, we need not the horns for to make us a lantern to light us to heaven,
for he is the true light that lighteneth every one, which comes into the
world, and his word is a lantern unto our feet and a light unto our paths, and
we need not the hide for to make us shoes, for God will give his Angels charge
over all true believers to keep them in all their ways, John 1.9. Psalm.
119.105.
that they dash not their feet against a stone: he will keep all the faithful
in their heavenly journey, Matthew. 4.6 Psalm. 19.11 12.
that they gaul not the soles of their souls with the gravel of the world,
and what now thinks my soul, concerning their prayers for the dead, or what,
to be short, do they show themselves by their mumming Masses?

Ecch. Asses.

SECT. 59. Superstitions always invented by the Popes for lucre sake.
But tell me what the reason is, that they give pardons for an hundred year,
for two, or for more: nay in general, what is the fruit and issue of every
popish ceremony?

Ecch. Money.

SECT. 60. What they worship and adore.
ANd finally, what do these blind leaders of the blind, what do these blind
bustards adore and worship in their masses and creeping pilgrimages?

Ecch. Images.

SECT. 61. A meditation on Christ's hiring laborers in his vineyard, and
agreeing with them for a penny a day.
O Sweet Jesus, thou have taught us in thy Gospel that the kingdom of heaven
is like unto a certain householder, which went out at the dawning of the day,
Mat. 20.1.2.
to hire laborers into his vineyard, and when even was come, he gave every
man a penny; this day surely is the whole time of our life, and when we wax
old, it begins then to wax night, for then the day with us is even at an end;
and therefore Christ himself when he lived bodily here on the earth said, I
must work the works of him that sent me while it is day, John 9.4.
for the night comes when no man can work; When our eyes are shut how can we
then see to do good? when our tongues cleave to the roof of our mouths, how
then can we cry Hosanna? when our hands are dried up, how can we then stretch
them forth to give? while we have time therefore let us do good; Gal. 6.
Let us work, let us labor in the Lords vineyard, that every one may receive a
penny. For surely by this word, a penny, is understood the reward of eternal
life; for as a penny is of a circular or round figure, whose circumference
has no end, so shall the reward of Gods laborers be without end, with out
any limit, or term of years; God himself is this reward, according unto that
which he spoke unto Abraham; Genesis 15.1. Mat. 13.44
Fear not Abraham, for I am thy buckler and thine exceeding great reward, thou
O Lord art all goodness, all richness, thou art that pearl of great price,
which when a man has found for joy tells no man, but departs and sells
all that he has, so that he may buy the field wherein it is; further he which
has this penny after a certain sort, has all things. For as we see here in
this world, that whatsoever a man will have, he must buy, and so come by it,
by the penny, and for it he may have what he will, and in like manner that
reward that penny has in it all things that may be desired: that which
neither the eye has seen at any time, nor the ear heard, nor yet the heart
of man ever conceived; And that a penny has the kings picture engraven upon
it, what does it signify else, but the perfect and pure Image of God in the
elect, when we all behold, as in a mirror, the glory of the Lord with open
face, and are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, as by the
spirit of the Lord. 2. Cor. 3.18 Romans 8.29.
And again it is said, that those which he knew before, he did also
predestinate, to be made like to the image of his son. Grant therefore, O
sweet Savior, O sweet Lord, that we may faithfully work in thy vineyard,
and never be weary of well doing, so that when even shall come when we shall
depart this life, we may receive every one of us a penny, everlasting life and
eternal happiness, and so ever be refreshed with thy glorious image, with the
bright beams of thine euershining countenance.

SECT. 62. The wicked and their reward.
I Marvel, my soul, into what monster the world is turned, sin and villainy
did never skul so much together as now it does; for the custom of this age is,
to pain and pine the belly for to paint the back: all seek honor and
renown with a iustling vain glory and aspiring impudency, some use to paint
white their faces, and color black their souls, of white lead is the
complexion made, which coueteth the center, for that it is ponderous and
heavy, I mean, not every heavy and penitent soul, but every lumpish piece
of lead, assayes downward to the pit of hell the center of all those that are
worldlings that are of the world: a pit without bottom, a fire without light,
Arist. Mat. 24.30 Mar. 9.43.
and an heat without heat, for there shall be cold, cold, and gnashing of teeth:
yet there shall those wretches burn in fire continually, they shall feel all
torments whatsoever, so that they shall have a death without death, and an end
without an end, and why? for that with black ugly sin, they color their
souls, sin is the color, the devil the painter, and custom (which is as
Aristotle speaks, altera natura, a second nature) is the oil which keeps
that doolefull color on still, so that no storms of the Lords wrath, no
thunderclaps against disobedience can beat it off, ne yet can any smiles of his
mercy once soken or loose it, nor yet can any sunneshine days of joy promised
melt it away.

SECT. 63. Not to be lofty but lowly.
Perhaps thou passing by some one of thine inferiors, who regard not thy
deserts, nor yet respect thy worthiness, thou art therefore mal-content for a
long time afterward, thinking with thy self that some duty or reverence
might have been shown thee; if then thou will pacify these inward broils,
as he respects thee not, so neither do thou thy self respect thy self, if he
cannot cast his eye up, so high as unto the flag of thine honor, do thou
therefore pluck it down, and humble thy self, that all may behold it, fret
not thy self at his unmannerly behavior, but rather smile thereat, smile at
his gross, and unseemly carriage.

SECT. 64. The downfall of pride and the praise of humility.
Satan does with the vainglorious, who lift themselves above other men, as the
crow does having an hard nut in her bill, the which she cannot easily crack,
she bears up on high in the air, and from thence lets it fall down allow
on a stone where it breaks into many pieces, so that at length she descends
and cateth it up: And the devil rayseth the proud man to honor, that thereby
he may bring him low, letting him fall down on the hard pains of hell, and so
devour him: pride and fire are werie like, for oftentimes have I seen a
seething pot running over into the fire, laying the heat thereof, and so
consequently become cold, the pot is cold, the fire is out, and is not the
fire cause of its own death, 1. Pet. 5.8.
and the pot the cause of its own coldness? surely yes, and he likewise that
spraineth his arm by reaching up on high, is the sole cause of his own
grief. I see that high hopes have oftentimes hard events, high reaching arms
are beared up in scarfes, and such as do snatch at the bough do most
commonly stumble at the root; tell me then my soul how a man ought to behave
himself, or what he must be, whereby he may seldom fall down on the
ground, Luke 18.14
or yet thereon once so much as stumble.

Echo. Humble.

SECT. 65. On the same.
AT the winnowing of corn the chafe being lightest, Psalm. 1.4.
mounteth aloft, the wind carries it abroad where it list, and where it is
lost, but the Corn which is heauiest, abides a low on the ground, and is
gathered up and put into the Garners of the farmer, Mat. 13.30
and kept for the profit of the commonweal, when as in the mean time the
chafe is burnt, lost, and devoured by beasts: so pride a vapor that ascends
high presently vanishes away into smoke, ye, even into nothing: when then is
the best time to be humble? in adversity, no, for that is scarce praiseworthy:
then a man of necessity must be humble, least that he makes a great fire in a
little cottage: the best time to be humble is in the midst of prosperity,
and this is praiseworthy, it is worthy of man's commendations, commendable
before men here on earth, and commanded by God above in heaven: yet oftentimes
the greater the bragger, the bigger his looks, the smaller roast, the greater
boast, and what says my soul, are they commonly clothed with most, that use
these high-vaulting brags?

Echo. Rags.

SECT. 66. There is no reason why men should be proud.
J Would then that such men would once again stand on tipto on the mount of
meditation, I would they would consider with indifferent eyes what our bodies
are in very deed, how beautiful soever they appear to our outward sight,
tell me my soul what other thing is the body of man, but only acorrupt and
tainted vessel, which incontinently sowreth and corrupts whatsoever liquor
is powered into it? Augustine.
what other thing is a man's body, but only a filthy dunghill, covered over
with snow, which outwardly appears white, and within is full of filth, and
uncleanness? what muckhill is so filthy? what sink auoideth such foul and
filthy stuff out of his channels, as a man's body does by several means and
ways? and why then O earth and ashes should thou be proud? why should
thou esteem thy self so much and be so vainly conceited; for tell me my
soul, what man's body does do to any thing that shall stay in it?

Ecch. Stain it.

SECT. 67. All things vanish save a good name.
ARt thou fair and welfauoured, praise not thy self, for the Lilly, though
it be white yet it stinketh, art thou big, strong, and of high stature, be
not vainglorious: for great and mighty things are oftentimes combersom: art
thou virtuous, and yet praise not thy self, least that thou become proud, and
so vicious: art thou virtuous; now all men will speak well of thee, it is
only virtue and godliness that makes foul things fair, and fair gracious:
all outward gifts of nature may soon be taken away, even when one is alive;
the tall man many grow crooked, the fair face may be shriuelled, the rich man
may be impouerisheds, his silks and veluets may be plucked off from his back,
his Jewels taken from his ears, his rings from his fingers, when as Virtus
post funera vinit: Ovid.
virtue though it seems to be dead, being obscured while he lives, shall
never dye, it shall live after death.

SECT. 68. One man thinks that all is too much that another has.
FInally, I marvel who can say and not counterfeit, I am contented with my
estate, for I see that the shoemaker treads stately in the eyes of the Cobbler,
the Brasier glisters before the face of the Tinker, and the Priest sings sweet
in the ears of the Clark, would not a Peddler be a Mercer, and the Mercer a
Merchant, would not the Attorney be a Counceller, and the Councellot a Judge;
thus many men climb the high Cedars of ambition, but the boughs thereof being
rotten they fall most dangerously upon the ground: it is better then to gather
grapes contentedly from that law, and yielding shrub, then to triumph on the
putrified arms of that unconstant Caedar; Ovid de Trist.
Qui iacet in terra non habet vnde cadat, when Icarus Icarcas nomme fecit
aquas. Nay, what think thou my soul, what will fortune (If I may so speak)
let any ambitious mind escape? for at whom does she aim with her dart so
fatal?

Echo. At all.

SECT. 69. A Meditation on Elisha his putting of Salt into a new cruse and by
casting it into the waters.
WE read that Elisha the Prophet by putting salt into a new cruise, and by
casting it into the Springs of the waters, these waters that were naught and
unwholesome, John 16
were made good and delightful, what shall we conceive hear by those waters of
Jericho, but the teadious combats of a bad conscience hear in this life, and
what by this new cruise, but an heart renewed by repentance? Col. 4.6.
Moreover salt does signify the power of the word of God: for as by the
sprinkling of salt on fresh meat it is kept from maggots, from Flie-blotes,
and from all corruption whatsoever, and he whose soul is seasoned with the
word of God, is preserved from all the corruption of sin, and from that worm
which continually knaweth the conscience, and never dies: O my sweet Lord,
grant then that we may be true vessels, filled with this mystical salt, that
we may overcome the teadiousnesse of this life. Psalm. 30.5
Thou have promised that although we weep and lament, and the world rejoice,
and although we sorrow now, yet our sorrow shall be turned into joy: Indeed it
is thy word O Lord, whereby we have rest in our labors, whereby we have
mirth in our mourning and whereby we are rich in poverty, thereby we are exalted
through humility and through contempt we are made glorious; this is that
meal of the prophet which made sweet the bitter pottage, 4. King. 4:
and when as they cried through the bitterness of those gourds, that were put
therein, mors in olla, mors in olla, death is in the pot oh death is in the
pot; and by that meal oh Lord thy word which is the bread of life, although
we seem to be dead, yet are we still renewed.

SECT. 70. Old age not to be despised.
IT is a thing most foolish in the sight of good men, and an offense most
heinous before God, to mock old men who are as we shall be, and who were as
we are now. Age, Time and death, these three a man may fore-thinke of, but
never prevent.

SECT. 71. Wisdom and discretion go not always by years.
YOuth never runs well say we, unless age holds the bridle, this seems to
be true and it is so: but alas wisdom consists not only in age as the vulgar
sort of people censure, for the young man beardlesse may be as wise as the
gray head, outward gravity argues wisdom very seldom, but wisdom
continually shows gravity, the young man fearing God is both grave and wise;
and he that has this fear before him, is the souls best counselor; John 3.5
And this cannot a father bequeath unto his Son; it goes not by birth, not by
our first birth which is full of corruption, except we be regenerate and born a
new, and then this latter birth extinguisheth the flames of the former; Neither
as I said before does discretion go by years, for there are many old fools
given up wholly to sensuality, which solely belongs to the beast amongst all
creatures, and there are many young men betrothed to civility, and this
appertains unto man, the image of God, even the best of all creatures, and
this is that which makes men on the earth famous, in the earth glorious, and
in heaven above the earth immortal, immortal both in soul and body.

SECT. 72. The praise of love and amity.
MEn in the beginning builded towns for society and safety, but now a man
may find more friendship in the wilderness amongst bears and tigers, then he
can find in the country wherein he was borne; but surely I have thought with my
self, that if men live never so richly and at variance, their lives are far
worse then death, for it is a second hell, as we term it; friendship is the
chiefest ornament that graceth Christians, whereby many men's hearts and wills
are united in one: a bosomfriend, me thinks, is a precious jewel, fit to
wear about ones neck, within whose bosom a man may unload his sorrows, and
unfold his secrets, which he will either releive with counsel, or else persuade
with reason, and if thou declare unto him joyful news he will rejoice with
thee, if doleful and heavy, Romans 12.15
he will mourn with thee, and in all thy affairs, thou shall find him, Alter
ipse a second self.

SECT. 73. Men are soon moved unto wrath.
But now alas, as the nature of the bruit beast is, Plin. Senec. philos. lib.
3. de Ira cap. 10.
such is the condition of man, trifles and vain things do move us unto anger,
a red cloth stirs up the bull, the venomous aspe of Africa rises up at a
shadow, and a white cloth or table napkin moves unto rage the bear and lion;
horses, wolves, nay most things else, very fierce of nature, are troubled with
the sight of very small and frivolous things, and in a manner with nothing, and
even so it falls out with penish and froward people, that they are stroke with
the very conceit only and suspicion of a thing, so that now and then they are
wrath, if a man wishes them never so well, or speak them never so fair, even
at the putting forth of a question, they are soon moved unto rage: the
ungodly, Psalm.
says David, are froward even from their mothers womb.

SECT. 74. The end of discord.
IF a man will live in rest, it is better for him sometimes to dissemble a
double wrong, then to revenge a single: let him rather be accounted a
dastardly coward, then a desperate caitiffe; yet valor in rightful causes is
to be commended, and if done with discretion highly also to be regarded and
rewarded, Gal. 5 26.
but otherwise all mischief, that may be, does follovv the heels of
self-love and discord, what then my soul, had we best embrace while we
have time and opportunity?

Ecch. Unity.

SECT. 75. A meditation on the disciples filling of twelve baskets full of the
broken meat that remained.
WHerefore grant, O my sweet Lord, that we laying aside all maliciousness, 1.
Pet. 2.12 Romans 6.4.
and all guile, and dissimulation, and envy, and all evil speaking, we may as
newborn babes desire the sincere milk of thy word, that we may grow thereby.
Feed our souls, O Lord, with the bread of life, that spiritual food; and
give us thine heavenly grace, that so we spill none thereof, but gather up the
broken meat that nothing be lost: O thou whose mouth is as sweet things and
art wholly delectable, this thou commandedst thy disciples, John 6.
and they gathered and filled twelve baskets full with the fragments of the
five loaves and two fishes, but why should there remain just twelve baskets
full, and no more nor less? surely because there were twelve Apostles, which
those twelve baskets did prefigure, who were filled with the bread of life, and
did nourish the souls of the believers into everlasting life. But first. O my
sweet Lord before thou gave the people to eat, thou did comaund them to
sit down, and there was much grass in that plece, and therefore we who
desire to be fed, with the spiritual food, Psalm.
to be refreshed with the sweet dainties of the grace of God, and to come and
taste how good and gracious the Lord is, must crush down, kick and despise
the lusts of the flesh, which thorowout the whole Scriptures is likened unto
grass: all flesh is grass, says the Prophet, and the glory thereof as the
flower of grass, Esaias 40.
let us sit down then upon this ground, upon this grass, Col: 4.5.
let us chasten our bodies, tame our inordinate affections, and continually
bridle our rebellious hed-strong lusts.

SECT. 76. On the five barlie loaves and the two fishes.
FVrthermore, it is said, that Jesus took five barley loaves and two fishes:
surely by these five barley loaves, we may understand the five books of Moses,
which he laid wide open unto the spiritual eyed, daily and hourly to refresh
their souls therewith, and they may well be likened unto so many barley loaves,
from the austeere and sharp decrees of the Law, that was contained in them:
yet at the last, like a good father because he would not suffer his children
to eat any longer dry bread, he added two fishes, which were divided among
them, that is, the two Sacraments, whose nature is to make pleasant and moysten
the harsh drith of the loaves; the law kills and is given to the lawless,
1. Tim. 1.9.
but mercy and truth comes by Jesus Christ.

SECT. 77. On drunkenness and the beastliness thereof.
MAny men think, that all friendship consists in quaffing and carousing,
but surely that is but drunken good fellowship: very heathens can persuade us
from it, by telling us that every man will unload his secrets in the bosom of
a good man, but no man will tell them to a drunken man, wherefore a drunken man
is not a good man, Senec. Epi. 84.
and who knows not this, that the tongue of such a one, is not in his own
power; we see that when new wine is put into any vessel, whatsoever lies hid
in the bottom works soon up unto the top, and he whose brains are
oppressed therewith, does utter at his mouth whatsoever lies secret in the
bottom of his heart, he can by no means keep close his stomach: the drunken
man, says Solomon is apt and prone unto all villainy, as unto wrath, murders,
swearing, whoring and the like, and let all the world know this my soul; for
whose say thou are these monstrous misdeeds?

Ecch. His deeds.

SECT. 78. The drunkards reward.
ANd again, to whom is woe, Prou. 23.29
says the wiseman, to whom is so row, to whom are wounds, to whom are the
rednes of the eyes? even unto him that sets his delight in drinking: and tell
me also my sweet Echo, thy opinion, what may be the cause of many red pimpled
faces, and therein of those unseemly spots?

Ecch. Pots.

SECT. 79. Gaming their whole delight.
ANd is this all, my soul, that they delight in, make they not some thing else
half of their Paradise?

Ecch. Dice.

SECT. 80. Where they are chiefly entertained and soothed up in them
wickedness.
ANd what places, for the most part, will allow of these wicked meetings, and
tolerate such abominable sins?

Ecch. Innes.

SECT. 81. The fruit of drunkenness.
SVrely, this notorious vice, has devoured more then the sea has devoured,
Gal. 5.21.
the sea swalloweth the body only, but this both soul and body; it
inflameth the liver, rotteth the lungs, dulleth the memory, and breeds all
diseases whatsoever: had I a deadly enemy, and would feign overcome him,
truly I could not wish him more harm then that he were a drunkard, I should
not need to make any war against him, for I should soon persuade my self,
that he would in short space destroy himself; God made man's soul of a living
substance, but his body frail and mortal, and for the soul he has appointed
spiritual food, for the body temporal and transitory, the first of these
shall endure for ever, the latter only for a certain limited time, wherefore
man must not desire to live, so that the may eat and drink, but so drink and
eat that he may live: but now methinkes that these Epicures greatly deceive
themselves, for they eat and drink, that they may die, for as hunger does
dry up the marrow, Eratost benes Cyrenaeus. Poe
so does too-much pampering of the flesh, consume and overthrow the spirits and
vital parts, for, Vinum igni aequale^ vim habet, says one, wine and fire are
both of one, force, both inflaming, both consuming.

SECT. 82 On filthy lust and how it is smoothed and smothered up in these days.
Unbridled lust is also an effect of drunkenness, Hosea. 42. verse 11.
the Prophet Hosea in his iiii. chapter, linkes them both together, yet many of
our Prophets for fear of incurring displeasure, will of incurring displeasure,
will not once name or take notice of them, they touch them indeed a little, but
how? very coldly; they glance at them, but they will be sure not to hit them,
it is a very rude speech, wherein any finne is named in particular, they beat
the bush, though they see the bird, surely that Chirurgian who minds to
recover his patient, searches the very bottom of the wound; if GOD then says
thou shall not commit adultery, Exodus 20.14
and if he means as he says, tell then the world plainly (O my soul) what
are they whom God abhorres?

Echo Whores.

SECT. 83. To beware of Strumpets.
MAny are caught through this sweet poison. Diana, lives closely in the woods,
Minerua lives prinily in her college, Pro. 7.10 11.12. etc
and Bellona in her tent; but Lais that brasen-face shines at Corinth, even on
the top of the high towers, I wonder when Venus will have finished her course,
she has dominered over other planets, she has been in her Apogaee, and in her
exaltation this long time; yet desire not thou the beauty of the strange woman
in thy heart, neither let her take thee with thy eyelids says Solomon: Pro.
6.25 26
for because of the whorish woman a man is brought to a morsel of bread, and a
woman will hunt for the precious life. Who then say thou my soul must beware
of these enticing strumpets, these whorish women?

Echo, Ye men.

SECT. 84. The Praise of Chastity.
THere is never a navy of men sailing out into the world, Mat. 8.24
but has askul of pleasure attending still upon the puppe; which soon will
drown the whole ship, unless they call and cry upon that skilful Mariner
Christ Jesus, whom both winds and Seas obey. And amongst all the enticing
pleasures of sharp combats of a Christian soul, none is more sore then the
wars of a chaste mind, in that the fight is continual and the victory rare,
and if the walls of chastity be once battered down there is naught left
praise worthy either in man or woman; for this is she which is the zeal of
grace, the staff of devotion, the mark of the just, and the only comfort in
death: when as in the mean space, lust is an enemy to the purse, a foe to the
person, a canker to the mind, corrosiue to the conscience, a weakener of the
wit, and a deadly bane both unto soul and body, so that he shall find
pleasure and delight the pathway unto perdition, he shall find a wound and
dishonor, and his reproach shall never be put away. Pro. 6.33


SECT. 85, Swearers and their foolishness.
THe Dog bites the stone, whose will is to bite him that cast it, the
traitor in heart defaceth the picture of the king, when as he cannot come
near his person and the Swearer, the drunkards copesmate too, by blasphemous
oaths, tears the name of God, who if he could would raize his essence, but
he may not reach it, Of all sins swearing has the least pleasure in it, and
is most unprofitable and most heinous and detestable; and again, me thinks,
that amongst all sinners the Swearer is most foolish, who cannot be contented
to sin secretly, but must needs call both God and man to witness his
impiety, how then can he think to escape such a presumptuous fault as this,
when as he runs willingly into sin? surely the Lord has said that he will
not hold him guiltless; if he believes that there is a God, he must believe
this to be true, but if he will swear by the name of God, and yet think (as
many do) that there is no God, Psalm. 13.1
and as David's fool affirms in his heart, then truly this man of al men is
most ridiculous, who will swear by that which he supposes not to be: this is
the fashion of all scoffing Atheists, then tell the world, O my soul, what such
men as these, what such blasphemers use to do, (when one shall but speak unto
them kindly) at every word that they shall answer.

Echo. Swear.

SECT. 86. What God is.
IT is not for a Christian to make a jest of swearing: Psalm. 33.5
if he swear he must swear in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness,
for otherwise though a man swear often, yet by my consent he should seldom be
believed. And a guilty conscience cleared by an oath, is like unto foul hands
scowred with soap, through which although they be made clean, yet they smell
very rank thereof a long time afterward, and a perjured soul though it be
cleared and blameless, in the sight of the world, by forswearing, yet that
same oath adjoined to the former fact, terrifies the soul the more, that false
kiss betraies it inwardly though it cannot be deciphered by a long space
outwardly; then in conclusion tell me, and tell all men (my soul) what God
that great thundering Jehovah most detests, and most detestfully Loathes.

Ecch. Oaths.

SECT. 87. A Meditation on the betraying of Christ.
O Sweet Christ, O sweet Savior, how wast thou tormented, for these sins of
ours, and the like; Lament. 1.
come then my friends, let us weep together and mourn, let tears run down
our checkes, and among all our lovers let there be none to comfort us, Mat.
26.14.15.
let our streets lament, let no man feast, let all our gates be desolate, let
our Priests sigh, let virgins be discomfited, and let us all be in heaviness:
for we have sinned, our sins are great, and for them is the son of GOD
crucified; Judas sold him, kissed him and betrayed him, he sold him for thirty
pence. O thou naughty Traitor, at what price do thou set the Lord of all
creatures, at thirty pe^ce? what my Lord sold for thirty pence? O what a vile
and slender price is this for a Lord of such majesty, certainly a very beast
in the shambles is commonly sold for more. And do thou oh Traitor sell for
so small a price almighty God himself, he sets not thee at so small a
price, for so much as he buieth thee with his own most precious blood; Oh
what a great price and estimation, was that of man, and how base an estimation
and price was this of God; God was sold for thirty pence, and man was bought
with the dearest blood of God himself: And when this Judas had betrayed him,
and was delivered into the hands of the Jews, see how each one gives him
buffets and and strokes; Mat. 27.29 Mat. 14.65 Mark. 8.22 23.
see how they spit upon that divine face with their devilish mouths: see how
they hoodwinke his eyes, and strike him on the face, scoffing and jesting at
him, saying, Aread who has smitten thee? O my soul, great were the mockes and
tau^ts he suffered for thee, how patiently did he bear the spitting of those
infernal mouths, that had himself not long before, with the spittle of his
own mouth, restored a blind man to his perfect sight, how suffered he their
whippings, whose servants were wont in his name with mighty power to whip the
very devils, how was he crowned with thorns that crowned his martyrs with
everlasting Garlands, how was he smitten on the face with palms of men's hands,
that gives the palm of victory unto such as be co^querors; how was he robbed
of his erthly garments, which cloatheth his saints with garments of
immortallitie; how was heproffered most bitter gaul, that gives us the bread
of life; how was he offered Vinegar to drink, that gives the cup of
salvation. Haec omnia sunt cypriani.
Consider moreover at what time the Savior of the world was nailed to the
Cross: how both the heavens and the earth were troubled, the Stars were
obscured, the elements disturbed, how the earth quaked, how the light was
darkened when the sun turned away his eyes, and would not suffer his beams
to shine upon the earth, least happily it might see such a great cruelty.

SECT. 88. Our sins the cause of Christ's death.
IF thou be not moved to take compassion on our sweet Savior, seeing him in
this doleful case for thy sake, if now when he sheds drops of blood through out
all his body, thou can not shed any tears from thine eyes, think verily
with thy self that thou have a very hard and stony heart, and if thou can
not weep for love toward him, yet at the least weep for the multitude of thy
sins, for so much as they were the very cause of this his agony and grief.
Now the tormenters do not whip him, neither do the Soldiers crown him with
thorns, that do cause blood to gush out of his body, but it is thy very sins
and offenses, those are the thorns that do prick him, they are the spear that
do thrust him into the side, they are torme^tors that do afflict him, they are
the heavy burden that do cause him to sweat this so strange and wonderful a
bloody sweat. Oh my sweet Savior and Redeemer, Oh thou lamb of God that
take away the sins of the world, how dearly have thou bought my salvation?

SECT. 89. They that are in authority must show good examples.
Governors either spiritual or temporal, sin more grievously by example
then by act; their act destroieth but one, their example may destroy many, and
therefore surely the greater account they are to render and the more
circumspectly to behave themselves, least that in their own precepts, they be
found faulty: the greater power then that one man has above others, must
teach him to excel in virtue above them: for what does it profit an Emperor to
be Lord and king over many kingdoms, if on the other part he become bondslaue
to many vices, titles of honor be nothing worth if the life of the party be
bad, surely true nobility consists not in dignity, lineage, large
possessions and the like, but in wisdom knowledge and virtue: and this nobility
brings a man to dignity in the kingdom of heaven, and as for this life it
is not the place as foolish men suppose, that makes the person renowned, but it
is the person that makes the place always honorable.

SECT. 90. The praise of silence.
OF all virtues the chiefest is silence, for by it thou hear the
imperfections of others, and concealest thine own; for commonly empty vessels
make the lowdest sound, and men of the weakest wit, and least capacity are the
greatest bablers; the heart of the fool says Syracke is in his mouth, Eccl.
21.26
but the mouth of a wise man is in his heart; then think this with thy self,
before thou make any man of thy counsel, that it is great folly, to think
to have that kept secret, by telling it unto another, when as thou can not
keep it secret thy self.

SECT. 91. The charitable man.
Whosoever drinks of the sweet springs of charity, is apt and ready to all
good, he labors and is not weary, he is weary and feels it not, be
feels it, but grieueth not: the malicious mock him but he regards them not:
he is cursed, but he blesses and curses not.

SECT. 92. Parents must instruct their Children.
SVrely that child is not bound in duty to love those his parents of whom
he never learnt any virtuous instruction, it is not enough for a man to say I
have a son, except the can say I have a son fearing God, and profitable for
the common weal, and a father that would have such a son, must teach him as
well by good examples as by Godly admonitions.

SECT. 93. Miracles are every day to be seen in the world.
SOme men look daily for miracles from heaven, yet they regard not these
miracles that are daily sent, every newborn babe bears a wonder, but who
esteems it worthy of admiration, ten hundred men ten hundred countenances,
all rare, all varying and all singular to show the singular rareness of Gods
power, ten hundred tongs ten hundred voices, some sharp some flatt, some
shrill, some hoarse, none alike, ten hundred minds, some good, some bad and
each one disagreeing.

SECT. 94. God does not defire the death of a sinner.
A Good musition having any key or string of his instrument out of tune, does
not immediately cut it off, and cast it away, but either by straining it
higher, or slacking it down lower, by little and little causes it to agree,
and God desires rather to reform the transgressions by small corrections,
then seek to cast them away for every trespass, he lifts them up high by
heaping his blessings upon them, to see whether or no, these his mercies will
bend them, but if this will not serve, he uses then to slack his loving
kindness, and to thrust afflictions on them; to try whether these his
threats will break them, so that it may be he will make them agree and
tunable with his will.

SECT. 95. We believe not that God is angry with our sins.
GOd oftentimes says David has bent his bow, and made ready his arrows, to
shoot at the wicked and impenitent sinner, and yet do they not think that he
is angry with their sins. And oftentimes again with most fatal and deadly
shot, has he charged the roaring gunnes of his wrath, and flust many times in
the pan, still putting the Lenity of his mercy in the touchhole, between
the barrel and it, to try whether we would take the wings of repentance,
and fly away; yet set we still cheering up and pruning of our evils like
foolish birds, thinking nothing, not at all expecting death, or yet any danger
to ensue, so that at length we tumble and totter headlong over the perch,
whereon we thought we sat most secure. Surely men in these days do
presumptuously depend upon Gods patience: they think him to be a God of
wax, whom they may metamorphise and change into what shape they please, whom
they may melt and turn into what fashion they will, but I fear that in this
their tempring of him, he will so stick to the skirts of all presumptuous
offenders, that all the waters in the broad seas will not be able to wash all
their besmeering off, to wash clean and cleanse their souls from that
horrible sin of presumption, God will not be mocked, Non est ludendum cum
sanctis, It is ill jesting with edge tools.

SECT. 96. We must humble our selves before God.
GOD is lofty and God is lowly, he is pitiful, and he is terrible, he is
great in compassion and great also in confusion, and in both without passion;
if thou do lift up thy self unto him, Number. 16 4.
he flies from thee; but if thou humblest thy self and kissest the ground
with thy face, he soon lights upon thy back, God is a spirit, and like a
shadow; which when thou arisest up vanishes away from thee; the only way then
to catch it is to fall down upon it, to fall down upon thy knees with the
Publican and cry, Lord have mercy upon me a sinner.

SECT. 97. We can see a moat in our brothers eye, but not the beam in our own.
IT is a strange matter to see, how every man will gaze and wonder at a fool,
yet no man will vouchsafe so much as to look upon his own deformities, me
thinks, most men have the eyes of those counterfeiting Lamiae, Eras. Rothe.
they can see a far off, yet not discern hard by; discern then a fool, and
see thy self, or see a fool, and wonder at thy self: most of the worlds
wisest men have some babble, Satan's Scepter, Vice the babble, Sin the
scepter, whereby the devils kingdom is vpholden.

SECT. 98. Vain glory a mere vanity.
MAny men hunt after vain glory, they run up and down to catch a feather;
and pray what is it but a fether? even as light as nothing, they dream that
they have mountains of gold; but when they awake out of their fleep of blind
ignorance they shall find just nothing at all in their hands, and what is
praise and renown when they have it, for which they gaped for so long, truly
it is not worth three points, for that it is only the breath of some few men's
mouths, the men may die, their minds may alter upon every light occasion,
which now makes him great, now little and now nothing at all; our Savior
Christ himself, was received into Jerusalem with trimph of Hosanna, crying,
blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest,
Matthew. 21. Mat. 27.20
and casting their apparel upon him, and cutting down branches and strawing
them in the way, but not long after this they cried as fast, crucify crucify,
crucify him, crucify him, let him be crucified.

SECT. 99. We love not to be told of our faults.
THough it be a fault generally for all men to sin, yet very few can endure
to hear their sins repeated or reproved, but we must hear what we would
not, when as we do what we should not, and what though the hearing thereof be
unpleasant to thy soul, yet me thinks the persuasions to amendment should be
sweet: mix one with the other; and drown the bitter and unpleasant taste of
reprehension, with a sweet and delectable resolution to lead a more godly and
Christianlike life, drown it with a sweet repentance.

SECT. 100. We must have patience in declaring the will of God.
ANd surely patience in declaring the will of God must needs be very good and
necessary, whenas those that are taught and admonished, do thus kick and
spurn at their teachers, and who^ if they could, they would persecute and
prosecute them even unto the death; Petr. Martyr in 2. ca. Romans
Austin says, that tho horses and asses do kick those that do heal and
cure their gaul backs, yet they never cease curing them, till that they be
full whole; much rather therefore says he, must we (though all the afflictions
in the world be laid upon us) endeavor to heal up the vvounded conscience.

SECT. 101. How high the calling of ministers is: and how little foolish
worldlings respect them.
But tell me, my soul, why should these gald-backe asses, thus revile and
scorn the ambassadors of Christ, as they daily do; do they think the
ministry but a needless thing, do they esteem the meddling with the secrets
of God, the saving of souls, the shutting and opening of the kingdom of
heaven, to be but a triste or matter of no value? they value them indeed in
their unequal balance, they put them in the lightest scale; their most
deformedst sons, and those of the shallowest dispensers of the Lords will,
the leanest beast, the lightest sheafe of wheat is for Gods Church, all is too
good that God has; which plainly shows what vain and curious prayers they
offer unto him, but when it pleases God to visit them with sickness, so that
they are like to die, who then is so much in request as the Preachers, they
desire to be buried in the Church, and withal to have a Sermon too, though
before in their life days, they lived even as Atheists, they would not so much
as once lift a leg over the Church style, to know their duty, either toward
God or man.

SECT. 102. A meditation on Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the life.
O Sweet Christ, Iobn. 14.6.
O thou the redeemer of mankind, O thou who art the way, the truth, and the
life, the way in doctrine, precept and examples, the truth in promises, for
thou Lord have performed thy promise made to a thousand generations, and thou
art the life in reward; I pray thee by this thine unspeakable charity,
wherewith thou vouchsafest to employ thy self wholly for our salvation, suffer
me never to wander from thee who art the way, neither ever to distrust in thy
promises, who art the truth, and performest whatsoever thou do promise,
neither to rely on any other thing, because thou art eternal life, then which
there is nothing more to be desired, neither in heaven nor in earth; grant this
I beseech thee, O thou dear son of God, to whom be praise and glory for
ever and ever, Amen.

SECT. 103. How impatient men are in enduring crosses.
IT is a strange thing to consider how impatiently the wicked suffer
punishments, and how discontentedly the godly endure crosses, whereas the sin of
both is the cause of both their afflictions. But if the wicked do esescape in
this life unpunished, it makes much for the comfort of the Godly, in that the
Lord gives the raines, that they may gallop unto their own confusion; God
very seldom or never gives the bridle unto the Godly, but by fatherly
chastisements restrains and amendeth them. Yet such is the corruption of the
flesh in both, that they commonly kick against the prick of the Lords
correction: Few men have embraced content, few rejoice or smile in troubles,
and few triumph in the wearisome Chariot of adversity: the contented are
prepared to bear the yoke of any afflictions whatsoever, whatsoever may fall
out unto them: Phidias that skillful caruer of Images, did not only cut them
out of Iuorie, but also of brass, marble, Senecain Epist. 86.
out of any kind of stone, nay, out of the basest brickleft metal that was
brought unto him: And the wise man will place content in every little corner of
his life, in riches, in poverty, in health, in sickness, as well in bondage
and slavery, as in freedom: as prosperity cannot breed pride and presumption
in him, so likewise cannot adversity make him despair: But alas, in these
latter days, impatience and discontent have smothered up many good and Godly
minds, one cries like the horse, oh I would I were an ox for I am spurred,
oh I would I were an horse for I am goaded; thus one houles in one corner, one
complains in another, one sobs and sighs, another grieves and groans, one
wrings and wrests his hands, another storms, stares and fumes so that here is
no place free from complaints and bewaylings, we are all Epicures in this
onething, for that we wish our bodies may live without griefs and diseases,
and our minds void of all sorrow and pertur bations.

SECT. 104. Comforts for such as are poor and miserable.
FIrst then, me thinks I hear one cry, poverty is grievous unto me; I am
poor and naked alas I am cold and hungry: even so? well, let me deal with
the first in the nature of a Philosopher, (which will best fit and satisfy
the desires of all our heathenish, and ignorant Christians) It is grievous unto
thee? fie, fie, this one reproachful word has done much harm unto innocent
poverty, it cannot be grievous unto it, all the fault lies in thy
discontented mind, Senec de Rome. vtri. us. sortu. ^ob^.
thou broughtest nothing into the world, and nothing shall thou carry out, and
this is the state and condition of every soul breathing on the face of the
earth, what is it then prithee tell me that thou can challenge? art thou
poor? then art thou free from thieves, free from care in keeping of goods, and
from sorrow in loosing them or departing from them, yea, and now shall thou be
free from setting thine hand to any band for thy friend: for through suretiship
says Solomon many men are overthrown, Pro. 6.1.2. and 17.18.
I warrant thee through this suretiship, if thou art poor though never so
honest, thou shall never take harm, be of good cheer, for through poverty
thou have escapt an hundred more troubles. Art thou poor and in misery?
complain not thy wants so instantly, God sees thee unfit for riches and apt to
be shooled by poverty; Eccles. 1
All under the sun is vanity, trouble and vexation of mind, what has man
to mourn for then, when as all that he can loose in this life, is fading,
miserable and transitory, nay, the world cannot take away any thing, for it
gives not any thing, fame perishes, wealth decaies, and this only remains
behind with us, and it is our true and only wealth too, that is our
constancy in crosses: if then thou will fight, resolutely against the world,
and manfully in Christ's battle, he shall take thee for his true-hearted
soldier, and dubbe thee Knight for thy constancy in conquering, for thy famous
victories, let neither joy nor grief overcome thee, Judge. 6.15.16. Isai. 25.4
for better were it not to be then to be a bondslaue unto passion; Art thou
poor? yet nevertheless, think with thy self that the humble thoughts that
smoke from thy poor cottage, are as sweet a sacrifide unto god, as the
vainglorious perfumes in the Palace of a Prince? Art thou poor? so was
Bias, but Bias was wise, be thou also wise with him, and art thou hard favored
with Bias, be thou also learned with him, so then they that look upon thee will
deceive themselves, both in thy riches and also in thy beauty, truly it is
the greatest beauty to be endued with learning, and greatest wealth, to be
enriched with wisdom, a poor man virtuous is as far beyond a rich man vicious
as the soul is beyond the body it is better to be a man without money, then to
be money without a man, wherefore if adversity approaches learn wisdom: if
thy troubles be small bear them, because they be easy to be borne, but if
they be great and grievous bear with them also, for in so doing, thy glory
shall be the greater, nay, both in bearing them, and also bearing with them, it
is thy duty, and and so shall thou purchase the reward of obedience; lastly
if thou can not have what thou would, thou must be contented with what
thou can get; to will much is folly, where ability wants, and to desire
nothing is content, which despises all things. If thou have neither land nor
living, labor diligently, and eat thy bread in the sweat of thy brows, so
God commanded and appointed thy father Adam to do; Genesis 3.19 and 23.
and the riches that proceed heere-hence are sweetest, and the blessing best of
all, and tell and those my soul, what they must trust too, that have hands?

SECT. 105. For such as are visited with sickness.
ANother cries, I am horribly punished with sickness, art thou so? persuade
thy self that thou shall have case anon; wherefore did God create Physicians,
save only to help the sick; what if thou art sick now, persuade thy self
that sickness and diseases cannot last long, for either thou will leave them,
or else they will leave thee, we cannot be at one stay; it makes no matter how
ill thy budy be, so that thy soul be sound, indeed if the inward man have a
pain in his head, whereby he cannot lay him down in peace and take his rest,
the contagion then surly is much to be feared; Psalm. 4.8
think not that bodily sickness is any cross at all, it is rather a
property, who then may avoid it?

SECT. 106. For such as are griened with old age.
THe third cries old age is crept upon me, I am filled with griefs and
aches, alas my body is weak, thereby mine hands shake, mine eyes dazell my
feet tremble; so that I am weary of my life, I would to God I were a yard under
ground, or else I would I were as lusty as ever I was, ah sinful wish, I see
now that thou delightest in naught, but in sporting and toying in vanities and
vain pleasure: if Gods spirit did dwell in thee, thou would not so
earnestly complain, but give God praise and thanks for thy long life, and
rejoice at thy gray head, which deserves much honor: Ieuit. 19.
this is that age which the Lord has promised unto all them that love him,
Exodus 19.
and keep his commandments, he has promised that their days shall be long
in the land, that they shall live many years. Nay, this is that age which
every man defireth: and tell me, did not thou thy self desire to see it
when thou wast young, think then that thou art happy now, for that thou have
thy wish; this also is no cross, only a property, Porphi^, p op^^^^ (...)
^^^^ra de Senect.
and only belonging unto man, but not unto every man. In this age there is no
swilling, no swearing no swaggering, no quaffing nor surfeiting.

SECT. 107. For such as are discontented for that they must leave the world.
ANd now who is he that will not complain when he must die, and howl and cry
when he must leave this world; who will say from his heart I have lived a great
while? this then is the part of an unthankful man, who is not contented with
the time he has lived; Grieve not because thou must die, that thou must leave
thy wife and children, thy lands and lordships, and all things else behind
thee, say not thou woe is me, woe is me that I must die: and must thou so, 2.
King. 12
what then? It is the nature of a man to die, it is no punishment, when thou
came first into the world it was upon this condition, that thou shouidest
once go out again, this life is but peregrination, for when thou have walked
unto the end of thy journey, thou must then return back, nay it is the part
of a fool and a dastard to fear that which by no means can be avoided, many
are gone before thee, and many shall go after thee, and thou must know that
thy life is not thine own, thnu art only vita commodatus and not donatus, thy
life is only lent unto thee, thou have not a lease thereof, thou art but a
tenant at will. Grieve not at the remembrance of death, for death it self
cannot be grievous seeing that it is but once, it brings all happiness with
it, and to the godly it is a very great advantage, But must thou die indeed?
if Godly then be glad, if wicked repent, no man I trow will speak against death,
save he who has a guilty conscience; death indeed makes this man tremble and
quake, but thou shall hardly see an honest man unwilling to die; Yet another
disc ontented blood cries out, alas, what must I dyin my youthful days, how
sottish and how ignorant art thou? tell me, what is not a commodity sweetest,
when as it comes unexpected? nay, death does even as well appertain to youth
as unto old age, the Lambs skin comes even as soon to the market as the sheeps.
And it makes no matter how many years thou have to live, but how many thou have
lived, then if thou can live no longer, that is thine old age; and this the
state and condition of all mankind, even to die at last.

SECT. 108. For such as are slandered.
YEt another grieves because he is slaundered, so that me thinks there is
never an heavenly minded man amongst us: art thou slaundered, if guiltless
rejoice, if guilty amend; will thou grieve at slanders, thou must know that
no good man will slander thee; and would thou be praised of evil men, I
tell thee to be commended of them is as bad as to be commended for evil
doing; Themistocles did never any famous thing in all his life time, Senec de
odio and Inuid.
or yet what was praiseworthy, and yet did no man ever speak against him,
Oftentimes have I saw cankers gnawing the greenest and freshest leaves, and
oftentimes have I likewise saw envy pricking those especially that were godly
and religious be thou then of good comfort, if Cicero, if Scipio if Cato, if
David, if Solomon, if Peter, if Paul, or if any of the Prophets or Apostles, if
any good man should speak evil of thee, then had thou some cause to grieve,
but these as malicious vipers do envy thy prosperity, no honest or virtuous
man will backebite his neighbor, and we know that the veryest whore will cry
whore first; they that are most vicious will soonest speak of other men's
vices, of other men's deformities and enormities, there are also many dogs that
bark often, Senec. de Kemed. fortuit.
not for any cause that they have, but only for custom sake.

SECT. 109. For such as have lost their money.
YEt me thinks I hear another set sighing for that he has lost his money,
what if thy money be gone? now thou art in less danger, oh how happy were
thou if thou had lost thy covetousness with it too, art sure thou have lost
thy money? prithee tell me, how many, money has lost, truly thou had better
loose it then to let it loose thee, and now shall thou be more light in thy
journey and more safe at home.

SECT. 110. For such as are lame and ill favored.
ANother is discontented, and cries, alas I am lame, I go upon crouches, I am
crompt sholdred, crooked and deformed, I am of an ugly visage and the like, so
that the least and lightest cross is burdensome and grievous unto us. Art thou
deformed? so was Aristotle, so was grave and prudent Aesope, and yet both of
them in their age, the wisest men that were, it is not the proper flature of
the body, its not the beard, the tyranuizing countenance, stately apparel,
new fashions, new cuts, rings, Jewels, or yet any outward ornament else that
makes the man, and likewise on the contrary, its not a platter face, maimed
limbs, one leg, one arm, or yet a pair of bow-legs that hinders his
difinition: a man as he is a man does not consist of flesh and blood, but of
mind and courage, of soul and spirit, we say such a beast is a fair beast,
but we say such a man is a virtuous man, which virtue only proceeds from his
mind, pray how do we define a man? we do not say a man is a living Creature
set out with a large pair of hose, or the like; but we rather define him
thus: Arist.
Homo est animal rationale; a man is a living creature endued withreason; to
conclude a man is a man, if he has but a socke on his head: What art thou
lame indeed? be content thy crouch serves as well to fight withal, as to
lean on.

SECT. 111. For such as are banished.
SOme again weep by cause they are banished, but let me ask them whether
they have not deserved it: indeed, we say that fools and children commonly
will eat their cake, and yet have it too, if they could; but be thou
contented: its no cross at all, though thou think it one; its law and
justice, it fitteth well thy desert: what though thou art banished out of this
la^d thou shall dwell in another, thou can not be banished out of the world,
oh I shall be banished out of my country wherein I was borne: thou art
deceived, for Patria est vbicunque been est, that is thy country, not that
wherein thou wast borne, but wherein thou can best live; what is thy
banishment? it is but a traveling, and what noble spirit does not desire to
travail and to see new fashions, if thou art not banished from the land of the
living, thou have no cause to grieve; Oh but I shall then die in a strange
country, what then? thou shall go to heaven in a strange land, as soon as in
thy native country, for heaven (contrary to the rules of Philosophy,) is a
center and the earth a circumference, from which unto the center are drawn
many lines, and though many ascend up one line, many byanother, yet at length
all meet and rejoice in one and the same place; let not this thought vex thee,
for there is no earth strange unto a dead man; but yet alas it may be as I
wander up and down, I shall die by my self, and so I may lie unburied, what
then? thou shall feel neither cold nor heat, wind nor weather, nay, if thou
do respect that, it is warmer lying above ground where the sun shines
pleasantly, then under the earth where is naught else but a cold crude and
dampish moisture; and what if thou shall lie unburied? know that Coelo tegitur
qui non habet vrnam he that has never a grave or coffin to shadow him, has
the whole heavens to cover him. What care I when I am once dead, whether fire
consumes me, wild beasts devour me, the sea drownes me, or the earth rots me;
surely I will never take thought for my body, had not I as good let the birds
those little pretty harmless creatures pick gently my bones, as to let
those filthy stinking maggots devour them: burying was not invented first for
those sakes that die, but for those that remain alive afterward, that so all
the noisome smells and stinking vapors arising from the dead carcass, Senee de
Rem. fortuit.
might be kept from them.

SECT. 112. For such as weep for loss of Children.
YEt cries another I have lost my Children, Oh what will become of me, alas
how sottish art thou, to grieve for mortality, is it a strange matter to see
thy Children die? surely its no matter to see the tree stand and the Apples
fall; and no more strange is it then to see the fruit of thy body diseased,
and thy self alive; now shall thou never hear worse of them, and will thou
mourn for that they be in joy? surely then thou do not love them, though
thou seem loath to leave them.

SECT. 113. For such as mourn because they are in bondage.
ANd lastly another cries, I am a slave, I am a bondsman; do not know, Qui non
didicit parere non potest imperare, he that has not learned to obey, can
never govern or rule his household well; thou need not now to hoe (as we
say) for hous-rent, servants wages, and the like things which thy master does,
if thou art not a slave unto old Satan al is well; But alas I have not my belly
full, if thou have not, be contented, for God punishes the glutton as much as
he does thee; if thou have stomach and little vittailes, he has vittailes
and little stomach, if thou labourest for meat for thy stomach, he labors
for stomach for his meat; nay, the drunken to spot is as often thirsty, as
the dry trauailer.

SECT. 114. An example of content in Dyogines the Cynicke.
I Wonder greatly at the impatience of this age, that cannot suffer a
fleabiting without rubbing and scratching, learn of the silly bird, who
although she be kept in a close cage, bard from all liberties and pleasures,
minst of her diet, yet sings she more melodious and sweet, then she that
flies abroad, in the open air, no close imprisonment, no thought can molest
her: But we are sullen in afflictions, murmuring in crosses, and powting in our
sweetest trobles, what though my lodging be in bulkes, porches, and tubs, Vita
Dyog.
what though my diet be alms, be roots and herbs, what though my drink be
water, my riches poverty: and mine honor, only taunts and scoffs; yet shall
these as ye term them crosses breed a coffeehouse in me? no, no. I know
my tub to be more beautiful then Alexanders great palace, neither would I
change any jot of my estate for his, though he if he were not Alexander would
be Dyogines, yet I of I were not Dyogines, would not be Alexander, Plut. in
vita Alex.
for I think his so gorgeous an habitation woeful: and what says my soul
unto his so proud and sumptuous a palace.

Ecch. Alas.

SECT. 115. The end of affliction.
IF a man lives contented with his affections, they scowre all filth from his
soul, Act. 14.15.
that eternal part, for through many troubles and afflictions he must enter
into the kingdom of heaven, he that has crosses must embrace nay, coll and
kiss them. And then what says my soul, if a man bears them patiently hear
on earth, is obtained in heaven through every distease?

Echo. His ease.

And what through every affliction Echo. Sion. Psalm. 87


SECT. 116 How careful God is in afflicting his Children.
SVrely the love of God is exceeding large toward mankind, 1. Cor. 10.13
in that he lays no more afflictions on the^, then that they can easily
bear, he is sparing in cursing, but bountiful in blessing, he gives his
wrath by weight, but his mercy without measure; Amongst all men therefore he
undoubtedly is blessed on the one side, whom no fear troubles, no pensiuenes
consumes, no desire of worldly wealth afflicts, and to whom no cross can
seem intolerable, whereby he may be discouraged or despair; and he likewise
is happy on the other side, whom no pleasure can proudly puff up, no delight
can so move unto mirth, and no promotion make him so vainglorious, whereby
he presumes above others, or preferres himself before them, for oftentimes
have I saw, and how often I know not the footman hoysted up into the saddle,
when as he that rode before, has now been glad to lackie after. The riches
that men gather in time may fail; friends may prove unkind and unconstant,
hope may deceive, but content can never be conquered: the contented man kills
adversity if it assault, dries up tears if they flow, stays wrath if it urge,
heales wounds if they fester, and and lastly wins heaven and heavenly joys,
if it hold on unto the end, and therefore Paul learned in what state so ever
he was in, Phil. 4.11
therewith to be content.

SECT. 117. Comforts in general for such as are in afflictions.
NOw leaving the Philosophers reasons, let us see my soul how far the
Christian reasoning, can comfort us in enduring crosses: surely their fruit is
very great; first then for by them through Christ, we purchase remission of
finnes, and reconciliation to God the father by them we are exercised in
Godliness, and for suffering them we shall have our reward, a reward of
inestimable value, me thinks then that afflictions should not make me
despair and grieve, and seeing that Christ Jesus our Captain has broke down
the hedge, before our eyes, I say let it not grieve us now to follow after, all
the saints of God, his Soldiers, all the Prophets and Martyrs, have sounded
the bottom, and found the depth of all afflictions whatsoever, fear not then
thy footing: God plays the careful cook with all his children, he gives them
sharp Olives to whet their stomakes, and breed their appetites, sharp sorrows,
sour crosses, bitter and brinish troubles, because they should come and taste
how sweet, how good and gracious the Lord is, we are punished in this world
says Austin, to the end we should not be damned with the world, in the world
to come: In like manner as a Nurse that to weane her child from the love and
liking of her milk, does rub her tear with aloes, with wormwood or with the
like bitter thing, so our merciful father who would feign retire us from the
love of the world, and worldly delights, uses to send tribulation unto us
therein, to the intent we may cry with the child paw, pan unto the world, to
the end we may shun and avoid its intising dugs. Again we read that Moses
striking with his rod the hard rocks brought sorth water, Exodus 17.5, 6
and the rod of correction falling on the back of stony-hearted sinners, most
commonly mollifieth them to contrition, and oftentimes brings forth a flood
of tears to repentance.

SECT. 118. On the same.
THe stones that were appointed to serve for the glorious temple of Solomon, 1.
Kings.
were beaten, were hewed and polished with out, at the quarry side, for that no
stroke of hammer might be heard within the temple, and Peter tells us that the
Godly are chosen stones, to be placed in the spiritual building, of God in
heaven, where there is no beating, no hewing, no sorrow, no tribulation: surely
then it is meet for us here in this life, in the hard quarrie of this sinful
world, to be cut and polished, and made fit for that glorious temple; and with
all we ought to be most glad when we are thus handled, Psalm. Amos 4.1.
for that it is a sign of our election, to that most glorious house of Gods
eternal mansion. Oxen appointed for the slaughter are suffered to feed at
their pleasure, and so are David's fat Bulls of Basan: trees that bring forth no
fruit, and are kept for the fire, are never beaten, and the sick man, that is
past all hope of health is suffered by the Physician to have whatsoever he
lusts after, when as he whose health is not despaired, cannot have that
liberty granted.

SECT. 119. We ought to rejoice in troubles.
MEthinks how necessary it is to know, that all afflictions come from a divine
and just hand, wherefore they cannot be evil or unwholesome, as many account
them; Indeed crosses are very troublesome unto the weakness and frailty of
the flesh, yet if thou will behold their effect thou have cause enough to be
merry, to be patient and contented therewith; The seafaring man, who although
he be beaten most grievously with storms and tossed very dangerously with
blustering winds, yet remembering the haven smiles to himself, and clears up
his dull and heavy spirits, if he the^ rejoices in the mids of those storms
beholding the haven a receptacle only for his wearyed body, thou rather may
(I think) rejoice, casting thy eyes on heaven, a sweet refreshing shore for
thine afflicted soul Its a most base and crauonish part to grieve for the want
of any temporal benefit, what shall old age make me sigh, shall poverty make
me mourn, shall sickness make me despair, or shall death it self make me
afraid, no, no, he truly is no man that in this life is not filled with
miseries, and he is no Christian that cannot bear them, troubles are but
flea-bitings, but alas we unskillful worldlings, know not their effect. Tell
me then my soul what that soul shall obtain in heaven, which suffers crosses
patie^tly here on earth, tell me my soul what shall there be cast upon her.

Ecch. Honor.

SECT. 120 The reward of such as are patient in troubles.
ANd what can be a greater dignity then to be clothed with the brightness
of GOD, then to be endued with immortality? and what can be a greater grace or
an higher felicity to any soul, then to see God face to face, for his face is
the fullness of all beatitude, to see him that made both heaven and earth, to
see him that made thy seife, to see him that redeemed thee, and glorified thee,
for in seeing him thou shall possess him, in possessing him thou shall love
him, in loving him, thou shall praise him; for he is the inheritance of his
people, he is the possession of their felicity, their reward, their crown of
glory, in him our souls, shall find all wisdom, all beauty, all riches,
all delight, all goodness whatsoever, whatsoever deserves love or admiration
or works pleasure and contentation. Briefly, in this kingdom, there shall
be joy without sadness, health without sickness, life without labor, light
without darkness, felicity without abatement, all goodness without any evil;
lo thus shall he be blessed that patiently indureth crosses, troubles and
afflictions, their youth florisheth, and never waxes old, life that knows
no end, beauty that never fades, love that never cools, health that never
diminishes, joy that never cease, a song of gladness that never ends,
there shall we sing and rejoice for ever, happy are they, Psalm. 83.
says David that live in thy house for they shall praise thee eternally, there
shall we sing unto that blessed Trinity God the Father, God the son, and God
the holy Ghost, we shall sing and cry Aleiluia, Aleiluiah, world without end.

Awake now my soul, rouse up thy self and arise, call to thy friends and
companions, that we may all go together and hear the spiritual talk,
between Christ and his poor afflicted members; make have my soul, for I
hear the comfortable speeches of my redeemer, sounding in my ears already.

A DIALOGVE BETWEEN CHRIST and his Church afflicted, by which we may easily
see, what Christ does require of those, that suffer persecution, for his
namesake: and how they ought to behave themselves in afflictions.
Christus. IN me ye shall have peace, John 16.33.
in the world ye shall have affliction, but be of good comfort, I have overcome
the world.


Ecclesia afflicta. Lord increase our faith. Luke 17.5.



Chr. Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, Matt. 11.28
and I will ease you.


Eccl. Master to whom shall we go to else? John 6.68.
thou have the words of eternal life.


Christ: Follow me. Mat. 4.19



Eccles: Master I will follow thee whithersoeuer thou go. Mat. 8.19



Christ: I am the good Shepherd John 10.11



Eccles: We were as the good sheep going astray, 1 Pet. 2.25
but are now returned to the Shepherd and bishop of our souls.


Christ: I am the light of the world John 8.12.



Eccles: Lord lighten my eyes, least they behold death.


Christ: I am the way. John 14.6



Eccles: Show us the way of thy truth, Ps. 119.33
teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I will keep it unto the end.


Chr: Blessed are ye that weep now. Luke 6.21.



Eccles: The Lord shall wipe clean away all tears from our eyes. Revel. 21.



Christ: Blessed are ye when men hate you. Luke 6.22.



Eccles: If I should please men I were not the servant of Christ. Gal. 1.10.



Christ: Blessed are the pure in Mat. 5.8
heart for they shall see God.


Eccles. Create in me a new heart O Lord. Psalm 50.



Christ, Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake,
Mat. 5.10.
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.


Eccles: I suffer all things for the elects sake. 2. Ti. 2.10.



Christ: Lay up treasures for your selves in heaven. Mat. 6.20.



Eccl. Our conversation is in heaven Phil. 3.20.



Christ: Woe be to you when all men speak well of you. Luke 6.26.



Eccles. We ought rather to obey God then men. Act. 5.20



Christ: Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. Mat. 5.12



Eccl: There is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, 2. Tim. 4.8
which the Lord shall give me at that day.


Christ. My sheep hear my voice, John 10.27



Eccl: If an angel of heaven preach unto us any other gospel, Gal. 1.8
let him be accursed.


Christ. I came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance. Mat. 9.13.



Eccles. This is a true saving, 1. Tim. 1.15.
This is a true saving, and by all means worthy to be received that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the chief.


Christ. If any man will follow me, Mat. 16.24
let him forsake himself, and take up his Cross and follow me.


Eccles. I am able to do all things through Christ, Phil. 4.13
which strengthens me.


Christ. He that believes in me shall never die. Ioh. 11.26



Eccles. I believe that thou art Christ the son of the living God. John ib.



Christ. Whosoever shall humble himself as a little child, Mat. 18 4.
the same is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.


Eccles. We are unprofitable sernants, Luke 17.10
we have done but that which was our duty to do. John 6.32



Christ. My father gives you the true bread from heaven.


Eccles. Lord evermore give us this bread. John 6.34.



Christ. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, John. 4.14
shall never be more a thirst.


Eccles Sir, give me of that water that I may not thirst. John 4.15



Christ. Fear not my little flock. Luke 12.32



Eccles. O Lord in thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded.


Christ. Pray for them that hurt you and persecute you. Mat. 5.44



Eccles. Lord lay not this sin to their charge. Act. 7 60



Christ. He that loves father or Mother more then he loves me, Mat. 7.37
is not worthy of me.


Eccles. When my Father and my Mother forsook me, Psalm. 27.10
thou Lord tookest me up.


Christ. I came not to send peace but the sword. Mat. 10.34



Eceles. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Romans 8.35
shall tribulation or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword? etc.


Christ. Ye shall weep and mourn but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.
John. 16.20



Eccles. I account that the afflictions of this present life are not worthy of
the glory, Romans 1.18
that shall be showed unto us.


Christ. Where I am, John 12.26
there shall also my servant be.


Eccles. I desire to be loosed, Phil. 1.23.
and to be with Christ.


Christ. He that loves his life shall loose it, John 12.25
and he that hates his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal.


Eccles. For thy sake are we killed all day long, Romans 8.36
we are counted as for the slaughter.


Christ. If the world hate you, John 15.18
ye know, that it hated me before it hated you.


Eccles. If God be ou our side who can be against us? Romans 8 31.



Christ. The servant is not greater then the Master. John 15 20



Eccles. Christ has suffered for us leaving us an example that we should
follow his steps. 1. Pet. 2.21



Christ. In my fathers house are many dwelling places. John 14.2.



Eccles. We know, 2. Cor 5.1
that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building
given of God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.


Christ. GOD sent not his son into the world, John 3.17
that he should condemn the world, but that the world through him might be
saved.


Eccl. Let us therefore go boldly unto the throne of grace, Heb. 4.14.
that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.


Chr. He that believes in the soune shall not be condemned. Ioh 3.18.



Eccl. There is no condemnation to them, Romans 8.1.
which are in Christ Jesus.


Chri. All the hairs of your head are numbered. Mat. 10 30



Eccl. The Lord knows who are his. 2. Tim. 2.19.



Chr. Ye believe in God, John 14.1.
believe also in me.


Eccl. We believe and know that thou art the Christ, John 6.69.
the son of the living God.


FINIS Dialog.
SECT. 122. The true felicity of this life and the false.
GOD has given us a true felicity in this life, a true practick I mean,
which is the continual meditation on the Laws of God, Psalm. 1.1.2.
though not a divine and theorick which is else where; yet some men think
pleasure with swinish Aristippus, some think honor, with vain glorious
Periander, and some think riches with covetous Midas; But how can this be?
when as gold and silver are but the very excrements of nature, and found in the
most barren and barbarous places of the earth; they cannot ease the grief of
the body, much less then of mind: how again can honor be the felicity of
this life being but a vapor soon vanishing, only the breath of some men's
mouths? Job. 7
Job did not regard it when he said unto rottenness, thou art my father, unto
dust and worms, ye are my sisters and my mother. If any one then will brag
of the fame and renown of his auncesters, let him look with holy Job into
their graves, and there he shall see all honor and promotion of this life to
be turned into a little loathsome stinking earth; And how then, beastly
Epicure, can pleasure be the felicity, of this life? when as it kills the
soul, poysoneth the body, when as it is naught else, but scum of venerie, and
a iakes receptable for all filth and beastliness, and then again should
dogs be in as good estate as man, if pleasure should be the happiness of
this life, nay, now in fine tell me my soul what is was, that brought on each
wicked one of Israel, the Lords heavy wrath and sore displeasure?

Echo. His pleasure.

And tell me again, what space of time may cast down, all the flourishing
robes of renown, and utterly deface the beauty of honor?

Echo. One hour.

SECT. 123. The world is unconstant, wherefore man must be constant.
THe world is full of change and alteration, here grieses hang over pleasures,
here war arises in the midst of peace, here security is turned into
sudden fear, here a friend is soon become an enemy, and here all our summers
pastimes are soon changed into winters threatening thunderclaps; the summer
turns into winter, the day into night, youth into age, prosperity into
adversity, and pleasures into sorrows, so that for riches we exchange
poverty, for health sickness, and for honor and renown, contempt and
disgrace; nay in fine, this life is constant in nothing but in inconstancy, it
is constant in nothing, but that it is unconstant in all things; Seeing then
that this life is thus unconstant and full of misery, man's heart must be filled
with content, he must learn with Paul to be content with the state whereto
he is called, Phil 4.11.
without grudging. This godly content depending on the Lords will, is the only
sluice that staieth and stops all the raging floods of misfortune; we know
this, that there is no part of a man's life so close and secure, but that the
fear of death may creep in, that there is no man's life so fortified about
with peace and happiness, but that grief now and then may shake and terrify
him, wheresoever a man hides himself calamity will seek him out, and still
attend on him; here are many external and outward evils, which do entice and
tempt us unto lewdnes here are also many inward and secret complaints of the
conscience, many griefs, many cares, which in time will exciccate and consume
the body, yet a joyful and contented soul, like of sound and well headed
waster puts them off all without any foil or blemish at all; such a
cauellering spirit or resolute under Christ's banner, cares not though strength
be subject to weakness, riches to poverty, health to sickness, fame to
disgrace, or life to death.

SECT. 124. The tokens of a wise man, and contented.
EVery wiseman, has continually this thought in his heart, he thinks that he
feels death, when as he does but only hear thereof; he supposes that he
smarteth with his brothers wants, when as he does but only see them, he does
as well and as willingly entertain the worlds crosses and calamities, as its
joys and felicities; he despises riches as well present as lost or absent,
or those which he knows he shall never enjoy, he neither rejoices at their
presence, nor yet mourns for their absence; he thinks Gods blessing
neither going away nor yet coming; he persuades himself that all the earth
is his, and that his is for all men, and whatsoever he has, he does neither
miserably keep nor yet prodigally spend it, he conceiueth this in his mind,
that the friendship and society of men must be as the stones in an oven, one
must strengthen and uphold another; These are the signs of a contented soul,
Sense. Epi. 96.
thus to live peaceably, and tell this to all men my soul, tell them what will
drive away all calamity.

Ecch. Amity.

SECT. 125. The praise of content.
BRotherly love and content in this hard iron age, is the only salve for all
diseases. I am weak, but therewith contented, why then am I strong, but not
contented mith my strength, then am I weak, I am ignorant, yet contented with
the portion of wisdom that God has given me, then am I wise, I am wise, yet
would I feign know, Quod supra me est, that which is above my capacity for to
know, then am I foolish, I am a fool: I am poor, yet contented therewith, why
then am I rich, I have abundance, yet crave I more, then am I poor: Content to
the weak and feeble is strength, to the simple wisdom, to the poor riches,
to the slaundered praise, to the sick health, to the aged, youth; to the
afflicted comfort: nay what is it not? Its all in all. And now my soul, what
shall I be gone? shall I bid thee farewell, and here make an end with the
worlds discontent?

Ecch. Yes, content.

I had thought to have made my race somewhat longer, but seeing it is thy will
I should end here, here then will I place my farthest post: good Echo I say
farewell, farewell, until we talk again, which God-willing, shall not be
long first, if so be that these our first buds that now spring, be not cropped
or blited by some envious breathing blast; which must hang on the good pleasure
of God, and only on his will depend.

Ecch. End.

I Will end, and now farewell my spirit.

Echo. Here it.

Here yet, and yet too, you will have the last I see, but yet withal, I pray,
let me also bid all those farewell, 1. Tim. 4.1 2. Tim. 3.1. 2. Pet. 3.3.
that are enemies to the base humors of this age, such as cannot well brook
or digest the lewd and filthy conditions of these latter times. So now once
again, my soul, I cast you on him that made you.

Ecch. Adieu.

FINIS.

