SERMONS UPON Solemn Occasions: PREACHED IN Several Auditories. BY HVMPHREY
SYDENHAM, Rector of Pokington in SOMERSET.

D. Aug. Sermon. 46. de Tempore. Multa sunt ora ministeriorum, Sermonis
gerentium, sed unum est os ministros implentis.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE, for Humphrey Robinson, and are to be sold at
the Sign of the Three Pigeons in PAUL'S Churchyard. M.DC.XXXVII.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, MY VERY GOOD LORD, WILLIAM, Lord
Archbishop of CANTERBURY his Grace, Primate of all ENGLAND, and Metropolitan,
and Chancelour of the University of OXFORD.
MOST REVEREND,
IN matters of Bounty or Benefit received, He that speaks thanks, Sigratum
dixeris, omnia dixcris. Sen. lib. de Ben. 2.
commonly, Speaks all; The Divine not so, His profession requires as well
Devotion, as Gratitude; and what is only Acknowledgement in others, should be
Prayer in him. These have made way for this Ambition of mine (for so it will be
censured) in seeking your Grace's Patronage; to which, by your former great
Favors and Encouragements, I have met with a double staire; The one, in my
first admission to spiritual preferment; The other, in settling it, when it was
disturbed; Both these, here bound up by a thankful and zealous obligation, in
this Tender of my poor Endeavors: which, though I fear, will scarce hold
weight in the Scale of your stricter Judgment; yet, in that of your Charity,
They may pass, perhaps, with a Grain or two, (as oftentimes light pieces do)
and so vindicate me from the imputation of that loose and lazy Ignorance,
which the very Spirit of Ignorance would put upon me; where Vociferation is
cried-up for Industry; and Faction for Holiness; and a bitter and unbridled
Zeal for sound knowledge. But notwithstanding the foaming of those muddie
waters, Springs may run clear; and I doubt not, but Mine shall, if they
find a Current in your Graces Protection; with whom, though in the most
Critical and envious Eye, All things are clear and pure, without the least
taint or tincture of corruption (like waters in their own Source and Fountain)
yet the Waters of Marah have been round about you, and no doubt, but your Grace
has had a taste (no less than others of that Hierarchy) of their Gall of
Bitterness. Witness their divine Tragedies and impudent Appeals; their late
Curranto's, Acts 8.23.
and Legends of Ipswich, and since (I know not by what poor Haberdasher of
small wares) Their Looking glass for Lordly Prelates; In which they have not so
much wounded the particular Honors of eminent and learned men, as struck
through the sides of Religion it self, in blemishing the outward face of the
Church, not only by obtruding to her, her former Spots and Moles (as what
Church was ever yet without them?) but over-spreading it with a kind of
Leprosy; And so, instead of being black, Cant. 1.5.
like the Tents of Kedar, They would make her uglie, like the Tent of Korah,
thereby exposing her to the scornful eyes of her enemies abroad; and (if
possibly) of her own Sons at home. Now, if bold men dare thus play with the
very Beard of Aaron, Psalm. 133.2.
what will they do to the Skirts of his Raiment? If the goodly Oak, and the
Cedar be thus beaten on with their Tempests, what shall become of the slender
Fur Tree, and the poor Shrub of the valley? If Schismatic hands be
catching at the Mytre and the Rotchet, how will they rend the contemptible Hood
and Surplesse? Certainly, if the maine Pillars and Buttresses of the Church be
once shaken, the weather-beaten Tiles and Rafters will be tumbling about their
ears; However, in despite of the envious Basiliske, Psalm. 57.4
this poison of the Aspe, and Gall of the viper, the spears and arrows and
sharp Swords of these holy Libellers (O blessed for ever be the God of Heaven;
and under him, here His God of earth, Ezra 7.6.
a most Gracious Sovereign!) Ezra is in high Favor, and The King has granted
him all his requests according to the hand of the Lord his God upon him: So
that, your Grace is still above danger, and shot-free of their Power, though
not of their Envy; which; no doubt, is cursed enough, but that her horns are
short; and if they were not, I might appositely enough bring home, That to your
fatherly Care of the Church, here (a word only or two exchanged) which in the
like case, S. Ierom did to the learned Bishop of Hippo, the great Repairer of
the primitive Faith; In orb celebraris, Canonici, Te, Epist. 57. D. Aug. circa
sinem.
Conditorem antiquae rursum Fidei venerantur; and quod signum majoris eft
gloriae, omnes Schismatici detestantur; and Tuos, pari persequuntur odio; ut
quos Gladio nequeunt, voto intersiciant.

Pardon this Digression, most Reverend Father. Obscure men may, without
offense, deplore the miseries they cannot redress; Those that are more
eminent, may do both. A General Harmony, as well in Doctrine, as in Discipline
is yet wanting in the public practice of our Church, though not in the
Principles thereof; which is the maine Anvile most of my Sermons hammer on;
where, though you shall meet, belike, with much dust and rubbish, yet there is
a way begun to a richer Mine, which more elaborate and higher wits may dig
after, if they please. And as in public Vineyards, there are tam Vvae, quam
Labruscae, here a wild Grape, there a Green one; yonder a Third, in its full
blood, more ripened for your Palate; So it is in this mixture of my labors,
according to the disposition of their several Dedications; where, though every
piece may find an Incourager, None a Vindicator justly, but in a religious and
learned Metropolitan, to whose Gracious hands are in all obedience offered,
These and all the Powers of

Your Graces most obliged Honourer, and Servant, HVM. SYDENHAM.

THE WEL-TVNED CYMBALL. OR, A Vindication of the modern Harmony and Ornaments
in our Churches. AGAINST The Murmurings of their discontented OPPOSERS. A
SERMON, Occasionally preached at the Dedication of an ORGAN lately set up at
Bruton in Sommerset. By Humphrey Sydenham.

PSALM. 150. v. 4, 5. Laudate Dominum in Chordis and Organo, laudate eum in
Cymbalis Iubilationis.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE, for Humphrey Robinson, at the Sign of the
Three Pigeons in PAUL'S Churchyard. 1637.

TO MY HONORABLE Friend, JOHN COVENTRY, Esquire, Son to the Right Honorable
THOMAS, Lord COVENTRY, Baron of Alesborough, and Lord Keeper of the Great SEAL
of England.
SIR,
I Presume a musical Discourse can neither be improper, nor unseasonable for
him, that has so much harmony in himself, that holds such a consonancy with
the practice of the Church he lives in. And this is both your happiness and
your aim. Too many there are which employ their wit and greatness a contrary
way, and delight altogether in the jarring of the string, as if there were no
Melody but in Discords; but such are not within your fingering; nor, indeed,
your fancy; knowing that a Song of Sion, is a Song of Peace; and he that
keeps not time in the Hosannah below, shall hardly sing his part in the
Hallelujah above. I could whisper something in your ear, but being in part a
stranger, I may be thought to gloze; and therefore I will tell't abroad, where
I am conceived to be a little blunt, and therefore unapt to flatter. You have
besides your accurate speculations both in Divinity and Arts, a way to sweeten
them. an humble and courteous affability, by which you have given so much
encouragement to those more canonically devoted in our (commonly despised)
Tribe, that you have made them even tributary, and captive; so that they
equally study their own thankfulness, and your honor; to which if these
poor scriblings of mine may give either luster or advancement, (you having
been formerly pleased to afford them not only the charity of your fair
opinion, but the approbation also) I have done something to glory in; and
amongst the Troop of your other Honourers and Admirers, shall persist as the
most humble, so

The most Faithful, HVM. SYDENHAM.

THE VVELL-TVNED CYMBALL.
The first Sermon.
PSALM. 59.16. I will sing of thy Power; yea, I will sing aloud of thy Mercy, in
the morning, because thou have been my defense and my refuge in the day of my
trouble.


THe Text, though but a verse, is a complete Psalm, having in it all the
properties of a spiritual Song; where we may find the Parts, the Ground, the
Descant, the Author or Setter of it, the Time when 'twas sung, and the
Occasion of the singing.

1 The Parts two, in two words; Potentia and Misericordia, Power and Mercy; and
these voic'd alost, in a sacred and purer strain, fitter for a Quire of Angels
than of men; and that in double Tue, Tua potentia, and Tua misericordia, Thy
Power, and Thy Mercy; Thine, the God of men and Angels; the God of all Power
and Mercy.

2 The ground likewise in two words, Adiutorium and Refugium, Defense and
Refuge; but these pitched lower, in a double- Meum, Adjutorium meum and
Refugium meum, my Defense and my Refuge; but, Meum, ATe, and Adte Domine; this
My having Reference to, and Dependence from Thee; Thee, the God of Defense and
Refuge: And therefore my Defense, because of thy Power; and my Refuge, because
of thy Mercy.

3 The Descant, likewise, in two words, Cantabo and Exaltabo, I will sing, and
I will sing aloud; Here is singing only of Gods Power; but there is singing
aloud of his Mercy; as if his Mercy were more exaltable than his Power, and
That reached the very Heavens; This, unto the Clouds.

4 The Author or Setter of it; here singly expressed (not like the rest) in a
naked Ego, but an Ego with a double Office and Appellation; I, a King and a
Prophet, and not barely so; but I, David, a Singer too, the sweetest Singer in
Israel: I will sing of thy Power, and I will sing aloud of thy Mercy.

5 The Time when 'twas sung; not Vespere, or Post Meridiem (as the custom of
some Churches were, and are) no Afternoon or Evening-Antheme, when spirits are
dull, and devotions sleepie, and voices flatted; but in Matutinum, in the
morning, when his Thoughts are brushed and swept, the pipes, formerly
obstructed, clean; the Bellows of his Zeal filled full with the breath of
Gods Spirit; Then comes he with his Cantabo, and his Exaltabo, then can he best
sing of Gods Power, then sing loudest of his Mercy.

6 Lastly, the occasion of the Singing, opened here in the Adverbe, Quia,
Because; and this Quia being the occasion, looks narrowly to the Ground of the
Song, to Adjutorium and Refugium, to God his Defense and his Refuge; and
because he was so, and in the day of his Trouble too, therefore he would sing
of his Power, and sing aloud of his Mercy: Nay, he will sing of his Mercy for
ever; With his mouth will he make known his faithfulness to all generations,
for his Mercy shall be built up for ever, and his faithfulness established in
the very Heavens: So he professes in his 89. Psalm, 1. and 2. verses.

Thus, I have showed you a Model of my Discourse, where I shall not dwell
punctually on each limb and parcel of it, the time will not give way; no, not
to touch on some: And seeing we cannot well sunder the Descant from the Song,
or either, from him that sings it, let us join all three together, and so
begin, and so end, I will sing, and I will sing aloud.

It Is then most happy with the affairs of Gods people, when Kings are not only
Patrons of the Church, but Ornaments, such as can no less beautify Religion,
than propugne it. And this David did in a double way, of Majesty and
knowledge, being the prime piece in all, Israel, for Harmony and Eloquence,
exquisitely endowed with the perfections both of Poetry and Music; In so much,
that some of the Fathers either to cry down the vaunts of Heathens in their
rarities that way, or else to rival him with the fertile and richer Wits of
their Times, have been pleased to style him Simonides noster, Alceus,
Catullus, Flaccus, S. Jerome ad Paulinum.
and Serenus; let me add the Divine Orpheus, and Amphion, one that made Woods,
and Beasts, and Mountains; brutish, stony, and blockish dispositions to dance
after his Harp; and sometimes to sing with it in a Laudate Dominum ipsi
montes, ipsi arbores, ipsa jumenta, Praise the Lord ye Mountains and little
Hills, Trees, and all Cedars, Beasts and all Cattle, V. 10.
Psalm. 148. Herein personating Christ himself, who was that Poeonius medicus
(as Clemens Alexandrinus styles him) the Spiritual Aesculapius, Ille Sanctus
aegrotae Animae In cantator, The holy Inchanter of the sick Soul, who first
transformed Beasts into men, reduced Savagenes and Barbarism into civilitie:
Qui sevos, ut Leones, Clem. Alexan. paed. lib. 1. cap. 2.
ad mansuetudinem; Fallaces ut Vulpes, ad sinceritatem; obscenes ut sues, ad
continentiam revocavit: Cruelty, Craft, Obscaenitie (Hieroglyphically shadowed
under Lions, Foxes, Swine) he translated to meekness, innocence, temperance,
causing the Wolf to dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard to lie down with
the Kid, and the young Lion and the Fatling together, Isai 11.6.
and a little child leading them, Isai. 11.6. And although there be no
Analogy between Truth and Fiction in respect of substance, let us make it up
in respect of circumstance: They Nugivenduli Ethnicorum vates.
by their dexterity in Music, and cunning on the Harp, redeemed some of
theirs from the Gates of Hell; our Prophet, though by his heavenly touch and
warble, that way caused not the Redemption of any from below; yet on his
ten-stringed Instrument, he sung sweetly the Resurrection; For so Saint Jerome
tells his Paulinus, David Christum Lyra personat, Ier. ut supra.
and in Dechacordo Psalterio ab inferis excitat Resurgentem.

But lets us not so resemble small things to great, that we should dare
compare those Poeticke Rhapsodies with his sacred Harmony, their sensual
Elegies and Madrigals with his diviner Sonnets: O procul hinc procul ite
prophani. It Is true, his verses consisted of number and feet as well as theirs,
and he was as critical in their Observation as the daintiest Lyrick or
Heroicke, yet there was a vast disparitie, both for sublimity of matter and
elegancie of expression; Insomuch, that Petrus Damianus, the great adorer of
Humane Eloquence (and one whose very soul was charmed with their prophaner
Sonnets) was enforced at length to his Dulcius, immurmurat filius Iesse. The
Thracian Harp, and the Mercurian Pipe, and the Theban Lute, were but harsh and
grating, when the Jewish Psaltery came in place; One touch of the son of
Iesse, one warble of the Singer of of Israel, was more melodious than all their
Fabulous incantations, Clem. Alexan. paed. lib. 1. c. 2.
their Syrenicall fictions, which were but Iucunda quaedam auribus Raucedo, a
kind of plausible hoarsenesse, in respect of those sweet murmures of that
heavenly Turtle. An Iliad of Homer, or an Ode of Pindarus, or a Song of
Anacreon, or a Scene of Aristophanes, have not the juice, and blood, and
spirits, and marrow; the acuteness, elegance, vigor, majesty, that one of his
sacred Ditties are ballac'd and fraught withal: And God forbid that those
Ventosae nugae, and Expolita mendatia, those Superbi errores, and Gacculae
Argutiae, D. Aug. Ep. 131.
(as Saint Augustine styles them to his Memorius) their garnished and
beautiful lies, their windy trifles, their vainglorious errors, their
elaborate kick-shawes; their ingenious nothings should stand up in competition
with one Michtam of David, his Jewel, his golden Song, far above their
buskined raptures, their garish Phantasmes, their splendid vanities; the
Pageants and Land-skips (if I may so term them) of prophaner wits: And yet
there have been some Heretics of old, Gnostics and Nicolaitans, which have
rejected the Psalms as prophano Sonnets, the births of humane fancy and
invention, without any influence or aspiration of the holy Ghost, whereas the
very Spirit of God, our Savior himself, and the Uni-vocall Consent of all the
Apostles (nay the hallowed Quire of Heaven and earth, of Saints and Angels)
have acknowledged, that God spoke by the mouth of his servant David, that he
was the sweet Psalmist of Israel, that his Word was in his tongue, Act. 4.24. 2 Samuel 23.2.
he in Spirit calling him Christ the Lord, Mat. 22.43. Notwithstanding, he that
has a little traversed Primitive Records, shall meet with one Paulus
Samosetanus, Eusebius. l b. 7. cap. 26. and 29.
a branded Heretic, and many other ways infamous, who in open assemblies,
inveighed against Expositors of Holy Story; Psalms sung to the Honor of our
Lord Jesus he caused to be expunged and razed out from the Church, accounting
them but the work-manship of noveltie, the forgeries of some Neotericks and
Vpstarts in the Church; Instead whereof, in the body of the Temple, upon the
high Feast of Easter, he suborned cetaine women (flickering and unstable
creatures, whom he had molded to his own purposes) to sing loud Sonnets of
his praise. Though some favorers of the Heretic have been pleased to blaunch
a little the foulness of his practice, Pol. Syntag. l. 1. c. 32.
and would not have it thought a disparagement of the Psalms of David, but of
the Hymns and holy Songs, which Christians in a religious vow and zealous
endeavor made afterward in the honor of Christ, and the commemoration of his
Name. But were they religious Songs or Psalms that had been thus
sacrilegiously debarred the inheritance of the Church; I stand not curiously to
discuss, I am sure the custom was abominable, to chant their loud Panegericks
there, where only should be sung Hosannahs to the Lord. For as Temples were
first dedicated to the glory of God, so they were still continued to the
worship of his Name; of his Name only; except where Superstition had
interposed, Ignorance or Heresy taken foot; and so Apostates and Idols, nay
Devlis themselves have sometimes shared in that worship which was peculiar to
the Lord of Hosts. Or else, perchance, the purblind zeal, or devout errors
of others, who have erected their glorious Pyramides to the memory (and it were
well, only to the memory) to the Adoration of some Saint or Martyr, which in
their primitive institution were proper only to the God of both.

And for this, Gods better Reverence and Majesty in his Service, the Churches
of old have generally mixed Psalms with their Devotions, and Melody, with
their Psalms; Melody, as well of Instrument as of Voice; which, as it has
been a gray-hair'd custom of most times and places; so not so obsolete, now,
or super-annuated, that it should beburied wholly with that Law of Ceremonies;
for besides the countenance and authority which it found in the first
ordinance, it has been the practice of Gods best servants, in most ages of the
Church, nay in most ages of the world, except that first age of Sacrifices,
when we read of no public Service, but by Holocaust; of no Church but the
Tents of Patriarchs; no preaching of the Word but by Dream or Vision; when
Altars wore the tongue of Religion, and devotions were cast up by Incense, and
not by Voice. But not long after them, when there was not yet a Temple built,
but an Arc only (a mystical porch or entrance to that Temple to come) we
find a Representative Cathedral amongst the Jews. Singing men, and Psalms,
and Instruments of Music, and all the Complements of a full Quire. It Is true,
in the first rearing and forming of the Arc, we read only of Priests and
Levites, with their attendance and charge; of no Songs or Iestruments either
prepared yet, or enjoined, only two Trumpets of Silver made by Moses at the
command of God; and these the Israelites used, not merely for the calling of
Assemblies, and journying of the Camp, and the Alarums for War, but in
solemn days and times of Gladness, the Sons of Aaron were to blow them
over their Burnt Offerings, and the Sacrifices of their Peace Offerings (as if
on special Festivals and times of joy, God could not be praised sufficiently
without this louder Harmony) and therefore the Text says, It was to them for a
memorial before God, Numb. 10.10. But afterward the Israelites setting
forward in their journey; when the Arc was to remove from the Mountain of the
Lord, we find a kind of To Deum laudamus amongst the people, Numb. 10.35.
Moses beginning a Magnificat to the Lord, Rise up Lord, let thine enemies be
scattered, and let them that has thee flee before thee. And this Surge Domine,
is by David afterward (speaking of the removing of the Arc) voic'd into a
Cantate Domino, Sing unto the Lord, sing praises unto his Name, extol him that
rides upon the Heavens by his Name JAH, and rejoice before him, Psalm. 68.4.
After this, I read no more of the Ark of God, without some kind of Music,
whether in times of peace or war, of triumph, or overthrow, except once when
the Philistines to the disgrace of Israel led it captive, and brought it from
Eben-Ezer unto Ashdox, where though it lost a while its former melody, it found
a kind of observance from the Pagans themselves, who put it in the house of
their God, and because it should not be long there without reverence, Dagon
himself falls on his face to worship it, as if he had blushed, that metal,
and wood, and stones (the substance belike of that false God) should
acknowledge a true Divinity, where Barbarism and Infidelity would not. But (it
seems) God was not well pleased with this kind of worship, but instead of a
blessing, sends a disease; the Emrods drive the Ark of God from Ashdod to
Gath, from Gath to Ekron, from Ekron to Bethshemesh, from thence to
Kyriath-iearim, where after some time of lamentation, David fetching it again
to Zion, prepares all manner of Instruments for the removal, and the whole
house of Israel play before it with Harpes, and Psalteries, and Timbrels, and
Cornets, and Cymballs, 2 Samuel 6.5. And after the Arc had rest, there being a
place prepared, and a Tent pitched for it in the City of David, the chief of
the Levites and their brethren were appointed to be their Singers with
Instruments of Music, sounding, by lifting up their voice with joy, 1 Chronicles.
15. v. 1.16.

And because this sacred melody might not breed confusion in public services,
special men are culled out by David for special Instruments, others for
Songs, for the better raising up of men's hearts, and sweetning their affections
toward God; Eleezer and Iehosaphat the Priests were appointed to sound with
Trumpets continually; Heman and Ethan with Cymballs of brass, Zacharit and
Maasiah with Psalteries on Alamoth, Maitathia and Azzacia with Harps on the
Sheminith to excel, Chenaiah chief of the Levites was for Song; for Song as
well to instruct others, as to sing himself, so says the Text, He instructed
about the Song, because he was skillful, V. 19, 20, 21, 22.
1 Chro. 15. Insomuch, that though our Prophet here seriously professed, that he
himself would sing, and sing aloud, yet we understand it for the most part
rather of his Pen, than of his Voice; for though the greater bulk of Psalms
was composed by David, yet (as Saint Augustine observes) he sung only nine in
his own person, Asaph, Eman, Ethan, Ieduthun. D. Aug. de Tit. primi Psalm.
Reliqui dicti a quatuor principibus juxta titulorum inscriptionem, the rest
were sung, or at least commanded to be sung by one of those four chief
Musicions specified in the inscription fronted to each Psalm; and these were
men, Spiritu sancto mundati (says the Father) whom the holy Ghost had purified
and apted for a sacred modulation, and he that had the greatest measure of the
Spirit for the present, he for the most part sung, and not only sung, but
sometimes prophesied, prophesied with instruments too (for so we read) Asaph,
Eman and Ieduthun were to prophecy with Harpes, Psalteries and Cymballs, and
this custom was continued until the days of Solomon, 1. Chron. 6.32.

Neither did it cease in the beginning of this wise Kings Reign, but we hear
an Echo and resounding of it, at the Dedication of his glorious Temple, where
we have a touch again of this melodious Hierarchy, Priests, Levites,
Nethynims, Singers, Trumpeters; the Levites with their Sons and brethren
(which were Singers) being arrayed in white linen, and having Cymballs, and
Psalteries and Harpes, stood at the East end of the Altar, and with one hundred
and twenty Priests sounding with Trumpets, and the Trumpeters and Singers were
as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising the Lord God, 2 Chronicles. 5.12.

And this manner of Jubilation and magnifying of God aloft, continued (only
the time of Captivity excepted) till the expiration of the Law, and though in
the first seeding of the Gospel, it seem swept clean away with those
Ceremonies of Israel (we having no mention by the Evangelists, either of
vecall or Isntrumental melody, except in a solitary Quire, by a Song of
Simeon, or a Magnificat of Mary, or a Benedictus of Zacharias) yet some of the
Fathers will tell us, that in the Jewish Synagogue, even in the times of
Christ, there was a kind of Diapsalma, a leaping into Dances; which though
some jeering Michals may account to be little less than mimicall or
ridiculous, yet no doubt religious enough, if sincerely done, as we may see by
the holy practices of David and Myriam, and many thousands more.

It Is true, in the dawne and rising of the Primitive Church, we read of
Spiritual Songs, Hymns, and Psalms; but these (it seems) spoken only, not
sung; or if there were singing then, no singing aloud. No Melody so proper
then, as of the heart (and surely then, and now, that is the best private
Melody). Speaking to your selves (says Saint Paul) and making melody in your
bearts to the Lord, Ephesians. 5.19. And this was the loudest melody the Church
could or durst make awhile, being yet but a handful of Apostles, with their
Proselites or Catechumeni, and these for the most part under the sword of
persecution too; but not long after, this custom of singing aloud began again
to revive in the Church, in the days of Eusebius. l. 3. c. 32. Socrat. lib. 6.
cap. 8.
Ignatius (that Ignatius that trod so near on the heels of the Apostles, the
Disciple of John, and second, or as some would have it, third Bishop after
Saint Peter in the Church of Antioch, M. H. Eccle. Chron. ad ann. 100. T. C.
lib. 1. page 203.
martyred in the time of Traian near 100. years after Christ) though Eusebius.
l. 3. c. 32. Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 8.
some, who labor not only to deface, but to cry down Antiquity this way,
derive the pedigree a little lower from the times of Constantius the Emperor
25 5. years after, when this solemn custom bloomed again by the zealous
endeavors of Flavian and Diadore, men that stoutly propugn'd the Apostolic
Faith, M. H. Eccl. Chren. ad ann. 355.
against the Bishop of the same See, Leantius the Arrian; nay, lower yet 23.
years after to the times of Damasus in the Reign of Valentinian, by
Chronologicall computation 378. years after Christ, Theod. lib. 2. c. 24.
though it be evident, that this custom was on foot long before in the Greek
Church: M. H. Eccles. Chron. ad ann. 178.
And for proof hereof, a learned Idem ad annum, 367.
Antiquary quotes both the Authority and Practice of S. Basil, who first
brought it into Caesarea, where he was Bishop, and afterward bequarrell'd by
Sabellius the Heretic, and Marcellus, who took occasion to exasperate the
Churches against him, as being the Author of Innovation, he alleges the
examples of many Churches in this kind, Sanct. Basil. Ep 63.
those of Egypt, Lybia, Thebes, Palestina, Tharabians, Phenicians, Syrians,
Mesopotamians, etc. And after a voluminous quotation of Text and Fathers, the
unparalleled Hooker (for I must name him, and I must name him so) concludes,
Lib. 5. Eecl. pol. sect. 39.
whosoever were the Author, whatsoever the time, whencesoever the example of
beginning this custom in the Church of Christ, the practice was not less
ancient than devout, nor devout than warrantable, having had acquaintance with
the world since the first times of the Gospel above twelve hundred years, even
by the consent and account of those who have fifted the Antiquity and manner
of it to the Branne, T. C. page 203.
not so much to know as to deprave; and yet at last are enforced tacitly to
assent, that all Christian Churches have received it, most approved Councels
and Laws ratified it, the best and wisest of Gods Governors applauded it; and
therefore not only without blemish or inconvenience, but with some addition of
luster and majesty to Gods service as having power to elevate our devotions
more swiftly toward Heaven; to depresse and trample under foot (for the
present) all extravagant and corrupter thoughts, rowzing and relieving those
spirits which are drooping, and even languishing in a solitary and sullen, and
(oftentimes) a despairing heaviness; nay, the very Hammer that bruizes and
beats into Devotion those dispositions which will not be otherwise suppled and
made tender, but by the power and virtue of those sounds which can first ravish
the affections, and then dissolve the heart.

And yet there are some ears so nice and curious (I know not whether through
weakness or affectation) to which this Harmony in the Church is no more
passable than a Saw or a Harrow, which in stead of stroaking, dragg's and
tortures them. David's Cantabe is generally current, but his Exaltabe passes for
Apochryphall; Singing in private families, or congregations, have a taste,
questionless of Geneva; but singing aloud relishes too much of the Romish
Synagogue; and though perhaps it do, yet there can be no Plea here for those,
who obtruding to us the use of Instruments by Pagans in honor of their Idols;
or the modern practice of some places, where Religion lies a little sluttish
and undressed, that therefore they are not warrantable, or at best but
offensive in a reformed Church; for immediately upon the reign of Ahaz, that
idolatrous King, who made a molten image for Baalim, and burnt incense in the
Valley of the Sons of Hinnon, where those louder Instruments were in use for
drowning the cries of little children whom they barbarously forced through
their cruel fires, to the worship of their God Moloch, the good King Hezekiah,
laboring to restore Religion to its primitive luster as it shined in the days
of our Prophet (and then questionless it shined without Idolatry) with the
Rulers of Israel, goes to the house of the Lord, and in a solemn Sacrifice
sets there the Priests and the Levites with Cymballs, Psalteries, and Harpes,
and this upon no particular or private fancy of his own, but the Line and
Rule of his uncorrupted predecessor, David; so says the Text, According to the
command of David, 2 Chronicles. 29. And not only so, but (that Kings may be known
to rule as well by special revelation, as by prescription, or their own will)
by the assent of the Lord too, his principal Agents, Gad the Kings Seer, 2
Chro. 29.15.
and Nathan the Prophet, in the 15. verse of the same chapter; and after this,
when Manasseh his son revolted from the sincerity of his Father, and followed
the abominations of the Heathen, whom God had cast out before Israel, building
again the high places that his Father had broken down, making Groves and
erecting Altars for all the Host of Heaven (when no doubt all the pomp and
raritie of Music was in request both to allure and besot the people) the
immediate Successor after Ammon (the son of his Idolatry and witchcraft) the
good Josiah, when he had demolished those Baalitish Altars, cut down the
Groves and carved Images, and their molten Gods, cinder'd and brayed into dust,
repairing again the house of the Lord his God, calls for the Sons of Merari
and Zechariah and Meshullam, and others of the Levites that could skill of the
Instruments of Music, and the Singers, the Sons of Asaph were in their
place, according to the commandment of David, and Heman, and Ieduthun, the
Kings Seer, 2 Chronicles. 35.15.

However, there are amongst us some anti-harmonicall snarlers, which esteem
those bellowings in the Church (for so they have bruitishly phras'd them) no
better than a windy devotion, as if it cooled the fervor of their zeal,
damped the motions of the Spirit, clogged the wheels of their fiery Chariot
mounting toward Heaven, choked the livelihood and quickness of those
raptures, which on a sudden they ejaculate; when, if they would but wipe off a
little those wilful scales which hang upon their eyes, they could not but see
the admirable virtues and effects which melody has wrought even in that part
of man which is most sacred; Insomuch, that both Philosophers and Divines have
jumped in one fancy, that the Soul is not only naturally harmonicall, but
Harmony it self. And indeed, the whole course of nature is but a Harmony; the
order of superior and inferior things, a melodious Consort; Heaven and Farth,
the great Diapason; both Churches, a double Quire of Hosannahs and Halleluiahs,
Magnus Divinae Majestatis praeco, mundus est, says the lofty Nazianzene, the
world is the great Trumpeter of Divine Glory, Suave canticum, as Saint Bernard
has it, a sweet Song; D. Aug. lib. 11. de civit. Dei, cap. 18.
or else Carmen pulcherrimum (as S. Augustine will) a golden Verse; as if in
Art and Consent both, it resembled both a Verse and a Song. Now Carmen in most
languages is nothing else but laus; and therefore that Psalmodicall Tract,
which we call Liber carminum, the Hebrews call Liber landationum; So that a
Song is nothing else but a Praise; and therefore the whole world being a kind
of Encomium, or praise of the glory of God, we may not improperly call it a
Song also.

And as the greater world is thus a Song, so is the lesser too: Ephesians. 2.10.
Ipsius factura sumus (says Saint Paul) we are Gods workmanship, which some
from the Greek render Ipsius poema sumus, we are his Poem, his Heroicke
Poem: All creatures, men especially, being certain luculent Songs or Poems,
in which divine praises are resounded. Nay some of the Fathers have called
Christ himself a Song (for so Clemens Alexandrinus) pulcherrimus Dei Hymnus
est homo, P. ed. lib. 1. c. 2.
qui in justitia aedificatur, the man of Righteousness is a most beautiful
Hymn or Song, and so is his Spouse a Song too, and the love between both,
Canticum canticorum, a Song of Songs, there being such a harmony between God
and the World, and the World and the rest of his creatures there, that the one
is like a well-set Antheme; the other as so many Singers and Choristers to
voice and chant it: First, the Heavens, they sing, Isai 49.13. and then the
Earth, that sings Psalm. 98.4. the Mountains also they break forth into
singing, Isai. 55.12. the Valleys they laugh and sing too, Psalm. 65.13. the
Cedar and the Shrub are not without their Song neither, Isai 14.8. (as well the
Isai 42.11.
Inhabitants of the Rock, as those that dwell in the and 26.9.
dust) nay, those creatures that cannot yet speak, do sing, The lame leapes
as an Heart, and the tongue of the dumb sings, Isai. 35.6.

Seeing then, that the whole course of nature is but a Song, or a kind of
singing a melodious concention both of the Creator and the creature: how can we
conceive them to be less than prodigies, who as if they distasted this
general harmony, revile that particular and more sacred in our Churches, not
considering what wonderful effects and consequences Music has wrought both
in expelling of evil spirits, and calling on of Good.

Exagitabat Saul spiritus nequam, says the Text, An evil spirit troubled
Saul, and with one touch of David's Harp he is refreshed, and the evil spirit
departed from him, 1 Samuel 16. Elisha, V. 14.25. V. 15.
when he was to prophecy before the Kings of Judah and Samaria, call's for a
Musician, and as he played, The Spirit of God fell upon him, 2 Kings 4. Mirum
(says S. Augustine) Daemones fugat, D. Aug. prol. in lib. Psalm.
Angelos ad adjutorium invitat. And yet it is not a thing so strange as
customary with God to work miraculous effects by creatures, which have no
power of themselves to work them, or only a weak resemblance. What virtue
was there in a few Rams horns, that they should flat the walls of Jericho?
or in Gideons Trumpets, that they should chase a whole Host of Midianites?
Digitus Dei hic, the finger of God is here, and this finger oftentimes runs
with the hand of the Musician: and therefore a modern and learned Wit, M. Th.
Wright.
discoursing of the passions of the mind in general, falls at length on those
which are raised by Harmny, and dyving after reasons, why a proportionable and
equal disposition of sounds and voices, the tremblings, vibrations, and
artificial curlings of the air (which in effect he calls, The substance of
all Music) should so strangely set passions aloft, so mightily raise our
affections as they do, sets down four manners or forms of motion, which
occur to the working of such wonderful effects.

The first is Sympathia, Sympathia.
for such is the nature of our souls, that Music has a certain
proportionable Sympathy with them, as our tastes have with such varieties of
dainties, or smelling with such diversities of odours. And Saint Augustine this
way, was enforced to acknowledge, that Omnes affectus spiritus nostri, all the
affections of our spirit, by reason of the variousnesse and multiplicity of
them, had proper manners and ways in Voice and Song, D. Aug. lib. 10. coas.
cap. 33.
Quorum nescio qua occulta familiaritate excitentur, which he knew not well by
what secret familiarity or mysterious custom they were excited and roused up.

The second, Providentia, Gods general providence; which, Providentia.
when these sounds affects the ear, produces a certain spiritual quality
in the soul, stirring up some passion or other, according to the variety of
sounds or voices; For The imagination (says he) being not able to dart the
forms of fancies, which are material, into the under standing which is
spiritual, therefore where nature wants, Gods providence supplyeth. And as
in humane generation, the body is from man, and the soul from God; the one
preparing the matter, the other creating the form: so in Harmony; when Men
sound and hear, God strikes upon and stirs the heart; so that, where
corporal mussicke is unable of it self to work such extraordinary effects in
our souls, God by his Ordinary natural providence produces them.

The third, more open and sensible, Sonus ipse, the very sound it self, Sonus
ipse.
which is nothing else but an artificial shaking and quavering of the air,
which passes through the ears, and by them unto the heart; and there it
beats and tickleth it in such sort, that it is moved with semblable passions,
like a calm water ruffled with a gale of wind: For as the heart is most
delicate and tender. so most sensible of the least impressions that are
conjecturable; and it seems that Music in those Cells, plays with the
animal and vital spirits, the only goades of passion; So that although we
lay altogether aside the consideration of Ditty or Matter, the very murmr of
sounds rightly modulated and carried through the porches of our ears to those
spiritual rooms within, is by a native vigor more than ordinarily powerful,
both to move and moderate all affections; and therefore Saint Augustine would
have this custom of Symphony kept up in the Church, Vt per oblectamenta aurium
infirmior animus in affectum pietatis assurgat. D. Aug. lib. 10. cons. cap. 33.


The fourth, Multiplicitas objectorum, Multiplicitas objectorum.
for as all other senses have an admirable multiplicitie of objects which
delight them, so has the ear: And as it is impossible to express the
variety of delights or distasts which we perceive by, and receive in them, so
here variety of sounds diversificate passions, stirring up in the heart many
sorts of joy or sadness, according to the nature of Tunes, or temper and
quality of the receiver. And doubtless in Harmony we may discover the
misticke portraitures both of Vice and Virtue, and the mind thus taken with
resemblances, falls often in love with the things themselves; insomuch, that
there is nothing more betraying us to sensuality, than some kind of Music;
than other, none more advancing unto God. And therefore there must be a
discreet caution had, that it be grave and sober, and not over-wanton'd with
curiosity or descant. The Lacedaemonians banished Milesius their famous Harper
only for adding one string to those seven which he was wont formerly to teach
withal, as if innovation in Art were as dangerous as in Religion: Insomuch,
that Plato would make it a Law in Music that it should not be Multiplex and
effeminata, V. de Osor. lib. 4. de Iustit. Regis.
he using it to his Scholars, non (...), sed (...) non (...); ut condimentum,
non quotidianum pabulum; as sauce only, or a running banquet only, not as a
full meal.

The over-carving and mincing of the air either by ostentation or curiosity
of Art, lulls too much the outward sense, and leaves the spiritual faculties
untouched, whereas a sober mediocritie and grave mixture of Tune with Ditty,
rocks the very soul, carries it into ecstasies, and for a time seems to cleave
and sunder it from the body, elevating the heart inexpressably, and resembling
in some proportion those Halleluiahs above, the Quire and unity which is in
Heaven. And this glances somewhat at that story of Ignatius by Socrates, who
took a pattern of his Church-melody from a Chorus of Angels; Lib. 6. cap. 8.
which (as the Historian testifies) he beheld in a Vision extolling the blessed
Trinity with Hymns interchangeably sung. Or if this perchance prove fabulous,
that of Saint Augustine will pass for canonical, where he styles this voycing
of Psalms aloft, Exercituam coelestium Spiritale Thymiama, D. Aug. Prolog. in
lib. Psalm.
The Music of Angels themselves, the spiritual Incense of that caelestiall
Army. And as it is a representation of that Unity above, so is it of Totius
Eccles. vox una. D. Aug. ibid.
concord and charity here below, when under a consonance of voice, we find
shadowed a conjunction of minds, and under a diversity of notes, meeting in
one Song a multiplicitie of Converts in one devotion, so that the whole Church
is not only one tongue, but one heart. And to this purpose Saint Augustine
again, Diversorum sonorum rationabilis moderatusque concentus, concordi
varietate, compactam been ordinatae civitatis insinuat unitatem, in his 17. De
civitate, 14. chapter.

And here I cannot but justle once more with those spirits of contradiction,
which are so far from allowing Harmony, an Emblem of unity in the Church,
that they make it their chief engine of war and discord: and that which does
as it were betroth others to those solemn services, is their chief motive of
separation and divorce. A Psalm by Voice barely they can allow, but not by
Instrument, as if this were abrogated by the Ceremonial Law; the other not,
and yet if one, why not the other? And herein they not only destroy the nature
and property of Psalms themselves, but cry down the authority of the
Psalmist too, in his laudate Dominum in Psalterio, Psalm. 150.
praise the Lord upon the Psaltery, an instrument first invented for the
Psalms, and used only to it; and therefore called Psalterium a Psallendo:
Insomuch that some of the Fathers have defined a Psalm to be nothing else but
Modulatio per Instrumentum musicum, or Sermo musicus secundum harmoniae
rationem ad Organum pulsatus, Vide Coq. in lib. 17. civit. Dei cap. 14.
(so the Translator gives it me both from Saint Basil and Gregory Nyssen.) And
what is this but our Prophets Landate Dominum in chordis and Organo? Psalm.
150.4.
Praise the Lord upon stringed Instruments and the Organ. The word of the
Septuagint there is (...); which, though it generally signify any kind of
Instrument, yet that is most properly called so; D. Aug. in Psalm. ult. v. 4.
Quod inflatur follibus, says Saint Augustine: And what other is that in use
now in our Cathedralls? which like those of old is an Instrument of Exultation,
Job. 21.12. and had his original (for ought I know) from the invention of
Iubal himself, in the 4. of Genesis 21. But whether it had or not, doubtless
in many it does sublimate devotion, sets their contemplation a soaring, as
having a near affinity with the voice of man; which lifted as it ought,
resembles that of Angels, Et hoc fit modulatione quadam and delectabili Canore,
D. Aug. prol. in lib. Psalm.
says that renowned African, by a kind of modulaminous and delightful air,
which insinuating strangely with the outward Sense, steals subtilely into the
mind of man, and not only invites but draws it to a holy chastity and
immaculatenesse, and therefore 'twas the wisdom of the Spirit (seeing man's
disposition somewhat refractary to good, and struggling naturally with the Laws
of virtue, his affections more steep and prone to the ways of pleasure than
the untrodden paths of Righteousness) to mix the power of Doctrine with that
of Tunes, Vt dum suavitate carminis mulcetur auditus, divini Sermonis pariter
utilitas inseratur, that whilst the ear was charmed with the sweetness of the
Ditty, the mind also might be rapt with the divinenesse of the matter, and so
whilst others sing, we not only hear, but learn too; D. Aug. prol. in lib.
Psalm.
O vere admirandi magistri sapiens institutum, ut simul and cantare videamur,
and quod ad utilitatem animae pertinet doceamur, the Father still. And yet, by
the way let us take heed, whilst we too much indulge this outward modulation,
we are not more transported with the melody of the Tune than the sense of the
Psalm; the singing, than the matter that is sung: Saint Augustine, when he did
so (as he confessed he did so) confessed likewise, D. Aug. lib. 10. conf. cap.
33.
that he did Poenaliter peccare, and yet withal acknowledged, that in those
sounds which Gods sacred Word did quicken and inspire, when the voice that was
to chant them had both sweetness and art, Aliquantulum acquiesco, non ut
haeream, sed ut surgam, cum volo, he rested a little, though he stuck not
there; and 'twas a wonder he had not, considering what a means it had been
formerly to his mortification, when after his conversion by Saint Ambrose,
being baptized at Millaine with Alipius and his son, he confessed, or sighed
rather, Quantum flevi in Hymnis and canticis suave sonantis Ecclesiae vocibus
acriter commotus? when his head was a full Sea, each eye a fountain, and every
cheek a channel, where tears did not so properly drop as flow, as if he
threatened one flood with another, a flood of transgressions with a flood of
sorrows; notwithstanding, afterward upon a new recollection of his spirits,
and (as it seems) his judgment, the devout Father was pleased to censure some
curiosities in the Church this way, and that from the authority of Athanasius,
who would have the Reader of the Psalm to use such a slender inflection of
voice, Vt pronuntianti vicinior esset, quam canenti, D. Aug. lib. 10. conf.
cap. 33.
that it should seem rather utterance than Song; whereupon some have presumed
to affirm, that singing at first in the Church was little more than a kind of
melodious pronunciation, though it be apparent (and I can prove it so) that the
Doricke Tone was in use even in primitive times, and for the gravitie and
pleasantness of it Psalms and Hymns were then continually sung to that kind
of Harmony. And this had a double aim in the first institution; the one, for
Novices in devotion, that where minds but lately carnally affected (which
naked words could not so easily bore and enter) the flatteries of Art, the
insinuations of Music, might gain a more plausible convoy and access for
diviner matters; the other, for the spiritual refreshing and comfort of those
that for Religion heretofore groaned under the yoke of tyranny; when this kind
of singing was first set up by Saint Ambrose in Millaine, according to the
custom of the Eastern Churches, D. Aug. lib. 9. confess. cap. 7.
Ne populus maeroris taedio contabescat, so that it was not only a special in
ducement to the mortification of those which otherwise had been still secularly
disposed, but a maine cordial and solace for them also, which under the sword
of Arrianisme were set apart of old for the Fiery Trial.

Some Philosophers are of opinion, that the Spirit knows and understands
only by the help and service of the Senses, Nihil est in intellectu, quod non
fuerit prius in sensu, which if it be generally true, our ears doubtless are
as trap-doores to our mental faculties, which as they are shut or open, so
shut or open to their spiritual operations. But Aristotle here was too much a
Naturallist, and somewhat injurious to the soul, in so beslaving it and
setting it a begging of the senses, as if it had not virtue and wisdom enough
of it self to exercise her functions without the special administration of
outward Adjuncts, knowing that the Senses apprehend only the simple Accidents,
and not the Forms and Essence of things, much less the secrets in or above
Nature, which are a journey and task for our contemplative and intellectual
powers, and these also puzzled sometimes in their inquisition, and well nigh
lost in the windings and turnings both of metaphisicall and natural
speculations. And therefore doubtless in spiritual affairs (where the Soul
chiefly is imbarqu'd) we are, or should be, more elevated to God by Reason
than by Sense, when we ascend to him by serious Meditations, deep Penetrations
of his Word, Tho. Wr. ut supra.
Majesty, Attributes, Perfections, which chiefly transport those that are
truly grave, that are mortified indeed; when this overtickling of the Sense by
the plausibility of sounds, this courting and complementing with the Ear by
the elegance and raritie of some well-run-voluntary or descant, are for Punies
in devotion; to whom notwithstanding they are as sensual objects to ascend to
God in Spirit, to contemplate his sweetness, blessedness, eternal felicity;
though even in those also that are most pure and sanctified (to whom the most
curious Air that ere was set, is not half so harmonious as one groan of the
Spirit) do not always attend those deeper cogitations, but now and then
intermingle their devotions with this sacred sensuality, which as a pleasant
path leads to the Fountain of spiritual joy and endless comfort. And
therefore let the Psalmist be once more our remembrancer, and as a
remembrancer, an informer too, Laudate Dominum in Psalterio, Psalm. 150.5.
laudate eum in Cymbalis Iubilationis; let our outward praises of the Lord so
run with those within, that our Soul may magnify him, and our Spirit
rejoice in him that saved us, and then no doubt we may sing cheerfully of his
Power, and sing aloud of his Mercy; so sing, and sing aloud, that our Psalterie
may bare a part with our Cymball, our heart with our tongue, our sincerity with
our profession, our actions with our words.

Saint Augustine paraphrasing on that of the 104. Psalm, Sing unto the Lord,
sing Psalms unto him, makes a criticisme between Cantate and Psallite;
Singing unto God, and singing Psalms unto him, Verbo Cantat, Psallit Opere,
he sings to God that barely professes him, he Psalms it that obeys him; the
one is but Religion voyc'd, the other done; and it is this doing in spiritual
business that sets the crown on Christianity; Profession only shows it, and
oftentimes scarce shows it truly, like an hypocritical glass, which
represents a feature as it would be, not as it is; as it desires to seem, not
as it looks. Again, Psalterium pulsatur manibus. D. Aug. ibid.
Ore Cantatur Manibus Psallitur, he that Sings, makes use of the mouth; he
that Psalms it, does exercise the hand, so that the mouth (it seems) only
expresses our faith, the hand our good works, the one does but tattle
Religion, the other communicates it. And therefore our Prophet no sooner
mentions his Cantate and his Psallite, but immediately there follows a Narrate
and a Gleriamini; First, Sing unto the Lord, and sing Psalms unto him, and
then in the next verse, Talk of his wondrous works, and glory in his holy
name: So that belike, He that only sings unto God (the vocal professor) he
does but talk of his wondrous works; but he that Psalms it (the realist in
Christianity) he glories in his holy Name. And to this purpose, the Father
doubles on the Prophet, Psalm. 67. Sing unto God, D. Aug. in Psalm. 67.
sing praises unto his Name. Cantat Deo, qui vivit Deo, Psallit nomini ejus,
qui operatur in gloriam ejus, he sings unto God that lives unto God, and he
sings praises to his Name that does something for the glory of his Name: And
happy is that man that so sings, and sings praises, that both lives and does
to the glory of GODS Name.

And how can Gods Name be better glorified than in his House? and how better in
his house, than by singing of his Power and Mercy? his Mercy in so drawing us,
that we can live unto him; his Power, for inabling us to do something for his
Glory. And it is well, that Those whom God has enabled to do, will do
something for Gods Glory; for the Glory either of his Name of House. A
President this way is but Miracle revived; and the Thing done, does not so much
beget Applause, as Astonishment. It Is somewhat above Wonder, to see the One
without Profanation, or the Other without Sacrilege; I mean not (and I say I
mean not to forestall the preposterous Comments of others, which sometimes
injuriously pick knots out of Rushes) that Sacrilege, which fleeces the
Revenewes, but the Ribs and Entrails of a Church; defaces Pictures, and
rifles Monuments, tortures an innocent piece of Glass for the limme of a Saint
in it; Razes out a Crucifice, and sets up a Scutchion; Pulls down an Organ, and
advances an Houre-glasse; and so makes an House of Prayer, a fit den for
Thieves. And indeed, this malicious dis-robing of the Temple of the Lord, is no
better than a Spiritual Theft; and the Hands that are guilty of it, are but
the Hands of Achan; and for their Reward, deserve the hands Gebazi. God is the
God of Decency. And Ornaments either In his House, or About it (as they are
Ornaments) are so far from awaking his Jealousy, that they find his
Approbation. He that has consulted with the Jewish Story, cannot want instance
this way, nor illustration. The Law of old required the Altar clean, the
Priest washed, the Sacrifices without blemish; and this, when there was yet not
only a Temple not built, but not projected; but this once enterpriz'd,
straightway stones must be choicely hewed from the Mountains, Artificers
fetched from Tire, Cedars from Libanus, Silver from Tharshish, Gold from Ophir,
1 King 6. and 7. 2 Cron. 3.4. 1 Chro 29.4
Silver and Gold in no small proportion, ten thousand talents at least, to
overlay the walls of it; besides, the very beams and posts and doors
o'respread with Gold, Gold of Parvaim (no other would serve the turn) garnisht
within with precious stones and graved Cherubins, 2 Chronicles 3.
Cherubins of Gold too ^^^e Gold: (so says the Text) veiled over with blue and
purple and crimson and fine Linen, nothing wanting for luster or riches, for
beauty and magnificence for the house of a God; the King would have it so,
Solomon the wise King, and he would have it so for Ornament, and not for
Worship, except for the worship of his God, and that his God approves of with a
fire from heaven, 2 Chronicles. 7.1.

And now, my Brother, what capital offense in the Image of a Saint or Martyr,
historically or ornamentally done in the house of the Lord? It invites not our
knee, but our eye; not our Observance, but our Observation; or if perchance our
Observance, not our Devotion: Though we honor Saints, we do them no worship;
and though sometimes we sing of, we sing not unto them; we sing of their
Sufferings, not of their Power; and in so singing, we sing unto God; Sing first
of his Power, that he has made them such Champions for Him; and then, Sing
aloud of his Mercy, that they were such Lights unto us. And here, what danger
of Idolatry? what color for Offense? what ground for Cavil or exception? Our
days of Ignorance and blind zeal are long since past by, but (it seems) not
of Peevishness or Contradiction: And certainly, if Fancy or Spleen had not
more to do here than Judgment, this Quarrel might be ended without Blood. We
are so curious in Tything of Mynt and Cummin, that we let go the waightier
matters of the Law; and whilst we dispute the indifferencies of a painted roof
or window, we sometimes let down the very walls of a Church: And I dare say,
if a Consistory did not more scarre some than a Conscience, Temples would stand
like those Egyptian Monuments, I know not whether a Model of Antiquity or
Desolation. It Is a misery, when the life of Religion shall lie in the Tongues
of men, and not in their Hands; or if in their Hands, sometimes not in their
Hearts. The times are so loud for Faith, Faith, that the noise thereof drownes
sometimes the very Motion of good Works; and even there too, where Faith is
either begotten, or at least strengthened in the House of the Lord; That stands
Naked, and sometimes Bare-headed, as if it begged for an Alms; when our
Mansions swell in pride of their Battlements, the beauty of their Turrets; and
yet their Inhabitants still cry as the mad people did after the Flood, Come,
Genesis 11.4.
let us make Brick, let us Build: But all this while, No noise of an Axe or a
Hammer about the House of the Lord; Their project is to lift their Earth unto
Heaven, and it matters not though the Heaven here below lay level with the
Earth, they sing of a City and a Tower to get them a Name; They care not for a
Temple to sing aloud in to the Name of their God: And hence it is, that this
God makes that sometimes a way to their confusion, which they intended a means
to their Glory.

I have observed three special sorts of Builders in our Age, and three sorts
of singing by them. Some build up Babel with the stones of Jerusalem, (Adorn
their own Mansions by demolishing of Churches) and such sing only Requiems to
their own name, and are so far from singing unto Gods, that he cries out
against them by his Prophet, Though you build aloft, Obad. 4.
and nestle among the Clouds, yet I will bring you down into the dust of the
Earth.

Others, build up Jerusalem, with the stones of Jerusalem, repair one Church
with the ruins of another; Take from that Saint, and Give unto this: And in
this they think they sing aloud unto God, but he hears not their voice; or
if he hear, he rebukes it, Away with your sacrifices, I will none of your
burnt offerings, Isa. 1.13.
they are abomination unto me, says the Lord God.

Others build up Jerusalem with the stones of their Babel (Repair the ruins
of Gods house, with their own costs and materials) and not only repair, but
beautify it, as you see; And such not only sing unto God, but sing Psalms
unto him; Talk and do to the Glory of his Name. And blessed is the man that
does it, does it as it should be done; without froth of ostentation, or wind of
Applause, or pride of Singularity; But from the uprightness and integrity of a
sound heart, Psa. 69.9.
can Sing aloud to his God; It Is my zeal to thy house, that has thus eaten me
up. And doubtless, he that is so zealous for the house of the Lord, the Lord
also will be merciful unto His; and he that so provides for the worship of
Gods name, God also will provide for the preservation of His; Deuteronomy. 28.
Blessed shall he be in the City, and Blessed in the field, Blessed in his
coming in, and Blessed in his going out; Blessed in his basket and in his
store; Blessed in the fruit of his cattle, and the fruit of his ground. Gods
special Providence shall pitch his Tents about him, the dew of Heaven from
above, and the flowers of the Earth from below: Before him, his Enemies flying;
behind him, Honors attending; about him, Angels intrenching; on his right
hand, his fruitful Vine; on his left, his Olive-branches; without, Health of
body; within, Peace of Conscience; and thus: Psalm. 25.12.
His Soul shall dwell at Ease, and his Seed shall inherit the Land. And whilst
he sings unto Heaven, Blessed be the Name of the Lord for his mercy endures
for ever. Heaven shall rebound to the Earth, and the Earth sing aloud unto him;
Blessed is he that puts his trust in the Lord, for Mercy shall incompasse
him on every side. And now (O Lord) it is thy Blessings which we want, and thy
Mercies which we beg; Let thy Blessings and thy Mercies so fall upon us, as we
do put our trust in Thee; Lord in Thee have we trusted, let us never be
confounded. Amen.

Gloria in excelsis Deo. Amen.

FINIS.
The Christian Duel, IN TWO SERMONS, Ad Magistratum. Preached at two several
ASSIZES, held at TAUNTON in Sommerset. Anno Domini, 1634. 1635. By Humphrey
Sydenham.

ROMANS 8.5. Qui secundum Carnem sunt, quae Carnis sunt, sapiunt:
Qui vero secundum Spiritum, quae Spiritus sunt.
Vellem quidem et carnem meam esse in vita; sed quia non potest, sit vel
Spiritus meus, sit vel Anima mea.

D. Aug. Sermon. 6. de Verbis Domini. LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE, for Humphrey
Robinson, at the Sign of the Three Pigeons in PAUL'S Churchyard. 1637.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE, BOTH BY BLOOD and VERTVE, Sir JOHN POULETT, KNIGHT: Son
and Heir to the Right Honorable, JOHN, Lord POVLETT, Baron of Henton St.
George.
SIR,
IF there be a Succession of Virtues with the Fortunes of Great men, doubtless
there should be of the Services of those that honor them. This makes me speak
boldly through the sides of your Noble Father, whose continued respects toward
me, and encouragements, I cannot better acknowledge than by my thankful
expressions to such a Son; who (in the hopes and expectations of his Country)
shall no less inherit Him, than his Revenewes; Ana then, Honor, Riches,
Wisdom, you cannot but prescribe for; and what else may either entitle you to
Greatness here, or to Glory hereafter. Such a Patronage as This, I could not
but listen after, where is as well Virtue to countenance me, as Power; and so
perhaps, Censure and Prejudice may be a little hush't, or at least, not so
loud, but that the labors of poor men may travel the world; if not without
their snarlings, (for who can so muzzle a black mouthed Curre?) yet without
their public Barkings and traducements. Believe it, Sir, what I present you
here is mine own, though but a mite; and a mite thus offered cannot prove
less acceptable to a noble Treasury than an Oblation of a richer value, since
your Freewill offerings were ever of best esteem, both with God and Good men;
which does hopefully encourage me of your fair entertainment of This, from the
hands of

Your most devoted HVM. SYDENHAM.

THE CHRISTIAN DUEL.
The first Sermon.
ROMANS 7.25. So then with the mind, I my self serve the Law of God, but with
the flesh the Law of sin.


THis life is a warfare, and this Text a lively description of it, where the
parts lie as the two Armies of Israel, and the Philistines did in Elah and
Ephesians Dammim, there is a Mountain on the one side, and a Mountain on the
other, and a Valley between them, 1 Samuel 17. Here is first Lex Dei, V. 3.
the Law of God; on that Mountain the Israelite pitcheth; then Lex peccati, the
Law of sin, on this the Philistine, between both there is a spacious Valley,
where David encountreth the mighty Goliath, the spiritual Combatant, his
fleshly adversary: and this in the Ego ipse, I my self; where the conflict is
both hot and doubtful; sometimes the flesh has the defeat, and then the Law
of God has the glory; sometimes the mind is overlaid by the strokes of the
Flesh, and then the Law of sin. In this Duel our Apostle is a maine
Champion, or to use his own word, a Servant, Ego ipse servio, I my self serve,
and I serve two ways; mentally with the mind, that is for the Law of God;
carnally with the flesh, this for the Law of sin. Sermon. 44. de temp.
Audi (says the Father) vitam justi in isto adhuc corpore, bellum esse nondum
triumphum, the righteous man has but a skirmish here, no triumph; no triumph
yet, but a daily tempest and struggling between the mind and the flesh, the
Law of God, and the Law of sin; and this Law is the occasion of that war,
and that war of captivity, and yet this captivity at last of triumph; I
find a Law in my members fighting against the Law of my mind, Quando audis
repugnantem, quando, captivantem, bellum non agnoscis? D. Aug. ibid.
and bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin, V. 23. Here is fighting
and bringing into Captivity, that is the War on the other side, Wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? I thank God
through Jesus Christ our Lord, v. 24. Here is deliverance from death, and Grace
by Jesus Christ our Lord, this the Triumph. Now the ground both of that war
and this Triumph the Apostle locks up here in a Nempe igitur, a so then, So
then with the mind, I my self serve the Law of God; but with the flesh, the
Law of sin.

Thus you see how the Field is pitched, and every word in its several
squadron; but before we enter lists, or can well show you the heat of the
encounter, it will not be amiss to open first what the word Mind imports,
what her office and properties; then what the Law of God, and the service
required there, and so the Analogy between both. In the next rank, what the
word Flesh specifies, what the Law of sin, the service due there also, and
the relation between them. This done, I shall in the rear bring up the ego
ipse, the Apostle himself, harnessed and ready armed for the spiritual
conflict, and setting him between the Mind and the Flesh, the Law of God and
the Law of sin, typifie and represent unto you the state of a true Christian
Soldier here on earth, how his loins should be girt, his feet shod, his
Armor buckled on, what his breast plate, and Shield, and Sword, and Helmet,
and how far able, or not, to withstand all the fiery Darts of the wicked one.
This whilst I endeavor to perform, I shall desire this honorable and learned
Throng, to make use of Saint Augustines Apology on the same subject, Potentiam
mihi praebeat charitas vestra, D. Aug. Sermon. 5. de verb. Ap.
ut si habeam propter obscuritatem rerum difficilem disputationem, saltem
habeam facilem vocem; ut autem prosit labor noster, sit patiens auditus vester.
Discourses which savor of depth and industry are most proper for noble and
ingenuous Auditories, and look for patient attention, and candid
interpretation. I begin, where I should, with the mind of man; tell you what
it means here, and how it holds conformity with the Law of GOD.

PARS I. With the mind I serve the Law of God.
AND for the better opening of this Cloud, both Fathers and Interpreters make a
criticisme between Soul, and Mind, and Spirit; which some endeavoring to
express, have not unfitly compared to a house of three rooms or stories, in
the lower room is Anima, in the middle Men's, above both, Spiritus, as the
Cock-loft or upper Region of the Soul. In these three is the substance of the
soul lodged, Quasi quadam sua Trinitate, this being (it seems) an Emblem of
the Deity; a Trinity in Unity, and a Unity in Trinity; the Essence the same
in all, but the propriety diverse: like several strings in an Instrument set
in tune to make up one Harmony; and therefore it is called Anima, De spirit.
and Anima c. 12.
dum animat; Spiritus, dum spirat; men's, dum metit and meminit. Or else, Anima,
dum vegetat; men's, dum intelligit; Spiritus, dum contemplatur: So that here is
no Essential, but only a Vertuall difference, the substance of the soul
lying in the powers and properties thereof, and yet not divided into parts, but
simple and individual, these powers neither impairing nor adding to the unity
of the soul, no more than the diversities of streams to the unity of one
source or fountain. And yet there are diverse steps or degrees of perfection in
them, in some of them, not all; Oculus corporis est anima, animae, men's, the
soul is the eye of the body, and the mind is the eye of the soul; and as the
eye is the beauty of the face, the bright Star of that Orb it moves in, so
is this the beauty and bright Star of the soul; and therefore that is
called, Men's quod emineat in Anima; Mind, because it shines in the soul, as a
light in the sphere it rolls in. Hence some would derive the Etimology of Men's
from the Greek, (...), D. Aug. ut. supra cap. 11.
which signifies the Moon, not so much for variety of change, as brightness;
or else, Men's, a mensurando, from a dexterity it has in measuring, or
contriving. Now, Dijudicare, and mensurare estactus intellectus, Part. 1. q.
79. Art. 9. ad 4.
(says Thomas) to judge and to measure is an art of the understanding, and the
understanding is the very form and selfe-being of the soul, or rather the
soul of the soul, as the apple of our eye is the very Eye of our eye; so that
the mind is the beam and splendour of the soul, as the soul is of the body;
so near Divinity, and so much resembling it, that the Romans of old adored
the Mind as a Goddess, and by Marcus Aemilius Scaurns there was a Temple
dedicated, Deae menti, ut bonam haberent mentem, as S. Augustine observes in
his 4. Book, De civitate Dei, 21. chapter.

Well then, that we may now look back unto the Text, we take not here the
word Men's physically, for reason and understanding as they are in Meris
naturalibus; but Theologically, for the spiritual and regenerate part of man:
And so taken, it stands at some distance with the word Anima, though not with
the word Spiritus: For though every Soul be a kind of Spirit, yet every
Spirit is not a Soul, nor every Soul a Mind, at least, a Mind regenerate;
but Mind and Spirit (for the most part) kiss in Scripture; Saint Paul in the
latter end of this chapter, calling that Men's, which in the very beginning of
the next, he names Spiritus: so that Mind and Spirit in a sacred sympathy go
hand in hand, but soul and spirit do sometimes justle.

My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoced in God my Savior,
Luke 1.46. Here the blessed Virgin makes a difference between her Non in hoc
gemmo vocabule gemina substantia intelligitur, sed cum ad distinctionem ponitur
gemina vis ejusdem substantiae, una superior, per spiritum, altera inserior per
animam designatur: in hac utique divisione, anima and quod animale est in imo
remanet; spiritus autem and quod spiritale est ad summum evolat, ab infimis
dividitur, ut ad summa sublimetur, ab anima seinditur ut domino uniatur. De
Spiritu and Anima. cap. 34.
soul and her spirit; and why? why? It is called soul in respect of
vivification, spirit of contemplation: Soul, as it is a leiger and sojourner
with the body, quickening and informing that: Spirit, as it is mounted and
imbarqu'd for Heaven, and rapt with the beatitude of that caelestiall Host: the
soul does only magnify God as a God; the spirit rejoices in that God as a
Savior. In a word, the soul in man, as it is a soul, is like Fire raked up
in embers; the spirit like that fire extenuated and blown into a flame, the
one glowing in our ashy part, the other sparkling in our intellectual.

And this distinction the great Doctor himself uses to his Thessalonians:
where after some benediction, at length he prays, that their whole spirit,
and soul, and body, may be preserved blameless to the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 These. 5.23. Mark, he begins with the spirit, O culatissima
hominis part, the Eagle part of man which eyes things divine; that like
another Mary, always sits at the feet of Jesus: then comes the soul, Stella
in cap. 1. Lucae.
Quae naturales exercet ratiocinales; this like another Martha is cumbred with
much serving, busied about Reason and the natural faculties, but the unum
necessarium it has not chosen yet. And lastly the Body, that villa Marthae,
the Village where our Martha dwells, those earthly affections of ours, which so
taste of the body and earth, that if they be not restrained, make man as it
were all body, that is, all carnal; for which cause we find some men called
spiritual, some animal, and some carnal, 1 Cor. 2.3. Thus the spirit is
(...), as a Pilot or Governor squaring and fashioning new motions in the
regenerate, and subjecting their will to the will of God: The soul is (...),
under whose Lee come the sensitive faculties, Reason, Judgment, not yet washed
and purified by the spirit: the body, Organum illorum, the engine and
Instrument of both, which they employ in their diversities of actions and
operations: These three are the integrall parts of a man regenerate, when of
the earthly man there are only two, (...), and (...), Aret. in Ep. 1 Thessalonians.
cap. 5. v. 23.
soul and body; no spirit he, it is foolishness unto him. Hence proceeds
that double man so frequently mentioned in the Scriptures; the one (...), who
is also (...), Animal or carnal, and lives yet in the state of Nature; the
other (...), mental or spiritual, and in the state of Grace, showing his
profession by his Faith, and his Faith by his Works. Now, as with man there is
a double man, spiritual and secular; so with the spiritual man, there is a
double man too, inward and outward; the one in the Text here called Mind, the
other Flesh, that serving the Law of God, and this the Law of sin.

And here, by the Law of God, we understand not that only on Mount Sinai,
first promulgated by Moses, and after him taught by the Prophets, but that also
on Mount Sion, by Christ and his Apostles; to wit, The eternal will of God
declared in the Doctrine of the Gospel, which is no less a Law than the
other; and this Law every regenerate man does serve, serve though not fulfill;
serve with the mind, a willing mind, crying out with the Prophet, My heart is
ready, Psalm. 42.1.
my heart is ready, so ready, that it pants and gaspeth for the water-brooke,
the Commandments of God, which are as deep waters: But on the other side, the
Flesh plays the Craven, and as if it had received some deadly wound, makes him
complain with the same Prophet, Thine Arrows stick fast in me, there is no
health in my flesh, nor any rest in my bones by reason of my sin, Psalm. 38.3.

You hear then, how sin still lies at the doors of the Flesh, though the
Flesh be not properly the seat of finne, but the soul; and yet the soul newborn by the spirit serves principally the Law of God, which is indeed rather a
freedom, than a service; a perfect freedom, says our Lyturgie, and because
made perfect by the Spirit, the spirit of freedom too, Non accepistis spiritum
serviiutis, sedlibertatis; And if Christ have made us free, we are free indeed;
otherwise, our freedom is no better than a bondage, Romans 8.15. This made the
Singer of Israel warble sweetly, Psa. 19.7.
The Law of the Lord is an undefiled Law, converting the soul: And the Soul
in this manner converted, is a kind of undefiled soul; because it so serves
the Law of the Lord. Thus, He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit, 1 Cor.
6.17. One Spirit? How? Essentially? no, how then, accidentally; one in charity,
consent of will grace, and glory too, Cornel. Lap. 1. Cor. 6.17.
Quae hominem saciunt, quasi Divinum, and Deum; which make a man as twere
divine; so far forth God, that with God he is as one, and the same spirit:
And therefore a chaste and a holy soul, the Fathers often style Deisponsam,
the Betrothed of the Lord. Now, Sermon. 7. sup. Cant.
Sponsa and Sponsus, (as S. Bernard notes) Maxim indicant internos animi
affectus: And doubtless, God does so intimately affect a religious and a
sanctified soul, that in his Arms he does embrace it, even as his Spouse; and
with the Beloved in the Canticls, does even kiss it with the kisses of his
mouth: and therefore, as at first, in the matrimonial Union between man and
wife, Cant. 1.2.
Two were made as one flesh; so in this mystical union between God and the
Soul, two are become as one spirit.

Again, The Commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes,
Psalm. 19.8. Light unto the Eyes, what Eyes? the eyes I told you of before, the
eyes of our intellectualls, the eyes of our mind, which being dimmed, and
clouded by the fall of the first man, God does illuminate again by the beams
of the spirit: and the Eyes thus opened, behold instantly the wonderful works
of his Law; and so, Psa. 36.10.
In lumine tuo videbimus lumen, In this light we shall see light, Psa. 119.105
the Light of his Word and Commandments, which he called, A Lantern unto our
feet, and a light unto our paths; and without which we grope in ignorance and
error, walking in blindness and in the shadow of Death; the way of the wicked
being darkness (says Solomon) and a continual stumbling, Prove. 4.18, 19
but the way of the Just, as a shining Light, which shines more and more unto
the perfect day: And therefore S. Peter calls the word of Prophecy, (which is
the Word of God, and of his Law) A Light which shines in a dark place, until
the Dawne and the Day Star arise in our hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. Our hearts which
were but the Chambers of darkness, the couch and resting place of our blinded
mind, God, who has commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined
into, 2 Cor. 4.6.
shined into the darker corners of them, To give the light of the knowledge of
the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, who is the spiritual day star,
that dayspring from on High, Luke 1.79.
which through the tender mercies of God has thus visited us, giving light to
them that sit in darkness, and guiding their feet in the way of everlasting
peace. Hereupon the Kingly Prophet ravished, it seems, with the joy of the
inward man; tells us, That the statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the
heart, Psalm. 19. V. 8.
The heart which was before merely sensual, a rude lump of flesh, a cage of
unclean birds, a bundle of sinful and impure thoughts, they new brush and
sweep, and so garnish with spiritual gifts and graces, that instead of
drooping, they cheer and elevate it; making that which was before the ground
of Terror, the means of rejoicing; more desiring it now than gold, than fine
gold; sweeter than the honey or the honey comb: that, to the mind regenerate,
the Law of God is not a service barely, but a delight; His delight is in the
Law of God, and in that Law does he exercise himself day and night, Psalm. 1.2.
And indeed, wherein should he be exercised? what object more proper or more
blessed? what should the Spirit mind, but the things of the Spirit? what the
Righteous aim at, but his center and eternal resting point? God has created
man for his own Glory; and as Man is the end of the world, so is God the end of
man, and his Glory of both: And therefore he is called, The Temple of the
Living God, and his mind the Sanctum Sunctorum in that Temple; in which God is
said, not only to dwell, Sermon. 27. Sup. Cant.
but to walk, 1 Cor. 6.16. O quanta illi Animae latitudo, quanta and meritorum
praerogativa, quae divinam in se praesentiam and digna invenitur suscipere, and
sufficiens capere! says S. Bernard. That Soul is of a boundless circuit and
goodness, that can comprehend the incomprehensible God: Cannot the greater
World contain him, and is he involved in the less? Is the Mind a Temple for
him to dwell in, that dwells not in Temples made with hands? Is there in Man
a Tabernacle for his service, at whose seete both Men and Angels fall down and
worship? This then should mount him above the world, and all the base Lees and
dregs thereof, disrobe him of his earthly garment, make him put on the New man
in Righteousness and Holiness, shake off the very dust from his feet, those
dusty corruptions which stick so fast on his feet of frailty, lifting himself
above himself, and retiring from all outward things into the Soul, the soul
unto the mind, and the mind unto God, may seek his conversation in Heaven
only, minding nothing but Heaven and Heavenly things; every true sanctified
soul being not only Heavenly, (says S. Bernard) but Heaven it self; S^rm.
27. sup. Cant.
and sitting in the body, tanquam Deus in suo mundo, where his understanding
shines as the Sun; his virtues as the Stars; and his Faith as the Moon;
which he calls, Psalm. 89.36.
The faithful witness in Heaven. And so Man being a kind of Heaven to
himself, and having a God within him, ruling and commanding it, should always
have his Contemplation winged, his thoughts towering upwards to the God of Gods
in the Heaven of Heavens, where there is joy unspeakeable for evermore.

And now you have heard what the Front of the Text means by the word, Mind,
what her office and properties, and how they look to the Law of God; In the
next rank I am to sew you, how the Flesh comes up with all her Forces, and how
that joins with the Law of Sin.

PARS II. With the Flesh I serve the Law of Sin.
SOme Expositors leaving the Geneva Rode, and treading the by ways to Rhemes
and Doway, make a double partin Man, Reason and Sensuality; the one of them
they style Spirit, the other Flesh, dishonouring thereby the sacred Doctrine of
our Apostle, as if Reason and the Spirit sounded alike, in regard of the Inward
man; Flesh and Sensuality in respect of the Outward: But this were to rival
Philosophy with Scripture, Acts 19.9.
send S. Paul to Stagyra, and Aristatle to the School of Tyrannus; for the
same Divinity the great Peripateticke preaches in the first of his Ethics;
where he divides the Mind into two parts, (...), Cap. 13.
where Reason dwells; and (...), where Passions reign: These drawing one
way, and That another; Appetite in an incontinent man, being toward Reason, ut
membrum paraliticum, as a limme that is struck with the dead Palsy, turn it
to the right hand; and it falls to the left; whatsoever Reason dictates for the
Better, Sensuality straineth to the worse, and what is that (say they) but the
Flesh and the Spirit? Thus, they would confound Nature with Grace, the mere
Carnal men with the Regenerate; making the struglings of the one between
Sensuality and Reason, the others combat between the Flesh and the Spirit;
Lib. 6. cap. 11.
But S. Augustine tells Julian the Pelagian (who first hatched this dangerous
Cockatrice) that in these words of the Apostle. Sunt gemitus sanctorum, contra
carnales concupiscentias d^rnicantium, the deep sighs and groans of the
Saints, breathed out against their remainders of corruption, and their carnal
frailties; their mind serving the Law of God, but the Flesh the frail Flesh;
lead captive by the Law of Sin.

Now, in Scripture, you know the word Caro, Flesh, Isa. 40.6.
is taken either properly, pro carnulenta illa mole, for the body which is
composed of Flesh; or else Tropically, Genesis 6.3.
for her fleshly qualities: and in this latter sense it sometimes signifies the
corruptions of the Flesh; sometimes, the lusts of the Flesh; sometimes men
exposed to Both, which are nothing else but Flesh; and hold a direct Antipathy
with the Spirit: And therefore the learned African tells his Consentius, Epist.
164.
that he that will be Eminent in virtue, must be free of the Flesh; And hence
is the Apostles, Vos non estis in carne, Ye are not in the flesh but in the
spirit, Romans 8.9. And the Evangelists, Quicquid natum de carne, caro est,
Whatsoever is borne of the flesh, is flesh; and whatsoever is borne of the
Spirit, is Spirit; Joh. 3.6. Again, Caro goes sometimes for Concupiscentia,
Cornel. a lap. in Canon. verb. Epist. Sancti Paul's, page 22.
not properly, as if Flesh were Concupiscence it self, but Metonimically;
because the Flesh is, as it were, the shop of the Soul, where it moulds and
works, as the Potter does his clay, Concupiscentiarum imagines and portenta, I
know not what strange Anticks and Monsters of concupiscence: And therefore some
Philosophers are of opinion, that as the censations, so the motions of the
sensitive appetite are as well in the body and organs of it, as in the soul;
though others more subtly, and indeed more rationally, say, that as they are
spiritual, vital and animal, so they are in the soul only; since that
alone is said, of it self to live, and the body by that life; and yet the body
(as they conceive) by the Organs, Spirits and Blood, does dispose and assist
the soul in these and the like motions and operations, whereas Saint Cyprian
will by no means hear, that the affictions should any way belong unto the
body, but to the soul, Hoc ipsum quod dico carnis affectus, improprie dico,
says the Father: For vices indeed are principally the Souls, to which sin
is directly and properly imputed, for as much as it is endowed with judgment,
will, knowledge, power, by which it may eschew that which is evil, and cleave
to that which is good: the Soul using the Body as the Smith his hammer, or his
Anvile, by which he forgeth and fashioneth, Omnium turpitudinum idola,
quarumcunque voluptatum simulachra, all her voluptuous and filthy Idols of lust
and sensuality. The Flesh does neither dictate nor invent, nor form, nor
dispose; no project, no thought, no malice, no sin from her; not from her,
but by her; S. Cyp. in prol. de Card navirt. Christi.
the soul not sinning neither, but by the flesh, Saltem mediatione remota: And
yet the Flesh, as it is Flesh merely, without the Soul, can neither sin,
nor serve sin; knowing that when the Flesh is separated from the Soul, Idem
ibid.
it is nothing else but Putredinis massa, and paludis Acervus, a putted and
corrupt Mass or Bog, and when it is joined with it, It is at best, but
Quadriga Animae (as Galen calls it) the Chariot of the Soul, in which it jogs
for a time in Triumph, and then it is Seneca's Carcer animae, the Goal and
Fetters of the Soul; nay, his Sepulchrum animae, the Greeks calling it, (...)
quasi (...), a Tomb or Sepulcher, a living death, a sensible carrion, a
portable grave; Vbi homo in vitijs est sopultus, ubi corrupti corporis scatent
scelera, ubi homo hominis est sepulchrum, ubi in homine, non homo cernitur, sed
cadaver: as the golden tongued iChrysologus in his 120. Sermon upon the fifth
of S. Matthew.

But what then, is it this Carcass and Tomb, and Sepulcher St. Paul here so
much complains of? is it the body and the frailetties there, that are here
meant by this word Flesh? noe: But as before we took the word Men's,
Theologically, not Phisically; so do we here the word Caro, Flesh; not for
the fleshly lump, this frail mass of shinne and blood, and nerves kneaded
and incorporated into one substance: but for the Carnal and as yet
unregenerate part of man, Will, Mind, Affections, soiled and corrupted from
the old Adam, so Gal. 5.20. Heresies are called (...), Works of the flesh:
Now, Heresies you know flow from the mind, not from the body, so that the
mind is in some sort Flesh as well as the other, not flesh sensible and
material, but Metaphorically taken: insomuch that the very Saints and servants
of God, as long as they have the dregs and remainders of sin about them, not
only in the inferior part of the soul, but even in the mind and the will, are
said to be Flesh; and the reason is because that that sin by which we
consent unto the lusts of the flesh is not committed but in the will, where it
has his original and foment. The Schooleman defining Concupiscence to be
nothing else but Voluntatem improbam, Altissiod. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 3. q. 2.
qua Anima appetit fornicari in creatura, A depravednes of the will, by which
the Soul desires to play the strumpet with the creature: And hence it is,
that the Apostle confesses that he is not yet delivered of the burden of the
Flesh, that he still labors of her infirmities; that he is Carnal both by
Nature and Suggestion; by Pareus in cap. 7. ad Romans v. 25.
Nature, because borne so; by Suggestion, through the daily flatteries and
titillations of his fleshly associate, Quae non post nos, sed in nobis, nos
sequitur, says St. Ambrose; de poeniten. lib. 1. cap. 14.
which haunts and whores us wheresoever we go; a continual Dalilah about us,
and within us; not discarding of this Hittite, nor this Amorite; but in
despite of us, it will be meddling with our flesh pot, so journe it will in
our Mesech here, and dwell in our tent of Kedar. However, I presume, you
conceive a difference between Flesh and Flesh, only that is merely Carnal,
and another which is carnal but in part; him that is In the Flesh, walks in
the Flesh, and whose weapons are fleshly, and him that is only obnoxious to
the infirmities of the flesh, In cap. 7. ad Romans
an Amphibion (as I may call him) between Flesh, and Spirit, Carnem habentem
legi Dei obstreperam (as Carthusian speaks) whose flesh is ever scolding with
the Spirit, and his spirit ever chiding with the flesh; for to be flesh
imports for the most part a humane Imbecillitie, but to be In, or After the
flesh, an universal bondage and subjection of man's nature to the lusts of the
flesh. The Patriarcks, and Prophets, and Apostles them selves were flesh, and
lived here (says St. Augustine) but they lived not here In the flesh;
Portabant Carnem, Sermon. 6. de verb. Dom.
non Portabantur a Carne, the flesh was their Burden, not their Guide. And
therefore it is one thing to say, that Sin and fleshly corruptions are in
man; another that man is in sin, and in the Flesh; as that of St. Peter to
Simon Magus was more wounding, Thou art in the gall of Bitterness, then if he
said, the gall of Bitterness is in thee; For, for man to be In sin and In the
flesh presupposes a kind of Uassalage and Thraldom, sin and the flesh have
over him; for sin to be in man, an Hereditary corruption, quam nec fugere
possumus, nec fugare, St Bernard, sermon. 7. sup. cant.
circurn far necesse est, which we can neither shake off nor avoid, but it
sticks like a Burre to our frail condition, and though we labor to wash it
out with all our Hysop, all our Nitre, yet this Aethiope will not be clean,
this Leopard will not change his spots; but though the Mind be intent upon
the Law of God, yet the Flesh, the weak, weak flesh will be still serving the
law of Sin.

The Law of Sin? what is that? what? that which before S. Paul entitled to the
Lex membrorum, The Law in his members; v. 23.
and what is that Law? That which in the next verse, he calls Corpus mortis,
The Body of death. And what is that death, and that Law? v. 24.
That which all the Servants and Saints of God have pang'd, and groaned under
Concupiscence; that which S. Austin styles legem foetidam, legem miseram,
vnlnus, tabem, languorem, Sermon. 46. de temp.
A putred loathsome and wretched law, an enticing and lustful law, lodging and
reigning in our very members; and in such a Tyrannical way, that the Flesh is
even enforced to serve, and obey it, and therefore by the Apostle here called
(...), a Law, the word Law being taken at large, for any thing that governes,
and moderates our actions. So that Concupiscence holding such a strict Empire
and Command over it, can be no less then a Law unto it; and therefore Peter
Martyr calls it, Vim In cap. 7. ad Romans v. 24.
peccati, et innatae pravitatis, The Scepter (as it were) and Prerogative of
sin; an inbred pravitie, Qua quisque D Aug. in 7. ad Romans tom. 4.
carnis consuetudine implicatus astringitur, By which every man, involved in
the customary snares of the flesh, is so manacled and bound as by a rigid Law.
Now it is called lex peccati, The law of sin, because such concupiscence is sin
indeed, not only Fomes, et Causa, and Poena peccati (as the Church of Rome does
cavil) but peccatum it self, S. Paul, no less then fourteen times in this
Epistle calling it plainly Sin; seven times in this Chap. four times in that
before, and three times in the next that follows. It is called Lex membrorum
the law in our members, because it uses all our parts and powers and
faculties, as instruments or members: or else lex membrorum, in relation to
corpus mortis. This law in the members, Pet. Mart. in cap. 7. ad Romans v. 24.
being afterward called The body of death, and there is no true body, you know
without its members; which members do here signify, as well all the Powers of
the mind, as all the parts of the body, infected and defild by sin, which as an
hereditary disease we have derived even from the womb, residing not only in
some one part of us, but sprinkling this contagion through the Whole Man, and
every parcel and memeer of him.

Now this whole man though it suffer the distinction of Interior and Exterior
Homo, yet it is but one and the self same man; But by reason of diverse States,
Affections, and Operations, called the inward and the outward man; and not as
the Manichees wildly fancy, teaching two souls in man: the one good, from
which virtues flowed; the other, evil, whence vices proceeded; and so
consequently, that in one man there were, as two men; the inward embracing
those virtues: and the outward, following these vices; but in one, and the same
man, there is one and the same soul; and in this same soul, and the same
portion and faculty of it, Calvine sets this Apostolical combat, Cor. lap. in
cap. 7. ad Romans v. 25.
making the inward man nothing but the mind, quatenus consentit legi Dei, the
outward the same mind, quatenus concupiscit mala, which though the Jesuit cry
down for (...), Soli renati habent hom nem interiorem, Ephesians. 3.16. soli filij
dei sunt renati, Ioh. 1.13. and soli renati spiritum habent-Rom. 8.14. quem
mundns excipere non potest. John. 14.17.
et Haeretica, and set's up Reason and sense in a vie with the Flesh and the
Spirit; for mine own part I think it both senseless and reasonlesse;
forasmuch as the combat between these is proper only to the Regenerate;
Between the other, to the mere natural and carnal man, who has no touch of
the Spirit at all, nor oftentimes of God about him. And therefore that we may
at length take away the veil from this darkened face, pull aside the curtain
that so obscures the Text, we must know, that in one and the same S. Paul here
there is a double man considered; the one, Interior Ingraffed into Christ,
assisted and agitated by the holy spirit, which searches every chinke and
cranny of the heart, watering her barren furrows, and sending showies into the
little valleys thereof, making it fruitful with the drops of rain, Psalm 65.11.
suppling and mollifying that stone like flesh; According to this man, which is
Inward; he wills that which is Good, approues the law of God; serves it,
delights in it, magnifies it; The other Exterior, which is not yet totally
renewed, but remains in part carnal, still retaining the corruptions of man's
nature; and as a prisoner to the flesh, has not yet knocked off his Gives and
Fetters; This man being still outward to the world, follows the law in his
members; And hence is that (...), that contrary war in the same man, in the
one part or wing of him, we see the law of the members, fighting and struggling
for the law of sin, leading man captive through the infirmities of the flesh:
On the other side, is the law of God: to which, in a holy correspondency, the
mind or will being renewed, assent. Between these is the whole man placed,
Aret. in cap. 7. ad Romans v. 23.
quasi communis praeda, as a common booty or prey exposed unto the assaults of
both. And in this encounter it speeds with him. as with the two opposite armies
in the valley of Rephidim, Exodus: 17. sometimes Israel prevails; sometimes
Amaleck; the mind sometimes; sometimes the flesh: As long as the hands be held
up, whiles the thoughts be elevated, the mind soring, there is a great shout
heard in the Hebrew Camp, the Israelite has the day, the inward man
prevails, and then the Hosannah goes for the Law of God: but when the hands
be let down, when his devotions are a drooping, when he begins to flag and
grovell toward the Flesh, straight there is a noise of victory in the Heathen
troops, the Amalekite gives the chase, the outward man prevails, and so the
cry runs for the Law of sin. In this case the regenerate man must do as
Moses there did, rest upon the stone, the Cornerstone, Christ Jesus: and his
hands being weary with lifting up, his mental parts overburdened with the
weight of the flesh, Faith and Prayer, like another Hur and Aaron, must pillar
and support them; then he shall be steady till the going down of the Sun, till
he set in death; when Amalek shall be discomfited, all his spiritual enemies
put to the sword, and he in peace go in and possess the land promised to his
Forefathers, the caelestiall Land, the Canaan above, where he shall reign
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, for ever and ever.

Thus in a double rank, I have showed you the double man, inward and outward;
the one under the colors of the flesh, marching for the Law of sin; the
other under the Ensign of the spirit, fighting for the Law of God. It remains
now, that in the Rear we bring up the Ego ipse, the Apostle himself ready
armed for the conflict; and viewing him, dividing these Ranks, observe how with
the Mind he serves the Law of God, but with the Flesh the Law of sin.

PARS III. Ego ipse servio, I my self serve.
SOme ancient Heretics, taking occasion by the error of Origin, S. Chrysostom.
Theo. Basil.
(whom many of the Greek interpreters followed, and some of the Latin) make
here a Prosopopeia, or fictio personae, as if by this Ego ipse, I my self,
Saint Paul himself had not been understood, S. Amb. Icrome.
but some other by him personated (some unregenerate or carnal man) or if
himself, himself as he was formerly under the Law, and not yet under Grace:
D. Aug. ad Simplicium. lib. 1. q. 1. D. Aug. lib. 6. cont. Julian. c. 11.
In which opinion the great Saint Augustine confesses that he sometimes
wandered, but afterward took up with his Prius aliter intellexeram, vel potius
non intellexeram, in the first of his Retractations 23. chapter.

And upon this tide many scruples of the Church then were after wasted to
posterity. The Pelagians of old, and their way-ward Proselites, have scattered
two pestilent Epistles to this purpose, the one written by Julian to Boniface
at Rome; the other by eighteen Bishops, Ringleaders of that Faction, to the Sea of Thessalonica, both which quoted and confuted by the learned Father in
his Anti-pelagian controversies, principally against Julian the Muster-master
(if I may so style him) of that dangerous Sect; who contended, that under this
Ego ipse, Saint Paul either described, Vid. fusius, Par. in cap. 7. ad Romans v.
25.
hominem aliquem libidinosum, some one that was luxurious or incontinent, not
yet washed from the grosser corruptions of the Flesh; or else discovered the
nature of man after the Fall, when and how far he might prevail without
grace; and upon this misconjecture, they struck at the heart of original
sin, strangled that in the womb of our first Parents, gave suck to new
fancies of the times, cocker'd an upstart of their own begetting, shouldered
up nature with grace, engaged freewill in matters of the Spirit, contrary to
the Apostles Peccatum in me habitans, and his quod non vellem, hoc ago, in the
15. and 17. verses of this chapter. But it is more than probable, that this Ego
ipse reaches Saint Paul himself, he continuing his complaint, in the first
person, through the whole body of this chapter, Ego sum carnalis, ego agnosco,
ego consentio, ego delector, ego servio, it is I that am carnal at the 14.
verse, and I allow not, at the 15. and I will not, at the 16 and I delight, at
the 22. and I serve here, at the 25. I, I my self, I Saint Paul, I the
Apostle, I the great Doctor, I the chosen vessoll, he gives not the least
hint or touch of any other: Ego nescio quid sit Scr. pturas penitus pervertere,
si hoc non sit, Beza Annot. in cap. 7. Romans v. 25.
And therefore it is a bold Fiction, and a manifest depravation of the Text, to
wire-draw Scripture to men's private purposes, interpreting here Ego, by Alter,
as if I Saint Paul were not carnal, not sold under sin, not captivated by
the Law of it, but some other, some Jew or Gentile not yet converted, when the
maine bent of the great Doctor drives another way, he speaking of himself in
the state of his Apostleship, the conflicts and sikrmishes he then had
between the Mind and the Flesh, not of his old Pharisaicall condition, as
some dream, for the words are of the present, Ego servio, not Ego servivi, not
I did, but I do serve, and not barely (...), neither I, but (...), I my self,
I and no other, which excludes all figurative interpretation whatsoever: And
therefore doubtless the Apostle here, even as Sed hoc forte aliquis; non
Apostolus; certe Apostolus. D. Aug. sermon. 5. de verb. Apostoli.
Apostle, by an ingenuous and humble confession of his own frailties, does
bemoane his present condition, and though in the state of grace, finds
himself not only not conformable, but in part averse to the spiritualitie of
this Law; acknowledging with deep groan, that he was Peccati mancipium, sold
under sin (as he phraseth it) that inward sin he mean, Concupiscence, not
only a servant to it, but a very captive (...), leading me captive to the Law
of sin, v. 23. A Metaphor taken from the practice of Generals in their
Wars, whereas some are destined to the Sword, so others to thraldom and
imprisonment: In which, though there be not always a noise of slaughter, there
is of bonds and shackles, and sometimes of death too, when the Ammonite must to
the Saw, and the Axe, and the Harrow of iron, 1 Chronicles. 20.3. But in this
Apostolical War there is no danger of the Axe, nor the Saw, though there be
of the shackle; no stroke of Fate, but of captivity; no marking out to the
Sword, but to Ransom, to that, Empti estis pretio magno, 1 Cor. 6.20. In
expectation whereof, though he complain for a time of wretchedness and death,
with a Quis me liberabit? who shall deliver me from the body of this death? yet
a death indeed he rather bewailes than suffers, this being the voice not of one
despairing, Vox non desperautis sed deplorant is carnis infirmitato^. Aret. in
c. 7. ad Romans v. 24. Trahi captivum in legem peccati, solum est renati, cum
^mpii, and a gratia alieni, ultro ad mala currunt, imoruant. Par. ad cap. 7.
Romans v. 25.
but deploring his carnal infirmities: So that in this service of the law of
sin, Saint Paul is not a voluntiere you see, but goes upon command, has his
presse-money from the Flesh; serve he must, whether he will or no; he has a
Marshall within him, that dragges him as a slave, and he must fight or suffer:
This makes him groan indeed, groan to an Aeru^nosus ego homo, wretched,
wretched man that I am: And yet, though he so groan, and under the heat (it
seems) of his restless assaults, and is thereby enforced sometimes to
retrait; yet he leaves not the field totally; a Captain he had rather be than
a coward; and a Captive he is made, but it is much against the hair; serve he
does, and must, but assent he will not; Nemo sponte captivatur. paer. Romans 7.
his mind is engaged another way, that is for the Law of God; but the Flesh,
the traitorous Flesh, lies in ambush all the while, and this betrays him to
the Law of sin: this makes him so deeply complain, I know that in me, that
is in my Flesh, V. 18.
dwells no good thing, that is true, none, not in my Flesh, no good there,
and why? because it serves the Law of sin. But I know again, that in me,
that is in my mind dwells some good, that is true too, good there, and why?
because it serves the Law of God: Et in isto bello est tota vita sanctorum,
Ser. 5. de verb. Apostoli.
says Saint Augustine. Every sanctified life, is but a Duel, such a Duel as
this, between the Mind and the Flesh: No true child of God but has been a
Captive in this Combat: whosoever is regenerate, is spiritual, I confess, but
he is in part carnal too, for as much as he has not deposed his carnal
infirmities, not yet totally unclothed himself of Nature and the Flesh, Si
qui^ dubitet, excutiat cor suum, if any scruple it, let him search his heart a
little, sift his own bosom; and there he shall find either his lust
lurking, or his hypocrisy: we are not all Mind, nor all Flesh, but composed
of both, lest we should either despair for our infirmities, or grow proud
through our spiritual endowments: The Mind perhaps may be mounting, and
rowzing as it were her feathers, take her flight upwards to God and his pure
Law; but the Flesh will be still bottoming, Caro semper manet infirma, semper
nos in cursu moratur. Aret. ad cap. 8. Romans v. 21.
fluttering here below, and stooping servilely to the Law of sin.

Now, this Law has not barely an habitation in our Members, but a very Throne;
it not only possesses the Regenerate, but reigns in him; reigns in him as a
Tyrant, not as a King; makes him a slave, not a subject; bids him acknowledge a
sword for a Scepter, and a Scorpion for a sword: And therefore Lombard tells
us, Lib. 2. d. 32.
that it is Ipse Tyrannus in membris, a very Nero in our members; or else,
Manubrium Daemonis (as Pimenius has it) the Hilt of the Devils sword, De vit.
pat. l. 7. cap. 25.
by which he brandisheth, and plaieth so cunningly his prizes with the Flesh.
And of these and the like Fancies, Greg. de val. depec. orig. cap. 60.
Bonavent. sent. 2. d st. 32.
the Schools do generally ring, Vulnus animae, and Languor naturae, and
Habitus corruptus, and Vitium ingenitum; A wound, a disease, a languishment,
nay a Vice they will hear of, Thom. 1.2. q. 82. Art. 10. ad 1. Estius sent. 2.
did nct. 32. lit. g. b. Lom. lib. 2. did. 32. lit. 8.
but not a Sin; a Sin by no means (the Master himself allowing the word
Vitium, but not Peccatum) the Mother Causa, Fomes, poena peccati. Psalm. 51.5.
De fide ad Pet. Diacon. cap. 26.
and Nurse, and rod of Transgression, the Tinder, and Touch-wood of sin; nay
the match and the sparkle too, and yet not sin it self. When our Apostle
here Be-sinnes it over and over, the man after Gods own heart confessing, that
He was shapen in wickedness, and that in sin (this very sin) his mother
conceived him. And therefore S. Augustine, or (as some would have it)
Fulgentius puts it on Peter the Deacon, as a point of Faith; That every man was
borne, Impietati subditum, so that not only concupiscence it self, but as
they rarifie it with their Primi Motus, the Ebullitions, First-risings and
Assayes of lust, nay, their Primo-primi; or, if they have an Art to mince them
smaller, their Primi-primo-primi are all Sin; forasmuch as Concupiscence being
evil of it self, is, of it self without the consent of the will, Pol. Synt.
lib. 6. cap. 3. Omnes primi motus, quia apti sunt insequirationem, and peream
regulari, si eam pervenerint, dici possunt peccata, etiam in parvulis, and
fatuis, quia sunt praeter ordinem naturae primitus, institutae. Gerson de reg.
mor. page 128. lit. B.
a sin: Otherwise in infants, which by reason of their suckling and tender
years cannot yet assent to wicked desires, there should be no sin at all;
whereas these inordinate motions are not barely the Symptoms, but the very
Impressions of a sickly soul, Strom. lib. 2.
(...), (as Clemens Alexandrinus calls them) Against which we are to take up
our Sword and Buckler; and not only oppose, De Sacrament. Mat. cap. 7.
but murder them, if we can. And therefore in this war of the Flesh, the
learned Parisiensis would have the prima acies cut off, the first Motions
slain, propter iniquitatem Rebellionis, for their rebellious attempts against
the Spirit; as being, not only bellows and fuel, but Fire also, to our daily
and dangerous mis-treadings; And yet the Church of Rome is so hot here, for the
immaculatenesse of the Saint, that she altogether dis-inherits him of flesh,
cuts off the Intaile of his primitive corruption, washes clean away his
original Taint in the Laver of Baptism; And so does the conduit of our Church
too, quoad Reatum, but not quoad Actum; The guilt of sin is expunged, but the
act and existency remains still, even in the Regenerate; there being found in
them not only poenas quasdam, aut sequelas peceati, Certain sequels or
punishments of sin, but also really; and in their own Nature damnabiles
Reveren dissimus Davenantues de justitia habit. cap. 1.
Reliquias, remainders enough to damn them; but that the dominion of sin
being Bankrupt (as it were) and broken, and the bond cancelled above, they make
not to the condemnation of his person that is atton'd and reconciled by Christ.
And therefore the Cardinal may forbear to traduce us for Messalians and
Origenists, Bell. de sacr. Bapt. l. 1. c. 13.
because we allow not a total eradication of sin by the power of that
Sacrament; for as much as some of his own Tang, denying concupiscence after
Baptism, to be Peceatum; yet they say, that it is Radix peccati, and so takes
hold in the very child of God; which Root though it be crushed a little and
bruiz'd, yet it sticks fast still in the Nature, notwithstanding the guilt be
absolutely removed from the person of the regenerate. And this much their own
Lib. 2. did. 32. lit. B.
Lombard in circumstance will tell us, who grants, that by the virtue of
Baptism, there is a full absolution of original sin in respect of the Guilt
of it, but a Debilitation only, and an Extenuation of the vice, no total
Extirpation. And therefore the Gratianists stick not to gloss here: that it
is not so dismissed, ne sit, that it be not at all; But it remains debilitatum
and sopitum, languishing and slumbring, not dead it seems; Nay, A^not. ad Romans
cap. 5.
Hugo de sancto victore, comes on more fully, Manet secundum culpam, dimittitur
secundum solum aeternae dan nationis debitum. Whence I gather, with that
learned Episcopus Sarisburiensis, de justitia habit. cap. 20.
Prelate, that concupiscence after Baptism is no less than Culpa, even in the
Regenerate; And that, That Justice which is conferred on them, consists rather
in the participation of Christ's merits, who cut the score, than in any
perfection of Virtues, or Qualities infused; So that the Vis damnatoria (as
they call it) The condemning power in this Sin is taken off by virtue of that
Sacrament, but the contagion or deordination of it, still dwells in man; which
is so rivited in his nature, and as it were nature it self; ut tolli non
possit sine destructione naturae, we may as soon destroy nature herself, as
It; And if we believe the Scholeman, Non est medici summi illum tollere, In
this case God himself cannot do it; so Alexander Halensis, de Sacramento
Baptismi, 4. part. 8. quaest. 2. Articl.

Let others, then, vaunt at their pleasure, in the riches and ornaments of
their inward man, ruffle in the gaudy plumes of their conceived perfections,
deck their minds in their white robes of purity: file and whet, and sharpen
the very point of the spirit they talk of, yet if we knock a little at the
doors of their hearts, Enter into them with a Candle and a snuffer (as Charron
speaks) we shall find Concupiscence there sitting in her chair of state,
commanding, or at least, drawingon the motions of the flesh, which they can no
more restrain then the beating of their pulses, which still keep centinell in
the body, and are the watch words of nature that the heart lives. Sermon. 58.
super Cant.
Erras si vitia putes emortua, et non magis suppressa, He is in an error
(says S. Bernard) that thinks his corrupt inclinations to be absolutely dead,
and not rather suppressed, or smothered; Velis, nolis, intra sines tuos habitat
Cananaeus, let the Israclite do what he can, this Canaanite will be still
skulking about his coasts; subjugari potest, exterminarinon potest, made
tributary (perhaps) he may be, exiled he will not. And indeed, those untamed
lusts and affections of ours (which are nothing else but the waves and storms
of our souls raised by every little blast of the flesh) as long as we are
environed with these walls of frailty, this rotten tabernacle of the body,
Mother ari et regere possumus, S. Ier. Reg. Monach. c. 22.
amputare non possumus, master perhaps, or qualify for a time we may, totally
subdue we cannot.

The mind no doubt may put in her plea with a Video meliora; I see that the law
of God is the better, I see, and approve it too, and therefore I serve it; But
then comes the flesh with a Deteriora sequer: it is true, the other is the right
way, but it is troublesome, and slippery, and like a sandy hill to the feet of
the aged; The way the flesh walks is smooth and even, pleasing to him that
treads it, and therefore I follow that; I follow? That were more tolerable, but
I serve; I am in subjection to it; though my mind have a desire, and more then
a desire, an act of serving the law of God: yet, there is another Master I must
serve too, my flesh invites me; invites? nay commands and hurryes me, and
that is to the law of sin, Certum est, Orig. Homil. 21. in Ios.
etiam Iebuzoeos habitare cum filiis Iudoe in Jerusalem, says the Allegorical
Father; nothing more certain then the deep remainders of corruptioneven in
Gods peculiar Israel; These Iebusites will be still dwelling with the sons of
Judah in Jerusalem: the flesh will be serving the law of sin, even in the
sanctified and chosen vessel, S. Paul himself; and the reason is, it is a
church militant we live in, Cant. 2.
an Army (says Solomon) terrible with her banners; no lying idle, then, in
tents and garrisons, but a daily marching on against the enemy, a continual
skirmishing with the flesh; which though by the daily sallyes and excursions of
the spirit, it be sometimes repelled and driven back (as if it had received the
foil or the defeat) yet gathering new strength and forces, it comes on again
with her fresh, and restless assaults: so that, there is no expectation of a
total triumph and surprisall here, but in a church triumphant, where the Palm
and the Crown and the white Robes are laid up; and instead of Drums and
Ensigns, Hallelujahs to the Lamb for ever.

I have done now with the text, Applicatio ad Magistratum.
and the two laws there, lex Dei, and lex peccati; But the occasion of this
meeting listen's after a third law, and that is lex Regni: which though it be
grounded (or at least should be) on the lex Dei, yet it sometimes falls
unhappily upon the lex peccati. Now, a war there is in this law, as between
the former two, Inveterate; sometimes Irreconciliable, and not to be decided,
but by Deaath, war much of the nature of the other, between Spirit and Flesh: a
proud spirit for the most part, and a stubborn piece of flesh: for if there
were either humility on the one side, or patience on the other, the noise of
discord would not be so loud in our streets, but the voice of the turtle would
be heard better in our land: There would be more peace within our walls; I am
sure, more plentiousnes within our habitations. What, in the first institution,
was intended as a shield, or buckler, is used at length as a semiter or sword;
That which should defend me from the blows of another, is the engine by which
I wound him at last, and my self too; The law, which in case of in jury, or
trespass was ordained of old for a Sanctuary, is made sometimes little better
then a house of correction. If I malice another, it is not I must seourge him,
but the law; though it be in mine own power to chastise him with whips; yet the
law do it with more state, and more fury too, for that shall chastise him with
Scorpions: when all this while, the lash falls not so much on the back of the
transgressor, as his purse: and the bleeding of that (as the world goe's) is as
fatal as the other. Sed hominum sunt ista, non legum, the fault is not in the
law, but in some of her touchy and waspish votaries: or if it be in the law, I
am sure it is not in the lex Dei, nor (I hope) in this lex Regni, but in the
lex peccati; It Is the law of sin is to blame here, the mighty Holofernes (as
Castrusian told S. Ierom) that rebellious lust of ours, which thus plaie's the
tyrant with our selves and others, Ille criminum leno; Ille par asitus
vitiorum, that bawd and parasite of vices which in one act flatters and
betraies us: This is the Fox with a Firebrand in the tail, that burns up the
corn field of the Philistines: the prime wheel and stirrer of all our
turbulent motions, our unpeaceable proceedings, which first sets our pride
a-gog, and then our malice, and at length our revenge: and in such a high way
of distaste, that no sorrow of the party offending, no mediation of friends,
no tender of sitisfaction, no interposing of the Magistrate himself can atone
or pacify: But as if there were no Gospel upon earth, or else no mercy by
that Gospel, they are still Jewishly bent with their crucifige, crucifige, the
Law, the Law. And let such implacable Spirits have their fill of it, let it
enter like water into their bowels, and like oil into their bones; let the Law
at last be their comfort, and not the Gospel, let justice have her full
swindge, and not mercy; and so (if they will needs have it so) Currat Lex, let
the Law go on, a lege ad legem, from one Law to another, from the Lex Regni,
to the Lex Dei; from the Court of Common Pleas here below, to the great
Star Chamber above, where every man shall receive either doom or recompense
according to his works.

The Law all this while is unreproveable you hear, no stain nor blemish
there, but either in the malicious Clyent or Solicitor, or both; It being true
in this case what Saint Paul spoke in another, Lex quidem spiritualis, illi
vero carnales, venundati sub peccato, Romans 7. v.

And here some may expect that I should have a fling at the Gown, or at least
(as the custom of this place is) instruct or counsel it: But this were to
bring drops to a River, offer a few mites or pence to a Treasury that is full;
for no charity can be so barren, as to conceive, that those should be ill
husbands in counselling themselves, that so abundantly dispense and communicate
to others: And indeed how, or to what purpose should they receive instructions
in a Church here, that are taking so many in a Chamber? How make use of the
Doctrine of the Preacher, that are so busy with the breviat of a Clyent? But
by their leave (for I must have leave to tell them so) God is herein
dishonored, and the solemnity both of this time and place disparaged, if not
profaned. They are not (I presume) so straightned with time, nor so thronged
with the multitude of affairs, but they might sequester one solemn hour for
the service of the Lord: The hearing of a Sermon can be no great prejudice to
the debating of a cause, if it be just and honest; and a few Orisons first
offered in the Temple, are a good preparative and prolog to a conscionable and
fair pleading at the Bar. As for any error else, either in their practice or
profession, I have not to obtrude here; or if I had, I would not: Every man, or
at least, every good man is a Temple to himself, and has a Pulpit in his own
bosom, where there is a continual Preacher or Monitor, a conscience either
accusing or excusing him: and one lash of that touches more at the quick,
than a thousand from the tongue or pen of another. Cor hominis (says Saint
Augustine) aut Dei Thuribulum, aut Diaboli, every man's heart is an Altar for
God, or for the Devil; and according to the nature or quality of the
Sacrifice, so it smoakes either to his doom or glory: and this is enough for
an understanding ear without farther boring it. And indeed it is not my
practice to pull Gravitie by the beard; bring back the gray hair to the Rod
and the Ferule; School (as some do) a Magistrate, and catechize a Judge; nay,
traduce him too with their borrowed and affected Epithites, Rampant, Couchant,
Dormant, and the like unreverent and saucie follies, which are nothing else but
the leakings of bottles which are not sound, the noise of Caskes which are both
foul and empty, fragments of that broken vessel Solomon speaks of, which
can contain nothing, no not the droppings of their own vanities. For mine own
part, I have been taught what the word Judge means, both by representation
and by office, a King one way, and a God another; and what is that but a God,
and a God? and therefore a God shall admonish him, not I; and one God, I
presume, may speak roundly to another.

Hark then what the God Iekosaphat tells the Gods, his Judges, in the fenced
Cities of Judah, Take heed what you do, for you judge not for man, but for
God, who is with you in the judgment; Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord
be upon you, take heed, and do it, for there is no iniquity with God, no
respect of persons, nor taking of gifts, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7.

Doubtless, the matter is of great weight and consequence that is thus
prefac'd with a double caution, Take heed, Take heed. The former Cavete is for
a Quid facitis, the latter, for an ut faciatis; first, take heed what you do,
and then take heed that you do it too; so that in matters of Judicature, a
deep consideration should always precede Action; Deliberation, Judgment: And
the reason of the quid sacitis, if you observe it, is very ponderous; For you
judge not for man, but for God, and God (as the Psalmist speaks) Judges
amongst the gods, Psalm. 82.1. You gods that judge men here, that God shall
judge hereafter: and as you judge these, so shall he judge you.

The reason of the ut faciatis, is no less weighty neither, for there is no
iniquity with God, he loves it not, and what he loves not, you are to condemn
and judge; and that this judgment may carry an even fail, there must be no
respecting of persons, nor taking of gifts. The ears must be both open, and
the hands shut; the complaint of the Widow, and the Orphan, and the oppressed
must be as well listened to, as the trials of the rich and mighty; as well, and
as soon too: nay, sooner; for the one gives only, the other prays: and men's
devotions go with us to heaven, when their benevolences, with the giver,
moulder upon earth.

Let the Sword then strike where it should, in the great business of life and
death; let the balance hang even in matters of nisi prius; that there be no
selling of the righteous for a piece of silver, Amos 8.6.
or of the needy for a pair of shoes: no cruel mercy, in the one, in
remitting incorrigible of fenders; no partiality in the other, in siding with
particular men, or causes; but, fiat justitia, et ruat coelum.

And when justice is thus done in your part, it is not done in all: manifold
experience tells us, that when causes have been prosecuted by all the fidelity
and care of the solicitor, pleaded by all dexterity of counsel, attended by all
the vigilance of the Judge; yet the mystery, the wicked mystery of a december
tales shall carry them against wind and tide; and a heard of mercenary
ignorants (for mnay of them are no better) shall buy and sell a poor man and
his estate for eight pence: This is neither christian, nor moral, nor scarce
humane; and therefore for reformation of this capital abuse, it is both just,
and necessary, that such substantial men as are returned in Iuryes should attend
in their own person: and not shuffle of the weight of public affairs upon the
shoulders of those, who either understand not a cause when it is debated; or
else, use not a conscience, as they should, in giving up their verdict; but
make their foreman their primus motor, whom they follow like those beasts' in
Seneca, non qua eundum est, sed qua itur. No man is to good to do his God, or
King, or Country service; nay every good man thinks it rather his honor,
then his burden: and therefore, where there are delinquents this way, let the
mulct and the fine be laid on, according to statute; that where admonition
cannot prevail, imperet Lex, compulsion may.

And now I have performd my office, done the part of a spiritual watchman,
blown the cornet in Gibeah, and the trumpet in Ramoth, told Israel aloud her
sins, and Judah her transgressions. The next act is from the Pulpit to the
Tribunal; where it will be expected that Moses should do all things
according to the pattern showed him by GOD in the mount beer, that laws be
not only written, or prescribed, or remembered, but put in execution also: and
for your better encouragement herein, observe what the same Moses says to
Joshua; Deuteronomy. 31.8.
Be strong, and of a good courage, for the Lord thy God he it is that goes
with thee, he will not sail thee, nor forsake thee.

To that God, and to his son Christ Jesus, with the blessed spirit, be
ascribed all honor, glory, power, and dominion, both now and forever, Amen.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.

FINIS.
The Christian Duel. THE SECOND SERMON, Ad Magistratum. Preached at the
ASSIZES, held at TAUNTON in Sommerset. 1635. By Humphrey Sydenham.

ROMANS 8.6. Quod sapit Caro Mors est; Quod autem sapit Spiritus, Vita and Pax.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE, for Humphrey Robinson, at the Sign of the
Three Pigeons in PAUL'S Churchyard. 1637.

TO THE NOBLE AND MVCH DESERVING, Sr. WILLIAM PORTMAN, BARONET.
SIR,
STartle not, (my Noble Sir) This is no Challenge I present you with, but a
Flag of truce; for though it have an Alarm in the Front, and the subject
speaks war altogether, and discord, yet it prepares to peace, such a peace
as presupposes victory, and victory, life; and life, Eternity. To tell you
here the nature of this war, it is fears, stratagems, dangers, sufferings,
were but to preach by Letter, and degrade a Sermon to an Epistle. The following
discourse shall give you a hint of all, where shall find, that he that is a
true Christian soldier must be at peace with others, though he have no concord
with himself. This is the model of the whole fabric, and this I offer to
your Noble hands, which when it shall kiss, be confident you cannot hold
faster, than (please you try) the heart of him that offers it. Sickness and
Age (both my companion, now) are but ill Courtiers, and as little acquainted
with the nature of Ceremony, as the practice; A Complement then, you cannot
style this, but an expression of my zeal to the merits of your dead Brother;
to whom, as I was of old a faithful Servant, so still a true honorer of his
Name, though not (O my unhappiness!) an Attendant; which I cannot so much
ascribe to negligence, or error, as to Fate. But suppose either, or all, or
others, I murmr not, but bless rather; and bless thus:

God preserve you and yours, and send you length of days, and accumulation of
honors, and fruitfulness of Loins; that as your Fortunes look green and
flourishing, so may your Name also; to the glory of your God, the service of
your Country, the hope of your friends, the Joy of your Allies, and the
Prayers of

Your wel-wishing Honorer, HVM. SYDENHAM.

THE CHRISTIAN DUEL.
The second Sermon.
GAL. 5.17. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit lusts
against the Flesh.


It Is not my intent to perplex either my self or Auditorie, with any curiosity
of Preface or division, the words are already at variance between themselves;
and so instead of farther dividing them, the Text at this time shall pass for
a division: for here is Flesh against Spirit, and Spirit against Flesh, and
lust against lust; and these in the same man, and this man cleft and sundred
between these in a bitter and restless Combat. My purpose rather is to show
you the original and ground of this Duel; where and whom it challenges, and
how; that so the nature and quality of this war being discovered, I may with
more truth and boldness unmaske the Hytocrite, pull off the visard from the
Mountebanke in Religion, shem you Christianity in her own face and feature,
without the whoredoms either of Art or Falsehood, the gildings and overlayings
of Dissimulation and Imposture, tell you who are selected Soldiers for the
Lords Battle, and who Volunteers for the service of the Enemy, what they are
that march under the Ensigns of the Spirit, and what these under the colors
of the Flesh, and all this in a Caro concupiscit adversus Spiritum, The Flesh
lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit lusts against the Flesh; of which
briefly, and as my custom is, bluntly, in a few broken Meditations, such as I
could solder and piece up from the remainders of a more involved and laborious
discourse: And now Caro-concupiscit, The Flesh lusts.

MAN, since the breach of his first Truce with his Greater, has been a
continual Rebel and Mutineere, up in arms against God and himself too; Genesis
3.
the violation of that great Caveat, Ne manducas, Thou shall not eat, has
exposed both him and his posterity to the Sword, and the doom thereof lies
fresh upon record, in a Mortemorieris, The Lord has bent his Bow, Isai. 9.
and whet his Sword, and prepared for him his instruments of Death, Psalm. 7.12,
13. And whereas Man has forsaken the way of peace, and broken his league with
the great Prince thereof, and by that revolt made himself no more a Man of
peace, but of open war; God therefore will sign him his Letters of Mart,
Genesis 3.15.
with an Ego ponam inimicitiam, Genesis 3. I will set enmity, not only between
the Serpent and the Woman, or the Woman and the Man, but even between man and
himself, so that instead of David's pax inter muros, Psalm. 122.7.
Peace within the walls of Jerusalem, peace within these spiritual walls
(calmness and quietness in the bosom of the Saints here) the noise of
Discord has been shrill in our ears, and that Propheticke speech of our
Savior is come not only about us, but within us; Bella and rumores bellorum,
Matthew. 24.6
There shall be wars and rumors of wars; Wars within us, and rumors of
wars without us. Certamen illud praeclarum decertavi, says Saint Paul, I
have sought the fight, the good fight, 2 Timothy 4. There Is the war we talk of,
Sonum bucccinae audit Anima mea, clangorem belli, My soul has heard the sound
of the Trumpet, the Alarm of Dissension, Ier. 4.19. there is the rumor of
war. To come home, Care concupiscit adversus spiritum, the Flesh is at
opposition with the Spirit, and the Spirit with the Flesh, in the Text here,
there is the war within: Vices and exercitus tui sunt contra me, Thy changes
and thine Armies are against me, Job 10.17. there is the war without.

Now though in these wars and rumors of wars there be not as in the other
insurrectio gentium, a rising up of Nation against Nation, or of Church against
Church, or of opinion against opinion, (for in their bloody pursuit, the Sword
has been a long time drunk, and made the Prophet of them for the truth of his
predictions, no less than a true God) yet there is a rising of Brother against
Brother; nay of each Brother against himself; the Spiritual is against the
Carnal, the unregenerate against the sanctified, the inward against the
outward man; and all these (as I told you) in the same man, and this man sawed
and rent between these in an irreconcilable Discord.

Neither is there only thus, a rising of Brother against Brother, but in an
allegorical way, of the Brother against the Sister (of the body against the
Soul) nay of the Sister against the Sister (of the Soul against her self.)
And herein both Rome and Geneva kiss; Cornel. a lap. in cap. 7. Romans v. 25.
Solius animae lis ista, the soul only is engaged in this Combat; the Flesh,
as Flesh merely, has naught to do, but as a second to abbet or look on. And
therefore, we take not the word Caro here properly for this fleshly Mass, or
lump (which is as it were the paste and crust of the body) but metaphorically
for the carnal and unregenerate part of man; neither do we take the word
Spirit physically, for the reasonable Soul merely, but Theologically, for the
spiritual and regenerate part of man; and between this Spirit and that Flesh,
this regenerate and that unregenerate part, this new and that old man, there is
a continual skirmish in the same man, and this Quarrel not to be decided but
by Death.

Now, as this Combat all the Saints and servants of God have, so they only
have it; a Combat so proper to the true christian, that none can fight it but
he alone; hanc pugnam non experiuntur in semetipsis, nisi bellatores virtutum,
et debellatores vitioorum, says S. Augustine; those that fight for virtue,
Sermon. 59. de diversis.
and against vice, feel this war, and no other; and this is a blessed war;
and where it is not, there is but a cursed Peace. If all be hushed and calm
within, there is not only a Sleepines but even a vacancy of goodness; the
spirit is no longer spirit in man, then when it is in agitation, and at
variance with the flesh. And therefore, we here peremptorily exclude two sorts
of men from any interest they can challenge in this war of the Regenerate;
such as are so buried in the flesh, that they seem to have no spirit at all;
and such as glory altogether in the spirit, as if they had no flesh; for, as on
the one side, if there be no spirit, there can be no reluctance of the flesh;
so on the other, if no flesh, no opposition of the spirit; and if neither of
these, no war; if no War, no Crown, no Garland, no Glory. The former sort
we may compare to the children of Israel, in the times of Deborah; Judges.
5.8.
There is not a sword nor a spear amongst forty thousand of them; a troop
of secular and carnal men, which know not the use of S. Paul's artillery; The
sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6.14. et 17.
and the shield of faith, and the breast plate of righteousness, and the helmet
of salvation are not their proper harness; but as unwieldy for their
shoulders, as Saul's armor was for David. A brawling, perhaps, they may have
between reason and affection, or between natural conscience and natural
affection, between the will and the understanding; which as in a mind
enlightened only, not renewed, is nothing else but a neighborly discord between
flesh and flesh; but for any solid debate between will and will, affections and
affections, flesh and spirit, indeed they have none at all; it being true of
these which God by Mosis spoke of those of the old world, My spirit shall no
longer contend with them, for they are but flesh, Genesis 6.3.

The other sort we may fitly resemble to the Children of Ephraim, who being
harnessed and carrying Bows, Psalm. 78.10.
turned themselves back in the day of Battle. Men that make a shrewd flourish
in the vant-guard of Religion, their Bow is ready bent against the wicked, and
they shoot their Arrows, even bitter words, desperately bitter, but when they
come themselves to the shocke and brunt of the Battle, to the handy-gripe of
the Adversary, to the trial indeed of their spiritual manhood, they instantly
forsake their Colors, and the Roe is not more swift on the Mountains, than
they to fly from the Standard and Ensign under which they fought, running
from one Clime and Church unto another; from an old one here founded on a Rock,
Councels, Synods, Decrees, Harmony of Fathers, the practice of the very
Apostles themselves, to a new one built on the sands of their own fancies, the
brainsick plantations of unstable souls. And such are so far from any true
spiritual valor or wisdom, that our Apostle bestows on them the livery of
Fools; their first March and Onset might perhaps be in the Spirit; but their
Retrait doubtless was in the flesh; their Coming on in lightning and thunder;
but their Going off in smoke.

And here in this throng, I cannot pass without shouldring a little with the
Anabaptist, and the Persectist; men forsooth so wholly sealed up by the spirit,
that they seem to disclaim the least impressions of the flesh; and pretending
that they see visions, do nothing else but dream dreams; lulled along in a
confidence of their legal righteousness, and slumbring in an opinion of their
perfection in this life; as if they were no longer militant but triumphant, But
as in the mouth of the foolish, there is virga superbiae, says Solomon, Arod
of pride; Prove. 13.3.
so in the mouth of those proudones, there is virga stultitiae, A rod of folly.
If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me; if I say I am
Perfect, I shall also prove my self perverse, Job: 9 20. Lo, here, in one
text, these great vaunters with all their flourishes and bravado's are put unto
the foil; and the justice and perfection they so wrestle for thrown flat upon
the back, even by Job himself, as just a man (the text says) as any the
earth had: and yet he tells them plainly by his own experience, tht if they
glory in the one, their own mouth shall condemn them, if they but mention the
other, they shall prove themselves (as indeed they are) wayward and perverse.
Shall we leave the just, and enquire after the perfect man, David, the man
after Gods own heart, (and such a one was a perfect man, you will say, if the
earth had any) we shall find him complaining of uncleanesse within, and
vehemently importuning the Lord for purging and washing Psalm. 51.7. S. Hieron.
Regmonach. c. p. 15
In carne justorum imperfecta tantum perfectio est, says Saint Jerome; the
most righteous upon earth here have but an imperfect perfection; and those that
would be thought more righteous then others, a perfect imperfection: And
therefore I may say of these phanatickespirits, as Hanna, the wife of Elkanah,
said of Peninnah; Talk no more so exceeding proudly, 1. Sam. 2.3.
let not arrogance come out of your mouth, for the Lord is a God of knowledge,
and by him actions are waighed. His hand is ever at the beam, his eye looking
how it turns; and so when your clipped and your washed gold comes to the scale,
your false stamped shekle to the balance of his sanctuary, how will it be
found lighter then vanity it self, how more vain then nothing? for if Angels
before him are charged with folly, how much more, those that dwell in houses of
clay, whose foundation is in the dust, that are crushed before the moth. Job
4.19.

That of the Athenians to Pompey the great, Ipsd est perfectio hominis,
invenisse se non esse perfectum: D. Aug. Sermon. 49. de temp: D. Aug. Sermon. 44.
de temp.
was a remarkable saying: Thou art so much the more a God, by how much thou
acknowledgest thy self to be a man; To be an excellent man is to confess
himself to be a man indeed; that is frail, imperfect; haec est vera
regenitorum persectio, si imperfectos se esse agnoscant, says Saint Augustine:
then is a regenerate man come to his true perfection here, when he knows that
he has none here, truly. And questionless, 2. Cor. 4.16. 2. Cor. 7.1.
If the inward man be renewed day by day; and that we are yet to perfect
holiness in the fear of God (as S. Paul testifies) then, this renovation and
sanctification being not yet absolutely ripe cannot produce any perfect
operation, until it self be perfect; and therefore our habitual justice is
so far forth complete, and no farther, D. Aug. lib. 3. contra. 2. Epist
pelag. cap. 7.
ut ad eius perfectionem pertineat ipsius imperfectionis et in veritate
cognitio, et in humilitate confessio; A true knowledge, and an humble
confession of our own frailties is the greatest justice and perfection we have
about us. Though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much soape, yet thy
iniquity is still marked before thee, Jer. 2.22. And, Though I wash my self
with snow-water, and make my hands never so clean, yet thou shall plunge me in
the ditch, and my very clothes shall abhor me, Job 9.30, 31.

There is no perfection then in this earthly Tabernacle, None, none as we are
Sojourners, and in our pilgrimage; But at our Iournies end, in the Palestina
above; None of Degrees, I mean, but of Parts only; As an Infant is a perfect
man, because he has the perfect proportion of a Man; there is nothing
monstrous, nothing defective or superfluous in him, in respect of the Organs or
Parts, but in respect of the Faculties and Functions, and the Operation of the
Organicall parts (which is the perfection of Degrees) he has none at all; for
though he have members, yet they cannot do their office; The feet walk not,
the hands feed not, the head judges not; So it is in our spiritual growth;
where there is only perfctio viae, not patriae; S. Augustine detrmining this
point with a Tum erit perfectio Boni, quandoerit consummatio mali, A perfection
of Good, and a consummation of Evil have their Joynt-inheritances in the
Kingdom of Heaven; so the Father in his 15. Sermon de verbis Apostoli.

No doubt, Egypt here may afford us her Garlike, her Onions, and her
Fleshpots, but the Flowings of milk and honey, and the Rivers of Oil will be
in the Canaan above. The earthly Jerusalem may abound with Silver and Gold, and
Arabian spices; But what are These to the gates of pearl? to the streets paved
with precious stones? Sheba and Tharshish and Ophir may supply her, both with
treasure and delight, Ivory and Apes and Peacoks, 1 King. 10. But these are
comparatively Toys, in respect of those rich and glorious Constellations which
shine in the heavenly Jerusalem; The Emerauld, the Sapphire, and the Chrysolite
are there; The Iacinth, the Topaz, the Amethist are above: Rev. 21.20.

Honorificentissima praedicantur de Te, Psalm. 87.3.
O Civitas Dei, Sum honorifica! Great and excellent things are spoken of
Thee, thou City of God, Thou everlasting City! Great and excellent indeed, for
there is neither true Greatness nor Excellency, but There; where we shall grow
up to the perfect Man, Indeed, as S. Paul tells us, And to the measure of the
ture of the Fullness of Christ; Ephesians. 4.13.
when we shall lay hold on that (...), That Aeternum pondus Gloriae, The
excellent and eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. No Defect there, no Sin,
no Temptation, no Lust, no Infirmity, no Sorrow; but we shall be filled with
all the Fullness of God; Ephe. 3.19.
The Sun shall not burn us by day, nor the Moon by night: Nay, there shall be
no need of Sun and Moon; for the Glory of God shall shine there, and the
Lamb is the light thereof for evermore.

But whilst we wander as strangers and pilgrims here on earth, there will be a
daily tempest between the Flesh and the Spirit; a wilderness of sin must be
past through, and a fiery pillar required to guide us in our night of errors.
And though God by his great mercies in his Son Christ Jesus has brought us
out of darkness into his marvelous light; yet, even in this light, darkness
sometimes over-shadowes us. And therefore as in the Creation of the greater
World, God ordained two principal lights, the one to rule the day, and the
other the night: So in the restoration of this lesser World, Man, God has set
two lights also, a Sun and a Moon, Christ and his Church, the one to govern
him by Day when the beams of the Spirit do enlighten him, the other in the
Night when the fogs and mists of the Flesh do overspread him; and as those
natural Planets do sometimes meet with their Clouds and Eclipses, so do
these mystical also. Now as the interposition of the Earth between the Sun
and the Moon causes an Eclipse in the Moon; and as the interposition of the
Moon between us and the Sun, causes an Eclipse in the Sun: So the
interposition of the Flesh (which is as our earthly part) between God and the
Soul, causes an Eclipse in the Soul, whereby her saculties are over-clouded;
and the interposition of concupiscence or lust between our Spirit and the
Spirit of God, causes an Eclipse in the Spirit, whereby Grace is darkened, and
that Sun of Righteousness which would otherwise arise in our hearts is many
times over-shadowed by our corrupter motions; insomuch that the best Saints and
Servants of God have often groaned within themselves, and powered out their
complaints in bitterness of Soul with an Vsquequo Domine Jesu, usquequo? How
long Lord Jesus, how long? How long this Tyranny of the Flesh? this bondage of
corruption? this body of Death? this captivity to the Law of finne? Psalm. 120.5.
Wretched, wretched that we are, who shall deliver us? Woe that we are thus
constrained to sojourne in Mesech here, and to dwell in the Tents of Kedar. But
even in these spiritual convulsions they have their lucida intervalla, their
Divine solaces and refreshments; this being not the language of desperation,
but complaint. Ieb after all his passionate expostulations with God, tell's
Bildad, that he knows his Redeemer lives, Job 19.25. And Saint Paul after
his sad and manifold disputes with his own frailties here, can give thanks to
God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 7.24. which sacred ejaculations of
theirs, preach no other Doctrine and use but this, That we feeling this thorn
in the flesh, and the messenger of Satan ever ready to buffet us, 2 Cor. 12.7.
should not be exalted above measure; but when we begin to bristle and advance
our selves in the whiteness of our feathers, swell in the opinion of our own
Justice and perfections, we should cast down our eyes upon the black and
ugly feet of our infirmities, and so humble the pride of our imaginations with
the modest language of the Prophet, Lord blot out my transgressions as a mist,
and as a thick cloud my sins: Isai. 44.22.
Melior est peccator humilis quam justus superbus; D. Aug. sermon. 49. de temp.
a sinner in his humility is a more acceptable Sacrifice than a just man (if
such a one may be) in his pride. And yet as we should be thus sensible of our
infirmities, how daily, how hourly, how minutely, how unavoidably they are; so
we should not humble our selves below our selves, forgetting the great Pilot
and Anchor of our Souls; but whilst we have arms, and Oars, and plankes to
waft us in, let us not voluntarily plundge our selves in that depth which may
occasion our everlasting shipwreck, diffidence and despair; but knowing that
Prophers and Disciples themselves have been in the like Tempest, the Ship
ready to sink, and her Great Steeres-man asleep, they crying amazedly, we
perish, we perish, yet if we invoke him by our zealous importunities, rouse him
with a Master, Master, he shall awake at length and rebuke the churlish winds
and the waves, Luke. 8.24
and a blessed calm shall follow. The greatest servants of God have had their
great infirmities; and yet none so great, but have had a fair audience in his
Court of mercy, and met both with excuse and pardon from the mouth of a
compassionate Judge; who acknowledges that their spirit is ready, though their
flesh be weak, and their mind following the Law of God, though the Flesh, the
frail Flesh, be led captive by the Law of sin.

And this peculiar Plea of Gods chosen Servants is at length become an Apology
for the customary sins of those who in their conversations are most wicked
and depraved; the prophanest Esaus, Pet. Mart. in cap. 7. ad Romans v. 25.
the loosest Libertines that are; Illae pestes, and furiae temporum (as Peter
Martyr calls them) those plagues and furies of the times, lay title to it, and
it is made not only the excuse of their sins, but their very patent and
privilege of sinning, who under the color of their carnal frailties can
blanch and palliate their deepest enormities; make Scarlet, Snow; and Crimson,
Wool; crying out with those wretches in the times of S. Augustine, Vide D.
Aug. Sermon. 46. de Temp. and Ser. 13. deverbis Dom. and Sermon. 6. de verbis
Apostol.
Non nos, sed Caro; non nos, sed Caro, Not us, but the Flesh, the Flesh, that
must be are the blame, whatsoever the Sin be; Their mind, they pretend, is
prone enough to matters of Religion, but the flesh, as a violent Tide or
Torrent, drives them another way; and no sin so capital but finds S. Paul's
evasion, Non nos, sed peccatum in nobis, It Is no more we that do it, but Sin
that dwells in us. Lies and Oaths, and Blasphemies and Prophanations are at
length but a business of the Flesh, to wallow in Surfets and Vomitings and
Excess of Riots, till the wine inflame, and the eyes look red, and startle, a
toy of the flesh too; Raylings and Envies, and Scandalls and Back bitings, (the
Cut-throates of neighborhood and amity) but a frailty of the flesh neither;
Chambering and watonnesse, and a lustful neighing after thy neighbors wife,
nay, the rank sweat of an Incestuous Bed, a trick of the flesh also; (and
that is a trick of the flesh indeed) to grind a poor man, or steece a Tenant,
or pillage a Church, cheat God himself of his dues, imbeazle his tithes and
offerings, Imbrue our hands in the blood of his Sacrifices, but a trifle of the
Flesh neither: In a word, be their Sins dyed in Grain, never of so sanguine
and deep a Tincture, so mighty, so heinous, so inexpiable, the Flesh shall be
their excuse still, and the words of the Apostle are ever ready to plead for
them, Romans 7.25.
With the mind I serve the Law of God, but with the Flesh the Law of Sin. But
let such corrupt Glossers on the Text consider who S. Paul was that used those
words, and of what sins, (for let the Pelagian bray what he list, the words are
S. Paul's, and S. Paul's of himself, and of himself as an Apostle, Vide D.
Aug. Ser. 5. de verbis Apost.
not as a Pharisee) not of public and scandalous, and notorious sins, (from
which even his Pharisaisme was exempt) but of bosom and inward infirmities,
whereby he felt his sanctified intentions strangled by the counter-plots of the
Flesh. Moreover the Text properly belongs to those that struggle, not to them
that lie soaking and weltring in their sins; the Spirit must be still lusting
against the Flesh; and the Flesh still lusting against the Spirit: (This Sea of
Ours, never lying calm, and unruffled without some storm) So that those which
tugge not, and bear up stiff Sail against this Tide, but plunging themselves
headlong in all manner of Vices, yet still pretending a rectitude of their mind
and will, have nothing to do with this prerogative of the Saints, For, as a
grave Neoterick of ours strictly observes, None can say, The mystery of self
deceiving. by. D. D. cap. 14.
that sins are not Theirs, but the Fleshes; but such have the Spirit besides
the Flesh, contending with the Flesh. Now those, says he, which are so ready
with their Non nos, sed caro, Not us, but the flesh are oftentimes themselves
nothing else but flesh; no Spirit at all to make the least resistance, but give
up themselves in a voluntary subjection to the lusts and corruptions of the Old
man. So that, this non Nos, sed Caro is but a vain Pretense of Theirs,
sounding nothing else but us, and our selves; For, in understanding, will,
memory, affections, soul and body too, they are altogether flesh; Nature
speaking of These, as sometimes Adam did of Eve, Adest Os ex ossibus meis, et
Caro de carne mea, Here is Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh, Genesis 2.23.

Notwithstanding, in the committing of some grievous sin, they have no doubt,
a kind of inward murmuring and reluctation. Pilate will not condemn Christ,
but he will first wash his hands, pretending that he is innocent of his
blood: Mat. 27.24. Felix will give S. Paul liberty of speaking for himself,
before he will deliver him mercilesly to the Jews, bound; Acts: 24.27.

There is a grudging and recoyling in the consciences of most men, even In, and
Before the act of their mistreadings; but this resistance is not from a mind
renewed, but enlightened only; not from a religious fear of offending God for
this or that sin, but the fearful apprehension of punishments which shall
follow upon those sins; so that they do it only, says S. Austine, timore
poenoe, non amore justitiae, rather to avoid a hovering vengeance, Sermon. 59.
de diversis.
then for any filial obedience, or respect to God and his commands. And
herein, as in a mapp or glass, we may see the difference of the combat
between the regenerate and the mere carnal man; that of the regenerate is in
the same faculties of the soul, between the will and the will, the affections
and the affections; these faculties even in the renovated soul, being partly
spiritual, and partly carnal, whence it follows that when the renewed part of
the will (which is the spirit) invites us to good; the unregenerate part (which
is the flesh) swayes us to evil; But the combat in the mere carnal man is
between diverse faculties of the soul, between the understanding and the
will, between the conscience and the affections; he neither resisting
temptations to sin, nor the swindge of them when he is tempted, neither hating
the sin forbidden, nor loving the law forbidding it; but still draws on
cords with cart-roaps; vanities with iniquities; and these in a full measure,
drinking them like water; until he come even to the overflowing of
ungodlines; Job. 15.16.
so far from holding back from mischief, that he does it with greediness
and swiftness; committing all uncleanes with greedines, Ephesians: 4.19. Et pedes
festinanter currentes ad malum; his feet are swift in running to mischief,
Pro. 6.18. the regenerate man checkes evil motions when they are offered; the
carnal man gives them line and liberty of access without control; Sin to
the one is like the book Saint John mentions; causing bitterness in the belly,
Revel: 10.9. To the other, like Ezekiels scroule; it is to him as honey and
sweetness, Ezekiel: 3.3. That does utterly distaste, this does affect and relish
it; he, in the temptation of sin strives to avoyde the action; to this, the
action is as ready as the temptation; so that, instead of the rain or the
snaffle, he is altogether for the switch and the spur, veloces sunt pedes
ejus ad effundendum sanguinem, his feet are swift to shed blood: Romans 3.15.
Once more, The one keeps his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak
no guile. 1. Pet. 3. The others tongue frames deceit, and devises mischief,
and the poison of Aspes is under his lips; proudly vaunting with those in the
Psalmist, Quis est Dominus nobis? with our tongues we will prevail, we are
they that ought to speak, who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12.4.

I deny not, but the same sin, according to the act may be both in the
regenerate, and the mere carnal man, but not without this qualification, in
the one, for the most part, it is a sin of will, and choice, and delight, and
custom, in the other a sin of infirmity, and reluctation, and contempt, a
sin of invasion, not of appetite. Besides, as there is a difference in the
manner of their sinning so there is in their opposition which they make against
their sins; The reluctance, which the regenerate has, is from the
apprehension of the goodness of Gods law, forbidding sin; of the carnal man,
D. D. ut si p. (...)
from the apprehension of the truth of the judgments, denounced by that law,
punishing those sins, that from love; this from fear. Credit bonus, et vere
credit; (says Saint Augustine) credit malus, sed non vere credit; credit
Christum, sed odit Christum; the good man believes, and he believes truly; the
wicked man believes too, but he believes not truly: he believes Christ, but
he loves not Christ, he believes him as a GOD, loves him not as a Judge; in a
word, habet confessionem fidei in timore poenae, non in amore coronae. Peter's
confession of Christ, and the Devils was all one in respect of the words, but
not of the heart, they both acknowledged that he was filius Dei magni, the
Son of the living God. Math. 16. But see the difference: Hujus confessio,
quia cum odio Christi prolata est, merito damnatur; Eius, D. Aug. Sermon. 59. de
diversis Tom. 10. p. 616
quia ex interna dilectione processit, aeterna beatitudine remuneratur: The
Devil as an Angel that was fallen, enviously acknowledged Christ's divinity,
and therefore his own just condemnation: Peter as an Angel that should rise,
had an inward taste of his mediatourship, and therefore of his own undoubted
glorification.

In fine, though the motions of the flesh be alike in both, yet the humouring
of those motions is not. Aliud est concupiscere, aliud post concupiscentias non
ire: It is one thing to lust, another to go a whoring after it. As it is one
thing to glance and dart a wanton desire, another to court and plead it. A man
may have, and has and must, as he is man, his carnal titillations, and yet a
spiritual man all this while, if he oppugn them, if he withstand their
march, and onset: But if he once hang out his flags of truce, if he give way
to their fiery seige, if he open the city gates to let in this armed monster,
the spiritual man has lost the day, and the carnal has the full triumph.
Hark what Saint Augustine in this case obtrudeth, Quicunque carnalibus
concupiscentiis cedis, atque consentis etc: Whosoever thou art that give way
to thy carnal concupiscences, and either think them good to fill up the
saturity of thy lust, or else so see them to be evil, that notwithstanding
that evil thou do assent, and so follow them where they lead thee, and
what they suggest, commit, Tu, tu quisquis talis es, totus, totus carnalis es,
Thou art carnal, Thou, thou whosoever thou art, art All, all carnal. And
therefore the advice of the same Father will be seasonable here, If the
infirmities of the Flesh be such, D. Aug. Sermon. 5. de verb. Apost.
ut concupiscas, saltem post concupiscentias non eas; If thou must needs lust,
(as lust thou must, because a man) yet run not after thy lusts; Though they
surge and boil, let them not break upon thee; though their floods rise,
though they lift up their voice aloud, though their waves are mighty, and rage
horribly, let them not compass thee about, Psalm. 93. v. 3.4.
let them not come in upon thy soul; But though the rain fall, and the winds
blow, and these floods come, and beat upon thy house of clay, yet remember the
Rock upon which it is founded, the Rock Christ; The Rock of thy strength (as
David calls him) and the Rock of thy refuge, and the Rock of thy salvation.

Again, Math. 7.25.
seeing the Flesh is Hostis internus and gravissimus, (as Origin styles it) and
that our greatest Enemies are those of our own House, those that are about us,
Psalm. 62.7.
and within us, p^ae^aeteris omnibus, carnis insidiae formidandae sunt; we
should principally beware of the Stratagems and Ambuscadoes of the Flesh; let
us strive to awaken her forces, abate the edge both of her pride and teachery;
knowing, that where this Siren sings, it does but presage our shipwreck; when
this Delilah imbraceth, it is but to betray us to the spiritual Philistine,
it is the principal snare and pit fall the Devil uses to entrap us to our
destruction. He may be the Father begetting sin, but the Flesh, for the most
part, is the Mother conceiving and bringing it forth. And therefore Saint James
says, that Every man when he is tempted is enticed and drawn away by his own
Concupiscence, Jam. 1.14. So that although Satan has a hand, a powerful, a
subtle and malicious hand in tempting us, yet the Flesh and her Lusts carry the
greater stroke; He tempts only, the other entice and draw away; he does but
lay the bait, the other cause us to play and nibble, and at length to swallow
it. The Devil has only a subtilty in persuading, no power in compelling man
to sin, Non enim cogendo, sed suadendo nocet; D. Aug. Sermon. 197. de temp.
nec extorquet a nobis consensum, sed petit, says Saint Augustine. But the
Flesh does not only insinuate consent to sin, but even extort it; she being
both a Traitor and a Tyrant, first lays her powder plot, and then blows us
up. And therefore, let every one of us arm himself against the assaults of
the Flesh, the suggestions of our corrupter Lusts; humbling and macerating
these pampered bodies of ours by Prayer and Abstinence, choking all inordinate
motions, and all ways of distemper and excess, which may give them either
flame or nourishment. You know who tells you, that Gluttony is the fore-chamber
of Lust, and Lust is the inner-roome of Gluttony. On the other side, Abstinence
is the midwife of Devotion, and Devotion is the sister of Zeal, and Zeal is
the mother of true Prayer; so that there is neither Zeal, nor Prayer, nor
Devotion truly without Abstinence; I mean as well a corporal as mental
Abstinence; a Restraint from the fullness of bread, as from the fullness of
Sin. For it is with the soul and Body, for the most part (pardon the
similitude I beseech you) as it is with the Commonwealth, and the Exchequer;
if the one be full, the other, they say, is still empty. The Soul, which is
Gods Exchequer and Storehouse of his Graces, when it is full of Contemplations
and heavenly Entrancements, the Body is commonly empty of her carnal
repletions, as causing a drowsinesse and dullness in all spiritual agitations.
On the other side, the Body which is the Commonwealth of the senses, (the
rebels commonly of the Spirit) when that is crammed with satiety, the blood
dancing in the cheek and veins, and the joints swimming with marrow and
fatness, there is a kind of macelency and famine, and leanness in the soul,
all goodness is vacant and banished then, and Lust keeps her revell and
rendevouz. A fit caution and mements, as I conceive, for this place and
meeting, that those days which the Church has of Old solemnly consecrated to
the service of the Spirit, we devote not another way in making provision for
the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof: That the time she has set apart for
Fasting and Prayer, whereby we should magnify the Lord upon the strings and
pipe, and so make the tongue, Cymbalum jubilationis, A weltun'd Cymball, we
over-lavish not to feasting and excess, and so make our throat, Sepulchrum
apertum, An open sepulcher. I know, that Noble assemblies require something
extraordinary, both for State and Multitude, and let them have it; But withal,
I beseech them to consider what Lent is, Preached in Lent ad Magstratum.
and with what devout strictness observed by the Christian Church for many
hundred years together; though in these days of Flesh, cried down by some
pretenders to the Spirit, as a superstitious observation of our blinded
Ancestors. But let them know, or (if they do not) let them read; read
Antiquity in her clear, though slow streamings unto us, not the troubled and
muddy waters, novelty has cast upon our shore, and then they shall know, that
it is a time of Sackcloth and Ashes and casting earth upon the Head, for the
humbling and macerating of the Sinner; not of putting on the glorious apparel,
your vain shinings in silks and trssues, for the ruffling of the Gallant. A
time like that in the mountain, of restraint and scarcity; when a few barley
loaves and some small Fishes should suffice a Multitude, Ioh. 6.9. Not of pomp
or magnificence, when the stalled Ox, and the pastur'd Sheep, and the fallow
Dear, 1 King. 2.4.
and the satted Foul are a service for the Lords Anointed.

For mine own part, I am not so rigid either in practice or opinion (or if I
were in both, it matters not where a higher judgment and authority
overballac'd me) to deny sickness or age, or (in respect of travel, or
multitude of employments) the public Magistrate, what in this case were either
convenient, or necessary, or enough; however I desire them to remember, that
both the Sword and the Keys have a stroke here; and so that they would feed
only, not cloy; nourish, not dainty up the body, knowing that when it is
cocker'd and kept too high, the Soul it self is manacled, and more than lame
and heavy in sacred operations. And therefore let us not be altogether men of
Flesh; but as the Father has it occasionally on this Text, D. Aug. 43. Ser. de
verb. Dom.
Vincat spiritus carnem, aut certe ne vincatur a carne, let the spirit have a
sway too, and though not wholly a Conqueror, yet make her not a captive; let
our Devotions go along with our entertainments, our Acts of Charity with our
Acts of Justice: Foeneratur Domino qui miseretur pauperis, says the Wiseman,
He that has pity upon the poor, lends, or (as the Latin implies) puts
to use unto the Lord, Prove. 19.17. Now, Qui accipit mutuum, servus est
foenerantis, The borrower is a Servant to the lender, Prove. 22.7. So that the
Lord is as 'twere a Servant unto him that has pity on the poor, because in
that pity he lends to the Lord. And indeed, who would not be a lender to
the Lord, when his interest may be a Crown, and his reward everlastingnesse?
who would not exchange a morsel of bread for the celestial Manna? and alms
for the food of Angels? a few earthly rags for the white Robe of the Saints?
Since most of these are not so properly a lending or benevolence, as a due. The
gleanings of the Cor-field, Levit. 23.22.
and the shakings of the Vintage, were a Legacy long since bequeathed the
poor man by the Law, when the Gospel was yet in her nonage and minority: But
now it is not only the crumbs and fragments from thy Table, and so feed the
hungry, or the courser shearings of thy Flock, and so cloth the naked: But
visit the sick too, and those which are in prison, Mat. 25.26. So that our
charity should not only reach the impotent and needy, but the very malefactor,
and legal transgressor. The groanings of the prison should be as well listened
to, as the complainings in the streets; and at this time more specially, more
particularly; that those bowels which want and hunger have even contracted and
shrivel'd up; and those bodies which cold and nakedness have palsied and
benumbed, not finding it seems so much pity as to cloth and feed them as
they should whilst they were alive, may at last meet with such a noble and
respective charity, as to shroud and interre them like Christians when they
are dead. In the mean time I have that humble suit to prefer to the Gods of
Earth here, which David had of old to the God of Heaven. Oh let the sorrowful
sighing of the prisoners come before you, Psalm. 79.12.
according to the greatness of your power, have mercy on those which are
appointed to dye: Let your Vinegar be tempered with Oil, Justice suger'd over
with some compassion, that where the Law of God says peremptorily, Thou shall
restore and not dye, let not there the Law of Man be writ in blood, and say,
(except to the notorious and incorrigible offender) Thou shall dye and not
live. There will a time come, when we shall all appear before the Judgment
seat of God. 2 Cor. 5.10.
And what then? what? The Sinners Plea will be generally then, Job. 9.3.
Lord I cannot answer thee one for a thousand. And what if I cannot? yet, O
Lord, with thee there is mercy and plenteous redemption. Psalm. 130.7.
But now and then it falls out so unhappily at the Judgment seat of Man, that
parties arraigned, though they answer a thousand in one (multitudes of
inditements in one innocence) yet sometimes naked circumstances, and mere
colorable conjectures without any solid proof at all, shall so cast them in
the voice of a dazzled Jury, that there is neither hope of mercy nor redemption;
Genesis 40.22. Esther 7.10.
but Pharohs Baker must to the Tree, and Haman to the Gallows fifty cubits
high. But in this case, Be learned and wise ye Judges of the Earth, serve the
Lord in fear, and rejoice to him in reverence, Psalm. 2.10.

But I have here digress'd a little, and perhaps a little too sawcily in this
point of charity: let charity have the blame if she have deserved it, whilst
I return where I formerly left you, and that was at a feast in time of
fasting. Good LORD how preposterously, nay how rebelliously, and in one act
crossing both the civil and ecclesiasticke power which prohibit it. And
therefore since nature says, for the better maintenance and support of these
fleshly tabernacles, thou shall eat and drink ad necessitatem; and the church
to take down the frankenesse of nature, and tame the wildness of the flesh,
(for in point of fasting there is as well a religious, as a civil, or
politic respect) says, thou shall not eat and drink ad intemperantiam, let
us so eat and drink, that we may live and not lust, and so live, that thus
eating and drinking we care not if we die to morrow. The cause why Moses so
long fasted in the Mount, was mere divine speculation; the cause why David
did, humiliation: so that, the way to mortify the flesh, and to advance the
spirit, is by the door of abstinence, whereby we may undermine the palaces
of lust and wantonness, plant parcimony as nature, where riotousnes has been
study; Hooker Eccles. pol. lib. 5.
that whereas men of the Flesh eat their bread with joy, and drink their wine
with a merry heart, Eccles. 9.7. The man of the Spirit may be contrite and
wounded, and so humble his soul with fasting, Psalm. 35.13. Beware then of this
Ingenuosa Gula, this kick-shawed luxury, when the brain turns Cook for
pleasing both of the eye and palate: let us not court appetite, when we should
but feed it, not feed excess, when we should strangle it. Moderation and
sobriety are the best Governors of our meetings; and where these are, (as
they are not too often in the meetings of a multitude) the example of our
Savior will allow us to turn Water into Wine; and the advice of his Apostle,
to drink it also for our stomachs suke; and doubtless sometimes for our
mirths sake too, if we exceed not the bounds of temperance, nor fly out into
superfluity or Epicurisme, which are the blot and stain of Society, and a
hinderance of that true joy and comfort, which otherwise might smile in our
public meetings, when invitations are turned into riots, feeding into
suffocation, clogging the body and damping the spirits, and (thereby) those
blessings, which else happily might have shower'd upon us. A Soul drowned in
meat, as the Father phraseth it, can no more behold the light of God, than a
body sunk in puddle can behold the light of the Sun. For, as fogs and mists
arising from the Earth, and hiding the light of the Sun from us, debar us
for the present, of the virtue of those heavenly influences, which otherwise we
might partake of: So the fumes and vapors of an over-charg'd stomach,
ascending to the brain, cause a cloudinesse in the soul; hindering and darkning
those heavenly speculations, which the Spirit would else mount to in God, and
his Son Christ Jesus.

To conclude then, it should be our principal care to keep the whole man
brushed; all sluttishnes swept-of as well within, as without; not only those
outward spots and blemishes which bestain the flesh; but even those smaller
dusts and atoms, which over-spred the soul. Remember, it is the white robe
which is the dressing of the Saint; and that the hand which is washed in
innocence is accepted at Gods Altar; The hair that is unshaven is not for his
congregation, nor the foul and unclean thing for his kingdom. We read that
Solomon's Temple had two altars; the one without, Vbi animaliu^ caedebatur
Sacrificium, 1. Kings 6.20. and 22.
where the bullock was flaine for sacrifice; The other, within, Vbi
Thymiamitis offerebatur incensum, where incense and perfumes were offered, the
best mirrhe, and the onyx and the sweet storax. Ecclus. 24.15.
And we know that this temple of the holy Ghost has two altars also; the one
without, in the flesh, where the bullock should be slain, the Hecatomb of
our hundred beasts offered, our beastly lusts and corruptions, which fight
against the soul. The other within; in the mind, where the fumes of mirrhe
and frank incense ascend, the incense of prayer, and gratulation, that
spiritual holocaust, that vial of the Saints, full of odours, which reaches
the very nostrils of the Almighty. On these two altars, D. Aug. 256. sermon. de
temp.
God requires a two fold sacrifice; munditiem in cord, cleanesse in the heart,
which David so vehemently desired, create in me a clean heart O God, Psalm. 5
1. and castitatem in corpore, chastity in the body, S. Bern. inter sententias.
which S. Bernar calls martyrium sine sanguine, a martyrdom without blood;
where there is a death of the flesh, without the death of the body; a death of
her lusts, and a death of her corruptions by mortifying and subduing all
carnal rebellions. And this martyrdom of the flesh S. Paul glories in, I
keep under my body, or as the Greek has it (...), Corpus contundo, Paulin.
Ep. 58.
et Lividum reddo (so Paulinus reads it to S. Augustine) I Bray as it were,
and macerate my body, and mark what follows, (...) In servitutem redigo, I
bring it into subjection. 1. Cor. 9.27. And in subjection indeed it must be
brought, in subjection to the soul; which as it gives the other form; so it
should steer and master it. Vnumquodque sicundum hoc vivat, unde vivit says
S. Augustine; let every thing live according to the rule and platform of that
by which it lives. Vnde vivit caro tua? De anima tua; unde vivit anima tua? De
Deo tuo; unaquaque harum secundum vitam suam vivat: Whence lives thy body? from
thy soul: whence lives thy soul? from thy God: Let both then live, according
to that Life which gave them life. The world was made for man, and man for his
soul, and his soul for God. Tu^ recte vivit carosecundu^ anima^, D. Aug. Sermon.
13. deverb. Dom.
cum anima vivit secundum Deum; The sweet Saint Augustine still; then the body
lives rightly according to the soul, when the soul lives rightly according
unto GOD. Let the body then so live after the soul, and the soul after GOD,
that both body and soul may live with God in his eternal kingdom, and that
for his dear Sons sake, Jesus Christ the righteous: to whom with the Father,
and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory ascribed both now, and for ever.
Amen.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.

FINIS.
Jehovah-Jireh. GOD In his PROVIDENCE And OMNIPOTENCE Discovered. A SERMON
PREACHED Ad Magistratum, at CHARD in Sommerset. 1633. By Humphrey Sydenham.

Laudate Dominum de omnimoda potentia ejus, Laudate eum secundum multitudinem
Magnitudinis ejus.

Psalm. 150.2. LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE, for Humphrey Robinson, at the
Sign of the Three Pigeons in PAUL'S Churchyard. 1637.

TOMY HIGHLY HONORED FRIEND Sr. JOHN STAVVELL, Knight of the BATH, THIS.
SIR,
JUST promises are just debts, and debts (though delayed) ever come acceptably,
if they come with advantage. I long since promised you a transcript of this
Sermon (which was the Principal) and now I send it you with a Dedication
(which is the Interest;) and such an Interest, I presume, you will not refuse,
though presented by the hand of your poor Servant. Now it is yours indeed, but
it is yours chiefly to peruse, not to protect; for such a subject will look
above all humane Patronage, there being nothing fit either to own or protect
Omnipotence, but GOD himself; to whom I consecrate both my self and It. And
yet, though the subject be Sacred, and points directly at the Creator of us
all, yet there may be (and are by all likelihood) frailties in the discourse;
which as they will meet with some cavil or opposition, so they will require a
Bulwark and defense also, and from whom more properly, than from a Great man!
who both in place and nature is nearest to his God (if Goodness, as it ought,
shake hands with Greatness;) and of that no man dispaires in a Noble
disposition, where but to question virtue, were to profane it. Your Country
has often tasted of the Greatness of your Spirit, and where there is Spirit,
truly there must be something that is divine also; which cannot but speak
your Goodness without control, from me especially,

Your old, and (if you please to preserve him) constant Servant, HVM. SYDENHAM.

JEHOVAH JIREH.
PSALM. 59.16. I will sing of thy Power, and sing aloud of thy Mercy.


I Think it not unseasonable, Preached Ad Magistratum.
nor besides my errand, to sing of the Power and Mercy of one God in the
presence of another. Greatness is a kind of Deity; God himself affording
Rulers and Nobles no lower Title than his own, of Gods. But Gods by Office or
Deputation, not by Essence; and yet so Gods by Office, that they personate that
God by Essence. Power they have, a mighty one, and Mercy too, or should have,
and both these the people sing of, only mortality puts the distance and
divides between civil and sacred (or if you will) sacred and celestial
attributes. I say ye are Gods, Gods with a Moriemini, mortal Gods, there is a
but annexed to the Deity, But ye shall dye, dye like men, and fall as one of
the Princes, Psalm. 82.6.

And now that I may not beguile time nor you with any curiosity of preface,
the Text being only a parcel of a Psalm, I have formerly resembled to the
whole; where I observed the ground, the parts, the descant, the Author or
Setter of it, the time when it was sung, and the occasion of the singing. The
Author and his descant I have already opened in two words, Cantabo and
Exaltabo, I will sing, and I will sing aloud; Now method leads me to the
parts, Power and Mercy. Mercy is a plausible Theme, and a large one; enough of
it self to fill up discourse, and time, and attention, with exquisite
variety: And therefore I shall dwell for the present, only in the expressions
of divine Power. A Subject (I confess) like the Ocean, wide and deep, and not
without some danger to him that shall either steer or sound it. But that God,
who was a staff to his Patriarch to pass over Jordan, will be a Pilot to his
Disciple in the Sea too, that he sink and perish not (this vast and troubled
Sea of his Omnipotence) where some learned Wit have been overwhelmed, either
by a bold curiosity, venturing too far to shoot the Straight and Gulf they
should not, or else by a vain glorious conceit of their own Tenets have
proudly borne sail against wind and tide, the maine drift of Scriptures and
current of the true Faith, and so at length have run themselves on the
shelves of Heresy or Blasphemy, or both: Against both which I shall ever pray
in the language of the Disciples in the great storm, Master save me lest I
perish: Mat. 8.25.
And thus by Thee in safety I shall daily sing of thy Power, and sing aloud of
thy mercy, because thou have been my defense and refuge in the day of my
trouble.

I will sing of thy Power. THis word Power in respect of God is Homonymon, and
of various signification in sacred Story. Sometimes it is taken only for
Christ; so by Saint Paul: unto the Jews and Greeks (which are called) we
preach Christ (...), The Power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. Sometimes for the Gospel
of Christ, so by the same Apostle, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ,
(...), for it is the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.16. Sometimes neither
for Christ nor his Gospel, but the enemies of both; So the Samaritans said of
Simon Magus, (...), This Man is the great power of God, Acts 8.10. But here we
take Power for that Essential property of God, by which he is able and does
effect all in all, and all in every thing. And whereas Divines distinguish of a
double power, active and passive; the one, Ad agendam; the other, Ad
suscipiendam formam: It Is manifest that this latter is not in God, because God
who is a pure Act, and simply, and universally perfect, is not passive, nor
capable of any form, but in himself from all eternity contains the
perfection of all forms; this active power being in him principal and most
eminent, and indeed the very Mynt and Forge where all things had their first
stamp and hammering.

Now this Power of God is not only infinite in its own nature and perse as it
is the very divine Essence; Pol. Syn. lib. 2 cap. 29.
but in respect of Objects to which it is extended, and of Effects which it can
produce, and of Action too by which it does or can work miraculously; which
Action is never so valid and intense (for so Polanus words it) but it may be
set to a higher pin and screw, and woon'd up even to Infiniteness; And
therefore it is not only called Power, or Strength, or Efficacy, or
Fortitude, but Omnipotence; Insomuch that though it have some rational and
modall distinction by reason of our feeble capacities, yet no real and
substantial difference from Gods Will, Knowledge, Providence, but are all
wards of the same Key, shut and open to the same Essence: For when we name his
providence, we conceive it, ut dirigens; his Knowledge, ut apprehendens; his
Will, Estius in lib. 1. Sent. did. 42. Sect. 1.
ut imperans; and his Power, ut exequens; So that Apprehension, and Direction,
and Command, shine more properly in Gods other Attributes; but Execution
principally in his Power: And therefore it is called (...), Vim efficacem (as
Beza translates it) the Working power, whereby God is able to subdue all things
to himself, Phil. 3 21.

And as this Power is always, so it is only active; and that Saint Paul
intimated, when he styled it (...), Ephesians. 3.20.
The Power that works in us, so works in us, that no power of any Creature
can hinder that operation; for the Throne of it is a fiery flame, and the
wheels of it a burning fire, Dan. 7.9.

The Fathers, it seems, heretofore were much perplexed by the Pagan Sophisters
about this great Attribute of God, Omnipotence; Omnipotens Omnia-potens.
some jangling merely about the etymology of the word, have dashed themselves
against the rocks of heresy; Faustus the Manichee, and Cresconius the
Grammarian, have put Saint Augustine to the sweat about it, who dwelling too
critically upon God's omnia potest, went about to geld his omnipotence; Nay, D.
Aug. lib. 26. Cont. Faust. cap. 5.
some herein, making reason their pole-starre, and not faith, have leaped out
of their curiosity into blasphemy; as the Hermians and Seleucians of old, those
hoeretici materiarii (as Tertullian styles them) who following the proud sect
of the Platonists, Adversus Hermog. cap. 25.
made their materia prima co-omnipotent with God, because God, as they
pretended, could not make the world out of nothing, but of some praeexisting
matter. And from this hive belike, swarmed those Locusts of their age,
Menander, Carpocrates and Cerinthus; who took off the power of God in the
creation of the world, and set it upon Angels; D. Aug. de fide and Symb. c. 1.
and so, either pared too much the divine prerogative, in making it slow or
unable for so great a work, or else super-added to the glory of those
intellectual natures; as if this great frame of the universe had been rather
the workmanship of their hands then of his, that created both it and them:
Although others, of a like vertigo, were not so over-stagger'd with their own
phrenzies, but that they allowed the Godhead a superintendency of power, and
yet, not that Tri. Vne.
Triune power the christian struggles for (a power of three persons in one
essence, of equal majesty and command) but ascribed to the Father, only a
sulnes of power, a mediocrity to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, none at all:
and of this sink was Petrus Abaialardus, censured by Saint Bernard in his 190.
Epistle, ad innocentium.

But leaving these to their strong delusions, knowing that an evil conjecture
has overthrown their judgment: Ecclus. 3.24.
Let us return whence we have digress'd a little, to divine omnipotence; and
we shall find by ground or reason there of to be divine essence; (for GOD
works not but by his essence) and by how much more perfect the form is in
every agent by which it works, by so much, the power is greater in working.

Seeing then, the essence of God is infinite, his power of necessity must be
infinite too; now because to be thus infinite, is to be but one, there is but
one omnipotence, as there is but one essence and yet, for the diversities of
respects, Divines have cut it into a double file, an actual and absolute
omnipotence, Omnipotentia absoluta.
the absolute omnipotence of God is that, by which he can perfectly do any
thing that is possible to be done, and it is called absolute because it is not
limited by the universal law of nature; as if divinity were necessarily pinned
to the order of secondary causes, and that God could not do any thing besides
or above that law; and this the schools call omnipotentia Dei extraordinaria,
Gods extraordinary power; because by that he can work besides the trodden and
accustomed course of nature, producing of himself as well those effects of
secundary agents as others, Pol. syntag. lib. 20. cap. 29.
to which sublunary creatures cannot attain. Haec simpliciter essentialis
(says the Syntagmatist) this omnipotence is simply essential: by which God
can absolutely and simply do all things which are possible to be done, to
wit; such as do not repugne the will or nature of God, though they do
sometimes the course of nature; for that may be impossible in respect of the
one, which is not of the other. Quod dicitur impossible secundum aliquam.
Part 1. q. 25. Art. 40. ad. primum.
potentiam naturalem, divinae subditur potentiae, says Thomas; what natural
power calls impossibillity is without dispute possible to omnipotence; and
therefore, there is nothing that has but a Quicquid potest habere rationem
entis, comprehenditur sub possibil^bus, respect n omnipotentiae absolutae.
capability of being, that comes not within the verge of Gods absolute power,
of his power, though sometimes not of his will or wisdom, for God can do
many things, which these think neither convenient nor necessary to be done.
To imagine any thing of God, as if he did it because he can do it, is an
abrupt and rude presumption; non quia omnia potest facere, ideo credendum est
Deum fecisse, etiam quod non fecerit, sed an secerit, requirendum. God can of
stones raise up children unto Abraham, Lomb. lib. 1. did. 43. ex Aug. lib. de
spir. et lit. Cap. 1.
but he never did, nor I think will. Potuit Deus ut duodecim legiones
Angelorum etc. God could have sent twelve legions of Angels to fight against
those Jews that apprehended Christ sed noluit, says Lombard, potuit Deus
hominem pennis ad volandum instruxisse, God could have given man as well wings
as feet, made him soar as go; non tamen quia potuit, Tert. lib. adversus
Prax. cap. 10.
secit, says Tertullian. Potuit, et Praxeam, et omnes pariter haereticos
statim extinxisse; he could have crushed Praxeas, and all other heretics in
their very shell and first matter, non tamen, quia potuit, D. Aug. lib. de Not.
et Great. cap. 7.
extinxit, (says the same Father.) Once more, Dominus Lazarum suscitavit in
corpore, nunquid dicendum est non potuit Iudam suscitare in mente? God raised
Lazarus in body, and could he not Judas in spirit also? potuit quidem, sed
noluit, says S Augustine.

Thus, Antiquity, you hear, still pleades for Gods, Potuit, His infinite
Power, the Fathers generally acknowledge, but they sometimes restrain the
execution of it; and mince it with a Noluit, or a non fecit. And doubtless, he
can do more things than he does do; if he would do them, but he will not;
not that there is any defect in his Will or Power, but because in Wisdom he
does not think it meet.

Gods actual Omnipotence, able to do whatsoever he wil'd or decreed to be
done; Actualis omnipotentia.
but also, Really does it, Solo voluntatis imperio, at a beck or command;
without difficulty or delay, with a mere Dixit and factum est, He speaks
only, and he does it; So does it, that it cannot be hindered by any cause or
impediment whatsoever. And this, the Schools call again, Omnipotentia Dei
ordinata, Gods ordinated Omnipotence; because, he does by that what he has
ordained or decreed to do. And this has respect to the particular Law of
nature; and to a special order bequeathed things by that Law, through which he
at first creat'd all things; and still either conserves, or moderates, or
destroys them.

Now, as there are many things which God can do by his absolute, but not his
Actual Omnipotence; Pol. Synt. lib. 2. cap. 29.
so there are some which he can do by neither: For instance, he cannot make
Contradictions kiss, neither can he beatifie a Stone; for though his Power be
infinite, yet he never works but as it is modefied by his will or wisdom;
which sometimes either prohibit absolutely the doing of a thing, or else think
it not convenient to be done.

And now here is a way made for the Libertine to cavil, the Skeptic in
Religion to exercise the venom of his wit, who deal with Gods Power, as some
broken Artificers do with coin; which either forge a new stamp, or else
deface the old: Some dilate and beat it out too far, others again do wash
and clip it; Plin. lib. 2. not. Hist. cap. 7.
Superstition gives it too much, and Atheism too little. Pliny will deny Gods
Al-able Power, because he cannot kill himself; and Elymas the Magician,
because he cannot deny himself; Dyonis. lib. de Divin. nom. ca. 8.
strong reasons doubtless to puzzle a Divinity, arguments sitter to confirm
Omnipotence than to convince it. For if God could give way to his own death or
denial, he must lose his two attributes of Life and Truth; and then he should
not be so much not Omnipotent in what he could not do, as in what he did. God
were not truly Omnipotent, if he could do all things; Haec non potentiae
sunt, sed infirm talis. D. Aug. lib. 5. C.D. cap. 10. Idem lib. 15. de Trinit.
cap. 15. and lib. 1. de Symb. sid. ad Cathcc. ca. 1.
to dye, dissemble, lie, deceive are rather arguments of Frailty, than of
Power; Magna Dei potentia est non posse mentiri, says S. Augustine. It Is a
great proof of Omnipotence in God, that he cannot lie; for, if he were subject
to this or the like passions and defects, he could not be possibly God, and
therefore not possibly Omnipotent. Every possibility of doing does respect an
active Power from which it may be done, which Power doubtless is an absolute
persection: And therefore, Estius l. 1. sent. did. 42. Sect. 1. lit. E.
those things which speak infirmity or defect in the doer are not ascribeable
to God, whose omnipotence extends only to the doing of those things, whose
effects argue no imperfection in the doer. Nemo ergo Deum impotentem in aliquo
dicere presumat; sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of juniper blister
that foul tongue which would make God impotent in any thing; and the reason
Lombard gives, Quia omnia potest, quae posse, potentiae est, et inde dicitur
Omnipotens, in the first book of his sentences, 42. distinction.

And here, with one breath, we may blow-off the languishing and soule-lesse
allegations both of Libertine and Atheist, whose strongest objections against
Gods Omnipotence, are for the most part such as do not signify Action, but
privation; or if Action, Action with Deformity or Defect, or else such as
import motion or mutation, which cannot be without passion, and therefore some
imperfection; or lastly such as jarre absolutely amongst themselves, and imply
a manifest contradiction; as to suffer, to be deceived, to sin, to be unjust,
to be truth and yet salshood, and the like, which are Symptoms of debility and
impotence, and cannot possibly comply with Divine power: Revera, quaedam non
potest Deus, quia-est omnipotens. D. Aug. lib. 5. de C. D. cap. 10.
For God is so far from being omnipotent, because he should do all things,
that he cannot do some things because he is omnipotent.

And therefore to keep these in an even Scale, Divines distinguish between
impossibilities of and in Nature; Impossibilities of Nature are such as exceed
the ordinary course and Law of Nature, as that the Sun should stand still,
Iron swim, Fire not burn, which that God has caused to do or not to do, the
Scripture is a witness. Impossibilities in Nature are such as repugne the very
definition of a thing, and thwart Ens, as it is Ens, which yet never were, and
lest they should be, are hindered by Gods ordination and decree; such as imply
in themselves a being, and no being; truth, and yet lies, which are simply and
altogether impossible, as that contradictories should be both true, that a
perfect Triangle should not have three angles equal to two right, that Lines
drawn from the Center to the Circumference should not be equal: Talia
imposstbilia Deus non potest, Pol Synt. lib. 2. cap. 29.
such impossibilities God cannot do, because contraries cannot subsist in a
Nature most simple and immutable; nor contradictories find any room in an
Essence void of all falsehood, in a truth most absolute and perfect. And herein
both Schoolmen and Philosophers will countenance and direct us; Sub
omnipotentia Dei non cadit aliquid quod contradictionem implicat, Thom. part.
1. q. 25. Art. 4. un corp. Arist. lib. 6. Ethic. cap. 2.
so Aquinas; And, Hoc solo privatur Deus ingenita facere quae facta sunt, so
Aristoile; whatsoever implies a contradiction comes not within the verge of
Omnipotence, and Divinity is then put to the nonplus, when it would make a
thing done, and undone at the same instant. The Sententiaries, therefore, here
dig out their Cliffes and bounds; and with certain words (as by their proper
stones and land marks) have limited and pent in divine power; Estius lib. 1.
Sent. did. 42.. 1.
and they are two, factibile and possibile; and in this sense only understand
God omnia posse, because he can do omne possibile; and that power which in him
they call active, looks only to omne factibile or agibile; so that his
Omnipotence reaches farther than to things able and possible to be done, and
all things are contained within those possibilities which imply not a manifest
contradiction; and they which do are more properly said, Aquin. part. 1. q.
15. Art. 3.
Non posse fieri, quam quod Deus non potest facere: for in that they cannot be
done, it is not through any defect of divine Power, but because they have not
the nature or reason of things possible: For no understanding can conceive,
that truth and salsehood which are diametrally opposed, should possibly be
reconciled, and so the maime rests still in the contrarieties of things, not in
divine power; which therefore seems lame and imperfect, because things cannot
be done, not because it cannot do them. Or should we say peremptorily, as we
do, and did before; that there are some things God cannot do, we should
neither dissect nor weaken the nerves and sinews of his Omnipotence; for he is
most potent which has an immutable and constant power, and from that Power
will not tread aside nor decline; Constancy in the best things being the best
power: And therefore those which God has accustomed to do (he being
goodness it self) are doubtless the best things; and for him to vary from
such, must either question his Mutability or weakness, or both; and if
mutable, how a God? if weak, how Omnipotent? Hereupon the Master himself
makes Gods Power principally discoverable in two respects, Lib. 1. did. 42.
lit. E.
Quod omnia facit quae vult, and nihils omnino patitur; So that we take for
granted there is nothing passive in the Almighty, and that which is of Action
is qualified by his will; and the ground hereof is from the great Saint
Augustine, D. Aug. lib. 5. C. D. cap. 10.
Deus dicitur omnipotens faciendo quod vult, non patiendo quod non vult: And
again, Quod non possit omnia facere, Lib. de spirit. and lit.
sed quia potest efficere quicquid vult. So that belike Gods Omnipotence has
not so properly its denomination from his Omnia potest, as from his Quicquid
vult; God can do what he will do, and therefore is Omnipotent. And this is
the maine string that Prophets, Apostles and Fathers generally harp on, Omnia
quae voluit sccit, says David: Lo here his Will and Power meet; Voluit, he
would do, there is his Will; Fecit, he has done it, there is his Power; And
this Power not limited it seems, for there is an Omnia with the Voluit; All
that he would do, he has done; Psa. 135.6. Moreover, Voluntati ejus quis
obsistit? says S. Paul; here his Will and his Power meet again: For here is
an Obsistit, as well as a Voluntati; no resistance, because there is will;
that is a Power with a non obstante none can hinder it; a Power as before,
without limit, intimated in the Interrogatory Quis, Quis obsistit? Who has
resisted his Will? Romans 9.19. It Is a beaten Principle in Philosophy, In
perpetuis non differunt esse, and posse, In things perpetual there is no
difference between Power and Being: Now, the Will of God being perpetual, his
Power is extended no farther than his Will; So that only, what he wills, he
does; and this doing ever ordered by his Will.

And here with one voice Antiquity sweetly accords, S. Chrysostom. Hom. in
exposit. symb. Apost. ad princip um. Tom. 5. D. Aug. lib. 21. de Civ. Dei. cap.
7. Damasc. lib. 1. de side orthod. cap. 8.
ipse est ergo omnipotens, ut totum quod vult, possit; so Saint Chrysostom,
vocatur omnipotens, quoniam quicquid vult, potest; so Saint Augustine, credimus
virtutem Dei propria voluntate mensuratam, omnia enim quae vult, potest, so
Damascen. Hark how the quire of Fathers chaunt it? how one Saint warbleth to
another quicquid vult, Potest; quicquid vult, Potest. His omniporence they all
sing of, but the burden of the song runne's much upon his will; his vult bears
a part with his potest, still a part, but not all. God can do all that he
will do, but sometimes he will not do all that he can; so that his will
does rather order his power then abridge it. The text says plainly, that God
could do nothing unto Sodom till Lot was escaped unto Zoar, he could not,
non posse dixit, (says S. Augustine) quod sine dubio poterat per poten. tiam,
sed non poterat per justitiam Quasi poterat quidem, sed non volebat: et ill a
volunt as justa erat.
; he could doubtless, but he would not; and yet his will just, and his power
still infinite: so that his will is the rule and square of his justice, and the
rudder (as it were) and stern of his power; it does manage and dispose, not
lessen and contract it. D. Aug. lib. 2. contra 2. Epist. Gaudentij, cap. 22.
I shut up this dusky point with that of the great Schooleman, and so involve
one cloud in another; Dicitur Deus omnipotens, quia per se potest quicquid vult
fieri, et quicquid vult se posse; et nihil vult se posse, quod non possit; et
omne quod vult fieri, vult se posse; sed non omne quod vult se posse, vult
fieri; si enim vellet, sieret. The words are like the Author, crabbed and full
of knots, and yet easier to be understood, than rendered; If any stutter at
them, let them consult Lombard in his first Book, 42. Distinction, where they
may find matter that will both please, and disturb their Judgment; and
as well take up the brains, as the pen of the peruser.

Thus at length, the Atheist and Infidel we have hushed, and all their Cavills
examined and resuted; let us now hear the Christian speak, what Dialect he
uses, how he sings of the Power of his Creator. He enquires not so much what
GOD can do, as admires what he has done, and still does. In divine Mysteries,
he thinks it safer to believe, than to discuss; and to exercise the solidity
and vigor of his Faith, than any Acumen and Pregnancy of his reason. And here
is enough to employ all his faculties, imbarque the whole man, set all the
engines and wheels both of Soul and Spirit running, and turn them in
endless speculations. Whatsoever is above him, or below him; without him, or
with in him; is a fit object of Gods Power, and his own wonder. When I
consider (says our Prophet) the Heavens, the work of thy fingers, the Moon
and Stars which thou have ordained, Lord, what is man? Psalm. 8. What is man?
Nay, How is he? Surely like one in a slumber or a dream; for as he that
dreameth has his fancy sometimes disturbed with strange objects, which are
rather represented, than judged of; so in the view of those celestial bodies,
the contemplative man stands (as it were) planet-strucken in his
intellectualls, whilst he considers the Heavens, he loses them; and that Moon
and those Stars which should enlighten, dazzle him. The finger of God in them
he does acknowledge, but not discover; he made them by his power, he confesses
he ordained them, but how he ordained or made them so; his apprehension is at a
stand or bay, and transported beyond measure, cries out with that afflicted
Penitent, Job 26.14.
Tonitru potentiae ejus quis intelligat? The thunder of his power who can
understand? Can thou by searching find out God? Can thou find out the
Almighty to perfection? It is high as Heaven, what can thou do? Deeper than
hell, what can thou know? If he cut off, or shut up, or gather together, who
can hinder him? Job 11.9, 10.

If we lift up our eyes from the footstool to the Throne of God, and thus
lifted up, cast them back again; Could they make an exact and uncontrolled
discovery of both Globes, see all the wonders and secrets that nature has
there locked up in her vast storehouse, we should find in each cranny thereof
the sway of his powerful Scepter; Water, Fire, Earth, Air limit not his
Commands, but through the Territories of Heaven and Hell, the Bonds of his
Power obtain a Jurisdiction. Will you hear his own Secretaries speak? The
registers and penmen of Divine story? How they sing of his Power! How they
blazon his Omnipotence! Lo, Isa. 40.12.
He metes out Heaven with a span, measures the waters in the hollow of his
hand, comprehends the dust of the Earth in a measure, weighs the Mountains
in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance, Isa. 40.12. Here is the whole world
circled in one verse, and yet not his whole Power in that Circle; his Power is
his Godhead, and God himself has been called a Circle. It is he that sits
upon the Circle of the Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof are as Grassehoppers
before him. Mark, He sits there, he is not contained there; There? no, that
were above miracle; the greater Circle contained in the less. The Heathens
themselves could tell us, God was an intelligible Sphere, Empedocles.
without Dimensions; a Circle whose center was every where, no where his
Circumference, no where, not in the whole World, not in the Earth, not in the
Waters, not in the Heavens that circle both. The Waters (you hear) he measures
in the hollow of his hand, the Earth in the same measure, the Heavens that
contain these in a Span: Here is but a Span and Handful of his Power, and yet
this Handful graspes the Universe. This made our Prophet often sing, and in
his song, close as he began; How wonderful is thy Name in all the World! Psalm.
8.1, 9.
How wonderful in all the World! A double wonder indeed in respect of Man,
though of God not so; God could not be so wonderfully Great, if man had ability
to express him: and therefore having none, he expresses himself by himself;
or at least, himself by his Prophets, to whom himself he dictates; who like
men infused and intranc'd, Speak aloft in sacred Allegories, such as beseem
the Majesty and Greatness as well of the Penman, as Inspirer.

And here, Psa. 104.2.
what sublimity both of power and language! He clothes himself with light as
with a garment, Isa. 40.22.
stretches out the heavens like a curtain, and spreads them as a tent to
dwell in; by his spirit has he garnished the sky, Job 26.10.
and fashioned it like a molten looking glass; In them has he set a
tabernacle for the Sun, Psalm. 19.5.
which as a Bridegroom comes out of his chamber, Psalm. 103.
and rejoices as a Giant to run his course. He, he has appointed also the
Moon for seasons, and at his pleasure seals up the stars; Job 9.7.
He binds the sweet influences of the Pleiades, Job. 9.7.
and loses the bonds of Orion, brings forth Mazaroth in his season, and guides
Arcturus with his Sons, Job. 38.31.32.
Here all bumane Eloquence is befooled; Non vox hominum sonut: Oh, Dei, certe.
Such an expression of God none could frame, but God himself; and this made our
Prophet finge again, Psalm. 104.24.
O Lord of hosts, how wonderful are thy works? In wisdom have thou made
them all; who is a strong Lord like unto thee, or to thy power and
faithfulness round about thee: Psalm. 89.8.

Let us now leave the firmament, and (the Lord bowing the heavens and coming
down) see what empire and dominion he has in the regions of the air. There,
Psalm. 104.3.
he lays the beams of his chamber in the waters, makes the clouds his
chariot, and rides upon the wings of the wind. Through the brightness of his
presence are coals of fire kindled, lightnings and hot thunderbolts. Psalm. 18.
There, he has made a decree for the rain, Job. 38.28 en 37.16.
the ballancings of the clouds (as Job styles them) and there has he begotten
the drops of dew. Thence, he gives snow like wool, Psalm. 147.17, 18
and scatters the hoare frosts like ashes, and casts out his ice like
morsells. There, Job. 28.25
he makes weight for the winds, he binds up the waters in a cloud as in a
bottell, Job. 26.8.
and the cloud is not rent under them. This made our Prophet sing aloft,
Praise the Lord in the heights, praise him fire and hail, snow and vapors,
stor my wind sulfilling his word: Psalm. 108.1. and 8. verses.

Let us descend once more, and amongst those proud heaps of earth which seem
to lift their heads even to the very stars, observe what sway his power
carries there, or rather what terror. He shall thresh the mountains and beat
them small, Isai. 41.15.16.
and make the hills as chafe; he shall fan them, and with his whirle wind
shall he scatter them, Job 28.10.
and shall overturne them by the roots. Isai. 40.16.
If he be angry, Lebanon is not enough for incense, nor the beasts thereof for
a burnt sacrifice. The foundations of the round world are discovered at his
chiding, Psalm. 18.15.
at the blasting of the breath of his displeasure. This made our Prophet sing
again, The Lord is a great God, and a great King above all Gods, in his hands
are all the corners of the earth, and the strength of the hills is his also.
Psalm. 95.3.4.

Shall we yet stoop lower, and descending this mount, see how he is a Lord of
the valleys, and the inhabitants thereof. Job 38.6.
Lo, the foundation of the earth he has wonderfully set, Job 9.6.
and laid the corner stone thereof; at his pleasure again he shakes it out
of her hindges, Psalm. 114.8.
and the pillars thereof tremble: He turns the hard rock into a standing
water, and the flint-stone into a springing well. The Nations before him are
less then nothing, they are accounted as the drops of a bucket, Psalm. 149.8.
and as the small dust of the balance. He binds Kings in chains, and Nobles
in fetters of iron. Isai. 41.2.
he gives his enemies as dust to the sword, and as driven stubble to his bow.
He shall rise up as in mount Perazim, Josh. 10.12.
He shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon; that he may do his work, his
great work, Isai. 28.21.
and bring to pass his act, his great act. This made our Prophet sing again,
The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the compass of the whole
world, and all that dwell therein, for he has founded it upon the Seas, and
prepared it upon the floudes. Psalm. 24.1, 2.

Shall we now leave the earth, and those that sojourne there, and see the
wonders of the Lord in the great deep? Psalm. 33.7.
There he gathers the waters of the Sea together, and lays them up in
storehouses; At his command, the floods lift up their voice, the waves
begin to swell, Job 41.31.
and he makes them boil like a pot of ointment. Again, he rules the raging
of the Sea, and the waters thereof he stilleth at his pleasure. Psalm. 93.4.
He binds the floods from over flowing, shuts up the Sea with doors when it
breaks forth as if it issued out of the womb, makes the cloud a garment
thereof, and thick darkness a swaddling band, Job 26.11.
breaks up for it his decreed place, and sets bars and gates, and says,
Hither to shall thou come, no farther, and here shall thy proud waves be
stayed. Job 38.9, 10.

Shall we yet step a staire lower, and opening the Jaws of the bottom less
pit, see how powerfully he displayes his Eanners in the dreadful dungeon
below? Behold, Hell is naked before him, Job 26.6.
and destruction has no covering. This made our Prophet sing more generally,
The Lord is above all Gods; whatsoever pleased him, that did He, in Heaven and
Earth, and in the Sea, and in all deep places; Psalm. 135.6.
Psalm. 135.6.

Thus, you hear, God is in the world, as the Soul is in the body, life and
government; And as the soul is in every part of the body, so is God in every
part of the world: No Quartermaster, nor Vicegerent He, but universal
Monarch and Commander; Totus in toto, and Totus in qualibet part, A God every
where, wholly a God, and yet one God every where, only One; whom the vain
conjectures of the Heathen dreaming to be more, gave in the Sky, the name of
Jupiter; in the Air, Juno; in the Water, Neptune; in the earth, Vesta, and
sometimes Ceres; the name of Apollo in the Sun; in the Moon Diana; of Aeolus
in the winds; Ex D. August. Hot kerus, Eccles. pol. l. b. 1. Sect. 3.
of Pluto and Proserpine in Hell. And in fine, so many guides of Nature they
imagined, as they saw there were kinds of things natural in the world, whom
they honored as having power to work or cease according to the desires of
those that homaged and obey them. But unto us there is one only Guide of all
Agents natural, and he both the Creator and Worker of all in all, alone to be
blessed, honored and adored by all for evermore.

And is God the Lord indeed? Is he chief Sovereign of the whole world? Has
his Power so large a Jurisdiction? Does it circuit and list in Water, Earth,
Air, Fire; nay the vaster Territories of Heaven and Hell too? How then does
this frail arm of Flesh dare list it self against Omnipotence? Why does it
oppose (or at least incite) the dreadful Armies of him who is the great Lord
of Hosts? Why do we muster up our troops of Sins; as if we would set them
in battel-aray against the Almighty? Scarce a place where he displaies the
Ensigns of his Power, but man seems to hang out his flag of Defiance, or at
least of Provocation; and though he has no strength to conquer, yet he has a
will to affront; If he cannot batter his Fort, he will be playing on his
Trenches; anger his God, though not wound him. In the earth, he meets him by
his grovelling Sins; of Avarice, oppression, violence, rapine, Sacrilege, and
others of that stye and dunghill. In the Water, by his flowing sins; of
Drunkenness, Riots, Surfets, Vomitings, and what else of that frothy Tide and
Inundation. In the Air, by his windy sins; of Ambition, Arrogance, Pride,
Vainglory, and what vapor and exhalation else his fancy relisheth. In the
Fire, by his flaming sins; of Lust, Choler, Revenge, Blood and what else
sparkles from that raging furnace. In Heaven, by his lofty Sins; of
Profanation. Oaths, Blasphemies, Disputes against the Godhead, and the like.
And lastly, as if Hell were with man on earth, or man (which is but Earth) were
in Hell already by his damned sins of Imprecations, Curses, Bannings,
Execrations and others of that infernal stamp, which seem to breath no less
than Fire and Sulphur, and the very horrors of the burning Lake. Thus, like
those Monsters of old, we lift our Pelion upon Ossa; Tumble one mountain of
transgressions upon another, no less high, than fearful; as if they not
only cried for thunder from above, but also dared it. But wretched man that
thou art, who shall deliver thee from the horror of this death? 2 These. 1.8.
When the Lord shall reveal himself from Heaven with his mighty Angels in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that fear him not; what Cave shall
hide, 2 Samuel 22.9.16.
or what Rock cover them? At his rebuke the foundations of the world are
discovered, even at the blast of the breath of his displeasure: Out of his
mouth comes a devouring flame, and if he do but touch these mountains, they
shall smoke; Psalm. 104.32.
if he but once lift up his iron Rod, he rends, and shivers, and breaks in
pieces like a Potters vessel; he heweth asunder the snares of the ungodly, and
his enemies he shall consume like the fat of Lambs. Psalm. 37.20.
O then let all the earth fear the Lord, let all the Inhabitants of the world
stand in awe of him, let Kings throw down their Scepters at his feet, and the
people their knees and hearts at those Scepters; from the Cedar of Libanus and
the Oak of Basan, to the shrub of the Valley, and the humble Hysope on the
wall, let all bow and tremble; Princes and all Judges of the Earth, both young
men and Maidens, old men and children; let them all sear, and in searing
praise, and in praising sing of the Name and Power of the Lord God, for his
Name only is excellent, Psalm. 148.13.
and his power and Glory above Heaven and Earth.

On the other side, is the Lord Omnipotent indeed? Has his Power so wide a
Province and extent? Is the glory of his mighty Acts thus made known to the
sounes of men? Is his Kingdom not only a great, but an everlasting Kingdom?
His Dominion through and beyond all Generations? Psalm. 145.13.
Does he plant and root up? prune and graft at his own pleasure? Psalm. 147.6.
Does he raise the humble and meek, and bring the ungodly down to the ground?
Is he with his Joseph in the prison, with Eliah in the Cave, with Shadrach in
the Furnace, with Daniel in the Den? Does he deliver his anointed from the
persecution of Saul? His Prophet from the fury of Iezcbel? his Apostle from the
bonds of Herod? His Saint from the Sword and Faggot of the Insidell? Psalm.
104.21.
Does he cloth the Lillies of the field? Have Lions (roaring after their
prey) their food from him? Does he give fodder unto the Cattle? quench the
wild Asses thirst? feed the young Ravens that call upon him? Does he stop the
mouths of wild beasts? Quench the violence of fire? Abate the edge of the
Sword? Shake the very powers of the Grave, and all for the rescue and
preservation of his servants? his faithful, his beloved servants? Why art thou
then so sad, O my soul; why so sad, and why so disquieted within thee? Trust
in God, Psalm. 147.3.
he heals those that are broken in heart, and gives medicine to heal their
sick enesse. Though thy afflictions be many, thy adversaries mighty, thy
temptations unresistable, thy grievances unwieldie, thy sins numberless,
their weight intolerable, yet there is a God above in his provident
Watchtower, a God that can both protect and pardon, infinite as well in Mercy
as in Power. Are thy wounds grievous? there is balm in Gilead: Thy ulcers (in
the eye of man) incurable? the Samaritan has Oil: he searohes, and poures in,
and binds up, and heales the maladies of those that seek him with a true
heart: Psalm. 72.1.
Ah quam bonus Israel Deus iis qui recto sunt cord, says the Psalmist.
Doubtless, he that watches his Israel will neither slumber nor sleep, but
preserves his children as tenderly as the apple of that eye that watches
them; he is their staff and crutch, and supportation in all their weakness;
he erects them if they fall, directs them if they err, succors them if they
want, refreshes them in the heat of their persecutions, mittigates the
tempests of their sorrows, moderates the waves of their bitter passions,
smites their enemies upon the cheek bone, Psalm. 3.7.
breaks the teeth of those that rage and grin so furiously upon them; Insomuch
that God has sworn by his Prophet, to have mercy upon the dwelling places of
Jacob, and all they that devour her shall be devoured, and they that spolle
her shall be made a spoil, and all they that prey upon her shall be made a
prey; And he will restore health unto her, and cure her of all her wounds, Jer.
30.16, 17.
Jer. 30.16, 17.

This should arm us with resolution against that triple assault of the world,
flesh and devil, and make us buckle on our harness as that good King of
Israel did, I will not be afraid (says he) for ten thousands which should
compass me round about: Afraid? Psalm. 3.6.
No, for ten thousand of men and dangers. If calamities hover over me, God is
my Tower; if they would undermine me, God is my Rock, if they come before me
he is my Sanctuary, if behind me he is my Castle, if about me he is my Trench,
if on my right hand he is my Sword, if on my left hand, he is my Buckler; if
any way, he is my shield and for tresse, and mighty deliverer. Then, put not
your trust in Princes, nor in any child of man, Psalm. 146.3, 5, 6.
for there is no help in them; Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob: for
his help, and whose hope is in the Lord his God, which made heaven and earth,
the Sea and all that therein is, which keeps his promise for ever. This made
our Prophet awake his Harp and Lute, and cheerfully sing that Magnificat of
his, Praise the Lord, Psalm. 146.1.
O my soul, praise the Lord, yea as long as I have any being, I will sing
praises unto my God. I will be like a green Olive Tree in the house of my
God, my trust shall be in the tender Mercy of God for ever and ever, Psalm.
52.9.

Once more, and but once; Is God thus indeed a God of power? Questionless, and
only a God of power? No, the text tells us he is a God of mercy too; his
goodness keeps pace with his greatness, his sanctity with his fortitude; Luke
1.49.
He that is mighty, (says the blessed Virgin) has done great things for me,
and holy is his Name: Luke 1.49. Upon which place, Stella has an adverte
lector, A note (it seems) worth observation; Mary there to Gods name joining
both sanctity and power; Quia imperiumet potestas fine sanctitate Tyrannis est,
Stella in 1. Lucae v. 49.
says he, Command, not seasoned with holiness, is but Tyranny, Let
Nabuchedonozer, and Pharaoh stand for instance, whose wickedness got them the
nickname of Tyrants, which by their power, otherwise had the title of Gods.
Empire, there fore, must acknowledge it self indebted to religion, godliness
being the chiefest top and welspring of all true virtues, even as God is of all
good things. So natural is the union of true religion with power that we may
holdly deem, there is neither truly, where both are not. Insomuch, that where
there is command without holiness, there is not power properly, but cruelty;
and therefore, God is not only styled powerful, but holy also; Sanctum et
terribile nomen ejus, and Consiteantur nomini tuo magno, quoniam sanctum et
terribile est; in the 98. and 110. Psalms. And it is this mixture of Sanctus
and Potens, that divides between the God of Heaven, and those others of Earth;
Power and sanctity conjoined proclaim a God; Power without sanctity sometimes
a Devil. Mistake me not, I come not here to school the gray hair, to cast
dirt in the face of the Magistrate; no, I remember well what Elibu said unto
Job, Is it fit to say to Princes, ye are ungodly? Job 34.18. By nomeanes, I
leave such reproves to those saucie and pragmaticke spirits, which will
undertake to catechize a God, teach Divinity what it has to do; for whom the
reply of Job to Zophar shall pass for a counter check, O that you would
altogether hold your peace, and it should be counted your greater wisdom,
Job 13.5. My drift and purpose in this point, is, only to show you how prone
and headlong those dispositions are to all manner of depravednes, which
project rather to be great, then Good; and this an instance or two from
antiquity shall clear; in which the relation only shall be mine, the
application (as you bring it home to your own breasts) yours.

It was but an itch of Ambition, and a thirst of Greatness, not rectified as
it ought that was the ground work and first staire of Iulians Apostacy, his
fiercest enemies did acknowledge, that he was once a man of rare dexterity and
forwardness both in Wit and Virtue, and these not without their salt and
seasoning of true Religion, D. Aug. lib. 5. de C. D. cap. 21.
Sed illam egregiem indolem ('it is both Saint Augustines phrase and testimony)
Amore dominandi decepit Sacrilega and detestanda curiositas, his love of
Empire, and a little curiosity to boot, blew off his devotions from
Christianity to Paganism; So that the Altars and Oracles of the true God, are
now left for those doubtful and false ones of the Heathens; where instead of
Prophets inspired from Heaven, he now consults with the very factors and
promoters for the Devil, Wizards and Necromancers; incited principally
thereunto by the suggestions of Libanius the Sophister: So fatal sometimes it
proves to unstable greatness, that where men more subtle than sound hang at
the ears of it, there is commonly a trench dig'd, no less for ruin than
innovation. Who knows not that Nero (the meteor and comet of the times he
moved in) had at first his fair promises of youth, the glowings, as it were,
and sparks of future Clemency and Goodness? For when he was to sign the death
of a Malefactor, (which was a solemn custom among the Romans) his
unwillingnesse to do, with an Vtinam literas nescirem, was (if he dissembled
not) a great argument of his mercy: But when his Power once began to mount,
his Cruelty took wing also; And at length soared so high, D. Aug. lib. 5. de
Civ. Dei cap. 19.
Vt nihil molle habere crederetur, si nesciretur; There was not so much as a
thought of Mercy left, because none of Goodness; And now to be savage is no
less his inclination, than his sport; Sloth and Cruelty (two rare Eminencies
in Superiors) must innoble him to posterity, where he seems to be as greedy
of Fame, as before of Blood; Rome must be called Neropolis, and that month and
season of the year which was for his recreation and disport, Annot. Lud. viv.
Ib. them.
Neroneus.

What projects will not ungodly men set on foot, first for the advancement of
their name, and then the perpetuity; But such a perpetuity is not without a
kind of rottenness: It Is a curse the Spirit of God breathes against the
wicked, that Their memory shall rot; nothing shall remain of them, but their
Vices; and they sometimes of that stench and loathsomeness, that the Sent of
them is quick, though unsavory in the nostrills of Posterity. Eccles. 9.5.
What lives there of Herod (besides his Lust and Cruelty) but the manner of his
death? which was no less a prodigy, than his life; the story of the one,
being written by the blood of Innocents; of the other, by the fury of Worms:
And yet how cautelous this Monster was to propagate his honor to After-ages;
who doubting the baseness of his parentage should in future be discovered,
burns the Genealogies of the Jews, that he might be thought to have had his
descent as royal as the rest of his Predecessors. And this is the customary
Plea of the Aspirer, (the Gourd and Mushrome in Commonwealth) he cares not
whose name be obliterate, so his own flourish; causing other families to
vanish in a snuff, whilst his own must shine like a light in a Watch tower,
or a Beacon flaming on the top of a mountain. I could wish we had not such
Foxes in our Vineyards, such Boares about our Forest, which will not only
feed where they enter, but root out and destroy; like a steep Torrent driving
all before them: or as A sweeping rain (says Solomon) which leaves no food.
Pride, Violence, Pro. 28.3.
oppress on are too low for them, nothing stands up with the greatness of
their Spirit, or design but a General devastation, laying house to house, and
field to field; like Ravens of the valley, Prove. 30.17
pecking out the very Eyes and Heart-bloud of those that come under the Tyranny
of their Bill. And thus, They gather stones for other men's burial, in which
they interre both their Fortunes and their Name; not only scarifie them alive,
but Torment them when they are dead also; strip them of their monumentall Rites
(the solemn pomp and Trophies of the Grave,) ravish their sepulchers, deface
those ensigns and inscriptions which should remarke them to succeeding Times.
A Barbarism, or rather Sacrilege abhorred amongst the Heathens, as a Capital
injury and violence to their Manes and infernal Gods; the prophaners whereof
they threatened with the torture of all the Furies.

O consider this, All you whom God has advanced either in Title or Blood above
others; think it not enough to be Great or Fortunate, but to be Good also;
that men may as well sing of your Mercy, as your Power, rather magnify your
compassion, than murmr at your rigor; you are exalted to protect the
innocent, not to oppress them; to relieve the poor man, not to grind him:
The Lazar, and Widow, and Orphan should proclaim your care and pity, not your
insultation; acknowledge your Power, rather by their Love, than Fear. Remember
the greater you are in place, the nearer you are unto God; and he that is near
unto God, has a Greatness as well of Mercy, as of Power; And as of these you
sing unto God, so the afflicted must sing unto you; and as in their calamities,
you have been a strength and resuge for them; so in all your troubles, God will
be a Sanctuary for you; and then you may boldly rejoice in the words of our
Prophet here, I will sing of thy Power, and I will sing aloud of thy Mercy in
the morning; because thou have been my defense and refuge in the day of my
trouble.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.

Amen.

Osculum Charitatis: OR, MERCY and JUSTICE kissing. A SERMON PREACHED ON
CHRISTMAS DAY, Anno Dom. 1635. By Humphrey Sydenham.

Osculetur me osculis oris sui, sunt enim Amores tui meliores vino.

Cant. 1.2. LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE, for Humphrey Robinson, at the Sign
of the Three Pigeons in PAUL'S Churchyard. 1637.

TO THE TRVLY GENEROUS, AND NOBLY DISPOSED, DENIS ROLE, Esquire. This.
SIR,
IT was not thought of Old (however the Conditions of Men, and their Times
vary) either Presumption or Rudeness in the Divine, to salute his Superior
with a Kiss. Prophets have done so to Kings themselves at their Regal
Unctions, in the very Dawne of Sovereignty; And Apostolical men to their
greatest Proselites, in the first rising of the Christian Church, where the
prime Ceremony was a Kiss; And a Kiss like This I present you with, Osculum
Charitatis, a Kiss of Charity. A Kiss indeed of your own choice, in your
first honoring of it from the Pulpit; and now, in all justice of your
countenance at the Press. A Kiss much like your self, and Actions, where
there is such a sweet mixture of Charity with Power; that I know not well,
whether I should rather magnify Fortune, that you are Great; or Virtue that
you are Good. Your Noble Deportment in the public Services of your Country,
your great and unpattern'd Supplies of your engaged and necessitated Friends;
your courteous and liber all respects to those despised ones of mine own Coat
(besides the daily flowings of your Eleemosinary Bounties) can speak what
temper you are of; In all which, though you wanted not a Trumpet to proclaim
you, yet you blew it not your self: So just you are to your own merits, that
doing Courtesies, you scorn to blabbe them. Maxima Laus est, non posse
laudari; Tua, non velle. It is the greatest argument of Praise, to be beyond
it; of Nobleness, without it. Merit will be Merit without popular
acclamations, and common applause does not always give Luster to particular
honors, but sometimes Suspicion. For mine own part, my Style and Disposition
both are too rough for a Panegericke; And indeed, to sow pillowes under
Elbowes, I ever thought fitter for an Upholster, than a Divine. However, let
the world know, I no less hate. Rudeness, than Flattery; And as I would not
be thought clawing, so not uncivil; especially in religious Ceremonies, in
this holy one of the Kiss: which I shall desire you to entertain fairly and
cheerfully, with an even Brow; and not like the coy Dames of our Age, turn
the Cheek for the Lip, and so lowre a Kiss into a Scorn; That were to
lessen you in your former ingenuities, and cast a cloud over those virtues
which so make you shine in the opinion of others, and me

The unworthiest of your Honourers. HVM. SYDENHAM.

Osculum CHARITATIS: OR, MERCY and JUSTICE KISSING.
PSALM. 85.10. Mercy and Iruth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have
kissed each other.


EVery Attribute of GOD, is God himself; and God himself is principally
discovered by those Attributes. Now where we find Mercy and Truth, and
Righteousness, and Peace, and all these meeting and kissing in one substance, we
cannot conceive less than a God there, the true God; for the true God is the
God of all these. Had the words run only in the Concrete, merciful and true,
and righteous and peaceable; David perhaps, or who ever else was Author of this
Psalm, might have understood here some earthly God, a King, a Good King, as
David was; for these also meet and kiss in a religious sovereignty; But since
they are in the abstract, mercy, and truth, and righteousness, and peace, there
is a greater Majesty inshrin'd, A King of Kings, and a God of Gods. And what is
that God here? In General, and at large, the Triune.
Triune GOD, the One God in Three persons; In Special, and more particularly,
the second person in that One God, CHRIST; For, if we sunder and untwist the
Attributes, as they now lie folded in the Text, and so set Righteousness to
Truth, we shall find God the Father; if Mercy to Truth, God the Son; if
Peace to Truth, God the Holy Ghost. In Righteousness, there is the Creator; in
Mercy, there is the Redeemer; in Peace, there is the Comforter; in Truth, All
Three. But if we rank them again as they stood in their first order and so
make Mercy and Truth meet, and Righteousness and Peace kiss, they kiss and
meet properly in the Anointed, and the Savior, the King, and the Priest, the
God and the Man, and the Judge between Both, CHRIST JESUS: Mercy, there is the
Savior, Righteousness, there is the Judge; Truth, there is the King; Peace,
there is the Priest; or (if you will have it) Peace, there is both King and
Priest; Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech, Heb. 7.17.
Now Melchisedech was King of Salem, and Salem signifies Peace, so that he is
not only a Priest, but a King of Peace; a Priest and a King, so, for ever.

When the Earth was first in a general Combustion, and her sinful Rebellions
smoking against Heaven; when between God and Man, or rather from God to Man,
there was nothing to be expected but Fire and Sword; Christ stands between,
like Moses in the Gappe; He is the Attoner and Pacifier, the Propitiation and
Reconciliation for all our sins, 1 John 2.2. And here was Peace indeed, and
this Peace could not be procured without Mercy, an infinite Mercy; for a Son
to interpose between an angry Father, and an obstinate offender; nay, a
wilful enemy (for so was Man then) was an Argument of Mercy, you will say; But
to hunger, and to bleed, and to dye for him, and to dye ignominiously, and in
that death to bear the Curse due to the malefactor too, was an infinite mercy.
Thus God commends his Love toward us, his exceeding great Love, that when
we were yet Sinners, Christ dyed for us, Romans 5.8.

I will not trouble the Text, nor Time, nor you, nor my self with a Division;
what God has thus joined together, let not man separate; Mercy and Truth
meet, Righteousness and Peace kiss; and let them meet and kiss still,
only give me leave to show you, How, Mercy and Truth have met, and in whom;
and How, Righteousness and Peace kissed, and For What. Mercy and Truth are met
together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other. I begin with
Mercy, and there doubtless, we shall find Truth.

Mercy and Truth have met together. FOr Mercy, here, the Original has the
word Rachen from Racham, which signifies Diligere, to Love, but such a Love as
is inward, and from the very Bowels: Now, the Bowels, you know are the Seat
of Mercy; and therefore S. Paul presses his Collossians with an Induite viscera
misericordiae, Put on the Bowels of Mercy, Col. 3.12. But because, of this
Mercy there are manifold Effects, the Greek has it usually in the plural,
Origin. in. cap. 12. ad Romans 1.
(...), Mercies; Ad judicandam immensam Dei misericordiam, To show the
Greatness (says Origin) and not only so, but the Tenderness of Gods
Mercies; And therefore, we read, sometimes, Miserationes, sometimes, viscera
miserationum; sometimes, Viscera and miserationes: so Phil. 2.1. If there be
any Bowels and Mercies, where the Text has not only the word (...) but (...),
Cornel. a lap. in cap. 2. ad. Phil. v. 1.
which are the same with the Hebrew, Rachamim, miserationes, for Viscera
misericordiae: So Christ when he saw the people scattered in the wilderness
(...), says the Text, His bowels did yearne, or He had pity on them, Mar. 6.
Hence, compassionate men are called (...), Bonorum Viscerum, Men are good
bowels, which we translate Tenderhearted, or merciful, Ephesians. 4.32 So
merciful, that touched even at the marrow and intrails for the miseries of
another, they could pour out their very Bowels for him. And such were the
Mercies of God to Man, when he powered out his own Bowels, His only begotten
Son for us; So the Evangelicall Zachary Prophetically of Christ, By the tender
Mercies of God (where the vulgar reads Per Viscera misericordiae Dei, By the
bowels of the mercy of God) the Dayspring from on high has visited us, Luke
1.78.

And to this purpose, Saint Paul laboring the conversion both of Jew and
Gentile, Romans 12.1.
does beseech them by the mercies of God, as tenderhearted mothers their
immorigerous children, per abera et ventrem suum, Pet. Mart. in cap. 12. Romans
(says Peter Martyr) by the womb that bare them, and by the paps that gave
them suck; Nay more, per viscera misericordiae, by the bowels of mercy,
farther yet, per viscera Jesus Christi, by the bowels of Jesus Christ, he that
is womb, and bowels, and paps, and all mercy; God is my record, how greatly I
long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ. Phil. 1.8. And certainly,
if there were ever bowels of mercy, his were; or ever miseries for those
bowels to work on, ours were; when he not only poured out his affections,
but his very blood for us, us then his enemies, and without him, perpetual
captives, and gally slaves to sin, and Satan: And therefore, the Evangelist
having (it seems) no word more Emphaticall to express the mystery of
incarnation by, calls it mercy: Luke. 1. vide St llamin cap. 1. Lucae.
and the Apostle charity, Romans 8. Mercy and Charity? the Analasis of heaven and
earth, God and man epitomized: nay, God the man! and therefore, those two great
virtues, or rather attributes, Symeon in his song, calls salutare Domini, Luke.
2.30. The salvation of the Lord, or rather the salvation from the Lord, from
the Lord for man. Hence David rapt in the spirit, and desiring to see the son
of God, incarnate; pour's out his request to the Lord, with an Ostende nobis
misericordiam tuam, et salutare tuum da nobis domine, show us thy mercy O Lord,
and grant us thy salvation, Psalm. 119 41. thy mercy and thy salvation, because
from thee; but thy mercy, and our salvation, because for us. And this Salvation
for us, was a mighty salvation; So runs the prophecy, Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel, why? He has raised up a mighty salvation for us in the house of
his servant David. Luke 1.68. A mighty Salvation, and therefore a mighty Mercy;
such a mercy as the Apostle cal's, Divitias misericordiarum, riches of mercy;
mercy so wonderfully rich, that it is above all Gods works, all his works of
nature, or miracle, or glory, or mystery. In his works of nature there was
only flatus, or spiritus Dei, the breath of the Lord used, what breath? his
Dixit, et facta sunt; which were the breathings of the Almighty upon his
creatures, he spoke, and (for the most part) they were made, and where they
were not so; he spoke, and breathed, and they were made good. So God breathed
into man the breath of life, Genesis 2.7.
and man was a living soul. Genesis 2.7. In his works of miracle, there was
digitus Dei, the finger of God, so in those done before Pharach, and his
wisemen, When magic was at a stand, and all her spells and enchantments
non-plust in the production of lice out of dust, the Sorcerers and Wizards
instead of manifesting their skill, acknowledge their impotence, and that great
Master of their black art, who had hitherto tutored them in lies, now lectures
them a way to truth with a digitus Dei hic, This is the finger of God, Exodus
8.19. In his works of glory, there is manus Dei, the hand of God, so, those
roling torches of the firmament, those bright eyes of Heaven, Sun, Moon, and
stars, with all that spangled and glorious host, the Apostle calls, the
work of Gods hand, Heb. 1.10. But in his works of mystery, especially in this
greatest of incarnation, as if nature, and miracle, and glory were subordinate,
and the breath, or hand, or finger of the Almighty too weak for so mighty a
design, there was Brachium Dei, the arm of God, his mighty arm, the strength
of his mighty arm; And therefore the blessed Virgin Mary in a deep
contemplation of it, professes, Stella in 1. Lucae.
Dominum potentiam in brachio forti demomstrasse, The Lord has showed strength
in his mighty arm. Luke 1.51. In that ransom of the Israelites from the
Egyptian vassalage, the text says, he did it with his arm, his outstretched
arm. Psalm. 77. with his arm? why not as well there with his finger, or his
hand, as with his arm? why? Their freedom from that temporal captivity by
Moses, was a type of our redemption from our spiritual slavery by Christ, and
therefore as the arm was exercised in the one, so in the other too. We were
in our Egypt here in darkness, darkness so thick, that it might be felt,
made slaves to the grindings of a Tyrant, though not a Pharaoh, yet a Prince as
he was, of darkness, and worse then he was then, of utter darkness, under his
Iron rod and scepter, all the fetters and manacles of sin and Satan, till
God by the virtue of his Arm knocked off those iron shackles, and brake
asunder the bands of death and darkness. And herein was the work of his
Arm, his mighty Arm, the Strength of his mighty Arm; nay, it was not so
properly the strength of his own Arm, as that strength which is the Arm it
self, the Arm, JESUS. And here in two Prophets meet, Paravit Dominus brachium
suum, and Dominus in fortitudine ventet, and brachium ejus dominabitur, The
Lord has made bare his Arm, so Isaiab: His holy Arm has gotten him Victory,
so David. And why has the Lord thus made bare his Arm? or what is that
Victory his holy Arm has got? What? Isai. 52.10.
All the ends of the world shall see his salvation, Isa. 52.10. And, His
salvation is made known in the sight of all the Heathen, Psalm. 98.2. Here then
still, Psalm. 98.2.
this Arm is Salvation, and this Salvation, Mercy; and this Mercy Eminent,
and this Eminency in Truth: All the ends of the world shall see it, and it
shall be made known in the eyes of all the Heathen, all the Heathen, all the
World, all shall see it, shall See it, but not enjoy it; and yet to see it, is
the way to enjoy it; and that we may find that way, and at length enjoy it as
we should, Isa;. 52.9.
Break forth into melody, sing together ye waste places of Jerusalem; and not
only those, but the whole Earth: Sing aloud unto the Lord all ye Lands, the
round world, and all that therein is: ye sowles of the Air, Psalm. 98.
that sing among the branches; ye Beasts and Cattle upon a thousand Hills, ye
that sport also in the deep, Psalm. 104. v. 8. 11, 12.
that go up as high as the mountains, and down to the Valleys beneath. Let
the Sea roar and the fullness thereof; let the floods clap their hands, and
the little hills dance for joy: Let the Nations also be glad, let them sing
upon the harp, upon the harp with a Psalm of Thankesgiving. Praise him on
the Cymballs, ye sons of His, praise him on the Wel-tuned Cymballs: with
trumpets also and shawmes praise his Name. Power out all your acclamations and
shouts of Joy, all your Hosannahs and Hallelujahs, ye Saints of his; Sing, and
sing aloud unto the Lord, that his mercy is thus made known upon Earth, and
his saving Health among all Nations.

And here we cannot complain of the Lord as the Prophet did of old; Isai.
63.15.
Where is now the sounding of thy bowels, and thy mercies toward us? For it is
gone, you hear, into all Nations; but rather, where is the sounding of our
Thankfulness, our singing aloud in Magnificats and Regratulations unto him?
Misericordias Domini in aeternum cantobo, says, David, I will sing of the
mercies of the Lord for ever, Psalm. 89.1. And certainly, if they be Mercies of
the Lord, they are Mercies for ever; Psalm. 89.1.
and if Mercies for ever, great Mercies; and if Mercies, and Great, and For
ever too; worthy for ever to be sung by all those that are in misery, even by
Kings; by David himself, if a King (as he was) in misery. For, Misery has
as well a For ever, as Mercy has: And therefore it was necessary that God's
Mercies should be infinite, because of our miseries; and it was just that our
miseries should be infinite, because of our sins. Here then, Abyssus abyssum
invocat, One deep cries unto another; and here, Altitudo altitudinem invocat,
One height cries unto another; this Height and Depth will make up
Infiniteness. Now, infinite Sins cry unto infinite Miseries, there are the
two Deepes: Again, infinite Miseries cry upon infinite Mercies; and infinite
Mercies upon infinite Truth; there are the two Heights. Once more, Shame is a
consequent of Sin, and death of Shame; and of such a Death, Misery; here is a
Great deep. On the other side, the strength of Goodness is Power; and of
Power, God; and of God, Eternity: There Is a Great Height: Now, between this
Height and Depth, what Medium have we? Mercy still, and how this Mercy but
from Truth? and how this Truth but from God? and how from God, but as a Father?
And therefore S. Paul calls him, Pater misericordiarum, and Deus totius
consolationis, The father of Mercies, and God of all Consolation: 2 Cor. 1.3. 2
Cor. 1.3.
Mark, he is not barely Pater misericordiae, but Misericordiarum; General
offenses presuppose general Pardons: and therefore the Father of Mercies, not
of Mercy; and he is (...) The Father of them, there is no other. Besides, he
is Deus totius consolationis, Universal distresses require universal
comforts; S. Ber. Sermon. 5. de Natal. Dom.
and therefore, not only the God of This or That, but the God of All comfort.
Again, he is called Miserationum, non ultionum Pater, The Father of Mercies,
not of Revenge; For in this, he were rather a God, than a Father; and a severe
Judge, than a God; A Father then of Mercies, not of Judgments: Quia non tam
decet patrem indignari, quam misereri filiorum, says S. Bernard: Mercy is more
proper in a Father, than Indignation; and therefore a Father of Mercies still:
or if these be sometimes mixed with Indignation, Tamen miserendi causam sumit ex
proprie, ulciseendi ex nostro, The cause of being merciful, is from Himself:
of being angry, from us and our sins. On the other side. He is Deus totius
consolationis, The God of all Comfort; S. Ber. ut supra.
Quia micifice dum misericordiam exercet, omnes mortales consolatur. He has a
Salve for every wound, a Cordial for every languishment, for every calamity a
Comfort: And therefore, according to the diversities of Benefits we receive
from him, we return him as well diversities of Attributes, as Thanks. In
Weakness, we call him Strength; in Sickness, Health; in Misery, Mercy; in
Distress, Comfort. In time of War, he is the Sword, and the Bow; Psalm. 18.2.
of danger, the Buckler and the Shield; of Persecution, the Castle and the
Tower; of Trouble, Psalm. 27.1.
the Rock and the Sanctuary. And here the Apostle belike, calls him, The God
of hope and peace, the God of Patience and comfort, Romans 15.5, 13. Of Peace, in
War; of Hope, in Danger; of Patience, in Trouble; of Comfort, in Persecution.
Of all These he is a God, that is, Largitor (says Theophylact) the Benefactor
or Disposer; his very Deity does include Comfort, Theoph. in loc.
and by his Essence he is not only Tota, but Totus, consolatio; or rather,
Totum consolationis a full Tide and Sea of Comforts; which he powers out in
this life upon his Servants in Tribulation, with such a bountiful hand, that
mortal heart is not capable either of receiving or expressing it; but enforced
to cry out with that blessed Martyr, Satis est Domine, Satis est.

Lastly, he is called Pater misericordiarum intransitive, that is, multum
misericors, or by the same Hebraisme, Misericordissimus (as both Cornelius and
Carthusian gloss it) Father of mercies, Cornel. a lap. in 15. cap Romans v. 5.13.
for most merciful, or full of mercies; and in that sense, he is said to be
the Father of them, as elsewhere he is the Father of Rain; Job. 38.28.
('it is a quaint speculation the Jesuit has) because his blessings come in
showers, and are not so properly dropped as powered down upon his inheritance.
Justin. Genesis in 2 Cor. cap. 1.
Moreover it is the nature of rain to cherish and refresh the dry and barren
ground; and of Mercy, the languishing and thirsting Soul: And therefore the
Psalmist cries, My soul gaspeth unto thee as a thirsty Land, Psalm. 143.6.
Psalm. 143.6. Now the thirsty Land gaspeth after him as the God of Rain, but
the thirsty Soul as the God of Mercy: And yet these, as they are one in
substance, so oftentimes in effect and operation too. Mercy extends as well to
the unjust as to the just; Mat. 5.45.
So does the Rain, He raineth (says the Evangelist) as well on the unjust as
the just, Mat. 5.45. And doubtless both the just and the unjust want it, and
desire to be refreshed with those two dewes of Heaven, Providence and Mercy.
Hence is that elegant similitude of the Prophet, As the Heart brayeth after the
Rivers of waters, so my soul pants after thee, Ps 42 1. Here the Sic will
answer punctually the Sicut; the Heart (you know, for it is a trodden
observation) when he is hard chased and wounded, immediately betakes himself
to the next water or River, which is to him both balm and refreshment; and the
heart of man when it is sore chased and wounded by his manifold sins, flies to
the water and the River too, the River of everlasting waters, and these waters
everlasting comforts, comforts from him that is everlasting, the God of
comforts; and who is that God of comforts, but he that was before the Father of
Mercies? And who this Father of Mercy, but he that is the Father of Rain? From
the noise of whose waterspouts stream all those blessings which we here call
Mercies and Comforts, and these sometimes both in measure and manner
extraordinary. And indeed it was requisite (says Saint Bernard) that many
should be Gods Mercies and Comforts, because many were the tribulations of the
just; and so Miseria nostra multiplex non medo magnam misericordiam, sed
multitudinem quaerit miserationum, as the Father in his 5. Sermon, De natali
Domini: a manifold misery does not only require a great but a manifold Mercy.
And therefore David touched it seems at the quick with the smart and sense of
his transgressions, gives not off his suit with a single importunity, but
closely prosecutes the Lord with a Fac mihi gratiam, fac mihi gratiam Domine,
Be merciful unto me, O Lord, be merciful unto me Psalm. 57.1. And why this
doubling upon mercy, except his miseries were double? And doubtless they were
doubly double; and therefore be merciful unto me be merciful unto me? and why
thus unto me, unto me: why? Because my soul trusts in thee, in the 1. v. of
that Psalm. Now in what, or in whom should it trust but in the Father of
mercies? Or from what, or who^ should it expect redress but from the God of
comfort? and hereon the same Prophet wounded in soul, and under the bitter
pangs and convulsions of a griping conscience, dogged and pursued at the very
heels by the Hue and cry of two foul sins, Murder and Adultery, is at
length brought unto the bar, and after arraignment and conviction done calls
for his Psalm of mercy, and instead of an Exaudi me Domine, he comes with a
miserere mei Deus. 'Twas before, Hear me O Lord for thy righteousness sake,
as if he stood upon terms of justification, but now both the Tune and the
Plea is altered: And therefore have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great
goodness, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my
offenses, Psalm. 51.1. Here we find Saint Bernard again with his Magna
misericordia, and his Multitudo miserationum, great sins require great
goodness; offenses that are not common, the multitude of Gods mercies, the
multitude of his tender mercies; and according unto those, Have mercy upon me
(the Psalmist cries) upon me, thy servant, thy Prophet, the man after thine
own heart: My sins are such that they require thy goodness, thy great
goodness; my offenses so capital, that they look for thy mercies, thy tender
mercies, the multitude of thy tender mercies, for their sake, and only for
their sake, blot out these my foul corruptions; which if they should still
continue in that ugliness which they now are, whither, O whither should I
fly? No flesh is righteous in thy sight; nay, no righteousness in me as man
merely, but is as flesh in thy sight, frail, imperfect, rotten, not able to
endure the touch of thy judgments; If thou should mark what is done
amiss, who should be able to abide it? Psalm. 130.3.
Surely not flesh and blood; not I, I that am the miserablest of flesh and
blood; I cannot answer thee one for a thousand, Job 9.3.
not one for a thousand thousand; so desperate are my sins without thy goodness,
thy great goodness; so heinous my transgressio^s without thy mercies, thy tender
mercies, the multitude of thy tender mercies. And this ever was and will be the
plea of Gods Children in their great extremities; all their thoughts, words,
endeavors, then, tread no farther the way to heaven than a miserere mei Deus.
If any brainsick or upstart speculation have found out a newer cut, or a
nearer; for mine own part I give it the Pasport and good speed, that
Constantine did the Novatian Heretic, Tollescalas Acesi, Socrat. lib. 1. cap.
7.
and in coelum solus ascendas, let Rome suggest me, it is in him that wills,
or Geneva, in him that runs; Saint Paul's miserentis Domini carries the Palm
at last; It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God
that shows mercy, Romans 9.16. Those vainglorious opinions of merit and
perfection here are but the dreams, or delusions rather of two opposite and
wayward Sisters, Popery and Puritanisme; Non sum dignus, Nonsum dignus was the
true and ancient ensign both of sanctity and martyrdom. And therefore the
great Patriarch of the Romish Church was enforced at last to come in with his
Tutissimum est It is most safe (most safe Cardinal? Bellar. de justif. lib. 5.
cap. 7.
most just) In sola Dei misericordia, only in the mercy of God to repose our
hope, our confidence, our eternal exectation. And to this purpose one of the
candles, or rather stars of the same Church, speaking of the mystery of our
redemption, Stella in 1. Lucae.
calls it mercy, Quia tale and tam divinum opus sub nullo merito
comprehenditur, sed sola divena misericordia factum est: He that has heard of
Bellarmine or Stella, knows where the Quotations lie.

Here then, mercy and mercy only is embraced, and those old presumptions of
merit casheird by some of their greatest Rabbis; Now if I could but read or
hear of so much modesty or so much mercy from some Perfectists of ours (men so
pretendingly immaculate and pure, as if their hands and hearts were washed in
innocence, and they could go boldly to Gods Altar, as if they rather dared his
justice, then implored his mercy) I might at length believe (as I do not yet)
that it were possible for a sincere, or a learned, or a not discontented man to
turn Chatharist; and so find out a new way to Heaven by the spirit of
opposition, and singularity. If any such Pharisees there be here standing about
the Temple, which yet dare vaunt in their plumed righteousness, and tell God
sawcily to his face, that they are not as other men, Extortioners, unjust,
Adulterers, no not as this Publican, let them enjoy the fruit of their
insolent and uncharitable devotions, whilst others and my self address our
Orizons to God in his pensive and humble posture, where we may find a heart
more stooping then a knee, and a look then either, an eye so dejected and
intent, that it dares nor so much as glaunce where it offended, as if one cast
of it toward heaven were enough not only to dazzle but confound him. Besides,
a hand so trembling, or rather so feeble, that it moves only to the striking of
a sinful breast, no higher, thoughts so mortified, and gesture so lowly, and
language so modest, that we can discover nothing but penitence and submission,
and these rather expressed by groans then words; or if words, broken ones,
Luke 18.13.
God be merciful to me a sinner. And here by the way, we must remember, that
as mercy and truth meet, so peace and righteousness must kiss too, nay
righteousness and mercy: God is as well a righteous as a compassionate God, a
God of justice as of mercy; nay his mercy sometimes shines the cleerer for his
justice, as the Sun does near a storm or thunder-clapp. His mercyes (says
the Prophet) are above all his works; All his works? Psalm. 145.9.
That as you have heard, is without Quaere; not all his attributes too? No
though the Apostle seems to intimate so much, Misericordia Dei super-exaltat
judicium, mercy does super exalt or gloryes above, or (as some read it)
Against judgment, James 2.13. There is nothing in God majus or minus; His
attributes, as I told you, are himself, and therefore to make one less or
greater then another, were to make God less or greater then himself. God is
sum simplicissimus, not only one but very oneness, and therefore whatsoever
is in himself must be himself, and if himself, therefore infinite,
infiinite, then his justice as well as mercy, and all his attributes as either;
and yet though mercy and justice as they are referred to God, may be styled
infinite, and are; yet in relation to his works, they have such a reason of
their magnitude, as the work it self is either proceeding from mercy or
justice. And therefore when God suffers sins to pass by unpunished (as
sometimes he does) he is said to be exceeding merciful; But when he does
scourge a little, his justice was not home to the desert of the offender, so
that his mercy is said to be greater than his justice (though both be infinite)
because in his works Ad extra, he does more use mercy in forgiving, than
justice in punishing offenses. Thus, Misericordia Dei plena est terra, Psalm.
119.64. The Earth is full of the mercy of the Lord, and it need be full, the
merciful Lord knows, for the earth wants it, miserably wants it; And Domine
in coelo misericordia tua, Psalm 36.5. Thy mercy is in heaven also; Heaven is
full of it, and yet heaven never wanted it, for there is no misery, but
fullness of joy for evermore. And are Heaven and Earth thus full of his mercy?
where then does his justice reign? in both these, but that his mercy is,
sometimes, superintendent, and so does qualify the other, though not impair
it. When justice is at the bar, mercy interposeth, ventures on the very seat
of judgment, and not only sits by it, but (sometimes, in respect of man) over
it. It does mellow and sweeten justice, and takes away the acrimony and
sharpness of it. Gods threatenings, I confess, have sometimes a fearful browe,
and like a sky troubled and flak'd with red, intimate fire and blood, but
scatter none; They are sparkles perchance of his indignation, but not coals;
sent only to menace, not to destroy: Or if his vengeance once begin to kindle
indeed, so that from his Throne proceed Hailestones and coals of fix,
lightnings and hot thunderbolts, yet his mercies are still sprinkled on those
flames, and the very dregs of the cup of Gods sury are tempered with some
compassion; nay, God is seldom seen in any of his works or his Attributes,
but mercy is there either as an agent or looker on; Mercy in his goodness,
fortitude, providence, wisdom, Power, nay in his very justice. To be
merciful and just, and mercy and justice, merciful and mercy, just and
justice, are one with God Essentialiter, though not Denominative; Concretes and
Abstracts alter not the Godhead, but are the same in substance, though not
denomination; And therefore, whereas some works of his are said to be of
Justice, others of Mercy, Non diversitas subjacentis, sed varietas sensuum and
effectuum in creaturis monstratur, says Lombard, there is no diversity
expressed of the thing signified by the words, but the variety of senses and
effects manifested in the Creatures. Moreover, in some of his works there are
said to be effects of his mercy; in others, effects of his justice, not that
Justice does produce one thing, Mercy another; if we refer them to his
essence, but because of some effects, he is understoode to be Index, of others
Miserator; or as some please Iustus, et Misericors. In every work therefore of
God, secundum effectum mercy and justice do not always concur; but in some
mercy, in others justice; in others mercy and justice, (as some of the
Schoolmen would suggest us) and yet withal confess, that whatsoever God
has done, Misericorditer egit and Just, referring the reason of the speech to
the will of God, which is Justice and Mercy, not to the effects of Justice and
Mercy, which are in things; and yet others conjecture, and they more
rationally; that as God is said to do all his works justly and mercifully, so
it is to be granted, that in every such work there is mercy and justice,
Secundum effectum too, because there is no work of God in which there is not
an effect, or at least a sign of equity and clemency, either concealed or
open; for sometimes his clemency is apparent, and his equity hid; and
sometimes E converso, as the Master of the Sentences more at large in his 4.
Book 66. distinction.

Now, as Mercy and Justice go hand in hand in respect of God the Father, so
they do also of God the Son; Omnia quae Dei sunt, Christus est, says
Origin, Christ is Gods All, Wisdom, Sanctity, Providence, Fortitude, Justice,
Mercy, and all these One, but one here as before, by way of Essence, not
Denomination. To be Justice then, is to be as Essentially Christ, as to be
mercy; and to be just as to be merciful; we cannot divorce nor sever them;
for lo, mercy and truth here meet together, righteousness and peace do kiss
each other, meet and kiss in the same Christ. Thus Isaiah calls him the Prince
of peace, Isai. 9.6. and Jeremy, The Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23.6. Here
Righteousness and Peace kiss again, and as they kiss, mercy and justice
meet, mercy as he is the Prince of peace, Justice as the Lord our
righteousness. One Prophet says, that he is Fons misericordiae, another that he
is Sol iustitiae: So that belike he has as well the face of a Lion, as of a
man; of a Judge, as a Mediator; and therefore he came not only to govern,
but to judge the Nations. Government presupposes mercy; and judgment, truth;
and therefore he is called, mercy and truth toward Israel, Psalm. 98.3. Lo
here mercy and truth kiss, and as they kiss, peace and righteousness meet,
meet and kiss in the glorious Bridegroom Christ Jesus.

Thus, All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth, Psalm. 25.9. Misericordia,
qua placabilis est; D. Aug. ad psalm. 24. v. 9
veritas, qua incorruptus est, allam praebuit donando peccata, hanc opera
(...), faith Saint Augustine: It Is mercy then makes God not implacable, and
it is truth that speaks him not corrupt, by the one he is ready to forgive, by
the other to censure and scanour Actions. His mercy therefore still leans to
his truth; and his truth declines not from his justice. All the ways of the
Lord are here; all the ways, by which he either descends unto us, or by which
we ascend unto him. By his truth, heaven first came down unto earth; and by
mercy earth climb's up again to heaven; it is truth, qua a malo declinamus; and
it is mercy, qua bonum facimus. Lom. lib. 4. did. 66.
In these two are all Gods works included; and these two go hand in hand with
his judgments. Toward his Saints, all his ways are mercy: toward the
wicked, all his ways are Truth; Quia and in judicando subvenit, and sic non
deest misericordia, and in miserando id exhibet quod promisit ne desit verit
as. To all those then that he does either pardon or condemn, all his ways
are Mercy and Truth; Quia ubi non miseretur vindictae veritas datur, as S.
Augustine pleades it in his 19. Sermon upon the 5. of Matthew.

They then that would divide and sunder the Lord of Life, and cleave (as some
do) his mercy from his Justice, deal with him as some curious Limners and
Painters do, who commonly picture him with a half face: That which is of
mercy, is transparent and lovely to the eye, the other of Justice, is shadowed
and understood. But certainly, they that would look upon him, as All mercy,
deal too much with the spectacle and the multiplying glass, where the thing
they desire to see, shows greater than it is; and so endeavoring to aseist
the eye, they coozen it. Justice no doubt, is as visible as Mercy, but that
Flesh and Blood is apt to turn the perspective the contrary way; and so
beholds Justice in a small letter, but turning it again, views Mercy in a
large print. In such a case, I should rather chide, than counsel; did not the
Son of Syrach put in his caveat here, Ecclus. 5.5. and 6.
concerning Propitiation, Be not without fear to add sin to sin, and say
not, His mercy is great, he will be pacified for the multitude of my sins,
for mercy and wrath come from him, and his Indignation rests upon Sinners:
Ecclus. 5.5. and 6.

It Is true, the Mercies of the Lord are infinite, but his promises of them are,
for the most part, conditional and restrained; like as a Father pittyeth his
own children, so is the Lord merciful; Psalm. 103.13.
but to whom? Timentibus eum, to those that fear him. Psalm. 103.13. So again,
the mercyes of the Lord are throughout all generations; All generations? How?
Timentibus eum, to those that fear him throughout all generations. Luke 1.50.
No fear then, no mercy; But is there always mercy where there is fear? yes,
this Timentibus eum, joined with a Credentibus ineum; if fear go with
belief, and filiation with fear; not else. Yea, but the Devils believe and
tremble too, is there not mercy for them? Origin will say there is, and (after
some expiration of years) Salvation too: And for the better coloring of his
tenet, he has as well text for the Devil, as the Devil had for Christ; Has
God forgotten to be gracious, or will he in his anger shut up his tender
mercyes for ever. Psalm. 77. From which words he endeavors to lenifie those
often breathings against the wicked, Vt terribilus dicta, quam verius, as if
they had more horror in them than truth, and used only to awe malefactors, not
to punish them. But this wild fancy of his the Church long since spewed out as
erroneous, and interprets that anger of God, which he formerly urged in the
behalf of the damned, not any divine perturbation, but their own damnation,
which is frequently in scripture called anger, and that anger endless; and
therefore the Psalmist says, Inira sua, non ad finiendam, Lib. 4. did. 66.
or post iram suam, as the Master glosseth it. And doubtless, as the glory of
Gods children is endless, so is the destruction of his enemies; The text
oftentimes resembling their torments unto fire, fire unquenchable, everlasting
fire; Everlasting in respect of time, though sometimes not of rigor: And
herein is mercy still, though no salvation; mercy, in that there is a
qualification of punishment, not salvation, because no termination of time for
that punishment. Hereupon, Saint Augustine in his enarrations upon that of the
Psalmist, The mercy of the Lord endures for ever, Psalm. 106. From a double
version of the word ever, gathers a double observation of mercy. The Septuagint
reads it (...), In aeternum. Saint Jerome (whom the Father follows) In
seculum; Now there is a mercy (says he, Qua nemo sine Deo beatus esse potest,
by which, no man can be blessed without God; that is not enjoying him; And this
he calls mercy (...), In aeternum. There is a mercy besides Quae miscris
exhibetur, which is afforded to men in misery, such a mercy as either involves
barely a consolation; or else such a mercy as presupposes freedom, and this he
calls mercy In seculum, D. Aug. ad Psalm. 105.
that is, (as he interprets himself) In finem seculi, in quo non decrunt
miseri quibus misericordia praebeatur: At the general and dreadful assize, at
the last day, some shall not cease to be miserable, to whom mercy is allowed;
and so to the Devil, his Angels, and the reprobated drove, there is a mercy
granted, a mercy, not of enlargement, but relaxation; and so that mercy may be
said to be eternal, on their eternal misery, Non aeterno supplicio finem
dando, Lomb. lib. 4. did. 66.
sed levamen adhibendo, not by Ending, but by Easing their everlasting
torments. And here, D. Aug. ut sup.
Quis audeat dicere, says the Father, who durst say, this Easing is not Mercy,
or this Mercy not Eternal? His mercy endures for ever, His mercy endures
for ever; His mercy endures for ever; It Is the burden and under-song the
Prophet uses thrice in one Psalm, and 26. times in another. Whither then (O
God) shall we fly from thy Power? or whither so flying, but to thy Mercy? If
we climb up to Heaven, Mercy is there; If we go down into Hell, Mercy is
there; If we take the wings of the morn, and fly to the uttermost parts of
the Earth, Mercy is there also: It Is in Glory, Exile, Torment; Psalm. 118.
Above beyond, under us; with thy Friends, thine Aliens, thine Enemies, thy
glorified, thy dispersed, Psalm. 13.
thy condemned. Mercy, Before the world; and Mercy, After the world; Mercy,
From everlasting; and Mercy, To everlasting: Mercy, when there was no Time; and
Mercy, when there shall be Time no more; Mercy from that immortality which has
No beginning; and Mercy to that immortality which has Noend; Infinite,
Incorruptible, Aeternall: For his Mercy endures for ever, for his Mercy
endures for ever, for his Mercy endures for ever.

Well then, Is God the God of Mercy? And Christ the Christ of Mercy? Are we
Christ's? and Christ God's? Let us then be the Sons of Mercy too, being
merciful as our Father in Heaven is merciful; forgiving one another, as God
for Christ's sake forgave us. Let there not be a Nabal murmuring within us, no
heart of stone for the hammer of the Law to batter, but hearts of Flesh, soft
and pliable to the miseries of others; And as God has powered out his bowels
for us, so let us power out our bowels for our brethren, our bowels of Pity
and Compassion. Remember what the counsel of S. Ierom was to Demetriades the
Virgin, S. Hieron. part 3. Tract. 5. Ep. Epist. 17.
Laudent te esurientium viscera, non ructantium opulenta convivia, Let the
great man's Voyder be the poor man's Basket; the emptying of his Abundance, the
Accommodation of the others wants. Hunger will not be fed with Air, nor misery
with good words; they must have a taste of the Meal in our barrel, and of the
Oil in our Cruse: Let Us abate somewhat of our superfluities, to supply their
necessities; Sint tua supersiua pauperis necessaria Sen. ad Lucil. Ep. 51.
Bleed this Plurisie of ours, and Cordial their Consumption; Let the Naked be
clothed, the Hungry fed, the Impotent provided for, the Sick visited; Give not
for Bread a Stone; nor for a Fish a Scorpion: But let our hands speak, what
our hearts mean; our Alms tell that our thoughts are compassionate; And not
like those flinty professors, which turn Gospel into Law; Christianity, into
Barbarism; A poor widow, or Lazar, or Orphan, are an Abomination at their
gates. The story of Hatto and his mice revived, Away with such vermines as
these, which devour our Corn, they stand neither with our profit nor the Law.
A morsel of Bread for Gods sake, or a penny for the Passion of a Savior, they
choke with a penal statute; and their Charity is a Lex prohibet; Fie on this
cruel Mercy, it holds not with the Law. If a Collection for the disasters of
Fire, or Wracks, or distressed captives be presented them, (though stamped with
the Authority of a Regal Pattent) yet, Away with this Non obstante, it is
against the Law; Nay, if Tribute be required for Caesar himself, a supply
demanded for the ships of Tharshish, a Rate to be levied for the Royal Navy,
to the honor of their Prince, the Terror of other Nations, and the future
preservation of their Own; they are up presently with their Passive Obedience,
Goods forsooth they have, but in this case, Money they have none; (though all
the while they tumble in Bonds and Morgages) And why? It Is against the Law.
Thus, they make the mere Letter of the Law, Their Oracle; A Statute, their
Teraphin or tutelary God; Their Religion, Faith without Works; Their
Allegiance, murmuring; their Church, Mutiny; their Charity, Implacablenesse;
their Compassion, Bridewell; their Alms, a whipping Post.

O crudelis Alexi --
Nil nostri miserere? --
Argier, or the Holy Inquisition are scarce so merciless.

Again, Is God the God of Truth? and Christ the Christ of Truth? Let us then
be Christians in Truth too: not only in the Bark and Shell, in outward
deportment and resemblance, (as too many are) but at the very Core and Kernel;
in Reality and Substance also. He that is not sound at heart, is little better
than rotten in all his parts; And that Religion which has not warmth within,
is either Cold, or Counterfeit, or Both: A Cake on the hearth not turned, the
Prophet sharply condemned in Ephraim, and your halfe-bak'd Christian is an
Abomination to the Lord. What we profess to be, let us be wholly; least we
prove at last to be naught at all: Let us not have a Tongue here at home, and a
Heart at Geneva; our pretense for the reformed Church, and our project for the
Romish; But if we be for Baal, let us go after him; If for the Lord, let us
go after Him.

Lastly, Is God a God of Righteousness and Peace? Do they kiss both in the
Father, and his Son Christ Jesus? Let them kiss therefore in Us also that
are Christians, That as we are his Sons by Adoption, so we may likewise by
Imitation. Let us endeavor to be Righteous, as He is Righteous; at least in
similitude, though not in equality; to be the Sons of Peace, as he is the God
of Peace; turning our Swords into Sythes, and our Spears into Pruning-hookes;
that the voice of War and Dissension be no more amongst us. Away with those
waters of Marah and Meribah, those overflowings of bitterness and Strife; let
the silent Stream glide amongst us, no Raging of the waves, Rising of the
floods, no Noise of the water spouts. But let us all endeavor to keep the unity
of Spirit in the bond of Peace.

Remember whither you are now going, to the Lord's Altar; and he that comes
thither, must have his hands washed in Innocence, and his heart in Peace. It is
the Altar of Atonement and Reconciliation, and there is no Reconciliation with
God, except there be first Peace with thy Brother.

If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest, that thy Brother
has ought against thee: Leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy
way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come, and offer thy Gift; as
our Savior advises thee, Matthew. 5.24. Look not here for mercy from God,
except thou have first Charity with man; How can thou expect forgiveness of
thy Trespasses, unless thou forgive Them that trespass against thee; Forgive
then, and thou shall be forgiven: Seek Peace, and thou shall find it, even
That Peace which passes all understanding; And let That Peace always keep
your hearts and minds in the knowledge and love both of God and Man: And, The
Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost be with
you, and remain with you, now and for ever. Amen.

Gloria in excelsis Deo. Amen.

FINIS.
The Blind Ephesian: OR, IGNORANCE unvailed. A SERMON PREACHED Ad POPVLVM, at
Henton S. GEORGE in Sommerset. By Humphrey Sydenham.

Revela, Domine, Oculos meos, ut intuear mirabilia de Lege tua.

Psalm. 119.18. LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE, for Humphrey Robinson, at the
Sign of the Three Pigeons in PAUL'S Churchyard. 1637.

TO MY MOST DESER VING FRIEND and Kinsman, HENRY POVLETT, Esquire. THIS.
SIR,
WIth a bold dedication I have this humble suit to prefer; that you measure
not the disposition of the Offerer, by the quality of the Present. For if I had
not as well known the greatness of your Charity. as of your Judgment, I should
not have thus profaned a Noble Altar with a blind Oblation; which amongst those
Legal sacrifices of old was ever so much below acceptance, that it was not
farfrom Abomination. I must ingenionsly confess, this Piece was designed
elsewhere; and perhaps, importuu'd also: but then in all probability, the blind
should have led the blind, and so, both fallen into the Dyke together: with you,
I am sure, as well of a Cherisher, as Director, (and such a one our Ephesian
wants) who in his first offer to the pulpit, trip't a little (so apt blind
people are to fall) but it was in the misprision of the hearers, which commonly
receive things according to Fancy or guilt, and soldome to the intention of the
Speaker. However, he is now on his legs again, and will adventure under your
Countenance and Conduct, to travail the world a while, where wanting the
benefit of his own eyes, he shall be guided by the quickness and clearness
of Yours; which can distinguish between things really blind, and those which
are metaphorically, and in tittle only, such are the Freewill offerings of

Your poor Servant, and Allie, HVM. SYDENHAM.

THE Blind Ephesian, OR, Ignorance unvailed.
EPHESIANS. 5.8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord,
walk as Children of light.


NOthing so much debaseth man and brings him down to Beast, as a wilful
neglect or ignorance of moral and sacred principles. Our Apostle (you know)
has been formerly at Ephesus, where instead of incountring men, 1 Cor. 15.32.
he himself testifies that he fough: with beasts, a people belike as brutish
in their manner of deportment as Religion. Now Ephesus was the Metropolis of
Asia the less; a City, says Saint Jerome, stupidly affected to Magic and
Idolatry, In praemio Comment. hujus Epist.
in chief remarked for that renowned Temple of her great Goddess Diana, which
as it was the Mother of much wonder unto other Nations, so of superstition to
her own; for instead of those Magnificats and Hosannahs which were proper
only to the true God, Act. 19. v. 28. and 34.
Great, great is the Lord, and worthy to be praised; how excellent is thy Name
in all the world, Psalm. 8. Here the unruly shout of Crafis-men and
Shrine-makers (so busy are Mechannicks still in matters of Religion) are loud
for a more glittering Deity, and cause both the streets and the Temple to ring,
Act. 19.26.
Great is Diana of the Ephesians, Great is Diana of the Ephesians: Saint Paul
therefore pitying their blindness, and willing to reduce them from darkness
unto light, tells them that they were no Gods which were made with hands, but
the braine-sicke sancies of those that made them; and withal, acquaints them
with a new Divinity, which they had not heard of, and hearing perhaps could not
well understand, opens to them the mystery of a Trinity, tells them of Three
Persons in one God, nay that three persons were but one God, and yet every one
of these persons a true God, that there was a Father from everlasting which was
Divine, and a Son so too, very God of very God, begotten before the world,
and before all time, and yet brought forth after there was a world, and in the
fullness of time. This could be no less than a Riddle to Flesh and blood, and
more apt to stagger a natural understanding than inform it. But that God who
wrought miraculously in the Creation of man, does also in his Conversion. His
Apostle here shall do that by the secret operations of the spirit, which the
subtle powers of Art and reason, with all their acuteness and sublimity cannot
possibly aspire unto.

And now he begins to preach unto them Christ Jesus, and him crucified; 1 Cor.
1.23.
a matter of folly unto some, of stumbling unto others, but of salvation here;
and this great work is not to be done suddenly, or with a flash, but
requires both time and tears, diligence and compasaion, as if in matters of
spiritual employment, God not only expected the tongue or hands of his
Ministers, but their eyes also; for so Saint Paul tells the Elders of Ephesus
at Myletum, Acts 20. that He ceased not to warn every one night and day with
tears. And this he did for the space of three years, until a commotion being
raised against him by Demetrius the Silver-smith (one that more loved his own
gain than Religion, as most mercenary men do) he departed into Macedonia,
leaving Timothy at Ephesus for the farther growth of that Doctrine which he
there seeded. Not long after, going bound in spirit to Jerusalem, and from
thence to Rome, where he was in bonds, and fearing that the Dog might again to
his old vomit, he writes this Epistle to Ephesus, by Tychicus the Deacon; 2 Timothy 4.12.
not to the dispersed Jews, there, or Iudais'd Christians, as some conjecture,
for these had formerly revolted, 2 Timothy 1.15.
Phygellus and Hermogenes being chief, but to the converted Gentiles; for so
he himself professed, Ego Paulus vinct us Jesus Christi, pro vobis Gentibus, in
the 3. chapter of this Epistle: In which he is not only careful for the
suppressing of Heresies which were like to rise, or else already grown;
principally those of the Symonian Sect, and the Schools of the Gnostics,
Epiph. lib. 1. contra Haeres.
as Epiphanius notes; but also for the perfecting of that great work of
Christianity, which he had with such danger begun, and with such difficulty
proceeded in. And therefore, here, like a discreet Monitor, he first puts them
in mind of their primitive condition, Ye were sometimes darkness; Ye are
light in the Lord: Walk as children of light. These are the branches the Text
naturally spreads unto, and because they are large ones, and each particular
full enough for the whole body of a discourse, I shall pitch my meditations,
for the present, on the former only, and so confine both my self and them to
the very front of the Text, Eratis olim Tenebrae, Ye were sometimes darkness.

And here, lest we fall a stumbling in the dark, and with the Israclite wander
up and down under the Cloud, let us inquire a little what darkness is? or
rather what it is not? then what it is, or is not, in the Text here; and so
make up the Analogy between both. Now darkness is nothing else but Absentia
luminis, a Non-residency (if I may so style it) or vacancy of light. Qui
diligenter considerat, quid sint tenebrae, snil aliud invenit, quam lucis
absentiam. D. Aug. lib. de Genesis ad lit. imperfecte.
And to this purpose Moses tells us, that in the beginning, when the earth was
without form, and void, Tencbrae erant super Abyssum, Darkness covered the
face of the deep: which is all one (says Saint Augustine) with Non erat lux
super abyssum, There was no light upon the face of the deep: So that the
Father would have darkness there, to be only Informitas sine lumine, A
prodigy without light, blemishing and dimming that rich beauty and luster
which should radiate and enlighten the whole world. And indeed, if we
critically enquire into the original of things, we cannot bring darkness
within the verge of Creation; we read of a Fiat lux, let there be light, but
no where of a Fiant tenebrae, let there be darkness; as if with darkness God
had nothing to do; nothing indeed in respect of Creation, but of Ordinance or
Administration: For God made the Species of things, Ne vel ipse private ones non
haberent suum ordinem. D. Aug. ut supra.
not privations; not made these, but disposed them, least privations themselves
should not have their order; God managing, though not creating them, who is the
God of Order. Now, light you know is a created quality, not made (as I told
you) but ordained only; like a rest in a Song, where though there be an
intermission of voice for the present, as if there were neither voice nor Song,
yet if it be rightly timed and ordered, makes the Song more melodious, and the
art fuller: Or like shadows in wel-limn'd Pictures, which give the other life
and excellence, but in themselves Non specie, sed ordine placent, their shape
is not pleasing' but their order. We say not, nor dare not say that God was
the causer of this Ephesian darkness, but doubtless he was the Disposer of
it, otherwise it had never been advanced to this Lux estis in Domino, ye are
now light in the Lord. God is not the Author of any obliquity or crookedness
in our ways, but he is the Orderer, and turns them oftentimes to our
punishment and his glory; Nay oftentimes, (O the depth and riches of his
mercyes') from our punishment to our own glory, converting this Eratis olim
tenebrae to a Lux estis in Domino, making that which was sometimes darkness,
to be now light in the Lord. Quaedam sunt quae Dens ordnat and facit; quaedam
quae ord not tantu D. Aug. ut sup:
There are some things which God both makes and ordaines, and some which he
ordaines only. The just which are as light, as the shining light, (says
Solomon) which shines more and more unto the perfect day, God not only makes,
but ordaines; The wicked, which are as darkness, and a continual stumbling,
he ordaines only, not makes, not makes them wicked, but men; So that, although
both are not made by him, both are disposed of, though in a different manner
disposed of; The one Ad dextram Dei, On the right of God, with a venite
Benedicti Come ye blessed; The other Ad sinistram On the lest, with an Ite
maledicti Go ye cursed. And indeed, whither should light go, but to him that
is Pater luminum The Father of lights? James 1.17. Or whither should darkness
tend, but to him that is Princeps tenebrarum, the Prince of the power of
darkness. Mat. 9.34.

You hear then, that where light is, there is life too; and where there is
darkness, death; And these two are as distant as the two poles, as opposite
as two contrary winds, or tides, differing, sicut nuditas and vestimentum, as
nakedness and a garment does; D. Aug. lib. de Genes. ad lit. imperfect.
Now as in scripture there is some Analogy between light and a garment, so
there is between nakedness and darkness. The Psaimist describing the
majesty of God, says, that he was Amictus lumine sicut vestimento, clothed
with light as with a garment, Psalm. 104.2. Here garment and light shine both
together, and with them life. Job, typifying unto us the fleeting and unstable
condition of the Rich, under the sudden loss of his goods and children, with
his mantle rent, and his head shaven, at length prostrates himself with a
nudus exibo, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked I shall return.
And what of this nakedness? what? nay whither? Ecce, in tenebris instruo
Cubile meum, Behold, Job. 1.21.
I have made my bed ready in the darkness, Job 17.13. Here nakedness and
darkness sleep together, and with them death. And hence, I suppose it is
that the Evangelist calls darkness Vmbra mortis, The shadow of death. Luke
1.79. And the Prophet (whence he had it) Regionem umbrae mortis, the Land of
the shadow of death. Isay. 9.2. Death, and shadow of death, and the land of the
shadow of death; and of all these Darkness is an Hieroglyphicke, or Emblem,
or both; as if there were no other misery to express them by, but darkness.
And indeed, Darkness is a great misery and seldom mentiond in sacred story
without intimation of some curse or punishment. So, for the unprofitable
servant, Math. 25.30.
we find that the doom is Utter darkness; And for the Angels that fell,
Chains of darkness; Jude 6.13.
And for the wandering stars Blackenesse of darkness for ever. Nay, when God
himself speaks in terror to the world, (the Earth trembling: and the
foundation of the Hills shaking because he is wroth) A smoke out of his
nostrills, and a devouring fire out of his mouth, are not astonishment enough;
but as if there were nothing else to ripen horror, He makes darkness his
secret place, his Pavilion round about, dark waters, and thick clouds of the
sky. Psalm. 18.11. And therefore, in mount Sinay, at the promulgation of the
law, lightning and thunder and the noise of the trumpe, and the smoking of the
mountain like a furnace were too light, it seems, to cause a general palsy
and trembling in the camp of the Israelites; But to make terror solemn and
complete, and set her up in the chair of state, there must be a thick cloud
also, and to make that thickness more dreadful, Thick Darkness too: Exodus
20.21 And lastly on mount Calvary at the satisfaction of the law, when part of
the world seemd to dye, and part to resurge in the death of her Savior, the
Temple cleaving, the Earth quaking, the Rocks rending, the Graves opening, and
many Bodies of the Saints which slept, arising; Yet, in this there was not a
full pomp, either of forrow or wonder, not mourning or miracle enough for the
tragedy of a God; But the heavens must be clothed with blackness, and
sackcloth shall be a covering; And as if one light languish'd for the
extinguishing of another, The Sun it self shall blend and look heavy to see
her maker eclipsed, and Darkness, like a sad manile shall overspread the
whole land from the sixth hour unto the ninth hour. Matthew. 27.45.

By this time, you may conceive what Darkness is, and the miserable estate
and condition of those that lie captived under her bands and fetters; Now it is
time to reflect more particularly, upon the text, and enquire what the
darkness was that is there complained of, what that, which of old so
manacled the Ephesian. Ye were sometimes Darkness. Darkness here, Beza and
Cornel. alap. in locum.
has a metonimicall sense; and is (if you will take the word of a Jesuit, or
if not his, Beza's) more then ordinarily emphaticall, Tenebrae being used for
renebricosi, Darkeues for those which are in the dark, as wickedness is
oftentimes taken for those that are wicked, but dark or wicked in a
superlative way. Now as before Darkness was an absence or privation of the
light natural, so it is here of the light spiritual, and is a type or figure
of man in naturalibus, a representation of the state of nature before grace;
and such a state is a very darkness, in which there is not so much as a
glimmering of this Lux estis in Domino, ye are now light in the Lord; But
rather a blind relic of this olim tenebrae in the text here, that darkness
which of old so be sotted our Ephesian; And what is that darkness but
ignorantia veritatis, an ignorance of divine truth? Aret. in locum.
and imports only caecitatem innatam, caliginem mentit de Deo and Divinis, an
inbred blindness cast as a mist upon the soul, a mental dimnesse and
obscurity in respect of God and things divine; So that where such ignorance
dwells, there is no light at all, but darkness hangs like a thick fog
about it. First, Darkness in the eyes, Psalm. 69.23. Then, Darkness in the
heart, Romans 1.21. And at last, Darkness in the understanding too, Ephesians. 4.
And why this threefold darkness? Darkness in eye, in heart, and
understanding, why? Because alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them, at the 18. verse of the same chapter.

And here if we had neither light of Father nor In terpreter, Scripture would
comment upon scripture, Palpvviu^s, sicut coeci, parietem, We groape for the
wall like the blind, we stumble at noone day as in the night, we are in
desolate places as dead men. Isai. 59.10. Now what causes this blindness,
this groaping, this stumbling at noone day, this sicut mortui, that we are as
dead men, but the fearful night and desolation ignorance carries with it? And
indeed there is an ignorance which is no better then a desolation, a dwelling
for the Ostrich, and a dancing room for the Satyr, Where the Beasts of the
land and the Dragons cry Isay. 13. (men brutishly and barbarously, and
sometimes diabolically inclined) and it is a night too, a night for the Batt to
flutter, and the owl to hoote in (men of besotted and infatuated condition)
and it is not only nox, but nox media, says S. Augustine, the very depth of
night, and as it were a night in a night, and because I will not be thought to
coin it, I will quote it from the Father in his 30. Sermon, de verbis Domini.

Now, as night is a time for Zijm and Ohim, Isai. 13.22.
for the ranging of doleful creatures, and spirits that are wicked; so is
Ignorance a nightly haunt of Spirits that are dosefull, and wicked also; 1.
John 4 6
the Spirit of dullness, and the Spirit of error, and to make it nightly
indeed, the Spirit of slumber too, 1. Tim. 4.1.
Romans 11.8. per noctes quaesivi quem diligit anima mea, says the Spouse in the
Canticles, In the nights I sought for him whom my soul loves; And what then?
I sought him, but I found him not. Cant. 3.1. Christ will not be met with in
the dark; Night is not a season to seek Jesus in, though perhaps to betray
him, the night either of Ignorance, or Infidelity. For, what has a Savior to
do with him that knows him not? or with him that knows him, but believes him
not? or with him that believes him, but believes him not as he should? Again,
the Text says not per noctem quaesivi, but per noctes, not in the Night, but
in the Nights. Now Ignorance is a double Night; One of nature, the other of
grace; Reason and Understanding are darkened in the one, Faith and all
spiritual operations in the other. Habet mundus nectes suas, and non paucas,
says Saint Bernard; Scrm. 5. supcam.
The world has her nights, and too many; Nay, the world it self is but a
night, and totally involved in darkness, no light at all in it, but what is
influenced and beamed down from above; And therefore Christ is called Lux
mundi the light of the world; Because, where the knowledge of him shines not,
there is undoubtedly darkness, the O lim tenebrae in the Text here, Ye were
sometimes Darkness.

Again, Quot Sectae, tot Noctes, As many Schisms, so many Nights; Nox est
Iudaica persidia, Nox Haeretica pravitas, Nox Catholicorum carnalis
Conversatio; Heresy and Iudaisme, and the carnal Conversation of pretended
Catholics are all Nights. On the other side, Donatisme, Anabaptisme, nay the
holy Catharisme, or (if that word be too much antiquated) Carthwritisme, bragg
of their Lux in domino what they list, are Nights too; They wait for light,
but behold obscurity, for brightness, but they walk in darkness. Isai.
59.9. And lastly, which is the night of all those nights, Nox Ignorantia
Pagancrum ('it is Saint Bernards again) Pagan or Ephesian Ignorance is a Night
also; Ve supra.
or if not a Night, Darkness I am sure, the Olim tenebrae the Text speaks
off, Darkness sometimes, though afterward made light in the Lord and therefore,
as S. Paul says elsewhere of his These. Qui Ebrii sunt, 1 Thessalonians. 5.7.
Nocte Ebrii, Those, that are drunken, are drunken in the Night. So we may not
improperly say here of our Ephesian, Qui ignorant, nocte ignorant, Those that
are ignorant, are ignorant in the Night, for Ignorance is nothing else but a
mental Darkness, or Drunkenness, and both these a business of the Night,
causing us to groape without light (as Job speaks) and to wander in a
wilderness where there is no way. Job 12.24.
Errare eos faciet sicut Ebrios, They are made to err like a drunken man, Job
12.25. Here Error and Drunkenness reele together, and with them Ignorance, and
are as near allied as a Vertigo, and an Epilepsie; the one causing us to fall
or stagger, the other to some in our own shame.

Now this disease had a long time dangerously infected the world, this
Darkness fearfully overspread it, before the Sun of righteousness began to
arise, until Christ Jesus by the beams of his Gospel shined upon it;
Witness the woeful Blindness and perverse Judgment, which possessed the
Gentiles in the time of Gentilisme; even in those things which common reason
and the law of nature prohibited. The Persians took their Mothers, Sisters,
and Daughters, nefandis matrimoniis, (for so the Historian) into matrimony,
shall I call it, or incest? Either damnable enough. The Scythians were no better
then Anthropophagi, and made their own Sex their food; Sacrificing their
children (like those in the valley of Hinnon) to the Tabernacle of Moloch, Acts
7.43.
or the star of their God Remphan. The Massagetae, as Clemens Alexandrinus
testifies, feasted on the bodies of their nearest Kindred; Hircanae que admorunt
ubera Tygres.
the Hircani (and from thence I suppose the Poets Hircanae Tygres) threw out
their old men to the fowls of the Air; The Caspians to their dogs. The
Lacedaemonians magnified theft as a project of wit and industry; And Saint Ierom
writing-against Iovinian, tells him, Apud multas Nationes licuisse, Lib. 1.
Epist. part. Epist. 6. cap. 36.
that amongst many Nations many kinds of homicide were nor only conniv' dat,
but allowed, nay, if we reflect a little on the laws of Plato, Plato the
Divine, (as they style him) how monstrous and abominable in giving full liberty
to lies, to insanticide, to community of wives, to the unnatural abuse of
sick men that were ready for the vrne? and those brutish Edicts of Lycurgus
also, the great Lacedemonian Oracle, Pueros, impune prostitui, Feminas licenter
exponi: Proclaiming an unpunished freedom of prostituting and exposing both
Sexes to that which the Apostle calls Burning in lust, and a work which was
unseemely, Romans 1.27. Insomuch that some strumpetted their own wives,
unbracing them to their Guests in symbolum Hospitii, as you may have it in a
larger survey from Eusebius and Theodoret, quoted by Cornelius a lapide, on
this place. And if this kind of Antiquity will not pass for Authentic,
please you to enquire a little at the Oracles of God, and there you shall find
the mistredings of the Ammonite, and Moabite, and Ekronite; nay of the
Israelite himself, no less damnable then the other; Their abominations in
respect of Earth as great, and (if possible) of Heaven greater, leaving that
true God that made them, and making Gods of their own which were so far from
the True, that they were none at all; Sacrificing to stocks and stones, and
sometimes Devils, as our Ephisian here did; whose impietyes consisted most in
the darker practices of Magic and Idolatry, the one a plain trassicke with
the Devil, the other a tribute to him.

Now what is the cause of these prodigious aberrations, but an invellectuall
blindness, a darkness of the inward man? A stupid ignorance of God, and
things divine? And therefore, as a wicked man; is not quis but quasi quis; or
else, non homo sed quasi cadaver hominis (as Boethius has it) So an ignorant
man is not a man properly, but a quasi homo as it were a man; Nay, quasi
cadaver hominis, as a carcass of a man that was. And, where is a fit place for
a carcass, but in darkness? So I told you before, my bed is made in the
darkness; And what is this darkness but death? I go whence I shall not
return (says Job) And where is that? To the land of darkness and the shadow
of death, Job 10.22. Tolerabilior est poena, vivere non posse, quam nescire;
It Is a calmer punishment to be deprived of life, then knowledge; For knowledge
is a posting unto life, and ignorance a lingering or hanging back unto death.
And therefore Solomon tells us, that the holy Spirit of discipline will remove
from thoughts that are without understanding, Wise. 1.5. God dwells not with
him that dwells not with himself; that is, Multi multa sciunt, and seipsos
nesciunt; cum tamen summa philosophia sit, suipsius cognitio. Hugo de sancto
victore lib. 1. de Anima cap. 9.
not with one that knows not himself, and his God too; So that in every man
there is a double knowledge, not only required, but necessary unto life, Dei,
and Sui, of God, and of Himself; Of which, he that is ignorant, comes within
the lash of this Olim tenebrae, and is not only Darkness, but in the way to
utter Darkness; Such an Ignorance being not only dangerous or desperate, but
Ad perditionem, Damnable too; So says Saint Bernard in his 36. Sermon upon the
Canticles

Nosceteipsum was one of the proverbs of a secular wiseman, and Reverentia
Iehovae of a sacred. First, know thy Self, that morality enjoynes, and does
distinguish Man from Beast, then know thy God, and fear him too. This Divinity
requires, and divides man from man, makes that Spirit which was before-Nature,
and is no less then Caput scientiae The springhead as well of life as
knowledge; Prove. 1.7. And indeed, what hope of life without this knowledge? or
of this knowledge without humility and fear? of humility in thy self, which as
it is the Mother of virtues, so of happiness; of fear in respect of God,
which as it is the beginning of Wisdom, so of divine Love: Non potes amare
quem nescias, aut habere quem non amaveris, S. Bern. 37. Sermon. super Cant.
thou can neither love him whom thou know not, nor enjoy him truly whom
thou do not love. And therefore labor to know thy self, that thou may
fear God, and so fear and know God, that thou may love him too; In altero
initiaris ad sapientiam, in altero and consummaris; the one is the first step
to wisdom, the other the staire-head; that, as earth which is the footstool;
this, as Heaven which is the Throne of God. Moreover, as from the knowledge of
God proceeds his fear; so from the same knowledge, love; and from both, hope,
which is the blood and marrow of faith, and says of life and glory. Fili mi,
Reverere Iehovam, says the Wiseman; My son fear the Lord, and what then?
Salutare erit umbilico tuo, and medulla ossibus tuis, It shall be health to thy
navell, and marrow to thy bones. And is this fear, then, of the Lord, all? No,
but get wisdom and understanding too; and why? why? Longitudo dierum in
dextra ejus; in sinistra, divitiae and honor, Length of days is in her right
hand, and in her left hand riches and honor, Pro. 3.8.

Now, as knowledge does mightily advance man and sets him up to God, so
simplicity pulls him down, and thrusts him below himself; It unmans him,
makes him beast, buries him in shame, contempt and obloquie, whither in a
moral or civil, or spiritual way. The Stoicke will tell us, Loco ignominiae
est apud indignum, dignitas; Titles or Fortunes cast on a worthless and simple
man, tend more to his scorn than honor; for he is but Simia in tecto, or
Latro in scalis, as Ludolphus has it; Apishnesse or robbery advanced, De vita
Christi part. 1. cap. 68.
and in the vote and opinion even of the multitude, Non ad honorem, sed ad
derisionem, he is rather exposed to laughter than applause, as if men by nature
were taught to shun the presence of him in whom they perceived not the lips
of knowledge. Prove. 14.7.
And indeed, such a one is but a mere Bladder of honor, some thing that time
and Fortune have blown up as children do their bubbles, to game and sport at;
a mere windy Globe, which has color, but no weight; Titulus sine homine,
Contra Avaritiam lib. 2. p. 68.
says the sweet-tongu'd Salvian, a Title without a man, or a man without his
Soul, or a Soul without her ballace, Reason and Understanding.

Man that is in Honor and understands not, what becomes of him? Ask the
Psalmist, and he will tell you, Similis fit jumentis, he is made like unto the
beasts; what Beasts? Iumentis qui pereunt, to the beasts that perish, Psalm.
49.20. Other Beasts are not like or equal to him, but beyond him, Isai. 1.3.
God giving them a distinct pre-eminence, the Ox and the Ass before his
Israel, Nay, the Storke, the Turtle, the Crane and the Swallow, with the rest
of that winged Commonwealth, are better disciplined than he; they know their
appointed times, and observe them too: But Populus meus non intelligit, my
people do not understand, S. Bern. Sermon. 37. in Cant.
Ier. 8.7. An non tibi videtur ipsis Bestiis quodammodo bestialior esse home,
ratione vigens, and non vivens? says Saint Bernard, A man endued with reason,
and not squaring his actions accordingly, is he not more brutish than the
beast himself? Yes questionless; for though the one be steered altogether by
sense (reason being a peculiar property and prerogative of man) yet man
faltring either in the use of it, or end, the beast has got the start of him,
and is become, if not more rational, more regular than he.

Si ignor as o pulcherrima foeminarum, says the Beloved to the Spouse, If thou
know not O thou fairest amongst women; if thou know not, what then? what?
Egredere post greges tuos, Get thee behind the footsteps of thy Flock, and
feed thy Kids besides thy Shepherds Tents, Cant. 1.8. Mark, the Text says
not, get thee out with thy Flock, or to it, but behind it: And Ad quid hoc?
says Saint Bernard, what means this? but to set up Ignorance to more fear
and shame: Quod hominem bestiis non tam parem fecisset, quam posteriorem; In
that it has not ranked Man equally with Beasts, but below them, as if he that
understood not, went not side by side with creatures that are brutish, but
behind them; and behind them he is indeed; Forasmuch as Man has disparaged
and depraved Nature, which the Beast has not; and therefore justly convinced
to go behind the footsteps of his Flock, not only in this life Depravatione
naturae, but in that to come extremitate poenae, as the Father, sharply, in his
37. Sermon upon the Canticles.

Thus we have brought down the Ephesian to the Beast, and somewhat below him,
and so rivaled Ignorance with Darkness, and that Darkness with death;
though the Church of Rome be a little inflamed here, and would list it out of
darkness into the marvelous light; from this Olim tenebrae, to the Lux in
Domino, making her no less than a grave Matron in Religion, a great
foster-mother of the Church; and for the better dazzling of her opposers, she
tumbles distinction upon distinction, even to the dividing of hairs, and
mincing of Atoms. But upon farther sisting and enquiry, I hope it shall
appear, and that from her own Champions, that ignorance is so sarre from
being the Mother of Devotion, that it is the Grandame of all falsehood; this
wicked mother having two worse daughters, doubt and error; P^ssimae matris
pessimae silia, duae sunt, dubictas, and error. S B^rn. supra Cant. Sermon. 17.
Now where these two are, there can be neither Truth nor Faith, at least faith
that is true, no faith with doubt, no truth with error; and where no faith nor
truth is, what ground can there be for sincere Devotion? or for that which
kindles it, Religion. Nay; if we prick home, here, to the quick, we shall
find it, in some sort, common to all sins, (whether of will, or malice, or
presumption) that this Mother and her Daughter, ignorance and error are a
principal means either begetting or producing them, as being the leven of all
other sins, and that which sowres the whole lump, Errant qui operantur
malum, they err that devise evil, Prove. 14.22. So that it seems there is no
work of evil without error; Insomuch that the Philosopher will tell us,
Ethic. 3. cap.
Omnis malus est ignorans, every evil man is an ignorant man; And Scientia
present, Socrat. ibid. quotat. ab Aristot.
non peccatur, if knowledge be present there can be no sin, which is true
(says the Schooleman) if we extend knowledge to the right use of reason,
Estius lib. 2. sent. did. 22.
in particulari eligibili, for if wisdom or judgment stand right in the
particular object, there can be no sin; Man intending that which is good, or
at least seemingly good, and choosing it too, if reason warpe not, or prove
corrupted; so that error, all this while, is the mother of sin, as sin is
of misery and death. And therefore the great Peripateticke handling this point
Exprofesso, for the better illustration of the truth thereof, instances in
those that are incontinent, who have no true judgment or opinion at all, Rei
particularis, to wit, what is to be done precisely for this or that particular,
Aristol. lib. 7. Ethic. c. 2. and 3.
Quoad hic, and nunc (as he cants it) And therefore compares them to drunken
men rehearsing Verses of Empedocles, rambling that which they understood not;
in the 7. of his Ethics, 3. chapter.

And this explanation of the Philosopher shall serve for a comment on the
Father, Dyonis. de div^n. nom. cap. 4.
Nemo intendens admalum, operatur, No man works with an intention to evil;
that is, Evil apparent; Reason standing still rectified, and not depraved; But
that miscarrying, straight there is a trodden way to Error, and conse quently
to Uice, and so this Sun being once set, Night presently comes on, the
Ephesian falls back to his Olim tenebrae, whilst the Lux in Domino is in her
full Eclipse, For, as Darkness closes, and as it were damms up the windows of
our corporal eyes, so does Error of our mental ones and will not suffer us to
behold the light, nor our selves, and therefore when any one is ensnared by
sin, si obtenebratis oculis non videt delictum says S. Austine, D. Aug. in
Psalm. 18.
He sins without eyes, or at least with blind ones, Errorhath filmd and
over-scald them, and he cannot perceive that he has sinnd at all; Insomuch,
that S. Greg. speaking of the proud man, and in him of all sinners of that
rank, would persuade us, Quod superbire nequeunt, nisi prius oculos cordis
perdunt, A man cannot grow Insolent, nor Whore, nor profane, nor oath it
bravely, except he have first lost his eyes, his eyes of the inward man, and
when Error has once made them dim or purblinde, he falls instantly into al
manner of debauchment.

And the ground hereof we have from the Seraphicall Doctor, (for so the Roman
style goes) who makes it an unbatter'd Principle of his, 1.2. quest. 77. Art. 1.
that Motus voluntatis natus est semper sequi judicium Rationis, the motion of
the will does naturally follow the judgment of Reason, as the lesser wheel in
a clock does the greater; and both, the weight or poise that turns them; for,
Reason is the begnning of humane operations, and therefore, if a man does not
actually consider what may, and ought to be considered; Such a neglect is
culpable, Thomas calling it Ignorantiam malae Electionis, An Ignorance of evil
choice; 1.2. q. 58. Art. 2.
So that no sin can happen, except there be first a defect in some act of
Reason directing it; And therefore in those that transgress, the judgment is
corrected Quoad particulare Agibile says the same Thomas, 1.2. q. 20. Art. 3.
And again Peccatum non fit, Sin is not committed, except there be first an
Error about the Object Saltem in particulari in his first book contra Gentes,
95. chapter. For, the will you know follows necessarily the understanding
which the Schools call Imperium voluntatis, because it lays a kind of Empire
and Command upon the Will, causing it to make choice of this or that thing at
her Pleasure; And therefore, if the Election be evil, falsitas est in Imperio.
Besides, the Will is the reasonable Appetite, and therefore cannot choose but
what Reason has judged to be chosen; so that the Conclusion rests still
unshaken Nunquam voluntas peccat El^gendo. Quin Ratio aberrat Iudicando, the
Will never sins in her choice, except Reason first err in her judgment. So
the Thomists in a full volly, quoted by Estius on the 2. of the Sentences, 22.
distinction.

Neither has this Doctrine only received countenance from Philosophers,
Schoolmen and Fathers, (which perhaps relish not with some snarling
dispositions, who either repiningly or prejudicately censure them as too
subtle, or too toylesome for the Pulpit, because they somewhat over ballace
their muddy intellectualls) but abundantly also from sacred Scriptures; Where
we shall find, that sins have oftentimes the style of Ignorance and Error,
as if without them there were no sin at all. So the Psalmist, Erraverunt ab
utero Psalm. 58. that is Peccaverunt; and so the Prophet, Omnes nos quasi O ves
erravimus Isai. 59. that is, peccavimus; And so the Apostle too, Si quis ex
vobis erraverit, James 5. that is peccaverit; So that both with the Psalmist,
and Prophet, and Apostle, Erring all this while is but Sinning, and this
sinning an ignorance of the right way; And therefore David joins both his
sins and his ignorances together, and prays against both in one, Delicta
juventutis meae and ignorantias meas ne memineris (So the old translation
runs) Remember not the sins and ignorances, which we render the
transgressions of my youth. Psalm. 25.7.

Hereupon, some of the Ancient Platonists (who doubtless had a taste of
divine truth, drawing most of their Philosophy from the books of Moses)
brought all virtues within the lists of knoweldge, and all sins of ignorance;
Insomuch, that it is not only a Stale or Bawd to their sins, but also
whorish in it self, Sin too; And if a sin, what color can there be for
the excuse they talk of? Except we make one sin to excuse another; and this
Ignorance cannot do; Since, he that can please divine justice, (says Leo)
must of necessity know. I am sure that under the law, a sin of ignorance went
hand in hand with a sin of violence, and had a like Guilt, and Sacrifice. If
a soul sin, though he wist not, says the Text, yet he is guilty, and he
shall bear his iniquity Levit. 5.17. On the other side, If a soul sin in a
thing taken by violence, he is guilty too Levit. 6 4. Here is the guilt plain
in both; Now what s the Sacrifice? They shall both bring a Ram without
blemish out of the flock, for a trespass offering to the Priest; In the 5. and
6. chapters of Levitcus, the 6. and 18. verses. Well then, if this sin under
the law were of that magnitude, and the guilt of it of such a tincture, that it
even touched with blood and violence, How comes it so spotless and innocent
under the Gospel? How grows it disputable whether it be a sin or no? Or if
a sin, whether not excusing, because of ignorance? the old Moralist will tell
us, Plut. lib. 1. moral.
Vulgaris quidem, sed frigida excusatio est, Insciens feci It Is indeed a
popular, but frozen excuse, I did it unknowingly; And, Iners malorum Remedium,
Ignorantia, says the brave Tragaedian, Sen. in Oedip.
Ignorance is but a sluggish Remedy of evils, and rather pretends to excuse,
then makes it. I deny not, that there is some thing this way, which may Rarifie
or Extenuate an offense, Nullify it cannot; Takes it of a tanto, eo quod minuit
Voluntarium, Because, it lessens that which is voluntary in sin, but it does
not totally expunge it: not so wholly wash it out, but that there is some
stain and blemish remaining still; which, without divine dispensation will
prove at length both evidence and condemnation. It Is true, that those do less
offend Christ, that offend him exignorantia; And yet, even those except God out
of his singular grace and goodness enlighten with repentant faith Damnandos
esse liquet their doom is no less then Damnation, Vide Bezae annot. in 2.
These. 1.8.
if the Authority of Beza will pass for Authentic; who does thus sentence
them from that of the Apostle, threatening, a flaming fire, to take vengeance on
those that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ. 2 Thessalonians.
1.8. Here then is fire and vengeance due, and the flame of both; And to whom?
Nescientibus Deum, To those that know not God, know not God? How? Out of a
wilful blindness only? No; but also of a simple Nescience, which excuses no
man so absolutely, Vt aeterno igne non ardeat, sed fortasse ut minus ar deat;
So Lombard him self in his 2 book 22 Distinction. lit. k.


And now we are fallen upon the very Pikes of the Schoolmen, who here press
home upon us for the justification not only of their invincible ignorance,
Thom. 1.2. q. 76. Art. 1. in corp.
which they say is not conquerable by Diligence, nor Endeavor; and therefore
excuseable; but of that ignorance also, which is vincible, and may be
mastered, concluding it to be no sin, if it be of those things, which a man
by nature is not apted, and by duty not bound to know; proportioning withal
certain limits for the necessity of that knowledge, which every man is engaged
under the pains of eternal death to know, Franciscus a sancta Clara problem.
15.
whether in respect of the means, or precept. Now, where they charge too hotly,
or too maliciously upon us; we will endeavor, in what we can to return their
points upon their own breasts; But where they flourish only, as if they would
but dazzle and not wound us, let us be contented to wheel fair about, and take
what we may for our own advantage; and not as some of our angry declaimers do;
come on in lightning and go off in smoke; Rail and vilify, when they should
consute; Calling doubt by the name of Heresy, and opinion (if not theirs)
Antichristian; And so Dum vix mactarint, excoriant (As Honorantius has it)
before they scarce wound their Adversary, lib. 1. cap. 18.
they flay him; I would have such to know; that Reason here is better then
violence, and solid Allegation then a sweatish and feverish Invective.

And here, Lomb. lib. 2. did. 22.
the Master himself will acquaint us with a threefold Ignorance; Qui scire
nolunt cum possint who will not know when they may; And this is so far from
excusing sin, that it is a sin itself; Qui scire vellent, sed non possunt,
which would, but cannot know; And this, says he, does excuse, and is only a
punishment of sin, Qui simpliciter nesciunt which simply know not; Neither
refusing, nor yet proposing to know, which does not fully excuse any, Sed
fortasse ut minus punietur but for their milder punishment.

And upon this Anvile the Scholemen have hammered that common Trident of
theirs, Estius in 2. sent. d st 22. sect. 7.
Ignoranttam purae negationis, privationis, and pravae dispositionis; which the
Syntagmatist has Analized and contracted into two; a Negative and a Privative
Ignorance. pol. Syntag. lib. 6. cap. 15. page 1919. D.
A Negative Ignorance is when a man knows not those things, which by nature he
cannot know, and by duty he is not tied to know; And this is not so properly
Ignorance as Nescience, not a Privation of knowledge, but a Negation of it,
which was in Adam in his state of Innocence, in the good Angels, and Christ
himself, as he was man, and is no sin at all, neither does it oppose the
knowledge of God, either in General or Particular. A Privative Ignorance is,
when a man knows not those things, which by nature he may know, and by duty he
is tied to know, lib. 3. de lib. Arbit. cap. 12.
and haec merito deputatur Animae in Reatum says Saint Augustine, This lays a
deserved guilt upon the Soul; it is sin, a dangerous one, and not only
Peccatum, but Paena too; as Treading opposite to the knowledge of the true God,
who is life, and without whom there is Death certanely.

So that, now we cannot but farther conceive a double Blindness in respect of
things Divine; The one affected, when through a voluntary Ignorance we know not
those things which we cannot not know; This is so far from lessening sin,
that it aggravates it, as being Direct voluntaria, and therefore necessarily
Sin; And not only so, Estius in 2. sent. d. 22. sect. 11.
but a Canopie or Curtain to sin with more freedom. And this Saint Bernard
has a fling at, with his frustra sibi de infirmitate blandiuntur etc. Sermon.
38. super Cant.
infirmity or ignorance is a vain Plea for those which are contented not to
know, that they may with greater liberty offend. And these the Prophet scourges
with a Noluerunt intelligere, Psalm. 34. And the Apostle with a Sponte ignorant
2. Pet. 3. and Job too with a Nolumus scientiam, Depart from us for we desire
not the knwledge of thy Law, Job 21.14. Such conditions are so far below man,
that they are altogether Brutish, and as brutish, taunted at by the Psalmist,
Nolite estote sicut Equus and Mulus, Be not like the Horse and Mule, which
have no understanding. Psalm. 32.9.

The other not affected, when through an Involuntarie Ignorance we know not
those things which are without, or beyond our knowledge, And this Ignoranee is
more pardonable: That of Saint Augustine standing in force here, Non tibi
deputabitur ad culpam, D. Aug. lib. de not. and great.
quod invitus ignoras; That shall never be imputed unto thee for sin, which
either thy Infirmities tell thee that thou can not, or thy will (if not
averse) that thou do not know.

Now, put the case that our Ephesian had still persisted in his Olim tenebrae
that his Darkness without an Apostolical illumination had overshadowed him
unto death, that neither Saint Paul, nor any Proselite of his had acquainted
him with the living God, not preached unto him Christ Jesus, nor his Gospel,
had not this Ignorance been invincible, and consequently no sin? No sin, in
respect of any law positive, but of the law natural; For between a law
natural and a law positive there is this difference, that the law natural
obliges every man, as far forth as he partakes of the use of reason, and
Quatenus so, without any farther obligation; But a positive law, whither it be
divine or humane, Est. in 2 Sent. Did. 22.. 9.
does not bind, Nisi positive promulgatum except it be positively proclaimed,
for it has not the essence and full vigor of law without promulgation. Whence
it is manifest, that the Ignorance of the law natural is allwaies a sin,
whither it have the access of external instruction or no; for, the Gentiles
which had not the law, that is, the Law taught, had notwithstanding the works
of the law engraven in their hearts Romans 2. And if engraven there, V. 15.
Ignorance had no plea.

But the Ignorance of a law positive, though it be divine, is not a sin to
those to whom it was not promulgated and taught; And therefore, that Insidelity
by which some believe not in Christ, to wit, to whom Christ has not been
preached, who have not heard any thing at all of his Name, to them it is no
sin; which our Savior himself intimates in his Si non venissem, and loquutus
essem, If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had had no sin, John 15.22.
What no sin? no, not of Infidelity; And therefore, Saint Augustine expounding
that place, and speaking of those to whom the preaching of the Gospel had not
sounded, plainly excuses them from sin, from that particular sin of
unbelief in Christ, but withal, thrusts them headlong into Hell, for other
sins committed against the law of nature, in his 89. Tract upon John, and
more at large in his 3. book against the 2. Pelagian Epistles 3. Chapter.

And here by the way, Some without pity censure, (I cannot) the unhappy
condition of those, unhappy as they would have them for the present, though in
their own condition admiredly happy heretofore; which were sometimes such
Lights unto the world, and their incomparable works still shining to
posterity, yet the Law of Nature prompting them, there was a God that gave them
Light, and the world too; and they not glorifying that God, Romans 1.21
they became thereby inexcusable, and are now under the chains of everlasting
darkness. Aristotle the Rational, and Socrates the wise, and Cato the
censorious, and Aristides the Just, and Seneca the moral, and Plato the
divine, with all their rich Precepts and Principles both of Nature and
Morality; they severely (I say not uncharitably) doom to eternal flames,
where they now burn: And yet in this heat of Justice they sprinkle them with
this Mercy, that for their natural and moral Excellencies they shall burn
the less; even civil virtues prevailing so far without true Religion, Vt
hac addita (as Saint Augustine tells. Marcellinus of the Roman Empire) If they
had had this, they had been Citizens, Alterius Civitatis, Denisons of the new
Jerusalem; so far from burning below, that they had shined as Stars in the
Firmament for evermore. But, as they were, they past not, Absque mercede, They
doing something, says S. Jerome, not only Sapienter, but also Sancte; God
being therefore bountiful unto them in this life prosperitate vitae, In Epist.
ad Gal. cap. 10.
and merciful in that to come levitate paenae. And indeed it stands with the
strict rules of Justice, that small offenses should less suffer, and so minus
punietur Fabricius, quam Catilina, Sanctus Hieron in E zech. cap. 29.
says the Father, Fabricius shall be less punished then Catiline; But he will
have him punished, not because he was good, but because the other was more
evil; For, Good we cannot call him, then he had been Crowned; but he was
less impious, and therefore punishable the less, less impious? How? non
veras virtutes habendo, sed a veris virtutibus non plurimum deviande, not that
the virtues he had were true indeed, but that they digress'd not much from
those which others had that were reputed true: so Saint Augustine again in his
4. book against Julian 3. chapter.

Well then, is Ignorance a Darkness? and that Darkness tending unto Death?
Do sins of affected weakness and simplicity lead man blinded to the ditch,
and there grovell him, not only dangerously, but without an infinite
compassion, Irrecoverably too? What shall we think then of those that dwell in
the light, that have the golden candlestick before them, the knowledge of
Christ, and his Gospel shining clearly, and yet both they and all their
practices, driving amayne to the Land of Darkness, and the shadow of Death?
Surely, there is a Vaetibi Corazim recorded against such, and the Tyrian and
Sydonian, in respect of divine justice have a more colorable Plea than those:
Woe unto thee Chorazin, we unto thee Bethsaida, It shall be more tolerable for
Tire and Sidon at the day of Judgment, than for you, Luke 10.14.

Again, are Justice, Temperance, Sobriety, Patience, Chastity, and the rest of
those moral Rarities in the Heathen (because not divinely illuminated, as they
should) now swimming in the burning Lake? And do we think (which daily hear
the voice of the Turtle in our Land) that Corruption and Dissoluteness, and
Riot and Lust, and Blood, shall without de epe Repentance pass by that Flood
of Brimstone, those Coals of Juniper, the flaming of that Tophet which was
prepared of Old? Do our ignorant mistreadings drag us to a strict Arraignment?
And shall those of Premeditation and Will, and Malice and Presumption escape
the Tribunal of the Great Judge? Hark the dreadful Thunderelap of the
Apostle, Voluntary peccantibus non relinquitur Hostia, If any sin willingly,
after they have received the knowledge of the Truth; What then? What? Horrenda
quaedam expectatio Iudicij, There is no more Sacrifice for sin remaining, but
a fearful expectation of judgment and fiery indignation, Heb. 10.27. A
place, I confess, loaded with Terror, and as with terror, so with Obscurity
and Doubt; enough to strike the presuming Sinner into a Sound, or a cold sweat:
It Is a Hammer for the breaking of the Stone, an Iron rod for the bruizing of
the mountain, able to batter and beat into shivers a rockie and Adamantine
Heart.

Again, Is there such vengeance due to those that know not God, and his Son
Christ Jesus? What is there then to those that know him, and yet crucify him?
Nay, what to Us, that crucify him afresh daily? That kiss him by our
treacherous sins of Disloyalty and Revolt? That Sell him by our greedy sins
of Rapine and Avarice? That spet upon him by our scornful sins of Pride and
Contumely? That Mock him with our cogging sins of Hypocrisy and impure
Purity? that buffet him with our churlish sins of Rigor and Incompassion?
That Scourge him by our bloud-fetching sins of rigid, malicious, uncharitable
censures? That crown him by our thorny sins of Oppression, Depopulation,
Sacrilege? That Revile him by our foul-mouthed sins of Oaths,
Prophanations, Blasphemies? That Nail him to his Cross by our implacable
sins of Choler, Revenge, Fury? And lastly, that pierce him to the very heart
by our javeline sins of Cruelty, Rebellion, Patricide, and the like; which
cry louder now against the Christian, than that Christi-cidium of old against
the Jews; because the heinousness of their fact was somewhat abated by the
Ignorance of the Agents: And so, instead of the rushing of that mighty wind,
Confunde Domine, confunde, Let them be confounded and brought to naught. They
meet with the whisperings of the soft and the gentle Voice, Pater ignosce,
ignosce, Father forgive, forgive, for they know not what they do. And indeed,
if they had known him truly (as many amongst us Glory that they do) what
could be the Reward of their matchless Butchery, but the Hailestone, and the
Coal of fire, the Lightning, and the hot Thunderbolt?

Once more, if ignorance of it self had such a privilege that it could
totally excuse; yet as the times go, there is no plea for ignorance; I
confess there was a time here to fore both of ignorance and blood, when
superstition hang dilike a dark Cloud over us, and Martyrdom at the heels of
it as a fatal Comet; I mean those Mariana tempora, when there was no other
Dilemma for a distracted Church, but either Rome or the sury of her faggot; but
those times are gone into Ashes, and some of those Ashes I presume into Glory;
and no ground lest us now, either for ignorance or fear; Our Church is full
crammed with Pastors, and our Pastors with the Word, and our Congregations with
both, and our Parlours sometimes with all three; more Preachers now a days
than we have either Churches or Pulpits; our Shops, and Cloisters, and Barnes
ring aloud of them; Insomuch, that for some of these there is still a full
maintenance in the Church; and that, as they pretend, Iure Divino, only the
poor Pastor, instead of cramming others, has scarce a competence to feed
himself and that is, no doubt, Iure humano, where Sacrilege has got the
authority to flay that revenue which the other in all equity should fleece. But
notwithstanding the rapine of such Cor^^orants, our Lamp is still burning in
the Tabernacle, and (magnified be the great GOD of Israel) still like to
burn, burn like a vestall Flame, that will never out; and cursed be they that
labor to extinguish it; or not laboring, cursed be those which mutter that
they would. It Is a kind of rifling of the Arc, or at least a busy prying
into it, to meddle with those, Arcana Religionis and imperii, Mysteries of
Religion or State are not a business for the multitude to champe on; who,
because they cannot have a Church and Commonwealth at their own fancy, will
be a Church and Commonwealth to themselves, and so lift the heel against an
Old England, for a New. But o height of folly and presumption! Nay, of
madness: What has Vzzah to do with the touching of the Arc? What a
Lay-Schismaticke with the Hierarchy of a Church? Obedience of old was better
than Sacrifice; and now, then sauciness; And therefore let such look home to
their Axe and their Hammer to their false Balance, and the unjust measure, to
the factious Loome and Shuttle; let not the Cobbler out-goe his Last, nor the
Tinker his Budget; But Tractent fabrilia fabri.

To shut up all, you must know, that every corrupt Conversation is a darkness;
the continuing in any customary sin, a great darkness. Seeing then, that the
night is past, and the day is at hand, Let us therefore cast off the works of
darkness, and put on the Armor of light; even that Arniour which Saint Paul
in the close of this Epistle prescribes his Ephesians, that Girdle, and Breast
plate, and Shield, and Sword, and Helmet, Truth and Righteousness, and Faith,
and Salvation, and the Spirit; and then no doubt we shall be able to withstand
all the fiery darts of the wicked. And to this purpose, let the incontinent
make a covenant with his eyes; the proud man, with the loftiness of his look;
the over-credulous with his ears; the Dissembler with his lips; the envious
with his teeth; the Slanderer, with his tongue; the Blasphemer with his mouth;
the Intemperate with his Throat, the Hypocrite with his heart, the
Incompassionate with his Bowels, the Glutton with his Belly, the Adulterer
with his Bones and marrow, the Covetous and grinding Miscreant with his bands,
the Purloyner with his Fingers; and lastly, the Transgressor in general with
his Feet, that those which have been swift heretofore in running to
mischief, and the shedding of innocent Blood, may at length be more careful
to tread in the paths of Righteousness, that they which were sometimes going
down to the Chambers of Death, to this Olim tenebrae in the Text, to the
fearful darkness our Ephesian was involved in, may at length climb up to
the Lux in Domino to be Light in the Lord, Heb. 12.23.
nay, to the Lord, who is the Light; To the general Assembly and Church of the
firstborn; where the foundations are laid with Saphires, and the windows
made with Agats, Isa. 54.11, 12.
and the Gates of Carbuncles, and the whole Fabric of precious Stones; which
as so many Lights point to that Light inaccessible to GOD the Father, and his
Son CHRIST JESUS; to whom with the Spirit of Lights be all Glory ascribed for
ever and ever.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.

Amen.

FINIS.
The foolish Prophet. A SERMON PREACHED Ad CLERVM; At the Trienniall VISITATION
of the right Reverend Father in GOD, WILLIAM by divine providence, Lord Bishop
of Bath and Wells. At TAUNTON in SOMERSET, June 22. 1636. By Humphrey Sydenham.

PSALM. 75.4, 5. Dixi insipientibus, nolite inique agere: nolite in altum
extollere Cornu vestrum.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE, for Humphrey Robinson, at the Sign of the
Three Pigeons in PAUL'S Churchyard. 1637.

TO THE NOBLY-INGENIOUS, EDWARD SEYMOVR, Esquire. This.
SIR,
It Is acriticall age we live in, where Divines and Poets have alike fate and
misery, most men frequenting Churches as they do Theaters, either to clap or
hiss; and it is with the Auditors of the one, as with the Spectators of the
other; sometimes they bestow their Laurel, sometimes their Thistle; Applause
sometimes, sometimes censure. Unhappy Creatures that we are to be thus fed with
Air, as if we no longer lived by the Spirit of God, but the breath of the
people. And if this Air were either pure or temperate, it were a passable
calamity; but it is for the most part, poisoned and corrupt. Loose men breath
their rottenness and filth upon us; and it is not wit (for sooth) nor bravery,
except it be drivell'd upon the Priest, whom they all besmeare with calumny,
and rake the very kennell for dirt to fling at him, as if he were the only
prodigy of the times, S. Paul's (...), or (...), the very dung of the world, 1
Cor. 4.
and the offscouring of all things unto this day. This is the common misery of
our Tribe, and it was mine, in opening the folly of this Pseudo-Prophet; which
hit so unhappily with the temper of those holy Monopolizers (which pretend so
much to be the only men of the Spirit) that the Catharist was up in Arms, and
Demetrius, and the Zealous Crafts-men were about mine ears; who put me
(without mercy) to the push of their Pike, and shot their poisoned Arrows,
even bitter words against me, such as malice could only sharpen, or falsehood
level. But notwithstanding the Spirit of Rabshakeh, and the venom of those
sanctified Raylers, I wanted not my Propugners amongst the impartially
judicious, both Divines and Layicks; and with the latter of these, more
eminently, your self. And had I had no more, it was enough that there was
Seymour in it, a name that involves Nobility, and the better part of it,
Virtue; and the better part of virtue, humility and courtesy, and all these
tempered in you with a religious observance of the Rites of the Church you live
in; so that you are not transported with change and novelty; not apt to be
misted with any false light of the times, not with the Ignis fatuus of our
Prophet here, no Proselyte of Schism or Innovation, but a man fast to your
self, constant and resolved in all your actions; which is an excellent temper
to make a Christian of, and a sure foundation to build true friendship on,
especially in this age of words, where Integrity and Goodness are so rarely
met with, by me (I am sure).

Your unhappy, but truehearted Servant, HVM. SYDENHAM.

THE Foolish Prophet.
EZECH. 13.3. Thus says the Lord God; Woe unto the Foolish prophets, that
follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing.


THus says the Lord God? Israel, no doubt, was out of Joint, and a strange
loosnesse in all her Tribes, when Folly and Blindness, and a Deluding Spirit
were obtruded to her Prophets, and thus thunder-clapt with an Woe too: and that
from the mouth of the Lord himself Sic dicit Dominus Deus, Thus says the Lord
God. It Is not always desperate with the Church of God, when his Prophets are
sent to it with a Cavete in their mouth (matter only of caution or premonition)
that has a taste no less of his Providence than his Mercy; But when their
cheeks are filled with a Vaevobis, (his hearuld of displeasure and
malediction) vengeance and her vialls, are ever at the heels; And this under
the law was customary from Go's Prophet to the people; but somewhat rare, and
of remarke from his Prophet, to their Prophets; and that by special command
too, from Heaven, in a sic dicit Dominus Deus, Thus says the Lord God. But
doubtless, this Woe was denounced in the very heat of superstition, when the
Rage and Fury of the people whoring after novelties, and following the
blindness of their own spirit, hurried them along to the worshipping of
stock and stones; when there were as many Prophets, as there were Gods; and
Gods almost, as things. Every Hill and Mountain had an Altar smoking; and in
every Grove, and under every green Tree, Incense burnt to the Queen of
Heaven, and all the Host of it; when the true Lord of both was forgotten in
his worship; the Pagan Hecatombe had cried down the Sacrifice of the living
God, and whole Herds and Droves offered to Ashteroth, and Chemosh, or some God
of Ekron; when there was scarce a Bullock for immolation to the Lord of Hosts.
The Almighty therefore, begins to rouse himself, and to show, that there is no
God, indeed, but himself; and no true Prophet but whom he pleases to
accomodate, will now harness one of his own; and for his better choice, he
goes, not to the glory of Israel, but amongst the captives, by the river
Chebar, he meets with the Son of Buzy, an obscure Priest among the
Chaldean's, upon him the Spirit of the Lord must rest: And because he shall be
known to be a Prophet of His indeed, and what he speaks to be inspired
merely from above, the Heavens themselves shall be opened, And lee, a Vision,
says the Text, such a Vision as had always God in it, or his Angel, A
whirlwind, and a fire, Ezeck. 1.4. To show belike, that the true Prophet of
the Lord must have Light with him, as well as Noise; Understanding, as Reproof.
And thus addressed, he is now sent to the house of Israel, That house of
stubbornness and rebellion, where he must set his forehead against theirs,
bid them read in it the Prophet of the true God; tell them that the gods which
they blindly worship, are no gods, but their own fancies; the Prophets they
dote on, no prophets, but their own Lies; And for their better unmasking and
discovery, he does first blazon them by their attribute Foolish, then by their
properties, and they are two. 1. Headstrong, lead by their own spirit. 2.
Ignorant, see nothing, for these he says, there is an Woe denounced, not
merely from himself, but the very mouth of God; Sic dicit Dominus Deus, Thus
says the Lord God.

Here is all the business of our Prophet to the Israelite, and mine, to this
reverend and learned Throng; which by reason of some late distraction through
my secular employments, I shall be enforced to present you in a broken
discourse, peec'd up from the remainders of my former more elaborate
endeavors: presuming that where there is so much Piety and Worth, there is not
only an attentive patience, but some charity; A weak man wants all, I beg
them; And now, Woe to the Foolish prophets that follow their own spirit, and
have seen nothing.

Which words are literal to the Hebrew text, to the Greek not so; where we
find no mention at all of the Foolish prophet, nor the Spirit which he
follows, only the Vaticination of the heart, and the Blindness which attends
that, Vae his qui prophetant de cord suo, and omnino non vident, (so S. Ierom
reads it from the Septuagint) Woe unto them which prophecy from their heart,
and see not at all. It seems the Father there, understands the heart for the
spirit; and the wild conjectures of that, he rivals with the folly of those
which too much indulge the other; the Blindness is alike in both, so that the
sense runs the same way, though the words do not, the Prophet after his own
heart being as Foolish, as the other after his own spirit, and the non vident
of the same latitude in both, except the Omnino make the difference, and so we
divide between a Prophet that sees nothing, and one that sees not at all.

And now the words being thus at peace for the matter of the Text, Lo, what
war in the manner of it! Not seeing? and yet a Prophet? Following a Spirit?
and yet Foolish? A Prophet and a Spirit at one? and yet an Woe denonunc'd? How
can this be? This word Propheta is no more than videns, no less neither; S.
Bernard tells me, and I am sure, Prophets of old were called seers.

How comes then the Blind here, to have his eyes unscal'd? and the Non videns
in the Text to be a Prophet? Besides, All wisdom and knowledge is from the
Spirit (says Saint Paul.) How is it then that our Prophet is subject to
Malediction, and he that follows his Spirit to be thus entitled to Ignorance
and Folly? Saint Jerome labors the answer, but not home, Non quempiam meveat
quod Prophetae appellantur, Let it not trouble any that they are called
Prophets, for it is the custom of the Scriptures, Vnumquemque vaticinationis
suae and sermonis Prophetam nuncupare, Every vision, or Divination, though
delusive, is a kind of Prophecy; and he that has either, a Prophet
doubtless; But a Prophet by way of restriction, with his reproachful
Epithites of Falsus, or Vanus, or Insipiens; They are all three in this
Chapter, though not in the Text; in the Chapter within four verses of the
Text, at the sixth verse we find a lying Divination, there is the falsus
Propheta; at the seventh, a vain Vision, there is the vanus too; And if we
weigh the dependances of words with matter, we shall bring this Vanus and
Falsus within the verge of the Text too; and so make the foolish Prophet, the
vain, and the Lying, all one; For whatsoever is false must be vain, and what
is vain is Foolish too; Novit Deus homines vanos, God knows vain man, Job
11.11. Vanus there is in the root, Naboub, which is as much as Concavum, or
Vacuum, any thing that is hollow or empty, a word which the Rabbines usually
bestow on fools, who have nothing in them solid and compact: and therefore in
Scripture resembled not only to an empty, but to a broken vessel. In the like
manner, the French (as their Bolducus tells me) has the word Folls, quasi
Follis, Bolducus in Job c. 2.
metaphorically borrowed from a pair of Bellows, which as they take in Air,
so they give it, and when they are full, are nothing else. Hence is that word
of contumely and disgrace, mentioned by the Evangelist, Racha, or more
properly, Richa, from the Hebrew, Rick, Evacuare, or offandere, so that it
seems Folly is nothing else but a leaking or pouring out, or spilling on the
ground, as Expositors gloss that place, Mat. 5.22. And indeed, mere
simplicity is but the poverty or emptiness of the mind; and therefore to be
empty, and poor, and foolish sounds one. Omnis stultus eget, says Saint
Augustine, and omnis qui eget, stultus est; every fool wants, and every one
that wants is a fool. The Father doubling on the words does at last
distinguish them, Egestas est verbum non habendi; and Stultitia verbum
sterilitatis, habet egestatem aliquis? habet non habere, habet stultitiam?
habet nunquam habere. Folly and poverty are names of barrenness and want; the
one may have some expectation, or at least hope of supply; the other, never.
Folly is not capable of alteration, poverity is; Folly will be folly though you
bray it in a Mortar; it is not only feebts, or shallow, but perverse; and thou
shall sooner bear it into Atoms, than break it of that course in which it is
a driving; 'twill be always following her own Spirit, the worst of Spirits,
Spiritum Eratoris, where once captivated it can see nothing, neither indeed
desires to see: And therefore the Father tells us, that it is not Quaevis, but
Vitiosa ignorantia, such an ignorance as is not only dark, or pur-blind, but
refractory; impatient as well of direction, as restraint; headstrong, will not
endure the curb nor the snaffle, but the Reins loose on the neck, gallops
where it list, not where it should; carried merely by the precipitation of the
will without any guide or convoy of reason or understanding: A Ship without
Stern or Rudder, unmanned, unballac'd, without Pole or Compass, the scorn of
every blast and billow. Hence it is, that the Holy Ghost puts the fool on
those that are the Lackeys and Slaves of their own imaginations, following
their own Spirit, by which they see nothing, and leaving that Spirit by which
they might see all.

So that now we cannot but discover here a double Spirit, the two Spirits
spoken of by Saint Paul, Dei, and Hominis 1. Cor. 2.11. By which we may
clearly distinguish the foolish from the wise, the false from the true
Prophet: That follows the tracke of his own wheel merely, as his spirit or
fancy gyres him; This turns his thoughts with those wheels in Ezekiel,
whithersoever the spirit was to go, they went, Thither was there spirit te go
too Ezec. 1.20. The one is in Egypt still in darkness, darkness so thick
that it may be felt; a gross and affected stupidity; The other follows his
pillar of fire, his inspired illuminations, and they conduct him to his
promised Canaan. The former with his dark lantern stumbles along the broad
way, which leads down to the chambers of Death; The latter with a lantern
too, but a light unto his stepps, treads that Semitam rectam in the Psalmist,
and that brings him into the land of the living. In fine, the foolish Prophet
without any divine influence or revelation, proprio vaticinatur cord, makes
the thoughts of his own heart oraculous; when the Prophet of the Lord, knowing
that the thoughts of the heart are evil continually, leaves those vain
suggestions, and perceiving that he is blind by nature, and must to his poole
of Syloam, desires to have his Spittle and his Clay washed off, and so cries
out with David, Lord open mine eyes, and then I shall see the wonderful works
of thy Law. Here then, as there is a double Spirit, so a double Prophet; And to
distinguish either Prophet, from his Spirit, Saint Augustine borrows a double
word from the Greek (...), and (...), and both these from (...), Spiro; but
this latter a Spirit of a courser temper. We read in the last of Saint John
that Christ breathed upon his Disciples Spiritum sanctum, the Original there
using the word (...), which for the most part has reference to the Spirit of
Sanctity; That the Father appropriates to the wise Prophet. In the 2. of
Genesis, it is said of Adam, that God breathed into him Spiritum vitae, the word
of the Septuagint is, there (...).
(...), more frequently used in the expression of humane spirit, then divine;
This he bestows on the foolish Prophet; And therefore some Ancient Romans,
well verst in the Criticisme of that language, D. Aug. lib. 13. C. Dei cap 24.
and for the better discovery of the difference in Idioms, will not call (...),
Spiritum, but Flatum: So in the 5. of Esaias the vulgar translation reads it.
Omnem flatum ego feci ( Flatus no doubt there taken for Anima) And so also that
of Genesis, Halitum, not Spiritum, breath of life, Cap. 2.7.
not Spirit, though the Chaldee paraphrase to reconcile both, joins there
Flatus and Spiritus together; and so reads; God breathed into man flatum sive
animam vitae the soul, that is the breath of life, Vid. Coqueum in lib. 13.
Aug. de Civ. Dei cap. 24.
and man was made in Spiritum loquentem a speaking Spirit.

Thus, after some struggling with the words, we have brought Soul and Breath,
and spirit in one, and this Spirit in the wise Prophet following the true God:
It is time now to look back unto the Text, and there view the foolish Prophet
leaving the true God, and following his own Spirit, Vae Prophetis
insipientibus, Woe to the foolish Prophet which follows his own Spirit.

And what is that Spirit which he follows? By Spirit no doubt are understood
the corrupt thoughts and imaginations of the Heart; For, what in the 2. verse
of this chapter was called Prephecy of their own heart, is in the Text here,
following their own Spirit. And indeed in the natural man, Spirit and
Imagination are al one in essence, though in action and virtue diverse, the one
receiving the forms and images of things with a kind of passion and
impression of the soul, occasioned by the presence of her objects, and
therefore called Imagination; The other a subtle facility in the penetration of
those forms, and images received, and therefore Spirit; which though for the
vivacity and quickness of it, some have been pleased to style the image of
the living God a taste of the immortal substance, a stream of the immortal
Divinity, a celestial Ray, by which there is a kind of kindred between God
and Man, there being nothing great with God but Man, and nothing great in Man
but his Spirit; yet if this Spirit be not guided by a higher, as the poise and
wheel by which it moves; but leaving the influence of that, follows the
motions of its own breast, we shall make it the source of all vanity and
error, a mere Quack-salver in the Church, the seedesman of imposture and
debate, and the very ground work of novelty and innovation. I have seen folly
in the Prophets of Samaria, an horrible thing in the Prophets of Jerusalem
says Jeremy. What is this thing of Folly and Horror he so deeply complains
off? What? They walk in lies, what lies? the visions of their own heart, Ier.
23.16. And doubtless, the visions of the heart merely can be no less then
lies, and therefore lies, because visions of their own, and therefore their
own lies too, because they walk in them; and because they thus walk in them,
they deceive themselves, and then there is no has in them. Truth has abounded
by my lie, to Gods glory Romans 3.3. meum dixit mendacium (says S. Augustine)
veritatem Dei; Truth there has reference to God, Lie unto Man, unto man
properly and solely, and therefore Meum mendacium my lie; and why my lie?
because I follow mine own Spirit, which being man's cannot but err, and so
prove false; and not the Spirit of God; which being Gods cannot but be true.
The Prophet then that thus follows his own Spirit, cannot but speak
according to that Spirit which he follows: And he that so speaks must of
necessity lie, Qui de seipso loquitur Mendax est, He that speaks of his own
is a verylyer, John 8.44. God only is to be believed in all he says, and that
because he says it. Truth depends not on any humane revelation or authority; I
may lawfully dispute, whether it will pass for current, except it be stamped
with a Sic dicit Dominus, Thus says the Lord God Audi, dicit Dominus, non
dicit Donatus, aut Rogatus, aut Vincentius aut Ambrosius aut August^nus, sed
dicit Dom nus. D. Aug. Epist. 48.
, there are no Principles in man, if Divinity has not either revealed or
confirmed them; All the rest is but a fancy, or a dream; the heat of some
private spirit at first, which taking bud and blossom from the approbation of
some weaker proselites, grew at length to the height of Aphorisms, and so must
spread our belief without controulment. But (as the great Critic of the
French observes) what judgment can be so infatuated, or made drunk, as to
receive for classical, either Plato's Idaea's, Charron. sap. lib. 1.
or Epicuru's Atoms, or Pithaegora's numbers, or Copernicu's vertigo of the
earth? They were but the indigestions of distempered spirits, mere chymera's
of their brain, which they rather faign'd, than knew; and we receive, than
trust. All humane positions weigh alike, except Reason turn the scale, and
with most men, all divine too without the Text. Personal Authority may not
totally sway us, except it convince our judgment; then we not only submit,
but subscribe too: But to be milk'd along with a bare Ipse dixit, not weighing
the reason as well as the authority, were to borrow our own overthrow, and
turn Bankerupt upon trust. A hasty belief speaks the heart light, Qui cito
credit levis est cord. John 5.36. 1 John 4.1. 1 Cor. 11.13.
and the brain shallow: The Holy Ghost tells us that we are to search
Scriptures, and try Spirits, and judge of occurrences; and yet oftentimes we
pin our Faith to the spirit of another, and so believe, and judge, and live,
and dye, and all upon his authority. There is not an Art or Science without a
Sic dicit to it, and the power of that must carry my reason, sometimes my
Religion too: Not a place of remarke or same without this Apothegme; It Is at
Athens, Sic dicit Socrates; at Siracusa, Sic dicit Archimedes; at Stagyra, Sic
dicit Aristoteles; at Millaine, Sic dicit Ambrosius; at Hippo, Sic dicit
Augustinus; at Geneva, Sic dicit Calvinus: And that Sic dicit comes hither too,
where it has been so long advanced in the opinions of many, that heretofore it
seemed to grow disputable, which was of greater authority, a sic dicit
Calvinus, or a sic dicit Dominus.

Let no hasty censurer condemn me here, I like the sic dicit of Antiquity
well; like it? magnify it; You hear I quote it often; Calvines very well, if
his sic ratiocinatur go with it: Otherwise, I may fairly evade him with that
of the learned Cardinal, Authoritatem video, argumentum non video. I
acknowledge him the great Patriarch of the reformed Discipline, the Lucernae
lucens both of the age and Church he lived in, a man of admirable dexterity and
spirit, and yet a man too, a man that in some things too much followed his own
spirit, and so might, and did err: And therefore to lay the whole bulk and
body of my Religion on a foundation, in part frail or sandy, must either
question my weakness, or partiality, or both; and so, whilst I lean too much
to the positions of a private man, I must fall off from the principles of my
God. Plura sunt quae nos tenent, quam quae premunt, and opinione potius, Sen.
ad Lucil. Ep. 53.
quam re laboramus. More things take hold of our belief, than carry our
reason; and we are not so much transported with the weight of things, as the
conceit of him that framed them. Thus we are led along by the Spirit of
another, which is as great a folly as to be led by our own, and that which
points us the way, is, for the most part a blind Guide, that common Huckster
of ignorance and popularity, Opinion; which without scanning the nature and
truth of things, grows at once resolute and lawless, and so travels the world
without a Past-port. But I would not have men pretending to knowledge and
sounder literature, to be muffled in matters of Religion; like Hawks that are
unmanned, kept hooded for fear of bating. An implicit faith we vehemently cry
down in the Romish Church, let us not begin to advance it in our own; for who
had ever eyes given him to keep them shut? or Intellectuals, that they should
slumber? or Judgment that it should fall asleep? Spiritualis omnia dijudicat
(says Saint Paul) The spiritual man judges, 1. Cor. 2.15.
or at least should judge all things, all things that are not immediately
sacred and inspired; knowing that there is no captivation of mind or judgment
to any principle, but divine, all humane propositions having a taste of
frailty, and following too much the spirit of him that follows his own
spirit; and how such a spirit must delude, hear, and then judge.

Man, poor man, in himself understands nothing perfectly, and purely, as he
should do; appearances do always circle and involve him, which are no less
in things that are false than true. Errors are received into our soul ('it is
Charron's I confess, Lib. 1. cap. 14.
there I had it) by the same Pipe and Conduit that the Truth is; the Spirit
has no power to discern nor choose. Truth and Error are but Cousin-germans
removed; and these sometimes so near, that a wise man is put to his plundge to
distinguish them; the means we principally use for the discovery of Truth,
are two, Reason and Experience; and the one of these is a mere Cheat, the other
a Curtisan. Experience it self tells us, that experience cozens us; the same
conclusion now made trial of, speaks one thing; upon a second experiment,
another; Insomuch, that learned men have bestowed one prime honor on it, in
making it The mother of fools. On the other side, Reason plays the Dalilah,
has Samson in her arms, but a Philistin in her heart, lulls us one way, but
betrays us another. It has two faces in one head, carries a staff with two
pikes, Charron ibid.
a Pot (says Epictetus) with two handles. There is no Reason but has a
contrary reason; and upon which of these shall I raise a principle for Truth?

Thus we see how weak our Spirit is, how false and yet how proud? The Fool
that ownes it, is not so properly a companion of it, as a drudge; he goes not
with it, but follows it, whereby he reposeth himself merely in his own
opinions, moves in his own circumference, rests in his own Center, will not
vouchsafe an ear to the reasons of another, but supposes the whole world must
sail by his Compass, as if Heaven and Earth and all moved, when he moved.
But this (says that wise man) is a Disease of our Judgment, an Ignorance of
our selves, in not discerning the weakness of our Spirit; which if it chance
prove vigorous and quick (as in some it does) it is the Mother of all prodigy
and disorder, grows not only troublesome, but dangerous; makes Earthquakes in
Religion, shakes the very Rock and Buttresse of our Faith, justles the gray
hair to make room for an upstart, lifts at aged principles to bring in
novelty, and under a color of clearing old doubts, creates new. It would seem
to remove weeds, but it sowes Tares; to root out Solecisme, but plants Error;
to prune impertinences, but grafts Faction. And this is the common Plea of all
Innovators, especially those of the refined and nimbler cut, who in mysterious
and abstruser points (the very Riddles and Labyrinths of Divinity) elevate
their Acumen, whet and sharpen the very point of their Spirit, by which they
thrust into the closet of the Almighty; nay, into his very Bosom; ransacke his
secrets there; call out his Prescience, his Will, his Decree, his Justice;
bring them to the Bar, Arraigne them, Censure them, know at a hairs breadth
whom he will save or damn; or else they will divest him of his Godhead, make
him unjust, and so manacling his Incomprehensiblenesse to their Reason, belch
sometimes their prouder blasphemies, that God must do this, if he be God, or
else he is no God; And thus whilst they follow too much the heat of their own
Spirit, they come within the lash of our Prophet, the Insipiens takes them by
the sleeve, the Fool here in the Text (the holy Ghost puts it on them, Not I)
Thus says the Lord God; Woe to the foolish Prophet that follows his own
Spirit.

Nil Sapientiae odiosius acumine nimio, your richest wits are neither
over-stor'd with wisdom nor holiness; neither with the subtilty of the
Serpent, nor the innocence of the Dove. The ordinary way of knowledge they
contemn; nothing pleases them but the Curvet, and the Levolto; Up they must in
their metaphisicall Speculations, their sublimate Raptures (the high built
scaffolds of their own pride and spirit) which indeed are but the fury of
brains intranc'd, and good for nothing but the torment of themselves and
others. There was never any great wit without a touch of madness; which, not
rightly modifi'd as it ought, is a fit stock to graft a villain on, whither
in Church or State. I have observed some my self, that have past for
Master-peeces, and petty miracles in their way; when their discourse has been
closely, Atheism, and their jest, the Scripture; And he that has but
traverst a little Ecclesiasticke story, shall find; That in primitive times, it
was the only Seminary of Heresy and Revolt; witness those two Firebrarnds of
their age, Julian, and Arrius; It Was the greatness of their Brains made them
lose their Bowels, and the foul Blasphemies they breathed thence, purchased
them a just Hearse and Tomb in their own dung. It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of God, a dangerous into the hands of men, but a most pernicious
into the hands of our selves; When in a presumptuous and proud dotage of our
own parts, a foolish following our own spirit, we commit idolatry with our
own bosom, adore our selves, worship the thoughts of our own hearts, not
looking up to our primus Motor who rules and turns this Machine and Frame of
our little world; but, without any reflecting on our personal imperfections,
we deifie these moulds of Earth, as if we could raise Eternity out of ashes,
or build Immortality on pillars of dust, saying to our selves, We shall be as
Gods, when God says we are but men, and that man in his best honor is as the
beast that perishes.

You know there is a proverb current, now in our language, but originally from
the Spaniard, O Lord keep my self from my self, and this is the tenor of
our daily prayers, Libera nos a malo, Lord deliver us from evil. What evil?
Ego sum malus, libera me a me malo, si bonus liberaverit me a malo (me, a me
malo) ero de malo bonus, so the Father runs his descant in his 30 Sermon, de
verbis Apostoli. And doubtless, if we but ransacke the inward man, sift the
chinks and crannies of our own breasts, we must acknowledge with the Apostle,
That in me, that is in my flesh dwells no good, and therefore, Libera me a
malo, me, a me malo, Lord deliver my self from my self, my self from that
evil in my self, and my self from my self that am all evil.

High thoughts are but the vain Alarums of the heart, and it is the pride of it
that beats them, Omnis homo qui sequitur spiritum suum, superbus est, Every man
that follows his own spirit, is a fool we know, but why a proud man good
Saint Augustine? the Father answers putatse aliquid esse, cum nihil est, He
thinks himself something, when he is nothing (and in such a thought, there is
both Pride and Folly, and this Pride and Folly a very nothing) Insomuch that we
find a blessedness promised to those who are poor in Spirit, pauperes
Spiritu suo (says the Father) divites autem Spiritu divino, Sermon. 30 de verb.
Apost.
poor in their own Spirit, but rich in the Spirit of the Lord. True humility
was ever a step to glory, and to a sense and feeling of that Spirit, which can
either make us to know God, or God us, or us our selves, as we should do.

When my spirit was overwhelmed within me (says David) then thou knew my
path. Psalm. 142.3. Quare defecit Spiritus tuus, O Martyr, in tribulatione
posite? When thou were in tribulation, O blessed Martyr, why was thy spirit so
troubled in thee the Father that made the Quaere answers it, Vt non mihi
arrogem vires meas, ut sciam, D. Aug. ut supra.
quod alius in me operatur istam virtutem, that I might not be blown up with a
conceit of mine own spirit, not arrogate to my self mine own strength, but
know, that thou art the Fountain of all virtues, and that their streams run
from and by thee, who do only so replenish them and me, that out of mine and
their bellyes shall flow Rivers of living waters. Thus as we are emptied of our
own spirit, God fills us up with his; otherwise, when we are full, we are but
empty still; empty as well of knowledge, as of grace, groap after shadows and
refemblances of things, and so are coze'nd with probabilities for truth.

There is but one certainty upon Earth, and that is, that there is nothing
certain there; and there is but one knowledge in man, and that is a great
knowledge if he knew it well, that he knows nothing; nothing in himself as
he should know. Nosce teipsum, was a wise man's Motto; and indeed, a hard task
if it be impartially done; It is a twisting of our vanities a little closer, a
bringing of our selves within our selves, that we may say we are men indeed,
that is, understand our selves, weigh our actions with our words, and our
deportment with our actions; and then the Insipiens in the Text has no
reference to us, we are Prophets of a diviner strain.

There are many Plausibilities in the world, which pass currently for Gold;
glitter and spangle hansomely a far off, which brought unto the touch will
prove at best, but Alchimy, or copper; mere counterfeite pieces, which have
stamp and color right, but the metal is naught. Vniversus mundus exercet
histrioniam, the whole world is a mere Play, where he that best dissembles,
acts best: And such a one carries strongly the Applause of the multitude. If I
would juggle a little with Divinity; turn Impostor in my calling, make Errors
in judgment, scruples in conscience; call Fury, zeal; and Faction purity;
leave all ways of learning to follow mine own Spirit; Ravish Scriptures to
force out doctrines for mine own ends; empty my Rancor, by turning them to
uses; give off my Charity to devour widows houses; leave the Field of my
spiritual adversary to lead women captive, and their lusts; call wilful
Sectaries, holy professors; Open Conventicles, Sabbath-Repetitions;
Braine-sicke Mechannickes, the Generations of the just; Presbyteriall
Ornaments, the Dresses of the whore; the Rochet and the Ephod, Rags of
Antichrist; In a word, would I leave the commendable Rites of an established
Church: for the newfangled fancies of mine own brain, turn Rebel to that
Discipline which I have sucked from the Breasts of incorrupt Antiquity, and
grow Separatist abroad; Damn all practices of Orthodoxe predecessors, by a new
form of Sacramental vows: pull down Ceremonies, and build up Anarchy; Leave
an old Church in this Land, to plant a new one in another; and all this under
the pretense of an immediate calling, when it is nothing but the heart-burning,
and proud discontent of mine own Foolish Spirit, Sublimi feriari sidera
vertice, Earth is too vile to contain me then, my zeal knockes at the
stars, and though my personal imperfections weigh me down, and the
knowledge of my thousand thousand weaknesses clogg and depresse me even to the
gates of hell; yet the Magnificats of the People shall keep me on my wings;
and as their voice shall elevate or mount me, so I must Soar; be my rebellions
to God, or his Church, never so intolerable. And this proceeds, at first from a
popular facility in some, who receiving and entertaining whatsoever is
proposed, but in a color of Truth, for Orthodoxe and Authentic, not sifting
the kernel and depth of things; but pre-occupated by a hasty belief of
particular men, and their opinions, subscribing wholly to their bare
asseveration or negation, without more ado, by a loose and idle lightness and
precipitation of their judgment, feed themselves with Lies, versat nos, et
praecipitat, traditus per manus error, et malumus credere, quam judicare,
Error, if it be once Traditionary, does strangely waft and transport the
hearts of the Simple; which are more prone rashly to consent then judge; which
is a maine Symptom of Spirits emasculate and sick; indiscreetly, and
womanishly zealous, that are carried along with Beliefes merely, not out of
choice and Judgment, but a partial Opinion of him they fancy. The times are
grown so perverse and peevish (and is there no cure O God, for this stubborn
Phrenzie?) That as I will forsooth, so I am opinion'd, and as I am opinion'd,
so I please to understand; and as I please to understand, so I must be
edified; and as I am edified, so is my zeal inflamed; when he that understands
any thing, knows that this way is both preposterous and false; For my will
should follow my understanding, and my understanding assist my Judgment, and
my judgment guide my opinion; and my opinion, thus guided, direct my zeal,
and then I cannot but look on men completely harnessed, full of Sap, and
vigot, and not carried about with Shells and Rattles, things turbulent and
empty, made only for the torture of the ear, and the perplexity of ingenuous
congregations. But oh the Phanaticke wilfulness of some, who though they
meet with a Prophet of the Lord indeed, one richly clad with the prime
endowments both of grace, and nature (the perfections and Rarities of both men)
insomuch that their own consciences, (if not perversely erroninious) must needs
tell them, that this man has his, vocatus sicut Aaron; yet their Fancy shall
sit above their Judgment; and as they please to humor another, or he them,
so he, only shall edify; the other not, though all this while he be no
better then the Prophet in the text here, A fool that follows his own
Spirit, Charron lib. 1. cap. 43.
and has seen nothing.

That learned Skeptic in his voluminous discourse of Wisdom, and the nature
of in (speaking of the vanity of men, and of their Spirits) does Analize the
whole world into three sorts of People, and so proportions them three
conditions, or degrees of spirits. In the first and lowest, are the weak and
plain Spirits of the world, of slender and course capacity, borne only to
obey, serve and be lead; who in effect, are but simply men; These as the
bottom, lees, and sink of mankind he resembles to the earth, which does
nothing but suffer and receive that which is powered down from above. In the
second loft or story, are such as are of an indifferent and middle judgment;
making profession of sufficiency, knowledge, dexterity; but do not fully
understand and judge as they should; resting themselves upon that which is
commonly held, without farther enquiry of the truth and source of things: And
these he resembles to the middle Region of the Air, where are formed all the
Meteors, thunderings, and alterations, which after fall upon the Earth. In the
third and highest Stage, are men endued with a quick and a clear Spirit, of a
firm and solid judgment, which do not settle themselves in Opinions popular;
but examining all things that are proposed, naturally sound the causes,
motives, of them, even to the root; These he resembles to the Firmament it
self, where all is clear, pure, and peaceable. The Moral or application I
make up thus; The spirits of the multitude are in themselves earthy, and
dreggish; and all their infusions and distillations of knowledge they receive
from your middle region'd men where all the thundering and the noise is, all
those hot meteors and exhalations in the brain which so embroile the church;
these are the maine Botifewes and Incendiaries in religion, the common blow
coals in ecclesiasticke tumults, carrying the people after them, in a
distempered zeal, as that wild Syrian in Florus did fourtythousand with a
nutshell of Sulpher between his teeth; Flammam inter verba sundebat. Flor.
lib. 3. cap. 19.
when on the other side, the man of judgment and solidity, has his spirit
calm, and temperate, sits down to the rites and injunctions of his church,
knowing, that many eyes see more then one, and a learned Synod to be less
erroneous, then the Fancies of a private spirit. To this purpose, Saint
Augustine paraphrasing on that of the Psalmist, Depluet super improbos laqueos,
God shall rain snares upon the wicked, Psalm. 11.6. plays on the word depluet,
and to make the Allegory, and his Fancy kiss, call's generally all Prophets,
nubes clouds; but more particularly, the Pseudo-prophet, the brother of the
foolish, here in the Text; who are ordained by God, says the Father, ut de
his, laqueos super improbes depluet, so that, it is the property of false
prophets, you hear, to be as clouds, by which there are snares rained, snares
on the wicked, not else (doctrines that sall not so much inform, as entangle
them) and when the minds of the people are once entangled with their doctrines
(though these doctrines, all this while, are but snares) it is not in the power
of learning either to dissolve or untwist them; For, Popular conceit is head
strong; and whereas wisdom is ever carried by strength of Allegation, Folly
and Popularity are Tyrants to themselves; their reason is their will, and this
will so perverse, and this perverseness so stupid, that reason is no more a
Guide, but a slave; and you may sooner persuade a Jew from his Talmud, or a
Turk from his Alkeron, then these from their Opinion to which they are once
rivited, Quod vult, non quod est credit, qui cupit errare, he that desires to
err, believes what he will, not what he should. Opinion, though ill grounded,
when it is once up in the hearts of the people, will not be hastily cried
down by any secular or humane power; scarce a Divine. Let Saint Paul himself
preach at Ephesus against the Gods of that place, the Craftsmen presently take
the quarrel to heart, and in a double shoute and volley of their fury make the
streets and the Temple ring, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, Great is Diana of
the Ephesians. And if we but observe (beloved) even in this our Age and Clime,
the Crafts-men are the maine Spokes-men for the church, the undoubted Champions
of Religion it is their zeal that is loud for the Temple; but this zeal
look's on squint; and like that of Demetrius and his rabble, has a cast to
their own ends. It Is true, a Goddess was in their mouth, and Diana struck
loud at the tongue; but it was the silver shrine, and the profit they drew
thence, made the Hammer double, Great, Great is Diana. Sins they would have
cryed-downe, and Judgments thundered aloude; but if the Hin, or the Omer, the
measure or the balance (oblique ways of their Gain) be a little touched
upon, the Hoobub is up instantly, Paul is a feducer of the people, our Craft
begins to Reele, and then, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

Thus they play at fast and loose with the Spirit of God, make Religion a trick
of Legerdemain, by which they would delude the eyes of the world by the
untrusty promises of a fair outside; they are a plausible entrance, I
confess; a pretty front or portall of a house, but the rooms within sluttish
and unswept. Such holiness (faies the Moralist) is a mere complexion, and not
a virtue; much like the picture of a Saint in a Glass; where the lineaments of
Religion seem drawn at a lively posture, all the silent Rhetoric of
devotion, eyes elevated, and knees bended, and hands expans'd, and yet this is
but a picture still, and a picture of the greatest deceit, a veil drawn over
it, a glassie one (a transparent sanctity) so brittle, and thin, and hollow,
that with the least intention of the eye we may at once discover the
imposture, and pity it. And yet forsooth these would monopolize all Religion
to themselves; there must not be a motion of the Spirit stirring, but where
they please to breath it, as if they carried the Holy Ghost (as 'twas said they
did, at the Council of Trent) up and down in a Cloak-bag: They pretend more
to the soundness of divine knowledge, than any Scribe, or Rabby, or Disputer
of them all. And no doubt there is more subtilty, and more acuteness of
Divinity in a Shuttle or a Needles point, than in all the body of the Schools;
and a Thimble or a Distaffe shall sooner knock down Antichrist, than a double
University. The spiritual Plough is not half so well managed by any, as one
that was yesterday conversant with the Goade and the Sullow; he knows when the
heart is to be plowed up, and when to lay it fallow, he has learned it from
his practice at the Furrow, where, the other day, he followed the bellowing of
his Oxen in the wide field, and now he is a bleating with his Sheep in the open
congregation. Thus the blind will be led by the blind, or if they chance to
see a little, Dicunt videntibus, nolite videre, Esaias 30.11. Seer see not, and
Prophet prophecy not, except thou prophecy deceit; the visions of thine own
heart, the fancies of thine own spirit, and so living in that war of
Ignorance (as Solomon styles it) they call so great a Plague, Wisd. 14.22.
Peace, Peace. Nay, Knowledge, as Irenoeus said of the Valentinians, Qui
veritatis ignorantiam cognitionem vocant; The Ignorance of Truth, was with them
a knowledge; and rudeness of speech, true holiness. Prophets they value none,
but such as are quoted in the Text, here, those that follow the ramblings of
their own Spirit, and have seen nothing: And to such, out of all Coasts, they
come in swarms, as the Flies did to the Sacrifice of the false Gods, which
were drawn thither, Nidore Sacrificii (as my Antiquary tells me) by the
savor, or stench rather of the Sacrifice, when at the Altar of the true God,
there was not a Fly stirring, which gave occasion to the Jews to deride the
Pagans and their Gods, calling Beelzebub, The God of Flies. And this is no new
business in the Church: All ages have tasted of this phrenzie in the
multitude; those of the Fathers and the Apostles, many hundred years ago;
that of the Prophets, many a thousand. All new ruptures in the Church are but
the gray hairs of an ancient Schism, new kemb'd and colored, or the bones of
some primitive Heresy revived; the like proportion of dispositions and
occurrences now, as of old. Errors still live, though their Founders and Ages
vanish, and the vices of men are hereditary, though the times dye.

The word Catharoi was damned for an Heretic many an age since, and yet some
of those locusts are now crawling about the Church; and it were well if they
did crawle only, they flutter almost in every congregation, Donatisme,
Anabaptisme, Sabatarianisme, in every corner. Those Tenets which were
worme-eaten, and even dusted with antiquity, are now again new brushed and
flourished, and those very principles which so long lay urn'd and buried with
the ashes of their corrupter Grandsires, are raked up again so plentifully,
that they fly abroad in the eyes of the multitude, and so blind them; that
what of old past for a foul Schism or Heresy, has been lately preached as
the Doctrine of the Reformed Church. But their maine Ringleaders and
Seedes-men have bin such, as Universities have vomited either as their burdens
or their trifles, and Authority justly condemned to silence or suspension, or
some other horrid Anathema; of whose seditious doctrines and uncontrolled
practices our western Pulpits have not been a little guilty, whence they
have departed, neither without popular applause, nor reward; neither with an
empty fame, nor purse.

But Vsque quo, Domine Jesus, Vsque quo? How long Lord Jesus, how long? how long
shall thy seamelesse coat be thus rent and divided? how long those wounds in
thy side? this spittle in thy face? these thorns on thy head? these lashes on
thy body? How long these daggers and darts in the bosom of thy beloved Spouse?
The Church has the same ground for complaint now, that it had of old; Filij
matris meae pugnaverunt coutra me, My mothers children were angry with me, or
fought against me, Cant. 1.6. Et pulchre filios matris meae (says Saint
Bernard) non autempatris sui, illos vocat; quia non habebant patrem, Deum, sed
Diabolum. Solomon was in the right, when he called Mutineers in Religion,
Sons of their Mother, the Church; not of their Father, God; there are many
In, and From her, that are not of her; some byblowes through Faction, and
Hypocrify, not all legitimate; and therefore the sons of my Mother, not my
Brothers, nor the sons of my Father, as if God had nothing to do with
Assacinates and Rebels in the Church; nothing as a Father, or a God; as a
Judge he has; as a Father he has not; He says, A Kingdom or Family divided
cannot stand; as a God he has not, He is called The God of peace, not (...),
1. Cor. 14.33.
Incompositi status (as Beza translates it) The God of a state or condition
incomposed, where there is neither Uniformity of things, nor Manners? He is
the God of Order, Decency, Method, Unity; And where these are not, God is not
to be found, no Deus pacis there, but that (...), spoken of by Saint Paul,
Unquietness, Exagitation, Tumult, or, (as we newly render it) Confusion. And
indeed, that word is most proper to the State and Church, where the Deus pacis
has naught to do; Confusion there, there necessarily. Peace is the Nurse both
of strength and plenty, if it be Fax Dei; But there is a kind of peace, that
the Deus pacis will not father, and there he is Deus eversionis as Tertullian
told the Marcionist in his 4. book, 3. chapter.

In Schisms, Heresies, Seditions, there is a kind of peace in respect of the
Agents, though not of their Ends, and Agreement in their Intentions, though not
in their Execution (if this be not more properly a combination than an
agreement) Now God is not there Deus pacis, but Deus eversionis. It Is true, God
is not the God of confusion, but of peace, says Saint Paul; But where is he
so? In all the Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33. So that amongst his Saints
only he is Deus pacis, but amongst their enemies and disturbers he is Deus
eversionis.

Of the Arc (which was a Type of the true Church) and the Floods on which it
was tossed, of the troubles and persecutions of it, God was heretofore Deus
conservationis: But when men to preserve themselves from the floods of their
own fancies, will raise up an Arc of brick, a Tower whose top should even
reach the Heavens (as if the earth were not large enough for their pride and
folly) God was Deus confusionis. And doubtless, when the Walls of Jerusalem
are pulling down, and those of Babel raising up, the peace and unity of the
Church demolishing, and Anarchie building on so fast, God will not be long
there, Deus conservationis, he will be at length, Deus confusionis. Though
thou build aloft, Obad. 4.
and nestle among the Clouds, yet I will bring thee down into the dust, says
the Lord God.

And it is well, that what the God of Heaven thus threatens, the Gods of the
Earth will put in execution. Authority which this way has been long time
asleep, begins to rub up her eyes again; and Aarons Rod which seemed in our
latter times to droope and wither, does at length blossom and bud afresh.
Canons, Constitutions, Decrees, which were formerly without soul or motion (Oh
blessed be the religious care of an incomparable Sovereign, a powerful
Metropolitan, and by them here an active Diocesan) have recovered a new life
and vegetation. Ceremonies, harmless Ceremonies, which some in the heat of
their foolish spirit, had Anathematized, and thrust out of our Church as
Antichristian and superstitious, have gotten their former luster and state
again. The Academicall Hood and Surplesse, so long in exile and disgrace
amongst us, are visible here in our Congregations. Churches are new swept of
their dust and Rubbish, and put on a more decent and ornamentall dress. Those
knees that were heretofore so stubborn and stiffe-joynted, that they would not
stoop at a Sacrament, begin at length (without fear it seems of their
murmured idolatry) to bow at the Name of JESUS: Nay, those tongues which were
set on fire, and Mar-Prelated you know of old, against the Ecclesiasticke
Hierarchy, can pray now (how humbly or heartily I know not) for the most
Reverend Archbishops, and the Reverend Bishops. And whereas that place of
Sacrificium incruentum.
Sacrifice, which not long since was so odious to them, that they beslabber'd
it with their greasy imputations of Dressers and Oyster-boords; they now begin
to re-mould their language, and restore it to the primitive Title and Style of
The Holy Table at least, though not the Holy Altar: Though there are still I
confess some black-mouthed censurers, which will not only bark and snarle at
this Reformation; but if they were not muzzel'd by Authority, bite too: Men
that this way even hate to be reformed, stopping their ears at the voice of
our charmings, and crying down the Ordinances of our Church, as the Edomites
of old did Jerusalem, Down with them, Psalm. 137 7.
down with them, even to the ground; for such is ordained that Apostolical
sword, Abscindantur qui disturbant vos, Gal. 5.12.
Let them be cut off that trouble you.

Here Aaron and his Oil must part, and exercise his Rod only, remembering that
of Saint Jerome to his Heliodorus, Solum pietatis genus est, in hac re esse
crudelem, Cruelty in this kind is a great piety, nay, a mercy, that those who
have been so graciously invited to this supper of the good King, and they
refusing to come, that of the parable may at last castigate and bring home,
Coge ingredi, Compel them to come in. Luke 14.23.


There are among us (right Reverend) and I even bleed to speak it, Qui dum
volunt esse Iudaei and Christiani, nec Iudaeisunt, nec Christiant. Hos. 7.8.
certain Hermophrodite Divines, mere Centaures in Religion; Saint Austines
Amphibions, in resemblance Jews and Christians both, in truth neither; Cakes
on the hearth not turned, certain dow-bak'd professors, which have a tongue
for Geneva, and a heart for Amsterdam; their pretense for Old England, and
their project for New; to the Jew they become as a Jew; to them that are under
the Law, as under the Law; to them that are weak, as weak; but not with the
same intention of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.20.
to gain some, but to betray all. 'Twere well if such had a hook put in their
Nostrils, and a bridle in their jaws; that as there is now a general
uniformity in our habit, so there may be in our mind and manners too, one
Heart, one Conformity, one Obedience.

I shut up all with the advice of Saint Paul to his Ephesians, Since he has
given some Apostles, Ephesians. 4.
some Prophets, some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; Be not
henceforth any more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of Doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness of those
whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but speaking the truth in love, grow up to
him in all things which is our head, even Christ: from whom the whole body
fitly joined together and compacted, by that which every joint supplyeth,
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes
increase of the body to the edifying of it self in love. And therefore, if
there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill my joy, that ye be like
minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of one judgment, end
eavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, knowing that
there is but one Body, one Spirit, one hope of our calling, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
you all. 1 These. 5.23.
And Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout, and I pray God that
your whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be preserved blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen, Amen.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.

FINIS.
The Good Pastor. A SERMON Ad Clerum. Preached at the Primary Visitation of the
right Reverend Father in GOD WILLIAM by divine providence Lord Bishop of Bath
and Wells. At CHARD in SOMMERSET, Anno Dom. 1633. By Humphrey Sydenham.

MATTHEW. 7.15. Cavete vobis a pseudo-Prophetis, qui veniunt ad vos in
vestimentis ovium, sed intrinsicus sunt lupi rapaces.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE, for Humphrey Robinson, at the Sign of the
Three Pigeons in PAUL'S Churchyard. 1637.

TO MY REVEREND AND LEARNED FRIEND Dr. RALEIGH Chaplain in Ordinary to his
Majesty, and Rector of Chedsey in Sommerset.
SIR,
WOnder not, that in such a troop of Dedications, I set a Learned Doctor in
the Rear; for it is my custom in public Epistles, as in my private Letters,
To remember my choicest Friend in a Postscript. Besides, you know I am a
Divine, and no Herald; and therefore should not so much study priority of
place, as merit; or had I done both, in these, I should have met with no great
disparity, since virtue was ever thought a companion for blood and fortune,
especially in them which can challenge as well an eminency of Descent, as
Knowledge. And therefore to suppose a distance here, were but to distinguish
men at Ordinaries, and make an upper end at a round Table. To you then I cannot
but send this wandering Pastor of mine, who amongst my other Pilgrims abroad,
hopes to find countenance and entertainment from you, and from you in a just
claim and interest; where (like several streams in a full channel)
Integrity, Learning, and Charity meet, and what else may speak a Pastor,
good; or a good man, glorious. In confidence whereof I tender this, with my
self (and you can have no more of your best votaries than all) assuring you
that you have not a truer honourer any where, than with

Your most respective Friend, and Servant, HUM. SYDENHAM.

THE GOOD PASTOR.
JEREM. 3.15. I will give you Pastors according to my heart, which shall feed
you which knowledge and understanding.


GOD is the God of Israel, and Israel is now sick at heart, and her Pastors as
sick as Israel. Her Diseases are in chief two, Ignorance and Idolatry, and
these no less fatal than infectious. This contagion has overspread the
Land, Numb. 1.46.
and amongst so many hundred thousands in her Tribes, which have bin
worshippers of the true God (so many that they have bin compared to the stars
of Heaven for multitude) there is but a remnant free, seven thousand left that
have not bowed to Baal. She that had so long the affectionate and familiar
style of the Daughter of my people, Ezech. 23.3.
and in purity preserved her Virgin Teats unbruised (as the Prophet speaks) is
at length become the Strumpet of the Nations: Upon every high Mountain, and
under every green Tree; Jer. 3.6.
she has played the Harlot, and through the lightness of her whoredoms has
committed Adultery with stocks and stones. Those Altars which were wont to
smoke only to the Lord of Hosts, now cast up their incense to false and
imaginary Gods: Jer. 7.18.
The children gather wood, and the Fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead
the Dough, to make Cakes to the Queen of Heaven. The Gods of the Ammonite and
the Moabite have their Offerings of drink and blood, when the Mighty One of
Jacob has not so much as a Sheep or an Ox for Sacrifice. In this great
disorder of the Church, GOD himself will become Bishop, and intends a
Visitation no less severe than speedy; and because he will reform as well as
visit, he threatens the deposing of the Old, with the choice of a New
Priesthood. Wherein you may please to observe, first, Dabo vobis, give you;
Next, the parties to be ordered, and they are entitled here to the word
Pastores, I will give you Pastors; Thirdly, Secundum cor meum, Pastors
according to my heart; Office, Pascent vos, they shall feed you; Lastly,
Scientia, and Intelligentia, with Knowledge and Understanding.

Dabo vobis, I will give you. I Begin this Dabo vobis, Pars 1.
with the gloss of Stella upon that Mittam vos, of Christ to his Disciples,
Luke 10. Non est omnium se divino ministerio ingerere, sed qui a Deodatur, and
eligitur. Instead of a Translator here, pray take an Apostle, who gives us the
sense, though not the words, No man takes this honor to himself, but he that
is called of God, as Aaron was, Heb. 5.4. In matters of divine Ministry, to
run, and not be sent, is, not to undertake, but to invade it; which invasion
is no less bold than dangerous; and therefore amongst the Jews, such as
prophesied without a Vision, were called Dreamers, and not Prophets; or if
Prophets, Prophets of the deceit of their own heart, Jer. 23.26.
and by the Sword and Famine such Prophets were consumed, Ier. 14.15.

The Scribe that made a voluntary tender of himself to Christ, resolving to
follow him wherso'ere he went, was refused with a secret check, Mat. 8.19.
whilst another, that in a religious excuse would needs go bury the Dead (bury
perhaps his own dead, his corruptions) the Lord commanded instantly to go and
preach the Kingdom of God, Luke 9.60.

Thus the intruder upon divine Ordinances does justly meet with his Quomodo huc
introisti, Friend how came thou hither? When the humble man that chides his
own abilities by undervaluing them, shall be honored with an Ascend altius,
Friend sit up higher, and in that height finds worship with all that are about
him, Luke 14.10.

It is the observation of Saint Augustine, that Christ was boldly invited to
the house of a Pharisee, but modestly denied the roof of a Centurion. Audi
(says the Father) in domo erat, D. Aug. de ver. Dom. in Mat. Sermon. 6.
in cord non erat, he was in the house of the Pharisee, not in his heart; And
why? the Pharisee was ambitious, and pride is not the seat of Religion: On the
other side, In cord erat, in domo non erat, he was in the heart of the
Centurion, not in his house; why? the Centurion was humble, and humility is the
groundwork of all spiritual advancement. And doubtless he that is thus
accommodated, is fittest for a sacred design; whither for Gods call, or
choice, or employment (for to call, to choose, and to employ, Ieron. part. 3.
Tract. 15. Ep. 82.
are terms distinct) upon which, some of the Fathers playing as well the
Critic as the Divine, would have the word vocation to belong indifferently to
God and man, election properly and solely unto God; the Church (say they)
might, Multi sunt vocati magistri per omnes ecclesias, multi vocati m nistri:
sed nescio an electi magistri and min stri. Ibid.
and did then, vocare, but not eligere; Hence it was that Saint Jerome tells
his Heraclius, That there were Masters and Ministers in the Church, to his
knowledge, abundantly called, but whither chosen, or not, he left to the
searcher of their hearts, and his; And thereupon concludes, that it was with
some Pastors, as with some Martyrs, Qui vocati sunt Martyrs, and non electi;
and he instances in those, Qui postea to rmentorum Agones, Ierom. ibid.
and Carcerum, non usque ad finem in Confession is toler antiae perseverarunt;
So that, belike, that Pastor that shrinkes and gives ground in time of
persecution, is but Pastor vocatus; But he that so buckleth on his armor, that
neither Sword, the Faggot, nor the Wheel, nor all the dreadful Engines of the
Tormentor can startle one inch from the constant profession of his faith; He is
electus Pastor, or rather Pastor coronatus; the Lord assuring him, that if he
be faithful unto death, he will give him a crown of life. Rev. 2.10. But
doubtless, the Father, there by the word Electus, meant rather the eternal,
then the temporal election; That to the everlasting Kingdom, not this barely
to the Priesthood; For, if we examine the body of divine writ, we shall find,
that the usual liveries of God's special servants, are in this kind,
principally two, Missio and Vocatio, or else, the Dabo vobis in the text; I
will give you; Hence it is, that we so often meet with a mitto Prophetas, and
a mittet Operarios, and a mittam Legatos, and a dabit Angelos; Laborers, and
Messengers, and Prophets, Mat. 23.34. Mat. 9.28. Mar. 1.2. Mat. 26.53.
and Apostles, and Ambassadors, and Angels themselves are under the condition
of a mittam vos, or a dabo vobis, he sends, or gives, or calls them; And,
certainly, they were not so nearly Gods, if God did not so send, or call them.
Those are not truly Pastors, that have not heard the voice of the great
Shepherd, that have not been acquainted with his whistle, or his Call. The
sons of Zebedee were but poor fishermen mending their nets, 'till the Lord
called them. Math. 4.12. Saint Paul is in fury running to Damascus, 'till by
the grace of God he was called. Gal. 1.15. Nay, the great Bishop, and Shepherd
of our souls, Christ Jesus himself, comes not to his office without a calling
neither; I have called thee in righteousness (says the Prophet) and I have
called thee from the Womb; From the Bowels of thy mother have I made mention
of thy name, I have made thy mouth as a sharp sword, and as a polished shaft
in my Quiver have I hid thee. Isai. 49.1, 2. verses.

Thus unbidden Guests may not come to the supper of the Lord, and a wedding
garment is required to the marriage of the Kings son; Whom God employes in
his services, he calls; and whom he calls, he clothes; gives as well abilities
of doing, as authority to do; And where both these are, the Lord has some
special interest. If Saint Paul have a door of utterance, God himself must
open it; Coloss. 4.3.
If the Apostles speak wonderfully the mysteries of God, Act. 2.3.
the holy Ghost must come down upon them in fiery tongues; If Isaiahs lips be
purified from their uncleanness, a Seraphim must touch them with a coal from
the Altar. Isai 6.6.
There is nothing to be done in spiritual undertakings, without this dabo
vobis, I will give you. Hence it was, that in time of consecration, certain
pieces of the Sacrifice were given or put into the Priests hands under the Law.
Exodus 29. (the ceremonies of that age, looking belike, to those of ours) where
as an emblem of our Ite, and Praedicate, the Bishop, in time of ordination,
gives a Bible into our hands, not only as a rule and platform of that which
should direct us, but also a sacred witness of that profession, into which we
are by a divine hand invested. Hereupon, the Hebrews of old were wont to style
consecration, T. G. Jewish Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 5.
the filling of the hand, so it stands upon record against Jeroboam, as his
perpetual wound and infamy; whosoever would, he filled his hand, that is,
consecrated whom he list, and out of the basest of the people, made priests of
the high places. Kings. 13.33.

The Church of God is never so much sensible of her Blemish and Dishonor, as
when her Pastors are thus sifted out of the very dross and rubbish of the
multitude. And therefore, in the first plantation of it, God himself gives
Moses an especial charge, and Moses Aaron, that his Levites (for the text
says, they were wholly his) should be first severed from among the children of
Israel, and then their clothes washed, were presented as an Offering before
the Lord. Numb. 8. v. 14, 15, 21.

Now their manner of Severing was double; Numb. 3.15.
First in the initiation of their office, which was, when they were but a
month old; Numb. 8.24.
and then at their consecration, at the age of 25. which was solemnly done
through the imposition of hands, by the sons of Israel (some read) others,
by the first borne of Israel, who were then the representative Church; and in
allusion to this, The Church of Christ is called the Church of the first borne.
Heb. 12.23. Insomuch, that this custom of severing or separating from the
multitude, was no less practiced in the time of the Gospel, Acts. 13.2.
then under the Law; Saint Lukes (...), looking as well to the christian
ministry, as to the Jewish Priesthood. Separate me Paul and Barnabas Acts.
13.2. And God has separated me from my mothers womb. Gal. 1.16. To show
belike, that Gods Ambassadors should be distinct from others, as well in matter
of Sanctity, as Choice; So we read, that Stephen, Philip and Nicanor were
separated from the multitude, and the Apostles setting them before them,
prayed, and afterward laid their hands upon them. Acts 6.6.

In which manner of theirs, for conferring of holy orders, T. G. Jew. Antiq.
lib. 1. cap. 6.
there was (as our english Josephus observes) a double posture observed, (...),
the Imposition of hands, in t^^en of consecration Acts. 8.17. and (...), the
holding up of hands, in token of confirmation. Acts 14.22. The first of these
borrowed from the Hebrews, the second from the Athenians, who had two sorts of
Magistrates; the one chosen by Lots, the other by holding up of hands. And this
Imposition of hands was primitively a custom so hallowed, that there was
scarce a remarkable Blessing, or Honor, whither secular or spiritual,
conferred publicly on any, without this ceremony of laying on of hands;
Insomuch, that Saint Paul charge strictly his beloved Timothy to keep
himself pure, and to lay hands suddenly on no man, least he be partaker of
other men's sins. 1. Tim. 5.22.

Here is a good Remembrancer for the Ephod, a fit Caution for Aaron himself;
that our learned Prelates admit not such into holy orders, as may pull either
dishonor on themselves, or scandal on the Church; that those they lay their
Reverend hands on may be, 'though not altogether (...), men eminently gifted
in all variety of knowledge; yet at least (...), Irreprehensibiles,
unreproveable either for Life or Learning; whereupon the great Doctor of the
Gentiles tells his young Bishop, that he that is capable of the office of a
Deacon, must hold the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience 1. Tim. 3.9.
Non solum peritus in religione debet, sed castus moribus, as Aretius glosses
that place; he must be well verst both in the Fundamentalls of Learning and the
practical part of Manners; Insomuch, that the Apostle there, calls Faith a
Mystery; and a mystery (you know) Ignorance cannot reach to; moreover, the
Conscience he desires to be kept pure, and purity dissoluteness will not
comply with. And therefore he comes afterward with his Hiprobentur in the 10.
verse, let these be first proved; Probation is required both for matter of
ability, and deportment. It Is not safe, no not discreet to take men's learning
or manners upon trust; And therefore, in this case, the advice of Saint Bernard
to his Eugenius, will pass for Authentic, Viros probatos oportere deligi, S.
Bernard. lib. 4. de considerat. ad Eugenium.
non probandos; Such as are admitted must be of a tried sufficiency, and their
worth, not of a naked Echo, and report; which has been such a negligence, or
rather an abuse, crept into our latter times, that with some enemies of the
Church, Episcopal Honor has been brought not only into question, but some
censure; A testimonial letter (as they murmr it) sets an Ignoramus into
orders without examination; And the approbation of the next justice into a
Lecture, without license. Hence it is, that the Church is sick of so many
Fevers and Dropsies as now reign in it; men on the one side, so burning with
an affected zeal, that it cinders and dries up the vitalls of religion,
Knowledge, and Conformity.

On the other side, men wholly obstructed in their intellectual parts, swollen
up with waterish and corrupt principles; what proceeds from them is crude and
indigested, nothing of solid nourishment either for themselves or others. And
questionless, if the blind thus lead the blind we cannot but expect the
ambo in foveam, a falling into the dike, a deep and a double one; of vice and
error; and then the fearful prediction of the Prophet on the Land, will be
completed in the Church, Formido, and Fovea, and Laqueus super te, Fear, and
the Pit, and the Snare are upon thee, Isai. 24.17.

It was not well, doubtless, with the Watchmen of Israel, Isa. 56.10.
when Gods prophets complained against them, in a Nescierunt universi, They
were all blind, all ignorant. For, what means Ignorance and Blindness in the
Sanctuary, where the Lamp and the Oil should flourish? Is it not a shame,
that those hands which trades have made Mechanical and profane, should dare
at length to weilde the Censer, lay hold on the very horns of the Altar, bring
the Sacrifice to the door of the Tabernaole, stand before God and the
congregation as his Anointed, as dispencers of his blessed word and sacraments?
Good Lord, what relation have A pair of sheeres to a Church? or a Loome, to a
Pulpit? And yet our later times have, to the amazement of many, produced some,
whose tongues have been as nimble at a Sermon, as their hands formerly at a
Shuttle; and others grown as expert in dividing of a Text, as in times past
they were in cutting of a garment: Nay some whom Courts have discarded, and
Corporations, as men either lazy or unapt for such kind of Negotiations; have
at last been shouldred into the Ministry, and grown as conversant with a
Bible, as of old with an office or a Shop-booke; and their Pens as fluent at a
Postill, as heretofore at a Summa Totalis, or a worme-eaten Record. S. Bernard
lib. 4. de consider. ad Eugenium.
Sed a nobis mos iste, vel potius mors ista non cepit, utinam in nobis desinat.
This is no modern calamity, a sin of one age or clime only, other places
and times have tasted of the like disorder; insomuch that Antiquity gives us
intelligence of many which have been merely Layicks, and for an itch of
temporal preferment (their Bishops being lately dead) have in the vacancy of
their See, been shaven, and made suddenly Priests, Et quo miles nunquam
extitit, Greg. mag. lib. 4. Epist. ex Reg stro. 13.
Dux religionis fieri non timuit, He that was never before a Soldier fighting
under Christ's holy Banner, was at length made General of the field, and feared
not to be a Conduct even of Religion it self, Res detestabilis in Ecclesia,
says the Father, Cap. 95.
A thing so distastefull to good men, and of such obloquy to the Church of God,
that the Father complaining of the like abuses in his age, persuades Virgilius
the Bishop to move Childebert his King, Vt hujus peccati maculam a regno suo
funditus repellat, in his fourth Book of Epistles, ex Registro, 95. chapter.
Nay, Rome her self (though she much vaunt in the Title of the Mother Church)
is not without her Moles and Scarres this way; Some of her own Sons, I know
not whether out of Zeal or Envy have bespaul'd her shrewdly, declayming
against her Prelates for their sudden jumpe from the Court to the Consistory;
whose former employments and endeavors were wholly devoted, Iuri Caesareo, and
could give no other account of their learning, Quam Venationi and Voluptatibus
student. At Councels, they were but as ciphers and margents, or rather mutes;
whilst others spoke, they were Instar ligni elinguis, vel lapidis muti, As a
dumb stone, or a tonguelesse piece of wood, and such there were in Sacro
Concilio Tridentino, the sacred and famous Council of Trent was not exempted
from this infamy, Stella in cap. 6. Lucae.
one of their Friars tells me so in his Commentaries upon the sixth of Luke 39.
verse.

-- Pudet haec opprobria --
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
Now the Ground and Original of these corrupt abuses in the Church, Flens
dico, gemens denuncio, Greg. ut sup.
I suppose to be that which Saint Gregory mournfully obtrudes to some Prelates
of his Age, generally condemning herein the practices of France and Germany,
where there were none admitted to Sacred Orders; sine commodi datione without a
Gratuity or Present; not remembering, it seems, that strict precept of Christ
to his Disciples; Who giving them power against unclean Spirits, and sending
them abroad to cure all manner of diseases, bids them Heal the Sick, cleanse
the Lepers, raise the Dead, cast out Devils, but with this caution, gratis
accepistis, gratis date; neither provide gold your selves, nor accept any
offered you: Lo, freely you have received, freely give Math. 10.10. The taking
of a few shekels of Silver, and a few changes of Raiment, stuck Naamans Leprosy
upon Gehazi, and his upon his house for ever. And upon this ground belike it
was, that our Savior afterward coming into the Temple of Jerusalem, with
great indignation overthrew the Tables of the money changers, and the Seats of
them that sold doves: And why? why? The Church is not a place of merchandise,
Math. 21.12.
the selling of doves is dangerous in the Temple and if we may believe the
Fathers comment on that place, a sin so heinous, that it touches upon the
holy Ghost, Columbas vendere est despiritu sancto commodum temporale percipere,
he that makes a temporal commodity by the gifts of the holy Ghost, Greg. lib.
4. Epist. ex Reg st. cap. 95.
does but sell doves in the Temple, translates a Church to an Exchange, makes a
house of prayer, but a den for thieves. And for this, or the like occasion, one
Simon doomes another with a pecunia tua tecum in perditione, Acts 8, 10.
Thy money perish with thee Acts. 8.10.

And now for redress of those gross enormities in the Churches where they
reign (as God forbid they should reign or touch here in a Church reformed)
there are two things necessarily required in their Guides and Governors,
Vigilance, and Integrity; that they look on men fraught with sufficiency and
worth: and not transported with any sinister or by-respects, either of profit,
or partiality. It Is lamentable, that Ignorance and Simplicity should be thus
braying out the Oracles of God, that such beasts should be employed about the
carriage of his Arc, which can do nothing but low after their calves at home.
Moses tells plainly the Israelite, 1. Sam. 6.12.
non junges Bovem and Asinum, an Ox and an Ass shall not plough together,
Deuteronomy. 22. that is (as the Father moralls it) Sapientem cum stolido non junges
inpraedicatione verbi. In the spiritual plough Wisdom and Folly are
unequally yoked; Greg Hom'l. 19. super Ezekiel.
Knowledge and Ignorance will never draw together; and therefore we read,
that the Raunge of the mountains is the feeding for the wild Ass; Job. 39.8.
but the fruitful Field for the Ox that treads out the corn. 1. Cor. 9.9.
Send then the illiterate a grazing on the mountains; Ignorance and
Barrenness will dwell together; But place the Scholar with the laborious Ox,
direct Learning to the corne-field, and the fruitful Vine to the green
pastures, and the still waters to the prepared Table, and the cup that
overstoweth; from the Vale of death to the Path of Righteousness, that he may
dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. Psalm. 23.


I conclude this tedious point with the advice of that devout Abbot to his
advanced Proselyte; and by way of humble suite prefer the same to the
reverend care of him, whom God's special providence has made a
super-intendent of his Church here; Beseeching him in the bowels of Christ
Jesus, that those which shall be hereafter partakers of his Dabo vobis, whom
he shall either sanctify by laying hands on, or otherwise publikly admit to any
service in the Church, may be such as the Father there squares-out, a President
and a Pattern unto others; Qui sunt compositi ad mores, probati ad
sanctimoniam, parati ad obedientiam, subjecti ad disciplinam, catholici
adfidem, fideles ad dispensationem, concordes adpacem, conformes ad unitatem:
This is not all, I yet press closer with Saint Bernard, Sint in judicio recti,
in jubendo discreti, S. Bernard. lib. 4. de considerat. ad Eugenium: circa medi
um.
in loquendo modesti, in professione devoti, in zelo sobrji, in misericordia
non remissi, in otio non otiosi, quorum ingressus pacificus, non molestus
exitus, qui Ecclesias non spolient, sed emendent, qui famae provideant suae,
nec invideant alienae. Here is all, and that is enough, enough, I am sure for
the matter of ordination, it is time now to look on the Parties ordered, and
they are described here by the word Pastors, Pastors with a qualification;
after mine own, which is the second part, I will give you Pastors after mine
own heart.

Dabo Pastores, I will give you Pastors. Pars 2.
The word PASTOR is of a large dimension; and if we traverse the latitude and
extent thereof, it will involve in the generality, any Teacher in the Church.
But because some of them instead of stars fixed in their Orbs, have proved
Wandering stars, Jude 13.
reserved for darkness; and the Text being in a direct Antipathy with such,
whom the Prophets style, Idol, corrupt, brutish, destroying Pastors; Ier.
10.21.
Let Us go up a little to the Mountains of Israel, to the Fat pastures, where
the Lord's Flock and Folds he, and there from the scriptures themselves, take
a view whom he has made choice of, what Pastors he has culled out, after his
own heart, where we shall find that as God is a God of Providence, so of
Order; And as in all other things, so principally in his Church. And that we
may begin in Moses (for before every man was King, and Prophet, and Priest in
his own Family) It will appear, that the first foundation of it was laid in
inequality; God then distinguishing her Attendants into three orders or
degrees, Priests, Levites, Nethinims, and above these an Aaron, as
Superintendent and Commander. After Moses death (long after) the people
returning out of Babylon, we have a special mention of certain Teachers in
Israel, which were also distinguished into three several ranks Wisemen,
Scribes, Disputers; and these not only succeeding but subordinate to the
Prophets which Saint Paul has a glaunce at against the Jews, where is the
Wise, where is the Scribe, where is the Disputer? 1. Cor. 1.20.

When the Temple was rebuilt, though these Orders grew into Sects, and instead
of them we find Essenes, Pharisees, and Sadduces, yet not these, Ephesians. 4.11.
without their Primate, and Metropolitan: And in the time of our Savior, when
Sects and Orders were so intermingled, that we could scarce distinguish them,
yet they all join in a Superior; and we meet with Priests, and Scribes, and
Elders, flocking for advise to the palace of Caiaphas the high Priest. Math.
26.3. After these, we find Pastors, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and
they, thus distinguished by the great Doctor Saint Paul: And lastly, Elders,
Presbyters, Deacons, and these under their Bishop Timothy. 1. Tim. 1.5. So that
a priority of degreee and power in the Priesthood, we may draw down from
Moses to Christ, from Christ to the Apostles, and from them to the Fathers, and
Prelates of the Church; not only by Ecclesiastical or Apostolical tradition
or constitution, but, for ought I am hitherto posseess'd of otherwise (and I
would some higher Judgment would inform me better) After Gods own heart and
Quamvis forsan, res ipsae in Ecclesia constitutae humani sint, sive
Ecclesiastici juris Ipsa tamen obligatio ad Reverentiam and promptam
Obedientiam talibus Ecclesiae constitutionibus exlnbendam, est juris Divint:
Iuxta illa dicta Evangellca, Math. 18.17. 1. Cor. 14.32. Heb. 13.17. Io.
Forbes. Ir enicum, lib. 2. cap. 1. sect. 5.
Iure divino. Insomuch, that Saint Jerome S. Ieron. comment. in Epist. ad Tit.
cap. 1.
himself, who has been reputed a great stickler for the equality of
Churchmen, and a Father that has sometimes rivall'd Presbyters with Bishops,
Idem
writing to his Evagrins, tells him, thus, Vt sciamus traditiones Apostolicas,
sumptas de lege etc., Part 3. tract. 4. Epist. 9. ad Evagrium.
that we may know Apostolical traditions to be derived from the old Law; we
doubt not but of what condition Aaron, his Sons, and the Levites were in the
Temple, Hoc sibi Episcopi, etc. The same, Bishops, Ministers and Deacons
challenge in the Church.

Now, who knows not that Aaron by Gods own appointment was superior to his
Sons, his Sons to the Levites, the Levites to the Nethinims? So that a
Bishop may claim a transcendency in the Christian Church, even by divine
Ordinance and Institution; Est. in lib. 4. sent. did. 24. sect. 25.
or if the truth hereof could not be clearly evidenced out of those sacred
Monuments, (yet as the same Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis dign^tate
pendet: cut si non Exors quaedam, and ab om tibus eminens det ur potestas tot
in Ecclesiis efficientur Schismata, quot Sacerdotes. S. Hieron. in Dialog.
adversus Luciferian.
Father adds) for avoiding of factions, and mutinies, and confusion in the
Church, there is one, eminently One, required necessarily to sit at the Helm
and Rudder, a Pilot and Steers-man in those differences (A Bishop) otherwise
there would be as many Schisms in the Church, as Pastors; And certainly,
where disorders have been so frequent, they have proceeded principally through
a defect of superiors, who either had not the edge of Authority; or having it,
have blunted it; though some, who have been embarked wholly in matters of
Discipline, have from the discontented spirits of their age, received their
censure rather of (...), and (...), than Episcopi. Arer. in 1 Timothy 3.1.
And yet if we look to the Analogy of Reason, as well as Scripture, we must
either grant them a superintendency, or else make an absolute confusion. For it
is here, as it is with Instruments, if all the strings be unisons, there can be
no harmony. That hand is unshapen and little better than monstrous, where all
the singers are of the same length; Parity, in a Church, is prodigious. There
must be as well a superiority in Ecclesiasticke as in Civil government, there
being required in both, One eminent above the rest, as Saul was higher than any
of the people from the shoulders upwards, 1 Samuel 9.2. It Is not enough that
there are in the Church (...), Seers, but there must be also (...), Overseers;
so Saint Paul charge the Elders of Ephesus, Take heed to the Flock, of which
the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, Acts 20.28. The old Roman was but
laughed at, that would make an Army of all Commanders, for where there were
none to obey, there could be none to govern. And therefore the Wise man says,
that the Church is Tanquam acies ordinatal, as an Army with her Banners
displayed, Cant. 6.4. And in such an Army one Officer is subordinate to
another, and a common Soldier unto both; Some are appointed to be Horsemen,
some to run before the Chariots, some Captains of sifties, some Captains of
hundreds, some Captains of thousands, 1 Samuel 8.12. Hereupon Churchmen have
been by some resembled unto Stars; for, as in the Firmament above, one
Star differs from another both in glory and magnitude, so they do also in
the Firmament of the Church here: Others compare them unto Angels, and as there
is a Hierarchy of them, so of these also, the inferior Angels are illuminated
by a higher order of Angels; so should it be with those Angels of the Church
below, the Spirits of the Prophets being subject to the Prophets, and God being
every where the God of Order, and not of confusion, 1 Cor. 14.33. Moreover, it
is evident, that the 70. Disciples were inferior to the Apostles, the Levites
to the Priests, even Iure Divino; and in consent to this, the Fathers warble
sweetly, the Bishops succeeded the Apostles; the Pastors and Presbyters, the
70. Disciples; so that as on the one side, they were inferior to the Apostles;
so on the other, these to the Bishops. Which allegation of the Cardinal (for
it is Bellarmines allegation) some of your Dutch Hotspurs laboring to wave,
not only exclude Bishops from Apostolical authority, but also from
succession; and to throw them clean under hatches, advance their own Pastors,
and can allow them to be the Apostles Successors, Aliquo modo; Ames. Bell.
Enerv. Tom. 2. c. 4. p. 113.
but Bishops (as they now are) Nullo modo; so the factious Franeker with his
Moles sine nervis, 2 Tome, 4. chapter. But if this shall pass for Text, and
they can thus dis-myter Bishops to crown their Presbyters; how was it that
Titus by the appointment of Saint Paul (from God no doubt, otherwise what had
Saint Paul to do to appoint Titus?) was left at Creet, to ordain Elders there
in every City, to reject Heretics, and to set in order the things which were
amiss? Tit. 1.5. And Titus was the Bishop, the first Bishop of the Cretians.
Moreover, how came it to pass, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 4.
that Timothy had by the same Saint Paul, power committed unto him over
Presbyters, and counsel given him to admit an accusation, or not; to punish,
or not to punish; 1 Timothy 5.19. And that, Timothy was a Bishop too, the first
Bishop of Ephesus, who can contradict? Now, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 4.
what can these instances otherwise imply then a Superiority by divine law? and
yet, this is again lifted by the Brethren from Bishops to their Presbyters,
who may receive an accusation (as they pretend) no less then others; And for
any Priority Timothy had over the Elders of his time, or any Authority to
punish, or not, they stiffly deny; not allowing Him, or any other Bishop, ullum
forum Ecclesiasticum, praeter forum conscientiae; Vt supra, Tom. 1. page 226.
Amesius in great heat would awhile persuade me so? yet afterward blows his
fingers, acknowledging, that there were in the Primitive Church, besides those
the Father styleth (...) Men eminent in the word, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 13.
certain Presbyters ( Bishops he will not call them, or if he do, he
reconciles the Terms) which did only attend Government; and for proof
hereof, he quotes Origin against Celsus; Orig. Tom. 3. contra Celsum.
where the Heretic exprobrating the christian Doctors for their weak and
simple Auditors, the Father answers, that the christian Teachers had first for
their Scholars, some that were (...) Probationers, and after they were
approved, did institute two Orders, Vnum Incipientium the one of Novists, which
they called Catechumeni; Alterum perfectiorum the other of riper and maturer
judgment; Vide Amesium, tom. 2. cap. 4. page 108. de distinct. Epis. cap. and
presbyteri.
and amongst them some were praepositi which inquired only into the manners and
life of others; and those which were vitiously inclined they punished, and
cherished them which were otherwise disposed to virtue. Thus, whilst he would
Enervare Bellarminum, he does but Enervare Ecclesiam, and playing too much
with that Candle, sindgeth his own wings. First, he drownes the word Episcopus
in Presbyter, and makes them both one, and so restraines them to those, and
only to those, whom he calls, Laborantes in Doctrina; yet afterward he new
ranks them again, and in one file places his Predicants; in another,
Governors. What Is this, but that Prelates themselves will allow inferior
Pastors? That there is Idem Ministerium, but Diversa potestas; and that they
differ not, Quoad virtutem Sacerdotii, but quoad potentiam Iurisdictionis.

There are some (and I would there were not) turbulent Spirits in our Church,
which are at such defiance with the Romish See, that they are impatient of any
other; and whilst they endeavor to dis-pope her, they would un-Bishop all
Christendom. For mine own part, a Papal Jurisdiction, I equally renounce,
and disapprove, as a Prerogative both insolent and usurped; but an Episcopal
does not only engage my consent, but my obedience, and that upon a double tie,
of Reason and Religion. If I should not respect order, I were a beast; if not
the Ordinance of my Church, a Heathen.

Saint Paul requires subjection to higher powers on a strong ground, Mat. 18.17.
because there is no power (says he) but of God, Romans 13.1.
no power, no civil one (you will say) nay, no Ecclesiasticke neither; they are
both the Ordinances of God, He has a finger in them; They are after his own
Heart; and he that does oppose them, the Apostle tells you what he purchases;
what? Contempt? yes, and only so? No, Condemnation too; Romans 13.2.

It Is well nigh grown proverbiall, now, in the English Church, no Bishop, no
King; and if neither Bishop, nor King, how a God? God professes Method and
Order in his universal Government; and without these, there would be some
manifest Breach and flaw in the carriage of inferior things. He knows, that
Equality looks to Anarchy, and Anarchy to Confusion. And certainly Episcopal
honor has gone down the wind, since this dream of parity first started in
the Church, since the Levite has been stripped of his proper portion, and fed
with the naked benevolences of the people. Geneva, doubtless, was well
pleased, when Bishoprics were first analiz'd into Pensions; when the large
revenewes of her Church were un-ravell'd to a stipend of 40. pounds per Annum,
The Layicke, whose religion lies most in his purse, little cares how the Ox
be muzl'd, so he have the profit of treading-out the corn; Insomuch, that her
great Presbyter Calvine himself, (who before, had laid the Authority of the
Church in the hands of the people and thereupon made stipendary) in his
commentaries on the lesser Prophets, sadly complains of a short proportion
and a slow Pay. And in deed, the Glory of the Pastor has not a little wrapped
and declined, since Divinity has been so much acquainted with the Stipend,
and the Trencher. We raise Doctrines now-a-daies according to our pay; fill
others Ears, as they our Hands, or Belly: put Honey in our Sacrifice, instead
of Salt; sweeten our discourse to the palate of our Contributors; We sing of
their power, and cry down our own; Add vigor and quickness to those
temporal hands, which can only bind and lose, on Earth, no more; and shackle
the virtue of those spiritual ones, which as they lose or bind on Earth, so
they Lose and Bind in Heaven also.

We have so long untwisted the power of the Clergy, and woon'd up that of the
Layicke, that now we are entangled in our own web, struck through with our
own Darts. Saint Paul had a time, when he could not only threaten his
Corinthian with the Rod, but the Galathian with the Sword too, with an
Abscindantur qui disturbant vos, Let them be cut off that trouble you; Gal.
5.12. But now, our Sword is not only Blunt, or Rustie, but wrested out of our
hand; and how to regaine or new-furbish it we know not. The Philistims have
not left us so much as a Smith in Israel; So that, 1. Sam. 13.19.
it speeds now with the poor Pastors as it did then with Readiness heartlesse
soldiers, who had neither Sword nor Spear for the day of Battle. 1. Sam.
13.22.
We have so long given advantage to the mere secular power, that at length
our Sword is beaten into the Sith, and our Spear into the pruning Hook; The
penal statute has a Jirke at us, and the Bench begins to usurp that
Authority which has been formerly peculiar to consistoriall proceedings. This
is our misery, and this misery we have pulled upon our selves, partly by
insinuation, partly by negligence, partly by pusillanimity, principally by our
own discords. Quot Capita, tot Dogmata, So many Opinions almost, as Pastors,
and Factions, as Congregations: One is for Paul, another for Apollo, another
for Cephas; This man is a Calvinist, That a Lutheran, and a Third a
Carth-writhian; Insomuch, that Religion begins to look asquint, and has one
cast for Geneva, another for Rhemes, another for Amsterdam. Eusebius. de vita and
transitu sanct. Hieron.
Multi hodie in Ecclesia (says Saint Jerome) non pastores, sed destructores,
sed Lupi, sed Mercenarii, ad quos nihil portinet de Ovibus, nisi ut devorantur;
There are many at this day, in the Church of Christ, under the name of Pastors,
which come to you in Sheep clothing, but inwardly they are, Ravening Wolves;
They pretend feeding, but the event is devouring the flock. Nihil
abominabilius, quam cum Ille, qui custodire debet, dissipat, says the same
Father. There have been a long time clustering about this Vineyard of the
Lord, the Brownist, the Anabaptist, the Familist, and of late the Perfectist;
and that we may lay all the heads of Faction upon one shoulder, the Catharist,
a Sect, long since cried down by the Fathers, for Heretical, but now
Buttress'd and Backed up as the maine Pillar of Religion, the polished corner
of the Temple, and he that is not hewed out for that Garb, has the spittle of
the multitude thrown in his face, wears the aspersion of a Libertine, and of
late, the broad Livery of a Sycophant, or Knave. Good Lord, that glow-wormes
and rotten Sticks, which were wont to glimmer only in the dark, should thus
shine more and more unto the perfect day; That this dull candle which has
been so long hid under a Bushel, should at length be set on a candlestick,
and give so proud a light to all that are about him; There was a time, when
Faction was neither so strong nor so bold, when the chief Patriarchs, and
Founders of it had for their Cities of refuge only Woods and Barnes, and their
Disciples but the Suburbs and Offall of the people; But now, forsooth, the
Fur Tree must be a dwelling for the storke, and the lofty Cedars spread
their boughs over them, great men are become both their Proselytes and
Protectors; Insomuch, that the Vultures have their nests, and the little Foxes
their holes; They Earth themselves in Corporations, and Peculiars, where they
are shot-free of the power of a Consistory, an injungendo mandamus cannot reach
them, or if it do, a common purse defends them both from bruize and battery;
So that the mouth of the Canon cannot reach them, the Thunderbolt of
Excommunication not so much as scarre them; and then Ceremonies, and the
Surplice, and the Rochet, and the Myter too are no better then remnants of
Superstition, weeds Babylonish, and Apocryphal. But oh, that Aaron would
remember he had a Rod, as well as Oil; Discipline, as Instruction; that where
the one cannot supple and make pliable, the other may bridle and restrain
Schismatic and contentious Spirits; that so his Rod may be ever budding, his
Authority green and blossoming, to the Glory of God, the flourishing of his
Church, the conformity of her Sons, the concord of her Pastors, and the Peace
of us all; Unity, Unity, Unity the Church groans for; O, let this Dew of
Hermon dropp plentifully on the little Hill of Syon; Let this precious Ointment
so overflow the head of Aaron, that it may run down his beard, and from
thence to the skirts of his clothing; That so there may be a perfect Harmony
in the Church, that we may sing joyfully together the song of Syon in our own
land; that we may be all Pastors as we should be, Pastors after Gods own
Heart, Pastors feeding his flock in love, feeding it as it ought to be fed,
with Knowledge, and Understanding, which is my last part. Pascent vos, They
shall feed you with Knowledge and Understanding.

THere is no Pastor, properly, without a Flock, Pars 3.
no Flock without feeding it, no true feeding without knowledge and
understanding; which like Salomons two Pillars are to be set in the Porch of
the Temple, in the very front and entrance of our Ministry. 1. Kings 7.21.
Knowledge directs our feeding, and Understanding does wield our Knowledge, and
God enlightens our understanding; so that the Pastor after his heart must both
scire and intelligere, and he that does not, feeds not a flock, but betrays
it. In that Dabo tibi claves of Christ to Saint Peter, there is a double key
left for the Government of the Church, the one of power, the other of knowledge,
and both these by Divines resembled to Zachary's two staves, Zach. 11.7.
Beauty and Bands, Doctrine and Discipline; of power and Discipline the Pastor
had his share in the last part; of Knowledge and Doctrine he challenges in
this, which is so essential to the condition of a churchman, indeed, that
without it he is not a Pastor truly, but an impostor or deceiver; Insomuch,
that Saint Paul carefully distinguishing between Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians.
4.11.
and Prophets and Evangelists, and Evangelists and Pastors, sets Pastors and
Doctors together without their difference, Ephesians. 4.11. And the reason Saint
Augustine gives to his Paulinus, Cum praedixisset Pastores, subjunxit Doctores,
ut intelligerent Pastores ad Officium suum pertinere Doctrinam, D. Aug. Epist.
59. ad Paulinum.
in his 59. Epistle Ad Paulinum; he joyneth Pastors and Doctors so near
together, because Doctrine is required to the Office of a Pastor. And indeed
blind Obedience is but an ill Nurse for the people; to the spiritual
perfection there is necessarily required a growing up from knowledge to
knowledge, from one Virtue to another. And therefore Ignorance is so far from
begetting Devotion, that it strangleth it; It Is the mist and fog, and dampe of
the multitude; the dark Lantern of the seduced Church, which is not only
close shut to it self, but to all that are about it. Stella in cap. 6. lucae.
v. 39.
Ridiculum est, ut qui speculator est, caecus sit, Doctor, inscius; It Is
beyond common absurdity, to make a blind man an Overseer; an illiterate one,
Doctor of the chair. Prophets of old, you know, were called Seers and Rulers
of the people, Men of good Eyes; Insomuch, that when Moses was to incampe in
the Wilderness, he desired Hobab not to depart from him, Because he should be
to him instead of eyes, Numb. 10.31. Numb. 10.31.
A Pastor or Governor with the people is as the eye in the body, or the apple
in that eye, or the quickness and cleernesse in that apple; It Is the Organ by
which they see, and are indeed blind without it. Hence they have their double
Title of Seekers and Watchmen, Jer. 10.21.
both for industry and perspicacy. And therefore Moses is commanded to tell
Aaron from the mouth of God himself, that he that was lame or blind might
not approach to offer the bread of his God, Levit. 21.17.
Levit. 21.17. So choice he was of admitting servants about him with any
mental blemish, that he would not brook a corporal.

When the Iebusites in the sight of David had laid their Blind and their Lame
upon the walls of Jerusalem, the Text says, They were hated of David's soul,
and not permitted to come into his house; 2 Samuel 5.8.
and he that would go up to the Gutter, and smite the Iebusites should be his
chief Captain and Commander, 2 Samuel 5.8. And in truth, what have the Blind
and the Lame to do with the walls of Jerusalem? What share or inheritance have
Impotence and Darkness in the Temple of the Lord? What has Ignorance to do
in the Sanctuary, where the Lamp and the Oil should flourish? David hates it
with his soul, the man after Gods own heart will not suffer them to come
under his roof; the Captains of Israel have a command to smite them; the
Gospel it self denouncing her bitter woes against the blind Guide, Math.
23.19.
and the Law prohibiting any thing that was Lame or Blind to be offered in
Sacrifice to the Lord. Deuteronomy. 15.21.
Deuteronomy. 15.21.

Thus the Ignorant is totally casheer'd from the office of a Pastor; and they
only admitted that are pastorally accommodated, that have their Rod and Staff
to comfort, Knowledge and Understanding; And he that is so harnessed, must not
only lead forth his flock by the pleasant Waters, but he must also feed it
in the green pastures, in the Path of Righteousness, that the loving
kindness of the Lord may follow him all the days of his life. Psalm. 23.
Saint Augustine paraphrasing on that of the 36. Psalm. Thy Righteousness is
like the mountains of God verse 6. does by Mountains, there, understand
Pastors. Christ is the Sun of Righteousness, and he first rises upon these
Mountains of his, his Pastors; and having enlightened them, he casts his
beams upon the lesser hills, and from them, to the Valleys below, to the
people that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death: This made the Psalmist
sing, I have lifted up mine eyes unto the Hills, whence my comfort and health
comes: Psalm. 121.1.
So that there is no comfort to the inferior people, but from those Hills
which are above them; no light to them that sit in darkness, but from that
Sun which casts his Beams on those spiritual Mountains, The asters
Paster his own heart: And therefore we find a threefold expostulation of
Christ with Saint Peter, If thou love me seed my flock; If thou love me,
etc. Every Si me diligis was seconded with a Pasce oves. No feeding then, no
love to Christ; Saint Gregory will tell us so, Si dilectionis est testimonium
cura pastionis, quisquis virtutibus pollens gregem Dei pascere renuit, pastorem
summum convincitur non amare, in the first of his Pastoralls, 5. chapter. A
feeding then there is strictly required, both by duty and command; and we hear
many a fearful volley and Thunderclap, as well from the Gospel as from the
Law, rowzing the sluggish Pastor to an industrious vigilancie and attendance on
the Lords Flock. But because we are fallen into these censorious times, where
they deny any kind of feeding, but preaching; or any kind of preaching, but
Sermoning; or any kind of Sermons edifying, but the hasty fancies and
voluntaries of some private heads; when such come not properly within the verge
either of pastoring or preaching; but the Apostles (...), that Inanis
garrulitas Saint Paul speaks of, those vain Bablings 2. Tim. 2.16. which as
in some, increase to more Ungodliness, so in others, to more Faction. Seeing
then I say, we are so dangerously beset with censures, that we must either
feed according to such men's humors, or else have our mouths shut up with the
imputation of dumb Dogs, let us from Christ's threefold command to feed,
observe a threefold kind of feeding, Verbo, Exemplo, and temporali Subsidio: I
shall beg your patience for a touch at either, and I have done.

First Verbo, There is a feeding by the Word; 1 Verbo.
and that is either per Iustructionem, or per Reprehensionem. Now Instruction
has two Breasts (says Saint Bernard) from whence her milk flows; The one is
for Saint Paul's Babe, 1. Cor. 3 and from that droppeth Lac consolationis; the
other for his stronger sort, and from this Lac adhortationis; both these to be
administered with gentle hands, so Timothy is advised, The Servant of the Lord
must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, in meckenesse instructing others,
2. Tim. 2.24. And in this case, Barnabas prevails; The Son of consolation
has his plea, the man of thunder has naught to do, but the gentle Wind, the
soft Fire, and the still Voice, that precious Balm which cures the wound, not
breaks the head. Psalm. 141.6.


Per reprehensionem, where Instruction by the word prevails not, Reprehension
must, there must be a hewing by the Prophets, Hosea 6.5.
and a slaying by the words of our mouth, 2. Tim. 2.4.
and then, Argue, Objurga, Increpa, says Saint Paul; Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort;
But how? cum omni patientia and doctrina, so that, those who are of a vicious
conversation, are to be rebuked; others more religiously inclined, exhorted,
but all with long suffering and Doctrine 2. Tim. 2.4. Hence it was, that in the
Arc of the covenant ('it is a Postill observation, and I pray take it so) was
placed the Pot of Manna, the Rod, and the Tables of the Testament; Jacob. de
Vorag. Domin. 2. post pas. ser. 2.
to typifie belike, that in the true Pastor, who is a living Arc, there should
be the golden pot of Manna, Sweetness of Exhortation, and this quoad bonos,
then the Rod Budding: Discipline and Correction, and that quoad duros, and
lastly, the two Tables written, Knowledge and Understanding, Judgment and
Discretion: and these quoad omnes. And for this reason it was, that Solomon set
engraven in the bases of the Temple, Lions, Oxen, and Cherubins, 1. Kings 7.29.
moralizing by the Ox, Gentleness: by the Lion, Austerity: by the Cherubins,
Knowledge: and therefore the Pastor after Gods own heart must be in respect of
the good, Mansuetus, of the obstinate Severus; of both, Sapiens and Discretus.
I know; the Scriptures mention a broken heart, and the bruized reed, and the
smoking flax; and for such is ordained the spirit of meekness, the Staff of
comfort, and the Obsecro vos per misericordias Dei, Romans 12.1. Romans 12.1.
On the other side, we meet with a Stiff Neck, and the Iron Sinew, and the
Heart of Adamant; and there the Hammer must be employed that breaks the
stone, two edged Sword dividing asunder the soul, and the spirit, the very
joints and the marrow. Heb. 4.12.

Is Piety then blossoming? shall I not cherish it? Is Wickedness branching
forth? shall I not prune it? shall I make a Pulpit, the Throne of Falshoode;
shall I teach God to lie? shall I bitter virtue, and sweeten vice? Call Light,
Darkness, and Darkness Light? Am I not Gods Ambassador, his Herald? shall
I proclaim Peace, where there is open War? deal with the Dulcimer and the
Cymball, when I should be at the Trumpet and the Fife? shall I sing of men's
providence when I should cry down their Opression? magnify their Religion,
when I should scourge their Hypocrisy? shall I apply Lenitives and Oils, where
Corrasives are more proper? stroke a sore, when I should bruize it? Lastly,
shall I instead of the Rasor, come with the Brush, and the Comb? when I should
lance or cut off a growing Insolence, shall I curle and frounse it? No, but as
on the one side I condemn the rough hands of Esau, so on the other, the soft
voice of Jacob; as well him that gripes the tender and relenting Conscience, as
him that will not scarifie the impostumated and corrupt. There is a time as
well for Lightning and Thunder, as for Rain; and all these from the clouds
above, from the Ministers of God, who are his spiritual clouds; upon which
the Fathers have many a dainty flourish, and continuing the Metaphor, drive on
to an Allegory, and say, that when God threatens by preachers, Tonat per nubes:
when he does wonders by them, D. Aug. in Psalm. 35. v. 5.
Coruscat per nubes: when he promises blessings by them, Pluit per nubes. Thy
mercy O Lord is in the Heavens, and thy truth reaches unto the clouds. Psalm.
108.4. By Truth here, Saint Augustine understands the Word, and by the Clouds,
the Teachers and Dispencers of it. Now how can we that are but Earth (says the
Father) know that Gods mercies are in the Heavens? mittendo veritatemsuam usque
ad nubes, by fending his truth unto the clouds, by revealing his word to his
faithful Ministers, which like those bright clouds Zac. 10.1. shall give their
showers of rain to every grass of the Field. Every man that is but as the
grass of the Field, shall know that these mercies of God are heavenly, and
provided for him; if he believe in the truth of that word which God reaches
unto his clouds; or rather in that truth which is The Word that comes with
the clouds, and every shall see. Revel. 1.7.


Now, though Pastors are so compared unto the clouds, that they can lighten and
thunder as well as rain; yet the rain is most fruitful to the pasturing of
their Flocks. It was a fearful judgment, God was, preparing for Judah his
Plant, and Israel his Vineyard, when he threatened it with a Mandabo nubibus ne
pluant super eam, I will command the clouds that they rain not on it, Isai.
5.6. And certainly, that Plant cannot, but wither; that Vineyard, but grow
into barrenness, and instead of the Grape, brings forth the Thorn and the
Brier, which is not refreshed with the Dew of Heaven, not watered with the
droppings of these Clouds. And therefore, the Church had need to pray, Jude 1 2.
that her Pastors be not such as Saint Jude calls Clouds without water (dry
and ignorant Pastors) or Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 2.17.
Clouds carried with^^ tempest (turbulent and factious Pastors) but Jobs
welballanced clouds, Job. 37.16.
those bottles of Heaven (as he styles them) which drop down the fruitful
dew, and send the joyful rain on the inheritance; Pastors that can feed as
well by instruction, as reprehension; by knowledge, as understanding.

As there was before a feeding by the Word, 2. Exemplo.
so here a seeding by Example too; our Life must preach, as well as our
Doctrine; Action, as Instruction. Titus must not only speak the things which
become sound Doctrine; but in all things besides, He must show himself a
pattern of good works, Part. 1. past.
Tit. 2.17. Non deoet hominem ducatum suscipere, qui nescit homines vivendo
praeire, says Saint Gregory; he that has the charge and government of
others, should as far outstrip them in Example as in Office. Those whom the
Scriptures so richly cloth with Titles of Lights and Candles, and Burning
Lamps, should so shine before men, that they may not only hear their words,
but also see their good works, and then Glorificabunt patrem, they shall
glorify their Father which is in Heaven. Vocem virtutis dabis, si quod suades,
prius tibi cognosceris persuasisse, validior operis, quam oris vox, as Saint
Bernard sweetly, in his 59. Sermon upon the Canticles. He that will work a
reformation in the miscarriages of others, must first circumcise his own; Si
me visflere, dolendum est prius; If I will be a curb to others, I must first
be a bridle to my self. The Pastor has not so great a conflict with the ear
of the multitude, as with the eye; which is more active and intent upon what
he practiceth, than what he does prescribe; and this is rather their madness
than their judgment, since examples are not totally to carry them, but
precepts. Nazianzene you know was wont to style great men, Speaking Laws, and
unprinted Statutes; they were first Laws and Statutes to themselves, and then
they not only spoke obedience to others, but also impressed and commanded what
they spoke, Boni mores praedicantium, Saleorum Doctrinae, the integrity and
manners of the Preacher is the salt of his Doctrine; 2 Kings 2.20.
And as that Salt which Elisha cast into the Spring made the waters sweet,
which were before bitter and unsavory, so shall his conversation sweeten his
precepts, though they seem never so bitter and untooth some to the people. He
that will be great in the Kingdom of God, must both teach and do; nay, if he
teach well, he must first do, Mat. 5.19.
and then teach. Eusebius tells Damasus and Theodosius, Facite, and
posteapradicate; Christ never said, Qui praedicaverit voluntatem patris mei,
sed qui fecerit; Not he that preaches, but he that does the will of my Father
which is in Heaven, Mat. 7.21.
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Subtilium verborum Dollor and non
operum, est quaedam levis aurium inslatio, (...) Dam^sum and Then^osium de vila
and ^^ansi^u S. Hieronim.
and sumus sine fructu pertransiens, says the same Father; This feeding of a
Flock by words only, is but a slight fanning of the air, a thin cloud of
smoke, that in the rising vanishes; and what is this to the substance of
Religion? Surely, no more than the shadow of it. Give then Camelians air, and
Men bread. There are many intruders upon the Sanctuary of the Lord, whose Bells
tingle shrewdly; but their Pomgranate buds not forth; a noise we hear of, but
no fruit, Cant. 7.12.
as if all Religion were planted in the tongue, none in the hands. Gods Word is
often in Scripture compared to a Sword, and a Sword how can a tongue brandish
without a hand? And therefore the sweet Singer of Israel says of the children
of Syon, that they had Exultationes Dei in gutture, and gladium hipennem in
manu; not only the high praises of God in their mouth, but a two edged sword in
their hand. Psalm. 149.6.
And upon this hint, belike it was, that Christ grounded his Fac hoc, and
vives, not Teach this, but Doethis, and thou shalt-live; And therefore your
Praedicants of old were called Operarios, quia opere magis quam ore praedicare
debent, as Stella glosses that, mittet Operarios suos in messem. Luke 10.6.

As there was but now a verbal and moral kind of feeding, Temporali subsidio.
Before, by Instruction and Example, now by Distribution; There Practice must
confirm our doctrine, here Charity our practice. And this is Saint Paul's super
omnia induimini, his vinculum perfectionis Col. 3. The chief part of that
religion which Saint James calls pura, and immaculata, first, Visit the
Fatherless and the Widow in their affliction, relieve them, and then the other
will follow, thou shall keep thy self unspotted of the World. James 1.21. All
our profession of sincerity without this, is but a tincling Christianity, no
better then the Apostles Cymball, or his sounding brass. Let our congregations
ring of justification by Faith only; you know who tells you without work,
Psalm. 51.14.
Faith is a dead faith. James 2.17. He that gives us tongues to sing aloud of
his Righteousness, does also teach our hands to war for him, and our singers
to battle. Our Actions fight more for our religion, then our words can. Psalm.
144.1.
He is a Rector indeed (says Saint Augustine) that does as well refresh the
hungry with the crummes of his table, as feed the ignorant with the bread of
his knowledge; D. Aug. 13. de div ersis.
Libenter audit'e jus linguam loquentem, cujus expect at dextram porrigentem.
Let then, our Hospitality preach as well as our Pulpit; our Alms edify, no
less then our Doctrine. Nature doubtless, intonded nothing superfluous, or in
vain; so that, Optimus Dispensator est, quisibinith; l reservat. S. Hieron. ad
Nepot. Ep. 7.
God allotting us two hands, and but one tongue, would have us distribute, as
well as talk; communicate by our substance, as by our knowledge; where the
mouth is always open, and the bowels shut, we have just cause to suspect
that man's religion for imperfect; seeing God is a God of compassion, as well as
jelousie. Between three Sermons a week, and but one Alms in an age there is
no proportion; Let us as well fill the poor man's Belly, as his Ears; that is
the way to glorify God, and thank us. I cannot but grieve at the Savagenesse
of those dispositions; that for bread, sometimes give but a stone, for a Fish a
Scorpion. a house of correction, instead of an Hospital; a Whip for an Alms.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, and by the same
reason, Cursed are the merciless, for they shall find no mercy. If I am thus
unnatural to my Brother whom I daily see, what respect can I have to my God,
whom I never saw? An Angel tells Cornelius, that his Alms were come up as a
memorial before the Lord. God does not only take notice of our charityes, Acts
10.4.
but inroles them; A cup of cold water given in his name does not lose a
reward, a reward? no, not a crown; we have his own word for it, I was
hungry, Matthew. 25.35.
and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and yet gave me drink; what is the
end of these? Their Righteousness shall go into life eternal. Math. 25.46.

God grant, that we may be all of us Pastors according to his Heart; that we
may so feed our flocks with the spiritual and the temporal bread, here, that
they with us may be hereafter fed with the Eternal Bread, the celestial
Manna, the Food of Angels, in the Kingdom of Heaven; To which the Lord bring
us for his Christ's sake Amen, Amen.

Gloria in Excelsis Deo.

FINIS.
Perlegi has Conciones in quibus nihil reperio sanae fidei, aut bonis moribus
contrarium; ideoque dignas judico quae Typis mandentur.

THOMAS WYKES R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. domest.
Land. July 10. 1637.

