A Myrror for Martinists, And all other Schismatiques, which in these dangerous
days do break the godly unity, and disturb the Christian peace of the
Church.

Published by T. T.

Math. 4. 24. Take heed what ye hear.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1590.

The Preface.
THE Apostle Paul exhorting every Christian to take unto him vniuersam illam
(...), Ephesians. 6. 13.
that same complete armor of a godly man, wills him to girde himself with
the girdle of truth. This truth seems to have great affinity with man's
nature, because we are made after Gods own image, (who is truth it self)
that we might express the same in our life, in our words, and in our manners.
But by reason of original sin, we all have made shipwreck of the truth, and
every man is become a liar. Yet, what man is he so unregenerate, that in open
show seems not to like and love truth? Do not the greatest liers and most
false accusers pretend truth? Celsus and Antiphon, two heretics, called their
books, Books of truth. The false Prophets which deceived Achab, made a great
brag of truth. The devil (who can transform himself into an Angel of light)
when he tempted Christ, had in his mouth the infallible truth of Gods word. But
Prosper says very well, Parum est, si verum in ore est, et falsum in cord.
And an other father to the same purpose says: Nihil prodest, quia hymnum
cantat lingua tua si sacrilegium exhalat vita tua. It is a very vile thing to
have truth in the mouth, and falsehood in the heart. A thief many times is not
known by his face from a true man. Experience proves, that as poisoning
herbs do grow green as well as the wholesome: And as counterfeit gold
looks to the eye so fair as good coin: so does falsehoode appear
oftentimes like the truth, yea to some, more plausible and acceptable. For art
and science, which should serve for the truth, are by the subteltie of satan
very often retained against the same.

The wisest creature among beasts (the serpent I mean) was by the devil abused
to set forth lies, to the seducing of the first man. And do we not see that the
same devil imploieth still art, learning, ripe wits, and other good gifts
which God has given unto men, against the truth? to wit, such as are in the
Papists, Heretics, Brownists, the family of Love, Martinistes, and all
Schismatiques, which never cease perverting the truth? It were to be wished
that the lips of these men might be continually sealed, as was the mouth of the
image Angerona, the Gods of silence. For better it were for them to be dumb
images of a vain Goddess, then the clattering false spirits of satan.

The hurt that may come unto thee (Christian Reader) by the poison of these
vipers, if it do but touch thee, for Sub melle latet venenum, under the green
grass lies a serpent, and falsehood is colored with truth, has made me
careful for thy good, to publish this small treatise. Therefore such as it is,
take it well in worth, and forget not this caveat of our savior Christ,
saying: Take heed what ye hear. Mark. 4. 24.


Vlterius ne tend odijs.
A Myrror for Martinists.
WHen I call to mind the grave sentence of our savior Christ, Math. 11. 19.
Wisdom is justified of her children, and do behold the miserable
contentions with which the Church of England at this day is so vexed and
turmoiled by the children of folly, I cannot but on the one side condemn the
late Martine libellers, and their favorites, who having a bad cause, do as
leudly handle the same: and on the other side mislike some repliers, who
notwithstanding they have chosen the better part, yet handle it not so
charitably and modestly as it requires. And albeit the first scandale comes
by those foolish workers of iniquity, yet Angerona the Gods of silence,
might better have answered them, then men of uncircumcised lips, whose evil
words corrupt good manners: for wisdom will not in such sort be justified of
her children. Wisdom. 1. 6
She is loving (says Solomon) and will not absolve him that blasphemeth with
his lips: nay, she will bring to pass, Verse. 8.
that the judgment of reproach shall not suffer him to escape.

These things considered, I have thought good to tender this Myrror, to take
from the face manifest spots: wishing as heartily that the Church might be as
free from those Martine Libellers, as they seem to wish it to be without all
manner of blemishes and imperfections. Cant. 6. 8
But although the Church of Christ for her simplicity is called a dove: Isai.
5. 1
for her fruitfulnes, a vine: for her beauty, a rose: Psalm. 125. 1
for her strength, mount Sion: Isai 46. 13
and for her holiness, Cant. 2. 1
a Priesthood: yet is it not so pure and simple, (so long as it is upon earth)
but that it fostereth foxes and wolves: 1. Pet. 2. 9
not so fruitful, but it has thorns and thistles: not so strong, but the
tyrants of the world do sometime assail and shake the same: neither is it so
holy, but that profane and wicked men seem to have place therein. Our savior
Christ said, Mat. 13. 47.
that the kingdom of heaven (which is the Church (has in it fishes good and
bad: Mat. 25. 1
virgins, wise and foolish: Mat. 13. 24.
cockle and wheat: and yet these are not of the substance, but as it were the
dregs and excrements thereof. The body of Christ is lively, neither has it
any dead members: and therefore Saint John speaking of false Apostles says,
1. John. 2. 19
They went out from us, because they were not of us: for if they had been of us,
they had surely tarried with us.

Assuredly the wicked are conversant in the Church no otherwise (says Saint
Augustine) then are corrupt and naughty humors in a man's body: for even as
those trouble and corrupt the health: so these vex and disquiet the Church,
and are loathsome unto Christ himself, insomuch that he spueth them out of his
mouth, and will say unto them in that great day, Apoc. 3. 15.
Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity.

They then are too peevish and wayward, Math 7. 23.
which at this day do feign and imagine to themselves a Church so reformed
here in earth, as they will have nothing out of square in the same: and do
look for that here, which is no where to be found but in heaven. And if they
find not the Church according to their conceit, they incontinent forsake the
same and make a scisme. Which to the Church (according to Cyprians opinion) is
more permitious than idolatry. For he says, that heresy and schism
succeeded in the place and self same degree that idolatry had before time.
Cyprian lib. de vnitate Ecclesiae.
Christi aduentu prostratus inimicus vides idola derelicta, etc. The enemy
Satan being overthrown by the coming of Christ, seeing idols forsaken, and
his sees and temples to be left desert, by reason of the great multitude of
faithful people, devised a new subtlety under the very title and name of
Christianity, to deceive the unwary: he found out (I say) heresies and
schisms, whereby he might overthrow faith, corrupt the truth, and divide the
unity of Christ's Church. This title and name of Christianity, whereof Cyprian
speaks, is that cloak of schismatiques, by which they would seem holy and
good to the detriment of the godly.

Schism (according to Saint Augustines opinion) springs from a certain
hatred amongst brethren. Many causes hereof are rehearsed by the fathers of the
Primitive Church: but they all agree that there be four especial means to
hatch them, The causes of Schism.
all which four have a sovereign supremacy, and a supreme sovereignty in
this latter age of the world. The first they set down, is the contempt of
Bishops, Ierom. in Epist. ad Euagrium.
to whom (as Jerome says) ever since Saint Marks time, the government of the
Church belonged: In hoc omnes sunt docti, etc. By so much be they now
accounted better learned, by how much they can whet their tongues sharper, and
shoot out more poisoned arrows even bitter words against them. The second
is, ambition, or as some think, envy at the preferment of others: This caused
of old Arrius, Donatus, and Nouatius to strain their brains, to find out
their monstrous assertions, and being found, to teach and preach them openly:
neither shall the sectaries of our days, ever clear themselves from this
suspicion. The third cause is, false love. All men desire to be commended for
their skill. They think nothing to be truly said, or well done, but that which
they themselves do. The fourth is, couetonsnesse, this caused Balaam to curse
Gods people: and Simon Magus to desire the gifts of the holy Ghost: Theodoret.
li. 2. Fab.
and hope of gain is said to be it, that caused Paulus Samosatenus to fall
into his damnable opinions.

This contagion has so spread it self like a canker through the veins and
hearts of the world at this day, that there is almost no hope of any
recovery. In respect whereof it cannot be said, as it was of Iay rouse
daughter, that it is even now dead: but as they said of Lazarus, that it
already stinketh.

These causes considered, A definition of Schism.
it may easily be seen what schism is, namely, a separation of a
congregation, either through hatred and contempt of Bishops, ambition,
self-love, or covetousness, by which there arises a diversity either of
mind, or opinion, or speeches, or election of governors, whether
ecclesiastical or civil, which things do both breed and increase that
hatred, contempt, etc.

Howbeit all Schism is not to be condemned. For there is a separation which we
may justly allow and commend, A distinction of Schism.
as when certain parts separate themselves from the whole, because they will
not be corrupted and infected with ungodliness. In this respect Abraham is
commended, because he forsook Caldea his native Country: Lot, Sodom: and
John Baptist was no Schismatique, though he departed from the Leuitical
Priesthood, himself being of the same Tribe: Paul departing from the Scribes
and Pharesies: the Gentiles converted from the Jews: and we, Math. 10. 34
from the Church of Rome: For Christ came not to send peace, but a sword, and
to severe men from their own household.

But if the body it self being good, and some members being putrified and
defiled are departed away, A most detestable schism.
such a schism is most detestable: both because the Church seeing it is a
body of diverse parts, when it is divided, is after a sort ruined: and also
because the parts thereof being distracted and torn a sunder, do perish,
for so much as they do fall from eternal life.

They that separate themselves in this kind of Schism, what other thing do
they but rip up ye seamlesse coat of Christ, and break the limits he has
set, by disquieting the peace of his Church, casting innummerable bones of
debate, to set men together by the ears, so destroying their own souls, and
so much as in them lies, the whole Church, unless Christ vouchsafe his mercy,
to restore and preserve the same. Here a question may be asked, why God does
suffer his Church to be troubled and turmoiled by Schisms, innouations, and
fantastical devices (of the which great learned men are many times the
authors) in such wise, that not only affinities, kindreds, friendships, and
whole families are subverted, as if Bellona or the furies were among them: but
also Cities, Provinces, and kingdoms brought thereby to utter desolation.

Moses the man of God answers this question thus, If there arise among you a
prophet or a dreamer of dremes, Deuteronomy. 13
(and give thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign or the wonder which he has
told thee come to pass) saying, Let us go after other Gods which thou have
not known, and let us serve them: Thou shall not hearken to the words of that
Prophet, or dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your God proves you, to know
whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your
soul. The cause then we see is as clear as the light, why the divine
providence sometime suffers certain teachers in the Church-learned men, False
teachers a temptation.
to preach and maintain new opinions (says Moses) That the Lord your God might
try or prove you. And in very deed this is a sore temptation, that he whom
thou iudgest to be a Prophet, a disciple of the Prophets, whom thou reputest to
be a Doctor and teacher of the truth, whom thou do reverence and greatly
love, that he (I say) should suddenly and covertly sow hurtful errors,
which thou can not quickly find out, nor easily condemn.

To make this place of Moses more manifest, I will set before thee some
Ecclesiastical examples.

When that unhappy Nestorius was turned from a sheep to a woulfe, how
grievously did he then tear and spoil the flock of Christ: when as they
themselves were bitten of him, which for the most part as yet took him for a
sheep, and therefore lay more open to be devoured of him. For who would have
thought yt he could easily have erred, which was elected to be Bishop of
Constantinople by a general consent of learned men, who was beloved of the
best, and reverenced of all men: who daily handled Gods word, and confuted the
pernicious errors both of the Jews and also of the Gentiles? Who would not
have believed, Nestorius held that Marie was the mother of Christ, but not the
mother of God: making two Christ's.
that this man did teach and preach nothing but the truth, and that he had bin
of a sound judgment? But he to make a way for his own heresy (denying the
divinity of Christ) inueighed against the blasphemies of all heresies. And
this is that which Moses said, The Lord your God does prove you whether ye
love him or not. Many things are reported by Zozomenus in his Ecclesiastical
story of the wickedness of this Nestorius, where amongst other things he
sets forth the wonderful and terrible judgment of God upon this
heretic, whose tongue, with the which he had blasphemed Christ, was
immediately after his death, found eaten and consumed from within his mouth with
worms.

But to leave Nestorius, in whom there was more cause of wonder then matter of
profit, more fame then desert: who was for a time more favored of the common
multitude (whom he sought to please) then beloved of God. I will set before you
those of more deserved fame and learning, and thereby a greater temptation to
good men. Among which, Photinus is to be remembered, Photinus denied the
Godhead of Christ
who not long after that he was called to the Church of Syrmitana by a general
consent, showed himself soon after rather a tempter then a teacher, insomuch,
that suddenly like that evil Prophet, or dreamer of dreams, of whom Moses
speaks, he began to persuade the people committed unto him to follow strange
Gods, that is to say, strange errors, which before they had not known: to
bring which wickedness to pass, he had great helps, as a singular wit,
profound learning and persuasible eloquence: insomuch that he could speak
copiously with delight, and dispute and write subtly and sententiouslie with
commendation: as plainly appeared by his books which he wrote in Greek and
Latin. But happily it befell, that the sheep of Christ committed unto him,
having a vigilant eye and careful regard unto their faith, soon remembered the
forewarning of Moses: and although they had in admiration the learning and
eloquence of their pastor and prophet, yet were they not ignorant of the
temptation. For him whom before they followed as the bel-weather of the flock,
the same now they began to shun and fly from as a most dangerous woulfe.

As we are warned by this example of Photinus, so also are we taught by another
of Appollinar, to beware of the danger of this Ecclesiastical temptation, and
to take diligent heed that we keep the faith. This Appollinar was also a man
of great learning, Apollinor held that Christ had no humane soul: and that he
took no flesh of the virgin Marie, but brought it from heaven, etc
as appears by those thirty books which he wrote against Porphyrius: and as
he was learned, so also he seemed zealous in overthrowing many heresies, and
confuting such errors as were contrary to the faith. It were too tedious to
make report of all his works, by which he might seem equal to the greatest
builders of the Church. But see the malice of satan. This man through a
certain profane desire of heretical curiosity, began to be newfangled, and
so as it were by the contagion of a leprosy, he defiled and corrupted all his
labors, whereby his doctrine in the end showed it self to be rather an
Ecclesiastical temptation, than a building of the Church.

But of all the most dangerous tempters of old time, none may be compared to
Origin, in whom many things were singular, many excellent, and many wonderful:
to speak of whose condign praises, in respect of the man's rare gifts, a whole
day will scarce suffice: all which notwithstanding did not make so much for
the glory of religion, as they do set forth the greatness of the temptation.
For what man is he, that rather than he would cast off one endued with such a
wit, so profound in learning in all science, such sweet eloquence, so holy a
life, and with so great grace, will not use this sentence, that he had rather
to err with Origin, then with others to be of a true and sound judgment. And
yet for all this, no common, but a perilous temptation by him (as the end
showed) carried many from the integrity of faith: insomuch that the self same
Origin, insolently abusing the grace of God, trusting too much to his wit, and
standing too fast in his own conceit, made small account of Christian religion,
thought himself more wise then others, contemned the ancient rites of the
Church, and interpreted some places of Scripture after a new and strange sense,
giving just occasion to Moses, to speak unto the Church of Christ concerning
him, Thou shall not hear the voice of that Prophet, because the Lord your God
proves you, whether ye love him or no.

But what need we seek examples so far of, when as at home daily we have
too many of these before our eyes, of such men as are endued with competent
learning and other good gifts, and having once begun well in the race of
discretion, to run a good course, and like good builders, to lay a good
foundation to rear up the Church of Christ by the preaching of the Gospel, are
now at the last like those foolish builders of Babel, confounded in their
work, building by presumption a tower of fond conceit to themselves, and are
by the just plague of God so divided therein, that some are Anabaptisticall
Brownists, some libertine Family-louists, and some (beside other sects)
malecontent Martinists, birds hatched of an evil egg, a generation of vipers,
that can find no life but by the destruction of their mother, to too greedy
to seek themselves and not Christ, having no care to maintain the peace of
his Church, but contrariwise seek to disturb the same: which preach not his
Gospel simply, but their self conceited devises, which are infinite: which
masking kind of hypocrites, have their visors daily taken from their faces,
and the most godly wise do know them perfectly, and can say, that they are no
better than those seducing dreamers and false teachers, of whom Moses speaks,
by which God uses to try us, whether we love him or not.

Who therefore seeing these dangerous days, does not rather wish with Jeremy
to dwell in ye wilderness, that so they might leave the society of sinful men,
and give themselves only to contemplation, that so also they might not see
the miseries like to fall upon us.

Polycarpus that holy martyr, scholar to Saint John the Evangelist, when he
heard in his time but of a little discord, in regard of that which at this day
reigns both in Church and common wealth, is reported to have cried out, Deus
bone, in quae tempora me reseruasti vt haec audiam, Good God, until what time
have thou kept and continued me, yt I should hear these things? How much more
just occasion have the godly of this age, not only to cry out with the
heathen Orator, O tempora, o mores: O times, O manners: but also with the
Prophet Isay, Hear O earth, and hearken O heaven, etc. Isai. 1


The godly and faithful of this most Christian Church of England feeling and
fearing the danger of Schism, do every where greatly complain of the
discord among Ministers. Such is the miserable corruption of this latter
world, that whereas calamities, troubles, and contentions do every where
abound, and the duty of the Ministers of the Church is, even as Fathers, The
duty of good ministers.
chief men, and teachers, or rather as messengers of peace in the house of
God, to teach men plain and simply, and instruct and confirm them in faith,
to reprove sin and errors, to exhort unto good works, to comfort the
afflicted, and finally to stir them up both to peace, charity and concord,
to amendment of life, and repentance from sin: yet notwithstanding many of
them do nothing less. And which is worse, they themselves are the authors of
schism, and distracting of the simple and ignorant multitude, using a
contentious kind of teaching and quarrelling among themselves, that being
overwhelmed with these garboiles, they nothing regard how they may (as cause
requires) provide for the public state, but in stead thereof, under a great
show of holiness and zeal, they thrust into the house of God, before the whole
congregation, their contentious conceits and peevish affections: and so by
these kind of Sermons, the simple and silly people receives small profit,
being by these not instructed as they ought to be, in faith confirmed, nor
moved to repentance: but rather are troubled, and made worse and disobedient.
Whereby it comes to pass that they say they cannot tell what to believe,
nor to what sound and true foundation to lean. And thus these Scismatiques by
their contentions (to use Saint Ambrose words against them) Quadam nuncapatiua
fidei germanitate parricidialibus gladijs homines cupiunt vulnerare. Ambr. de
incarnat. Dom. cap. 2.
With a certain brotherly affinity or likeness of one faith, they covet to
wound men, as if one brother should draw his sword against another. Such false
Apostles are crafty workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of
Christ, and are excellently described in the Apocalips, under the names of
locusts, the forms whereof were similes equis paratis in praelium, Apoc. 9.
like horses ready to the skirmish: that is to say, hot and vehement, and they
had upon their heads, as it were crowns, not crowns in deed, and like to
gold, but not gold: and their faces were as the faces of men, that is, they
seemed good and honest men: and they had hair like unto women's hair, False
Apostles described
many fair shows and resemblances, and the noise of their wings, was like the
noise of many chariots and horses, but they had tails like to Scorpions, and
their stings were in their tails: that is to say, the end and effect of all
their labors, was to seduce men to everlasting damnation.

The state therefore of the Church in these our days, is like a great
household, wherein not only the sons, daughters and servants are at
continual discord, and braule among themselves, whereby it comes to pass
that none of them does his duty, nor seeks to uphold the state of the
house: but also the parents themselves, which are chief of the house, and
ought to remove those contentions, and put every man in mind of his duty, are
also at contention and strife together: and so having respect only to their
own contentions, they let the whole house go to hauock, caring nothing at all
whether it be governed well or ill: yea by reason of these braules, they
confirm the troubled household in their conceived wickedness, whereby at last
they altogether miserably perish. For these unhappy contentions of the
parents, are the chief means to uphold the cause of that heavy destruction
of the whole household. This is a very fit reseblance of the Ministers of the
Church of England at this day (I mean those that be faltie in this behalf.)
For those which are not faulty, (as I hope through the grace of God, the most
are such) are not offended with this speech. For the other do grievously
offend, and no small part of the cause both of the corruptions of the present
manners, and also of the times do rest in them. For whereas they ought by
doctrine, reproving and exhorting gravely, to help the public state and
prevent the worst, they do not as they ought, employ their diligence hereunto,
Contentious Ministers,
but rather do give themselves to sow sedition, then study to follow their
function: and so unfruitfully they continually weary and offend the people,
that many (the more is to be lamented) do stubburnly persist and continue in
their incredulity, and so repent not, to their own destruction, and at the
last contemn both the Church and doctrine.

But such as rather love contentious inuectiues then quiet preachings, and have
so used themselves thereunto, that they can almost do nothing else but contend,
object to us the saying of Saint Paul, Tit. 1. 9
who commands a Bishop to hold fast that faithful word which tends unto
doctrine, that he may be able to exhort by wholesome instruction, and to
confute such as shall speak there-against.

Truly I answer, Ministers must reprove errors.
it is needful that every faithful Minister should steadfastly cleave to
wholesome doctrine, and earnestly bend himself against that which is contrary,
and against such as pervert the same, so as he may be able with firm
arguments to confute their perverse and false opinions, and so overthrow
falsehood before they can utter it.

This may be done stoutly, Modesty and mildnes of spirit becomes Ministers.
and yet modestly. And this grave modesty is to be learned by the examples of
the Apostles, who although they had many enemies, yet notwithstanding did not
immodestly rage in any place of their writings and sermons against a public
estate of the whole Church which themselves had planted. The Apostle Paul, who
would have a Bishop to hold fast true doctrine, and to resist those that
speak against the same, does notably speak of these things, charging thus,
The servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be gentle to all men: 1. Tim.
2. 24.
apt to teach, suffering evil men patiently, instructing them with meeknes,
that are contrary minded, provoking, if God at any time will give them
repentance, that they may know he truth, etc. These precepts of the Apostle are
to be observed by the Ministers of the word, in such wise, that they be not
moved to immoderate heat and railing, whereby in deed they destroy more then
they build.

But (say they) the evil manners of men must be restrained by the straight
discipline of the Primitive Church, and religion must be restored to that
perfection, from which by the corruption of times it is fallen, and this, say
they, is the mark and end of all our labors.

Let us see and consider this, have these reformers taken in hand to embrace
meekness and humility? A comparison between the Apostles and our reformers
Have they cast from them the bitter gall of hatred and cursed speaking? Have
they crucified their fleshly desires? The Apostles, whose steps they would
seem to follow, by their example exhorted the world to humility, lowlynes,
meekness and patience: these teach their scholars pride, cruelty, scolding,
and cursed speaking. The people say, they may not tarry the leisure of the
Magistrate in reformation of religion: the present state is Antichristian.
Again, they were all of one mind, disciples of one master the holy Ghost,
they labored to knit men together with the sure bond of peace, and to fasten
them with the gliewe of mutual love: they prayed to God for the health and
wealth of them that wronged them: being rayled on, they gave not foul language
again. Alas, the contrary is true with them. Quot capita, tot sensus. How
many heads, so many opinions. Their shameful doings, do disprove their
shameless sayings. They speak as if they had in se nihil humanu^, as if they
had mortified al concupiscence in their mortal bodies, as loosed from the
bondage of sin, as if God were the only object of their thoughts, and the
holy Ghost their counsailour. Curios simulant, et Bacchanalia viuunt: they do
outwardly pretend religion, and inwardly intend subversion: promise and
proclaim that they will restore ancient perfection, but they perform nothing
but the idle conceits of their own fancies. What better argument can there be
of this, then their deadly hatred toward their brethren, their daily
contentions, their tanting and ribaldrie railings upon their superiors, and
their Momish fault finding, wherein Saint Augustine fitly compares them unto
Jobs dogs, which licked his sore parts only. And Iustine Martyr compares
them to flies, which do ever gather about the diseased parts of any creature.

Moreover, many great Clerks now a days without any just cause stir up
grievous contentions, Peruerters of good things.
by mistaking and perverting the godly actions, and also the sound and wholesome
doctrine of reverend Fathers and good men: and so by this means those good
Ministers which are given to peace, and had rather apply themselves to
teaching reformation of life, and edifying of the Church, are constrained by
force to cease from their function and labor (being a thing most needful) and
to apply themselves for their defense against Brownists, Martinists, and such
other like pestilent Sects and Schismatiques, whereby it comes to pass, that
even against their wills, they are wrapped in contentions.

But those that kindle these flames of discord, and by that means provoke
other unto schism which are lovers of peace, do greatly offend the majesty
of God. And those again on the other side, are both before God and man to be
excused, which stoutly and modestly withstand that viperous brood, and yet so
much as in them lies, do still prefer peace before Schism.

In the Primitive Church of Christ, if there happened any stir, or any
suspicion of error to arise, they sought the reformation and quieting thereof
far otherwise, to wit, by admonition, by friendly communication and brotherly
conference: How schisms and errors in the Primitive time of the Church were
suppressed.
and when any manifest proof of suspected opinion was evidently showed forth,
they received the same, and quietly without gainsaying yielded themselves, as
it may evidently appear in the reconciliation of John the Bishop of Antioch,
Theodoretus, and others of the East, with Cirillus Alexandrinus. And by this
means they suffered not one braule to breed of an other: neither were their
contentions endless, neither striued they despitefully among themselves, but
handled al things with godly zeal unto sound doctrine. But if any had erred
and persisted obstinatly in his error, then did they admonish all men to
beware of him, Tit* 3. 10
and to avoid his company, like as Saint Paul both taught, and did also
himself. And by this means all things in the Church were in good state, and
al contentions for the most part were quieted. Also the ancient Fathers in all
ages did bend themselves against those which perverted the godly actions and
sound doctrine of others, The ancient fathers were ever enemies to scismatikes
and which went about to stir up needless contentions in the Church.

And those which in the Primitive Church professed one and the same religion of
Christ, could not easily be stirred to contention among themselves, least they
should give occasion thereby unto their enemies the Philosophers, idolatrous
Priests, and others of the subtle Gentiles and Heathen to rejoice, or matter
whereby they might be confirmed in their errors. But they altogether gave
themselves unto concord, Concord.
cutting off in due time all occasions of discord, and joining their forces
together fought against the enemies of the Church: whereof Constantinus magnus
(that good Emperor) very notably admonished the Bishops. But when they
followed not his counsel, The mischief of discord.
but without all reconciliation strove among themselves, there arose hereof
most lamentable miseries to the Church: as the histories both of Arrius and
Mahomet do evidently prove.

There arise also diverse discords and dissentions among the Ministers of the
Church: Singularity.
when some of them use a proper and peculiar form and order which themselves
have devised, both of preaching, and also of other actions in religion, and
would bind others to the same, although they know that the whole state being
christian, has otherwise decreed. And if peradventure their device be
rejected, so that men do not conform themselves to their fantastical
conceits, by and by they judge them not only enemies, but also cry out
against them, and say, that they are Papists and seducers: being so
contentious and peevish, that by no means they will be satisfied, except that
all those things may be received wherewith themselves are delighted. But let
them know, that where there is a Christian Church once instituted and
established, Order.
all things ought to be done in ye same in due order: else why did Paul reprove
some for breaking customs of preaching, 1. Cor. 11
of praying, of cutting of hair etc. which order Anabaptists cannot abide, but
would mingle and confound all things by the subtle instigation of the devil,
Anabaptists hate order.
who misliketh not any thing so much (especially in divine things) as a right
and well ordered government.

As there is one God, one Faith, and one Baptism: one Christ, one holy Ghost,
and one only true religion: so is it needful that all things be done
according to one rule: else many, yea infinite religions will rise, one
contrary to another, yea and contrary Churches to. For, every one will
invent a Church according to his own fantasy. We have all one hope, one
communion, one bond of peace, and one sacrifice: and who so ever divides
himself from this unity, Cyprian. lib. desimplicitate prelatorum.
(says Saint Cyprian) alienus est, prophanus est, hosts est: he is a
stranger, he is a profane person, he is an enemy. And Saint Augustine says,
Non potest esse particeps diuinae charitatis, qui hostis est vnitatis. Aug.
epist. 152 contra Donatistas.
Quisquis enim se ab Ecclesia seperauerit* quantumlibet laudabiliter se viuere
existimet, hoc solo scelere, quo a Christi vnitate seiunctus est, no^ habet
vitam, sed ira Dei manet super eum: that is, he cannot be partaker of divine
charity, which is an enemy of unity. For whosoever separateth himself from
the unity of the Church, how commendably so ever he seems in his own eyes
to walk, for this wickedness alone, by which he is severed from the unity of
Christ, he has no life, but the wrath of God abides upon him.

It is most convenient that there be in the Church one uniform order as
touching the times, Uniformity in the service of God.
the places, the forms, and other circumstances to be used in the service of
almighty God, for the honor of his name, as it is prescribed by the wisdom
and godly discretion of this whole Christian state, that all Schisms and
contentions might be taken away. Exodus 12. 49
Wherefore else did the Lord God command his people of Israel to meet together
in one place, and to sacrifice all after one form (in their several
sacrifices) which he had prescribed? Assuredly even because there should be no
occasion given of Schism, as might have been, if the Israelites had assembled
together in diverse places, John. 4. 20
and had used such order and form, as they themselves liked, 2. King. 17. 24.
and as the Samaritans did, which caused great contention between them and the
Jews in religion, as it is to be seen in Josephus.

Now a days, this uniformity of many inconstant men is loathed, and novelty
desired, who are ever learning and devising, and never hold any thing firm
and certain. Tertullian a most ancient writer, does in his book de
Praescriptionibus, show that in his time there were the like sort of men, which
continually did search the Scriptures, that they might thence bring forth some
new thing, and were wont always to defend themselves with these words of the
Gospel, Seek and ye shall find. To whom he answers: in deed we must
seek, but yet only those things which pertain to our salvation, and not
strange things which are nothing necessary, but are rather contrary to the
Scriptures, and rule of our faith. For like as he which has found that which
is true and right cease from seeking: so he which continues seeking,
testifies thereby that he has not yet found out the truth. There is an end of
seeking, beyond the which we may not pass. For the Christian faith is not
such, whose end cannot be found, so that we should have need always to
seek. And this is confirmed by the Evangelist S. John, who says ye Christ did
many things which were not written, for if they should have been orderly
written, the world could not contain them. But he adds, These things are
written that ye might believe that Jesus is Christ the son of God, and that
so believing ye might have life through his name.

And herein we see commonly the most blind, the most bold: the more
ignorant, the more busy: and the least witty, to be most inquisitiue. With
such kind of men Saint Basil was also troubled in his time, who being in
godly conference with the Emperor Valens about points of religion, one
Demosthenes, which was the Emperors cook, rudely would interrupt him, and
pervert places of Scripture according to his fantasy and purpose: whose
presumption, Saint Basil being no longer able to bear, he meekely reproved
him with these words, Histor. tripart. lib. 7. cap. 36.
Tuum est de pulmentariis cogitare, non dogmata diuina decoquere. It belongs
to thy office to make pottage, and not to make a hotchpot of Scripture. The
heathen misliked that the shoemaker should censure above the shoe: and would
that Carpenters only should (because they best could) deal with buildings.
Tractant fabrilia, fabri, etc.

He therefore is a good and true Christian, which loves the simple truth of
God, stays himself in true religion, and abides firm and stable in the
faith, what novelties so ever any one or a few light heads shall devise in
corners, knowing that they do not appertain unto religion, but rather unto
temptation: the which also the Apostle confirms, saying: There must be
sects, that the perfect among you may be known.

And observe it who that list, at the first budding forth of every novelty,
the gravity and steadfastnes of the wheat, and the lightness of the chafe is
by and by discerned. Inconstancy.
For the chafe is carried hither and thither with every vain blast of
erroneous doctrine. One while through rash presumption, they approve and allow
those things which seem uncertain, and another while they stand in doubt
through a fear without reason of those things which are certain: uncertain
they are which way to take, or which way to return, what to take hold of, or
what to let pass. Thus being out of the safe haven of truth, they are tossed
with the waves of diverse cogitations, and so are compelled to pull down their
sails of pride, which before they had spread abroad through the blasts of
novelties. Which when I consider with my self, I cannot marvel enough at so
great madness, and so great a desire that some men have to err, that not being
contented with good and profitable rules of most ancient Ecclesiastical
government, do still from day to day devise and seek after new and strange
plats to fit their fancies, and do ever in the store house of their vain
conceits, find some thing to add, to change, and to pull from religion, as
if it were not a divine and heavenly thing, which suffices not to be once well
established, but an earthly institution, which cannot otherwise be made
perfect, but by a continual and daily reformation, or rather reprehension.
Whereas the wise man gives this counsel, Eccle. 8. 9.
Go not from the doctrine of the Elders, for they have learned it of their
fathers, and of them thou shall learn understanding. And the Apostle after the
same manner instructs Tymothe, O Tymothe, keep that which is committed unto
thee: avoid profane and vain bablings, 2, Tim. 6
and oppositions of science, falsely so called, which while some profess, have
erred concerning the faith. O Tymothe (says he) keep that which is committed
unto thee, etc. The Apostle begins with an exclamation, proceeding from a
prophetical and most charitable spirit, foreseeing and sorrowing the errors
to come. Tymothe does bear the image and representation of the clergy at
this day. In consideration of thieves and enemies, Math. 13
Tymothe has matter of charge committed to his safe keeping, least men
sleeping, they should sow tares upon the good seed wheat, which the son
of man has sown in his field. Keep (says he) that which is committed unto
thee: not that which thy self have found: which thou have received, not that
which thou have devised: a matter not of wit, but of doctrine: not of private
vsurpatio^, but of public tradition: a matter brought and delivered unto
thee, not set forth by thee: whereof thou ought not to be the author, but
the keeper: not the institutor, but the follower. Keep (says he) that which
is committed unto thee: that is, keep the talent of faith and truth inuiolate:
let that abide with thee, which is committed unto thee: and let that only be
delivered by thee: Thou have received gold, deliver gold again. I would not
have thee chop and change deceitfully, and as one deuoide of shame, craftily to
tender copper in stead of gold: but pure and perfect gold, such as thou have
received. O Tymothe, O most reverend Doctor and teacher, as God has furnished
thee with good gifts meet to teach; Exodus 35. 30.
so show thy self a right Bezaleel, of the spiritual tabernacle: set forth the
precious gemmes of Gods word, place them faithfully, and polish them wittily,
that they may be resplendant and beautiful: let it be plainly understood by
thy exposition, which before time was obscurely believed: let this latter time
be thankful to thee for the understanding of it, which the former ages have
reverenced, not understood: notwithstanding so teach those things which thou
have learned, y^ when thou speak them newly, thou speak not novelties.

But some man will say, do ye then mislike that there should be any profiting
and good proceeding in religion? No verily, it is most to be desired. And who
is he so envious unto men, and so abominable unto God, which goes about to
forbid this? But yet there must be great care had, that it be a proceeding in
deed, and not rather a backsliding, an innovation and alteration from good to
evil.

It is a profiting and a good proceeding, when a thing is amplified and
enlarged in it self: and it is an alteration or innovation, when one thing is
transposed into another.

The understanding, knowledge and wisdom, as well of every one as of all
men, as well of one man, as of the whole Church, must of necessity grow and
greatly profit by the degrees of ages and times: but yet only in one kind, y^
is to say, in one religion, in one sense, and in one and the self same
opinion.

The religion of men's souls may be resembled unto y^ course and order of their
bodies, which albeit they grow to their full stature and bigness, Religion
compared to men's bodies.
by process of time and years, yet they are the very same still that they
were before. There is great difference between the blossom of youth, and the
ripenes of age, and yet old men are the very same that they were when they
were young: insomuch, that although the stature, apparel, and form of the man
be altered, yet the nature abides all one, and the person is the same. Small
are the members of sucking babes, greater when they be young men, yet all one
and the same. The child has as many sinews, veins, an^ bones as the old
man, and look what the more ripe age has, the same did the seed of infancy
bring forth: so that old men have nothing new in them, which before time lay
not hid in children. There is no doubt then, but that this is the most true
rule of profiting, the sure and comely order of growing, when age always
discovers those parts and forms in the greater, which the wisdom of the
creator made before in the smaller. But if the form of man be turned afterward
into any other similitude and likeness then of his own kind: or if he have
any more or fewer members then he should, the body then must needs either
decay, or else become monstrous. In like sort Christian religion must follow
these lineaments of profiting, to wit, in years it must be made sound and
perfect, in time extended and enlarged, and in time extolled and advanced, and
yet so, that it abide uncorrupted and pure, full and perfect in all the proper
members and senses thereof: because it will not suffer alteration, or
innovation, no loss of property, nor any variety of definition. As for
example, Our forefathers of old time, I mean in time of the Primitive Church
did sow in this ecclesiastical sowing the seeds of pure faith. It were now
unfit that we their posterity, in sted of the true and pure grain, should
choose the deceitful errors of tares: but this rather is more meet and
agreeing, that the first and the last, not disagreeing with themselves, we
reap the fruit from the increase of pure instruction, and also of pure
religion: that when the first sproutes of those seeds by process of time
begin to appear, and is now prosperous and garnished, yet nothing of the
property of the natural seed is altered. And although another form,
difference and distinction be added, yet the same nature of kind remains.
For God forbid that the rosarie plant of true religion, should be turned into
briers and thorns. Yea God forbid that in this spiritual Paradise, the sweet
Sinamom and fragrant Balsamus trees, should yield forth fodenlie and unlooked
for deadly poison. Therefore whatsoever has been sown in this church, which
is Gods husbandry, has bin sown by the faithful and painful labors of
their fathers: the same ought now to be trimmed and garnished by the industry
of the children and posterity: the same must flourish and wax ripe: the same
must profit and be profited. For it is meet that those ancient decrees of
heavenly Philosophy, should by process of time be adorned, beautified and
polished: but vnm^et to be changed, Innovation a dangerous evil.
abridged or maimed. They may receive cleerenes, light and distinction, and yet
retain fullness, integrity, and propriety. If this wicked liberty to chop
and change, to alter, to innouate, to set up and pull down, according to
every fantastical device, be granted, I fear to think, and quake to speak,
in what danger religion shall be to be defaced and quite abolished. The which
one done but in part, we shall have every year, every month, nay every day
a new religion. For the parts by little and little being rejected, what will
follow at the last, but that the whole also shall be banished. And if
novelties may displace ancient godly rules, if profane men may deface goldie
Fathers, which stand as pillars in the Church, it will at the last come to this,
that nothing in the Church shall be lest untouched, nothing sound, nothing
free: whereby in the end, y^ which was before time the closet of a chaste, pure,
and vncorrupt truth, shall become a filthy sink of abominable errors, and a
soul cage of unclean birds. But God for his mercy furne this away far from
the minds of his chosen, and let this be rather the fury and madness of the
wicked.

The Church of Christ being a vigilant and wary keeper of the doctrine
committed to her, does not change, diminish nor alter any thing at any time
concerning the same. It cutteth not off necessary matter: it does not add
superfluous things: it loses not that which belongs to her: it usurps
not forain and profane things: but withal endeavor she seeks this, that
making much, and embracing the most ancient rules and precepts, faithfully and
wisely the may further and advance that which at the first was but begun, she
may ratify and establish things expressed and manifested, and may constantly
keep whatsoever was before confirmed and determined.

But to return to the words of the Apostle, O Tymothe, (says he) keep that
which is committed unto thee, and avoid profane and vain bablings Shun
(says he) such as a viper, as a scorpion, and as a most dangerous serpent,
least they strike thee, not only by touching thee, but also by their sight and
breath. 1. Cor. 9. 11
Avoid them, that is, with such see you deal not: 2. John. 1. 10
If any come unto you (says the Apostle) and brings not this doctrine. What
doctrine? The Gospel of our Savior, first preached by him, then by Saint
Peter, Saint Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, and which has so remained
from age to age by the incorrupt tradition of truth, and shall also so continue
for ever unto the worlds end. What then? Receive him not to house, neither bid
him God speed: for he that bids him God speed is partaker of his evil.
Avoid (says Saint Paul) profane and vain bablings. And what is that?
Truly such speeches and writings as savor nothing of holiness or religion,
with the which such as are members of the true Church, are not acquainted.
Compare then the late seditious books of Martine and his mates with this
sentence of the Apostle, Martine reprehended by Paul for vain babbling.
and judge if they be not full stuffed with these profane bablings which we
are commanded to shun and avoid.

Look into them, and ye shall see both their mouths and books ouerflowe with
evil speeches, braulings, nips and tants: yea, and that against magistrates,
and such as are in chief authority. Are not Gods ministers in these days
used with much more contumely and despite by the profane and shameless
libellers of our time, then ever the heathen durst use the Priests of Jupiter?
Be they not much bolder in deprauing them (whom yet they know not) the^
Michael the Arechangell durst be when he strove against the devil, Deprauers
of good men,
to whom he would not give railing speeches? Mos hic semper fuit hereticorum,
quorum doctrinam no^ possunt, illorum vitam in odium adducere. This ever was
the custom (says a learned Father) of heretics, to bring their doctrine
into hatred, whose life they could not deprave. The same also was the practice
of the Arrians long since, who seeing it impossible to induce the people to
their heresy, while the good Bishops were had in reputation, devised therefore
slanders, and laid grievous crimes against some of them. Among which, they
charged the godly and learned Bishop Athanasius with murder and incontinencie.
False accusers
With murder, in that he should have cut off one Arsemius his arm, bringing
forth the arm of a dead man for proof of their purpose, yet afterward
Arsemius himself was known to live, and had both his arms. With
incontinencie, in that he should have ravished a certain woman, who being
suborned for that purpose, did take a most shameless harlot, without blushing
to avouch it to his face, though (as afterward it was proved) she never saw nor
knew him. And have not like false accusations been also of late forged against
good and godly Prelates, men for their profound learning and approved
constancy, worthy of all reverence? Good Christians (which these malcontents
would feign seem to be) never used such profane bablings: this has ever
been the manner of schismatiques and heretics. Who ever taught any heresy
that first began not with profane bablings and ianglings, so seuering and
dividing himself from the true Church. Al heresy first began with vain
babbling.
That this is true, examples will make it more then manifest. For who at any
time before profane Pellagius, durst arrogate so great virtue and power of
free will, Pellagius.
that he thought not the grace of God necessary to all good works? Celestinus.
Who before that monstrous disciple of his Celestius, denied all mankind to be
under the guilt of Adams transgression? Who before that blaspheming Arrius,
Arrius.
durst once think to divide the unity of y^ blessed Trinity? Who before that
abominable Sabellius Sabellius.
durst once take in hand to confound the trinity and unity? Who before that
cruel Nouatius, Nouatius.
called God cruel, for that he would rather have the death of a sinner, then
that he should return andliue? Who before Simon Magus ^^mon Magus
and Priscillianus ^iscilianus.
ever affirmed, that God was the author of evil? Who ever before the
Anabaptists ^nabaptists.
disallowed baptism to infants, denied war, the power of the Magistrate, and
ecclesiastical order, as do also our Martinists? Who before Pope Gregory the
seventh, otherwise called Hildebrand, ^ildebrand.
challanged the authority of both swoordes to belong to the Church of Rome,
^essalians.
etc. Who before the Enchetai or Messalians, thought that men ought to do
nothing else but pray continually, setting aside al other worldly business. And
who before our new vpstart Martinists affirmed, that men must do nothing but
to attend to preaching continually, rejecting all forms of prayer, except
such as their fantasies, (many times vnsauourly (God wot) upon the sudden do
devise? Who before the Celestines and our late Puritans, ^eldstins.
did so much as dream of a perfection in this life? What should I speak of
the Brownists, Papists, Family-louists, and such like? Many mo sectaries and
heretics there be of like sort both old and new, which for breuities sake,
and loathing of Christian ears, I omit. By all which notwithstanding it does
evidently appear, that the guise of heretics ever is to be singular,
new-phangled, to delight in vain and profane bablings, and by a false name of
knowledge, to make shipwreck of faith. Whereas contrariwise sincere preachers
in deed, and true Christians without hypocrisy, do continually and
steadfastly hold fast one truth, and do condemn and abhor profane
novelties, and as the Apostle said, and said again, If any man bring them any
other doctrine then that which they have already received, they should hold
him accuised.

Wherefore I most humbly and heartely beseech all the Ministers of Christ, An
exhortation ^o y^ ministers of the Church
that they end and cast away al their controversies, and that they knit
themselves together in true concord and charity, forgiving each other their
errors and offenses, avoiding new devises, and to teach the people not only to
know the truth, but also to avoid the fellowship of the enemies thereof. So
Saint John taught others, and so himself gave example, Fugiamus hinc, ne
balneum cadat super nos, in quo est Cerinthus veritatis hostis. Let us (says
he) speedily depart hence, least the bath wherein Cerinthus, the enemy of the
truth is, do fall upon us. Conuersing with them does argue consent and
allowance of their doings. Digni sunt morte, non solum qui faciunt illa, Romans
1. 32
sed etiam qui consentiunt ea facientibus. Not only they which commit such
things are worthy of death, but they also which have pleasure in the^ y^ do
the^. Preach plain and sound doctrine, which evermore agrees with it self. Bring
the Church into one unity with Christ so nere as you can, and faithfully
endeavor your selves to preserve true concord therein: Let the rule of S.
Augustine prevail with you, Ad Cassul. presbit.
to wit, In quibus rebus nihil statuit certiscriptura, mos populi Dei et
instituta maiorum pro lege tenenda sunt. In those things wherein the Scripture
has made no certain determination, the manner and custom of Gods people, and
the constitutions of our ancestors, are to be holden for a law. But chiefly
pray unto God devoutly with all feruencie for his grace and holy spyrit, that
ye may do all these things with a willing and a ready mind. For these things
not observed on your part, an infinite number of souls through your fault shall
most miserably be brought into danger of damnatio: and how then will ye excuse
your selves at the hour of death, and in that great day of the Lord.

Weigh well these things with your selves: it is a horrible thing to fall into
the burning wrath of the Lord. And as y^ Apostle warns you, Galat. ^
If ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of
another. Good, grave, and godly men are justly offended with your contentions,
for ye wound the weak consciences of your brethren. Math. 18. ^
Ve vohis a scandalis, etc. Woe unto you because of offenses. On the contrary
part, Papists, Atheists, and other wicked and godless men are delighted in
them: for that the idolatrous superstition and abomination of the one is not
(as it ought to be) reproved and condemned, because you have now wholly turned
the spyrituall swoorde from them against your brethren, having given occasion
to the Papists to say unto us, Vos Christiani dissidetis inter vos, etc. Ye
Protestants do disagree among your selves, Clem. Stromat. lib. 7
and have so many sects among you, that all which notwithstanding bear the
title of Christianisme, yet do ye curse and condemn one another: wherefore
your religion is no true religion, neither has it proceeded from God: and
because the hypocrisy and counterfeit holiness of the other is not discovered,
who only hope that will come to pass through your discention at the last,
that they shall possess the whole patrimony of the church. Which if it should
so fall out (as God forbid it should) learning thereby will decaie,
barbarism will take place, and so in time this most flourishing Church in
Christendom, shall be overthrown.

Moreover, they which are come to a little taste of the Gospel, and are now
ready to forsake their errors and superstitions, purposing to cleave unto the
Gospel, are set back and hindered by these contentions, and say they know
there are many ercors, abuses, and great faults in the Popish Church, but yet
they cannot join themselves unto us, who so sharply contend, accuse, and
braule one with another. Of these weaklings Chrysostom speaks thus: Venit
gentilis et dicit, velim fieri Christianus, sed nescie cui adherem, etc. The
Gentile comes and says, I would feign be a Christian, but I know not with
whom to join: there are many dissentions and tumults among you, I know not
what opinion to choose and hold: for every one says: I speak the truth. Also
of this stumbling block Melancton in his time complained, Quos fugiamus
habemus, sed quos sequamur non intelligimus. We know (says he) whom we should
avoid, meaning the Papists, but whom to follow we cannot determine. Such is
the state of the church of England at this day, through the diversity of
opinions, that weaklings are greatly dismayed. Yet this excuse in the day of
judgment, will not make weaklings (whom Paul secludeth out of Gods kingdom)
faultlesse: and at the end of their life, except they convert themselves unto
Christ, and yield themselves wholly unto him, they can never have a quiet
conscience.

Other some also say (and most truly) that God is the God of peace and
concord, and not of strife: but these Preachers (say they) are at dissension
among themselves, and therefore God is not with them. But this might have been
objected against the Churches in all ages. For among the Jews were sects, as
the Saduces, the Pharesies, the Essers and the Stoikes. Among the School men
were Scotists, Tomists, and Occamists. Among the seven Deacons of the Primitive
Church, Act. 6. 4.
was Nicholas, of whom came the Nicholaitans, Apoc. 2. 6
mentioned in the Revelation of Saint John.

Yea, this might have been objected against the Primitive and most perfect and
holy Church of Christ militant, wherein have bin so many heresies, schisms and
sects, as Irenaeus, Tertullian, Epiphanius and Augustine do testify, that in
regard of them the very name of Christ began to be odious among the people:
and as Socrates reports, the christians were mocked and iested at on public
stages, and in their common plays and enterludes.

Nevertheless by these objections it may appear, how great heaps of evil
suspicions these discords and contentions do bring: whereby we are put in
mind, the more earnestly and diligently to study for peace and concord: so
shall we show our selves to be of that blessed number, of whom Christ
pronounces this benediction, Matthew. ^. ^
Blessed are the peace makers, for they shall be called the children of God.

ANd as concerning you (men and brethren, beloved in Christ) which are to hear
and learn of us, An exhortat^^^ to hearers an^ readers.
the pure and whoelsome doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, take heed how
and what ye hear. Math. 4. 24
Prove the spirits whether they be of God or no, because there be many
seducers in the world: 1. John. 4. 1
and hold these for undoubted and approved rules: Romans 16 17
first, that none can lay any other foundation beside that which is already
laid, that is, Christ Jesus: secondly, that the true Church is always known
by these three things, by the preaching of the Gospel, the administration of
the Sacraments, and the exercises of holy life, as appears by the words of
the Apostle, Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might
sanctify it, being cleansed by the washing of water through the word, that he
might make unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, etc.

The first two marks are expressed in these words, By the washing of water
through the word: and the last mark is this, That he might make it unto
himself a glorious Church without spot, etc.

Thirdly, that the same Church is from time to time troubled with false
Apostles, whom Paul thus painteth out in their coulors, Romans 16. 17
to the end ye may know them, Have (says he) a diligent eye unto such as cause
divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoid ye them. For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own bellies, and with fair speech and flattering deceive the hearts of
the simple: 2. Tit 3. 6
they creep into houses, Tit. 1. 10.
and lead captive simple women, which women are ever learning, 2. Tim. 3. 8
and are never able to come to the knowledge of the truth: 1. Tim. 6. 4
they are vain talkers and disobedient, subuerting whole houses, teaching
things which they ought not, for filthy lucers sake: they are men of a
corrupt mind, and reprobate concerning the faith, puffed up, knowing nothing,
but wering themselves about questions and strife of words, whereof comes
envy, strife, railings and evil surmisings, and vain disputations: 1. Tim.
5. 13
men destitute of the truth, which think that gain is godliness: they are also
idle, and go from house to house: yea, 1. Tim. 1. 7 and verse 19.
they are not only idle, but also partakers and busy bodies, speaking things
which are not comely: they would be Doctors of the law, and yet understand
not what they speak, 2. Tim. 2. 16
neither whereof they affirm, but having put away a good conscience from
them, 2. Tim. 3. 5
have made shipwreck of faith: whose profane and vain bablings shall increase
unto more ungodliness, verse. 9
and their word shall fret as a canker: they have only a show of godliness,
but have denied the power thereof: but they shall prevail no longer, for their
madness shall be evident unto all men.

These marks being so evident, you cannot be severed from the true Church,
except ye will most wilfully run to schism, a monster most perilous.
Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 6. cap. 37
The famous Bishop Dionysius, as witnesses Eusebius, says y^ to suffer
martyrdom for the avoiding of schism, is more commendable, then for the
avoiding of idolatry, because in the one is the safety of our souls, in the
other is the salvation of the whole Church. The place is pregnant. And Saint
Augustine proves, that schism offended God more then idolatry, because it
was more grievously punished, as in Chore, Dathan and Abiram, who were
schismatiques, then in Aaron: and them that worshipped the golden calfe, who
were idolaters. The greater punishment most commonly is a token of the greater
sin. Also the danger is greater which grows by conuersing with
schismatiques and heretics, then with Painims and idolaters, which Augustine
notes very well in these words (handling the Psalm. 54.) Ab his qui long sunt
a me, facilis cautio est. Non enim me ta^ cito fallit, qui dicit, veni, Idolum
adore: multu^ a me iste long est. Christianus es. Christianus inquit: ex
propinque aduersatur, prope est, redime Domini pace animam meam, ab his qui
appropinquant mihi. I can easily beware of them that are far off from me. He
does not so soon deceive me that says, come worship an Idol, he is very far
off from me: but I say to another, Art thou a Christian? Yea forsooth a
Christian (says he.) This fellow stands near me and may quickly overthrow
me. Redeem and deliver my soul O Lord, from them that after this sort
approach and come near unto me. Lib de vnitate ecclesiae.
And Saint Cyprian says, Non aperta tantum periculia metuenda sunt: facilior
cautior est, vbi manifestier formido est: plus cauendus est inimicus qui
latentur obripit, etc.

It is a most dangerous thing to be separated by any occasion from the true
Church, the which (God be thanked) may be so plainly seen at this day in this
realm of England, that no man can doubt of it. And yet very many have bin
carried away from the same through the blasts of false doctrine: and some
without any cause have too too rashly divorced themselves, what color of
reformation so ever they have pretended. The Corinthians were very much divided
among themselves: one would be of Paul, another of Cephas, another of Apollo,
and so they attributed as much to their Ministers as unto Christ. They brought
their strifes and contentions to the judgment seat of Ethnikes: they suffered
an incestuous man, who had the wife of his Father, to be conversant among them:
they thought not whooredome to be sin: they did every where eat with the
Painims, of things offered unto idols: they celebrated the supper of the Lord
with unquietness of mind: they abused the gift of tongues: neither did they
judge truly and godly of the resurrection. These were no doubt grievous
blemishes, yet notwithstanding Paul did not forsake the Church of Corinth.
Nevertheless some men can (as they think) with a safe conscience condemn this
our most Christian Church, both by speaking and writing against it, and also by
cutting off themselves from the same, gathering themselves together into
corners and in secret conuenticles, as the Family of Love, the Brownists, the
Martinists, and others like unto them.

Such were in old time their predecessors the Donatists, who in comparison of
themselves condemned all other Christians. They released their own crew from
the severity of the censure, and yet in their congregation suffered most
impure men, namely the Optatians, the Gildonians, and the Primians.

Be not ye like unto those men? abstain from their companies, refrain their
assemblies, frequent not their sermons, read not their libels, defend not
their opinions, but rather detest them. By reading heretical books, Eus.
Eccle. hist. lib. 7. cap. 6
many learned men have yielded to error, and may not ignorant men much sooner?
Dionysius Alexandrinus a most learned and virtuous Bishop, confesses to a
friend of his, that he felt himself much the worse by reading of evil books.
If ye shall presume upon your constancy and knowledge, that there can ensue no
danger, Qui stat, videat ne cadat, Let him that stands, take heed least he
fall. Yea know, he that touches pitch shall be defiled therewith: and the wise
man says, Qui dormit iuxta sepem, mordebit eum coluber. He that sleeps by a
hedges side, shall be bitten of a snake. Evil words corrupt good manners, and
so does evil company to.

Furthermore my brethren take heed of self-liking, of arrogancy, of
singularity, and of contempt of wholesome doctrine delivered by this Church:
The devils cords, whereby he draws men into heresy.
for these are the devils cords, by which he draws men at the last into
horrible heresies: fearful examples whereof there have been too many of late
within this land, especially in the County of Suffolk, where sundry
persons within these three or four years, both men and women, beginning first
to be so singular, that they controlled the Ecclesiastical government, and
present state of the Church, fell at the last yet further, and became plain
Anabaptists, denying flatly the power and office of magistrates: and not
staying here, fell yet more horribly into greater wickedness, namely into the
heresy of the Arrians, most blasphemously denying the Godhead of Christ Jesus.
For the which most detestable heresies, Jews, Cole and Ket.
three of them being by the devil obdurated in their wickedness (namely
Jews, Cole and Ket) were burned at Norwich, and some others of them abiured
their heresies openly in the town of Ipswich.

Let these fearful examples brethren, move you to beware of contempt of
wholesome doctrine, and of singularity, and so many of you, in whom there
rests as yet such heart burning and division about things of no moment, as if
in religion we were utterly sundered one from another, and had no point of
faith at all that were common betwixt us, I do humbly beseech for Christ's
sake, and of the peace of his Church, whereof you profess your selves to be
members, that with all speed you return unto that unity again, from whence
ye are most dangerously fallen. Amemus Dominum Deum nostrum, etc. Aug. in Psa.
^^. sub finem.
Let us love the Lord our God (says S. Augustine) and love we his Church also:
him as our Father, and the Church as our mother: this matrimony is conjoined
with singular love: no man offends she one, and has the favor of the other.

The Epharamites were of the people of God, and yet revolted away from the
law, though still they held (after a sort) the profession thereof: and having
so done, they so continued a long time after, as a wanton, untamed, and unruly
heifer, notwithstanding all the warnings that God by his Prophets did give unto
the^. But yet it is recorded of them, that at the length they returned again,
smiting upon the thigh, and acknowledging that they had committed many shameful
things. If now with Ephraim ye have so erred and stepped aside, pity it were
but that ye should be as ready with him to repent and return again. Remember
what S. Paul writes to the Ephesians, Be ye careful to keep the unity of the
spirit through the bond of peace. Again, One Lord, Ephe. 4. 3.
one Faith, one Baptism, one God the Father of all, which is above all,
through all, and in all. He says also that we be one body of the flesh and
of the bones of Christ, that we be most nearly conjoined unto him, and the
gifts which we have, be derived unto us by God through the flesh of Christ,
given for our sake upon the cross: and so by the flesh of Christ we be
coupled and united to God. And in the Gospel of Saint John, Christ prays thus
for his Church, John. 17. 21.
Cause you that they may be one, even as I am in thee, and thou art in me. The
unity of the Church therefore by the places alleged, consists in the
spirit, in the word of God, in the Sacraments, and in a most near bond with
Christ, who is the head of all the members of the Church. This unity we must
by no means break, but first seek all the ways that possible we can, to
make the same safe and sound.

Bernard an ancient Father of the Church says, that neither prayer, Bernard in
(...) quem habuit ad sor. de modo been viue^(...)
sacrifice, nor any thing else, pleases God better then our concord and
unity, and that nothing grieueth the devil more, then that we should live in
unity: For if we fast (says he) the devil seareth it not, because he never
eats: if we watch he cares not, because he never sleeps: if we pray, he
regards it not, because he never prays: but that we should be in unity, it
displeases him: because we being men, and on the earth, should do that which
he could not do, being an Angel in heaven. We know it now by experience,
that Fratrum odia acerbissima, and that inimici hominis domestici eius, that
the hatred of brethren is most grievous, and that a man's enemies shall be they
of his own household. The Church of God never received more detriment by the
tyranny of papists, then she has and does daily by the cruel hatreds of
false and dissembling brethren.

If therefore ye intend to be citizens of that heavenly Jerusalem, Subtraite
vos ab omni frate ambulante inordinate, Withdraw your selves from every
brother that walks inordinatly, and understand that the earthly Jerusalem,
Psalm. 122. 3.
is builded as a city that is at unity in it self. Of the Primitive Church
it is said, that they continued with one accord in prayer: and the multitude of
them that believed, were of one heart and of one soul. If ye will abide in this
unity, Act. 2. 46
then must ye be always constant in the truth, and not depend upon men. Act.
4. 32
For through inconstancy the peace of the church, which is the bond of unity,
is many times broken, when as our affections and likings of men is such, that
thereafter as ye love the^, so ye like their doctrine. For ye regard the
messenger, and not his message: ye look upon the earthen vessel, and not upon
the heavenly treasure therein contained. And hereof it comes to pass, that
ye do contemn and despise, not only wholesome doctrine, but also the minister
and preacher thereof: and then comes such a nicenes and choice liking of
some, that at the last follows also an utter loathing of others, whom before
ye greatly liked.

Thus has the common multitude always behaved themselves toward the
ministers of the Gospel. Inconstancy of ye multitude
Yea thus was our savior Christ himself handled among the Jews: John. 6. 14.
15
who one while would needs make him a king, John. 7. 1
and anon after was ready to kill him: one while they called him Rabbi, John,
6. 60
and another while a Samaritan, saying that he had the devil: they which once
loved his doctrine, said afterward, this is a hard saying. And as Christ
himself: so also were Apostles rewarded at their auditors hands: and no
marvel, Luke. 6. 40
for the disciple is not above his master. It is enough for the disciple, Luke.
3. 15 and verse 20
if he be as his master is. Therefore John the Baptist had such estimation for
a while, when he first began to preach the Gospel, Math. 14. 10
that he was taken of most men for the Messiah: yet stood he not long before he
lost his head. Act 14. 11 and verse 15.
When Paul and Barnabas had wrought that notable miracle upon ye lame man, the
people were blindly carried with such inconsiderate zeal, that in all have
they would have done sacrifice unto them as unto God: but in a moment this hot
zeal was so cold toward Saint Paul, that they stoned him almost for dead. The
same Apostle was of the Galathians also reputed for an Angel of God, Gal. 4.
14 and verse. 15. 16
insomuch, that if it had bin possible, they would have plucked out their own
eyes for him to do him good, but afterward they took him for no better then
their enemy. And why? Forsooth because he preached unto them the truth.
Consider and see, if the very like inconstancy, and far worse if worse may
be, has not bin among you. In the beginning of her Majesty's most happy
reign, you had those learned and grave fathers in great estimation, which
during the time of Queen Mary suffered exile for the testimony of the gospel,
some in Geneua, some in Frankford, and some other in other parts of Germany:
and at their first return to the Church of England, being placed by her
Majesty in the rooms of greatest charge in the Church, as tried and approved
men that had borne the whole heat and burden of the day, ye esteemed of them
worthily, ye were very glad to see and hear them, ye embraced their most
wholesome doctrine, and so ye begun to run well in a good course, but ye
persisted not, ye were soon weary of your old men, and ye must needs have
new: and I fear me that this prophetical saying of the Apostle, is verified
upon many of you, The time will come, when they will not suffer wholesome
doctrine, but having their ears itching, shall after their own lusts get them
a heap of teachers, 2. Tim. 4. 3
and shall turn their ears from the truth, Gal 1. 6
and shall be given unto fables.

Be not carried about with every wind, Eccle. 5 9
and go not into every way: for (so says the wise man) does the sinner that
has a double tongue. Such double walking, and such dissembling talking, will
at the last, and that ere it be long, cause greater division and contention
among you, to the woeful ruin of us all, if it be not amended betimes. And if
we go forward in discord and bitter contentions, as we have hitherto done,
it is greatly to be feared, least GOD have appointed and ordained that same
against us, which in time past he did in the reigns of Dioclesian and Maximian
the Emperors, when as there were like strifes and contentions in the Church: as
notably appears in the Ecclesiastical history written by Eusebius: the
effect of which history is diligently to be marked for this cause, to wit, for
that in those days the Church of Christ flourished. But the people were
unthankful unto God, and impenitent, and the ministers of the Church were
ambitious, and stirred up grievous and hot contentions among themselves.
Wherefore God being angry with them, gave them into the hands of tyrants, who
raised up greater persecutions against the Church then ever was heard of
before. For thus writes Eusebius.

But when we were not touched with any of these things, nor went about to
reconcile our selves unto God, but as godles men, supposed that God neither
cared for, nor yet would visit our wickedness, but heaped sin upon sin.
And those which took upon them to be our patrones, shaking off and casting
from them the rule of godlynes, were kindled with hatred one against another:
and whilst they gave themselves only hereunto, to wit, to threatenings,
pride, malice and hatred, every one greedely, and in a manner of a certain
tyranny followed their own ambition. Then the Lord, even then I say, made the
daughter of Sion obscure and dark, according to the prophecy of Jeremy. For
he lifted up the right hand of her enemies, turned from her his sword of
defense, and was not her help in the day of battle, but ceased from purifieng
her, and threw her throne unto the ground, and shortened her days; above all
this he poured out confusion and shame upon her. All these things are
fulfilled amongst us, whilst we see the places appointed to prayer, to be
raced from the top to the very foundations, the divine and holy Scriptures to
be burned in the midst of the market places, and the Ministers of the Church
with horrible confusion, to run here and there to hide themselves, and some
were taken and put to open shame by their adversaries: and according to another
prophecy, Contempt was poured out even upon their Princes, etc.

Thus far Eusebius, who after through his whole book following describes
the martyrdomes, calamities and afflictions which the faithful in that most
cruel persecution suffered. Wherefore God is most earnestly and diligently to be
prayed unto, that he will vouchsafe to give us his grace, repentance, and
mutual concord: least for our leude lives, ingratitude and contentions, he
deal with us as he has done with those fathers before us, and so deliver us
into the cruel and bloody hands of the Turks, and others the enemies of
Christianity. God in his mercy turn this evil from us.

Moreover, all godly and Christian Princes and Magistrates, according to their
calling committed to them by GOD, An exhortation to magistrates.
ought diligently to take heed hereunto, and with all their might and wisdom
help, that the people of this Realm may altogether forsake those unprofitable
and troublesome contentions, and cease to braule and quarrel with their
brethren and fellow-seruants: and that the ministers may fruitfully with great
modesty and gravity, preach unto the congregation repentance and amendment
of life, and true faith in Christ.

It is written of king Iosophat, 2. Chron. 17
that he sent certain Princes and Levites, and giving unto them the book of
the law of the Lord, commanded that they should teach true faith, and the
sincere worshipping of God. The like did the most holy kings Ezechias and
Josias, who religiously deprived from their offices, all those which walked not
rightly in the way of the Lord, and did not according to the law of God.
Constantinus the great, followed the example of those most holy kings, and
performed the like in his Empire. For when the Prelates in his time were at
variance and contention among themselves, and writ and preached one against
another, and were so bold to offer those contentious libels unto the Emperor
himself, to the end that they might contend before him: he receiving al their
books, sharply reproved them, inasmuch as they being by the providence of God
appointed unto the people for pastors and captains of concord and charity,
were so at variance among themselves. Neither would heee give any judgment as
touching their controversies, or yet read their libels which they delivered
unto him, but cast them into the fire: as he also commanded upon pain of
death, Martian and Iustinia^ mad careful law to the lame purpose.
that no man should read Read
the books of Arrius, but burn them at the first hand: that at the least they
might thereby learn that those contentions and braules displeased his
majesty: and so setting discord apart, might afterward give themselves to
peace and concord. In like manner when he sat with the Bishops at the Counsel
of Nice, Zozomenes li. 1. cap. 20 ^ le. 2. cap. 3. de libris (...) heretici.
amongst whom also many contentions were, he laying forth the books of the
Prophets and Apostles, to wit, the holy Bible, commanded them to decide and end
their controversies by them, and all of them with one consent, to preach one
and the self same faith.

This excellent example of the worthy Emperor Constantine, whom God in this
world honored with the title of Great, whose name and glory through the whole
world was famous and of great renown among all men, and is much more
excellent in the eternal felicity. This example I say, let all Princes and
magistrates of this age follow, touching the staying and suppressing of all
controversies among the prrofessors of the Gospel, that thereby they may
provide for the peace and public health of the Church.

Peace is that new years gift, which Christ gave unto us at his birth. Luke.
2. 14
It is the bond of perfection which he commended to his disciples in his whole
life. Mat. 10. 1^. 1
It is the legacy which he bequeathed us at his death, John 20. 26
Pacem meam relinquo vobis, My peace I leave unto you. The Apostle Paul
following the same example, in every Epistle that he wrote, exhorts us unto
peace. O nos miseros si quos toties repetita pax non mouit* O miserable
wretches that we be, if peace so often repeated does not move. Peius est (says
a Father) ecclesiam scindere, August. cont Pet^^anum.
quam Idolis sacrificare. It is a worse thing to be a schismatike then an
idolater. Also Saint Augustine exhorting unto peace, says, Fratres teneamus
charitatem, sine qua fides nihil est: habet^s autem charitate^, si teneatis
vnitatem. Brethren, let us hold charity, without the which faith is nothing:
ye have charity if ye keep unity.

The God of peace grant, that as we may already say, in regard of our most
gracious sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, mercy and truth have met together:
so we may one day also say, in respect of our selves and this whole nation,
righteousness and peace have kissed each other. And I beseech you brethren, by
the bleeding wounds of our savior and redeemer Jesus Christ, that none do
increase old faults by new offenses, but rather that every man in sincerity
and holy obedience, reform his own ways, and conform his life according to
the rule of perfect holiness, that so our conversation before men, may
witness our perfect religion, and we glorify our father which is in heaven.
Let us beautify the chambers of our hearts with the flourishing branches of a
godly life, mortifying and killing all those evil and perverse affections,
which may blemish and darken those bright beams of Christian profession. Let
us bear the sails of our conuersations even with the wind of Gods word: and
beseech we the holy Ghost to rule the stearne, and guide the rudder of our
thoughts, least at any time we crack the bark of our religion against the
rocks of evil tongues. So shall our adversaries be ashamed to mutter against
us for living contrary to that which we profess. And God who is the God of
peace shall in the end give unto us his everlasting peace in his heavenly
kingdom through Christ our Lord, Amen.

FINIS.

