A CATECHISM or institution of the Christen Religion.

Newely set forth by Richard Tauerner.

Anno. M.D.XXXIX.

Cum Priuilegio, ad imprimendum solum.

RICHARD TAVERner to the Christen Readers.
FOR as much as not only fathers and mothers (which by the Deu. 1^.
law of god be commanded to teach their children) godfathers and godmothers
(which be as it were suerties for the same purpose) have been of long time in
such sort blinded and utterly ignorant in Christ's doctrine which
nevertheless they profess, that they be not able to Catechize, that is to say,
to institute, teach, bring up, and instruct their children, for whom the one
have promised to the church at the Christening of the same, Deu. 11.
the other are bounden by gods law (as before is remembered) to se them taught
and ryghtly instructed in the christian faith and laws of god: but also the
prestes themselves which be their curates and pastoures 1. Tim. 3
(where as by Paul's sentence they ought to be apt to teach) partly for
defaulte of lerning and partly for neglecting their flock (like careless
hyrelinges be be exceading defective in this be half: Joan. 10
I therefore moved of christen charity to utter the little talent that God has
endowed me with, am enforced, according to the example of learned men in other
countries, to set forth unto my country men some handsome and compendiouse
Catechism (which is so called because it instructs, and brings up the
yo^ge christian in Christ's law) For undoubted such one is to be setforthe in
the church to be learned and as it were dro^ken in of children, to be often
reuolued of men and women, yea and to be continually carried in the hands or
bosoms (but much rather i^ the hertes) of all ages, for an instruction to the
ignorant persons, a comfort to the troubled, rejoice to the faithful, spur
to the slothful, brydell to the arrogant, relief to the desperate, occupation
to the idle, refresshyng to the occupied, to be short, an argument and matter
for sklender shepherdes whereupon to instruct their cure.

Now therefore, like as the kings most excellent majesty most worthy to be
compared unto the godly king Ezechias, 4. R^. 18.
which destroyed the most detestable ydolatrie of the brazen serpent, by the
high providence of God traueileth daily of a wonderful zeal he bears to the
auau^cement of gods true religion, to banysh all poprie and Romyshe
marchaundyse within this his graces realm, to the unspeakable health of his
people the church of England, to the supremacy whereof he is by the said
providence of god now at last in spyte of all his enemies restored: So
semblably it shall be your part to embrace such pure, true and sincere doctrine
of Christ as sets forth the same, and so utterly to renounce not only the
Romisshe bishop our archenemie and the most pestilent ouerthrower of al god
lines, but also his deuelyshe laws, constitutions and supersticious things
which have hertofore entangled our consciences contrary to the Evangelical
liberty and truth of gods word.

That if ye shall appear louyngly and gredely to embrace this brief work,
wherein is co^prysed as well compendiously as purely the hole doctrine of the
christen religion: ye shall occasion me not only not to repent me of my pains
taken for your sakes in this behalf, but also to take the like when so ever I
shall espy that my industry and diligence may serve to your edification, profyt,
instruction and pleasure, which thing is my only desire and instau^t prayer,
as best knows god, that sees all, to whom be all glory praise and thanks
for ever and ever. Amen.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
AN INSTITVcion or Catechism of the Christen Religion.
That all men be borne to religion or godlynes.
BEcause no man at all can be found, be he never so barbarouse, never so
rudely and ^uyl brought up, but has some felyng of religion or godlynes, and
is naturally disposed to the same: it is plain that we all be made to this
purpose and end, that we should knowledge the majesty of our maker and the
same so knowledged to embrace, and with all fear, love and reverence to
worship. But (to let the ungodly alone which seek nothing else but to drown
this opinion of God planted in their minds and to wype ye same out of their
memory) we at least which profess godlynes and would be called Christ's folk,
needs must think that this brykle and unstable life ought to be nothing else
then a certain say or meditation of immortality. Now, the everlasting and
immortal life we can no where find but in god. Wherefore the chief care and
thought of our life should be to seek god, and with all the endeavors of our
mind to get up unto him, and to repose our selves nowhere else, save in him
allonely.

What difference is between the false and true religion.
FOr as much as we know this by our common sense and understanding, that if
our life be destitute and void of religion we live most wretchedly, yea and
differ nothing at all from the brute and unreasonable beasts, there is no man
that woll seem to abhor utterly from al godliness religion and service of god.
But now certainly in the manner and form of expressyng and declarynge this
religion is doubtless no little difference: for the most part of me^ be not
touched with the true and sincere fear of god, but because, whither they will
or not, they be pricked with this thought (which ever among has recourse in
their minds) y^ there is a certain divinity or Godhed, at whose pleasure
they stand or fall, being I say therefore stryken with the opinion of so great
a power, least they might happen to stir the same against them by their
ouermoche negligence or despysi^g: they give some manner of worship (such as it
is) unto this Godhed and power. In the mean season yet leadyng a most beastly
and lawles life and castyng up all studies and endeavors of honestye and good
behauour: they show themselves excedyng careless and wonderful recheles in
despysynge the ryghtfull dome and sharp sentence of god. And then, because
they measure not god by his in finite majesty, but by y^ loutishe and gross
vanity of their wit, they so depart and traytrously shrynke away from the
true god. Wherefore with what care so ever they afterward busye them selves
how they may worship god, they are never the better, but labor in vain,
because they worship not the everlasting God, but the dreams, fansyes, and
dotages of their heart instead of god. But as for true religion and godlynes
surely it stands not in fear, which would feign indede flee the judgment
of god, and therefore because it can not flee it, fears it but it rather lies
in true and sincere affection, in loving god as a father, and fearing him
with all reverence as a most drad sovereign lord, evermore imbrasyng his
ryghteousnes and hatyng wors then death to offend his majesty. So who soever
is roted in this godlynes and true religion dares not of his own brain forge
him a god as he him self lusts, but seeks the knowledge of y^ true god,
even at god him self, and takes him to be none other, tha^ such as he
shows and declares him self to be.

What we ought to know of God.
Sith the very majesty of god passes y^ capacite of man's understanding, so
far that it is impossible for him to co^ceyue it, it is expedient for us to
honor rather his hyghnes, then rashely to search it, least of such
incomprehensible light we be utterly stryken down. For this cause then, god
must be sought and searched out in his works as by certain foresteppes, for
Gods works in scripture be called the shows of things invisible, for as
much as they represente before our eyes such things concerning y^ lord as
other ways could not be seye. This I say, not that god would keep our minds
in doubt, by vain and void speculations, but that it is enough for us to
know y^ true religion, I mean faith coupled with the fear of god, and that
the same is first breathed into us, nourished and strengthened only by god,
for in this universal order and cours^ of things, we behold the immortality
of our god, from whom all things flow and have they^ begy^ning, we se also
his might in that he made such a work and vpholdeth y^ same, his wysdom in
that he has set in so goodly order such an infinite dyuersitie of creatures,
and keapeth the^ always in the same to the eschewyng of co^fusio^. We mark
also his goodness, which was the very cause both that these works were made,
and that now also they stand sure and strong, his rightwysnes in that so
wonderfully he declares him self in defendyng the godly and punishing the
ungodly, we perceive also his high mercy, in that so gentylly he suffers our
wyckednes, to y^ intent we should return as his mercy gives us occasion to
do. Here upon might we at large be informed (as much as were sufficient for
us) of Gods majesty and goodness and what he is, but y^ our dulnes is so
great and the eyesyght of our mind so blount and daselyng at so open a light.
Neither is it only a blyndnes that thus causes us to stomble, but there is
also such a froward and cankred opinion in us, as in ponderyng the works of
God takes every thing a mysse and clean out of course, yea and tourneth up
set down all ye heavenly wysoome so eudiently apparaunt in creatures. We must
therefore needs come to Gods word, for in it, and by it (I mean in the holy
scriptures) God is by his works wondrous well descrybed unto us, where the
works the^ selfs be weyed and esteemed not after our froward judgment, but
by the rule of the everlasting truth. Here tha^ we learn that our God is the
only and everlasting fountain of all life, ryghtwysenes, wisdom, power,
goodness and mercy, from whom like as without exception al goodness does come,
so all praise ought worthily to be rendered to him as his own. And by this
means all things though they evidently appear in every several part both
of heaven and earth, yet to what purpose they serve, what they may do, and
unto what use we must understand the^, we shall easily espy when we step
down to our selves, and consider how god sets forth his own life, wisdom
and power in us, and how he practices his ryghtewysenes, goodness, and mercy
toward us.

Of man.
MAn was first made to the image and likeness of God, (...). 1.
that in all his ornaments and iewelles where with he was rychly decked of god,
he should honor the maker of the same and worship him with such kyndenes as
became him. But forasmuch as he, trustyng so much upon the excellencye of his
own nature that he had quyte forgoten whence he came, and whereby he was
mainteyned, attempted to auaunce him self above god, it was necessary he
should be spoiled of all gods benefits whereon he was so folyshely proud, to
the intent that whereas he that was so rychely endowed of Gods bounteousnesse
thought scorn to know his maker in his felicity, should now being naked and
destitute of all his wealth, learn to know hy^ in his mysery. Wherefore so
many of us as be spronge of the sede of Adam, be borne very flesh of flesh,
ye lykenee of God utterly abolyshed and extincte in us, so that now upon what
part so ever of man we cast our eye, we can se nothing, but that is vnpure,
unhallowed and abominable before god. For ye wisdom of man being blinded and
wrapte in infinite errors, with stands always the wisdom of god, his
forward will full of corrupt affections, hates nothing worse then gods
ryghtwysnes his powers untoward to all good works run hedlong upon all
wyckednes.

Of free Will.
SCriptures every where witness that man is the servant of syn, Joan. ^. To.
6. 2 Pa. 2.
whereby is meant that his disposicion is so turned from the ryghtwysenes of
God, as he can neither think, lust, nor employe him to any thing, but y^ is
ungodly, crooked, nawty and vnpure, for the heart being so in the inner parts
enuenomed with ye poison of syn, can breathe nothing but the fruits of sin.
Yet it may not be so taken, that man is forsed to sin, as by urgent
necessity, for he synneth of his propre and most ready will. But forasmuch as
his affections be corrupt, he utterly abhors al ryghtwysenes of God, and
gredely renneth upon all kind of wickedness. And so he is clean shut out from
the free power to chose good from badde which they call free will.

Of sin and death.
Sin in script^^e, is called not so much the corruption of nature, which
indede is the head spryng of al vice, as ye ragyng lusts that spryng thereof,
yea the heinous abominacions that brast out of these lusts, as murder,
theft, aduoutry, and other like. Wetherfore sy^ners even from our mothers
womb be all borne to the wrath and vengeance of God, and ever the elder we
wax, the more grievous judgment we heap upon us, so that all our life long
we go forward unto death, for sithe it is no doubt but all iniquity is
cursed of gods right wysnes, what shall we wretches look for at his hand,
but very confusion, for that brings his displeasure with it, for as much as
we be pressed with so greuouse a burden of sins and corrupted with so
infinite dross of uncleanness. This thought, though it be hable to overthrow a
man with the fear thereof and even drive him down with despair, yet to us it
is necessary, that we being thus striped of our own right wysnes, destitute of
all trusting in our own power, and put back from all hope of life, may
learn to fall down low before the lord knowing how beggarly we be of our
selves, how miserable, and very villaynes, and thus knowing our own
wickedness, dishabilitye and fall that we may give him all the praise of
holiness, power, and salvation.

By what manner we be restored again to life and health.
FRom this knowledge of our self, so plainly showing us how we be nothing at
all, (if it can earnestly settle in our hertes) there is a plain and ready way
to a more true knowledge of God, yea he him self has now opened us the
first gate into his kingdom, thus under mynyng the two most noysom
pestilences, I mean the vnregardyng of gods vengeance and ye false trust on
our selves. For then we begin to lift up our eyes unto heaven, which before
did cleave fast unto the ground, and we that before reposed in our selves now
think long for the Lord. That same lord and father of mercy although our
sin has deserved the contrary, yet for his unspeakable mercy of his own
mere goodness, shows him self to the troubled and astonyed conscieces, and
calls us home again by what means he knows most expedient for our
weakness, from straieng to the right way, from death to life, from perdition
to sauegarde, yea and from the kingdom of the devil to his own kyngedome.
Wherefore even to so many as the lord vouchsaueth to restore to y^ enheritau^ce
of his heavenly life, he uses such manner trade, that they being sore wounded
in conscience by their sins, and weryed with the burden thereof, might be
styrred to fear him. First of al therefore he gives us his law, to exercise
us unto that knowledge.

Of the law of the Lord.
IN the law of god is delivered us the most perfect rule of all ryghtwysnes
which we may well call the everlasting will of the Lord. For there in two
tables has he plainly and fully declared what so ever he requires of us. In
the first what worship his majesty allows, and in the other what offices of
love be due to our neighbor in few commandments he has expressed. Let us
therefore hear the law, which done we shall se what learning we must take of
it, and what truit we ought to gather thereof.

Exodus xx.
I am the Lord thy god, which have brought the out of the land of Egypt
from the house of bondage. Thou shalt have no strange Gods before my face.

ONe piece of this commandment is instead of a preface to the hole law, for
whiles he affyrmeth that he him self is the Lord our God, he means that he
is such one as has authority to command, and to whose commandments we
ought to obey. As he says by his prophet. M^la. 1.
If I be the father, where is love? If I be the lord, where is fear? he also
reherseth his benefytes, to reprove our unkindness, if we obey not his voice.
For with the same goodness whereby he preserved y^ people of the Iues ones out of
the bondage of Egypt, does he also deliver all his servants from their
perpetual Egypt that is And where as he forbyddeth to have any other gods, he
restrayneth us that we should not give that is gods duty to any other, then to
him alonely. He says therefore. Before my face, whereby he declares, yt he will
not only be known as a god by outward confession, but also y^ he will be
truly taken for the only god i^wardely in heart. These things belong properly
to god alone, which without sacrilege can be given to none other, so that him
only we ought to honor, in him to repose our trust and hope, him to tha^k for
what soever good and holy thing we have, and unto him to render all praise of
goodness and holiness.

Thou shalt not make thy self any graven image / nor any likeness of any
thing / that is in heaven above / or i^ earth beneth nor in the water / under
the earth. Thou shalt not bow down to the^ / to worshype them.
Like as in ye first commandment, god declared him self to be but one, so
now he shows, what a God he is, and how he will be honored. He forbyddeth
therefore to make him any lykenes. And the cause hereof he shows in Deuteronomy.
Deuteronomy. 4: Esaias 40.
and in Esaias: for that no bodyly substance can be resembled to a spirit. He
further forbyddeth us to honor any image as a thing of holiness. Let us learn
then y^ the worshypping of God is a spiritual thing, for like as god him self
is a spirit, so he woll be worshypped in spirit and troth He adds therefore
an horrible thretnyng, Joan. 4.
whereby he would we knew, how grievously he is displeased with the breach of this
commandment. ( I am thy Lord God.) This is afmoch as if he should faye that
he only is the Lord God, on whom we ought to hang and that he ca^ suffer
none to be his fellow, or matched with him, y^ he will also defend his majesty
and glory if any go about to transpose it to graven ymanges or other things
and with such vengeance as shall be neither short nor sengle, but y^ shall
reach to our children, our childre^s children and unto their children also,
eue^ as many as follow their fathers wyckednes, lyk as again he sets forth
everlasting mercy and grace to the godly and their ofsprynge also, even to as
many as love him and keep his law. In this thing he shows us the largenes
of his mercy stretched forth into a thousand generations, where as he
assigns his vengeance to reach only but to four generations.

Thou shalt not take the name of thy Lord God in vain.
HEre he forbyddeth us to abuse his holy name in swerynge, either for folysh
tryfles or to establyshe our own lies. Oaths ought not to serve neither to
self will, nor pleasure, but to very necessity, where either the glory of God
must be vpholden, or a thing affermed that belongs to the furtheraunce of
our neighbors. Utterly he forbyddeth us to de file his holy name in any thing,
but to use it reverently and with high dignity according to his holiness,
whether we swear or what other word so ever we speak of him. And for asmoche
as the principal use of the taking of gods holy name chiefly consists in
calling upon him: here we may understand that we have a commandment to call
upon him.

In conclusion he appoints the penalty, least those should trust to escape
his reuengeau^ce that have abused the holiness of his name by perturyes and
blasphemous oaths, and therefore adds that the Lord woll not have him
unrevenged that takes the name of his Lord God in vain.

Remember thou keep holy the sabbath day.
WE have marked three causes of this commandment, for it pleased God, under
the quyete of the seventh day to give the people of Israel a figure of a
ghostly rest, wherein the faith full ought to cease from their own will
works, and suffer God to work in the^. Second, he would also that one
certain day were assigned, wherein the people should assemble together to
hear the law, and to do their honest ceremonies. Thirdly God would that
servants and such as be at other men's commandment should have one day to
rest in, y^ they might have some release of their labor. As touching y^ first
cause, no doubt it ceased at the coming of Christ, for he is the truth, at
whose presence forthwith all figures and tokens vanysh, he is the body, at
whose coming, shadows be left, Colo. 2
Therefore says Paul, the sabbath was but a shadow of a thing to come, the
troth whereof he expounds, where he teaches we be buried with Christ, Romans 6.
that by his death we might dye to the corruption of our flesh. Now this is
not done in one day, but in the hole coursse of our life it must be practiced,
until at last being utterly dead in our selves, we may be filled with the
life of God. Christians therefore ought not to have any supersticiouse keeping of
days. But for as much as the two latter causes ought not to be accounted with
the old shadows, but serve a like for all times, therefore though the sabbath
day be abolyshed, yet nevertheless among us even at this day, this
commandment has his place, that at certain days we should mete together
for the hearing of gods word, for ye breakinge of the mystical bread and for
common prayers to be made, also that servants and workmen may have release
from their labors, for it can not be brought to pass (our infirmity is so
great) that such assembles can be kept every day. Wherefore for ye destroieng
of supersticion, the Jews sabbath day is taken away, but for the kepinge
still of good order and peax in the church, an other day is assigned to that
be houfe. Therefore as the troth was given unto the Jews under a figure, so it
is set forth to us without shadows, First that all our life long we should
practice a continual saboth (that is to say) a rest from our works, that the
Lord by his spirit might work in us. Second, that we should keep the
lawful ordinances of the church appointed for gods word to be herd, for
sacraments to be ministered, and general prayers to be made. Thirdly that we
should not vngentylly ouercharg our feruauntes and prentyses with work.

Honor thy father and thy mother etc.
HEre is given us in commandment to have a ready service of heart toward our
parents, and other which instead of parents have rule over us by the
ordinance of god, as the king and other his deputies, I mean that we embrace
the^ with al reverence, obedience, kyndnesse, and all the service we ca^ do. For
this is the will of the Lord, that we should recompense those that brought us
into this life with kyndnes for kyndnes. And it makes no matter whether they be
worthy or unworthy to whom this honor is given, for what soever they be, God
has set them over us instead of our parents and heddes and wol we honor
them. yea this is the first commandment that has any promise knit unto it,
Eph^. 6.
as Paul says wherein whiles God promises the blessing of this life to those
that honor their pare^tes with due reverence according to their bounden
duty, he meaueth also that his most certain curse shall light on their
necks that be stubburne and disobedient to their parents or other superior
powers. But these one thing by ye way is to be marked that we be not commanded
to obey them, but only in the Lord, we may not therefore for their pleasure
trangresse the law of the Lord, Eph^. ^
for then we ought not to take them for our parents and heddes, but for
strangers which go about to withdraw us from the obedience of our true
father.

Thou shall not kill.
IN this commandment is forbydde^ al violence, force, wrong, and generally
all manner of trespace, whereby our neighbors body is hurt, for if we remember
how man is made to the image of God, we ought to esteem him as an hallowed
thing, so yt he ca^ not be distayned but ye image of God must be distayned
also.

Thou shall not commit adultery.
HEre god da^neth all kind of horedom and uncleanness, for the Lord has
joined together ye man and woman in the law of marriage only. And with his
blessing also has he hallowed that couple, going together by his authority
Whereby it is manifest, y^ all other ioynyng save only in marriage is cursed
before him Wherefore so many as have not the gift to refrain, which is a
singulear gift and stands not in man's power, let them case the intemperancy
of their flesh with the honest remedy of marriage, Heb. 1^
for marriage is honorable among all men, but hoar mongers and adnouterers god
will judge.

Thou shalt not steal.
Utterly we be forbid one of us to lie in awaite for the goods of an other.
For god will not, yt in his people be any wrongful takinges, whereby y^ pore
should be vexed and oppressed nor any disceytes whereby the simple should be
co^pased about, Wherefore if we woll keep our ha^d^s pure and innocent from
theft must refrain as well from all craft and subteltie as from violent
extorcions.

Thou shalt bear no false wytnes etc.
IN this commandment the Lord damneth al sclaunderous checkes, tawntes, and
evil reapportes whereby our brothers good name is appeyred, he forbydeth also
al manner lies whereby in any part our brother is hurt, for seeing a good name
is more precious, then al other treasures, doubtless it can be no less hurtful
for us to be robbed of our good name, then of our temporal goods, for to the
undoing and spoylynge of a man a false wytnes, sometime works more myschiefe
then the violent force of hands Wherefore like as in the other commandment
above remembered the hand had a restraynt, so in this has the tongue.

Thou shall not desire thy neighbors house / thou shalt not desire thy
neighbors wife / nor his seruau^te nor his maid / nor his ox / nor his ass
/ nor any thing that is thy neighbors.
HEre the Lord makes a restreynte upon as many as raunge over the lystes and
bounds of charity, for where as other commandments forbid us to do
contrary to the rule of love, this forbyddeth us even to think any such thing
in heart, Wherefore by this commandment be reproved hatred, envy, and malice,
even as well as murdre in the other precepts above rehearsed, lust also and
inward uncleanness of heart be here condemned, as well as horedome and aduoutrye
in deed, And where in the other commandment were restreynede robhery and
gile, here is also covetousness plucked in by the bryddell, where before all
opprobriouse words were ^estrayned, here is also repreued malice of mind it
self. So we se here how universal a commandment this is, that extends so
on every side. God requires such a wondrous affection and brotherly love so
fervent, yt by no lust he will have it arise against ye wealth and profit of our
neighbor. This is then ye pythe of this commandment, that such a study
and mind we ought to have, yt webe incensed ne tychled with no manner of lust
contrary to the law of charity, and that we be ready with all our heart to
yield every man that is his. Now, that must we reckon to be every man's own,
which by our bounde^ duty we owe unto him.

The pyth of the law
TO what purpose all the commandments of the law pertayne: sufficiently
declares Christ our Lord, where he says that the hole law is contained in
two principal co^mau^demes, that is, to love the Lord god with all our heart,
with all our soul, and with all our power, and to love our neighbor as our
selves, which exposition he took our even of the self law, for the first
part is red Deuteronomy. vi. and the other Leuiti.xix.

What profyt comes unto us by the Law only.
LO here a true exemplar and president of the right and holy life, yea a very
perfect image of ryghtwysnes it self, so that if any man can inlyuing
express ye law of god, the same can lack nothing to his perfection before
god, In so much (as he him self is witness) he promises to those that keep
his law not alonly excellent prosperities and commodities of this life (which
be reckened Leuiti.xxvi. and Deuteronomy. xxvii.) but also the reward of everlasting
life. On the contrary part he thretneth punishment of everlasting death to
those that have not fulfilled what so ever he has given them in commandment
to be done. Moses also when he had publyshed the law, called to witness heaven
and earth, that he had setforth to the people good and evil, life and death.
Now where as he show us the way of life, we must se what profyt we have by
this appoyntynge and showing of the way. Uerely if our will were al together
framed and bent unto the obedience of gods will, then were the only knowledge
of the law enough for our salvation, but seeing our nature being flesshely
and corrupt, warreth like an extreme adversary against gods law a thing of
the spirit, and is in nothing amended by her good nurtur and instructions,
therefore the law it self which was unto our salvation (if it could have had
good hearers) is now become an occasion of sin and death, for asmoche as we
be all cast and convict as transgressors thereof, So the more openly it
declares ye ryghtwysnes of god the more hemously does it utter our wyckednes.
And again the higher transgressio^ the law has to lay to our charge, the
more grievous judgment are we condemned to. Thus now the promise of life is
utterly taken away, and only remains y^ curse and that upon al our necks
by occasion of the law.

The law is mean unto Christ.
Now though the wyekednes and damnacion of us all be sealed up and confermed
with witness of the law, yet this is not therefore done to the intent we
should fall into despair, or in this extreme plu^ge run hedlong to our
ownede struction, for the Apostell declares us all damned by judgment of the
law, Romans 5.
to the intent every mouth should be stopped, and all the world be brought under
gods danger. And yet the same Apostle says in an other place that god has
shut up all men under unbelief, Romans 11.
not to destroy all, nor to suffer the^ to perish, but to have mercy upon al.
The Lord therefore will that we by ye law thus being warned of our own
weakness and uncleanness: should take comfort upon the trust of his power and
mercy, and that in Christ, for whose sake he shows him self so tender and
merciful a father unto us. In the law can it not be seen that he rewards
but only perfect rightwysnesse, which all we ^acke, where as otherwise he is
a straight judge of sins. But in Christ his face is all full of favor and
grace even toward wretches and unworthy sinners This so wonderful a token of
his exceeding, love he showed us by gyuyng up his own son for us, in whom he
has against other he extends the rygorousnes of his judgment, let us suffer
the cause to rest in his hands, for this thing he woll have unknown unto us
all, and that not without good skyll, for neither the dullness of ourewyt is
hable to abide such a light, ne the skle^der capacity of the same is in any
part sufficient to conceive so great a power of his wysedom, For verily here
who so ever will attempt to aduau^ce him self, not refreynynge the rashness of
his wit, shall find it true yt Solomon says, Prou. 50.
whosoever woll search the majesty: shall be oppressed of the glory. Let us only
determyne this with our selves, that this same ordinance of the Lord, though
it be secret unto us, yet it is righteous and holy, for if he would destroy al
mankind, doubtless he may of right do it. And surely in those whom he calls
back again from da^nacion: we can se nothing but his high goodness. Let us
tha^ conceive with our selves that the chose^ be ye vessels of mercy, as they
be in deed, and that the forsaken be the vessels of wrath and not but of a
just cause. But of the^ both we may take occasion and matter to advance gods
glory. Neither yet shall we (as many men do) for a sure establyshment and
knowledge of our salvation clyme up to heaven and sawcely enserch what God has
decreed of us before the world began, which thought can no other thing do, but
bring us in a miserable doubt and trouble, But let us rather be content with
the witness wherwyth ye Lord has sufficiently made our salvation strong and
sure, for like as in Christ were all the chosen even as many as before the
foundation of the earth was laid, Ephe. 1.
ordained unto life: so is he ye person in whom rests the assurau^ce of our
salvation, if we by faith receive and embrace him. For what other thing do we
search in the election, but to be partetakers of the everlasting life? And
this salvation we obtain in Christ which was the self life from the
beginning, Joan. 1.
and was made ruler over us unto life, that all those that believe in him should
not peryshe, but have everlasting life. Wherefore if we possessinge Christ by
faith possess also in him everlasting life, Joan. 5.
it is no point of our charge to make any further enquirye of gods eternal
counsel, Romans 5. 1. 10. 3.
Christ is not only a glass wherein gods will is represented unto us, but also
an evidence wherein it is after a manner sealed up for us.

What is true faith.
THe christian faith ought to be taken neither for a bare knowledge of God,
neither yet for such an understanding of scripture, as like a fansye flyeng
here and there in the brain* works no good mocion no^ goostly affection in
the heart, as when commenly men conceive in their heads certain opinions of
such matters as seem to have strong reasons to make with them. But it is a
sound and steadfast belefe of heart, whereby we safely rest and stay our
consciences in gods mercy promised us by his gospel, for thus shall we well
defyne what belefe is, if we ernestly behold^ y^ nature of gods promysses,
which belefe so hangs upon the promise his propre foundation that if ye
take the promise away, it forthwyth fails and goes to naught. Wherefore so
long as the Lord offerethe us his mercy by his promise in the gospel, if we
faithfully trust thereunto we be counted in faith to receive his word. Hebr. 11.
And thus does the Apostle defyne faith, where he says, faith is the ground
of things that be trusted upon, and the proof of things not seen, He means
that faith is none other thing, but a certain and sure possession of all such
things, as be promised us by God, and an evidence of things that as yet do
not appear, I mean of the life everlasting, whereof we co^ceyue an hope and an
expectation upon the trust we have in the goodness of god so lyberally offered
us in his gospel. 2. Cor. 15.
And for as much as al gods promyses are strong in Christ, and after a manner
performed and made good in him, it follows undoubtedly that Christ him self
is the everlasting Butte and mark of our faith, in whom it may behold all
the riches of gods deep mercy.

Faith is the gift of God
IF we well ponder and weye with our selves, how blind these our wit is and
how far unable to attain unto Gods heavenly secrecies, and with what doubt
and mystrust our heart labors within us, then shall we well perceive how
far faith surmounteth and passes all our natural power, how also it is a
singular and excellent gift of God, For sithe that no man (as Paul reasons)
is of secret counsel with man's will, 1. Cor. ^.
but only the spirit of man, which is in man, how may it be that man can
have any certain knowledge of gods counsel? And for as much as Gods open
troth is very weak among us, in those things that here we se before our
eyes, how should it be strong and sure, where god only promyseth those things
that never were seen by eye, nor yet conceived in ma^s wit? Now it is evident
and plain that faith is a lightening of ye holy ghost, whereby our wits be
lyghtened and our hertes established and strengthened with a sure stay of
conscience, being thoroughly persuaded in our selves that God of his promise is
so true, faithful, and just, that he can not but perform what so ever he
has bound him self to by his holy word and promise. And for this cause
faith is called y^ pledge or ernest because it sets our conscience at the
stay of gods troth, It is also named a seal wherewith our hearts be sealed
and marked against the day of the Lord, 2. Cor. 1. Ephe. 1. Romans 8.
for the Lord himself is he that bears witness to our spirit yt God is
our father and we his dear beloved sons.

In christ we he made rightuouse by Faith.
FOr as much as it is evident and plain, yt Christ is the everlasting Butte,
and mark of faith, we can none other wise feel what profits and benefytes we
take by faith, the^ only by lokynge and having a direct eye toward him,
for unto this purpose was Christ given us of the father, Joan. 17.
that in him we might obtain everlasting life as he him self says, this is
the everlasting life, Joan. 11.
even to know one god the father, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ. Also he
says, he that believes in me, shall not dye for ever, that if he dye he shall
live. But how may this com to pass? forsooth thus, we that be unclean by
reason of sin, must be pourged and cleansed in him, for no unclean thing
shall enter into the kingdom of God. Christ therefore makes us parteners and
as ioyntpatentes with him, so yt though of our selves we be sinners, yet for
Christ's rightwysnes we be accepted for righteouse at the judgment seat of
god, And thus spoiled of our own rightousnes we be cladde, and endewed with
Christ's righteousness. So where as by works we be unrighteous, by faith in
Christ we be made ryghteouse, I say we be justified by faith, not that we have
any rightousnes within us of our selves, but that Christ's ryghtuousnes is
counted for our righteousness, and our wickedness is nothing at al laid to our
charge, so that, with one word, we may call this rightousnes forgyuenes of
sins. The Apostle clearly declares this, Romans 10. Pilip. 3.
whiles oftentimes he sets the righteousness of works with the righteousness
of faith, and shows how y^ one ouerwhelmeth and turns the other vpsyde
down Now by what fashion Christ has dedeserued us this ryghtousnes and in
what parts it is contained ye shall se in the symbol of faith where every
Article severally by it self shall be orderly rehearsed, whereupon is founded the
hole belefe of a christen man.

By Faith we be hallowed and as it were seasoned to the obedience of the law.
Like as Christ through his rightwysnes is a mean for us unto God ye father,
that he being as it were our surety we be taken and reputed for ryghtwyse, so
by the partakynge of his holy spirit he haloweth us to all pureness and
innocence. For upon him rested the spirit of the Lord above al measure, I
mean the spirit of wisdom and understanding, Esa. 61. 12
of counsel, strength, knowledge, fear of the Lord, so that of his plently and
fulness we all receive and drink up largely grace for grace. They therefore be
deceived that boaste their Faith in Christ, where they be utterly void and
destitute of the halowynge of his spirit. For scripture teaches that Christ
is not only made our ryghtwysnes, Iere. 31.
but our halowyng also, for by the self same covenant yt the Lord makes
with us in Christ, he promyseth both to pardon our wyckednes, and also to write
his law in our hertes. Therefore the keeping of the law is no work of our
hability, but of a spiritual power, whereby our hertes be pourged from their
corruption and made soft in the obedience of ryghtuousnes. Now then the use of
the law to Christen men is a far other thing from that it should be without
faith, for when ones God graueth in our hertes a love of his ryghtousnes, then
the outward doctrine of the law which before did nothing but accuse us
as well of weakness as of trangression, is now becomme a light to our feet
that we should not straye from the straight way, Psalm. 119.
it is now our wysedo^, Deuteronomy. 4.
whereby we be informed, and styred to al honesty, Psalm. 11^.
it is our nurtonre which woll not suffer us to run to much at large in our
self will and lust.

Of repentance and new birth.
Hereupon it is easy to understand, Mat. 3. and in other places.
why repentance is always joined with faith in Christ, why also the Lord
affirms, that no man can enter into the kingdom of heaven except he be borne
a new, Joan. 3.
for repentance betokens a retournynge, whereby we bid the frowardenesse of
this world farewell and repare again unto ye Lords way. Now Christ because
he is not the ministre of sin, does wash away our sins, and deck us with
his ryghtwysnes to the intent we should not stayne this his grace with new
fylthynes again, but ones chosen to be gods sons should consecrate and
direct al our life from hensforth to the glory of our father. This work of
repentance ha^geth on our new birth, Romans 6. Colos. 5. and alibi.
which new birth, stands upon two parts, the sleynge of our flesh, I mean
of this corruption naturally spronge in us, and a spiritual quyckenynge whereby
ye nature of man's is restored to her clennes. wherefore upon this meditation we
must labor and employ our selves al our live long, that we ones deed to
sin and to our selves may live to Christ and to his ryghtuousnes. And
whereas this new birth ca^ never be perfect so long as we live in the prison of
this mortal body, it must needs be that this same mind and study of
repentance ought still to continue in us even unto death.

How ryghtwysnesse of good works and of faith may stand together.
GOod works that come of such a pureness of conscience doubtless be strong and
allowed before god, For sithe god sees his own ryghtuousnesse in them, he can
not but allow them, yet must we take heed, least we bear our self so hault
in the vain affiau^ce and trust of our good works, that we forget not how we
be justified by the faith in Christ alonely. For there is no righteousness of
works before God, except it answers to his rightousnes, so yt who so goes
about to be justified by his own works, it is not enough for him, to bring
out one good deed or two, but he must show forth a perfect obedience of the
law, which thing is far awey yea from those that seem most of all to have
profyted and gone forward before other in the Lords law, Beside this although
y^ ryghtuousnes of god could be content and pleased with one good deed only,
and no mo, yet should not god find so much as one good deed in all his
saints, yt worthily eue^ of the self works deseruynge he might praise and
commend as rightwyse. For this is ye very troth, seem it never so great a
meruel, that no work we do is perfect on every side, but is blemyshed with some
wart either in one part or other Wherefore sith we be sinners foiled with many
remnauntes of vices, we must needs be justified an other way tha^ by our
self. Now certainly we have always great need of Christ, that by his
perfectnes our imperfectness may be covered, by his pureness our uncleanness
may be washed by his obedience our iniquity may be blotted out, finally yt
for his rightousnesse we may befreely taken as rightuouse without any respect of
our works, which in no wise can be of such valor to stand in the
judgment of God. This notwythstandynge, so long as these our spots which
other ways might blemyshe and stayne our works before God, be thus hyd and
kept close, the Lord consydereth in them nothing but high pureness and
holiness, where upon he vouchesaueth to give them high tytles of praises, for
he calls and also estemeth them even ryghtousnesses yea and promyseth unto
the^ large rewards. So may we then shortly conclude that our fellowship with
Christ is of such strength and force, that for it we be not only freely
reputed ryghtuous but also our works be reckened us for justice and
ryghtuousnesse, and be abundantly recompensed with an everlasting reward.

The Symbol of faith or Christen Creed.
WE told you heretofore what profit we take by our faith in Christ, now
shall ye hear, what our faith ought to behold in Christ, and what to conceive
of him to the stablyshment and confermynge of it. Certaynely this is declared
in the Simbole or Christian Creed, as how Christ is made unto us by his father
our wisdom, ransom, 1. Cor. 1.
life, ryghtwysnes, and holiness. Now it makes no great matter, who was the
maker of this Symboll, or by what persons this abrydgenie^t of faith was set
forth, which in it has no humane doctrine, but is gathered of most certain
records of scripture. And because no man should muse why we knowledge our
selves to believe in the father, the son, and the holy ghost, we woli some
what speak hereof before we enter into the Creed. When we name the father, the
son, and the holy holy ghost, we make us not three gods, but in most simple
and pure unite of God, as well the scripture as the very experience of godlynes
show us God the father, his son and the spirit, so yt our understanding ca^
not conceive the father but it must also co^pryse as well the son (in whom
shyneth ye fathers lively image) and the spirit in whom his power and might is
opened. In one God therefore let us fyxe the hole thought of our mind, and yet
in the mean season consider y^ father with ye son and his holy ghost.

I believe in one God the father almighty maker of heaven and earth.
By these words we be taught to believe not nakedly that there is a God, but
also to know that he is our God, and to trust that we be of the number of those
whom he promyseth to be their God, whom also he takes for his own people.
This God is called almighty whereby is meaned, that by his providence he
disposes al things, and at his pleasure governs and through his power and
might orders them, when we call him maker of heaven and earth, we must
therewith understand yt he continually nourishes, susteyneth and quyckeneth
whatsoever ones he made.

And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord.
WHere above we said that Christ is he everlasting butte of our faith, this is
easy to se, for as^^ch as all ye parts of our he^ be here represented in him
(...) call him Jesus (which (...) was given him from heaven), Luc. 1.
because he was sent to save his people from their sins. Act. 4.
And therefore the scripture says yt there is none other name given unto men
whereby they might be saved. This addition or surname christ betokens yt he
was a^noynted and thoroughly endowed with all the graces of the holy ghost,
which in scripture be rehearsed under the name of oil, because without the^
through drought and barennesse we wyther and dekaye. Through this annoin tynge
of the father ^as he first made king, subdu^^^ unto him self all power in
heaven and in earth, that in him we might also be kings, having power over
the devil, sin, death and hell, So the^ was he consecrated pressed that
through his sacrifice he might pacifye the father and bring us in favor again
with him, to ye intent that in him we also might be priests, offryng unto the
father prayers, thanks, our selves and all ours by this same Christ, our
mediator and reconcyler. Furthermore he is called y^ son of God, not as other
faithful men be by election only and favor: but that he is the very true
natural son, and therefore is he named ye only, because he might be known
from the rest. He is also our Lord, not only by his godheade which he had
evermore the self same with the father, but also in that self flesh wherein
he was exh^^ited unto us. For there is but one God, of whom be al things as
Paul says, and one Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 8
through whom be all together.

Which was conceived by the holy ghost / borne of the virgin Marye.
HEre we learn by what manner y^ son of God became our Jesus, that is our
savior, and our Christ, that is to say the anointed king to defend us, and
preeste to bring us in favor with the father, for he put upon him our
flesh, to this intent that he now made the son of man should make us the
sons of God with him, taking upon him our poverty to advance us unto his
richesse, bearing our weakness to strengthen us by his power, receyuynge our
mortality to give us his immortality, coming down upon the earth to exalt
us unto heaven. Borne he was of the virgin Mary even because he might be
known the very son of Abraham and David which was promised in the law and
Prophets a very man, (...). 1.
like unto us in every point, Ge^^. 15*
only sin excepted, Esa. (...)*
he was tempted with our infirmityes to the intent he might learn to have
compassion and bear with us. This same Jesus was conceived in the womb of y^
virgin by a wonderful and unspeakable power of y^ holy ghost, to thinte^t he
might be borne not defiled with any fleshy corruption, but be sanctified in
most high and perfect pureness.

Suffered under Ponce Pylate / was crucyfyed / dead and buried / and descended
unto hell.
IN these words we be taught after what sort Jesus paid our ransom, for
this was cause why he was borne a mortal man. Romans 13.
For verily where as god was provoked to wrath through the disobedience of man:
Phil. 2.
Jesus through his obedience put it away, showing him obedient to his father
even unto death. And so i^ his death he offered him self a sacrifyce to the
father, whereby his ryghtwysnes might ones ^or ever be appeased, whereby y^
faithful might be hallowed for evermore, Hebr. 7. 9 and. 10
whereby also the everlasting satisfaction might be fully wrough and fynyshed.
He shed his holy blood for the price of our ransom, to the intent both the fury
of God which was kyndled against Romans 3.
us might be qwenched and also our wyckednes purged. Ephe. 1.
There is no part of his death that lacks a misterye. Colos. 1
He suffered under Ponce Pilate that is to wit, he was condemned by sentence of
a judge, Esaias. 3^*
for a felon and euyldoer, Mar. 15.
for this purpose yt we through him thus condemned might be quyte at the bar
of the high judge, Deuteronomy. 2^.
he was crucified, Gala. 3.
that in the cross which by Gods law was cursed, Heb. 2.
he should sustain our curse, which curse our sins did deserve, he dyed,
that through his death he might overcome death that gaped upon us and henge
over our heddes, and y^ he might swalowe up yt same death, which else had not
he been, should have swalowed us up. Romans ^.
He was buried to thynte^t we his fellows by the virtue of his death should be
buried to sin, enfraunchyshed from the dominion of the devil and of death.
And where we say he went down into hell, it is mea^t he was extremely
handled of God, and that he felt the horrible sharpness of gods judgment in
that he did put him self between us and Gods wrath, and on our behalf
satisfied the rygoure and sharp judgment of God, so did he pay and suffer
the due pains not for his own iniquite, for he had none in him, Mat. 3. 1^.
but for our wyckednes. Lue. 3. 9.
Not that y^ father was at any time angry against him (for how could he be
angrye with his most dear son in whom is all his delight and pleasure? or
how could he be pacyfyed with his prayer with whom he were displeased?) but
in this sense we say he bare the weight of gods rygorousnes, because being
thus strycken and as it were scourged by the hand of God, he felt all the
tokens and signs wherwythe god in his fume is wont to punysshe sinners, in so
much that when the Passion waxed strong over him, Mat. ^71
he was constreyned streyned to cry my God, my God, why have you forsaken me?

And the third day he rose again from death / he ascended into heaven and
sytteth on the right hand of God the father almighty / from thence he shall
come to judge the quycke and the deed.
OF Christ's rysynge again we may gather a sure trust of victory, Act. 2.
that we shall overcome death, for like as he could not be holden down by all
y^ panges of death, but mightily did brast forth beyond all deaths power, so
did he repress and quench all his stinges and that in such wise, as he is
not hable to styng us now any more, at least way to our destruction. 2. Cor.
15
So then his rising again,is first a right certain truth and even the ground
of our rysyng to come, Romans 7.
and also of this our present quickenyng, whereby we be raised up unto a
newness of life. By his asce^sion or mounting up unto heaven, he opened us the
way unto the kyngedome of heaven, which in Adam was against all men shut, for
he ascended in to heaven in our flesh as it were in our name, to the intent
that even now in him by hope we may possess heaven, and after a manner sit
even among the heavenly sprites. And assuredly he is not there without our high
profit: for according to the office of his everlasting presthod he went into
the sa^ctuary of god not made of man's hand, and there he labors as a
continual attorney and mediator for us before the father, (...)
where we say he sytteth on the right hand of god the father, it means that
he is crouned and proclaimed, king, judge, and Lord, over al things, yt by
his power he might co^serue and govern us that his kingdom and glory may be
our strength, power and boaste against hell, It signifies also that he has
received to dispose at his pleasure all the may be made perfyte and filled,
that is to wit, that his judgment moughte be manifested, 1. Cor. 15.
in which day he alone shall be set up on high, and shall be all together
in all men, gatherynge and receyuyng his faithful into glory, when satan's
kingdom shall be brought to confusyon, and utterly throw down.

The third.
Thy will be done in earth / as it is in heaven.
IN this petition we desire of god that as he is wont in heaven, so in earth he
wovouchsaue to order and dispose all things, as his gracious pleasure shall be,
to bring every thing to pass as shall like his wisdom best, to use al
creatures at his own pleasure, and to subdue all wylles unto his. And thus
requyrynge, we utterly refuse and abandon all our own desires, renouncing and
gyuynge up unto the Lord what so ever affection, will, or lust, is in us,
desiring his graciouse majesty that he suffer not the world to pass with us
as we our selves would have it, but that he cause all our matters so to go
forward with us, as he knows before and forseeth best for us and as he has
appointed the same to be. Nor we do not only here ask, that god would make
our own desire void and of no effect, even so many as be contrary and
repugnant to his will, but also that he, extinguyshinge these our affections,
would shape in us new thoughts, new minds, and new ententes, so that none
other motion or lust be felt in us, then a pure consent and full agreement with
his will, and for a conclusion that we woll nothing of our self, but as the
holy spirit woi in us, by whose secret instruction and teachinge, we may
learn to love those things that be pleasant to him, and to hate and abhor
wors then death what so ever displease him. Now assured we are that
displeases him y^ is contrary to his word and institucion.

Give us this day our daily bread.
HEre in general we ask of god all things necessary to the behouf of our
bodies under the clementes of this world, not only to be fed and clothed,
but, also what so ever thing he forseeth to be expedient for us to the intent ws
might eat our bread in peax. In this petition with few words, we betake our
selves into his keeping, and commit us to his divine providence that he would
feed, nouryshe and preserve us, for y^ most graciouse and tender father does
not disdain to take unto his keeping and tuicio^ also this our body, y^ he
might exercise our faith in these same little small things, whiles we look to
receive at his hand all things what so ever we have need of even to a crumme
of bread and a drop of water. Where we say Daily and this day, it means that
we ought only to ask things sufficient for our need, even as it were for no
more but this day: With this assured confidence that our father, after that he
has nouryshed us this day, woll not fail us to morrow. Now how much
abundance so ever of goods through his benefit we have, yet it behooves us
to ask our daily bread thynkyng on this wise, that all our substance is
nothing, but so farforth as god by powryng forth his blessing, shall prospere
and increase, and that which is in our hands is none of ours but so farforth
as god bestows it unto us and suffers the use thereof in our hands from
time to time. In that we say, Our bread, is hyghly declared the bou^tyousnes
of god, which makes y^ to be ours, which by no reason was dew unto us.
Finally in that we desire it to be given us, it is meant that it is the pure
and free gift of god, from whense so ever it come to us, though it seem
never so much to be gotten by our science and propre industrye.

The fyfthe.
And forgive us our trespasses / as we forgive them that trespass against
us.
IN this petition we ask release, pardon, and forgiveness of sins to be
received at gods hands, a thing doubtless right necessary to all men and
women without exception, And we call them dettes, (for so signifies the greek
and also the latin word) because we owe god a punyshement for them as a price
or penny worth due for the same. But by no means can we make this payment
good, oneles we be discharged by this forgyuenesse which is the free pardone
of his mercy. We ask this pardone to be given us, even as we forgive our
detters, that is, as we spare them and forgive them, of whom we have been in
any thing, either harmed, sharply handled, or contumeliously checked. This
condition is here added, not that by our forgyuynge of other men's trespasses
against us, we may or can deserve gods pardon, but it is here put for a ^ygne
and token to acertayne us, that so truly our sins be pardoned us of god, as
we semblably in our own consciences forgive other, in case our heart be clean
purged and void of all hatred, envy, and vengeance. On the contrary part, we
be warned that they be shaken of and expulsed from the nombre of gods
children, so many as be ready to revenge, hard to forgive and that styffely
bear malice in their hearts against their neighbors, For all such are hereby
monyshed not to be ones so hardy as to call god their father, nor pray to
escape gods wrath, lyth in their own stomach they bear wrath and displeasure
against other. yea Christ expressly says, Mat. 6.
that onles we for give men their offenses, the father wol never forgive us
ours Which thing he also teaches by the parable of the king and his
servants. Mat. 18.
Finally he wol have forgive us our neighbor not ones or twyse, Mat. 18.
no not seven times only, but seventy times seven times, meaning herby, we
ought contynually from time to time to forgive our brother.

The syxte.
And let us not be led into temptation / but deliver us from evil. Amen.
IN this demand, we do not require, that we should never feel temptations, for
by them rather it is our profit to be styrred and rubbed on the back, lest
through ouermoche rest, we might wax sloggardes, for the lord tempts his
chosen daily, chastysyng them by reproach, poverty, trouble, and other kinds
of crucyfyenge. But this our prayer is, 1. Cor. 10.
that with the temptation he wol make us a way out, so as we be not overcome
and pressed down of any temptations, but that by his power enstrengthened we
may stand sure against all the power of our adversaries wherewith they assault
us. Also that we taken to his governance, hallowed by his spiritual graces,
and fensed with his protection may stand styffe against the devil, death,
hell gates, and the hole kingdom of the devil, and this is to be delivered
from evil. We must mark also how God wol that our prayers be shapen. Truly
we must shape them after the rule of charity, for so has he taught us to
pray, not for our own behoufe without any regard of our brethren, but he
commands us to be even as busye for their commodity, edificatyon and
profit, as we would be for our own.

Continuance of prayer.
THis then it behooves us to look upon, that we go not about to bynd god to any
circumstancies, like as we be taught in this prayer, nor to assign him any
law, or apoynt him any condycyon. For before we conceive any prayer for us, we
first require and forespeke that his will be done, whereby now we subdue our
will to his, that as with a brydell now restreyned, it should not p^sume to
force god to a course or trade. If our minds ones brought to such obedience,
we suffer our selves to be ordered at tharbitreme^t of gods provision, easily we
shall learn to continue in prayer, and referrynge our requests unto the lord,
pacyently to awayt his pleasure, being assured that god is always present with
us, though it seem not so, and that when he sees his time, he wol declare that
he gave no deaf ears to our prayers. That if after long awaytyng, our mind
cannot attain what it has profyted by prayer, nor feel any fruit gotten
thereby: yet our faith shall certyfye us of that, that by feeling we could not
perceive, even how we have obtained that expedient was for us. And thus shall
faith work, that in poverty we may possess abundance, and in trouble
comfort, for if all together go to wreck and fail us, yet shall god never
fail us, never forsake us, since he can not disapoynte the awaytynge and
long suffrau^ce of his, him alone may we have in stead of all things, for he
co^teyneth in him all goodness, which without doubt in time to come, he woll
show us all at large and most fully.

Of Sacraments, wherefore they properly serve.
Sacraments be ordained that both before god and man they should be exercyses
of our faith. Before the lord they exercise our faith, whiles they
establysshe it in gods truth, for where as the Lord perceived it expedyent
for the ignorant of our flesh, he did setforth heavenly mysteries to be
beholden under carnal elements. Not that any such powers be given to the
self natures of things, as be propowned to us in sacraments, but that by the
lords word they be signed hereunto. For y^ promise comes always before,
which promise is contained in the word, then follows the token to strengthen
and seal the promise, and to make it of more authority among us, eue^ as
the Lord forseech, that it is expedient for the capacite of our weakness.
For undoubted so small and weak is our faith, that except it be propped up on
every side, and born up by all means and ways possible, anon it wolle qwayle,
be shaken a pieces, and overthrown. Now this faith is also among me^
exercised by sacraments, whiles by the same it goes ope^lye to show her
self to the world, and is styrred up to render due praises to the Lord,

What a sacrament is, and how many there be.
A Sacrament is therefore properly an outewarde sign, wherein God represents
and witnesses his good will toward us, to sustain the weakness of our
faith. Or an other way more short and also more plain, A sacrament is a
witness of gods favor, declared by an outward sign. Now there be diverse
holso me sacraments in the church, and namely seven recounted of the fathers,
Matrimony, Baptism, Confirmation, Penance, Eucharistia commonly called the
sacrament of the aultare, Orders, and extreme unction.

Matrimonye, Wedolcke
god him self did first institute in paradyse, Gene. 1.
and saint Paul calls it honorable in all things. Hebre. 13.


By penance we atteyne the high benefit of absolution, Penance
neither ought we to neglecte the power or keys of the church, sithe to it
Christ says, Whose sins so ever ye forgive shall be forgyuen, Johan. 20.
and whose sins ye reteyne shall be retained. Luc. 10.
And again he says, Who hears you, hears me.

The sacrament of orders, Order.
is whereby, by layeng on of y^ hands, persons of such qualities and
conditions, as Paul describes to Timothy 1. Timo. 3.
and Tite Tit. 1.
should be called and elected not only to ministre sacraments but much rather
to preach gods word purely and syncerely to the people.

Confirmation Confyr.
and extreme Extreme unction.
unction the ancient fathers of the church taking occasion and groundyng
themselfes upon the doings and acts of thappostles have received. But of
baptism and Eucharistia because they be the principal sacraments and in the
new testament instituted expressly by Christ himself, I intend somewhat
more at large to entreat.

Of Baptism.
Baptism is given us of God, both to serve our faith before him, and to
serve our profession before men. Faith has eye to the promise, whereby the
mercyful father offerethe us the felawshyp of his Christ, that we endowed with
him might be partakers of his goods. And two things it chiefly represents
unto us, the clensynge, ^urgation.
which we have in Christ's blood, and the ^leynge of our flesh,
Mortificatio^.
which we have obtained through his death. For the Lord commanded his to
be baptized into remyssyon of sins. Ephe. 5.
And Paul teaches that the church is hallowed of Christ her spouse, and
washed in the lauer of water in the word of life. Furthermore he declares
that we be baptized into Christ's death, Roma. 6.
buried with him, to thinte^t we might walk in newnes of life, whereby it is
not meaned that the cause or power of clensyng and of new birth is in the
water, but only that in this sacrament is perceived a knowledge of such
gifts: when we be accounted to take, obtain and purchase that, which we
believe to be given us of the Lord, whither we first espy it, or whyther it
were known to us before, and be here more certainly informed of the same. Now
as touching our profession before men, this Sacrament also serves, for it is a
mark or token whereby we openly profess that we will be accounted among the
people of god, that with all other godly persons by like relygion we
worship that same one god. Sith then in Baptysme the covenant of the lord is
specially made with us: therefore of good right we baptize also our infauntes
in that they be fellows and partakers with us of the everlasting covenant,
wherein the Lord promyseth him self to be the God and graciouse lord, not to
us only, but to our seed also.

Of the lords souper, or sacrament of the aultare.
UNto what end the mystery of this sacrament, 1. Cor. 11.
which saint Paul calls the lords souper, and is called of the fathers
Eucharistia and Synaxis, was ordained, and whereunto it serves, the promise
there added euyde^tly declares which is to acertayne us, that the lords body
was ones so offered, so betrayed for our sakes that now it is ours, yea and
evermore shall be, and that his blood was ones so sprynkled and shed for us,
that it should be ours for evermore. The bodyly eye sees but the signs and
figures of bread and wine, but the inward eye of faith under those signs
sees how the lord gives the true partakynge of his body and blood, For all
though he being now taken up into heaven, keeps his residence in heaven and
no longer in earth, I mean in personal and humayne lykenes, yet no distau^ce
of place can let him to feed his faythefull with his own self, and so to
work that they (though heaven and earth be never so far asunder) should yet
have most present fellowship and company with him. And hereof have we a
lesson given us in this sacrament so certain and manifest, that we must
fastly believe that christ with all his richesse is here given and presented
unto us, no less then if he stood even personally present, to be seen as he is
in his majesty with our eyes and to be felt with our hands, yea and that
with such power and might, that not only he brings to our souls an
undoubted trust of everlasting life, but makes us sure also of the
immortality of our flesh being quyckened of his immortal flesh, and after a
manner taking part of his immortality. Wherefore under the signs of bread and
wine be presented and ministered unto us the body and blood, to the intent we
might learn y^ they be not only ours, but also serve unto us for life and
nourysshyng. Thus when we se this most sacred and mystical bread, anon we
must co^ceyue this similitude, that like as bread nourysheth, susteyneth, and
preserves the life of our natural body: so is the body of Christ the fode,
comfort, and defense of our gostly life. When we se the form of wine, look
what profit wine brings to man's body, the same must we reckon, spyritually
to be brought unto us in Christ's blood. Now, this mystery as it is a proof
and declaration of the great bounty of God toward us: so it ought to monysshe
us, that we be not unkind for the same his goodness and excedyng liberality
showed unto us, but rather as our duty is, auaunce the same with praises, and
magnifye it with thankesgyuyng. And furthermore that we should embrace one of
us an other with such an unite, as we se the members of one body knyt and
fastened among them selves. For there can be no quycker spur to stir
brotherly love among us, then whiles Christ, thus gyuynge him self to us
does not only allure us by his exemple, every one of us freely to yield and
give him self to other, but also like as he makes him self commune among
us all, so in him he makes us all to be as one. But would god we would learn
to measure and to contemplate in our mind the greatness of this so high a
sacrament given us of god. would god I say we considered how foul a sin
ingratytude is, how horrible peynes and punisheme^tes do ensue of the
vnreuerent handlynge and prohanation of this sacrament. Neither is it to be
thought y^ those most grave thretninges y^ s. Paul pronounces be frustrat
and void. 1. Cor. 11.
For thus he says. Wherefore who so ever eats this bread and dryncketh the
cup of the lord unworthily, shall be gyltie of the body and blood of the
lord. Let a man therefore examine him self and so let him eat of that bread
and drink of that cup. For he that eats and dryncketh unworthily, eats
and dryncketh his own damnation, not decernynge the body of the lord.

Of the Pastors and herdmen of the church, and of their power.
FOr as much as the lord will that both his word and the Sacraments be
ministered by men unto us: it behooves Curates or herdmen to be set in office
over the church, which with pure doctrine may inform the people both pryuely
and apertly, ministre Sacraments, and with good exemple instruct men unto
holiness and pureness of life. Who so despiceth this institution and this order,
be unruly and disobedient not against men but against god, in that they
factiously withdraw them selves from the fellowship of the church which
without this ministry, by no means can stand, for that has no little
authority, that the Lord ones witnessed, saying, that he him self is
received, when they be received, (...)
and that he is cast out, when they be cast out, And to the intent their
office should be no vile thing ne unregarded, they be endowed with a special
commandment of byndynge and loosynge, (...)
having thereto a promise, that what so ever in earth they bind or loose,
(...) 20.
the same is bound and loosed in heaven. And Christ him self expounynge his
word declares that to bind, is to hold sins, and to loose, is to release
them. Now by what fasshyon they loose, the apostle expouneth, when he says,
(...)
that the gospel is a power to save every beleuer. Again what way they
bind, he declares when he says that the Apostles have a ready vengeance
against all disobedience. 2. Cor. 10.
For the sum of the gospel is that we be i^eruauntes of sin and death, and
that we be losed and made free through the ransom which is in Christ Jesus,
and as many as do not receive him for their redemer, be bound with new bonds
of a greater condemnation. But we must remember that all this power which
scripture gives to pastors and bishops is contained within the mynistery of
the word, for Christ gave not properly this power to men, but to his word,
ordeynynge men only the mynisters thereof. Wherefore in gods word whereof
they be made disposers and layers out, boldly let them ieoparde even all
things, and constreyne all the power, glory, and pride of the world to stowpe
and obey unto it, by it let them command all men, from the highest to the
loweste, let them build Christ's house, pull down Satan's kingdom, feed the
sheep, stay the wolves, teach and exhort those that will learn, reprove the
stubberne: but all together in the word, from which word if they swerve to
their own dreams, and fanses: they be no longer esteemed for pastors and
shepeherdes, but rather (for asmoche as they be pestile^ wolves) ought to be
driven away and deposed. For Christ commands none other to be heard, then
such as teach us the things that they have taken of his word.

Of men's traditions.
Sith we have a general sentence of Paul, 1. Cor. 14
yt all things in thassembles and churches should be done comely and in good
order: civil ordinances, whereby as with bonds an order and comely fasshyon is
kept in the company of the Christians, and a concord thereby conserved,
ought not to be reckened among men's traditions: but must rather be referred
unto the rule of the Apostle, so that they be not believed as things necessary
to our salvation, nor bynd the consciences to any superstition through them,
nor be kept as any worshyppynge of god, nor that any holiness be reposed in
them. But such ordinances as under a title of spiritual laws be thruste upon
us, to bind our consciences, as things necessary to gods honor, all such
laws I say ought we earnestly to resyste, for they do not only overthrow the
liberty which Christ purchased us, but also dymme the true relygion, and
defile gods majesty, who alone wol raygne in our consciences by his word Let
this then abide for a sure gron^d, 1. Cor. 3.
that all things be ours and we Christ's, and that god in vain is worshypped
where be taught doctrines, Mat. 15
the commandments of men.

Of excommunication.
Excommunication is, whereby notable horemongers, aduouterers, usurers,
extortioners, spoylers, rouers, pirates, brallers, ryoters, dronkardes,
seditious persons, wasters, after they have been admonished, and do not amend,
be reiecte and banysshed from the company of the faithful, Mat. 18.
according to the lords commandment, not that the church casts them unto
perpetual ruin and despair, but it dainneth their life and manners and
except they amend, the church ascerteyneth them of their damnation. This
order is therefore necessary among the faithful, that since the church is the
body of Christ, (...). 1.
it ought not to be defiled with such stynkyng members, which redounde unto the
shame of their head. And moreover least by company of such a naughty sort (as
it commonly chau^seth) the good also might he corrupt, It is also profitable
for them selves, that their lewdnes be thus chastised which, where as other
ways by sufferaunce, they would wax more wilful and obstinate, now driven thus
to shame, might learn to amend, which thing if they can be won unto, the
church gentyllye receives them into her felowshyppe again, and to the
partakynge of that same unite, from whens they were banysshed and shut out. And
least any man should proudly despise the judgment of the church, or little
regard that he by the church is thus condemned, the Lord witnesses that
this judgment of the faithful is none other thing then the publysshynge of
his own sentence, (...)
and that it is approved in heaven, what they do in earth. L^c. 10.
For they have gods word, whereby they may damn the froward, they have again
Gods word whereby they may receive those that return unto grace.

Of civil rulers and governors.
THe Lord witnesses, that not only he allowed temporal gouernau^ces and the
office of magistrates, but also for that with such honorable authority he
sets forth their dignity: hyghly he commends the same unto us, for he
assures us y^ it is the work of his wisdom, that kings raygne, Pro. ^.
that counselours discern justice, that the honorable be judges of the earth,
yea and otherwhyles he callethe them gods, because they supplye and exequute
his rowm, Psalm. 82.
In an other place also they be reaported to exercise judgment even for god
and not for man. Deuteronomy. 1.
Furthermore Paul recyteth the offices, 2. Part (...).
among the gifts of god, Romans (...).
and where as he makes a longer treatye of them, he manifestly teaches that
their power is the ordinance of god, and that them selfs be ministers of god
to the praise of the weldoers, and to the vengeance of the (...) (...) in
(...) me (...) to (...) gods (...) yea all (...) they hyther^^^ (...) employe,
that (...) the vniuersalle (...) true religion with (...) or spot, that they
(...) the people with good (...), (...)
that both openly and and pryuately they procure the weal, commodity and
rest of their dominions. This can not be done but by justice and judgment,
which two things especially be committed unto them of the prophet Justice is
to mayn (...) (...) his heavenly myste^ (...) ^^crete counseles (...) ^^arye to
monissh^^ (...) when they come (...) scryptures (...) with (...) and pleasau^
(...)


