A Rich Storehouse or Treasury for the Diseased.

Wherein, are many approved Medicines for diverse and sundry Diseases, which
have been long hidden, and not come to light before this time.

Now set forth for the great benefit and comfort of the poorer sort of people
that are not of abillitie to go to the Physicians.

Rebus aduersis constans.

AT LONDON, Printed for Thomas Purfoot, and Raph Blower, Ann. 1596.

To the Right Honorable Thomas Skinner, Lord Mayor of the City of London.
IT has been, and is (right Honorable) a lawdable custom in this City, that
at the entering of any Lord Mayor into his Office, not only his familiar
friends and acquaintance, but also of every fraternity, some selected men
should present his Lordship with one gift or other: Whereby they do not only
congratulate with him his late increase of honor; but also those presents are
as tokens, or earnest pence of their yielding duty and obedience unto his
Lordship, during his office. In like sort, I my self (though one of the
poorest, yet a Citizen, and none of the least, in humble obedience, and
dutiful good meaning toward your honor, am imboldened to present your
Lordship with this Book, entitled, A rich Storehouse or Treasury for the
Diseased, A Book (Right Honorable) very necessary, and convenient to be used
of the poorer sort of people (for the preservation of their health) that are
not of ability to go to the Physicians, and I assuring my self, that your
Lordship will vouchsafe to be a protector of the poor peoples profit and good,
both in health and wealth, (the same coming by chance into my hands) have
thought it good to publish it under your honorable name, whose Authority may
best countenance the same, and whose courteous admittance shall be a sufficient
guerdon of my dutiful good meaning herein. If my worth were greater, my duty
would show greater: in the mean time, as it is, it is bound to your Lordship,
To whom I wish long life, still lengthened with all happiness.

Your Lordships in all duty Raph Blower.

DIVERSE and SVNDRYE GOOD Instructions and Rules for all such as are the true
Practisers of Physic and Chirurgerie, which are very meet and convenient to
be observed and known unto them, And also concerning Bloodletting, Purging,
and of the use and commodity that often times comes thereof.
FOR AS MVCH as Health is profitable and pleasant to all men, since that all
men do continually wish, and pray either for the restitution or continuance of
the same, and how that it is the property of nature, only to fight and
strive against diseases, and also that the Physician is but the minister and
servant of nature, either to apply such things to her, as may be used to
distroy the disease withal, or else by taking away the greatest part of the
same matter which causes and mainteyneth the sickness, and therefore it is
very meet and necessary for every Physician, before such time as he do
minister any thing at all to the sick person, diligently to learn, and to
search out perfectly the principal cause of the disease, in the which ^^be be
ignorant, it is more by good fortune, then by any cunning or skill, that he do
ever cure any disease at all. For how is it possible to help nature, with that
which she has need of ^ except it be first known, what she needs, which
none can know, except the cause of the disease be first manifestly known unto
him, so y^ he may minister things directly, contrary to the cause of the same
disease. And therefore I do most greatelye lamente the ignorance of the common
sort of People, who for the most part are persuaded, that one medicine is
sufficient for one disease, and not regarding that one disease may come of
sundry causes, and therefore it does necessarily require diverse medicines, as
for example, weakness of the stomach (that it cannot digest well, or that it
has no good Appetite) is one disease, which nevertheless may come a dozen
sundry ways at the least. Therefore the cure of it cannot be always with one
medicine, As if weakness of the stomach, do come of a weak distempure of it
self only, then it must of necessity be made hot by some means, but if
heat be the cause of weakness, then it must needs be cooled, Likewise you
must moisten drynes, and dry moisture, But if the weakness do come of some
superfluous humor that both abound, which has flowed into the stomach, or
has been there engendered, then must that ill humor, of necessity be purged
out, either by a vomit, or else a purgation with a meek medicine for it, And
if it be fleame, then with a medicine that expels sleame, But if choler be
abounding there: then must it be such a medicine as does purg choler, And
likewise for melancholy, a meet Purgation must be used to expel the humor,
But if the imbecillitie of the stomach, be caused by a distillation and Rewme,
that falls out of the head into it, then is the cure to be remedied in y^
head, and not in the stomach, Likewise if distempure of the liver or spleen,
do weaken the stomach, then the cure consists in the healing of those
members, and not in ministering of any thing for the stomach.

Therefore let no man think it sufficient for the Physician, if he know that
a man has such a disease, as the Ague, the Colic, the Flix, or such other
like etc. that then he may straighte way (if he be skillfull) minister a
medicine meet for it* Noe not foe, but he must first search by all means
possible, the very cause it self of ye disease, which many ignorant People do
persuade themselves, that a skillful Physician may do in all diseases, by the
only sight and inspection of the Urine, But alas they are altogether deceived,
and for to come to y^ knowledge of the cause of some inward disease, the Urine
profits nothing at all, for in most inward diseases of the body, there
ought as great a regard to be had and taken to the Pulses, and to the
dispositions and state of the Brain, of him that is sick, as there should be
had of the Urine. Also the Egestions, Sweat, Spettle, and other Excrements, are
not to be neglegted, in soemuch, that at some time they do declare y^ cause of
the disease, and the state thereof, when the Urine does not show any thing
at all.

Likewise for example, in a Plurisie, or an inflammation of the Lunges, or in a
Squinancie, or such like, there is more to be known by Spettle, then there is
by Urine.

Also in a Laske, or a bloudye Flixe, or in a Collicke, or Iliake, there is
more certainty of Judgment, to be given by Egestion or Ordure, then there is
by Urine: Which things, those that are not altogether addicted to their own
fantasies, may easily by good reason, be persuaded to credit, for Urine is
nothing else, but the watrie and washie part of the blood, for it is
separated from blood in the Liver, and sucked from thence into the Raines, from
whence it distilleth down into y^ Bladder, and so passes forth. Seeing
therefore that Urine is the excrement that is separated from y^ blood: there is
good cause why it should show the state of the Liver, and of the Blood, in all
parts of the body, and it can also declare the state of all such members as it
passes by, as of the Raines, the Bladder, and such like.

But certainly in other diseases that be out of the Veins, and be distant
from the places, by which the Urine passes, there is no certain judgment to
be given by the Urine unless the vehemency of the disease has infected the
blood or the Liver after some sort, Nevertheless such is y^ ignorance of many
people, that they think him woorthye of noe estimation in Physic, which
cannot at the first sight of the Urine (although it has been carried xx.
Miles) tell whether it be the water of a man or a woman, and how the disease
greeueth the patient better then himself, and also whether he shall live or
dye, what disease soever it be, which things undoubtedly in diverse diseases
are impossible to be known by the only sight and inspection of the Urine.

Therefore it is very necessary for him that will minister Physic, duly and
rightfully to observe these 4. rules following (That is to say) first to see
the sick Person, and to confer with him or her, which soever it be, for there
is none that can so well declare any grief (whatsoever it be) as he can that
is troubled therewith. Secondly to view and feel the Pulses, and to observe
well the state of them. Thirdlye to view very diligently all the excrements,
not only the urine, but also the Spettle, Sweat and Ordure. Fourethlie and
last of all, to have a respect to the place where the grief is, and to
consider well the accidents that do arise thereof, not omitting to know the
former diet and trade of life, which the sick person has used, These things
then being diligently and severally marked, the Physician may more certainly
learn the chiefest cause of the disease, the strength thereof, and to what
end it will come unto, then by seeing the Urine only, and also by what means
he may minister a meet medicine for it, whereby the sick person may soon
find ease, and purchase unto himself exceading great fame.

Thus have I partly declared, what things ought to be known of every
Physician, that thereby he might withdraw, and take away the fond and foolish
opinion, that a great number of people do deem to be true, that is, that the
sight of the Urine is sufficient enough, for a cunning Phisitio^, perfectly to
know the disease of the sick, and the true cause thereof, and to minister apt
medicines for it. And now I cease to speak any more hereof, but I will as
briefly as I may entreat somewhat of the use and benefit that does arise and
come of Purging, and Bloodletting, and I would wish all those that do practice
the same, to be careful thereof.

Note also that if the body of a man, do abound with humors, which are
ready to oppress nature, then whether there be any sickness in the body
present, by means of them, or if there be but danger of sickness, those
humors must be euacuat out of the body, either by Bloodletting, Purging,
vomit, Sweating Bathes, or else by some other kind of euacuation. But I will
speak here only of euacuation by Bloodletting and Purging, and first of all
of Bloudletting.

There be diverse things to be considered of, before Bloodletting, as the age
of the patient, the complexion, the time of the year, the region, the custom,
the strength, and the vehemency of the disease.

The age must be considered, because Children under 14. years of age, and old
folk may not be let blood, unless great necessity require it.

The complexion is to be noted, because a hot complexion has large veins,
and abounds with much blood, and they may therefore forbear a good quantity
of blood; But cold complexions have narrow veins and little blood, and
therefore their euacuation must be small.

The time of the year must be very well marked, that the weather be not too
hot nor too cold, and therefore the spring time is the most aptest time for
bloodletting, because that then it is temperate.

The Region and Country, is to be spoken of, because it is to be noted, that if
the Region be very hot, or else very cold, it is not good to let blood, but a
temperate Region is most meetest of all for it.

Custom is not to be neglected, for thereby we may know that they that have
been accustomed to bleed, may better suffer bloodletting, then those that
were never letten blood at any time before.

The strength of the Person must be regarded, for if there be great weakness,
then is it very daungerouse to let blood at all, except great necessity
compels.

Also the vehemency of the disease is worthy to be marked: for if it be a
vehemente disease, then you must let blood forthwith, if the former
circumstances will permit it.

These things being considered, if they will permit bloodletting, and if it
be in a needful cause, then it shall be very necessary to know in what sign
the Moon is in, for you must take heed that she be not in the sign that
governs that member, wherein you intend to open the vain, and also to forsee
that she be in such a sign, as is good to let blood in.

The uses and commodities of bloodletting, are these that are here expressed.

First, This is a general rule, that bloodletting is a very good remedy for
all diseases that be engendered of abundance flowing or eruption of blood, as
be chiefly the Fevers called Sinochy.

Also the Phrenesie, Squinancie, Plurisie, Peripnewmony, Opthalmie, and against
all inflamatious, and impostumatio^s engendered of blood in the Liver, the
Spleen, the Raines, the Womb, the Share, the Arme-holes, the Arms, the
Legs: and to conclude, in all inward or outward parts, wheresoever the
inflammation be: bloodletting is good for it, whether it be now present; or
that there be any danger, that it will shortly engender.

Also Bloodletting is good in Fevers, whether they be continual or
intermittent, insomuch that the obstructions and stoppinges of the Veins, be
caused of immoderate repletion of the humors.

Note also that Bloodletting does empty and euacuat from the body, all
humors alike, as well the good as the bad.

And therefore it is chiefly to be used, when there is to great an ab^^dance
of blood in the body and other humors, which do strain the veins, and
that there is great danger and ieopardie in breaking of some veins, or the
brusing out of some flux of blood, or of choking, and to extinguish natural
heat. And therefore in such cases, you must let blood with all spead, although
the sickness be not already present.

For by letting of blood in due season, the superfluous fullnes of the veins,
is brought into a mean state again, and the pains that came of the fulness
and stretching of the vessels, beeased: And the heaviness that was felt in the
body, is clean taken away, and the body is lightened, and made more quick
and nimble, to do all such actions as nature has ordained it to do. Also it
causes nature, to have a larger scope, and a free passage by opening and
emptying of the straight ways and passages, of the veins and Arteries.

Last of all, if it be done in time, it preuenteth diverse and sundry diseases,
into which the body was both apt and ready to have fallen into.

Many more commodities might here be rehearsed as concerning bloodletting,
which is done when necessity requires, and as it ought to be done, but to
conclude (omitting all other) Note this for a general rule, that bloodletting
is very good against all kind of diseases, which be caused and engendered of
blood, and not only when the diseases are present, but also it is good
letting of blood, to prevent any such diseases, if they be forseene or feared,
always regarding that there be none of these impediments aforesaid, which do
prohibit and forbid bloodletting, except it be in great necessity and
extremity, for then as the common proverb is, Necessitas non habet legem,
that is: Necessity has noe law.

Here would I leave of to speak of bloodletting, but that there comes into
my mind, the common opinion of the ignorant people, which do certainly
believe, that if any person be let Blood one year, y^ he must likewise be let
blood every year, or else he is in (I cannot tell) how great danger, which
fond opinion of theires (whence soever it sprung at the first) is noe more like
to be true, then I should say, when a man has a great wound by chance, in
any part of his body, whereby he loses much blood, and that after it is
healed, he must of necessity have the like wound again the next year, to
avoid as much blood, or else he is in danger of great sickness or of death,
Which opinion, if I my self did affirm it to be true (although it be most
false) yet I might use the like reason and authority to defend it, that the
common people do use for theires: for they can say nothing if they be asked
why they think so, bnt that they have heard many say so, Therefore I would
wish that noe man should credit any longer this fond and foolish opinion,
being most false, unless he can show good reason for it, which I am very
well assured of, noe man can do. Mary this I think, that like as
bloodletting is not good against all diseases, so also it is not good in all
persons, but only in those that will be content to use afterward a moderate
and convenient diet.

Those therefore that do abound with blood, and will be let blood to preserve
themselves, from the danger of any disease, which is like shortly to ensue
and molest them, They must for a long time after, be content to use a moderat
and convenient diet, For those that be intemperate and gluttonous in meats, or
are great drinkers, and wine-bibbers, they do not only receive no commodity
at all by bloodletting: but also often times, they catch more hurt by it, then
they should have had without it, for in 3. or 4. days space after, they fill
and stuff themselves with more raw juices and humors (by means of
vnmeasusurable diet) then they had before, and often times they do dye through
connulcion.

And therefore note that there is such force and virtue in a moderate diet, to
eschew and decline diseases, that without the due observation of it,
bloodletting is to noe purpose at all. And therefore if the common saying of
the people be true in any body, that they must of necessity be let blood
often, it is very true, but it is in such as keep an immoderat diet,
presently after Bloodletting, and therefore I do advertise all men, to beware
of excess in eating and drinking after bloodletting.

Note also y^ after bloodletting, none ought to walk very fast, or to run,
or to use any vehement exexcise, but let him be quiet and rest himself, until
such time as his spirits shall be well refreshed and quieted again.

Note also, that no person being let blood, ought to sleep immediately after
bloodletting, but let him keep himself both quiet and wakinge, and avoiding
all contention and exercise of body and mind, and about two hours after
lettinge of blood, there may a little food be taken, but let it be suc^ (...)
will make good juice and nourish apace, and within 4. or 5. hours after
bloodletting or some what before, the patient may be permitted to sleep, so
that it be provided for, and taken heed of, that he do not turn himself upon
that Arm, where the vain was opened, and let him also take good heed that he
do not loosen the band, and so let the blood flow out again, and let him
afterward use a sparing diet, daily increasing it by little and little, until
such time as he be come to his accustomed or ordinary diet again.

And note that the morning is the most meetest time of all for bloudletting,
when every digestion is perfectly finished, and the superfluities and
excrements of each of them fully avoided out, which things of necessity must
be foreseen, that they be so, Or at the least in a time of great extremity,
the next apt time to let blood in, is when the stomach is somewhat empty, and
that is about six or eight hours after meat. Thus much I have entreated of
as concerning blood-letting, and now I am purposlie minded to speak somewhat
of the use and commodities that come of Purging.

First it is to be understood, that every kind of Purgation, has that secret
virtue and property in it self, that when it is received into a man's body,
and provoked to exercise the virtue that it has by natural heat laboring to
digest it, then does it draw unto it all such humors, as it has virtue and
power to Purge.

And therefore a Purgation is an euacuation of vicious and corrupt humors,
which do oftentimes trouble and molest y^ body, but not of all corrupt and bad
humors alike.

For every Purging medicine, does draw unto it self, one peculier and proper
humor (that is) either Hegme or choler, or else melancholy or watery humors.

And therefore those persons that be perfectly in health, ought not to take a
Purgation, since they do not abound with corrupt humors, wherefore in those,
when the medicine find^^^ no such superfluous humors as it has virtue to
draw, it consumes and wastes the blood and the flesh. And for that cause,
whole folks are not purged by purgations, but rather consumed and wasted, for
it is manifest hereby, that Purgatio^s be very dangerous to them that are in
perfect health, which thing is testified also of Hippocrates in the 37.
Aphorism, of his second book, where he says after this sort, Qui corpore
been se habent hos purgare periculosu^ est, (that is) it is dangerous purging
of those that be in perfect health.

Also because every purging medicine has virtue to draw one peculier humor,
there is good heed and care to be taken, that such a medicine be ministered as
has virtue to draw out the humor abounding, and none other, or else in stead
of much good, that of it self it would do, if it were conveniently ministered:
it may contraryewise do exceading great hurt, and work many inconveniences
to the body. And according to to the saying of Hipocrates in the last
Aphorism of his first book^, in this manner. Si qualia oportet purgari
purgentur, co^fert, et facile ferunt, si contra, difficulter, that is, if such
things be purged as ought to be, it profits, and may easily be suffered, but
if it be contrariwise, it hurts and may scarcely be borne. Therefore there
ought diligent care and heed to be taken in the receiving of a purgation, that
it be ministered by a skillful Physician, that has certainly found out what
humor it is that abounds. But alas the greatest number of the common sort of
people, do, hold an opinion that if they may have a medicine for a little
money, which will poruoke them often to the stool, what humor soever it be,
and purges out, they are safe enough: how be it, I would wish them hereafter
always to have in mind this saying of the most excellent Physician Hipocrates
in the xxxii. Aphorism of the first book, Deiectiones non multitudine sunt
estimandae, sed si talia deijciantur, qualia conueniunt, that is: Egestions are
not to be esteamed for their great quantity, but if such bad humors be
purged out as they ought to be (that is) such vicious and corrupt humors as
do abound and be superfluous in man's body, then is the body quieted for a
long time after, if it be dieted as aforesaid.

There be diverse things chiefly to be considered of by every Physician before
such time as he do minister any Purgation to the sick person: as the quality
and quantity of the humor, the strength of him or her that is sick, the age,
the time of the year, and lastly the disease.

The quality of the humor is greatly to be considered, that thereby he may
perfectly know what kind of humor is to be euacuate, and purged out, for it
must be only that which troubles the body, with superfluous abundance
thereof.

As if great abundance of fleame do molest and trouble the body, then he
must of necessity minister a medicine which purges fleame, and so likewise
for all other humors what soever abounding in any part of the body.

Also he that does undertake the ministering of any medicine, ought to have
great respect to the strength of the sick or diseased person: for if he be
very weak and feeble, there ought no purgation at all to be ministered unto
him, because all manner of purgations do both weaken nature and diminish
strength, and the stronger the sick person is, the more he is weakened
thereby. Let all men therefore beware of vehement and strong purgations, least
they put their lives in hazard and danger. By the age of the Patient. the
Physician is put in mind that children and old men ought not to receive any
Purgations, except maruailous great necessity do require it. The time of the
year is not to be neglected, for there be some times of the year wherein
Purgations ought not to be ministered, as in Summer, and especially during the
time of the Dog days, as they are most commonly called, and also during all
the time, that the Sun is in Leo, for then is nature burnt up, and made so
weak withal, that she is not able to suffer the force and violence of a
Purgation, but the Spring time is the most meetest and principalest time in all
the year, for the taking of Purgations, because it is then temperate.

Last of all, the Physician ought diligently, to behold and contemplate the
disease, that he knowing certainly what kind of disease it is, may the more
better find out of what humor, it is caused, As for example.

If the Physician do perceive y^ disease to be a tertian Fever, straightway he
knows that it is caused of great abundance of choler, and therefore he must
of necessity minister a meet medicine to purge choler, withal, and so
likewise in all other diseases.

Note likewise, that if there be none of the impediments above named, a
Purgation is good to be ministered to all such as have abundance of evil juice
or corrupt humors in the body, for it draws out all the bad humors that do
molest y^ body, and thereby does restore it to his own state again.

But if a Purgatio^ be rashly ministered either to one that needs it not, or
at an inconvenient time, or that it be such a medicine, as draws no^ out the
humor which then abounds, or if the medicine be vehement and very strong, it
will surely put the Patient in great danger of his life.

These things therefore ought to be well taken heed of by all men, lest
they catch great hurt when they hope for some great profit.

But if a Purgation be discreetly ministered to him that has need of it in due
time, and by an apt and meet medicine, which is of that force and abillitie, to
draw out the abounding humors in sufficient quantity, then does the medicine
purchase most singular great commodties to the body, for it euacuateth and
emptieth out all the chiefest causes of the diseases and sicknesses, either
present or else to come, being engendered of any superfluous or corrupt humor,
as are most commonly Fevers, tercians, quartaines, quotidians, or Fluxes, and
are caused of raw humors or sharp choler, Dropsies, Goutes, Palsies,
Litargies, and diverse other etc.

Note also that before a Purgation be ministered, there ought a medicine to be
taken, which should prepare the body, and make it apt to purge, and therefore
it is called a preparatiue, it is given for two causes, either to divide,
extenuat, and make them gross and clammy humors, that they may be ready to
flow out, when the medicine draws them, or else it is given to open and
vnstoppe the conduits and vessels of the body, by which the Purgation must
draw the superfluous humor to it.

And this is that which Hipocrates does counsel in the first Aphorism of his
second book, where he says, Corpora cum quisque purgare voluerit, opportet
fluuia facere, that is, when any man will purge the body, he must make it
flowing, by opening and vnopening of the vessels.

The most meetest time of al to receive a Purgation is in the morning, for then
are all the digestions perfectly finished, and the stomach is without meat,
There is also great heed to be taken in what sign the moon is in, before
such time as any Purgation be ministered, for some signs are very good for it,
and other some are evil, Therefore I would wish all such as do take upon them
the ministering of any Purgation, to have great regard before they do minister
it, of the sick person, the time, and the place grieved, and also to mark well
all such things as are before rehearsed, least that they do more hurt thereby
in one day to ye sick person, then they are able to do him good in a whole
year, and yet they may do it of mere simplicite, not knowing themselves what
they have done, neither are they able to cure the same wound which they
themselves have made.

A Purgation must be taken hot, for so it offends the stomach least, and
it will work the sooner.

Also those that are apt to vomit, and are not able to endure the smell of the
Purgation, let them stop their nosethrills, or else let them smell to some
odorifferous thing, when they are about to take it, and as soon as it is
taken, it is good for the Patient, to smell to a toste of brown bread dipped
in vinegar, and to apply warm clothes to the stomach, and to wash the mouth
presently after that it is taken, with some odoriferous wine, or else to chew
some sweet and pleasant thing to take away the bitter taste or smell of the
medicine, and by this means vomiting shall be eschewed.

Likewise for the space of one hour after that the Purgation is taken, let the
Patient sit still and keep himself quiet, and without any sleep at all, that
the strength of the medicine may pass into all parts of his body, but if the
Purgation do work slowly, let him walk up and down for a good space after,
if he can, and when it works, in any case there must be great care taken,
that the Patient do not sleep, for so the operation of y^ medicine would be
stopped.

Also in the time of Purging immoderate heat and cold are to be eschewed, and
therefore a very great fire, and the cold and open air are both hurtefull, for
the body must be kept in a te^perate heat.

After that the Purgation has done workinge, the Patient must be nourished
with a mean quantity of some broth, that will breed good juice, and be
easelie digested, and afterward by little and little, return to his accustomed
diet again.

Thus have I as brieflye as I could, declared the commodities which do come of
bloodletting and Purging, being well and duly ministered and used, and also of
the discommodities that will eusue both of bloodletting and Purging if they be
at any time misused, wishinge all men as they do tender their health and
lives, to beware of those ignorant persons, who do most commonly use to open
but one kind of vain, for all manner of diseases, and do occupy but one
kind of Purgation against all humors, not considering at all, the strength
and the age of the Patient, neither the time, nor the chief cause of the
coming of the disease whatsoever it be, nor of any other of the
circumstances before named, but let them always seek for the counsel and
aid of one that is known to be skillful in Physic and Chirurgerie, and is
circumspect in his doings. Who can consider what need they have, and what is
most meet to be ministered unto them for y^ same disease.

Cap. 1. An approved Medicine for an Ache or swelling.
TAKE Time, Lauender cotton, Knotty Strawberies, of each of the^ one handful,
then cut them and beat them in a Mortar, and when you have so done, then take
4. or 5. Swallows out of a Neste, being ripe, and beat the^ in y^ Mortar with
the Herbs, vutill you cannot perceive the feathers, and then take half a
pound of fresh Butter unsalted, and mingle them altogether, and let them stand
for the space of 24. hours, then sees and strain them into a gally pot, or
else into some earthen vessel. And so use it twice a day, in anointing of the
place where the grief is, and in five or six days it will be whole. This
has been often proved.

Cap. 2. An other for the same.
TAKE of Sage, and Rue, otherwise called hearb-grace, of each of them one
pound, and half a pound of wormwood, and half a pound of Bay leaves, beat
them altogether in a Mortar: then take three pound of Sheep suet, and cut it
very small, and put it to the herbs, then put it into a Mortar, and beat it
with the herbs, until y^ suet cannot be perceived: then take it out, and put
thereto a pottle of Sallet oil, and so work them altogether with your
hands, until such time as they be very well steeped in the Oil, then keep
it close in an earthen pot, for the space of eight or nine days, then seethe
it in a brass Pot, with a soft Fire, until y^ strength of the herbs be
gone (to try it, take a spoonefull of it and put it into a linen cloth, and
so strain it, and if there be any juice left in it, then is it not boiled to
his perfection, but if you find none therein, then is it well boiled, And thus
must you prove all good ointments made with herbs.) then strain it and
anoint the place grieved, often therewith.

Cap. 3. A present Remedy for an old Ache.
TAke very strong Aquauitae, and two spoonefuls of the water of Arstmart, and
anoint the place where the Ache is, every day two or three times, and it will
spedily heal it.

Cap. 4. Another for the same.
TAke Aquacomposita and the oil of Netes feet luke warm, and anoint the
Patient upon the place of the grief, laying warm clothes thereon.

Cap. 5. A Medicine for an Ache, or shrinking of any Sinews.
TAke the tenderings of Rosemary, and marsh mallows, by as even portions as
you can guess, and gather your herbs when they be dry, from any rain and
dew: Beat them in a mortar very small, then take May butter well clarified,
and put it to the herbs, and mingle it in a vessel, and then let it stand
four days, then set it over the fire and let it sees till all the strength
of the herbs be gone, then take a little of it in a spoone, and let it drop
upon your nasle, and if it be green as the Emerauld, it is perfect, and then
put it into an earthen pot, and when you will use it, you must warm it.

Cap. 6. A perfect Medicine for an ache or Sciatica.
TAKE Oil of Netes feet and Aqua composita, and mingle them both together,
and set the Patient anoint the place where the pain is: then let him take
Wool which is newly plucked from the Sheep back, and let him lay it
thereupon, and let him wrappe it well with warm clothes.

Cap. 7. A present remedy for all manner of aches, and bruses in the bones.
TAKE a good quantity of Wall-woort, and a certain quantity of Balm, and
Smallege, and stamp them, then take a pound of May butter, and temper them
very well together, then make them into round balls, and let them lie for the
space of eight days after, and then stamp them again as you did before, then
take it and frye it, and strain it, and put it into an earthen pot, and so
use it, and this will help the bruise if it be never so black. Probatum est.

Cap. 8. An approved Medicine for an ache or swellinge.
TAKE the flowers of Camamill, and Rose-leaues, of each of them a like
quantity, and sees them in white wine, and make a plaster thereof, and let
it be laid as hot as may be suffered to the place grieved, and this will both
ease the pain, and assuage the swelling. D. Bartlet.

Cap. 9. An other for the same.
TAKE a small quantity, of oil de ay, and Aquauitae, and mingle them both
together, and let the Patient anoint the place which is grieved and it helps
him.

Cap. 10. A sovereign Medicine for an ache in the shoulder or else where.
TAKE Reisons of the sun, and Figs, of each of them a like quantity, and
half as much Mustard-seede, and beat them very small, then take it and grind
it in a Mustard Querne, with the best white wine vinegar y^ may he had, then
take it and spread it upon a lambs skin, and lay it to the place grieved,
and this will by gods grace help you, Probatum est.

Cap. 11. A precious Ointement or Oil, for all manner of Aches or swellings in
the Arms, Knees, Legs, or Feet, being taken with Cold.
TAKE a gallon of Sallet Oil, and of Sage, Lauender, Southernewood, Wormwood,
and Camamill, each of them a like quantity, then cut the Herbs very small,
and put them into the Oil, and stir it well together, and let them stand in
a basin of Latten, or else some other like thing, for the space of a full
month (but you must be sure to put as many Herbs into the Oil, as will make
it very thick) and so let it stand until the herbs be rotten, then make a
fire of coals, and set the basin thereon, and so let it boil for the space of
three hours, or some what more, then take it from the fire, and let it cool
somewhat, and when you see that it is but Milk warm or somewhat better, then
take a bag made of strong Canues, and with a staff, strain out all the
substance, as clean as you may, and then put it into a glass or gallypot, or
else into some earthen vessel, and stop it very close, and it will continue
in his virtue very long. This is good for any Wound or old bruise, and also
for the shrinking of any Sinews, and all manner of sores.

Cap. 12. An Excellent good and approved Oyntement, for all manner of Aches,
Agues, Bruses, Goutes, Cankers, Lamenes, Stitches, or hardenes of the Spleen,
and for all manner of pain in the Head and Ears.
TAKE Sage and Rue, of each of them one pound, Wormwood, and Bay leaves, of each
of them half a pound, of Sheep suet clean picked from the skin, the
quantity of three pound, and a pottle of Oil oliffe, and choppe the herbs
very small, and then stamp them as small as may be, then shredde the suet
very fine, and put them altogether, and then stamp the herbs and the suet,
until such time, as the suet cannot be perceived, then take it forth, and put
it, into a fair pan, and put the Oil therein, and cover it close, and so
let it stand for the space of twelve days: then take it forth and break it
with your hands into a brass pan, and set it upon a soft fire, and you must
be always stirring of it, until such time as the herbs be cracklinge, then
take it of and strain it thorough a canues cloth, into an earthen pot, and so
keep it. For those vehement aches, when you shall lay any of this oyntement
upon the place grieved, you must take Wool that grows between the sheeps
legs, or else of the longest of the Wool, and let it be carded in broad
flakes, and basted upon a linen cloth, and so keep that always to it.

Cap. 13. An approved Medicine for an ach in any of the Huckle bones, Thighs,
Arms, Shoulders etc. which comes by taking of Cold or etc.
TAKE a Kettle of fair running Water, and boil 3. or four wooden Dishes
therein (which Potage are usually eaten in) and let them boil a good space
over the fire, then take one of the same Dishes, and with a linen cloth, wipe
of the water which is within, and upon ye side of it, then take the same Dishe
and whelue it upon the Joint, Sinew, or place grieved, as hot as it may
possibly be suffered, and so keep it thereon until it be cold, then take an
other of the dishes and do as aforesaid, and so the third or fourth, and let
the party grieved use this for a certain space both morning and evening. And
this without all doubt will help hi^, for this has helped many that their
sinews were shronke up, but the party grieved must apply hoce Woollen
Clothes or else some Lambs-skinne, or the skin of a Hare, or Conny, to keep
in the heat when he takes in y^ dishes from it.

Cap. 14. A medicine for an ache.
TAKE Persly, and Wormwood, of each of them one handful, and sees them in a
quart of Ale, with sweet Butter, and wash the place well therewith that aches,
and also bind the herbs to y^ place as hot it may be suffered.

Cap. 15. Another medicine for an ache.
TAKE Sowthistle, Chickweede, Elder-leaues, Grou^dsell, and Cleauers, of each
of them a handful, dry all these together between two tiles, then lay these
herbs to the place where the grief is, but let the herbs be washed before it
be dried, and this helps.

Cap. 16. For aches and swellings in the knees.
TAke a quart of Malmsey, and a handful of Time, boil them together a good
space, and when it is half boiled, put into it a good piece of new fresh
Butter, and let them boil together from a Quart to a Pynt, and when you go to
bed, bathe your knees therewith, and wette a cloth three or four times
double therein, and lay it to your knees as hot as you can suffer it, and so
let it continue all night, and in this sort let him use this six or seven
times, and doubtless it will help you. This has been well proved.

Cap. 17. A very good Medicine for any manner of aching sores.
TAKE the juice of Smallage, of Sorrel, of Waybred, of each of them like much:
take Hunny, and the white of a new laid Egg, of either of them a like
quantity also, and mingle all these together till they thicken, let it come
near no fire but all raw and could, lay it on the sore.

Cap. 18. A plaster for an Ache.
TAKE stone Pitch, to the quantity of a tennis ball, a spoon^full of Tar, a
penny worth of Treacle, the qua^tieye of a tennis ball, of Rossin, and a
spoonefull of Hun^ye, boil it over the fire in a kettle, and stir it well
together, until it be well melted, then take a sheep skin that is new
killed, and make holes in it with a bookyn, and spread the fleshye side of the
skin, and lay it to the ache as hot as you may suffer it, for it has been
proved.

Cap. 19. An excellent good oil, for all manner of aches, bruses and
straininges of the sinews.
TAKE a pottle of Neates foot oil, and a quarte of an Ox gall, a pint of
Aqua-vitae a pint of Rose water, Bay leaves, Rosemarie stripped from the
stalks, Strawberie leaves, roots and stringes, Lauender-cotten, of every of
these a handful beat them small, and put them into the foresaid stuff, and
sees it over a fire of coals, in a pan of Two gallons, and at your own
perrill, let not the flame touch the stuff, let it sees very well, and then
take it of, and let it stand until it be almost could, then strain it through
a course linen cloth, (but not the bottom of the said licquor) then put it
into a glass, and so keep it, and when you are payned, anoint your place
where your grief commonly uses.

Cap. 20. A sovereign ointment for any manner of ache or Swelling.
TAKE two pound of Boares grease, one pound of fresh Butter, and a good
quantity of smalage, and malowes, and a good quantity of oil of neates feet,
then take the^, and stamp them very well altogether, then frye them, and
strain them in a earthen vessel that is clean, and when the Patient will use
it, let him anoint himself therewith, before a good fire, and let him take
heed that he do not take could upon it.

Cap. 21. An ointment for all manner. of Aches.
TAKE a good quantity of Smalage, and put thereto some Aquauitae, then strain
it, and put thereto a good quantity of Boares grease, and temper them very
well together, and let the patient be anointed therewith both morning and
evening before the fire, for the space of 5 or 6 days together if the pain do
continue so long. This has been well proved.

Cap. 22. For an Ague.
TAke of red Sage, of Smalage, of ground Iuie, of Bay Salt, of Plantine leaves,
of green Glass, of each of these a handful, and put therein a little Rose
vinegar to make it moist, and with a linen cloth bind it to both the wristes
of the Patient. For this has been an approved medicine.

Cap. 23. Another for the same.
TAke the grease or fat that is under the manes of horses, and melt the same in
a new earthen pot, and strain it into a gallypot or some such thing, and when
the Patient feels the Ague coming, let the Thine of his Back be anointed
therewith, and within Nine days he shall be hole, keeping in the mean space
a reasonable diet.

Cap. 24. Another for the same.
TAke the yolke of an Egg, and put thereto a quantitye of gross beaten
Pepper, and two sponefull of Aqua-vitae, and drink it could, and after you
have taken this drink walk for the space of an hour, and forbear other
drink as much as possible you may.

Cap. 25. A very good medicine for an Ague.
TAKE a handful of Harts-horne, that grows in the field, and a handful of
Bay Salt, and beat them both together in a mortar and lay this to both your
wristes and this will help you.

Cap. 26. Another for the same.
TAKE Bay salt, Smallege, white Frankencense and Plantine leaves, of each of
them a handefull, beat them in a Mortar until they be very small, then take
them and divide them into four parts, and then lay two parts thereof unto
your breasts, and the other two parts to the boughte of your Arms: and an
hour before your fit does come, then take a pint of good stale Ale, and
seethe it from a quarte, to a pint, and continually as any froth does arise,
skome it of, then put into it, a cruste of white bread, and let it sees in the
Ale, and when you perceive your fit coming, drink it warm, and eat the
cruste, you must use this drink dueringe all the time of your sickness, for it
is very wholesome and good.

Cap. 27. An other for the same.
TAKE three pintes of Ale, Bay leaves, and Red Sage, of each of them one ounce,
fine Sugar three ounces, and a spoonefull of Pepper, sees all these together,
in the Ale, from the quantity aforesaid till it come to a pint, then take it
and strain it through a fine cloth, and let the Patient drink a good draught
of it as hot as he may abide to drink it, a little before his fit comes.

Cap. 28. Another for the same.
TAKE a Pint of Malmsey, and a handful of May Weed, bruise the May-weede,
and put the juice thereof into the Malmsey, and let the Patient drink thereof,
as often as he shall think good, and this will help him. This is also good
against the Plague, and good to comfort nature, being drunk as aforesaid.

Cap. 29. Another for the same.
TAKE a good quantity of the blades of Daffadillies, and bruise them, and
sees them in a pint of Ale, or Wine, and put into it a sponefull of Grains
bruised, and let the patient drink thereof, half an hour before his fit does
come, and this will help him.

Cap. 30. A very good drink for an Ague.
TAKE Bay leaves, and Sage leaves, of each of them a like quantity, then take
Bay Berries and bruise them very groslye, and mingle these all together, and
put the^ into a quart of White Wind, and sees them for a good space then
strain it through a fine cloth, and a little before the fit comes let the
Patient drink thereof.

Cap. 31. An proved medicine for an Ague.
TAKE three quartes of fair Running water, and put it into an earthen pot, and
put thereto a good handful of Violet leaves, and Flowers, boil them for the
space of a quarter of an hour together, then take it of the fire, and put
thereto a sawcerfull of Wheaten branne, and cover the pot a good while, then
strain it through a fine linen cloth, and when it is could put thereto a good
quantity of fine Sugar, then let the party grieved drink thereof, both
morning and evening fasting, also let him before he eat any meat in the
morning eat 6 or 7 Damasins, and at night let him eat roasted Apples with
Sugar, and at Dinner let him drink white wine, with the water abouesayd mixed.
This has been much proved.

Cap. 32. Another for the same.
TAKE a quart of new Milk, as new as you can get it from the Cow and sees
it, and when it does sees, put into it a good lump of Roch Alum, and stir
it until it has a good Curde on it, and when it is very well Curded, scumme
of the curde clean, and when you have so done, then take the same drink and
drink it, as often as you think convenient, and as hot as it may possibly
be suffered, but put away the curde for it is not good.

Cap. 33. An excellent remedy for an Ague.
TAke Burre roots, and red Nettle crops, and sees them in stale Ale, and
clarify it, and give the sick thereof to drink, about such time as the could
fit begins to come, and after the heat be past, when you see that he
begins to sweat, give him to drink Posset-ale made with marigold and
Fennel, but see that the Posset-ale be well clarified: use this medicine for
it will take away the Ague within three or four fitts at the uttermost.

Cap. 34. Another for the same.
TAke Nettles, Cobwebbs, and Salt, and beat them together in a wooden dish,
and lay it to the left arm of the sick, and it will take away the heat of
the Ague.

Cap. 35. Another for the same.
TAKE a tossed of Bread, and speade it over with Treacle, and let the patient
eat it, before the fit comes, at the least three several times, for the
space of iii. days, Probatum est. Per Guilielmum Lenthell, Oxon Armig.

Cap. 36. An other present remedy for an Ague.
TAKE two ounces of bay salt, Two ounces of white Frankensence, a handful of
Smalage, beat them altogether and lay them to your wristes of both your hands,
and to the bows of your arms let this be done, 2 hours before the fit does
come, this has been proved.

Cap. 37. Another for the same.
TAke two or three cloves of Garlike and bruise them, a penyworth of
Aqua-vitae, half a pynt of Ale, and sees them altogether, and drink it as
hot as you may suffer to drink it a little before the fit comes.

Cap. 38. An other for the same.
TAke Soote, yolks of Eggs, bay salt, and Pepper, and mingle them together,
and lay it to the wristes of the Patient, do this twice a day for the space of
Three or Four days and it will take away the Ague. For this has been often
proved.

Cap. 39. An approved medicine for a burning Ague.
TAke the quantity of a quart of Running water, and half a Dozen of Orenges,
and then pill away both the upper rind, and the white skin and pick out
the Kernels out of them, then take and stir them, and sees them in the said
water, until the water be consumed half away, then take the quantity of 4
ounces of Sugar, and boil it a little space therein, and when you perceive
that it is sodden inought, then strain it and when it is cold, drink it and
so use it for the space of three days, and if need require use it oftener,
but if your burning be vehement, when your stomach will serve, stamp some
Sorrel and eat the juice thereof with your meat, this do and it will help
you.

Cap. 40. Another for the same.
TAke Smalage, Sheapheards-purse, and Liuerwort, of every of them a like
quantity, Bay Salt and Frankencence as much as you shall think needful,
beat all these together, and lay it upon a linen cloth and bind it to the
inside of the wriste of your left arm, use this for the space of 9 days
together, and it will help this disease for it has been often proved.

Cap. 41. An excellent remedy for a quotidian Ague.
TAke a quart of stale Ale, a handful or somewhat more of red Sage, a
penyworth of unbeaten Pepper, take and boil these altogether, from a quart to
a pynt, and when it is sod clarify and strain it, and half an hour before
the fit comes drink a good draught thereof and walk thereon, and it will
presently help you. This has been often proved.

Cap. 42. An other for the same.
TAKE Fetherfewe and Smallege, of either of them to the quantity of a good
handful, stamp them both together in a Mortar until such time as they are
beaten very small, and strain it, then take half as much as the juice of the
same is, of small Ale, and mingle them together, and then let the Patient
drink the same warm, a little before such time as his fit does come (that
is to say) when he perceives any grudging upon him. This must be used three
or four several times at the least, and let the Patie^t go to bed, and
have as many clothes laid upon him, as he is able to bear or suffer, and so
let him be continually kept, until his fit be ouerpast, and thus in three
or four times doing, he shall be helped by gods help, This has been diverse
and sundry times well proved. D. H.

Cap 43. A very good Drink to be used for any manner of Ague.
TAKE a quarte of Ale that is not ouer-stronge, and bail therein a good
quantity of Centorie, and let the Patient drink it luke warm.

Cap 44. An approved Medicine for a tercian ague.
TAKE of Dragon Water, and Aqua composita, to y^ quantity of a quarter of a
pint, or either of them, and put thereto a penyworth of Ieane Tr^eacle, and
half a quarter of an ounce of gross beaten Pepper, warm all these together,
and be still stirring it with a knife or else with some other Instrument, and
give it to the Patient to drink, as hot as he may possibly suffer to take
it, a little before the fit comes, and let him lie in his bed and sweat
very well. This has helped many.

Cap. 45. A Medicine For a tercian Ague.
TAKE Nine leaves of white stock Gillie flowers, and five or six croppes of
Rosemarie, and stamp them altogether, and take the juice thereof and drink it
in Ale luke warm, a little before such time as the fit does come.

Cap. 46. An Excellent Remedy for a Quartaine Ague.
TAKE an Ox Gall, and as much Aqua composita, and put thereto a quarter of an
ounce of Pepper, bruised but a very little, and two penyworth of Trieacle, and
annointe the hands stomach and wristes, with the aforesaid things, being
all mingled together, half an hour before y^ fit comes, but let it be
laid too, as hot as the Patient may suffer it, and let him sweat well upon
it, and this will speedely help him, Probatum est.

Cap. 47.
Another for the same.
TAKE Snailes which be in shells, to the quantity of two handefulls, Bay
salt, and Mallows, of ecahe one of them a handefull, beat all these
together, and lay it to the Soles or bottomes of your feet, before y^ fit
comes.

Cap. 48. An other present remedy for a Quartaine Ague, and for the drought
that comes thereof.
TAKE Red wine and new Milk, of a Cow that is all of one color, of each of
them a pottle, then take three or four handfulls of Mouse-eare, well picked
and washed, strippe it into the Wine and Milk, and temper them altogether, and
let them stand so, for the space of one night, and then put them into a
fair Still, and so distill them with a soft fire, then take the water and put
it into a Glass, and set it where it may stand in the Sun, for the space of
five days, and let the Patient when he is dry in his Ague, drink thereof
three or four times, and he shall be rid of his Ague, and this drink will
quench his thirst if he be never so dry.

Cap. 49. A very good Medicine for an Ague.
TAKE a spoonefull of green Glass beaten to powder, and 3 spoonefulls of
Stone honny, a handful of red Sage, mingle these with a head of Garlic, and
put thereto, as many Cob-webbes as will temper the same: and let it be in
bigness, to the quantity of an egg shell full in all, and then take the
aforesaid things and bind them about both the wrists of the Patient, and
this will help him. Probatum est.

Cap. 50. A Remedy to take away the drought in an Ague.
TAKE Sorell and Borrage, of each of them a like quantity, and a certain
quantity of Strawberrie leaves, and Violet leaves, boil them altogether in a
pottle of very fair Running water, until it be consumed from a pottle to a
quarte, then take the Herbs and strain them, and then take half a pound of
good Almondes, and blaunch them, and beat and strain them with the said
water, and put Sugar therein, and drink it warm, do this for the space of
five or six days, and it will help him.

Cap. 51. An excellent Rule to be observed in the making of Drink and
Pottage, for them that are infected with an ague.
TAKE Buglosse Borrage, Endive, Fennel Roots, redsage, Lettice, Pruines,
Parsley roots, great Reiso^s, Sinckefoile, Sorrel, and Succorie, of each of
them a like quantity, and put all these into his pottage, and likewise in
Posset ale, and Almond Milk and this is very good.

Cap. 52. A very good remedy against corrupt airs wherein the agues are first
engendered and gotten.
TAKE Bettony, Centory and Egremony, of each of them one handefull, then take
them, and stamp them and strain them with ale, and with a Liquorice stick
bruised, and then boil it, and clarify it very well, and make it pleasant with
Sugar; and drink thereof, every morninge luke warm 3. spoonefulls, for the
space of 3. or 4. days, and it will preserve one from all corrupt aires and
infection.

Cap. 53. An approved Medicine to cool the heat of the Back, and also to
cure the disease called Gomoria Passio.
TAKE Water-cressets, and Colombines, of each of them a good quantity, and
sees them in Cow Milk, and if it be for a man, the^ let it be the femalle
Cresset, and if it be for a woman, then take y^ Male Cresset, and when y^
herbs are well boiled in the Milk, then take it from the fire, and let the
Patient eat thereof, with a little white Bread therein, and let him drink it
also both Morning and e^ening, for a certain space, and by gods grace it will
help him. Probatum est.

Cap. 54. A Sovereign Medicine for the weakness of the Back.
TAKE Daisie roots, plantine, Bursa pastoris, Centu^modie, croppes of Acornes,
of each of them a ^andfull, and as much of Bole armoniacke, and the powder of a
Hearts horn, then take a Bucke Cony that is fat, and boil all these together
in white wine, and water, and let the water and the wine be of equall-porcions,
and let them boil until the flesh of the Conny be separated from the bones,
then take y^ Conny and the other stuff out of the broth, and strain the
broth into a clean vessel, and let it stand until it be turned to a
Iellye, and when you are in your bed, cause your Back to be anointed
therewith, by a Chafing Dish of coals, for the space of three Nights together,
and lay thereon a linen cloth warm (but in any wise chafe not your back over
much) and this will help you. Probatum est.

Cap. 55. An other for the same.
TAKE four or five Cape Dates, and peele them very cleave, and let them be
stamped small in a Mortar, and put unto them the Yolke of a new laid Egg, and
the quantity of a quarter of a pint of Muskadine, and let the Patient drink
thereof both Morninge and Evening, and it will help him.

Cap. 56. A present remedy for a heat and pain in the Back.
TAKE Rose-leaues and Rose Water, of each of them a like quantity, and put
thereto as much Saunders, as you shall ^hinke good, and let them be steeped in
your Rosewater, for the space of 24. hours, then wash your Back as often as
you can co^uenie^tly every day, for y^ space of six or seven days, and this
will both assuage the pain, and take away the hear, and much comfort the
Raines.

Cap. 57. Another medicine for the pain in the Back.
TAke Sage, Rose-mary, Camamill, and Maudiyn, (...) these a handful then stamp
them altogether in a mortar, or other stone vessel, and let it be tried ^^^h
May Butter, and anoint your back with it warm, but in any case beware of
taking cold thereon.

Cap. 58. A medicine to cleanse the back and purge the reins.
TAKE 2 Pa^sy roots, and pick out the (...) of them, and a Fennel root, and
put to it Peliitory of y^ wall, and wash them clean, and boil them in
Posset-ale, and drink thereof when you go to bed, and as often as you wake
every night do the like.

Cap. 59. A good medicine for the reins of the back.
TAke half an ounce of Venice Turpentine, and let it be very well washed in
Plantine water, or in Rose Water, and then mix it with fine white Sugar, and
make thereof 4 or five balls, of the which you must eat three in a morning
fasting, and daily drink a little white wind, or rennish wine ymmediatly after.

Cap. 60. An excellent good medicine for the weakness in the Back, and also to
restore nature.
TAke a quart of Sack, a top of Rosemary, Succory, Penny royal, of each a like
quantity, Ginger and Nutmeggs, as much as will burn the wine, the^ take 2
new laid Eggs, yolks and all, and temper them with 3 or 4 spone^ulls of
Red-rose-water, and put thereto a good piece of fine Sugar, the^ take the burnt
sack, and burn it again with the eggs, and put into it a little Mace, and it
will be in manner of a caudle, the^ put to it some salet oil, and mix it with
the burnt seek, and let the patient drink this thrice a day, (that is to say)
in y^ morning after dinner, and when you go to bed, and this will help you
in a short space, for it has been proved.

Cap. 61 A very good Medicine to strengthen the back.
TAKE a quarte of Ale, and three or four whole Maces, and as many Dates the
stones picked out, and the Pith also, then take a good handeful of the tops
of Rosemarie, and let all these be boiled together, until it be confumed from
a quarte to a pint, then take the Oil of two or three new laid Eggs, and
take of the ri^de that is about the yolks, and then put the yolks into the
Ale, and boil them well together, and stir them, and so let the
Patie^t-drink hereof, both Morning and Evening, for the space of five or six
days, and this will strngthe^ his back marvelous much, Probatum est.

Cap. 62. A Medicine for the heat of the back.
TAKE Vnguentum frigidum Galeni. iii. and spread this Oyntement upon a five
lynnen cloth, but you must first dippe it in Rose Water, and then warm it
against the fire, and lay it upon the Ridneies, and when it waxes hot take
it of, and lay it to an other place

Cap. 63. An other for the same.
Take the water of Plantine, distilled, or else the juice thereof, and put to
the leaves, and the leaves of Red-roses distilled, and also the water of
Red-roses, and the water of Red-rose vinegar, then put all these together into
an earthen pot, and put into the water, a fine linen cloth to steep, then
take it forth again, and with a few leaves of a Red-rose, cake, lay it to the
back of the Patient, and when it wareth hot, use another cloth dipped
therein, as aforesaid. This has been often proved by Doctor Huicke.

Cap. 64. A very good medicine for one that has a weak Back.
TAKE five, or six croppes of red Neepe, and two sponefull of Archangell
flowers, and shread very fine, then take two or three new laid Eggs, and
temper al these things together, then take a little sweet butter, (that is
but little salted,) and make three or four fritters, and let them be fried in
some little earthen pan, and let the Patient eat them, without either bread or
salt, but only with a little fine Sugar strawed upon them. This has been
proved.

Cap. 65. A very good plaster to ease any pain or cricke in the Back.
TAKE white Archangell flowers and leaves a good quantity, and of Cumfrey
leaves and roots, 1 ounce of Plantine and Bursa Pastoris, Ana 1 ounce beat
them al together very fine, and put to them a spoonefull of Honny, and then
frye them in a frying Pan, and divide it into tower parts; and make of every
part thereof, a Plaster, and so lay to the back of the Patie^t every night
when he goes to bed, one of them, and by gods grace this will speadely help
him.

Cap. 66. A very good Oyntement for the back.
TAKE four ounces of Vnguentum frigidum Galeni, and an ounce of the juice of
Housleeke, two drams of Myrtle, and as much of burned Lead, and one drame of
Camphire, half a drame of Red-rose leaves, and as much red Currall, and
according to art, make all these into an Oyntement, in a Mortar of lead or
Stone, and let the Patient annointe his back often therewith. Probatum est.

Cap. 67. A very good restoratiue for the back.
TAKE a quarter of stale Ale, half a handefull of Germaunder, a handefull of
Clarie, a handful of unset Hisop, a handefull of unset Time, one branch of
Rosemarie, a good quantity of english Saffron, a dishe of sweet Butter, and a
good piece of Sugar, then boil all these together, until the one half be
consumed then strain it, and let the Patient take it both Morning and Evening,
and this will help him. This has been proved.

Cap. 68. An other good restoratiue for the back.
TAKE new Milk and set it one the fire, and when you see that it is ready to
sees, take the quantity of a Nut of Roch Alum, and stamp it small, and put
it into y^ Milk, and stir it with a spoone, and cover it close, and when the
Curde does arise, take it of, and let the Patient drink thereof morning and
evening, for y^ space of five or six days together, and it helps him very
much.

Cap. 69. An other for the same.
TAKE a quarte of Goats Milk if it may be gotten, if not, then take a quarte
of Cow Milk which is new, and a handful of Otemeale, and a good deal of the
Pith of an Ox back, and stamp them together, and put them into the Milk,
and when it is sodden strain it through a fine linen cloth, and let the
Patient drink it Morninge and Eueninge and this will help him. Probatum est.

This is also good for them that are in a Consumption.

Cap. 70. A good Medicine for the Raines of a man's back.
TAKE Aquauitae, and put therein, a little Hempe-seede finely beaten, and let it
soke in the Aqua-vitae 7 or 8 days together, then strain it, and let y^
Patient drink it, and it will help him. If you cannot get Aqua-vitae, the^
take good white wine, or else stale Ale, any of these will serve.

Cap. 71. A good Medicine for the weakness of the back.
TAKE a pint of Claret wine, and put therein a good quantity of fine Sugar,
and Red-rose water, Buglosse water, and Borrage water, of every one of them a
good quantity, and mingle them together, and let the Patient drink two or
three good draughtes thereof, and a little Diasaturion, This is a very
comfortable Drink to cool the Stomach and the Raines, and it will strengthen
the back very much.

Cap. 72. A Marvelous good Oyntement for the back.
TAKE four ounces of Vnguentum frigidum Galeni, an ounce of the juice of
Housleeke, two drams of Myrtle, and as much of burned Lead, one dram of
Camphire, half a dram of Red-rose leaves, and as much red Currall, and
according to Art, make these into an Oyntement, in a Mortar of Lead, and when
the party grieved will use it let him anoint himself before the fire, and
this will presentlye help him.

Cap. 73. A Medicine for the heat of the Raines, and to avoid blistering in
the mouth.
TAKE Liuerwoort, Sorell, Balm, and Succory, Ana, one ounce and sees these in
quart of Whay, having been well clarified, and let the Patient Drink half a
pynt thereof at the least, every morning. Probatum est.

Cap. 74.
A present remedy to stay the running of the Raynes.
TAKE a good quantity of Otemeale, and beat it very small, and put it into a
quart of new milk, and sees it, and put therein a good quantity of Sugar,
and when it is well boiled, strain it, and let the Patient eat the milk, and
this will help him without all doubt.

Cap. 75. A present remedy to help the running of the Raynes.
TAke Venice Turpentine, and wash it clean, in these waters following, Viz. in
Plantine water, in Red-rose water, and in water of Licquorice, and when you
have washed it very well, then take the Turpentine, and sees it with as much
white Masticke, and when it is sodden enough it will break to a powder, it is
easily perceived upon a knives point, then take half an ounce of Nutmegs
beaten to powder, and put to it the like quantity of the powder of Venice
Turpentine, and half an ounce of white Sugar, and mingle them very well
together, then let the Patient put a quantity of this powder into an Egg or
two which must be but rear roasted, and so let him supp it of, and let him
eat nothing for the space of an hour after, but if he eat two or three of
these Eggs every morning so dressed, it will be the better, until such time
as he be whole, and then let him drink half an ounce of Red-rose water, and
half an ounce of Plantine water, after such time as he has eaten his last
Egg.

Note that he must eat Two of these Eggs aforesaid in his bed before he
do arise in the morning, and the third one hour after that he is risen up out
of his bed, and after the space of one hour more, he must drink the water
abouesaide, and then he must walk a good while after it.

Cap. 76. An other for the same.
TAKE a quantity of y^ Stones of the roots of Stockflowers (viz) Diasaturion,
and the roots that lie like beads in barren grounds, and preserve them as
you do Cherries, or other things, then make a Caudle of Muscadine, and bail
the same roots therein, with a Nutmegge grated, and a little white Masticke,
then let the party grieved eat of the roots, and drink of the same Caudle,
of Muscadine, and this will presently help him.

Cap. 77. An other for the same.
TAKE two new laid Eggs, and put the whites of them away clean, and set them
in the fire, until they be blood warm, then take half a Nutmegge, and a
good piece of Sugar Candy, and a pretty quantity of Currall finely beaten to
powder, then take a little Cinnamon and Amber, of each of them a like quantity,
and mix all these together, and put them into the Egg, and let the Patient
suppe it of, or else let him toste a piece or two of fine white bread, and
power thereon the yolks of the eggs, and then straw the aforesaid powder upon
it, and so eat it, and this will presently help him, This has been proved.

Cap. 78.
Another marvelous good remedy for the runninge of the Raines.
TAKE three Kernells of Pistia, which are not old, then take a drame of clear
Masticke, and a drame of Mirre, and three scruples of Camphire, of y^ Cups of
Acorns and yellow Amber, of each of them a like quantity, and let the Patient
use this first with a quantity of Uenice Turpentine, clean washed in Plantine
water, and afterward in the yolke of an Egg, which is rear roasted: But if
the cause be hot, then take three drams of Bole armoniack, and put it thereto,
Probatum est.

Cap. 79. An Excellent good and an approved Medicine, for the running of the
Raines.
TAKE May-weede, Plantine, Neepe, Clarie, Balm, and Daysie roots, of each of
them a good handefull, and boil them all in a quarte of pure Malmesie, and
boil it until the one half be consumed, and let the Patient drink thereof
Morning and Evening, and this will stay the Running of the Raines, although y^
Patient has been long troubled therewith, This has been often proved. D. L.

Cap. 80. An other present remedy for the runninge of the Raines.
TAKE a good quantity of Uenice Turpentine, and a Nutmegge or two beaten
small, and a good quantity of Cinnamon ground to powder, then take five or six
Date Stones, and grind the^ also until they be come to a fine powder, and mix
all these very well together, and then make it into bullets pellet like, and
wrape it in white Sugar, and let ye Patient swallow down three or four of
these pellets every morning next his heart, and let him walk half an hour
after it, before he do either eat or drink, and it will speedily help him.
Probatum est.

Cap. 81. Another principal medicine for the running of the Raines.
TAke a shiue of fine Manchet, and tossed it at the fler until it be brown one
both sides, then take Two new laid Eggs, and divide the whites from the
yolks as clean as you can, then take the two yolks, and spread them upon the
tossed of bread, then take two penyweath of white Sugar Candy, and beat it
very small in a mortar, and straw it upon the yolks of the Eggs, as they
lie upon the toste, and let the Patient eat it in the morning fasting, and let
him fast an hour or two after he has taken it, and so let him continue this
for the space of five or six mornings together, and by Gods grace it will help
him, although he has been grieved therewith 7 years before. Probatum est. Per
master James.

Cap. 82. Another medicine for the same.
TAke a tossed of fine Manchet, and tossed it on both the sides, and straw upon it
Sugar Candy, Nutmegs, Amber, and Currall, of each of them equal portions,
being all finely beaten into powder, and a little grated Sinamon, mingle all
these together, and straw upon the tosted bread and let the Patient eat this
fasting every Morning, for the space of three or four days together, and by
gods help he shall be cured. This has helped many that have been sore
trowbled with this disease.

Cap. 83. Another for the same.
TAKE Pellitorie of the wall, Wild Time, and Pasly, of each of them a good
handefull, and boil them in a quart of strong Ale, and let it boil, until
the one half be consumed, and let the party grieved drink the quantity of
half a pint thereof at a time, every Morning and Evening for the space of
Nine or ten days together, and it helps.

Cap. 84. A very good water to wash the Yard, of one that has lately had the
running of the raines, and has been cured thereof.
TAKE Woodbinde, Daysies and Plantine leaves, of each of them three good
handefulls, and a good quantity of the best english Honny that you can get,
and a piece of Roch Alum as big as a Wallnut, then put all these together,
in a quart of fair running water, and a good quantity of Red-rose Water, and
boil them in an earthen pot, or Pipkin, and let it be close covered, for the
space of half an hour, and then strain it through a fine linen cloth, and
then take of this water being luke warm, and with a searinge squirte it up
into the Yard of the Patient, and let the Pipe be put in, an inch or somewhat
more, and let it be always very stronglye spouted up, whereby the Water may
go beyond the sore place, and so use it every day three times for the space
of one whole Moves together, and then he shall be quite sound from this
disease for ever after.

Cap. 85. Another easy Medicine to help the runninge of the Raines, and also
to scour the Yard.
TAKE Plantine water, and Wood-binde water, and mingle them both together, and
with a searing, let the Party grieved squirte himself as above said, both
Morning and Evening, and as often as he shall think good and doubtless this
will help him. Probatum est.

Cap. 86. A Medicine to take away the pain or gripinge in the Belly.
TAKE Sothernwood, and lay it against y^ place on the contrary side where the
pain is, and it will drive it out: and if it be laid to the Nauill of the
Patient, it will take the pain clean away, This has helped many.

Cap. 87. A very good Medicine for one that is hard bound in the Belly.
TAKE a good quantity of Hempe-seede, and sees it in fair running Water, and
when it is well sodden strain it thorough a fine cloth, and let the Patient
drink a good draught thereof when he goes to bed, and this will make him
Laxatiue, For it has been proved.

Cap. 88. An approved Medicine for a Laske or losenes in the belly.
TAKE Aquacomposita, and a new laid Egg, and boil the Aquacomposita with the
Egg, until such time as it be dry, then take Sugar and Cinnamon, of each of
them a like quantie, and let the Patient eat it with y^ Egg, and this will
help him. probatum est.

Cap. 89. A very good Medicine for any manner of Byle, Fellyne or vncome.
TAKE Smallege, Rue, and red Sage, of each of them a handefull, and a piece of
Wheaten Leven, and a quantity of the grounds of strong Ale, and mingle all
these together, and make a Plaster thereof, and let the Patient apply it
oftentimes to the place grieved, and this will presently help him, For this
has helped them that were in great ieopardie to have lost a ioynte thereby.
T. H.

Cap. 91. An other for the same.
TAKE Red Sage, and Rue, of each of them a like qaa^titie, and choppe them very
small, then take grounds of strong Ale, and a good piece of brown Leven, and
a few Crumes of brown bread, and mingle them all together, and put them into
the said, grounds of Ale, then sees it until it be thick, and then make a
Plaster thereof, and lay it warm to the sore place, and you shall find great
ease thereby Probatum est.

Cap. 92. An other Medicine for a Fellyn or Vncome.
TAKE a good quantity of sower Leven, and crume it into a little Pypkinne, then
take half a penny dishe of sweet butter, and four or five spoonefulls of Rose
vinegar, the leaves and all, and boil them altogether, and lay it to the place
grieved, as hot as it may be suffered, and this will speadely help it, for it
has been often proved.

Cap. 93. An other for the same.
TAKE to the number of xx. Garden Snailes, and beat them shells and all in a
Mortar, until you see them come to a Salve, then spread a little thereof, upon
a linen cloth, and lay it to y^ sore, and when one Plaster is dry, then
apply an other to the place again, and it will kill the felline, and it will
both heal it and draw it, Probatum est.

Cap. 94. An other for the same.
TAKE Rue otherwise called Herb grace, and let it be gathered in March, and
white woortes, of each of the^ a like quantity, then take Rusty Bacon, a little
Butter, and a house Snaile, and mingle them very well together, and make a
Plaster thereof, and lay it to the sore, and this will help him.

Cap. 95. An other for the same.
TAKE Red Sage, Rue, Snailes, Bay Salt, and Bacon, of every of them, what
quantity you shall think good, and then temper and beat them well together,
and then lay it to the Fellyn, and this will presently help you, Probatum est.

Cap. 97. An other for the same.
TAKE red Sage, Rue, and Housloeke of each of them an ounce, wash them
altogether, and dry out the water, with a clean cloth, and choppe them very
small, then take the quantity of a Tennis ball of sower Leven, and two
spoonefulls of Tar, and a spoonefull of black soap, then stamp them
altogether in a wooden Dish, with a Pestle of wood, and make a Plaster of it,
and lay it an Inche thick upon a piece of linen cloth, or else upon a piece
of leather, and every Morning and Evening, apply it to the sore, and this will
both draw it and heal it. This is also good for any manner of Byle Fellyn or
vncome.

Cap. 98. An Excellent good and approved Medicine for any Fellyn, old sore, or
any other manner of Vncome whatsoever.
TAKE a quarte of Ale, and put therein a race of Ginger, beaten to powder, and
sees y^ Ale, until such time as the Ale be half consumed away, then put into
it a good piece of Sugar, to the quantity of a quarter of a pound, or somewhat
more, then take it from the fire and let it cool, then take a fine linen
cloth and then put the things aforesaid into it and then let them soke well,
and so lay it upon the place grieved, and this will help it, if it be never
so sore, Probatum est, per M. L.

Cap. 99. An other for the same.
TAKE fine Wheat Flower boulted, and temper it very well with white Wine, and
boil it until suchtime as it be thick, then take it and lay it upon the
sore, as hot as you can suffer it, and this will both open the hole, and draw
out the venom or filth, and ease the Akinge, and it will also close and heal
it up again, and for want of white wine, you may take either Ale or Beer,
This Medicine will also heal the pricking of any Thorn or Needle in any
ioynte, and if the hole be never so close stopped up again.

Cap. 100. An Excellent good Medicine for any manner of Biles, White blows,
Fellyns of Vncomes.
TAKE Bores grease, Wheaten Flower, Sage, and May butter, and stamp them in a
Mortar altogether, and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the place which
is grieved, and it will both ripen it and draw it, and if you do frye it in a
syringe Pan, it will work much more the better. Probatum est.

Cap. 101. An other Experienced Medicine for to ripen any Byles, Whiteblowes,
Fellyns, or any other Vncomes whatsoever.
TAKE a pint of sweet Milk, and put thereunto, a good quantity of Sheep
suet, and cut and shredde it very swall, then take a handefull or two of
Otemeale beaten very small, then set it over the fire, and sees it until it
wax thick, so that you may spread it upon a fair linen cloth, and lay it to
the sore, as hot as ever you can possibly suffer it, and this will quickly
ripen it and break it, without any great pain, and when it is broken, then
lay a little Turpentine upon a piece of whit Leather, and prick it full of
holes, and it will both draw and heal the sore, This has been often proved.

Cap. 102. An Excellent good Medicine to purge the Bladder of one that cannot
Piss.
TAKE Parslye, Red Fennel, the roots of Elisaunders, the roots and leaves of
Hartes-toung, and a quantity of Mayden-heare, of each of them a like quantity,
and sees them in white Wine, and then strain it and give it to the Party
grieved, to drink first and last, and it will purge the Bladder, in a short
time. Probatum est.

Cap. 103. An other for the same.
TAKE Rue, otherwise called Herb grace, Gromel and Parslie, of each of them a
like quantity, and stamp them very well together, and temper them with white
Wine, and give it to the Patient luke warm, and this will help him.

Cap. 104. An other for the same.
TAKE Berries of Iuy, and beat them into powder, and put it into White wine,
or else into stale Ale, and let y^ Patient drink it as hot as he is able to
suffer it, and it will do him much good, Probatum est.

Cap. 105. A very good Medicine to cause one to make Water that cannot, and
also against the Stone.
TAKE a New laid Egg, and in the greatest end thereof, make a hole, and take
out both the Yolke, and the white of it, and lay the hole of the same Egg,
downwardes, upon a hate Bricke-stone, and so let it remain, until it be
we^l purged, so that you may make powder thereof, then take it and drink it
with White wine, twice every day first and last* and it will help you. M. Rose.

Cap. 106. An other for the same.
TAKE a quarte of very strong Ale, and set it upon the fire, then take a good
handefull of Time, and bind it up very fast into a little bunch, and so seethe
it in the Ale, until such time as you do perc^iue the strength th^ereof to
be clean gone into the Ale, and let the Party grieved drink a good draughte
thereof every day both in the Morninge and Eueninge, for the space of five or
six days together, and it will help him. Probatum est.

Cap. 107. An other for the same.
TAke a good quantity of the seeds of red Nettles, and put them either into
your Ale, or else into your Pottage, and so drink or eat often thereof, and
this will help you presently. R. Cox, This is also good against the
Stranguarie.

Cap. 108. A medicine for one that cannot piss.
TAke a flint stone, and lay it in the fire, and there let it remain until it
be red hot, and then put it into the Ale that the party grieved does drink
and then let him drink a good draught thereof whilst it is warm, and he
shall find marvelous great ease thereby.

Cap. 109. An other for the same.
TAke a quarter of a handful of Parsley, and as much red Fennel, and wash and
shredde them very small, and put them into a cup of stale Ale, and make a
posset therewith, and drink the Ale and it helps.

Cap. 110. An other medicine for one that pisseth Blood.
TAke Bursa Pastoris, Parsly-seede, and Ambros, of each of them a handful,
stamp them altogether, and soke them very well with Goats milk, and then
strain it thorough a fine linen cloth and give it to the Patient to drink
and this will help him. Probatum est.

Cap. 111. very good medicine to cause one to piss that cannot.
TAke a very good quantity of the best English Saffron, that you can
possiblye get, and beat it into fine powder, and then take the like quantity
of pure Black Soap, and mingle them both very well together, and spread them
upon the fleshye side of a piece of fine Sheep leather, and then lay it
upon the Nauill of the party grieved, and it will procure Urine within one
hour, or a little more. Probatum est per I. I.

Cap. 112. A medicine to provoke urine.
TKke a good handful of red Nettle roots, and sees them in a quart of good
Ale, and let them sees until the one half thereof be consumed then put into
it half a Two-Peny-dish of sweet Butter, and let it be clean skommed, before
such time as the Butter be put into it, and also seethe therein a very good
Quantitye of Elisaunder seeds, Parslie seeds, and Gromell seeds, being all
very well beaten into a fine powder, and then strain this through a fine
linen cloth, and let all these things aforesaid, be of equal porcions, and
let the Patient use to drink often thereof, and especially first and last, and
this will help him without all doubt.

Cap. 113. An other for the same.
TAKE three quartes of Ale, and sees it, and let it be three or four times
skommed, then put into it Rosemarie, Time and Peny-royal, of each of them one
handful, and let them boil altogether, until such time as one quarter
thereof be consumed, or somewhat more, then take it and strain the herbs
from the Ale, and let the Patient drink a good draught of the Ale, luke warm,
every Morning and Evening, and this will ease him very much,

This is also good against the Stone, and it has been very well proved.

Cap. 114. A very good Medicine to cause one to piss that cannot.
TAKE Horse-dounge out of the stable, new Butter and Aqua-vitae, of each of them
equal porcions, and frye them all together, and make thereof a Plaster, and
apply it to the patient, from the Nauill, to the Fundament, as hot as ever he
may possibly suffer it: But let not the Patient be afraid, although it cause
blood to issue forth, for such is the nature of the Medicine, Also it causes
the Stone speadily to avoid. Probatum est.

Cap. 115. An other Medicine to provoke Urine very speadely.
TAKE Betony, that grows in Woods, both roots and leaves, wash them very
clean, and then put them to dry into an Oven, in a Sieve, or else some other
like thing, and let it be in an Oven where brown bread has been newly
drawn forth of it, then take the leaves and roots aforesaid, out of the
Oven, and beat them into powder, and let the Patient use half a sponefull of
the same powder either in White Wine, Posset drink, Portage, or else into your
ordinary drink.

Cap. 116. A Medicine to heal a Canker upon the Yard.
TAKE an ounce of Roch Alum, and half an ounce of Verdygrease, and mingle it
with Smithes water, and and put them all together, into some vessel of glass,
and boil it, for the space of two hours together, then strain it, and use it
as you see occasion.

Cap. 117. A very good Medicine for the swellinge of the Yard or Coddes.
TAKE the Water of Egrimony distilled, and put thereto a good quantity of Roch
Alum, and set them over y^ fire to soke, until they are ready to boil, then
take a fine linen cloth, and anoint the Yard under the skin, with the same
Water, and let it be warm when you do use it, and it will abate the extreme
pain of the Yard, and also of the Coddes, if they be washed with the same.

Also to incarnate the skin, of the Yard within, take y^ water of Fumitorie,
and lay a quantity of Licquorice, which is pared, to steep therein, for the
space of one Night, and then put of the same water, into the Yard with a
sponge, or else with a Tente, made of Linen cloth.

Cap. 118. An Excellent good remedy for the burning and intolerable heat of
Urine.
TAKE the seeds of Purslane, the seeds of Lettice, the seeds of Endive, the
seeds of white poppie, of each of them two ounces, then take the weyghte of
half a dram of He^bane seeds, and two ounces of Saffron, five ^^^mms of
Licquorice, x. drammes of Pineapple Kernells, two ounces of Sebastian, the
quantity of six pounds of fair springinge Water, Mingle all these very well
together, and boil them until such time, as the full third part thereof,
be consumed, then take it and strain it, and let the Party grieved, take
every Morninge one ounce thereof, and mingle it with one ounce of of the juice
of Violets, and let him use it for the space of three days together, and the
fowerthe day you shall see marvelous strange varieties in y^ Urine, This has
been very well proved.

Cap. 119.
A Marvelous good Water for to break the Stone in the Bladder.
TAKE Two Pintes of the juice of Saxifrage, of Grommell and of the juice of
Parsley, or either of them one Pint, and of the best Vinegar that is made of a
pleasant wine, the quantity of 8 or 9 ounces, distill all these together, and
put the distilled water into some glass which has a narrow mouth, and let
the Patient take an ounce of it in the Morning, an other at Noone, and as much
when he goes to bed, and this will help him. This has been truly proved.

Cap. 120. A marvelous good drink to cleanse the Bladder which must be drunk
after the stone is disperced, and to cause it to be done away by Shieuers.
TAKE Rose-marie, and wild Time, of each of them a handful, sees them in a
quart of rain water, and let it sees until the one half thereof be
consumed, then put into it as much Sugar as will make it sweet, and let the
party grieved use to drink often of it, until he do perceive his water to
be clear, and unless his water be thick, let him not drink thereof.

A good Medicine to help the swellinge of the Yard.
TAKE Wax and Oil, and the juice of Purs^ane, and mingle them all together,
and so lay it to the Yard, that is swollen, and this will help it.

MANY things more, might have been he are spoken of, as concerning all such
diseases as come of the Bladder, as the Sone and such like etc. but as
concerning y^ stone it self, Look in the Title of Colic and Stone, and
therein you shall find things aunswearable to expectation, Therefore I will
now omit to speak any more at this time of the Bladder, hopeing that there is
none that do take upon them the practice either of Phificke or Ceirurgery,
but are of themselves sufficient enough to judge thereof, and to minister apt
Medicines for it, and for those that are unskillful in the Sciences
aforesaid, I would wish them to have a great rare and respect, to y^
Medicines that they do minister for diverse diseases coming of the Bladder, and
they not knowing the causes thereof, wherein if they be not skillfull, they do
very much hurt, Therefore I would wish them first to learn of those which are
skillful, before they attempt any such thing themselves, and to know
perfectly the principal cause of the disease, whereby they may more easily of
themselves afterward, Minister Medicines accordingly, and as they have
occasion, and not any way prejudice or hurt the Party grieved any thing at
all, but purchase to them selves everlasting fame

Cap. 122. A very good Medicine to staunch blood.
TAKE White wine Vinegar, of the best that may be had, and the Water of
Plantine, of each of them the quantity of two pounds, and mingle them
together, then take diverse lynnen clothes, and we^^e them therein, and then lay
some to the soles of the feet of the party grieved, and some against the
Liver, and some to the Palm of his hands, and this will staunch the blood
forthwith* For this has been truly proved.

Cap. 123. An other Medicine of st^^^ch ^e bleeding at the Nose.
TAKE Inckle, and bind the party that bleedeth about the Temples of the Head
very hard, and knit the Knot thereof in the Neck, and this will presentely
staunche the bleedinge.

Cap. 124. An Excellent remedy for to staunch the bleeding at the Nose, if
bleed never so freshlie.
TAKE an egg and break it one the top, that all the white and yolke may issue
clean forth of it, then fill y^ egge-shel with the blood of the party, that
does bleed, an dput it in the fire, and there let it remain until it be hard
then burn it to ashes, and it stauncheth the bleeding.

Cap. 125. A singular medicine for to staunch the bleeding at the nose.
TAKE a linen cloth, and wet in vinegar and wrap it about the privy members
of the patient and he shall cease bleeding. Quod probatum estper Iohannem
Linsell clericum Maiestri Anthonij Bronwne in Essex.

Cap. 126. Another for the same.
TAKE Centory, green Rue, and red Fennel, stamp all these together and
strain them and drink them warm, and this will stop any manner of wound
cut, bruise, or otherwise hurt.

Cap. 127.
Another for the same.
TAKE Bursa pastoris, Isope, and Plantine, of each of these a like quantity,
and bruise them in a mortar, and warm them as hot as you can against the fire,
and lay them to the nose of him that bleedeth, and bind some of the herbs to
the Temples of his head as hot as he can suffer them.

Cap. 128. Another for the same.
TAKE an old linen cloth, and wet it well in vinegar, then burn it to powder,
then take the powder thereof, and if it be a wound cast it therein, and it will
stop the bleeding immediately, but if the nose bleed then snuff the aforesaid
powder into thy nose, and it will cease bleeding.

Cap. 129. Another for the same.
TAKE Betony, and stamp it with a little salt, the quantity of both must be
as much as thou can take up with thy Two fingers and put it into thy nose,
and it will presently staunch the bleeding.

Cap. 130. Another approved medicine for the staunching of blood.
TAKE Linen cloth and burn it, and take the powder thereof, and put it into
an other cloth, and she lay it to the Wound, and this will staunch the
bleedinge of any Cut or Wound. Also take an Herb that is called by the name
of Pimpernell, and hold it between your teeth, and you shall not bleed
whilst you do hold it there.

Cap. 131. A very good Medicine to staunch blood, when noe thing else will
stop it, by reason that the veins are cut, or that the wound is great.
TAKE a piece of Salt Biefe, (the lean only) as much as will lie in the
Wound, and lay the biefe in the Embres of the fire, and let it be thorough
hot, and when it is hot, thrust it into the Wound, and bind it fast, and it
will forthwith staunch the blood, and let it lie for a good space after in the
Wound, for the stopping of the blood. This is a present remedy, and has been
often proved.

Cap. 132. An other for the same.
TAKE a Toade, and dry him in the Sun very dry then put him into a linen
bagg, and hang him about your Neck with a stringe, so low that it may touch
your breaste, upon the left side near unto your Heart, and most commonly it
stays all kind of bleeding at the mouth, Nose, or Wound.

Cap. 133.
An other Medicine to stop blood.
IF your Nose do b^eede immeasurable, the^ tie your little finger very hard
about the lower ioynte, and for the most part commonly, it fails not, but
stays the same.

Cap. 134. A very good Medicine to staunch the bleeding at the Nose.
TAKE the White of an Egg, and a little red Oker, otherwise called Bole
armoniack, and a little Dragons blood, bray all these together very small, then
take a little Flax, and wet it therein, and make it like a Fillet, and lay it
upon the foreheade of the Patient, from the one ear to the other, but be sure
that it lie upon the Temples, and this will presently staunch the blood. This
has been sufficiently Proved.

Cap. 135. A present remedy to staunch the bleeding of any Cut or Wound.
TAKE a good quantity of Vine leaves, and dry them and beat them into
powder, and put it into the wound, and it will cease bleedinge presently. This
is an aproued Medicine.

Cap. 136.
A medicine for one that bleed thin wardly.
TAKE a good quantity of the juice of Neepe, and let the party grieved drink
it, and it will cause him to cast up blood presently. This has been truly
proved.

Cap. 139. An excellent remedy for one that spitteth blood.
TAKE the doung of mise, and beat it into powder, (as much as will lie upon a
groate) and put it into a Pint of the juice of Plantine, and put thereto a
little Sugar, and let it be finely beaten to powder, before you put it into y^
juice, and let the party grieved drink of it morning and evening, until he
perceive this infirmity to be clean gone.

Cap. 133. Another for the same.
TAKE the juice of Betony, and temper it with Goats milk, and give the same
to the patient to drink, and let him use it for the space of three days
together, and this will doubtless help him.

Cap. 141. Another for the same.
TAKE Betony, Mintes, Smalege, and Rue, of each of them a like quantity, and
sees them together in new Milk, and let the party greened suppe it of as
hot as he is able to suffer it, and this helps. Probatum est.

Cap. 142. A Medicine for the biting of any Venomous beast.
TAKE Plantine, and drink the juice thereof, and likewise take Selandine and
Plantine, of each of them a like quantiitie, Stamp then very well together, and
temper them with stale Piss, and lay the same to the place grieved, and yt
will presentlye both assuage the Swellinge, and draw out the Venom thereof,
and if yt be never so much For this has been often times proved.

Cap. 143. A Medicine for the biting of a mad Dog.
TAKE Nyght-shade, Betony and Wild Sage, of each of them one handefull, and a
pince of fair running Water, then stamp the herbs, and strain them with
the said Water, and put thereto a Penyworth of Triackle, and give it to the
Patient to drink, for the space of two or three morninges of fasting, one
after an other And yt helps, Probatum est.

Cap. 144. A Rule to know what things are good and holosome for the Brain.
To smell to Camamill or Musk, To eat Sage, but not overmuch, To drink Wine
measurablie, To keep the Head warm, To wash your Hands often, To walk
measurablie, To sleep measurablie, -- To hear little noise of Music or
^ingers, To eat Mustarde and Pepper, To smell the savor of Red-roses, and to
wash the Temples of your Head often with Rose Water.


Cap. 145. These Things are ill for the Brain.
All manner of Brains, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Late Suppers, To sleep much after
meat, Anger, Hauines of mind, To stand much bare-headed Corrupt Aires, To
eat overmuch or hastily, Overmuch heat in Trauaylinge or Labouringe, Overmuch
Watching, Overmuch Cold, Overmuch Bathing, Milk, Cheese, Garlic, Oynions
Overmuch Knocking or Noise, and to smell to a white Rose.


Cap. 146. A very good Medicine for to be used of one that has a stinking
breath.
TAKE the seeds of Coriander, and boyse yt in white Rumney or Sack, and let
the Party grieved drink three spoonefulls thereof in the Morninge, and as
much in the Eueuinge, but note that, y^ which he takes in y^ morning must be
cold, and the other hot, but he must use to take noe excess of meats, nor
drinks, nor let him not use to sit up late at night, but rise up early in
the morninge, and it will him Probatum est.

Cap. 147. An other approved Medicine for a stinking Breath.
TAKE a very good quantity of Rosmarie leaves and flowers, and boil them in
white Wine, and with a little Cinnamon and Benieamin beaten to powder, and put
therein, and let the Patient use to wash his mouth very often therewith, and
this will presently help him. Probatum est per M. Gatticars.

Cap. 148. An other for the same.
TAKE of Cummin seed ana. iij. and beat yt to powder, and sees it in a
pottle of white Wine, and let yt sees until such time, as the one half of it
be consumed away, then take it and strain it, and let the Patient drink
thereof, twice every day at the least, for the space of six or seven days,
together, and let him use to drink a quarter of a Pint thereof at a time, and
this will help him without all doubt For yt has been often proved. I. B.

Cap. 149. A medicine for the Tisicke, and stopping in the Breast, and to open
the Pipes.
TAKE Parsly-rootes, Fennell-rootes, and Succory roots, and take all the
Pithes out of them, and sees them in White Wine, til they be soft, and if you
can get any Ginger Berries, sees them therein, with the rest, and then strain
it, when you see that it is well sodden, then put thereto a little Pellitorie of
Spain, to the Wine, and let the Patient drink of yt both Morninge and
Eueninge, for the space of eighte or nine days, and yt will help him, by Gods
grace, For yt has helped many that could fearce fetch their breath at all.

Cap. 150. A good Medicine for the stopping in the breast.
TAKE Rue, and sees yt in Eysell, and so let the Patient drink yt: Let him
also drink Nettle-seede brayed, and yt will cause him, to avoid great store
of Gravel from the stone, in the Rain of the back.

Cap. 151. An excellent Medicine for all manner of diseases in the breast, and
against all Impostumes, Coughes, and Plurisies.
TAKE a good handful of Scabious, and let yt be very well dried, then take
Annise-seed and Fennell-seed, of each of them one ounce, then take an ounce of
Licquorice, and pare it clean, and cut it very small. and twelve Figs, and
half an ounce of Erins, then take all these, and put them all together,
either in a quarte of fair runninge Water, or else a quarte of pure White Wine
to soke, for the space of one Night, then let them boil until such time, as
the one half or somewhat more be consumed, then strain yt thorough a fine
linen cloth, and when yt is strayned, put into it, a little fine Sugar, to
make it sweet, and let the Patient use to drink this both Morninge and
Eueninge, for the space of eyghte or nine days together, and by gods grace,
this will help him in a short time, For this has been sufficientlye proved.

Cap. 152. A very good Medicine for to increase Milk in a Woemans breasts.
TAKE Fennel Roots, and Parsneepe Roots, and let them be boiled in Broth,
which must be made of Chickins, and then let the Patient eat the same roots
mixed with fresh Butter, which must be as new made, as possibly it may be
gotten, and this will cause great store of Milk to increase in any Woemans
breasts, This has been often proved.

Cap. 153. An other for the same.
TAKE Rice and sees it in Cow Milk, and crume some Wheate^ bread therein (it
must be such as is clean without Rye) and put into the said Milk, some Fenell
seed beaten to fine powder, and a little Sugar to make it sweet, and this is
known to be exceading good.

Cap. 154. An other for the same.
TAKE a good quantity of green Wheat, which grows upon the Ground,
between Michaelmas and Easter, you must take both of the Blades and Roots,
and stamp it very well and strain it through a fine Linen cloth, into some
Posset Ale, and put therein a little fine Sugar, to sweeten yt withal, and this
will increase great store of Milk in a Woman's breasts, within the space of
three or four days, by vsinge of yt, This has been proved.

Cap. 155. An other for the same.
TAKE Crystal, and beat it into a very sine powder, and Mingle yt with as
much Fennel seed, likewise beaten into fine powder, and a small quantity of
Sugar, and let the Patient use oftentimes, to drink it warm, with a little
White Wine, and this restores her Milk again, if it be gone clean away from
her, For this has been sufficientlye proved.

Cap. 156. An excellent good Medicine, for a Woman that has a sore or
swellinge breast.
TAKE a Colewoort-leafe, and cut away the vain of yt, and then anoint the
leaf yt self, with May Butter, boiled with Rose Water, and then lay yt to the
woman's breast that is sore, and yt will assuage the swellinge and pain
thereof, in a short time, This has been oftentimes proved and found to be
good.

Cap. 157. An other approved Medicine to break the sore of a woman's breast.
TAKE a good handful of Figs, and stamp them in a Mortar, until such time
as all the R^ruells be all broken* then take them and temper them very well
with a little Swines Grease that is fresh, and make a Plaster thereof, and lay
yt to the Woman's breast that is sore, as here as ever she can possibly abide
yt, and yt will take away the swellinge, and also the pain thereof, and if yt
be ready to break, yt will help yt forwards forthwith to break, or ^lse
not, This is an approved Medicine.

Cap. 158. A Medicine for the swelling of a Woman's breast, after the wayning of
a Child.
TAKE Red Sage, Camamill, and whitewine Vin^ger, and apply yt often to the
Woman's breast tha^ is sore and yt helps her. Probatum est.

Cap. 158. An approved Medicine for an old Sore or Bruise.
TAKE Selandine, red Sage, and Sorell, of every one of them a good handefull,
two handefulls of Woodbinde leaves, half a handefull of Rue, otherwise called
Herb grace, and a good handefull of the Topps of Rosemarie, bail all these
together, in a Pint of good white Wine, and a Pint and an half of fair
running Water, and let them boil, until you perceive that they look yeallow,
and before such time as they are altogether sodden, and put as much Honnie into
it, as you do think will sweeten it, and then put into it, half a quarter of
a pound of Roch Alum, and when the Alum is molten, then take yt from the
fire, and strain it through a Coulender, or else thorough some course linen
cloth, and put yt into a Gallypot or Glass, and stop it very close, and let
y^ Patient use this to the sore, and it will help him, probatum est per D. S.

Cap. 159. An Excellent good Medicine for a bruise.
TAKE Brooke-Lime, Smallage and Browse-woorte, and frye them altogether in
sheep Suet, and then take it and strain it thorough a fine linen cloth, and
it will presently become an Oil, then put thereto a quantity of Spermaceti,
and mix them very well together, and ann oynte y^ place grieved often
therewith, Probatum est. per M. Cox.

Cap. 160. A good Medicine for any manner of bruise in the Arms, Legs, or else
where.
TAKE a good quantity of the Suet, of an Heart, Buck* or sheep, which is new
killed (if it may be had) and put thereto some Lees of Wine, and Wheaten
branne, then take Watercresses, and wash them very clean, and boil them in
fair runninge Water, and let them boil until such time as they be soft,
then put them into a Morcer, and beat them, and then put them into a clean
Pan, then mix all these things together, and frye them, and make a Plaster
thereof, and lay it warm to the Sore place, and so use iiii. or five
Plasters, or more as need shall require, probatu^ est.

Cap. 161. An approved Medicine for any Bruise or other sore, which is vnriped.
TAKE Otemeale Grotes, and sees them in Cow Milk which is new, and let them
see the until they be very thick, and then put it into a Pan, and mix it
with a good quantity of sheep Tallowe, and then boil them very well, and
stir them continually, and then make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the
sore, as hot as it may be suffered. This has been proved.

Cap. 162. A Medicine for a bruise or strain.
TAKE Chickweede, Wheat branne, and the grounds of strong Ale or Beer, and
mingle them very well together, and lay yt to the place grieved, three or four
times a day, yt being spread upon a red Cloth, but not over thin, and this
will help yt, Probatum est.

Cap. 163. A Medicine for a bruise.
TAKE a quarte of Claret wine Vinegar, and voyle it very well with Leauened
bread, and then put into yt, a a good quantity of Deeres Suet, and a good
quantity of Otemeale, and sees yt until such time as it be very thick, then
take a linen Cloth, and double yt, and spread yt thereon very thick, and lay
yt to the sore, But you must change the Plasters two or three times in a day,
Use this for the space of three days together, and yt will help you.

Cap. 164. A Most singular good Oil made of Camamill, which is good for all
manner of bruses, Splenes, and Swellings.
TAKE a Pint of good Sallet Oil, or somewhat more, and bruise a good quantity
of Camamill, and put therein, then put yt into a Glass, and set it to stand
in some place in the Sun, where yt may stand safe, for the space of ten or
twelve days together, and when it has stood there for the space of five
days then strain your Oil through a fine linen cloth, and so set yt
again in y^ sun, and at the end of the aforsayd ten or twelve days, then
you must strain yt again, and then set yt in the Sun to stand in the Sun
for so long time as you shall think yt to be purified very clean, and so
strain yt the third time, and when you perceive that yt is clean purified
from the drugs, then put yt into a clean Glass, and stop yt close, until
such time as you have occasion to use yt, and when you will use yt annointe the
place grieved, twice or thrice every day, chafinge yt before the fix, and this
will help you. This Oil if you will keep yt close stopped, it will continue
good for the space of two years and more, For yt has been oftentimes
sufficiently proved.

Cap. 165. An excellent good Medicine for to be drunk of one that is burst in
the Belly, or Coddes.
TAKE a handefull of Camfrey, a handful of Polypodium, otherwise caled
Oke-fearne, a handful of Sparakinge, otherwise called Knotwort, a Potle of
white Wine, a Knuckle of Veale, half a pound of Resons of the Sun, half an
ounce of Mace, and half so many Dates, and then take all these and put them
into an earthen Pot, then take a Ketle of five or six gallons, and fill yt
with Water, and set yt over the fire, then take the said Pot and stop yt
very close, with a little Paste, and then put yt into the aforesaid Kettle of
fair Water, and so let the same water sees continuallye for the space of
five or six hours with the earthen Pot therein, and keep the Rettle still
seethinge with other seething water, then take out the said earthen Pot, and
take forth thereof, all other things, and beat them in a Mortar, add strain
it, and give the Patient of y^ same Licquor to drink both first and last, and
in so doing he shall be by gods help cured.

Cap. 166. An other for the same.
TAKE the Call of an Ox and Oynions, and fry them with a quantity of sheep
Suet, and with a fine linen cloth, put it to the sore, and this will presently
help you, For it has been well proved.

Cap. 167. A very good Plaster for a bruise.
TAKE Wormwood and Cummin, of each of them a like quantity, and put thereunto,
a little rose Vinegar, then lay it to the bruise, like a Plaster, before that
the skin be any thing at all broken.

Cap. 168. A Medicine for a bruise or cut.
TAKE roots of Louage, Ale-hofe, Parslie, and Annisseedes, and beat them in a
Mortar very fine, then take Barrowes grease, and boil them together, then
strain forth the juice thereof, then take as much unwrought Wax, as a
Wallnute, and half as much Rosine, and let them boil together, and when you
have so done, then strain it through a fine linen cloth into a little Pan
of water, and then let it stand until it be cold, then take it in your
hands and labor it, until it be somewhat short, and then wrappe it in a
piece of Leather, and so use it as you shall have occasion.

Cap. 169. An Excellent good Drink to heal all manner of bruses.
TAKE Egremony, Betony, Plantine, Sage, Roses, luie leaves, and Parslie, of each
of them a like quantity, and stamp them all together, and mingle them with a
quarte of good White wine, and let the Patient use oftentimes to drink thereof,
until such time as he be whole, which will be by gods grace in a short
space, Probatum est.

Cap. 170. A very good Medicine to skin any old Sore or bruise.
TAKE Red bramble Buddes, Selfe-heale, and Sinckfoile, of each of them a good
handful, and a little water- betony, and boil them all very well together,
with Barrowes grease, then let the Patient apply it to the sore as hot as
possibly may be suffered, and this will help him without all doubt. Probatum
est.

Cap. 171.
An approved Medicine, for any burning with fire, or Scaulding with Water.
TAKE a good handful of Housleeke, and a handful of Hemlockes, and beat them
both together, then take a quarter of a pound of Bores Grease, and feeth both
the Herbs and yt together, until suchtime as they come to an Oyntement, and
then strain, them into a Box, and let y^ Patient annointe the place grieved,
therewith, twice every day until such time as he be hole, which will be in a
short time by gods help, Probatum est.

Cap. 172. An other for the same.
TAKE Iuy leaves, but they must be of those that grow next the ground, and the
leaves of Marigolds, of Woodbinde leaves, and Plantine, of every one of them a
like quantity, and choppe them very small, and boil them in Bores Grease, or
else Hogs Grease, and then strain them into some earthen vessel, or else a
Gallypot, and let the Patient anoint the place where the grief is often
therewith, and yt helps, This has been well proved.

Cap. 173. Another for the same.
TAKE a brake-roote, and stamp yt very well in a Wooden Dish, or in a Mortar,
and then strain out the juice thereof clean, and let the Patient annointe the
place that is burned often therewith, and it will help him For this has been
sufficiently proved.

Cap. 174. A very good Oyntement for any manner of Burning of Gunnpoweder, or
Scauldinge with Water.
TAKE two or three handfulls of Housleek, a handful of Baroes Grease, and two
handfulls of Groundsell, stamp all these together, and put thereto, two
handfulls of Sheep Dounge, that is new fallen, and as much Goose Dounge, and
stamp them altogether as aforesaid, and then boil them all very well
together, and strain them through a fine Linen Cloth, into an earthen Pot,
and with the Liquor that comes thereof, anoint the place that is burned and
yt will help yt forthwith.

Cap. 175. An other very good Oyntemente for any manner of burning with fire, or
otherwise Whatsoever.
TAKE Daysie roots, Plantine, Waybroad leaves, Green goose Donnge, and the
Green Bark of an Elder Tree, of each of them a like quantity, and a
quattitie, of Oil Olyffe, stamp them all very well together, and strain them
thorough a fine Linen Cloth, and with a Feather let the Party grieved
annointe him self therewith, as often as he shall think good, and this will
help him without all doubt, Probatum est.

Cap. 176. A very good Medicine for any manner of Burning with Fire, or Scalding
with water.
TAKE a Brake root, and stamp it in a Dishe, and then strain ont the juice,
and put into it, a good quantity of Cream, and let the Party grieved,
annointe the place which is burned or scaulded therewith, and this will both
fetch out the heat, and assuage the pain: For yt has been truly proved.

Cap. 177. A very good remedy for any burning or scaldwith a Handegunne, or
otherwise.
TAKE a good quantity of the Dung of Geese, which is of one Nights making,
and a good quantity of Butter unsalted, or else Clarified Sheep Suet, and
fry them in a frying Pan for ye space of a quarter of an hour, or until
your Butter or Suet, be almost consumed, then put them into a course linen
Cloth which is clean, and strain them into a Gally-pot, or else some small
earthen vessel: then take a feather, and dip it in the same Liquor, and
anoint the place therewith, which is burned or scaulded, and when you have so
done, then take a fine Linen cloth, and wet it well in y^ same Liquor, and
lay it upon the sore place to cover it withal, and so do this twice or
thrice every day until it be whole, and this by Gods grace, will speadely help
you, probatu^ est.

Cap. 178. Another for the same.
TAKE a good quantity of Mayden-woort, and stamp it, and sees yt in fresh
Butter, and strain yt, and let the Patient anoint the place grieved often
therewith, and yt will speadely help him. Probatum est.

Cap. 179. A Medicine to take away a heat or burning with Gun-pouder.
TAKE a good quantity of of Housleeke, and stamp yt, and wring out the juice
clean, then take the whites of five or six New laid Eggs, and beat them in
a Dyshe, until such time as they be Thin, and then take of the skumme of yt,
and put the rest together, and wash the sore place with a Linen cloth, and
lay the cloth aloft upon the sore wette.

Cap. 180. An other Medicine for Burning or Scaulding.
TAKE Black Soap, or Gray Soap, and lay it ymmediatlye to the place which is
burned or scaulded, and yt will speadely help yt, For yt has been truly
proved.

Cap. 181. Another for the same.
TAKE a good handful of Auans, and as much Sheep Dunge, and so fry them in
May-Butter, and strain it, and let the Patient anoint the place grieved, with
a little of the same stuff yt being told, twice or thrife a day, and let yt be
anointed first, either with Gray or black Soap, and yt will help yt, But the
Oyntement must be spread upon a five (...) Cloth, if that yt may be gotten,
probatu^ est.

Cap. 182. A Medicine for burning or skalding in what place so ever it be.
TAKE the white of an Egg, and put it into a pewter dish, and then labor it
with an Allome stone, until it be like a Posset curde: then take a fine piece
of Linen cloth, and wet it in Oil Oliffe, or in some other Oil then lay the
said cloth upon the soar, and above it lay the aforesaid curde made of the
white of an Egg, and that shall does draw out the fire, and heal the soar.

Cap. 183. Another Medicine for the same.
TAKE four Eggs and roast them, and then take out the yolks of them, and fry
them in a pan softly upon the Embers, till they be black, and thereof will
come an Oil, the which you must save, and put it into a Gallie pot, and so use
it when they have need thereof.

Cap. 184. A good Medicine for a burning, for lack of other things.
TAKE the verries of the Elder-tree, and lay them unto the soar, and they will
presently help you.

Cap. 185. Another Medicine for the same.
TAKE Oil Olife, and beat it with fair water, until it wax very white, and
then annoint the place grieved, and it speedely helps.

Cap. 186. An other approved Medicine, for any burning or scalding.
TAKE a dozen Eggs, and let them be as new as you can have them, and lay them
in the fire, and roast them as hard as you can take the yolks, and choppe them
as small as you can, and put them into an earthen pot, and set it over the
fire, and stir it with a stick, and let it boil until you see it consumed
in a manner to nothing: Then take it from the fire and set it in the air a
quarter of an hour, or more, and there will come an Oil thereof, then take a
feather and annoint the grief with the same Oil, and take Hartstong leaves,
and lay upon the grief, and that will gather the skin, then you may bind a
cloth thereto.

Cap. 187. Another for the same.
TAKE a Hen Egg, and roast it until it be very hard; then take forth the
yolke, and bruise it with fresh Butter that is clean without any salt, and
annoint the place grieved therewith, and by Gods help it will be whole.

Cap. 188. An other for the same.
TAKE a Pound of Wax, a pound of Rosme, and half a pound of May-butter,
and boil all these very well together, and stir yt continually as yt does
sees, and then let yt cool again, and when you will use yt, make yt
Plaister-wise, and this will help you. probatu^ est.

Cap. 189. A very good Medicine for any burninge with fire.
TAKE Black Vernish, and with a Feather, anoint the place well which is
burned, and yt will assuage y^ heat thereof, and yt will heal yt as fair as
ever did any other Medicine, and so use yt continually, until such time as
you be perfect whole. This has been truly and sufficiently proved.

Cap. 190. An approved Medicine for any manner of burning or Scauldinge, be yt
with fire, Oil, or with Gunpowder.
TAKE Salt dissolved in Water, or else Brine, which the strength of yt self,
does take away the pain, and y^ heat of (...) burning, and especially if yt
be bat^ed with linen clothes wette, or dipped in the same, and afterward
applied to the place which is burned or scaulded, and this will presently
helpeyt. Probatu^ est.

Cankers in the mouth.

Cap. 191. An excellent remedy for a Canker.
TAKE Peny-royall, red Fenell, red Sage, Rosemary tops, Mayden-heare, of each
of them a good handful, and a little Isope, boil all these well together in a
qua^e of white Wine, and put thereto as much as two Walnuts of Roch Alum, and
as much Honey as will make it sweet, then take it and strain it through a fine
cloth, and let the patient wash his mouth often therewith.

Cap. 192. An other for the same.
TAKE the Wheaten flower, new Milk, Tar, and Coleworts, of each of them as
much as you shall think good, and boil them altogether and make a plaster
thereof, and apply it to the sore place, and this helps.

Cap. 193. A very good water to kill the Canker and Scurfe in the mouth.
TAKE a quarte of white Wine, Sclandine, red Sage, Rosemary stripped, Hisope,
and Woodbinde leaves, of every of them half a handful, boil them in the
white Wine, until the one half be consumed, then strain them, and wring
forth the juice, then put thereto half an ounce of Allom, a quarter of an
ounce of white Coporas, and two or three spoonefuls of Honny, and then set it
to the fire again, and let it sees but a little: then take it and strain it
again, and put it into a Vial, and when the party grieved, will use it, let
him wash the Canker with this water, being luke warm, three times a day at
the least, either with a linen cloth upon his finger, or else upon a sticks
end if he cannot come to it with his finger. This has helped many.

After the patient has washed his mouth, let him take Sandeferd beaten very
small, and (the patients mouth being opened) either with a Reed or a quill,
blow a little of the powder upon the sore. This water will in a short time
heal any old sore, beeying washed therewith, and a fine linen cloth dipped
in it, and laid upon the sore.

Cap. 194. A Medicine for a Canker in the mouth, both white and red: the white
Canker will break out, but the red will not: Also this Medicine is very good
for any sore lips, sore legs, or any other sores.
TAKE two handfulls of Woodbinde leaves, and a handful of Sage, shread them
fine, and beat them very small in a Mortar: Then take two spoonefulls a Honny,
and Roch Alum to the quantity of half an Egg: then take a quarte of fair
running water, and sees these altogether, until they be thick, then strain
it through a fine linen cloth, and put the licquor into a fair earthen pot,
and cover it very close: then annoint the gummes of the patient therewith,
within his mouth, on the sore side, or else if need require, you may annoint
your whole mouth therewith: And if it be a white Canker, then annoint the
utter side of your mouth, and then wet a cloth in the liquor, and lay it
thereunto, on the out side of the sore, and use this three or four times in a
day, and when you are dressed, then lay your face to a warm chafingdish of
coals, and then you shall see the water run forth of your mouth in great
quantities. And if the Canker be in the nose, or in any other place where it
can not be touched, then spout some of this liquor with a quill, and this will
heal you within a short space. This liquor will be kept well one and twenty
days, in his virtue and no more. This has been often proved.

Cap. 195. An excellent Remedy for a Canker in the mouth or throat, or else
to wash your teeth that be hollow and stink.
TAKE a quantity of red Sage, and twelve crops of Rosemary, and a quantitye of
Hony-Suckles, and wild Daysies, and Sinkefoyle: Boil them all together in a
pint of very fair runnyng water, until it be half consumed: Then take a
little Roch-Allum, and burn it to powder, and half a spoonefull of Honey, and
put therein: then take and strain it through fine linen cloth, and when it is
cold; put it into glasses, and let the patient wash his mouth therewith, as
often as he shall think good.

Cap. 195. A very good Medicine for a Cankar in the mouth.
TAKE white wine Vinegar, and Honny, of each of them a like quantity, and boil
them altogether with a little Roch-Allum, and let the patient, wash his mouth
therewith as often as need shall require, and this cures the Canckar.

Also the juice of Plantine, Vinegar, and Rose water, is very good for the
Canker, or a stinking breath.

Cap. 196. An other Medicine to dry up the Canker and to stay it.
TAKE the juice of Woodbine, and the juice of Marygolds, and a quantity of
Honny, and a quantity of powder of Cannell, and as much powder of Coporas, and
the powder of wild Sage (burnt and mingled all together) then lay them on the
place where the Canker is, and it will dry it up. But to slay the Cankers,
take a red Onion and lay it thereon, and it will both slay it and cure it.

Cap. 197. A very good Medicine for a Canker, or disease of the G^mme^ or
throat.
TAKE Plantine and Honysuckles, of each of them a handful, an ounce of Daisy
leaves, half a handful of Sage, and a quart of very fair running water,
boil all these together, until the one half be consumed: then put therein
five spoonefulls of sharp Vinegar, five spoonefulls of stone Honny, and as
much Roch-Allum as a Wallnut, this has been proved to cure the Canker.

Cap. 199. A Medicine to cure any Canker in the mouth.
TAKE a Flowerdeluce root, wash it, and stise it, then take a few leaves of
Penyroyall, lay them to steep in very fair Conduite water, or else in fair
running water for the space of xxiiii. hours, then take the same water and
wash your mouth therewith as often as you shall think good.

Cap. 200. An other for the same.
TAKE Vinegar, Rose Water and the juice of Plantine, and wash thy mouth
therewith many times, and it will help thee.

Cap. 201. A Medicine to cure a Canker in a woman's pappes.
TAKE Goose-doung, and Selandine, and bray them very well together, and lay
them to the sore pappe, and it will cle^se the Canker, slay the worm, and
heal the sore.

Cap. 202. A very good water for to cleanse the mouth, and to fasten teeth.
TAKE Woodbinde leaves, and Sage, of each of them a handful, a good spoonefull
of pure english Honny, and a piece of Allume as big as a good Wallnut, Boil
all these together in a quarte of fair running water, and let it boil till
the one half be consumed: then strain it through a fine linen cloth, and let
the Patient wash his mouth with this water luke warm, three or four times in
a day, and this will cleanse his mouth of any corruption that shall abide
therein, after any Canker or other disease.

Cap. 203. An excellent good Medicine for a Canker.
TAKE Ground Iuie, Plantine, Peny-royall, Woodbinde, Daysies, Rosemary, Isop,
Featherfew, Sage, Lauender-spike, and Hearb-grace, of each of these alike
quantity, and two spoonefulls of white wine Vinegar, stamp and strain all
these together, then take wheaten Flower, and Honny, of each of them one
spoonefull, then mingle the juice of the herbs, and these things all
together, and let it be stirred about very well: then make a Plaster thereof,
and lay it to the sore place cold, and by Gods grace it will help you very
speedely.

Cap. 204. A Medicine for a Canker in the mouth.
TAKE the juice of Plantine, Woodbinde, and a little Roch Alum, Rosewater, and
white wine Vinegar, and mingle all these together, and let the Patient wash his
mouth therewith, and this will help him in a short space, for it has been
well proved.

Cap. 205. A Medicine for a Canker, or a sore mouth.
TAKE a handful of Sage, and a handful of Hony-suckle leaves, a pretty
quantyty of Rosemary, and as much Roch Alum, as half a good Wallnut, and a
spoonefull of Honny, boil all these together in a quarte of fair running
water, and let them boil a good while, then strain it into a Glass or Vial,
and let the Patient wash his mouth both morning and evening, as long as he
shall find himself grieved, and this will help him. Used much by Tho.
Sefold.

Cap. 206. An excellent good Medicine for a woman laboring of Childbirth.
TAKE Mugwort, and sees it very well in fair water, and plaster it as hot
as it may be suffered, both to the Navel and Thighs of the woman laboring of
child, and it does provoke speadie delivery of Childbirth, and afterburden,
without any peril, but it must not be suffered to continue very long to any
part of her body, for if it do, it will cause the Matrix to follow.

Cap. 207. An other for the same.
TAKE Hisope, Veruoine, and Betony, of each of them one handful, stamp them
very small with old Ale, and strain it, and wring forth the juice thereof,
and let the woman that trauaileth, drink a good draught of it, and it will
help her presently without any danger. This has been proved.

Cap. 208. A present remedy for a woman that traueleth with child, to help
her to a speady and good deliverance.
TAKE Pollipodium, otherwise called Okefearne, and stamp it very well, then
plaster it upon the feet of the woman that traueleth with child, and it
causes speedy birth of the child, either alive or dead. This is a marvelous
good secret.

Cap. 209. A Medicine for the Crampe.
TAKE Oil of Violets, Holy-oke, and of Swines grease, of each of them a like
quantity, and make an Ointment thereof, and let the party grieved annoint the
place very often where the grief is with the same Ointment, and this will
help him. Probatum est. Per I. B.

Cap. 210. A very good Medicine for a Chincough.
TAKE a Mouse and flea it, and dry it to powder in an oven, and drink it in
Ale. The same is also good for them that cannot hold their water. Probatum est.
Per M. Ierueis.

Cap. 211. Another for the same.
TAKE Bores-greace, and warm the soales of the feet of the patient to the
fire, and chafe and rub them with the aforesaid grease, and when you think
that you have rubbed and chafed them enough, then let him go to bed, and there
be kept very warm, and lay clothes enough to his feet.

This may be used to little Children, and it will help them.

Cap. 212. An approved Medicine for a Cough.
TAKE three Figs and roste them, and put them in a cup of Beer, and put
therein a little Licquorice, and Annise-seedes beaten to powder, and set it to
stand by the fire till it be warm, then take out the Figs and eat them,
then when you go to bed drink up the drink also, and cover your self very
warm, and in so doing for the space of four nights together, it will break
the Cough. This has been proved.

Cap. 213. A very good Medicine to take away a cough, or stitch.
TAKE a quarte of Malmesye, Anise-seede, and unset Isope, of each of them a
handful, a Licquorice-sticke or two, bruised, and half a two-peny dish of
Butter, sees all these together till they be thick, and then take it and
spread it upon a toste of Wheaten-bread, and lay them within a fine linen
cloth, and set it to your stomach as hot as you may suffer it, but if you will
use this for a stitch, the Butter must be left out.

Cap. 214.
A very good Medicine for a cough, and to cause one to avoid phlegm from the
stomach.
TAKE a quart of stale Ale, and a handful of Goose-meate, which is commonly
called Hayrefe, and a good quantity of Liquorice pared, and a quantity of small
Reisons, and boil them altogether, until the one half be consumed, and let
the patient drink thereof first and last.

Cap. 215. An excellent good drink to break the cough.
TAKE two penyworth of Licquorice, and set it to soke in very fair running
water, and so let it stand for the space of a day and a night therein, then let
the patient drink a good draught thereof when he goes to bed, as hot as he
can drink it, then let there be a hot Board, or a Logget of wood laid as hot
as it may be suffered, to the soles of his feet when he goes to bed, and
provoke him to sweat if you can, and so in the morning do the like again, and
within three days he shall be whole. Probatum est.

Cap. 216. A Medicine for the Cough, and for the straightnes of the pipes.
TAKE dry Figs, and Isope, and stamp them very well together, and boil
them with Honny, then let the patient use to drink it fasting, this is good,
and has been very well approved to be true.

Cap. 217. An excellent good and approved Medicine against an extreme Cough.
TAKE Fennell-rootes clean washed and Annise seeds, of each of them a like
quantity, and a little Licquorice, and sees them altogether in white Wine,
then take and strain it, and put it into some earthen or close pot, and drink
a good draught thereof when you go to bed, and the next morning, take a Fig,
and a Date, and roast them, and eat them as hot as you may, and when you have
so done, neither eat nor drink for the space of two or three hours after,
and thus in three or four days you shall be whole.

Cap. 218. Another Medicine for the same.
TAKE Hore-hounde, and Isope, of each of them a like quantity, then take Water
and Sugar, and boil them altogether, till it become a syrop, and so use to
eat this morning and evening, and at all other times when you shall think
meet and convenient, and this will break the Cough, for it has been proved.

Cap. 219.
TAKE a toste of Bread, and make it very hot, and put on as much sweet Sallet
Oil, on both sides thereof, as the bread will receive, and eat it, use this
morning and evening, and it will help you.

Cap. 220. Another Medicine for the same.
TAKE a little of the root of Elicompanae, Reysons of the sun, Figs cut in
small pieces, and Annise seeds, Isope, Licquorice, and Hore-hounde, of each of
them a like quantity, Boil all these very well together in fair running
Water, then strain it, and drink it every morning fasting for the space of
three or four days, and it will help you.

Cap. 221. Another Medicine for the same.
TAKE Barrowes grease, or Bores grease, and four or five Cloves of Garlic,
and stamp them all together: then when the Patient is going to bed, let him
warm his feet to the fire, and anoint them with the aforesaid ointment, then
when he is in his bed, let him have a trencher made hot, and put to the soales
of his feet, as hot as he may abide it, and warm clothes, and this will
help him. Probatum est.

Cap. 222. A very good Medicine for the Cough, and to break the fleagme.
TAKE a pottle of pure Muskadine, and a qua^t of Isope water distilled, and
fine or six good races of case Ginger, pare off the rind from them very
clean, and slice them, then take twice as much Licquorice as you have Ginger,
and pare it likewise, then take two good handfulls of Sugar-Candie, gross
bruised, and mix all these together, and put them into a Glass, and shake it
often, and stop it very close, and let it stand for the space of xxiiii.

TAKE half a pound of white Suger-Candie, half a pint of Rose Water, a
spoonefull or more of Anniseseedes, a pint or more of Isope-water, and a good
quantity of Licquorice clean pared and bruised: Boil all these together,
until you see it come to a syrop, then strain it through a fine linen cloth,
and put it into a Glass, and take it at all times when you shall think most
meet, and convenient for you.

Cap. 228. A sovereign Medicine for the cough of the Lungs.
TAKE Raysons of the sun a handful, and let them be clean washed, with the
stones of them clean picked out, and a penyworth of Maydenheare, half a
spoonefull or more of Annise seeds bruised small, ten or twelve Figs, half
a pound or somewhat more of Portugal Sugar, three pintes of very fair running
Water, Boil all these together, until the one half be consumed away, then
strain it through a fine cloth, and every morning drink two spoonefulls
thereof lukewarm, and you shall presently find remedy thereby. Probatum
est. Per M. Baker.

Cap. 229. Another for the same.
TAKE half a pound of the best Sugar that can be gotten, and a good quantity
of Annise seeds, and Licquorice, two handfulls of great Reysons, and let the
stones be picked out, two penyworth of Mayden-heare, a gallon of fair running
Water, a pound of Figs, Boil all these together, until it be half
consumed, then take it, and put it into a clean earthen pot, and as you use
it, take a little at a time, and put it into a Maudlin Cup, or Cruce, and warm
it, drink this as often as you shall think good, but especially Morning and
Evening.

Cap. 230. A Medicine for the cough of the Lungs, and for the Rewme.
TAKE a li. of Elicompanae roots y^ are young, of Setrach, Mayden-haire, Ana.
1.. all being new gathered, scrape the Elicompanae roots, and cut it into
small slices, sees them in five pintes of fair running Water, and let it
boil until it tome to a pint and an half, then strain them, and put to it
the quantity of three quarters of a pound of fine Sugar, then boil it again,
until it come to the quantity of three quarters of a pint, them take two or
three yolks of new laid Eggs, and beat them very well, and put them therein,
and let them boil together for the space of half a quarter of an hour, then
take it off the fire, and when the Patient will use it, let him take a
spoonefull at a time, one in the morning, and an other in the evening, and let
the Patient lie upon his back for the space of an hour after he has received
it, and let him use this for the space of five or six days, keeping himself
very warm, and it will rid the greatest cough that is from him, for it has
been well proved.

Cap. 231. A very good Medicine for the Cold.
TAKE a Pottle of Ale, and boil it, also scome it very clean, then take Hisop
and Peniroyall, of each of them half a handful, Annise seed and Licquorice,
of each of them an ounce, and three penny worth of case Ginger, and five or six
Figs sliced: If your Figs do not make it sweet enough, then put into it a
quantity of fine Sugar, (you must slice your Licquorice and Ginger, and bruise
your Annise seeds) and then boil it over the fire, until the one half be
consumed, and then strain it through a fine linen cloth into some Glass, or
else some Pot, where it may be kept close, then let the Patient drink thereof
morning and evening for the space of five or six days together, and he shall
find great ease thereby. Probatum est.

Cap. 232. Another for the same.
TAKE Hisop, Rosemary, Plantine, and the root of Raddish, of each of them a
like quantity, and sees them in a pottle of white Wine, until the one half
be consumed, then take it from the fire, and separate the herbs from the
licquor, then take the herbs, and put them into a Mortar, and stamp them very
well, and strain them, and put it into the Pot again, then take a pint of
english Honny, and boil it, and skome it, then take the quantity of a small
Nutte of May Butter (if it may be gotten) and let it be clarified, and put into
the other Licquor, and let it sees a little space after, then strain it
again through a fine linen cloth, and put the Licquor into a Glass, or some
other clean Uessell, and let the Patient drink thereof morning and evening,
to the quantity of seven or eight spoonefulls at a time, with stale Ale, until
he be whole. This has been often proved.

Cap. 233. A Medicine for the stopping of the nose and head, which comes by
reason of cold.
TAKE a good quantity of the juice of Primrose, and blow it with a quill into
the Patients nose, and let him keep himself warm after it, and it will
clear both his head and nose.

Cap. 234. A very good Drink for a Cold or Cough.
TAKE Isop, Rosemary, Plantine, and Raddish-rootes, of each of them a like
quantity, and sees them in a pottle of pure Muskadine, and so let it sees
until such time as the one half thereof be consumed away, then take forth
the herbs, and put them into a wooden dish, or else into a mortar, and stamp
them, and strain the juice into the licquor, and then put in the herbs
again, then take a pint of clarified Honny, and the quantity of a quarte of
May-Butter, being likewise clarified, and so boil all these again for the
space of a quarter of an hour, or somewhat more, then take it and strain it
through a fine linen cloth, into some glass, or else into some clean earthen
vessel, and stop it close, and let the Patient use to drink this both morning
and evening for the space of 3. or 4. days together, but he must take the
quantity of vii. spoonefulls at a time, mingled with stale Ale warm, and this
will help him, although his Cold or Cough be never so great, for it has been
well proved. C. D.

Cap. 235. Another very good Drink for the cold, and to open the Pipes.
TAKE Endive, Succory, Parsley, Fennel, Bourage, Time, Hisop, Germaunder,
Neepe, and Penyroyall, of each of them a good quantity, and sees all these
together in a pottle of fair running Water, and let them boil until the one
half thereof be consumed, and then strain it, and put to it the quantity of
two spoonefulls of good wine Vinegar; and three or four ounces of fine Sugar,
to make it sweet, and so let the Patient drink a good draught thereof morning
and evening, for the space of three days together, and this will help him.
Probatum est.

Cap. 236. A good Medicine to take away any Corn in your Toe, or elsewhere.
TAKE a knife, and pare the Corn as near the quick as it may be suffered, and
then take the inner part of a Fig, and a quantity of Verdy-greace, and mix
them both together, and lay it to the Corn, and let it be bound very fast with
a linen cloth, and this will eat out the root of the Corn, for this has
been proved. Per I. Bell.

Cap. 237. Another Medicine for the same.
TAKE Marygoldes stamped, and lay them upon the sore both Morning and Evening,
and if the Corn be not very deeply rooted, it will help. Or else pare your
Corn, and lay thereto the quantity of half a pease or somewhat more of
Turpentine and red Wax boiled together, and this will take away the Corn.

Cap. 238. Another Medicine for the same.
TAKE and cut away the Corn, and then take a black Snaile and bruise it, and
put a drop or two of the juice thereof into the place grieved, and put thereto
a little powder of Sandefere, and it will help you.

Cap. 239. Another Medicine for the same.
FIrst, pare away the Corn as near as it may be suffered, then take Vnslekt
Lime, and put it into the hole, to the quantity of a Fatch, and cover it with a
plaster made of Wax and Rosen mixed together, and let it continue on the
place for the space of four and twenty hours, and this will presently help
you.

Cap. 240.
A Medicine to heal any Corns in ones feet or toes.
TAKE red Wax, Vinegar, and a little quantity of Aquavitae, and boil them all
together, with two or three cloves of Garlic, then take a knife that is
sharp, and when you go to bed, cut your Corn as near as you can suffer to
cut it, then take one of the cloves of Garlic, and some of the Wax, and
bind it to your toe, use this three or four times, and this will take away
the Corn, that you shall never be troubled therewith again.

Cap. 241. Another Medicine for the same.
TAKE Oysters and open them, and cut out the white pith that grows unto the
shells, and dry it, and make thereof a powder, and when you go to bed cut your
Corn with a sharp knife, and pick out as much of the root as you can, then
put into the hole some of this powder, and if you will, you may use a very
little of sublimed Mercury, the which is to be had at the Apothecaries, and
then wrap a linen cloth about your toe, and it will eat away the Corn
clean. This has been proved

Cap. 242. A foueraigne Medicine for the Colic.
TAKE household bread that is made of clean wheat, and make a toste thereof,
and toste it at the fire, and ever as you toste it, cast Malmesye on it, then
take Lauender flowers, and cast it on the toste, then lay it upon a thin
cloth, and as hot as the Patient can suffer it, let him lay it to his Navel,
as close as he can. This has helped many.

Cap. 243. Another Medicine for the same.
TAKE Dates and bren them in a pan as ye do parched Peason, and let the Patient
put them in a linen cloth, and set them to his Navel as hot as he may
possibly abide it, and by using this often, he shall find great ease.

Cap. 244. Another Medicine for the same.
TAKE a clean stone, and make it red hot in the fire, then take it forth
again, and let it cool until the redues be gone, and then take a penyworth
of Saffron and lay it upon the stone, and turn it too and fro, until it be
turned almost to powder: then take it and temper it well with the quantity of
two spoonefulls of pure Malmesey, and so let the Patient drink it first and
last, and by Gods grace this will help him.

Cap. 245. An approved Medicine for the Colic and Stone.
TAKE the cuttings of a Vine and dry them thoroughly, and when you are disposed
to use them, burn them upon a Tilestone, or else upon some clean harth, then
take the ashes y^ comes of y^ Vine, and mingle it with a pint of Rennish
Wine, or white wine, and so let it stand for y^ space of a night, and the next
morning you must drink a good draught thereof fasting, (you must have a great
regard in the putting of the ashes and the wine together, because they ought to
be of equal quantities.) This has been proved.

Cap. 246. A Medicine to be used for the Collicke and Stone in manner of a
Plaster.
TAKE Parsley and Smallage, of each of them one ounce, and two spoonefulls of
Capons-grease, put these into an earthen vessel, and let one spoonefull of the
grease be put on the top, and the other in the bottom of the herbs, then set
these to boil on the embers from morning to night, and then stamp them and
strain them: then take the ointment and spread it upon a linen cloth, and lay
it as hot as it may be suffered to the Navel, and bottom of your belly.
Probatum est.

Cap. 247. A good Medicine for the Collicke.
TAKE a quarte of white Wine, and Milk that is new from the Cow, or Goats
milk if it may be gotten, and make a posset thereof, then skome the curd away
clean, and take the posset drink, and put therein a handful of Mother of
Time, and a handful of young Parsley, and sees them in the posset drink, then
take a penyworth of long Pepper and bruise it, and put it into the posset
drink, and let the Patient drink a good draught thereof first and last, and
he shall find great ease thereby. Probatum est.

Cap. 248. A good Medicine for a woman that is troubled with the Collicke.
TAKE the buds of Palm when they be floured in March, and distill them, and
give a good draught of the said water to the Patient to drink fasting for the
space of three or four days together, and the party grieved shall quickly be
whole. Also Litarge drawn into water, is good for the same disease.

Cap. 249. A good Medicine for the Stone.
TAKE a good handful of Time, and as much Parsley, and sees them in white Wine
a good while, then strain it, and share a good spoonefull of white Soap, into
a good draught of the same Wine, and give it to the Patient to drink, and this
will help him presently.

Cap. 250. An excellent good Medicine for the Colic.
TAKE a good quantity of the leaves of a Lorell tree, and dry them and beat
them to powder, and put thereto a quantity of the powder of Nutmegs, and mingle
them with fresh Butter, and with a linen cloth bind it to the Navel of the
party grieved, and it will help him speedily.

Cap. 251. Another Medicine for the same.
TAKE a handful of Grouncell and stamp it very well in a Mortar, and put
thereto an ounce of Cummin, and fry them with sheep suet, and stale Ale, and
make a Plaster thereof and lay it to the Navel of the party grieved, as hot
as it may be suffered. This has been proved.

Cap. 252. An approved Medicine for the Colic and Stone.
TAKE Philupendula, Scabions, Mouse-eare, water Cressets, of each of them a
like quantity, then take the middle rind or bark of an Elder tree, and then
put all these into an Duen that is hot, and dry them, and make thereof a
Powder, and give the Patient to drink the quantity of a spoonefull at a time,
either in posset ale, or Ale it self alone warm. Probatum est.

Cap. 253. Another Medicine for the same.
TAKE the weight of eight groates of Cummin, the weight of seven groates of
Gallingall, the weight of six groates of Bays, five groates weight of long
Pepper, the weight of four groates of Fennel seed, the weight of three
groates of Alisander-seede, two groates weight of Parsley seed, and the weight
of one groate of english Saffron: Beat al these to powder in a Brazen Mortar,
and let it be very well searsed: then put thereto a good quantity of fine
Sugar, and mingle them well together, and let the party grieved use of the same
powder in his Pottage, (the quantity of half a spoonefull at a time) And let
him use of this powder in his drink, (as in Ale that is old, or else in white
Wine, but it is best in Pottage. Probatum est.

Cap. 254. An approved Medicine for the Colic and Stone.
TAKE a pottle of white Wine that is pure and good, and put it into a pot, and
take also two great blew Flint stones, and let them be as big as they will
easily go into the pot whereas the Wine is, then cast the stones into the
fire, where as they may be red hot, then take them forth and quench them in
the pot whereas the Wine is, then take them forth again out of the pot, and
put them in the fire again, as is aforesaid, and so in like manner the third
time, and so from time to time, until the one half be consumed away: and when
you see that the Wine is half consumed, then set it to stand until it be well
settled, and then let the party grieved drink thereof, and let him use it as
often as he shall think good, or that he shall feel any pain, and this will
help him of the Colic and Stone. For by experience I am able to report, that
it did help one Master Tailor of Bristow, that was prisoner in the Kings
Bench, with diverse others.

Cap. 255. An excellent good and perfect Medicine to cure the Colic, Stone,
and Stranguary.
TAKE v. or vi. leaves of the herb called Laurel, stamp them and strain
them in Ale, or if they be dry, beat them to powder and put it in Ale, and let
the Patient drink thereof fasting, and let him be kept warm all the same day
after in his Chamber: for after the receipt thereof, he shall be troubled with
five or six stools, or more. This herb grows in Gardens, and is like to
Misselden, otherwise Mistletae, and it has leaves like unto the herb which
is called Missell, which grows in old Apple trees, and bears a berry of the
bigness of a warte, and it is commonly given to Cattle for medicines.

The next day after that you have taken this Medicine as aforesaid, make a
Powder of these things following, Filinendula, and Saxifrage, of each of them
one ounce, Coriander seed, Gromell seed, and Alexander seed, of each of them
half an ounce, Iuy berries, Broome-seede, the blossom of the Elder flowers,
and the berries of Holme, of each of these one ounce, and the like quantity of
Annise seed and Fenell seed, (...) Oxegall, and half an ounce of the Row of
a red Hearing, the Roundes of a Thorneback-fish, which is a round nut, which
you shall find within the pricks which stand upon the fishes back, and
Pollipodium, which is a fearne growing out of an Oak, dried into powder: of
each of these half an ounce, beat all these in powder, and mix them
together, and for the space of six or seven days following, take every day
fasting to the quantity of one spoonefull of the same Powder, and mix it with
Ale, and drink thereof: but you must abstain from meat and drink for the
space of four or five hours after the receipt hereof. This has cured many.

Cap. 256. A Medicine to cure the Colic and Stone.
TAKE Black berries, Hawes, and Akornes, and dry them upon Tiles, then take
the powder of them severally, of each a spoonefull, and searse it fine, and
give it to the Patient in Malmesey to drink every morning fasting, for the
space of five or six days. This has been proved.

Cap. 257. Another Medicine for the same.
TAke unset Leekes, Mallows, Pellitory, of each of them a like quantity,
stamp them very well, and put thereto a penyworth or two of Neates oil, fry
them well together in manner of a plaster, put them into a bag made of linen
cloth, and being very hot, lay it to the belly of the Patient, and it will
help within one hour.

And for the Stone, lay the same to the Reins of the back behind, and it
will help with speed.

Cap. 258. A very good Medicine for the Collicke.
TAke Gromell seed, Parsley seeds, and Annise seeds, of each of them two
spoonefuls, green Fenell one handful, one Parsley root, one Raddish root,
let either of them be as long as a finger, unset Time, Cherystones,
Philopendula, of each of them one handful, Wash all these, and bruise and stamp
them very small, Then take them and boil them in a pottle of white Wine, in an
earthen pot close, till a pint thereof he consumed, and then let it run
through a linen cloth without strayning, and drink this both morning and
evening. Probatum est.

Cap. 259. A Medicine for the Collicke and Stone.
TAke Camamile, as much as will lie in the palm of your hand, Pellitory of the
wall, and Auens, of each of them a handful, and a spoonefull of Partly seed a
little bruised, then make a Posset of Rennish Wine, and let the curd be clean
taken off, and then boil all these together in the same posset drink, till
all the substance be boiled out, then use to drink this both morning and
evening, and this will help you.

Cap. 260. An aproued Medicine for the Collicke.
TAke an ounce of Cloves and Mace, a handful of Time, a handful of Rosemary,
and as much Isope, and sees all these in a pottle of white Wine, and let it
sees until it be consumed from a pottle to a quarte, then put thereto a
little Sugar, and then drink the same lukewarm at such time as you feel
your self to be in pain, and when it is very well sodden as aforesaid, you
must burn it as you do commonly use to burn other Wines.

Cap. 261. An aproued Medicine for the Stone.
TAke a Carret root, and slice it very thin, and lay it in white Wine, and
so let it remain for the space of two days and two nights, and then strain
it, and let the Patient drink thereof morning and evening fasting, and this
will help him. Probatum est.

Wind Collicke.
Cap. 262. An aproued Medicine for the wind Collicke and for a stitch.
TAke Capillus Veneris, Parsley roots, and Fenell roots, of each of them a
quarter of an ounce, bruise all these herbs together, and let the party grieved
drink the juice thereof with white Wine morning and evening for the space of 3
or 4 days, and it will help him. Probatum est.

Cap. 263. An excellent Medicine for the Windy Collicke.
TAke a pottle of pure Malmesey that is not mixed with any other Wines, and 4 or
5 spoonefuls of the pith of Parsley roots, and two handfuls of Violet leaves,
and a dosen of Bay leaves, sees all these together until the one half be
boiled away: then take it, and strain it well through a very fine linen
cloth, and let the Patient drink a good draught thereof morning and evening
warm.

Cap. 264. Another Medicine for the same.
TAke a quart of Ale clarified, and two spoonefulls of the flower of
Licquorice, and a spoonefull of the flower of Annis seeds, and half a
spoonefull of Fennel seeds bruised, a little Time, and sees them all together
until it be consumed from a quart to a pint, and then strain it through a
linen cloth, and use this morning and evening for the space of 4 or 5 days
warm, and this will help you.

Consumption.
Cap. 265. A remedy for a Consumption.
TAke a pottle of Rosewater, and as much Milk of Goats, of Mares, or of the
Milk of a Cow that is all of one color, and put thereto to the number of 50
or threescore Eggs, mingle the yolks of the Eggs very well with the Milk and
Rosewater, but let not any of the white remain amongst them, and distill a
water thereof, and give it to the Patient to drink warm first and last, with
a Cake or two of Manus Christi, which is made with Gold and Pearls: Use this,
and you shall find much ease thereby, for it has helped many.

Cap. 266. A remedy for a Consumption in the Reins.
TAke a handful or two of Clary leaves, and prick them, and 4 or 5 yolks of
Hen eggs newly laid, then take Saffron and dry it upon a Tilestone or some
such thing, and grind it very small, and put all these together, and fry them
in fresh butter, and eat it first in the morning, and this will help you.

Deafness.
Cap. 267. A sovereign Medicine for the pain and buzzing in the head, which
hinders the hearing very much.
TAke a Cloue of Garlic, pill it, and pick three or four holes in the
midst of it, and then dip it in fine english Honny, and put it into your
ear, and put a little black wool after, and for that night lie upon the
other side, and let your ear that is stopped be upright, and the next night
following use the other ear in the same sort, and lie them on the contrary
side again, and so every other night alter as aforesaid, and so continue it
for the space of eight or nine days together, and this will expulse all the
ill humors forth at your nose, it will also expel the pain, and restore the
hearing. This has been proved.

Cap. 268. An approved Medicine for deafness.
TAke Bayleaues, Bapherries, Betony, and Sticards, of each of them one
handful, sees them in white wine, until the one half be consumed, (and for
an old man use Malmesey in stead of white wine) then take it, and put it into a
vessel that has a narrow mouth, and let the Patient hold his ear over it
(being unstopped) so that he may suffer it (the same not being too hot nor too
cold) then take oil of bitter Almonds, and let three or four drops thereof
fall into his ear. Let the Patient have always a lock of fine black wool
that grows between the Sheep legs, to stop his ear close withal,
wherein, if he put a little Musk, it will be the better. This has been
proved by Tho. Steuens of Bushton.

Cap. 269. An excellent Medicine for one that is deaf, and that his hearing is
almost clean gone.
TAke a red Onyon, and take out the core that is in the midst thereof, and
put thereto the oil of roasted Almonds, but let the Onyon be somewhat warm
when you put the oil into it, and let it stand so for the space of one night,
then let it be bruised, and strayned into a poringer, and let the party grieved
cause one to drop three drops at a time both morning and evening, and let him
stop his ear with a little black wool that grows under the ear of a
black Sheep, and let him when he is in his bed lie on the same side: thus
using first the one ear, and afterward the other in this manner, it will by
Gods help cure him. This has cured many.

FIrst, it is to be considered what things are good for the eyes, and what are
not, for the eye is the most necessary member of all other pertaining to man's
body, for without the sight thereof, we can of our selves do nothing: therefore
this small member is chiefly to be regarded, and according to my simple skill,
I have gathered a few flowers (as I may term them) to preserve, and keep
the same, and in so doing, if I offend, I shall be heartily sorry, but if they
please, then shall I think my labors happily spent.

Good for the sight. Measurable sleep. Red Roses. Veruaine Roots. Fennel.
Selandine. Pimperuell. Oculus Christi. To wash your eyes with clear water. To
look upon any manner of green colors. To look in a fair Glass. Washing
your hands and feet often.
Ill for the sight. To eat Garlic, Onyons and Leekes. To eat Lettice. To
travel or go too sudden after meat. Hot Wines. Cold air. Drunkenness.
Gluttony. Milk. Cheese. Overmuch beholding of bright and red things, and also
white. Much sleep after meat. Too much let. of blood. Cold worts. Dust.
Fi^e. Much weeping, and overmuch watching.


Waters for the Eyes.
A special good water for to preserve the eyesight.
TAke a new laid Egg, and roste it hard, cut the shell in the midst, then
take forth the yolke, and put a piece of Coperas into the place where the
yolke lay, and bind the Egg together again, and let it lie in the fire,
until you think that the Coperas be resolved to water, then take the white
out of the shell, and cut it into small pieces, and put it into a glass of
clear running water, and let it stand a little while, then strain it through
a very fine cloth, and keep it in a close glass, and every morning and
evening wash the Patients eyes therewith.

A Medicine for sore eyes.
TAke Coporas, and lay it to steep in fair running water for the space of 5
or 6 hours, then take it, and strain it through a linen cloth into a little
glass or Vial, and when you go to bed strike the brees of your eyes
therewith, and let it drop into them, and this will help your eyesight very
much.

A very good Medicine to kill the pin and the web in the eye.
TAke red Sage, red Fennel, three leaued grass, and Daysies, of each of them
a like quantity, then take the white of a new laid egg, and beat it till all
the froth may be easily taken off, and put thereto half a spoonefull of
Honney, then stamp all the herbs together, and when you have stamped them
very small, then strain them, and put to the juice thereof the white of the
egg and the Honny all together, and let them be very well tempered, then take
a feather, and drop a little of this into the eye of the Patient: then take a
plaster of Flaxen tow, and dip it in the said Medicine, and lay it upon the
Patients eye, and bind it fast, and let it continue an hour or somewhat more
at every time that it is dressed. This has been many times proved.

Another sovereign Medicine for the web in the eye, if it be old.
TAke red Pimpernell, and Euphrasia, and stamp them very well in a Mortar, and
then fry them with Capons grease in a clean pan, and when it is fried, wring
it through a linen cloth into some brass vessel, and let it stand therein
three days after, then take it forth, and put it into a box of Horn or
Tin, and a little thereof at time, and put it into the web of the eye, and
this Medicine will help it.

A very good Medicine to clear the eyesight.
MAke a Powder of Fennel, Annise, and Elicompane, and temper them with
Aquavitae, and then dry them again, and ear a quantity thereof every morning
and evening, and this will both clear the sight, purge the wind, and make one
seem young long. This has been proved.

A Medicine for bleared eyes.
TAke the stone that is called Salumnaris, which is to be had at the
Apothecaries, and beat it to fine powder, and put it into a spoonefull or two
of Rosewater, and one spoonefull of running water mingled together, then take a
feather, and every morning and evening let a drop or two fall into your eye.
Use this often, and it will help you.

A Medicine for eyes that are bloudshot and red.
TAke Housleeke, and stamp it very small, then take a new laid egg, and make
a hole in the end, and draw out all the meat, and put into it the juice of
Housleeke, and set it in the embers, and so distill it, and with a feather
scumme it clean, and at night when you go to bed take a feather, and drop a
drop thereof into your eye, lying upon your back, and it will presently help
you. This has been proved.

A Medicine for to kill a pearl or web in the eye.
TAke three leaued grass that bears the Ho^ysuckle, and take the juice
thereof, and put it into the eye of the party grieved, and it will by using it
twice a day, help it in fir days space.

An experienced water for the eyes.
TAke Selandine, Fennel, Sage, Rosemary, Veruine, and Rue, of each of them a
good handful, take all these and wash them very clean, and dry the water
forth of them again with a fine cloth: then put them into a Limbecke, and
distill them, and let the Patient drop of this water often into his eyes, and
this will recover his sight again although it be supposed to be past all hope
of recovery.

Face.
A very good Medicine to destroy any beat in the face, or in any other place,
although it be S. Anthonies fire.
TAke a pottle of Smithes water, a handful of Sage two handfuls of Elder
leaves, or of the green bark of an Elder tree, and two penny worth of Alum,
take these, and sees them altogether, from a pottle to a pint then take it,
and put it into an earthen pot, or some gally put and let the Patient anoint
his face therewith when he goes to bed, and by the next morning be shall find
great ease thereby: but let him use it for the space of five or six days, and
this will help him by Gods grace.

Another very good Medicine for a red or high colored face.
TAke Vi^e-leaues and Strawberies, of each of them a like quantity, then take
as much sweet Cream, as you shall think good for the quantity of the things
aforesaid, then put unto it two penyworth of Camphire, and put it into a
Stillatory all together, and distill it, and then take the water thereof and
wash your face therewith every morning and evening for the space of nine or
ten days, and this will take away the high color. This was much used by
Master Cox, who did help many with it.

Another Medicine to take away the pimples and high color out of ones face, be
it never so far gone.
TAke green and white Coporesse, of each of them a like quantity, and put them
into a sawcer of fair running water, and warm it on the coals, and as hot
as ever you can suffer it, anoint the pimples of your face therewith, or any
other place of your face which is high colored, or red, and in using this
often, it will help you.

A Medicine for to make ones face clear, and to shine.
TAke a good quantity of the Marrow of Swines feet, Cow-milke, and Rosewater,
and mingle them well together, and anoint your face therewith lukewarm, and it
will make it very fair.

Falling Evil.
An excellent good remedy for the Falling Evil.
TAke Piony-rootes one handful, and a handful of Mistlet^ that grows in a
Blackthorne Tree, and an handful of Pollipodium, otherwise called Okefearne,
and a handful or two of Selandine, if it be to be had, stamp them very well,
and soke them in Ale for the space of 24 hours, then take it, and strain it
through a fine linen cloth, and put it into some earthen pot to be kept close
from the air, and let the Patient drink a good draught thereof every morning
fasting, and last in the evening for the space of nine or ten days, and by
Gods help he shall be cured. This has been proved.

Another very good Medicine for the same.
TAke Germander that is gathered in May, when it has the blossom on it, and
dry it in the shadow where no Sun comes, and make thereof a powder, and
when you will, use it: then take the yolke of an Egg, or two, and beat the
powder and the yolks all together in some wooden dish or porenger, then sees
it, and when it is sodden, give it to the Patient to eat both morning and
evening for the space of nine days: But during this time, he must abstain
from all kind of Wines, and carnal company of women, and also from all manner
of Pulse, as Beans, Pease, Fitches, and Tares, and from all other things that
are of a hard concockcion or digestion, Probatum est.

Another Medicine for the same.
TAke the Matrice of a Sow that has young Pigges, and dry it upon a Tilestone
or Fireshouell, and make a Powder thereof, and give it to the Patient to eat,
or else put it in his drink, and as soon as he has received the same, you
shall perceive the sickness to remove into his fingers ends, grieuing him very
sore for a space, Then make same kind of rupture to set to his fingers ends,
and you shall in a short space see the yellow matter or corruption proceed
forth of them.

A very good Medicine for the bloody Flux.
TAke Plantine, Knotty-grasse, and Sheppards purse, of each of them a good
quantity, and boil them all together in new Milk, Broth, or red Wine, and
when they are well sodden, then strain the herbs ano the Milk, and let the
Patient drink this often, and it will help him. Probatum est.

Another excellent good Medicine to stop the bloody Flix.
TAke a pound of Alm^nds, and blaunch them, and stamp them in a Mortar very
small, then take the yolks of xii new laid Eggs rear roasted, and mingle them
with the said Almonds, then put to them a quart of good red wine-vineger, and
mingle it with the aforesaid stuff, and put them into an earthen pot, and
stir them well together, and so let the Patient drink the quantity of v. or
vi. spoonefuls thereof at a time warm, 3 or 4 times every day, as long as
need shall require, and it will help him.

An experienced Medicine to stay the bloody Flix.
TAke a piece of Beef which grows about the Brisket of the Ox, and let the
Patient eat a piece thereof raw, and this will speedily help him.

Gowte.
An experienced Medicine for the Gout.
TAKE stale Piss, and sees it, and scome it, and put thereto a good quantity
of the juice of red Nettles, red Fenell, Mints, and Wormwood, and let the
juice of them be of as even porcions as you can guess them, Mustard and Cummin,
of each of them a little, and the juice of herb Benet as much as of all the
rest, Sees all these together, and make a Plaster thereof, and so apply it
often to the place grieved, and it will help. This has been proved.

Another good Medicine for the Gowt, or any other ache.
TAke Rosen and Pitch, of each of them a quarter of a pound, and a quantity of
Frankensence, as much as a bean, and as much of Turpentine, then take a
quantity of Deare-suet, or Sheep ^allow, and boil them all together in a
pot, and when it is well boiled, then take it forth, and wash it as you do
Birdlime in clean water, and then take some of it, and spread it upon a piece
of Leather, and lay it to the sore, and so let it remain there until it fall
off it self, Use this two or three times, and you shall find great ease
thereby.

A Medicine for the Gowte.
TAke Shomakers spects or pieces of leather, and fry out the grease, and lay
some of it upon a brown paper, and warm it a little at the fire, then apply
it to the place grieved, and it will take away the pain thereof in one night.
Probatum est.

Green Sickness.
An approved Medicine for the Green Sickness.
TAKE a pottle of red Wine that is pure, (or for want thereof, take so much
Hollocke) and two ounces of Fennel seede^, and three ounces of A^^ise seeds,
and put them all t^gether, and ^et them boil over a soft fire, until the one
half be consumed, then strain it, and let the Patient drink thereof first
and last, luke warm, and let the Patient drink the quantity of half a pint
thereof at a time, if it may be endured. This must be used for the space of
eight days together, always beginning two days after the changes of every
new Moon: and if it be far gone, that the Patient cannot recover perfect
health in that space, then let this Medicine be used eight days in a month
for the space of three months together, in the beginning of every month as
aforesaid, and without all doubt it helps. This has been often proved.

A Medicine for the Green Sickness.
TAke an herb that is called Rosus solus, it grows low by the ground, and
it has somewhat a broad leaf (some do call it the Sheep rot) it bears a
yellow flower. Distill this herb, and give some of the water to the Patient,
to drink morning and evening, and let him use some exercise of labor, and by
this drink he shall be helped without all doubt. The Patient must use this
drink for the space of six or seven days together, for it is also
restoratiue, and much virtue has been found herein.

A Medicine for to take away any extreme ache, or swimming in the head.
TAke Rosemary, Lauender-flowers, Winter-sauery, Camamile, Bays, and Lauender
it self, both new and old, Mints, and Fenell, sees these all together in
water, and put thereto a handful of Bay salt, then take the same licour the
herbs and all, and wash your feet therewith twice every morning and evening
for the space of three days, and in doing thus, it will take away any pain in
the head if it be never so extreme or grievous, for it has been proved.

An excellent good Medicine for the Headache or Megrime.
TAke five or six Nutmegs, and pare and slice them very thin, then make two
little linen baggs of the length and breadth of your finger, and put in the
Nutmegs, then take a quantity of pure red Rosewater, and lay your baggs in the
same water, in a dish, upon a cha^ngdish of coals, and make them hot, and lay
them to the temples of your head, and this will help.

Another Medicine for a continual headache.
TAke Betony-water, and then take a cloth and double it three or four times
double, and let it be some three fingers broad, wet it very well in the
Betony-water, and lay it to your forhead cold. Let the cloth being wet, come
round about your head, and tie it very fast, and when the cloth is dried, wet
it again, and in doing thus three or four times, it will by Gods grace help
thee.

A very good Medicine to cleanse or purge the Head.
TAke Pellitory of Spain, and chew the root thereof in your mouth, three or
four days at several times, and this will take away the pain of the head,
and also fasten the teeth in the gummes. Probatum est.

A very good Medicine for the headache.
TAke water of Margerum, and hold your nose over it, and draw your wind hard
unto you, until such time as the water has entered into your nose diverse
times, and then suddenly your headache shall be taken away.

A very good Medicine for the Megrime truly proved.
TAke an dunce of Pepper, and 4 or 5 Nutmegs, a quarter of an ounce of Grains,
and a quart of Vinegar, and two handfuls of Rosemary, boil all these together
between two platters upon a chafingdish of coals, and then take a cloth and
put it over your head, and hold your head close over it, until it be very well
boiled: It is the better if you let it boil almost all away, by Gods grace
this will help you.

Iaundise.
A Medicine for the black Iaundise.
TAKE shell-snailes and roast them, or else dry them at the fire, or in an oven,
and when they are dry, beat them to powder, then take a spoonefull thereof at
one time, and drink it in Ale, and this being taken for the space of nine or
ten days together both morning and evening, it does perfectly cure this
disease.

A very good Medicine for the yelow Iaundise.
TAke earth-wormes, and wash them and slit them, then take a little scraped
Iuory and english Saffron beaten to powder, mix these with white Wine, and let
the Patient drink a good draught thereof lukewarm, both morning and evening.

A Medicine for the yellow.
TAke Baysalt, Otes, and Commin, and dry all these, and make two bags thereof,
and as hot as the Patient may suffer it lay the one after the other to the
plow, or crown of the head, and so let him use it a good while.

A present remedy for an Itch.
TAKE Dock-rootes and beat them, and bruise them with fresh Butter, and anoint
the Patient with the Salve, and in five or six times dressing, it will help
him.

Liver.
A Medicine for the stopping in the Liver.
TAKE Broth made of a Chicken, with these things in it, that is to say, Mercury
and Succory, of each of them half a handful, and a few great Reisons, the
stones picked out, and let all these be boiled together, then take a few bitter
Almonds, and blaunch them and beat them, and with the same Licquor, make
Almond Milk, and so use to drink it every morning first.

Another Medicine for the heat of the Liver, or dryness in the hands.
TAKE a good quantity of Strawbery-water distilled, and sees therein a good
quantity of Liuerwort, and drink it with a good quantity of Sirop of Mints,
and this will cool the heat of the Liver.

A very good drink made of Whey, for to cool the extreme heat of the Liver
and Stomach.
TAke Violet-leaues, Sinckfoile leaves, Succory, Endive, Scabions, and
Fumitory, of each of them a good handful, sees all these in a pottle of Whey
which has been boiled, and so let it continue still seething, until a third
part thereof be consumed, then strain it through a fine liunen cloth, and let
the Patient drink a good draught thereof both morning and evening, and it will
help him. Probatum est.

An approved Medicine for the Mother.
TAke a quantity of Nepe-royall, and stamp it, then take two spoonefuls of the
said juice, and a spoonefull of Sallet oil, and let two parts thereof sees
away, then unto that which remains, but only the quantity of the oil, and
let the Patient anoint the place very often where the Mother does arise.

Morphew.
A very speedy remedy for the Morphew.
TAke three spoonefulls of Elder-water, and let the Patient drink every day so
much, for the space of nine days, and look that the Patient do sweat every
day, then take three or four Oke-apples, and lay them to steep in white wine
Vinegar for the space of 24 hours, and then let him wash his body with the
Vinegar, and this will help him.

Piles or Emerodes.
An excellent remedy for the Piles.
TAke the beards of the heads of unset Leekes, and wash them clean, then take
a quantity of fair running Water, and boil them therein, till they be
somewhat tender, then dry the^ well in a linen cloth, then stamp them as small
as you can, and when you have so done, take a good piece of fresh Butter, and
boil them therein upon a Chafingdish of coals, then put into it a good
quantity of english Saffron, and boil them together, and when it is well
boiled, strain it through a fair linen cloth into a Glass and keep it, and
when you will use it, make a Plaster thereof upon a linen cloth, or else a
piece of leather, and lay it cold to the place which is grieved, and this will
speedily help him.

A Medicine to staunch the bleeding of the Piles.
TAke the juice of Millfoile, and put thereunto the powder of burnt Garlic,
and let the party grieved drink thereof, and in short space the Piles will
dye. This has been proved.

French Pox.
An excellent good water for the French Pox.
TAke white Coporas, Roch-Allum, Licquorice, and Honny, of each of them a
penyworth, or somewhat more, of Sage, Rosemary, and Woodbinde, of each of them
a like quantity, and boil them all together in fair running Water, and let
the Patient use this often, and it will help him.

A marvelous good ointment for the French Pox.
TAke Hoggs-greace that is untried to the quantity of a quarter of a pound, of
Quicksiluer,. 1. and qualify your Quicksiluer with fasting Spettle, then put
to the Hoggs-greace and the Quicksiluer 3 or 4 spoonefulls of strong and sharp
Vinegar, then beat all these very well for the space of two or three hours
together, and then put it into an earthen pot, or Gally pot, and let the
Patient use to anoint the place grieved often therewith, and doubtless this
will help him. Probatum est.

A good Medicine to kill the great Pocke.
TAke a good quantity of Camphire, and lay it to the place where the Pocke is,
and it will presently eat it clean away. Probatum est.

Another for the same.
TAke a good quantity of Hemlocks, and a good quantity of the dregs of strong
Ale, and a good quantity of Mutton Suet, and boil all these very well
together, and make a Pultis of them, and lay it to the place where the grief
is, and this will help him. Probatum est.

An excellent good Medicine to heal the French Pox.
TAke Goacum Capium half a pound, Salsa perilla two ounces, Bark of Goacum
two ounces, Licquorice one ounce, Annise seeds one ounce, Fennel seed one
ounce, Seeny one ounce, and of Betany, Scabions, Smallege, Pellitory of the
wall, Penyroyall, Harts-toong, Maydenhere, wild Mints, or red Mints, red Sage,
Oculus Christi, Liuerwort, and of the herb Mercury, of every one of them a
good handful, clean picked and washed, and then put all these together to
sleep for the space of one whole night, in three gallons of fair running
Water, or else in two gallons of pure white Wine, and one gallon of strong Ale,
then take them, and boil them all together, until it be consumed to three
quarts, then strain it through a fine linen cloth, and put it into a close
vessel.

Note this, that if you boil it in water, it will continue but six or seven
days, but being boiled in Wine, and Ale, twenty days, which is too short a
space for the party which is sick and diseased, to use it.

This must be drunken by the sick person both morning and evening, and at
meat, and you must put into every three quartes of the water, one quarter of
an ounce of Coloquintida, and let the party which is sick use it, until such
time as it has scowred the body very well, and if it do not purge well, then
take this Medicine following.

Another for the same.
TAke half an ounce of Seny, a spoonefull of Anniseseedes, half an ounce of
Licquorice, a spoonefull of Fenell seeds, twenty Reysons of the sun, the
stones picked forth, boil these all together in quart of Water, and let it
boil until the one half be consumed, then strain it, and put thereto one
ounce and an half of Deaphenicon, and shake it together, and let the party
grieved drink thereof warm every morning fasting.

This Purgation never makes the body sick, neither does it hurt the stomach.

Note also, that this drink aforesaid, will heal any old ulcer if it be
washed therewith, and especially of that which is made both of Wine and Ale, if
the party be never so sore diseased, let him purge twice or thrice with
Coloquintida, prepared, and it will help him for ever.

Small Pox.
A Medicine to drive out the small Pox.
TAke Milk, Saffron, and english Honny, and sees them together, and give it
to the Patient, and let him be kept warm after it.

Another for the same.
TAke Dragon-water, white Wine, and Methridatum, or Treacle of Ieane, and some
Unicorns horn, and sees these together, and give them to the Patient as
aforesaid.

Purgations.
TAke a pint of white Wine, and an ounce of Se^^ie, and a good handful of
Reisons of the sun, the stones picked out, and half a spoonefull of
Anniseedes, put all these into the said white Wine to sleep one whole night,
and the next morning boil it until it be come to a draught, and so ^et the
Patient drink it lukewarm, and if you will you may put thereunto three or
four roots of Polipodie of the ^ke. This is very good. Probatum est.

Plague and pestilence.
Herein are contained diverse and sundry good rules and easy Medicines, which
are made with little charge, for the poorer sort of people, as well for the
preservation of all people from the Plague before infection, as for the curing
and ordering of them after such time as they shall be infected.

A preservative by correcting the air in all houses.
TAke Rosemary dried, Juniper, Bay-leaues, or Frankincense, and cast the same
upon the coals in a chafingdish, and receive the fume or smoke thereof into
your head. If you will, put a little Lauender or Sage that is dried, into the
fire with the rest it will do much good.

Also to make your fires in earthen pannes (rather to remove about your
Chambers, then in Chimneys) shall be better to correct the aires in your
houses, then otherwise.

A preservative against the Plague.
TAke a handful of Hearbe-grace, otherwise called Rue, a handful of
Elder-leaues, a handful of red Sage, and a handful of red Bramble leaves, and
stamp them well together, and strain them through a fine linen cloth, with a
quarte of white Wine, then take a quantity of Case Ginger, and mingle it with
them, and drink a good draught thereof both morning and evening for the space
of nine days together, and by Gods grace it will preserve you.

An excellent good drink to be taken every morning for a preservative against
the Plague, and for to avoid infection.
TAke a handful of Winter-Sauery, and boil the same in a quart of good
wine-Vinegar, with a spoonefull of Grains being very fine beaten, and put into
the same, then put into it a quantity of fine Sugar, and so drink a good
draught thereof every morning fasting.

When you must of necessity come into any place where any infectious persons
are, it is good for you to smell to the root of Angellica, Gentian, or
Valerian, and to chew any of these in your mouth.

A special preservative against the Plague.
TAke five spoonefuls of wine-Vinegar, three spoonefuls of fair running-Water,
half a spoonefull of Treacle of Iene, and of Bolearmoniake as much as a small
nut, being beaten to powder, and drink this every morning and every evening.
Proved by M. Knight of Andouer.

Take vi. leaves of Sorell, and wash them with Water and Vinegar, and let them
lie to steep in the said Water and Vinegar a good while, then eat them
fasting and keep in your mouth and chew now or then either Stewall, or the
root of Angelica, or a little Cinnamon, for any of these is marvelous good.

Medicines to be used after infection taken.
FOrasmuch as the greatest cause of the Plague does stand rather in poison,
then in any putrefaction of humors, as other Agues do, the chiefest way is to
move much sweating, and to defend the heart by some cordial thing.

Suppositarie.
IF the Patient be costiue and bound in his body, let him take a Suppositarie
made with a little boiled Honny, and a little fine Powder of Salt, and so take
it in at the fundament, and so keep it till it move a stool.

A very good Medicine to be drunk, suspecting any to have the Plague.
TAke a great onyon and take forth the core, then fill it full with good
Treacle of Iene, and wrap the same in a paper, and roast it until it be soft,
then strain the same with a little white wine Vinegar, and temper it with a
quantity of Sugar, and give to the Patient two spoonefulls thereof to drink
fasting, and if the Patient be infected with the Plague, you shall perceive it
within six hours, after the receipt of the same drink.

An excellent Medicine for the Plague.
TAke three or four slips of herb grace, and vi. spoonefulls of Vinegar, and
beat them both together in a Mortar, then strain the juice out thereof, and
put thereto an ounce of fine Treacle, and an ounce of fine Sugar, and set it
over the fire, and stir it together, and make thereof a sirop, and then put
it into a close bare: then take a Sage-leafe, and every morning fasting spread
as much as a bean thereof upon the same leaf, and so eat it morning and
evening first and last. And if he that eats it be infected, it will drive it
clean from his heart, and if he be not infected, it will preserve him within
the space of xxiiij hours after the receipt thereof.

A very good Medicine for the Plague.
TAke in the morning fasting, one dry Fig, one Wallnut, and 4 or 5 leaves of
hearbe-grace, chopped all together very small, and eat them, and drink
afterward a good draught of white or claret Wine: If it be a woman with child,
leave out the hearbe-grace. This has been often proved.

A very good Medicine against the Plague.
TAke a Fig, and put therein a little Hearbe-gra^^ mingled with a little
Baysalt bruised, and the kernel of a Wallnut clean picked, these being put all
together into the Fig, let the Patient eat three or four of these Figs so
dressed, every morning next his heart, and drink a very good draught of white
Wine after it, and let him walk an hour after it, before he eat any more
meat, and by using of it thus every morning, by Gods help he shall be safe
from any infection.

A Medicine to break the Botch.
IF it fortune the Botch to appear, then take red Bramble leaves, Elder
leaves, and Mustard seed, and stamp them all together, and then take thereof,
and make a Plaster and lay it to the sore, and it will draw forth all the
venom.

A marvelous good drink for them that are infected with the Plague.
TAke leafe-gold, and mingle it with the juice of Lemons, and a little
Suger-candie, Cloves, Mace, and a little Cinnamon, and a like quantity of
Licquorice finely pared and sliced, and let this be steeped in white Wine, or
else in good Claret Wine, and put therein a good quantity of the powder of
Angellica, or else of the decoction of the same root, the same drink will
help the Patient being drunk warm.

An excellent Medicine to ripen and to bring forth the sore.
TAke a white onyon, and cut it in pieces, and three ounces of Butter that is
clean without salt, then take cloves of Garlic clean picked, the weight of
xx d. and the quantity of half an egg of leven, and a little otemeale small
beaten, boil all these together with a little new Milk, or else fair water,
and make a pultesse of it, and lay it very warm to the sore.

Suppositarie.
IF the Patient be costiue and bound in his body, let him take a Suppositarie
made with a little boiled Honny, and a little fine Powder of Salt, and so take
it in at the fundament, and so keep it till it move a stool.

A very good Medicine to be drunk, suspecting any to have the Plague.
TAke a great Onyon and take forth the core, the fill it full with good
Treacle of Iene, and wrap the same in a paper, and roast it until it be soft,
then strain the same with a little white wine Vinegar, and temper it with a
quantity of Sugar, and give to the Patient two spoonefulls thereof to drink
fasting, and if the Patient be infected with the Plague, you shall perceive it
within six hours, after the receipt of the same drink.

An excellent Medicine for the Plague.
TAke three or four slips of herb grace, and vi. spoonefulls of Vinegar, and
beat them both together in a Mortar, then strain the juice out thereof, and
put thereto an ounce of fine Treacle, and an ounce of fine Sugar, and set it
over the fire, and stir it together, and make thereof a sirop, and then put
it into a close box: then take a Sage-leafe, and every morning fasting spread
as much as a bean thereof upon the same leaf, and so eat it morning and
evening first and last. And if he that eats it be infected, it will drive it
clean from his heart, and if he be not infected, it will preserve him within
the space of xxiiij hours after the receipt thereof.

A very good Medicine for the Plague.
TAke in the morning fasting, one dry Fig, one Wallnut, and 4 or 5 leaves of
hearbe-grace, chopped all together very small, and eat them, and drink
afterward a good draught of white or claret Wine: If it be a woman with child,
leave out the hearbe-grace. This has been often proved.

A very good Medicine against the Plague.
TAke a Fig, and put therein a little Hearbe-grac^ mingled with a little
Baysalt bruised, and the kernel of a Wallnut clean picked, these being put all
together into the Fig, let the Patient eat three or four of these Figs so
dressed, every morning next his heart, and drink a very good draught of white
Wine after it, and let him walk an hour after it, before he eat any more
meat, and by using of it thus every morning, by Gods help he shall be safe
from any infection.

A Medicine to break the Botch.
IF it fortune the Botch to appear, then take red Bramble leaves, Elder
leaves, and Mustard seed, and stamp them all together, and then take thereof,
and make a Plaster and lay it to the sore, and it will draw forth all the
venom.

A marvelous good drink for them that are infected with the Plague.
TAke leafe-gold, and mingle it with the juice of Lemons, and a little
Suger-candie, Cloves, Mace, and a little Cinnamon, and a like quantity of
Licquorice finely pared and sliced, and let this be steeped in white Wine, or
else in good Claret Wine, and put therein a good quantity of the powder of
Augellica, or else of the decoction of the same root, the same drink will
help the Patient being drunk warm.

An excellent Medicine to ripen and to bring forth the sore.
TAke a white onyon, and cut it in pieces, and three ounces of Butter that is
clean without salt, then take cloves of Garlic clean picked, the weight of
xx d. and the quantity of half an egg of leven, and a little otemeale small
beaten, boil all these together with a little new Milk, or else fair water,
and make a pultesse of it, and lay it very warm to the sore. I would wish that
all such persons that have been infected ^ith this disease, should willingly
keep their own houses, or places of abode, without being conversant with
those that are whole, until the sores have left running, and be perfectly
whole and sound, which in sanguine and choleric persons will be healed sooner
then in those which be of melancholic and flegmatike complexious. Such persons
(I assure you) may not very well be conversant with them that are not infected,
for the space of one whole month at the least. Likewise the contagion
suspected to remain in any clothes, either woollen or linen, cannot very well
be avoided by better means then by fire and water, and by often washing of
them in frosts and sunneshine with good discretion, and burning the clothes
that are of small value. Therefore I beseech God of his great mercy to keep us
all in safety from it.

Ringwormes or Tetters.
A Medicine to kill a Ringworme or Tetter, or any other manner of Itch.
TAke Sallet-oyle and salt, and temper them very well together, and warm them
luke warm, and let the Patient anoint the places where the sores are, and in
three or four times dressing, it will help him.

Salues.
A very good Salve for a new cut or wound that will not cease bleeding.
TAke the blades of unset Leekes, and stamp them very well, and put thereunto a
quantity of wheat flower, and a quantity of Honny, and stir them very well,
but let it come near no fire, but all cold lay it to the wound, and this will
staunch the bleeding, and draw out the bruised blood, and make it clean. This
has been often proved.

An excellent Salve for a cut.
TAke two handfulls of Valerian, and two handfulls (...) Bugle, that is most
commonly growing in woods, and bruise them very small, then take a quantity of
Deeres suet, and half as much unwrought wax, Let there be of these two as
much as the herbs may boil therein, then set it on the fire, and when it is
half boiled, then put a quantity of the best Eurpentine therein that may be
gotten, then let it boil till it be enough (but all the while, see that you do
not cease sturring it) then strain it through a fine linen cloth, and put it
into some Gallypot, or earthen vessel, and so keep it. This has been many
times and often proved.

A very good way to make the black Salve, that cures all old sores and
ulcers, be they never so great, foul, and stinking.
TAke a gallon of stale Ale, being very strong, two handfulls of Woodbinde
leaves, half a handful of seeded Nettles, and as much Coleworts which have
the ragged leaves, half a pound of red Onyons, half a pound of Garlic
pilled, a pound of unset Leekes, a handful of the powder of a rotten post,
which is Oak, for that is best, then let all these be stamped all together very
small in a Mortar, and then put them into the Ale, with half a pound of Roch
Alum, then set them over a soft fire, and let them boil, until the one half
or more be consumed, then strain them through a fine cloth, into some earthen
or other vessel that is clean, and then put to them half a pound of virgin
wax, half a pound of Rosen, half a pound of Neruoile that is green, and a
quantity of stone Honny, then let it stand for the space of four or five
days, then take it again and boil it till half be consumed away, then put
it into an earthen pot, and let it be stopped very close, and use it as you
shall have occasion.

An aproued Medicine to keep teeth from stinking, and also to make them white.
TAke a quantity of long Pepper, Mints, Purslane, Aristologia rotunda, Salgem,
and sees them in pure white Wine, and strain it into a Glass or Vial, and
when you shall think good, wash your teeth therewith, and this will keep them
both white and sweet. Per M. Cox.

A most excellent remedy to ease the raging pain of the teeth.
TAke a little Balm and Basil, and rub them both together in the palm of
your hand, until such time as they come almost to a juice, and then put it
into your ear on the same side that the pain is on, and it will help you
presently. This has helped many.

A very good Medicine for the toothache.
TAke a good quantity of the roots of Henbane, and sees it in white
wine-vineger, or Rosewater, and put the decoction thereof in your mouth, and it
will help you.

Worms.
A Medicine for Worms in a Childs belly.
TAke Aquacomposita that is made of herbs, and wash the breast of the child,
then take powder of Mirrhe very fine beaten, and straw it likewise upon the
breast of the child (after that it has been well washed) and lay a warm
cloth to it, and so let it lie for the space of xxiiii. hours to it.

FINIS.

