THE Case is Altered. How? Ask Dalio, and Millo.



LONDON

Imprinted by T. C. for John Smethicke, and are to be sold at his Shop in S.
Dunstons Churchyard in Fleet Street.

1604.

TO MY VERY kind and approved friend, D. R. F. R. wishes a com^orts that
Fortune in her best Cases bestows on the kindest Natures, and a further joy
in the heart, than Fortune has in her hands.
Sir, your long Experience in the variety of Cases, has made me send you
these few merry, pitiful Cases: In which, if your leisure be to read, your
judgment is sufficient to discern the cause of their gathering together, and
setting down as you see: the best is, they are no such unreasonable Cases, but
they may be pleaded, with pleasure, in the private conference of conceit and
patience: Some are longer then other, all are free from the thought of malice:
But, lest I speak any thing in their praises, knowing nothing wo^th any thing;
I will leave them to your kindness to consider of, and my love to your farther
commandment. And so, fearing, lest through want of means to express my
affection, I should, in the suspicion of oblivion, bury the great heap of your
undeserved fauou^s, entreating your patient acceptance of this, till a better
be made ready: in a pitiful Case of coffeehouse, that I have not a better
present for your kindness: wishing your worthiness, the comfort of all happiness,
I rest in the midst of al my Cases, and in what Case soever: to my uttermost
power.

Yours, as mine own. F. T.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I pray God, I do not flatter you, for if you should prove
either unwise, or unkind, I should call in my Title: So it is, that having
nothing to do, I set my self on work about a little better matter, to write
down certain Cases never pleaded, but only discoursed upon, by a couple of
idle people; the matters handled, are of no great moment, and therefore scarce
worth the reading: but yet, if you peruse them all over, no doubt but some of
them will please you: if any of them do otherwise, I am sorry, I know not your
humor: but if you find your self touched with any evil, rather mend the
fault in your self, then find fault with me. In brief, I only write upon
Cases, neither kniue Cases, Pin Cases, nor Candle Cases, but only a few
merry pitiful Cases: In which if I have lost time, I am sorry for my labor; If
I have lost my labor, I am sorry for my time; but, if I have gained your good
will, all is not lost: and I thank you; but, because I know not where to come
to you to tell you so, I leave you to read and like what you list, and to
think of me as you have cause, and so in good will, I rest.

Your friend, F. T.

The Case is altered: How? Ask Dalio and Mil^o.
DALIO. MILLO, Good morrow.


Millo. And a thousand to thee, honest Dalio: but whither plod you so sadly?


Dal. I was walking toward your house, and finding your wife abroad, I hoped
ye better to have you quiet at home.


Mil. You say well: Is it not a pitiful Case, that a man's house that should
be his castle, and his wise his comfort* should through the unquietness of
her indiscretion, become more terrible to him then a town of War?


Dal. I must confess it is too true, I have pitied you often, but could never
do you good: and he that could judge what I see and you ^eele, would confess
it were a pitiful Case ind^d; God help you.


Mill. I thank you, for I think that the noise of a volley of shot, is not
comparable to the roaring mouth of an ^nquiet woman: which since it will not be
mended* it must be borne, and so forth. But I pray you tell me, how does your
eld^st son? follows he his old courses? will no good counsel bring him
home again?


Dal Oh, no Neighbor: I may sigh to ^are men s^y, that yonder is an honest
man* yet has a son able to break the heart of his father: Oh, it is a
pitiful Case* that a man should (...) (...) care all the d^yes of his life,
to lay up wealth to: (...) (...) sonn^ that shall spend it before he were ready
to part with (...) (...) (...) he could (...) to be a child be sick of the
(...), (...) (...) upon his death, be glad of his sickness, (...) (...) (...)
(...) ^ continuing in an evil course, scorn (...) (...)* (...) (...) (...)
the Law, he grows so (...) (...) in his (...), (...) he be (...) of all good
compa^, (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) to his fathers hear^: (...) (...) (...)
(...) of (...), the (...) of punishment, the (...) (...) (...)* love of (...)
(...) (...) (...) him to good* (...) (...) (...) (...), to (...) him so past
gra^, that there (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) nature is of such f^ce,
that (...) cannon (...) his own child: what shall I say to it?


Dal. Why, as you said to me, let me say to you, a pitiful Case, a pitiful
Case, for it is ^o less* Ascolding wife, and a stubburne child, are two
pitiful Cases for patience to plead (...). But what is become o^ my
neighbors (...) daughter?


(...). Alas the day there is a pitiful Case indeed, if you (...) of a Case
to be (...). A ^ong wench, a fair wench, a (...) wench, a pretty wench, a
(...) wench a gallant wench, a proper wench, a wife wench, an honest wench, a
(...) wench a (...) wench, that could speak well, and (...) well, (...) (...)
(...), (...) pl^ (...), (...) w^ll, and do (...) thing (...), to be (...)
(...)* I say cast (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) ^, (...) (...), (...) that
loves nothing but (...) meat, (...) can (...) (...) (...) (...) upon gay
(...), ^ (...) (...) (...) all for a (...) (...) (...) (...), to be ^?


(...) ^ ^ ^ (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) the should (...) and I would reele,
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) a living, before I would bring her to her death
by such a misery.


(...) You say well, and so I think should I* but it is a pitiful Case, and so
let it be: And since we are entered into these matters, let me ask you a
question. I pray you what hear you of your Nephew, and his marriage?


Dal. You do well to put me in (...) of him for in t^th I pity him: a young man,
a handsome man a wise man, an honest man, a kind man, and a careful man,
given to thrive, like to do well, coming on well in ye world; to bestow the
p^me of his years, the hope of his fortune, and the fruit of his travail,
upon the figure of deformity, the discomfort of continuance, the cross of
pleasure, and the misery of time, and all for a little can^kred coin, which
may hap to be short of his reckoning and he may leave ere he be aware: would it
not fret a man to think on it? (...) a man to see it? and pity him, that he
cannot help (...)? when his youth is drowned in her age, his wit in her
wilfulnes, his learning, in her lack of understanding, and his worthiness, in
her wretchedness. Is not this a pitiful Case?


Mil. Oh yes, a pitiful Case, a pitiful Case indeed: and for my self, had I
such a son, I would make him plough and I would sow, and we would both labor
for bread* ^re he should ^ast with such a morsel. But to go on with you a
little, I pray you how does my Cousen Sindo, with his bar^aine?


Dal. You say well, for there is a Case pitiful enough, I think: oh poor
man, he is undone: wh^, his stock o^ (...) (...) put into a stock of sheep,
and having them warranted good and sound, takes a pasture for them, which has
been (...) ^th sick cattle, and there finds the^ day by day fall into
diseases that what with ye ^ot, the Scab, the Fly, the worm, the (...), and I
know not what, in a little (...), the Fold com^ (...) a little room, and the
(...) ^o (...) (...) the (...)* that the (...) (...) (...) not be worth the
taking up: wh^* (...) (...) the (...) and the Woolfe* the careless* o^ the
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) ground, or the (...) (...)* the (...) com^ (...)
(...) reckoning, yt repentance may (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) ^acke of (...)
of his own (...) play (...) (...) (...), (...) the shepherd with another: to
see an hones^ (...) in (...) (...) of his neighbous* careful of his estate,
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) should either through want o^ ^ill, or the (...)
o^ (...), come into such (...)* (...) being able to le^d (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...), should not now have either credit or comfort (...) misery: Oh is it
not a pitiful Case, that man, who should be as a God unto man, should become
such a devil unto man?


Mill. It is true, the devil at the first crept into the ear of a woman, to
deceive man, and I think he has of late so crept into the heart of man to
deceive one an other, and themselves most of all, that the monstrous minds of
these days do so deceive and abuse the simple hearts of honest souls, that
we may say it is a pitiful Case, to see what the devil can do among men: but
let this pass: and let me ask you a question.


Dal. With all my heart, and as I can I will kindly answer you: then say this:
When a rich man dies, and owes a great deal of money, to a number of poor men,
and women, many of them take his word and have no writings, he dies and makes
his will, gives what he has, to whom he list, but has no mind of his debts,
though he have set down all his debtors, and so with a conscience world wide
goes to hell with the devil: leaving poor men to beg, that cannot come by
their money: when the labourer, the widow, and the fatherless, come weeping to
the door for the payment of a poor reckening, and with a check or a ^aunt,
either deferred for a little, or with nothing but a rebuke sent away: while the
Executor come out puffing after a banquet, the h^re come prouding after new
apparel, the sister pricking as toward the hope of a gallant husband, and the
guests with curtisies, and I thank you for my good cheer going home, the
poor wretch, with a cold comfort, must walk away with a poor pittance,
breaking his heart with the sighs of his soul to see ye misery of his fortune,
Is not this a pitiful case?


Mill. It is a most pitiful Case, but who can help it when men's hearts are
so shut up in their purses, that money comes from them like their heart blood:
and with wicked consciences rather die indebted to many, to enrich their
posterity, then leave order for the payment of their debtes, even out of their
super (...): but I hope, there are not many such: But to go along with you,
let me tell you, which I think you have not heard of, a pitiful Case indeed:
I think as we have yet spoken of, the overthrow of (...). (...) estate.


Dal. It is the first time that I heard of the manner of it, but of his decaie
I have heard, and sorry to hear of it, and therefore, I pray you let me hear
you deliver as I know you will, the truth of it.


Mill. I will: and thus it was. The Gentleman, as you know, a proper man, well
carried, well qualified, and well disposed, deeply read, and soundly studied,
one whom his friends had good hope of, and many men of great wisdom did
converse withal for his judgment, in the midst of all expectation of his
fortune and well doing in the world, falls into acquaintance and too much
affection, with a Scholar that has more learning then honesty, who to gain a
little wealth, cared not whom he brought to beggary, and fell so far into an
ouerweening of his wits, and giving such an applause to his reasons, that for
the spending of a little money, he should grow into a mountain of gold, and so
long led through fools paradise with hopes of strange working in natures,
that every day impairing his estate, by the defraying the charge of his
expense, persuading him to make gold of dross, he found nothing in the end,
but to bring indeed gold to dross, for when his land was sold for money his
money went for coals, glasses, brickes, and bellows, and I know not how many
necessaries, as he was persuaded to be at charge with, for the making gold by
the Admirable Science of A^camist: when this glass was broken, and that fire
was out, and this and that must be renewed, and I know not what must be laid
out, till there were nothing to lay in, when the poor gentleman saw himself
thus mocked with imagination, and cosened by illusions, that he found Alcamist,
to be (...): which is, All mist: amazed to find him self All hid in a miste,
where through want of a clear sight, ^e grew so blind, that he could never
see a penny in his purse: Oh, how it st^ooke him to the heart to see the
woeful fruit of his wilful folly: believe me carele in a manner, either of
himself, or what might befall him, he fell to such a melancholy humor, as with
inward sorrow, sighing, and sobbing, desirous always to be solitary, and out
of company, fell at last into a consumption, and so as a dead man upon the
earth, walks up and down as you see. And is not this a most pitiful Case,
to see a proper man a handsome man, an honest man, a wise man a learned man,
and a rich man made such a Stale such an ^sse, and such a money, to undo
himself, to sell all he has and with sorrow to wear himself to the bones,
for a hope of wonders out of the wit of a villain, that only studied
Philosophy, to use a fool o so fie? Believe me, in mine opinion it is a
pitiful Case.


Dal. It was indeed: and is a most pitiful Case, to see how many are so
cousoned in the world, by imagination of miraculous courses in nature: but let
them burn that will needs leap into the fire: in one sense. I mean, in
Charity I could pity their misery, but truly I cannot but laugh at there
folly, that, in so seeking to make gold of lead, put them selves cleans cut of
silver. But let us leave these long Cases: and in brief answer me to such
Cases, as I will put you.


Mill. As I can I will.


Dal Well then first tell me your opinion in this: Is it not a pitiful Case,
to see a proper man without money?


Mill. It is.


Dal. And to see a fair woman without wit?


Mill. No less.


Dal. And an old man leacherous?


Mill Alas poor man.


Dal And a young man vicious?


Mill He will be sped.


Dal. And a rich man covetous.


Mill. It Is pity that he has so much.


Dall. And a whore undo an honest man?


Mill Fie upon her, there are too many of them.


Dal. And a fool in Authority?


Mill. Woe be to that government.


Dal. And a beggar an horseback?


Mill. Let him ride like a Rascal.


Dal. And a gentleman on soote?


Mill. I would he had my horse.


Dal. And a ^onky kiss a woman?


Mill. I ^auoured vr^hin.


Dal. And a dog (...) a man?


Mill. ^ang him Curre.


Dal. And a ^orse (...) his Rider?


Mill. (...) fortune.


Dal. And a ^enne C^ow trodden?


Mill. Cut her throa^e.


Dal. And a Fore kill a ^ambe?


Mill. Set dogs upon him.


Dal. And a woman beat her husband?


Mill. Let his neighbor ride.


Dal And a poor man arrested?


Mill. God help him.


Dal. And a villain rich?


Mill. Beware a mischief.


Dal. And a Lover deceived?


Mill. ^oo common.


Dal. And a deceiuer, beloved?


Mill. Oh pitiful!


Dal. And a good tale ill told?


Mill. ^acke o^ wit.


Dal. And a lie (...)?


Mill. Fie on fla^tery.


Dal. And love abused?


Mill. Ill nature.


Dal. And abuse favored?


Mill. Ill judgment.


Dal. And war (...)?


Mill. ^is dang rou^.


Dal. And peace (...)?


Mill. It Is impious.


Dal. And a Soldier beg?


Mil. It is grievous.


Dal. And a Pudding burn?


Mil. No, it skils not: It Is a thing of nothing.


Dal. And a Goose go bare-foote?


Mil. It is natural.


Dal. And a woman weep?


Mil. It is ordinary.


Dal. And an Ass loaded?


Mil. He serves for it.


Dal. And an Ape clothed?


Mil. It Is the Bearwards gain.


Dal. And a Greyhound spurned?


Mil. A churlish nature.


Dal. And a Mas^iffe stroked?


Mil. The Clownes jewel.


Dal. And a Tree fruit^esse?


Mil. Cut it down.


Dal. And a friend faithless?


Mil. Trust him not.


Dal. And a worke-man lazy?


Mil. Pay him not.


Dal. And a servant idle?


Mil ^eepe him not.


Dal. And a Wife graceless?


Mil. Love her not.


Dal. You answer briefly, but not directly to my propositions: I ask you if
al these be not pitiful Cases?


Mil. No: some are, and some are not.


Dal. Which are not?


Mil. Why a bare*foote Goose, for she can wear no shoes, but she would leave
them in the water: and a weeping woman when she cries for cursed heart: and a
bearing Ass, for he is good for nothing else: ^ an Ape in his coat, for he
makes sport for fools. These and a number more of this nature, I think need
not greatly to be pitied: for others, you may judge my mind by mine answers.


Dal. You say well: and yet let the Goose alone to feed with the Gander: but to
the woman, I think when she weeps she cries not, and then a kind heart will
pity her: and to load an Ass too much may break his back: and to cloathe
an Ape too richly, is cost ill bestowed: and therefore some way there is, none
of these things but are to be pitied.


Mil. I hold with you; but let us leave this short chepping of Cases and a
little speak of a Case too pitiful to be spoken of if it could be helped.
Say, that I should marry your daughter, being a widow, and being possessed of
pre^ty lands of her own inheritance, by her mother (who you lately buried) and
having lived with my said wife some few years, in love and kindesse, till she
be forced to walk the way of all flesh, and then she having a daughter, heir
to her said lands, living with some of her friends far f^o^ her; I knowing
this daughter true heir to these lands, do against my conscience, pass away
this land unto a man of wealth, who if it ever come in question, can follow the
Law with a good Purse: the Heir comes to claim her right: I am dead; he that
has bought it keeps her from it, and the Law finds means to keep her from
it. Is not this a pitiful Case?


Dal. Yes, and pity but it should be better plea^ed, that the Heir might have
her right, and the oppressor either be punished, or put to pay for it.


Mil. Well said, then let me tell you this: If a Rogue cut a Purse, and put it
in my pocket, I be demanded the Purse, and knowing my self clear from the
thought of such a villainie, do in fury deny it, and (...) (...) the Purse is
^ound about me, and I apprehended for (...) (...), except the thief come to
clear me, am like to hang for it: Is not this a pitiful Case?


Dal. Oh Lord, who would ^ot think so. And to answer you, if a fi^thy whore
be g^tten (...) child by a rascal ^naue, and be counseled by her (...) (...)
the (...) upon me, if she will (...) at^ though she sor (...) it (...) as mine,
I must be at the charg^ (...) keeping of it, and suffer I (...) (...) what
trouble for it, to my great discredit, and almost undoing: Is not this a
pitiful Case?


Dal. Yes in truth, and grievous: but to quite you. Say that you are a poor
man, and simply honest; I like a Gallant come riding on the high way, upon a
horse that I have stolen but a little before, and am pursued for: I seem to
light to untruss a point, and knowing the Country, deliver you my horse to
lead on a little on the way, and give you a small piece of money for your
pains, promissing to come presently back unto you: when I wake away through a
Wood to a Ferry, and so shift away and leave you; you are taken with the horse,
and if the Country be not the better unto you, you must hang for your
kindness: Is not this a pitiful Case?


Mil. A miserable Case: but leaning hanging Cases, let me ask your opinion
touching some few Cases, that come suddenly into my mind.


Dal. With all my heart, and I will deliver you my judgment, what I think of
them.


Mil Then say this. To give white-bread to a dog, and brown to a man: Is it
not a pitiful Case?


Dal. It is, and it is not.


Mil. How so?


Dal. It is pitiful in respect of ye bread, that was ordained rather for me^
than dogs; but of the gift no pity: for it is better to make much of a
profitable dog, then an unprofitable man.


Mil. Well then, is it not pity to see a wise man poor, and a fool rich?


Dal. It is, and it is not.


Mil. As how?


Dal. It is pity that wisdom should want, but wealth will corrupt a good
wit, and a wise man may live by his wits, while a fool may beg if he want
money.


Mil Well said: but is it not pity to see good meat ill dresset?


Dal. No* for if it were well dressed, it might cause surfeiting by too much
pleasing the taste, where now a little well disgested may do nature no hurt:
but yet in respect of the meat it is pity: so that in a priuale dish it is not
well, but in a pub^: Feast, it is no great matter.


Mil. Well Sir, but to see an honest quiet man matched with a scolde?


Dal. It is, and it is not: ^or though in respect of his better desert, it is a
pity, yet in regard it is an exercise of his pati^nce, it is profitable, and
so no pity.


Mil. But to see a careful maist^r matched with a careless servant, is it not
to be pitied?


Dal. I say as I said, it is, and it is not: for though in respect of his
hinderance it is a pity, yet for that it will keep him from lazines, in
having a careful eye over all his business, it is good for him, and so not
pitiful.


Mil. Well said: but to see a fi^e wench in rags, and an (...) favored Slut
well clothed, is it not a pity?


Dal. I say as I did still, it is and it is not; the Wench better des^rues it:
but in respect her beauty with a little virtue will get a better matter, then
clothing without wealth, it is no pity: and since it is easy to consider,
that the Croanes clothing is al her countenance, and without the which she may
go ^ry kitchin-st^ffe for her comfort: it is pity but she should have
something to help, that is worse than nothing: and the wench being virtuous in
her poverty, might perhaps be wicked if she were wealthy, and so (as I said) it
is, and it is not pitti^.


Mil. Well then, what say you to this: Is not the wreak of a ship, a pitiful
sight?


Dal. It is so one way, and it is not another: for in respect of the
commonwealths loss, that might have made good use of that she brought it was
a pity: yet in resp^ct yt it was a mean to humble the proud spirit of him yt
ought it* it is not pitiful.


Mil. You speak to some pu^pose: but yet I do, and not allow of your opinion
in many points: but for that w^ come rather to talk of Cases, then ^o fall out
about Cases, let your opinion stand firm, for it is not much (...): and let me
tell you of a pitiful Case that be^ell of late in a little Uillage, about a
(...) from my house.


Dal. Come on: and ten to one, but if my memory fas^e me (...), I shall requi^e
you with another worth the hearing.


Mill. Then hear me, thus it was. An old woman, a very old woman, a crooked
old woman, a creeping old woman, a lame woman, a deaf woman, a miserable
woman, a wretched woman, a wicked woman, f^ll with half a sight (for shortly
after she fell blind) in leave with a pretty neat nimble, spru^e, ^ly, handsome,
and in truth, lovely young man, and so fair, as after the manner of the
country people, she would if she met him in a morning bid him good morrow, with
how do you son? I pray you come near, if it were near her house, and I
pray ^ou sit down, and I pray you drink, and how does your good father, and
your mother, and all your house? In ^roath, you are welcome, I am sorry I have
no geed cheer for you but such as I have I pray you do not spaire, if I have
any thing in my house, it is at your command: In deed, I ever loved y^u of a
child, and if I had a daughter I would give her with all I have to you, that I
would, I truly would I: but and you could make much of an old woman, it may be,
I have some old Ruddockes that saw no day these twenty winters and ten, that
may make a young man merry: yea, and perhaps make you live by their noses that
hold their heads full high. And ^hus, with showing of him all her weal^h,
which she co^iured (...)* to keep secr^t, and giving a piece of gold or two
with him* she made h^n do, y^a mary did he, that which his cons^ience had no
comfort in, and he found no good of: for having robbed her (...) of a great
deal a come only bearing her in hand to be her A^se-band, and for a little
^fauoured kindness, it fell out that shortly after* he fa^ling in love with a
neighbors daughter, a we^ch worthy the lo^king on when all parti^s were
ag^eed, the matter was made up, hands were joined, hearts were joyful, ^he
^anes were (...), the Bride and (...) were married, the guests were bidden the
dinner was r^adie, the minstrel^s played the youth danced and the old fools
^aught, and the day was w^ll past, and nothing longd for ^ut night, and then
the supper do^e, the guest^s departed then curtes^e and I thank you, the Rich
had their bellies full, and the beggars had their pockets full* and the house
was at qui^t, the doors were shut, the fire and candel put out the bed made
soft, and the sheets white washed, and the pillowes sprinkled with rose
water, and all things in order, for the comfort of these young couple: the old
woman that grew mad at this match, though she durst not forbid the banes,
being at the church, and hearing of diverse saying God give you joy, fell to
mumbling to her self, and some sorrow too when how she wrought with her
Enchantment, I know not, but, the young people might kiss, while she might
sigh* and he fret, but there was ^s furthe^ matter to be performed: and this
continued some two years, till she in love and modesty, concealing her
misery, and he seeking all means h^ could for his comfort, and finding no^e,
met by chance with this old woman, and in a mistrust that she had done him
some villainy with her ill tongue, fell upon her, and throwing her down, ^rode
upon her, and did beat her, till he left her for dead: and indeed she never
eat bread after, for going home to her house, belike going about some other
hellishnes, her Cruch slipping, she fell over the threshold, and broke her
neck: when the young man came home and talked so kindly with his wif^, that
within for^ie weeks after she brought him a goodly boy: And is not this a
pitiful Case, that a man should so long be tormented by the wicked tongue of
a woman?


Dal. A woman, you would say the shape of a woman, for a witch is but a dwell
Incarnat^: it is pity that any of them are suffered to live. But to req^ate
you: not many ^iles from the town where I dwell the^e ^as an old man, (...) o^d
m^n, a coughing, sneueling, bleer-(...) wry mouthed, botle-n^sed, (...) legged,
pal^ie handed stumpe footed, w^y bodied, (...) (...), s^andering tongue, for*
stinking breathed, who walked but upon cruches, read but with spectacles, and
spoke with a wa^ing, nodding, or a noddy head, this ongly (...) (...) rather
abi^ct of nature, the sorrow of ^outhes e^e sight, the disprofit o^ time, the
hate of love, and the lam^ntation of hope, such a man as is not in the world to
be seen, by very ill ^ortune, upon a fair day chanced to meet with a
Tenants daughter of his, whom having well viewed, as his dumne sight would giu^
him leave, giving a nodde to her courtesy, sent the next day for her to his
house, but the wench the day before having so much of his sight, that she
desi^ed never to see him more, with bitter tears fell at her fathers feet,
and desired him to go and know his pleasure, and make excuse for her, that she
was not well, but the next day she would come to him: the poor man seeing his
daughter change color, did yield to her request, put on his best shoes, and
a clean band, and being but a little way to his house, through want of a horse
went on foot, when, but a little wetshod, with slipping into a ditch, he comes
at last to the door of this rich Clown who being head Bailiff^ to the chief
Lord of the manner, kept a house, the best thatched of all his neighbors in
the parish, there being saluted, by a couple of soul curres, not much unlike
their old master, being of his old acquaintance, showed him but their teeth,
and then wagging their tails, did him no harm, but let him there stay til
this Chaps, the old mezil, ^earing his dogs, and knowing their voices, came
out to hear whom they talked too, and there seeing this poor man, stand cappe
in hand, setting hunsclfe down upon a bench, after a horse cough, and a
spalling spet or two, begins to ask him for his daughter, whose excuse being
made, he falls aboard with him for her, to have her for his servant: which, he
answering with an excuse, that it could not be, for she had taken earnest of a
gentlewoman, to wait on her in her chamber: which he believing, answered that
he would do more ^or her then any gentlewoman of them all; for he had no
children, and he would make her both his child and his wife: and therefore she
should take no ear for service: the poor man glad of this message, went home
merrily to his daughter, told her what good fortune was toward her, for joy
sent for the other pot, and now thought to take no care for rent, when his
child should be his Landlady: but the poor girl seeming to her father to be
as joyful as he, when her father was gone to his days work in the morning,
took an old sack, in which she put up all her clothes that she had, and away
goes she to an Aunt she had ten miles of, and there with howling and crying,
that her father meant to marry her to the devil, entreated her to put her to
service, ^r she had rather wash ^uckes all days of her life, then be matched
with such a monster: Oh Aunt, every body says, that he killed his last wife with
kindness, and I think he would do as much with me.

Oh it is a venom man, as lives: and truly Aunt it is such an ill-favored man,
and he has such a breath, It is a beastly creature: besides the house that he
dwells in, he has but his life in, but if he had all the world, and as much
good, as would lie in all your house, I would not have him, I had rather beg
my bread.

Her Aunt seeing the honest heart of the poor wench, and knowing that she
could set a seame together, and handl^ her needle prettily, for a plain hemme,
and could tell how to eat a piece of meat howeuer she could dress it, spoke
to a gentlewoman near unto her to take her into her service, drove a bargain
for her wages, brought her to her, and placed her with her: where she behaved
her self well, and was well thought on: and there I leave her Now home comes
her father, misseth his daughter, runs to his Landlord, thinking to find her
there: the micher thinks he is mockte, he falls out with his Tenant, warnes
him out of his house, the poor man goes home weeping, his wife with her hands
wringing, entertaines him with a scolding, railing upon him, cursing her
Landlord, and swears she will have her home, hang him dog, he shall not be
the death of her daughter, she will not dwell in his house, she will have her
child out of his house, or she will beats down his doors: and is as good as
her word, the next morning with an open mouth goes to his doors, where lowd^
then both his Mastiffes, she makes an out^ry for her child.

The man knowing her to be an unreasonable woman, entreats her to be quiet,
swears by the cross of his Crutch, that he knows not whither she is gone:
and with much ado to pacify her, gettes himself rid of her: when coming
home, and not finding her dear daughter, she falls into such an agony, that a
horse would not abide it, when the poor man with grief takes such thought,
that he can eat no meat, and she weary and almost out of breath with scolding,
goes to bed for anger: and the old man with sorrow to loose his love, and to
see her parents misery, after a fit of the stone, with a stitch of the
Chollick, being griped at ye heart, and fearing to leave the world, sendes for
his Tenant, forgiues him his rent, and gives his house to his daughter if she
be found again: and so bestowing among the poor of the Parish, some little
matter not worth the speaking of having made al means he could, and by her
parents good care and travail, found out, and brought unto him some hour
before his death, gave her in an old foul Handkercheffe that, which paid for
more then the washing of two fair Smockes, and so causing the great Bell to be
towlde, after a hollow hemme or two* even for Love, (because he could live no
longer dyed. And is not this of a long Case? a pitiful Case?


Mil Yes, if it were true, but surely it is a jest: there was ^euer such a man*
nor such a matter.


Dal. Well then, say it were a jest, was it not a pitiful jest?


Mil. If there were any pity, it was in that he lived so long. But now after
your long Case, let me come to you with a short Case. Is it not pity to see a
fair house without Inhabitants?


Dal. It is, and it is not.


Mil. How so?


Dal. It is in respect of good Hospitality a pity: but rather then be either
a den of Thieves, or a Brothell of Whores, it were better stand void, and so
it is no pity.


Mil. Well then: but is it not a pitity to see a purse without money?


Dal. In respect of want is is: but rather then be filde with unlawful or
ungodly gains, it were better be empty.


Mil. So: but is it not a pity to see good clothes ill worn?


Dal. It is, and it is not: in regard of the good clothes it is pity, but in
respect of the wear^ it is not: ^or (...) (...) better to be careless, then
proud.


Dal. Well humorde. But is it not a pity to see a man blind?


Mil. Why? would you have all so* yt one should not see an other? or how would
you know blindness, if all had their sight?


Mil. Well, and is it not pity to see a woman dumb?


Dal. Oh! then the Market would be spoyld.


Mil. Is it not pity to have a Dog deaffe?


Dal. Hang him for his skin.


Mil. Is it not pity to see a Horse lame?


Dal. Keep him for a Stallien, or let him feed Hounds*


Mil. Or a Hawke lack a wing?


Dal. Pull off her head.


Mil. Or a Woolfe kill a Lamb*


Dal. Hunt him to death.


Mil. What say you to a storm in Harvest?


Dal. It will drive the Farmer to prayers, and the laborers to work apace.


Mil. So then, I see your sullen humor will not be altered: yet, as too much
pity marres a whole City, so a dogged mind is too near the devil. But it
may be, and so I guess it, that you only out of your humor, without spite at
any thing, speak all that you do, and therefore I will entreat you a little
farther to deliver me your opinion, touching some other Cases.


Dal. I am for you.


Mil. Is it not pity to see an Infant starued?


Dal. Hang the Nurse.


Mil. To see a Church robbed?


Dal. Strangle the thief.


Mil. To see a Christian become a Jew?


Dal. Put him to the fire.


Mil. To see a son kill his father?


Dal. Bury him quick.


Mil. What say you to see a Clown scorn a Lo^?


Dal. Marry him to a Whore*


Mil. To see a Witch kill a child?


Dal. Send her to the devil.


Mil. Your answers are bitter.


Dal. The Cases are villainous.


Mil. Well, yet what say you to Sheep without a Shepherd?


Dal. Ware the Wools^.


Mil. A horse without a Rider?


Dal. Ware his heels.


Mil. A Soldier in drink?


Dal. Ware mischiese.


Mil. A house of ^hie


Dal. Ware the whole Town.


Mil. An honest man a Cuckold?


Dal. Ill Fortune.


Mil. And a fair wench wicked?


Dal. Weakness in Nature?


Mil Or the penitent punished?


Dal Tyranme.


Mil. Or the wicked spared?


Dal. Oh! (...) money.


Mil. Or the honest scorned?


Dal. Corruption of time.


Mil. Or a man womannish?


Dal. Shoe the Goose.


Mil. Or a woman tyrannous?


Dal. A Fury.


Mil. Oh Dalio, thou art still one man: I thank thee for thy plamelesse: but
searing that I trouble thee with too many Cases, let me hear some from you.


Dal. And shall. I pray you what think you of this Case? What say you to a
young wench sleepie?


Mil. Ware her Mayden-head.


Dal. To a covetous Lawyer?


Mil. Woe be to she Client.


Dal. To a slouenly Courtier^


Mil. Banish him the Presence.


Dal. To a dicing Merchant?


Mil. Ware the Stock^.


Dal. What say you to a (...) (...)*


Mil. Ware the Camp.


Dal. To a careless Farmer?


Mil. He will die a beggar.


Dal. To a lazy worke-man?


Mil. A whippe, a whippe.


Dal. To a counterleit Cripple?


Mil. An open punishment.


Dal. To a faithless friend?


Mil. Give him the Knave of Clubs for a Cognizance.


Dal. To a malicious enemy?


Mil. Ware Treason.


Dal. To a smoothe tongued queen?


Mil. Take heed of witchcraft.


Dal. To a lying Rascal?


Mil. Loose no time with him.


Dal. To a despera^e (...)?


Mil. Aueyd his company.


Dal. To a shameless woman?


Mil. Let no man abide her.


Dal. Well said: but to go along with you a little to answer you in one point:
if I were bitter, you are not sweet: for so much as I have yet heard from you
(I speak it not in dislike of you, but to be quittance with you) and therefore
let me farther ask your opinion in this Case. I lend you money to do you good,
and you game by it: and when I come at my day to dema^nd it, you have it, and
will not pay it: another lends me money and I loose by it: at the day
appointed, I would and cannot pay it: you are rich and will not pay, I am poor
and cannot pay: yet you hold the reputation of an honest man, after many
delays, an^ I for one days breach an* accounted contrary: Is this a pitiful
Case or not?


Mil In truth I think the Case is pitiful, that I should have so much
credit, and so (...) conscience: and you so good a conscience, and so ^ll a
fortune.


Dal. You say right. Now farther let me put you another Case: Say, that I
should lend you a s^ord, to wear for a day or two: you in a wor^e mind than I
would wish you, fall by the high way upon a Purse, in his hands, that will not
easily part with it, you fight with him, and kill him, and take away his money,
and leave the sword either s^icking in him, or being pursued for the murder,
by some mischance in riding or running, loose the sword, or let it fall, and in
have, running for life, will not light for the sword, but by your horses
swiftnes, or what means I know not get away without tuch, the sword is found,
carried from Cutler to Cutler, till it be known who made it, and in the end
being sound out who made it, and who bought it, I am showed the sword, and
cannot deem it to be mine, if I cannot bring forth the thief, I must answer
the Law, and hang for my kindness: Is not this a pitiful Case?


Dal. Yes truly: in conscience this suspicion and presumption, are shrewd
points to con^emnation: but though he that is borne to be hangde will never be
drowned till he be dead, yet me thinks it is a pitiful Case, to hang a true
man for a thief. And now let me put you another Case: Say that I should,
loving you as I do, commit as I durst into your hand all the stock of my money
that I have, and you and I take a shop together, and sell our wares together,
you having as God sorbid you should, some wicked spirit of covetousness entered
into your ill conscience, watch a time, when I were out of doors go into my
Counting House, take all my money and writings, and at my return, begin to
thrust me out of doors, pick^ some quarrel with me, bid me seek mine own as
I can, and so without pacification, resolved to play the villain with me, dr^w
me to sue by Law to recover mine own, while with commo^ity of my coin, you
find means to use me as you list, and so long weary me with the suite, being
not able to hold wage (...) you, that in the end I am enforced either to leave
it, or to compound with you for a thing of nothing, and putting up all (...)
(...) (...) in vr^ed to make you an acquittance for all matters: to ^ischarge
you for all claims to my utter undoing, and have no remedy: but crave patience
of God, while you are going to the devil: Is not this a pitiful Case?


Mill. It is: but let the devil seek out his cop^smates. I have nothing to
do with him, I deffe him, and all his tricks, and so I hope do you, God
bless us from him.


Dal. Amen. For if there ever was such a Case, it was hellishly handled, that
the Law could no better determine it, but that a knave should so be the
undoing of an honest man: but, leaving more to talk of these Cases, is it not
a pitiful Case, to see a rich man who in the show of the world has been
reputed a man of honesty, and good conscience, upon the sudden, either at a
banquet, or upon a bench of Authortiy fall sick, so be carried home, there lie
rauing and crying out of the devil, have no mind of God, but only calling for
his keys, look over his bags, and curse every one that comes at him, and
like a dog, or a devil, without the thought of Christianity, leaving his
wealth to he knows not whom, dies like a logge: and so is tumbled into the
dirt with a number of tears, that he died no sooner: and he no sooner in his
grave but his son hangs himself, his daughters prove all whores, his
servants either beg or filtch for their living, for want of other ways, or
any thing left them by their wicked master: and thus upon a sudden is the
fall of the whole house of wickedness: Is not this a pitiful Case, that the
world should be so blinded with the outside of hypocrisy, to take such a Jew
for a Christian?


Dal. Pity? yes, it is pity, that ever he was begotten, that he died not in
his birth, or that he should ever look like a man, to be so inward with the
devil: but I hope there is no such man in this world. But tell me your opinion,
in this Case: If a young wench that were of a pure complexion, and of good
feature, well thought of for her good behavior, and with a little wealth, might
be a companion for an honest man, should, by falling into the company of some
idle girls, learn to paint her self, and to make strange faces* with leering
eyes* and mumping chappes, and fleeting smiles, after the whore fashion, to
draw fools to an ill banquet, and so, continuing this ill course. does spoil
her complexion, spill a good face* and become of the (...) of Bridewell and so
from one degree of shame to another, to destruction in the end: Is it not a
pitiful Case that ever such idle s^ares should be brought into a common
wealth, or ever such wickedness should be practiced among honest people.


Mill. Yes, in truth is it: but what is the help? I know not: and therefore it
is the mere pitiful, that a mischief so to be pitied cannot be helped.


Dal. Then let it alone: and let us talk of some other matters.


Mill. Content. But me thinks the day grows toward an e^o, the Sun is
setting, and I have a start home: and having pron^sed my wife to be at home* by
fi^e of the clock, I would be ^oth to break my word with her: for you know
her humor, and having some of her country tolkes come to see her, she means
to bestow some good cheer upon them: and therefore if you dare venture a
scolding ioy^t with your woman, go along with me, and howsoever i^ will be
hereafter, I dare warrant you a welcome: for she m^anes to be (...): the Cayon
and Goose are both ^ild.


Dal. But the Gander is left a live.


Mill. Yea she keeps him for breed, to give you a Gos^ing.


Dal. Well said old wagge, I think^ I shall never die in thy d^bte: and
therefore since all wodcockes have long bills, let us take our flights together.


Mill You say well: and since all Asses have great heads, let none be ashamed
of his long ears.


Dal. Good again: And since all Goats have beards, let them be known from
sheep.


Mill A good-yer on you, for me, I hope there are none in my flock.


Dal. If there be, remove them, for they will not do well together: but look
you, who comes ^onder?


Mil. It is my boy, his mother has sent for me I must away, to morrow is
market day* and if you w^l, ^ (...) (...) you here at this Oak, and we will
have some talk o^ (...) (...).


Dal Content, farewell: for though I say little. I know its good to keep women
in quie^, that will (...) for a (...) matter, ^specially if their husbands lie
not at home: farewell.


Mill. Farewell.

When they had thus ended their Cases, and given each other a good night, and
came home to their wives in good time, that al things were quiet for that
night* the next day about nine of the clock in the morning, according to
promise they met at the place appointed, the great Oak, under which, when they
had a little (...) themselves, upon their walking staves, atter a little (...)
(...) s^lutations, with good morrow, and well met, and how do^ you with all
your household? well I thank God, and I thank you, and God hol^ it, and so
forth: taking up their ^udgells, with come, go, the morning goes away, and the
market will be done, away they go together, and being some four or five miles
to the town, they fell into new matters, to talk upon, which, if you will
^ary, (...) they be written, as I have heard them, true or false as they be you
shall have them, in the time, hoping you will have patience with this, till you
hear of what follows, I will thus end.

A merry Case is wittifull:
A woeful Case is pitiful*
The wittifull does breed but Jest:
The pitiful, may breed unrest:
Then leave the last, and take the first:
And take the best, and leave the worst.

FINIS.

