A TABLE GATHERED OVVT OF A BOOK NAMED A Treatise of treasons against Q.
Elizabeth, and the Croune of England. lately compiled by a stranger and sent
out of France, Printed in the year of our Lord 1572.

The didicatorie epistle to her heighnesse.
MADAM this table of treasons does your heighnes to wit of a book called, A
treatise of treasons against you and the Croune of England. That treatise is
addressed of grateful affection borne to you, and discovers hidden treasons,
which ^each to the danger of your person, of your ^ate and life. That treatise
discovers the ^ransposing of the crown, the extincting of your line, and the
hazarding of the Re^lme. It opens unto you the contrivers of those treasons
to be a couple of companions of base parents borne: first callid to Court,
the one from book, the other from butterie: which two be now more then Barons by
office and dignity, more then Earls by possessions and wealth, more then
Dukes in authority: which two be now your cosoning Counsaillors, though set
up by your good favor in the chiefest places of the Realm, whereby they
have made them selves mighty in money, marriages and allies, and be the two
captain co^spiratours, that have in their own power and in the hands of
their confederates, all the offices, all the ports, all the fortresses, your
treasour, your armor, yea your self, your succession and the whole realm to
dispose at their will: They be the two captain conspiratours, that have beset
you rownde abowte with fears, and dangers prepared by them selves and by
sondrie fine devises removed from you all defenses of faithful frindes at home
and a broad, divided the realm into factions, abused your authority,
employed your treasours to the danger of your state, to the infamy of your
person, and to your final overthrow by death or deprivation ^ere it be long.

Thus that treatise discovers those two traitorous Counsaillours: who to
work more subtly their mischeuous intentions, and to keep you from espying
their terrible treasons, have misleaden you by a false show of other treasons,
which were never intended, and abused you under title of duty, pretense of
service, and color of security to hold them unsuspected.

In that treatise also your heighnes shall see the vnbuckling and lifting up of
their ^sardes and veiles, that would walk vn^eene, and still covertly
circumuent you by their fine fetches whiles they freely finish their
determined treasons against your person and state.

That treatise of treasons is abridged into this table, which shows forth but
in ^reife manner, what in the same is at full enlarged.

It is therefore passing necessary, that ^auing good regard of your own
person, the preservation of the realm and the ^ightfull succession of the
same, you call ^or that treatise, you read that treatise, ^s well for the more
full and better understanding of the conspiratours practices fi^allie meant: as
for their mischeuous means ^sed to bring their practices to pass. And ^t is
more then high time to understand the ^mpudent falsehood, the fatal malice,
the desperate devises of the conspiratours against your line, your life and
Succession if by speedy means and good advise, they be not prevented.

The author of the treatise, and the abridger of the same bear good affection
to you and to the realm: and therefore do discover unto you the present
perils that now hang over both: which when you shall by survew perceave and
understand, God give you grace, to consider and prevent.

And Madam for that it cannot be doubted but that those two Conspiratours do
watchfullie care and politickly provide, how to keep from you alletters, books
and treatesies, which they fear may let or discover their final purpose: It
has been thought neccessarie to invent and find out all good means whereby the
said treatise or at least the Table of the same, might by some more faithful
servant of yours, be addressed to your own hands: for the which respect it
has been by means conveyed to the sight of your trusty servant Mr. Hatton
(and others) who of dewtie and allegiance has been thought the most fit
instrument to present you the same. wherein he shall show your heighnes, more
love duty and faithful obedience, then those of your Counsaillors, that so many
months sithence, have had the treatise it self in their hands and concealed
the same, either of doubt their practices might be untimely discovered and
prevented, or in deed for lack of love toward your heighnes person: which
stands in greater peril then you can believe. God geve you grace to sorsee
and avoid the same.

Your heighnes daily Orator. G. T.

A BRIEF TABLE GATHERED OVVT of a book, callid a treatise of treasons,
against Q. Elizabeth, and the Crown of England, etc.
Treasons in general.
THE co^spiratours final treasons (...). 106.
be, to extinct the howses, and lines, of King Henry the 8. and of his Sister,
Queen Margarite of Scotl. The One resting presently in the Q. that now is, and
the other, in the Q. of Scotl. and to bring the Crown untimely unto the third
house, the house of Suffolk, unto the which them selves are united, and their
children incorporated.

Treasons in particular against the Queens person, the realm and right
succession.
THE conspiratours induced the Q. to (...). 107. 109. 125.
hold her self unmarried: whereby the house of England might consume in it
self, and that whole line finishe in, and with her person.

They have prevented, that none be declared, Fo. 110.
nor accepted as heir by law: and by pretense of law have compassed that the
Q. have no heir iudiciallie.

They mean by pretense of law to impeache Fo. 111.
al interestes and titles to the crown that the trial thereof may come to the
swoard, the principal force whereof rests in the conspiratours hands.

They have by spetial law provided under Fi. 112.
pain of treason that their be no known heir in succession established, and
that the known heir be made not known.

They have circumuented the Queen Fo. 114. 125.
to extinct her own line, and made her an instrument to remove the Queen of
Scotl. whose deprivation they have already procured.

The keeping of the Queen of Scotland Fo. 115.
in prison, is a plain promise of their indempnitie, for murdering the Queen
her self.

They govern tirannically, whereby to Fo. 163.
bring the Q. in hatred, an to kendle in the hearts of the people a wearines of
her subjection: that they may be the gladder to embrace such mutation as they
intend and will attempt, when they shall think the time ripe by death or
deprivation to remove her.

They have divided the realm into factions Fo. 167.
for the Crown, by preferring untimely the third house before the second.

They have made the Q. a ward at Fo. 94. ^64. 173.
40. years age, and her suertie less by the half: and made her an instrument
to undo her self, and do lead her to her own destruction.

Their last new law taking his effect, leaves Fi. 167.
the Crown without proprietarie to claim it.

They have compassed the extincting of Fo. 115.
the house and line of England, and brought it even to the brin^k, to be
finally ended, when them selves list.

Their trait^rous practices threaten manifestly Fol. 15^.
the Q. speedy ruin.

They have made half an execution of Fo. 164.
the Q. removing, whiles the Q. of Scotland is in their hands, that rule all.

They take from the Q. her principal Fo. 113.
defenses and faithful frindes: The Duke of Northf. faithfully affectioned:
the Q. of Scotl. nere in blood, and next in law to s^ccede: Sir Nicolas
Throgmorton faithful to his prince, of deep foresight, and of counsel
inventiue.

They abuse the Q. authority, (...) forces Fo. 33.
and treasures, to the danger of her state, to the dishonours and infamy of
her ^erson.

They abuse the Q. name to sow sedi^on, Fo. 100.
to raise rebellion in the provinces ad^yning.

They impouerish the subjects by Fo. 101.
^onsumption of treasures carried out of the ^lme, for wageing foreign rebels,
deui^g new exactions, collections and lotte^s.

They make them selves mighty in mo^y Fo. 96.
and armor: they acquire honor, ^rchasses, offices, titles, styles, and
au^oritie over the nobility: whereby they ^ue the sweet and the Queen the
^wer.

They unite them selves, and incorporat Fo. 106.
^eir children to the third house of Suf^ke, whereunto their final treason is
to ^ing the Crown by prevention.

They prevent by their own force, and Fo. 107.
^ndes, to be hable to give the Crown to whom they list.

They apply the Q. consent to what Fo. 96.
^ey list they geve, they take, they dispose, ^ey deny, they place and
displace, they (...) and distroie whom they list.

They abused the name of the Q. to the Fi. 28.
^ying of sondrie exactio^s over the people, there with to corrupt the noblest
subjects of france, Flanders and Scotl. to levy arms against their
sovereigns.

The chief Conspiratour aspireth to govern Fo. 129.
still, to leave his succession cosins to the crown, annombred among the
noblest and what more noman yet knows.

Particular Treasons of the Conspirators against the Queen of Scotl. the
Realm and the Prince.
THe Conspiratours procured the Q. of Fo. 23. 36. 114.
Scotl. deprivation, with the slaughter of her husbond and Secretary.

They procured, that her person was imprisoned Fo. 117.
first among her own traiterous^ie, and then in England unnaturally.

They made new devises to raise rebellions Fo. 117. 23. 36. 69.
in Scotl. money and pentions secretly promised, and the rebels succored:
the several slaughters of the secretary and king contrived by the advice of
the governor of Barwick, the direction and plott whereof was solicited by some
english men, yea directed from some of the Counsel at london.

They made sondrie attempts unto the Fi. 115.
Queen, to cut of the line of Scotland by parliament.

They compassed the Q. to extinct Fo. 107.
(...) own line, and to be the instrument of (...) extirpation of her fathers
line, by re^ouing the Q. of Scotl. from the crown (...) parliament.

They keep her prisoner by force and Fo. 107.
^olence: they remove from her all defen^s, all faithful frinds and servants.

Under the cover of the Q. favor, Fo. 155.
(...) good affection toward her, by degrees ^ey wonn her to the state she is
now in: whereby they lay on her all possible op^essions.

They prepare that the young Prince of Fo. 114.
Scotl. come never to full age, and hope (...) make him away.

Under their Q. name they used cor^ptions, Fi. 23.
feined lettres, frequent forces, ^anifest violences toward the nobility of
Scotl. to enforce them from the allegiance of their Q.

The Co^spiratours set up James, Lineux, Fo. 30. 23. 79.
Mar, and Morton to be Regents of Scotl. with large pentio^s and mainteyning
them with forces.

The conspiratours do free with favor Fi. 127.
and thanckes any thing spoken or written in the preference of the house of
Suff. and clean bar any saying or writing in the right of the elder house.

TREASON TO BOTH the Crowns of England and Scotl. fol. 118. 125. etc. Where
you shall find. xi. politicque and abondant provisions made for the
establishment of the third line, the house of Suff. whereunto the Captain
conspiratours have united them selves, and incorporated their children.
The fine fraudulent arts, the plats practices and polices which the
Conspiratours used, to compass their treasons with the Queen.
FIrst the Q. received the crown with Fo. 88.
great security, without color or shadow of mistrust of pope, prince, or any
papistical subject of her own, without murmour grudge or want of satisfaction
in the people. Fo. 87.


Then Fleck intruding him self, brought in his Mate the most known briber of
the isle of britany to sit in the heighest place of Justice.

They then suggested to the Q. that Fo. 90.
Card. Poole with diverse of the old counsel, had to foretime confe^red abowte
her deprivation which was never thought.

They suggested to the Q. certain false Fo. 87. 91.
fears and suspicions against the old coun^ail, persuading herito hold them al
suspected, only to retain a few of the Noblest to countenance them selfs.

They persuaded her against the advice Fo. 88.
of her Nobility and consent of all the Clergy to the change of religion and
to the setting up of a party protestant.

They persuaded the Q. that the Catho^icques Fi. 90. 108.
were not to be trusted, and that the ^ing of Spain aspired to her crown.

They persuaded her to intrude her self Fol. 91.
unto the ecclesiastical government, assuring her that all the princes her
neighbors would follow her therein.

They persuaded the Q. to ratefie a new Fo. 91.
form of religion and to establish the Schi^me by parliament, pretending no
co^straint of conscience to any Catholicque.

They pretended title of duty, service Fo. 85.
and affection.

They pretended care and ialozie of the Fo. 31.
Q. state and security.

They drew the Nobility into suspicion. Fo. 33.


They persuaded the Q. that the match Fi. 41.
between the Q. of Scot. and the Duke was dangerous to her state and to the
Realm.

They made the Q. beleene, that others Fo. 47.
had conspired to do the same thing, which them selves performed.

They spread abroad false surmises, forged Fo. 71.
fables notorious lies published by authority.

Foul malicious impudent lies against Fo. 13. 55.
the Duke of Norf. Shameless, vile, traitorous Fo. 14. 15. 18. 19. 21. 14. 54.
56.
doble, scoganishe, crafty, cunning, loud, lewd, shaunderous lies against
the Queen of Scotland, wicked and spiritishe lies against both.

Traitorous lies against the Realm. Fo. 18.


Gross lies against the subjects. Fo. 44.


Plain false lies against the king of Spain. Fo. 62.
Lies repugnant and contradictorie. Fo. 80. 49. 54.


Sicilian lies. Fo. 70.


Colourlesse lies, seducing from God and Fo. 135.
all true religion.

Circumuenting lies to abuse the Queen Fo. 83. 133.
and to blind the people: whiles they work their horrible outrages.

Sicilian tricks and policies tending to the conspiratours final pourposes and
treasons.
TO speak worst of the honestest sort, Fo. ^.
and best of the worst sort.

To hide and oppress truth. Fo. 10.


To serve the apperites of the evil disposed. Fo. 10.


To charge the Innocent with the deades Fi. 16.
of the guilty.

To plant seditions, to creat Civil rebel^ons, Fo. 19.
to move a sea of blouddie tragedies.

To flatter authority, smothlie to dis^mble, Fo. 10. 31.
humbly to crowtche.

To use doble dealings. Fo. 36.


To write to one purpose openly and Fo. 34.
^cretlie to an other.

To charge and defame Noble persona^es. Fo. 47.


To displace all such persons as be impe^iments Fo. 84.
to his final treasons.

To slander Catholicques, to belie Prin^es Fo. 99.
to occupy the people with lies and va^ities.

To cousin the Queen by weeping and Fi. 15^.
^hining to her face, by feyning sickness for ^orrow till she relent to his
lusts.

With a brazen face to owtface all the Pref.
world and his own Prince also with lies upon lies each one louder and lewder
^en other.

Falselie to accuse, subtillie to subourne, Pref.
hereby wrongfullie to condemn Noble ^d notable personnages.

To depose Princes, to transpose states, to Pref.
^urpe kingdoms for the thirst of heresy ^d ambition.

To prefer his ambition before his Prin^es Pref.
honor, his posterity before hers, his fa^ilie before her kindred, to play the
Queen him self in essence and substance of government.

To ligue him self with Rebels, to Fi. 104.
harborough pirates, and of their thyeuerie to share out his partlargelie.

To punish honest Citisens by pillerie Fo. 6.
for saying the troth.

To set forth pilde pamfletes containing Fol. 6.
railing reports.

To term that treason to the Q. which Fo. 13.
impugneth his final treason.

To play Scoggan with a Queen. Fol. 1^.


To alienat peoples hearts and affections Fo. 19.
from the rightful heir.

To fill the Realm with more the^ forty Fo. 29. 47.
thousand strangers rascals under pretense of religion to serve his tourn at a
day.

To make a treason of no trespass. Fo. 65.


What detrimentes and preiudices have ensued to the Q. and to the Realm: and
what increase of strength and advancement to the Conspiratours and their needy
faction, by their circumuentions tending to their final purpose and treasons.
FIrst the separation of the Q. from the Fo. 91.
Catholicque Church from the unity and amity of the Sea Apostolicque.

A confusion of the two obediences, Fo. 91.
the one to God, the other to the Queen.

A forsaking the service of all the bishops Fo. 92.
and principal Clergy.

A lack of the service of the greatest of Fo. 92.
the Nobility and ancient Gentlemen: with (...) supply of officers and
justices, greadie and hongrie of living.

A general change of the whole face of Fo. 93.
^e commen wealth.

A religion that changes his hew like Fi. 139.
he Camelion, and at xiiij. years end, is not yet known which sect shall
prevail.

A division from al other princes by an Fo. 92.
other law, then the Q. progenitors were wont.

Infamy, dishonor, reproachful terms, Fo. 93.
^ermes of Schism and heresy, terms of a ^he head, a breachlesse head, a
domme head of the Church.

The reviving the buried question and Fo. 140.
^ruple of her mothers marriage which time ^ad put to silence every where: her
fathers ^ife and manners, her mothers marriage and ^eath, her own birth and
conversation made the matter of much secret talk at ^ome, and more open
penning every where abroad.

The setting up of a party protestant, Fo. 15^* 94.
(the professed poison of kingly regiment) that obey no longer, then their
party be of strength: and now show a^ little obedience to the Q. as to the
Pope.

The Queen for assured foreign frindshippe, Fo. 147. 94.
brought to stand post alone, and constreyned to lean wholly to the captain
conspirators.

Infinite vexations of the subjects for religion: Fo. 94. 168.
yet making show in their lettres t^ princes that the Catholics may live af^
their conscience, and none impeached ^, religion or faith.

Field preachings, secret lectures, differences Fo. 95.
of sects and services of religion, inciuilitie, unbridled loosenes of
conscienc^ barbarous manners.

For ancient entire amity with Catholic Fo. 96.
Princes, confederacy with Hugonots, Gues and protestant rebels.

Of two Q. the one removed from he^ Fo. 158.
seat, the other abiding but the devotion o^ them that in woard and deed repine
a^ women's regiment.

Suppressing of truth, supporting of falsehood: Fo. 99.
a lying and Macheu^lian regiment*

A yelding to the Conspiratours, the Fo. 98.
substance and effect of Kingly dominion.

The consumption of ancient Nobility Fo 102.
the setting up of a base and needy sort that make them selves Noble.

The violation of the ancient league between Fo. 101.
the Q. and the house of Spain and Bourgundie: the laying hands upon the king
of Spaines money for payment of foreign rebels.

Great charges lost much care cast away Fol. 159. 160.
english blood spilt, dishonor gained, a seade of qwarell sown, a root of
revenge planted and laid up in the deck, which will be demanded when time
serves.

The weakening of the Q. strength and Fo. 102. 101.
state, the preiudicing her amity with the mightiest and sincerest frind that
^he had upon earth: so proved by 13. years experience.

The refusing of the Q. safety, by contempning Fo 102.
sondrie frindlie motions of Emperors, and kings, for her reuniting to the
Church.

England verified to be a harlott the Fi. 104.
^urce of al evils, accounted the neast and ^enne of thieves rebels and
pirates: in danger to answer the spoils of Nations by restitution, or way of
revenge at one time or other.

The delivery of the Q. and the Realm Fo. 149. 155.
wholly, into the hands of the two conspi^atours, who be the kings of the
Realm (...) effect, the Q. only bearing the name ^f Q.

The Q. circumuented, her state endangered, Fo. 84.
her honor stained, the Conspiratours advanced, the Nobility abased, the
people oppressed, the realm impouerished: and the Q. made a compagnion of 148.
an unfortunate felowshipp.

A declaratorie sentence of Excommunication, Fo. 93. 103.
a discharge of the subjects obedience: the weight whereof to be pondered by
the presidentes of time past, even confessed by the startling storming and
rageing thereat, of those that to her presence seem most to make light of it.

Violation of common Justice: and private Injustice used to the furtherance of
their final purpose.
FIrst the Conspiratours used a sclanderous Fi. 79. 66.
form of proceeding against the Duke and Q. of Scotl. and where they be
judges, all is treason that they will have so.

They use many ways of corrupt proceading, Fo. 81.
and arts to slander and intrapp the guiltless.

They save harmless all their own Fo. 105.
frindes, with the injury of any third, that will not with money bye his just
sentence.

The Justice of the Realm is prostibulated Fi. 149.
to be sold or hired for money, by malice or affection.

By the ministry of Rob. Beale in the Fo. 126.
year 1563. the conspiratours have procured that the doubtful wedlock between
therle of Harford and the lady Cather. in their frindes opinions, by the
seals and firmes of certain foreign learned men, is cleared again, which the
conspiratours reserve in secret to serve a turn when the day commithe.

They procured that the statute made Fi. 152.
for the Oath of the womanish Primacie should bind the inferior multitude unto
that, wherein it leaves the Nobility free.

They ordained the penalty of an other Fo. 152.
statut to take place from xiiij. years before the crime or any offense
committed.

The Q. is weakened, the Nobility abbased, Fo. 153.
the people pillaged, them selves enriched, their confederates strengthened.

The B. of Rosse diffamed because his Fo. 53.
service tended to prevent the conspiratours hidden treasons.

Charles Bailie a stranger afflicted and Fo. 36.
imprisoned without color of cawse other then for seeking to publish a
pamflett in the defense of the Q. of Scotl.

The Q. of Scotl. could never obtein to Fo. 24.
come to the sight, presence, nor speech of the Q. to plead her innocence:
could never obtain sentence to be given for her or against her iudiciallie:
could never obtein to come to the Parliament, there to acknowledge and confirm
the Q. estate, though she importunatlie labored the same.

The Q. of Scotla^ds overtures, to wit, that Fo. 25.
she would geve the person of the young Prince with the persons of iiij. Noble
men or their eldest sons as pleadges for xiiii. years etc. and to procure the
hands and seals of the Kings of Spain and France for the performance etc.
could not be admitted.

The principal conspiratour executed his Fo. 44. 52.
private malice and revenge against the Duke, for that he had charged him at
Greenewich with robbing the realm, dishonouring the Q. and mainteyninge
rebels: and would have removed him from the Q.

A description of the English Sinon.
OF base parentage, ambitions mind, Pref.
of subtle wit, of smoth tongue, of shameless face, of little honesty, of
no conscience: ennemie to the old blood Royal: Intollerablie insolent in
authority: vile and abject in adversity.

Sinons Credo. under King H. catholic, under King E. protestant under Q. M.
acreper to the cross. under Qu. E. first a Lutheran, then a Caluenist, then a
puritaine, no we a Macheuelian if not an Anabaptist etc. fol. 97.
Sinons sophistry. Fo. 60.
Sinons falsehood in fellowship. Fo. 31. 38.
Sinons table talk. Fo. 97.
Sinons badgies. Fo. 117.
Sinons similitude. Fo. 101.
Sinons bone to gnaw Fo. 168.
upon. Sinons provisions Fo. 126.
Sinons Tenants to do Fo. 102.
him service. Sinons Text to write Fo. 64.
upon. Sinons Cockerel. Fo. 106.
Sinons horse. Fo. 149.

Dispersed Notes in the book worth the consideration.
A Glass presented to the Q. wherein Fo. 131.
she may plainly see her own estate present, and by things done and past,
devine what is to come.

A true Annatomie of the new Religion. Fo. 141.


The great difference between the english Fo. ^37.
Church and al other Churches.

At Hanborough is preached publikelie, Fo 137.
who so lodges any man of an english religion, is an Ost to Satan, and
lodgith a devil in his house.

Impossible to extinct the party Catholic Fo. 168.
in England, whiles France, Flandres, Spain, Italy, Ireland and others can not
be induced to admit any other religion.

King H. 8. after much hanging, hedding Fo. 86.
and wasting his Nobility, sought his reconciliation, and had obtained it if
death had not prevented him.

The Q. of Scotl. sees the best of her Fo. 130. 115.
state as long as the conspiratours sit at the stearn of the English
government: the end of whose life is the beginning of the Q. death.

A frindlie Alarm.
Beware you Shrowsburie. Darby. Fo. 123. 153.
Sussex. Huntington. Beford. Leycestre and the rest: you that are yet much
made of, lulled and culled in Catelins arms, some sooner, some later, and the
most of you, must drinck of the drags, that Norfolk has left in the cup,
and you soonest that be accounted wisest, stoutest and least likely to be
won to the untimely setting up of the family of Suff.

A rabble of names with their several actions Fo. 37.
and practices, the copies of many monstrouse horrible letters promised shall be
published, which the writers think are not to be seen.

The conclusion of the Treatise proponeth. Fo. 172.
7. ways to her heighnes, whereby to restore her self to her pristinat
security, in which she shall find true quietness both foreign and domesticque,
true honor before God and man. unfeigned amity abroad. hearty obedience at
home. faithful love and revere^ of her cosins and heirs* and al loyalty of
her Nobility. by which she shall joy in her reign, and end it with the quiet
that she began it. And so God grant it.

G. T.

A COPY OF A LETTRE ADDRESSED from Antwerp the xxvi. of June to Mr. Hatton and
deliured unto him at Spaw the 5. of Iulie. 1573.
SIR you may not find strange since God has given to each man a charge and
care of his Neighbor (as it is in holy writ) if some one that wissheth you
(...) do give this adventure in few (...) to pu^ you in remembrance of God,
your ^oule, your prince and country. The ^st being mattre that ought to be most
dee^e unto you, is most to be considered: as that you were first baptized in
the faith Catholicque, your continuance for many years therein, and the danger
in forsaking the same: the weight whereof no worldly treasors or dignities can
counteruaille: the one being eternal, the other temporal, brittle and frail,
as over many of your condition have tried, finding their experience powdered
with bitter repentance. But your Natural good inclination gives forth bettre
hope that you will in time embrase the best, whereunto itseemeth God moves
you, by laying his heavy hand lovingly upon you, that you might for errors
past, endeavor timely satisfaction, and thereto has brought you to a safe
port, if you list therein to repose and quiet your self* where doubtless you
shall find more true comfort and peace of conscience, then if you would
(delighting still in vanities) retourn again to the place that flows and
abondeth with the tempests of wordlie temptations.

And for that you be known to be in the good favor and grace of your Prince
and to tender mattres that appertain to her security, and would what in you
lies advance to her knowledge, whatsoever threatens her peril, her state, and
the cutting of, the rightful Succession of the same: as also to be ready to
ministre her the occasion whereby her heighnes may in time repair her
dishonors and infamies procured by such as she accounted her most faith full
subjects, this enclosed being a table of Treasons collected out of a book
lately come out of France is addressed unto you, that you should thereof make
speedy conveye, in sort that the same may not fail to pass directly to her
heighnes hands. in duty whereof it is hoped you will not fail, for that it is
^irder intended that the said Table shall also be consigned to others of your
quality, and shortly come to print, and be published so, as both her highness
and the world may be wittnes that some one that loves her and wants other
ready means for the conveye thereof, has by laying the same upon you and
others, discharged his band and duty in that respect. Thus wisshing you as
much grace and comfort as to my self, do hartelie reco^mend you to the
mercies of almighty God. From Antwerp. the 26. of June 1573.

By yours to his power. G. T.

CERTAIN IMPORTANT POINTS added by the Abridger of the Treatise, after the
delivery of the Table to Mr. Hattons hands, implying vehement demonstrations
of the present peril of your Heighnes life and person.
ALBEIT your Heighnes great wisdom cannot but easily find in this table and
treatise the great danger and peril that imminently depends upon your person
and life, if the practice of these Co^spiratours be not prevented before it
take their desired end: Time yet (being the trewest discoverer of all hidden
mischeiffes) having daily more and more revealed the same by sondrie new
arguments since the treatise was finished (which has been concealed by the
Co^spiratours from your heighnes knowledge) your gracious, and benign Nature,
will not disdain (I trust) the simple oblation of this my poor myte, added
and cast into the copius heap of Tallentes presented unto you by the Author of
the book before me: who for my part intend breiflie to yield you evident
demonstrations of the present peril your person stands in.

FIrst therefore let it like your Heigh. a little I.
to observe that policy of theirs lately put in ure (since they vndrestood by
the edition of that treatise, that their mischeuons machination was eyed and
smelled,) by which they have for a years time almost pretended, and by brute
suffered to Sino^ tournithe over a new leaf.
be given out, that they deem now the Prince of Scotland most fitly and
rightfully to be declared by your Heigh. and the Realm, next heir apparent in
Success. And marck you how by this sweet bayte they have alluered and
enamoured (as it were) the Scottish nation to consent to the delivery of this
lamb into the woulfes hands: Behold I say how lately and sudden this change
comes, even now hotly and warmly, when they have for 12. or ^* years space
before, by forging of lies, by falsefying of old laws, by forcing of new, by
libelles, by preachers in all pulpettes and printed books, traueiled and
labored by all possible means to deprive and declare both him and his Mother
incapable of that Crown in Success. And look you a little into it, unto what
other end this is done, but only by hook or by crook, by one way or other to
win and wreast the person of the Infant into their hands. Remember what huge
sommes of money have been offered for the possession of his person: what
dishonorable, attemptes by corruption to cause his Nobility to consent to his
delivery. And why is that so gredelie sought and in such have, with what cost
soever? Let all stories be sought, and one example showed, where an Infant
Prince was by such corrupt means violently wreasted into the custody of them
that held his pare^tes in prison, other then to his bane, ruin, and
confusion. The consideration whereof implies manifestly that they intend by
way of prevention to warrant them selfs from being callid to any account of
what soever they have done or shall do, when they have cut of the three
impediments that lie between the Crown and the line of Suff. which be, your
self the principal, with the Mother and child.

NOw that they have brought both you and II.
your Realm so deeply into the infamy of the world, by iniurying all
Catholicque Princes for supporting their own private ambition with heresy and
rebellion every where: And finding your nature repugnant to those odious
injuries of your neighbors, and your wisdom not flexible The Q. own polecie
more secure, then Sinons fine fetches.
to consume your treasure and Realm so effuselie as they would pour it out in
this quarrel, and their party thereby not so strongly supported in France and
Flandres as they desire, they have therefore no better remedy, then to get
that Child into their hands, whose name and authority they may use to remove
you, for the better advancement of their faction abroad.

LIke as the Conspiratours polecie requires III.
your safety whiles the Mother and Son of Scotl. be out of their hands:
even so is it above all most necessary for their principal end, having once
fingered the Child (as they have already the mother,) to make an end of you
and your Cousin the Queen of Scotland, whether the Child shall live or not:
since under him they are sure for a time whereas under neither of you both,
they find them selves in the security they desire (lookeing howrelie when you
would charge them for stayning your honor, indangering your state, intangeling
your realm with so many foreign qwarrels of injury and revenge) and not
enduring the fear and danger of being charged therewith, do provide for their
own security, and find no way assured but your death or deprivation when
they have once that Child in their hands.

NOw that they have brought to pass, IIII.
that the religion is in debate, your person in contempt among the protestants
and hated of the puritaines, the Crown in question, the people divided, and
the realm answerable for infinite injuries done to nations adjoining: they
must dispatche your heighnes by prevention, least you might in good time charge
them, (if God so move you, or your dearest frindes advise you) upon so just
and important causes.

NOw that they have brought to pass by V.
pretense of parliament, that Titles of succession must no more be questioned,
the time is now ripe, by removing the present possessor, to intrude their new
Succession, which they cannot establishe whiles you survive.

Where as their ambition is to reign, VI.
and ambition abides not her due time nor the fear of falling: and they
already have for their private advancement not only contrived the diuerting of
the Crown from that course in which the laws have established it, but also
circumuented you, endangered your state, steined your honor, oppressed your
people, impouerished your realm, and procured infinite perilles to depend over
all: who may doubt but that they make their account that it is now timely
further to proceed, and to satisfy their ambition by your death or deprivation.

Having brought your Heighnesse to this, VII.
that neither by Child of your own body, nor by any heir known they stand
in The Q. of Scotl. D. of Norf. S. N. Throgm.
fear of any Successor: and having also plucked of, your principal feathers
by taking from you your trusty defenses, and dearest frindes, there lies now
nothing in their way, but when they list they may make you away, that by
setting up whom they list, they may reign securely.

NOw that they see the world does perceive VIII.
the deep discontentation they have in their hearts of the manner of your
government, for which they term you wilful, unruly, and in matters of most
weight wot not where to have you* which by passions blustered out in secret by
them to some frindes, are now diuulgued to the realm: fearing at your hands
due correction for such traitorous ingratitude, they think it high time to
assure themselves of you, and account it conscience to bannish women's regiment,
and a necessary polecie to set up a Child, under whom their devises (be they
never so wicked) may have more quick and speedy execution. which child is
most likely to be first the young Prince of Scotl. though not to reign for any
long time, but only that under that color, the Crown may in the eyes and
iugements of the world, descend more colourablely upon that other child the
issue of Suff. for, the La. Marg. Lineux just interest, they will not
acknoledge.

Having under your favor climed to the IX.
top of worldly felicity, atteyned to infinite treasures by pilling, polling
and lottering your subjects and Realm, by briberie, piracie and injustice
every way, it can not now possibly stand with their security nor final
purpose, to lend you long life or to suffer you to over live them selfs. And
being they both of good years and the one so owglie and deformed that he has
already one foot in his grave, your Heigh. may easelie make account of the
short term of life that your self holds by: which may in no condition be
longer then theirs, least their going away before you and the leaving
vnperfited the final execution of their dessignmentes: the provision for their
posterity and the deriuing the Crown to the issue of Suff. might by your
conversion and reconciliation to the Church and Princes your neighbors (which
they fear merueylouslie in your Nature and wisdom) might I say all fall to
the grownd, and their corrupt gains come to answerre in part, the detriments
done to you and your Realm: as of some of their Comperes in France and
Flandres, they have seen already come to pass.

NOw that they have drawn upon you the X.
terrible sentence of Excommunication, brought you to iniurye all the Princes
of the world, and with three of the chiefest to have implacable quarrel: and
thereby inuolued both you and your Realm in manifest danger of foreign
invasion: their shrewd heds perceive, you have no better remedy nor redier
shift, then to The Q. of Scotl. the principal pillar of the Q. security.
reconcile unto your favor the Qu. of Scotl. again: and consequently by a
reformation in religion to satisfy your neighbors abroad. which to prevent,
they have resolved first her death, and shortly after your own: least you
might be the revenger of hers, whom they can not induce you to hate, so deeply
as they would.

NOw that they have brought both you and XI.
the realm into the perils aforesaid, and so long dalied you forth from
bestowing your, self in marriage, and so often mocked the Princes abroad, that
such kind of offres be now contempned, they have for them selfs no bettre
shift now left, then (when they be suer of the Prince of Scotl.) first to
dispatch both you and your Cousin his Mother: and setting the Crown upon one of
the children, then by a treaty for marriage with one of the great kings, to
make their own peace, and to winn them the amity of the one or the other.

TO conclude Mada^: Now that they have heaped XII.
upon you and your Realm those huge heaps of dangers and quarrels, importable
for any of both to sustain: they find none so suer nor speedy remedy for
their own security, as to work your death or deprivation, that those
quarells may die and be buried with your person, and them selfs become free
from all deserved punishment, by charging you with their wicked government ^
making their suer reckening, by sending of you to your grave, they lapp up in
your shrowding sheet, the principal subject of all foreign quarrels, and by
your death to yeald satisfaction of all foreign desire of revenge.

ABuse not your self for gods love, with the fallible opinion and deceaueable
confidence in these men's honesties, because you have made them of naught, but
resort you to the examples, yea rather to the experience of the insolency,
contempt and odious ingratitude of base persons excessiuely benefited: and make
not your self to be annombred among the infortunat, whom, others perils could
not make wary. This time nor place admits not the allegation of many: let
these few examples therefore suffice, which our unhappy days have brought to
light, and finished with in the time of your own memory.

If in France ambition made the late Admiral not only to determine, but by
words also to threaten the utter ruin of the whole house of Valloyes (which
had so lately exalted his family from naught) for not satisfying his appetite
in the support of his faction: if in Scotl. the force of the same did draw the
Earl Bothwell, not only from his dutiful fidelity largely testified to the
Q. and her Mother in their several distresses, but also so far forced him: as
not containing him self within the limits of common crimes, drew him to excede
in such horror of treason, as the heart nor face of any reasonable creature
(other then of a very spirit incarnat) could ever have endured to conceive,
or once to sustain the dissembled countenance of so vile a mind: if there
also, the insatiable appetit of that humor, and the impatient fear of
falling: did draw the Earl of murrey from all bonds of nature, honor, and
gratuitie toward his sovereign and Sister, and to contriue such terrible
treasons against her, as time has now revealed, to have been so deep, and so
diuelishlie compassed, as passed almost all humane invention: yea if also the
violence of that pestiferus humor has been such, as in some other place has
drawn the soon, to forget all regard of nature, duty, or other bond toward
his own Father: if your Heigh. I say have seen these experiences in every
country adioygning with in the late years of your own reign; shall not these
suffice to admonish one of your wisdom to beware of that partial and blind
affection, wherewith it seems you are bewitched (as it were) to hold and
account the very contriuers of your confusion, for persons priuileged and
exempted from the common infection that has corrupted all their confederates
in every country befides? namely where the principal of these. 2. your
conspirators smacked so deeply thereof many years ago, that he joined him
self full ungratefully with the adversaries, to the overthrow of his own
master, his maker and aduancer? And where every free and unaffected sight does
already manifestly discover the self qualities and like humors of inordinat
ambition, impatient fear of declining, grutching murmour, and mislike of your
fainte supporting their faction, and a general repininge werinesse of your
yooke and regiment to have of a good time rancklie possessed the hearts of
these Coniurators against you, and your house: how blind must he be that
discernith less to depend iminentlie over iow, and to be nighe hand to fall
greauouslie upon you, then is already seen by your men's mates to have been
contrived and intended against all the Princes of the contreys about you.
which, if after this Gods gratiouse admonition, and faith full frindes
counsel, you shall not yet prevent and provide for, but suffer to fall on you,
you shall with the destruction of your body, bury also your fame of all
providence and wisdom; and remain condemned among the infortunat, and
forsaken by God as wanting all grace, and power to hear, or to see that
toward your self, which every man beheld, and you were forwarned of.

Your Heigh. is of deeper consideration then to judge that this so open a
detection of their treasons against you and the crown, could lack sufficient
proofs, if time did serve to plead their persons guilty. And their wisdoms
can smell out, that their secret dealinges could not thus far come to light,
but by sum which some times sit at their elbowes, and for fear of personal
peril, smothelie sooth their mischeuous meaninges for the time, and after, for
duty to their country, and love to your person, discover them to others that
be in saffer place to publishe the same.

If they be not guilty of contrived treasons against your H. why then by such
fearful and frawdulent means, keep they from your knowledge the Treatise
and Table of treasons which long since came to their hands by more ways then
one? If they can clear them selfs to be true men to the Crown, why then do
they by all possible means imbarre the coming to sight of such books which
set forth to the world the next most lawful and right heir apparent the
Queen of Scotl. but because they be guilty of the one, and can not clear
them selfs in the other, their best security and assurance (as you have
herd) must be, to make you sewre, and to get your heirs into their hands:
against the polecie and presidentes of all Princes security.

It is an historical observation that there is no surety in suspected
frindshippe, nor trust in conceived treason. If these traitors lacked either
wit, will, or power to bring to pass their devised pourpos, you might the
less fear their fatale malice. What ungracious wits they have, their former
plats so coninglie cast, declare. And who may think that traitorous minds
aspiring to the heighest, can want ready wills, to finishe their forward
attemptes?

As for power (take away that they be not absolute) it is sufficient to do
whatsoever. For be they not mighty in moneys, treasures and allies? sit they
not at the stern? be they not in place to pen their own Commissions? have they
not all in their own haudes that may advance their intended attemptes? what
lack they but that they look when time will so tempre, as to set forward
their terrible tragedies which must end with the Dispatche of 3. Princes, the
Q. of Scotl. her Soon, and your self, to the vttre confusion and ruin of a
flourishing Realm.


