THE HAVEN OF PLEASVRE: Containing a freemans felicity, and a true direction
how to live well: Profitable and del^ghtfull to all, hurtful and displeasing
to none, except it be to such pecuish dames as do either foolishlie reject, or
carelessly neglect the duty of chaste Matro^es.

Gathered out of the best approved Authors.

Printed by P. S. for Paul Linley, and John Flaskes, and are to be sold at
(...) shop in Pa^^es chu^chyard at the sign of the bl^^k Be^^^, 1597.

To the right worshipful the Governor, Deputies, Assistants, and generality
of Merchants adventurers: I. T. wishes prosperous success in all their
affairs.
RIght Worshipful, for so much as naturally we desire that which is good, and
that there is nothing that has so much power to preserve the life and soci^tie
of man, as that which is honest, profitable and pleasant; and because it is
certain, that amongst all other matters (the holy and sacred scripture only
excepted) there is nothing to be compared to that which brings a general
good to all, and contains in it those means to attain unto perfect
happiness, which all the ancient philosophers were far wide of, and that
way to live blessedlie, which every Christian ought to wal^e in: I thought
good having (with much pain and travail) opened this gappe, and made plain
the passage, to vouchsafe your worships the first entrance, and by your
permission, to make it a common beaten way for all men to have recourse unto.
With all sincerity and dutifulness, dedicating this my labor unto your Worcester.
and wishing that as many of you are known to be patterns of good and godly
life; so the rest may take example by you, to frame themselves to a well
disposed course: and if besides example they want instructions, this Treatise
may serve to lead them unto virtue. For you that do already know that this
worldly pleasure is only good in this respect, to serve as a spur to prick
you forward to the search of true felicity, whereunto every one is inclined;
it may help to confirm your minds and settle them, that they be not shaken by
any storms or assaults that vice can make. To the weak it may be as a stay,
and to the strong a comfort. And albeit I confess, it might by diverse have
been handled with more elegancie and finenesse of phrase: yet thus much I will
auerre, that I have done it faithfully, and truly, according to the meaning
of the Author, though in plain terms. And for my self, as the principal end
of my labor (next unto your Worcester. contentment and commodity) was the common
profit of my country men: So do I naught expect from them but thanks; and
from your Worcester. that this my labor may be as favorably accepted of you, as it
is freely offered: and so do wish you here in this world a prosperous success
in all your enterprises, and in the world to come, the fullness of all joy and
blessedness.

Your worships in all dutifulnes, I. T.

To al brawling wives and male pert mistresses, I. T. wishes a reformation of
indecent qualities.
GRacious Gentlewomen, (I mean such as are some of you who be gracious in
name, but in deed and effect as bitter as Wormwood) if the last chapt* of
this treatise do no better purge you from pride and presumptuous scoulding,
then Elleborus does ease you of melancholy and sullen powts: I fear me it
will be as seldom haunted of you for the one, as Antycira is frequented by
you for the other. For as they of old time thought melancholy was best purged
by sailing to that I Will to receive that herb; so I confidentlie conjecture,
the plumes of your pride will be never abated, till Iunoes bird behold her own
feet, and you (with the whole world) take view of your selves* All the time
that I lived in servitude amongst you, I exercised and employed my self (like
a good and skillful Anatomiste) in seeking the course of your veins, and the
passage of your pulses, and I always found the swelling of the one, and the
passionate panting of the other to be sucked by the miseraical veins of pride
from your insatiable ^ntrailes of want onnesse, and dispersed all over your
bodies by haughty conceits, from the liver of your needless yet ouerweening
presumptions: and all these to be nourished with the ignorance of your selves,
the which (as Lactantius says to another purpose) is the only cause of all
the evils in you. He^^e some like scoulding Xantippa shrewshake their Socrates:
others like pr^ude Cleopatra, consume their kind Anthony, and either horn
their Vulcan like short heeled Venus, or usurp the breech, and give their
husbands the apron. For seeing you are neither by education learned (for some
women of this sort have almost as good judgment as me^) nor permitted to
travail abroad for experience, but rather (as M. Smith says) to be housewiues
and not streetwiues (...) muse how you dare either assume to your selves more
knowledge then your husbands to discern; unless they be each of the^ another
Silenus, or more expertence then they, to judge of things, unless they be all
of them Sardanapali. But here methinkes I hear a malepert mistress say: Shall
not we have our wills in all things, as well as our husbands? for sooth gracious
*Parrat no, but it is thy part to be silent, or (if thou do speak modestly)
to be subject and conformable to the will of thy husband, to be loving and
faithful, serviceable and careful, thrifty and paineful to preserve things at
home, whilst thy husband and men servants be getting thy living abroad; to be
vigilant and diligent to train up thy maid servants in virtue and piety,
that by thy good example and instruction, they may learn how to obey and not
command, reverence and not rule their husbands when they have them, giving thy
husband leave to order his business abroad, and rule his men servants at
home. And what soever thing he conferreth with thee about, as his helper not as
his head to subject thy opinion to his judgment: saying in all things that
are honest, Thy will husband and not mine be fulfilled. This is mine opinion,
but do as seems best in thine own eyes. Now because this submissio^ can by
no means be wrought in thee without the knoledge of thy self, and thine own
imperfections, I have attempted in that Chapter to late open thy nature to the
view of thine own eyes, that I might in some sort prepare thee thereunto,
presuming notwithstanding, that though the virtuous will shadow their
imperfections with qualities of good education: yet thou the more I put thee in
mind of thy duty, the more unruly wilt wax; the more I contradict thee, the
more fiercer will thou rage; and the more I touch thy gauld back, the more
dangerously will thou winche; until thy precise pride be turnde to thy best
ornament humility, and thy ouerweening presumption metamorphosed to a
confession of thy weakness. And then when I see thee converted, thy mind
enlightened, thy proud brawling heart quieted, and al thy actions by knowledge of
thy self governed: I shall not only say with thy self that thou live well,
but that thou shall also die well, and at the day of judgment with Christ
farewell.

Yours so long as you are in subjection to your Husbands. I. T.

The Haven of pleasure, very profitable and pleasant for all sorts of People.
We must carefully fix our eyes, and lift up our minds to God the Father,
thorough our Lord Jesus Christ. Chapter. 1.
Whosoever is desirous of his own salvation, and coueteth to provide well for
himself: and whosoever in this life, affects with diligent watch and ward,
boldly and confidentlie to withstand such imminent casualties and
discommodities, as do violently assail us every moment; let him fasten his
eyes upon God our heavenly father thorough Christ, and let his mind be always
erected toward him, from whom as from a most plentiful fountain it was first
derived, and let him not elsewhere look for or follow after any other help
of his salvation, but let him trust and lean to this God alone, let him
worship, reverence, and love him, and let him in confidence and faith of his
Savior, require from him all things that appertain to his salvation.
Afterward, let him earnestly sifte and attentively meditate with himself,
what liberality God has used toward mankind, with what ornaments and
guiftes of Nature he has adorned him, with what dignity and authority he
has set him out, and to what honor and glory he has exalted him, that was
formed but out of the earth.

What great things God the Creator of all things, has bestowed on man.
Chapter. 2.
AS the form and external shape of man's body (being lostie and boult upright
toward heaven, whereby he may learn to lift up his eyes to that place
from whence he had his beginning) is more notable and more artificially and
comely made then any other living creature whatsoever: so his inward shape
does so vvonderfullie adorn him, that he is conformed and made like to the
very Image of God himself, that is, he does represent and resemble the
very essence of his maker, yea and approaches very near the Nature of his
Creator. Which excellent and infused power from above, consists wholy in
his mind and soul: which was drawn out of his first pattern, even the
treasury of Gods own Divinity. By which heavenly gift man obtained to
be endued with reason, 1 Cor. 3
judgment, and understanding, was made capeable of heavenly doctrine, and
was vni^ed unto him by the knowledge of him, and faith in him, and so is wholly
transformed into him. And this chiefly above all other notable prerogatives
has man obtained: that seeing God has made all other creatures (...), that is
altogether dumb and destitute of speech and utterance; God has given unto man
the gift of speaking, whereby to communicate with others the thoughts of his
mind, and to be able to show the conceiptes of his heart. And (which is
chief of all and most acceptable to God) with his voice to magnify his
Creator, and to honor him (whose knowledge he has conceived by faith in his
heart) with all praise, laud and glory. For by this means not only the
Majesty and glory of Gods name is extolled, but also (as far as man's wit
is able to stretch) he rend^^th all thanks for benefits received: showing a
testimony of a thankful and ready mind tovvarde so liberal and loving a
father. Psalm. 15.
For seeing God has no need at all of our goods, he requires nothing of us
but love and thankefulnes.

That there is nothing more dear unto God then man, and that all things were
made for his use. Chap. 3.
But as God is not only especially affected toward manne, and has adorned
his soul and mind (in which his Divinity shines) with many and notable
Ornaments: but also furnished and garnished it abundantly with external
guiftes and large possessions of those things that nature (as the minister of
god) does plentifully pour upon him, and has given unto him power and
authority over the whole earth, Cenes. 1
yea even to the poorest Cobbler and meanest man in the world; who does no
less enjoy the liberality of his Creator, and the visible pleasure of the
whole world, then any King abounding in wealth and riches: so that he is
not conversant in the large Theater of this world as a stranger, or tenant
that is alienated from the possession of worldly goods, Cosmopolites
but as (...), that is, a Citizen and free holder of this world, and lord of
all things that the earth brings forth. For to his use, profit and obedience,
were al things created under the Cope of heaven, or within the compass of Sea
and land. Which David wondering at, confesses the works of God in these
verses. Psalm 8.
O Lord our God how wonderful is thy name through all the world, because thy
glory is exalted above the heavens. What is man that thou art so mindful of
him, and the son of man that thou so carest for him? Thou have made him but a
little lovver then God or his Angels, thou have crowned him with glory and
honor, and have made him ruler over the works of thy hands, thou have brought
all things under his feet. Whereby he shows what estimation God has of man
next after Christ, and how he regards him, to whom all the world is
serviceable and obedient: Romans 8
so that not only all things created were made for his use and commodity,
but also Christ was subject to death for his sake, by whose grace and
merits the father gives us all things abundantly.

What great thankfulness man owes to Godward. Chap. 4.
But above all other things this ought to stir up the mind of man to give unto
god a more then ordinary love and reverence: that when he was estranged from
GOD, and through breach of his commandment cast into eternal death; our
heavenly father through the singular favor and merits of Jesus Christ,
received him again into grace. For Christ pitying man's destruction, has
reconciled him to his father, by purging him with his blood, and ouercomming
death, and shaking of the tyranny of his most deadly enemy, to whom he was
bound, and as it were tied with an earnest penie, set him at liberty by his
resurrection, and restored him again to his inheritance of the kingdom of
heaven. So that as Paul witnesses, we are no more the alians or strangers
of God, but citizens and heirs, yea and friends and household servants with
him, that is, built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2
even Christ Jesus the head corner stone, by whom we have access and
entrance by one spirit unto the father. Wherefore, Titus 3
when any one by the help of found doctrine thorough faith and the washing
of our redemption, is ingrafted into Christ, and as Paul says, by the
renewing of the holy Ghost, 2 Timothy ^
whom he has plentifully poured into us, have obtained grace and
inheritance: it is very meet, and the repairing of our salvation requires,
that placing all hope and faith upon so bountiful a father, and upon his
son Jesus Christ, who has abolished death and sin, we should submit our
selves unto him, and make good our lives, manners, and affections to him, and
that we should endeavor with all purity of heart, holy and blameless
conversation, with daily and fervent prayer to bind him unto us, to the end
we may obtain his grace and favor.

What profit Baptism brings to man, and what it warns us to do. Chap. 5.
BEcause Baptism or the holy washing, is the first entrance, door and porche
into the Congregation and company of the faithful, it brings us to the
trust and hope of our salvation. For by faith and repentance (that is, the
detestation of our former life) our bodies being mortified and minds renewed,
we are ingrafted into Christ, who vvasheth away, clean seth, and abolisheth
the spots and sins of our souls with the use of this external sign, by
pouring into our minds the holy Ghost, vvherby the certainty of our
salvation once conceived, we boldie cry Abba father. Which prayer or
invocation being doubled and oftentimes repeated, is so forceable and present
at hand to help, that it obtains all things of our bountiful father: so
that we direct our prayers, vows, requests, and sighs, to him thorough
Christ. 1 John 5 James 1.
For under this captain and Mediator which has assured his Grace unto us
with his blood, we shall obtain all things that are profitable for us, and our
prayers shall never return unto us fruitelesse and in vain. For the ears of
so bountiful a Father are not stopped at their prayers, for whose redemption
he has bestowed his only son.

After God we must be charitable to our Neighbor. Chap. 6.
Now as our love toward GOD ought to be so great, Deuteronomy, 6 Leuit. 7 Mark. 12
Luke, 10
that we should owe all things unto him, and that all human powers of our
minds and hearts, or souls and spirits, should be poured out toward him:
so ought there no less entire love and charity to be shevved toward our
Neighbor (that is, every one of our own nature and condition) then we
show unto our selves: to the end all of us may perform our duties
cheerefullie to God.

And if at any time need require, and occasion be proffered (which we ought
quickly to catch) to help the poor, and to aid him both with counsel and
money. For this is the chiefest fruit of faith, and the most sound and
certain testimony of christian Religion.

What ought to be the duty of Children toward their Parents. Chap. 7.
But as we owe all things to God, and many things to our Country and
friends, so is our debt also very great to our parents. What duty and
reverence we owe unto them, I need not bestow much labor to write, because
there is a natural love and good will ingrafted in all things toward their
own, yea even amongst the Heathen, Math. 5. Pro. 28
as Christ witnesses: yet so, that albeit this affection be dutifullie
performed by the heathen, deserves no praise, but only seems to avoid the
crime. Nevertheless, this ought to be earnestly imprinted in us from our very
infancy, that we carefully and heartily love our parents, by whose help and
ministry, we have obtained our first entrance into this light, and our
beginning of life: so that whatsoever reason bids and equity requires,
we should be dutiful and obedient to them, Luke, 2
as we read Christ was to Mary and Joseph. For piety, obedience and reverence
toward our parents, Exodus 20 Deuteronomy. 5 Marth. 15 Ephesians. 5
is pleasing and acceptable unto God, the which is strictly prescribed unto
us, both in the old and new Testament. This also is a notable saying of
Pittacus the Philosopher: Look what allowance thou bestowest on thy parents,
the selfsame and no better expect from thy children. Matthew. 7 Mark. 4
And the saying of our savior Christ serves excellently well for this purpose,
in these words: Look with what measure thou meatest (to thy parents) the ^^me
shall (thy children) measure to thee again. From this error and oversight it
comes often to pass, that Parents find their children stubborn, disobedient,
nay altogether careless of them, in such sort, that when their children come
once to years, they scorn and despise their parents admonitions: Mark this
you that will have no appearanc^ of evil in your house^
yea and that as a just revenge deservedly inflicted upon them, because they
themselves were not humble, obedient and kind to their parents before;
proudly, scornfullie, and cruelly checking and bitterly controlling them.

How every one ought to carry himself, toward them that are their
instructors. Chap. 8.
Give no less honor to those masters that instruct and garnish thy mind
with learning, then thou do to thy parents. For thus did Iuuenal commend
his forefathers and prayed for them, because they honored them with no less
love and kindness then they did their parents, saying:

-- Dent, inquit
Dij maiorum vmbris tenuem and sine pondere terram, Satyr 7.

Spirantesque crocos, et in vrna perpetuum ver,
Qui praeceptorem sancti voluere parentis
Esse loco.
Which is word for word:

God grant our elders ghosts may have light earth that wants weight, Sweet
spices, and a lasting spring within their burial pot; who would a master
should be had in place of reverent sire.

(Which because it smacketh so much of Heathenisme, who were wont to burn
their dead corpse, and put their ashes into a pot, I have thought good to
turn it after this sort into the best Christian sense and rhyme I could. God
grant our ancestors may come to grave in peace and rest,
And at their resurrection with heauenli^ ^oyes be blessed:
Who made their sons to reverence their ma^sters we like fear,
Which they expected for the^s^lues how ^^ch so ^re they were.


And Fabius admonishes his disciples, ^^b. 2 cap. 10
that they should love their masters no less than they do their studies,
and esteem them to be parents, not of their bodies, but of their minds. For
to be borne and to be instructed, are equals and almost of the same nature:
for the one brings forth the body, and the other fashioneth the mind. Now,
if the parents endued with all knowledge of humanity, do take the pains
themselves to instruct and teach their children: or if they themselves be
destitute of those helps, and hire a learned master to instruct and help to
bring them to learning and wisdom: they can bestow nothing on them more
profitablie, then by that means to deck and adorn them with virtue. For by
framing their lives after this forte, their minds are not only beautified
with excellent virtues; as soundness of life, honesty of manners, chastity,
mee^^enesse, placabilitie, modesty, courtesy, justice, temperance, and
familiarity: but also willingly brings them, or almost against their will
carries them to wealth, dignity and honor, to which learning opens them the
way.

Who above al others ought to be reverenced in this life. Chap. 9.
SEeing yt as Paul also teaches, Romans 13
every one ought to be honored according to his calling and degree: so ought
we chiefelie to perform this duty to old age (whither we all hasten) to the
graye headed, and such as are well stricken in years. For so says Moses by the
commandment of GOD: Leuit. 19
Before the gray headed arise, and honor the person of the aged. Lycurgus also
the Lavvgiuer of the Lacedaemonians, decreed the same to be kept, willing us to
give greatest honor, not to the rich and worshipful, but to those that were
aged and stricken in years. And surely old age was never so much honored as
then. Hitherto must also be referred all magistrates, counselors and
governors, by whose wisdom and authority the safety of the Commonwealth is
maintained, and all things are governed quietly and peaceably. Romans 13
To these we may add, all such as are of approved honesty, men of ripe age,
Gentlemen sprung from a good house, and men endued with the study of letters,
and ornaments of learning. But to such as are resident in the office and
ministry of the Church, and do take great pains in framing the minds and
correcting the wic^ed manners of men: to them do I yield the greatest and
chiefest honor. 1 Timothy 5.
For Paul bids us account those elders worthy double honor, who in
gravity for manners, age for wisdom, Romans 12, 13 Phil. 2
and integrity for living, do shine before the flock and feed them with
wholesome doctrine, and the pure and sincere food of the word of God: giving and
bestowing on them all things more ampli^^ and plentifully, not only
reverence in regard of their age, but provision sufficient to man^taine their
lives, and such things as are necessary for their houses.

What profit instruction brings to men, and of what sort it ought to be.
Chap. 10.
WE ought to have a great regard after what sort we be instructed. Wherefore,
when first our age is most capeable of learning, and most addicted to the
study of good letters, let it be aptly endued with the noble and liberal
sciences: for by them is the nature of man best framed to honesty, and soonest
garnished with the attire of humanity. But our best lesson for instruction,
must begin at the framing of good manners. Wherefore, when a young man is
prepared to study, let him first learn good behauior; and then eloquence, In
(...).
or the art of Rhetorique: which as Pliny says, can hardly be conceived,
except one be well nurtured, because the manner how to live well is of more
force then the order how to speak well; and soundness of living is a great
deal more to be wished, then elegancie of speech: albeit indeed these two
should be joint and inseperable companions, and the one to be assistant unto
the other. After the same sort may we reason, as concerning choice of words,
and judgment of matters. For albeit the knowledge of matter more then of
words, is to be wished: yet must the matter it self be declared in evident
and plain words. Now the precepts of life which bring an ornament to the
mind, and instructs it in piety, albeit they be in themselves honest and
profitable; ^ib 1 cap. 1 ^^b. 1. cap. 3
yet as Lactantius and Fabius say, they obtain a greater power and for^e to
persuade when their beauty is set out with the cleernesse of Oratorie. For
those things that are taught in their kind, and set out with skilfulnesse of
speech, do more powerfullie pierce into the minds of men. And albeit, we be
wholy given to words (as some Smatters are that are wholy ignorant of the
matter) yet is it better to coin eloquence and finenesse of phrase to
wisdom, least old words that are barbarous, foolish, and quite out of use,
do creep into our speech and sentence: whereby a sententious Oration is
rather obscured then any way opened. But if to picked and neat words
wisdom be vvanting, whereby there rests no gravity in the sentences,
blunt and rude wisdom is rather to be preferred, then babbling and foolish
fine speeches comm^ded. For as Cicero says: Lib. 2. de or a^
the foundation of eloquence (as of all other things) is wisdom. And
therefore excellently well said Horace, which all men may follow in their
several professions, when he says: Aut predesse volunt, aut delectare
poetae, In art poe.

Aut simul and iucunda and idonea dicere vitae.
Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci,
Lectorem delectando, pariterque monendo.
The Poets either wish to please or else to profit thee,
Or jointly speak things that to life will fit and pleasing be,
But he does al good method keep, which pleasing profit brings,
And which does warn and yet delight the Reader in all things.


Now the holy scripture inspired by the holy ghost, wants no human help,
for it affects not ye mind with eloquence and finenesse of words, but by a
secret and certain divine power, draws and transformeth the minds of men. 1
Cor. ^
Which Paul himself does witness to the Corinthians, where he says: When
I came first unto you and laid you open the Oracles of God, I used no glorious
words or brags of wisdom: neither was my sermon or preaching unto you in the
persuading words of man's wisdom, but with a heavenly and powerfu^l
demonstration, that your says might not stand in the wisdom of men, but in
the power of God. By which words, he does not reject gravity in words and
sentences, wherevvith he himself was plentifully furnished; neither does he
deprive himself of the force and efficacy of persuasion, whereby with firm
reasons and ^t words he draws men's minds to the knowledge of the truth: but
would thereby warn the professors of the gospel, not to trust to the force of
Eloquence, to draw men's minds unto them with enticing words, but with the
spirit and power of God. So that by this you may see, Paul speaks wisdom
with the perfectest. Wisdom in deed, not of this world, nor of the princes
of this world (that is of Orators who are defaced, and whose finenesse of
Orations are vanished) but ^ee spea^eth the wisdom of God closde up in a
mystery, which more forcibly affects the minds of men, and fasteneth
sharper pric^es in them, then any humain doctrine decked and trimmed with most
curious words. For the word of God (as he says) is lively and quick, Heb. 4
more piercing then any two edged sword, stri^ing thorough even to the
division of the soul and spirit, the ioints and marrow, and a discerner of
the thoughts and purpose of the heart. For thus says God by Ierenue. Are not
my words as fire or a hammer that breake^h the stones. Cap 23 Psalm. 1.8 P^o. 30
And David he confesses, he tried the force and flames of Gods word in his
heart. Moreover Solomon confirms it, saying: Every word of God is a fi^rie
buckler to defend all those that trust in him.

Wherefore let not the ignorant think, that Christian doctrine is idle and
vn^auourie, which endueth men's ^inds with so heavenly and wholesome virtues.
For that the Prophets of God were not unlearned, but were perfectly taught
the knowledge of words and matter, even this is an argument: that there are
dispearst in the bible so many notable parables, tropes, metaphors,
comparisons, figurative speeches and similitudes, ta^en from Beasts and
herbs, and from the whole nature of things dispearsed over the whole earth,
wherevvith the sermons of the Prophets are so de^ked and adorned, that you
shall sinde none so excellent in the writings of men; neither shall you
any where find such a majesty of words and sentences, that can so
forcibly affect men's minds, or stir them up to embrace so profitable
Doctrine.

Whence the soundness of manners and best precepts are to be sought. Chap. 11.
THou shall perfectly learn the soundness of manners and the most profitable
way to lead a good life, out of the decrees of our Savior Christ, to whom we
are incorporate and to whom we have given our names, whose doctrine does so
much the more forcibly affecte and transform men's minds, in that it is
delivered by the inspiration of the holy spirit, and has no dregs of this
world admixed with it: it sauoureth nothing of old wives superstitions (which
is but a shadow and certain show of Religion) but (which of all things is
most profitable) is removed far from al kind of Idolatry: that is, from
the adulterous and pernicious worship of any other God. Wherefore to what
kind of life soever thou addict thy self, or what kind of study soever thou
do enter into, vvherin thou think to abide and continue, thou may
exercise thy self in the word of God and in his commandments: and from thy
very infancy embrace this doctrine. For the mind of man endued from his
tender years with the word of God, and defended by him as with a hedge, shall
boldly and povverfullie defend it self against al lusts and monstrous
vices. Threnor. 5
Hence it came, that Ier^m comfortablie says: It is a good thing for man if
he have taken unto him the yoke of God from his youth. For as Solomon says:
Pro. 22
Look what way a young man enters into in his youth, that vvare will he not
forsake when he is old. To which that saying of C^p^ian agreeeth: That cannot
be suddenly and upon a stomach forsaken, which alvvaies used in youth waxes
old with the aged. For what thing soever a man uses in his infancy, the same
in old age can hardly be left off. Hence comes it, that by continual
custom, we see so many old drunkards, Lechers, and lascivious men ^uerie
where, Job 20
in such sort, that as Job says: Their very bones are corrupt with the vices
of their youth: that is, they have lived so lascivious and wanton beyond
decency and regard of their age, that their vices are grown to such a
greatness, that they can by no means shake them off.

But there are some, who when young years begin to be abated, and their
wanton heat is somewhat aswaged (for that age to wantonness is very
subject) they leap back and give themselves to thriftinesse, and blameless
conuersations. So says Cicero in his Oration for Celius: There have been
many most excellent and honorable men, in ours and our ancestors memory,
whose lusts of youth when they began to wax cold, became in old age men of
excellent virtues. But as there be many to whom this happens, who either are
cloyed with the loathsomeness of their former lives, or by a secret inspiration
from above, or else by their friends admonitions and exhortations stirred to
more discretion: yet are there many who carried away headlong with their
own opinion, are altogether frustrate of amendment of life: so that delay to
them is dangerous, and the occasion of repentance proffered them slippeth
away, before such time that with the hatred of their vices, they can lay hold
on the profitable instructions of life. Wherefore it is better, all delaie set
apart, to bestow some labor in the polishing of our lives, and in our youth
rather to accustom our selves to the best way, then by procrastination delaie
the occasion of a better life. Ephesians. 5 Colos 4
The Apostle Paul urges this in many places, and counsels us in the course
of this life to walk warily and circumspectly not as fools, but as wise
redeeming the time, for the days are evil. In which words, Galat. 6
he warns all sorts of people in this life not to let slip the opportunity
of our salvation, but at all times to take it when it least an^e and to redeem
it with the loss of al other things whatsoever, least at unawares contrary to
our expectation, we chance to be overtaken in our carelessness. Moreover,
Matthew. 13 Luke, 12
Christ does also stir us up in many places, awaking the negligent and
careless to watchfulness, diligence and carfulness; exhorting them by manic
examples to attend to their salvation, as valiant and courageous soldiers, who
placed in their corpse of guard, stand alvvaies ready girte and never forsake
their watch, least any at vnavvares break into the camp. Cap. 2.
Abacuc uses the same metaphor, saying: I will stand upon my guarde or watch
tovver, and I will set my foot upon my munition, and will consider what the Lord
says unto me. He takes on him the person of a vvatchmanne, which secretly
observes the attemptes and ambushes of his adversary, fixing his mind and
cogitations upon God, in whose trust he opposes himself against the enemy
of mankind the Devil, and stops the entrance of him and his accomplices. Luke,
12 Matthew. 24 1 These. 5 2 Pet. 3 Math. 25.
Our Savior Christ brings fit similitudes wherevvith he admonishes every
one of us of our duties: namely, from a guarde or scout in an army, from the
thief and oppressor by night, from the sudden anguish of a woman in
travail, from a bridegroom preparing his marriage: M^^ke 2 Luke 2.
from the secret coming of a master of a samilie: from the approach of war and
destruction: from famine and imminent danger: from a fig tree bringing forth
vvilde figs: from the day of death and judgment: with many other wherewith he
plucks us by the ears, and makes us attentive to hear the works of our
salvation. We have a notable example delivered to young men to frame a good
life by in Christ himself when he was at that age: who grevve up both in age
and wisdom before God and men; whose modesty in good manners, made him
gracious and favorable amongst al men: whom it becomes us chiefly to
imitate, and by his example to approve our pains and diligence both in city
and country. Now because our Savior Christ at 12. years of age, showed great
note of his towardlines amongst wise men, and spoke many things earnestly and
to purpose, and when he was asked a^^e question would answer mildly and
modestly without any show of arrogancy or pride, which vices are wont to be
in the ouerhastie, foolhardie and rash wits of youth: I interpret Christ to
have great reason in this action to do it, to the end our young men following
his example, should show some sign of their towardlines in their youth, and
give some hope to their parents and others, that they are like to become
virtuous. But because they have need of a conductor which as a guide may show
them the way, I will show them the path wherein they shall go, and what examples
of life they shall follow, and to what authors they shall addict themselves,
whereby they may come to perfect knowledge, or at leastwise come near unto it.

What Authors we may best use to file the tongue and instruct the mind, and what
arts ought most especially to be learned. Chap. 12.
TAke unto thee such choice Authors, that* thou may set them before thee as
most honest to read, and profitable to follow. For it is a very foolish thing
in imitation or emulation, not to follow the best patterns. Sowing has taught
us that in the very nature of it, in which we are wont to commit the best and
finest wheat to the furrovves of the earth. The same also is vviselie regarded
in grafting, in which we take the best and fruitfullest siens or shootes, and
graft them on another tree. Yea and which is also wont to be observed and kept
in painting, Music, Poetry and Oratorie: in all which ye curious aemulator does
desire to imitate the perfectest patterns and such as are don at an inch. 1
Cor. 12
And this does Paul also teach us to observe in those things that belong to
godliness and the gifts of the spirit, that we might attain and come to
those things that are most powerful and excellent. For whosoever frames
either his study or course of life after this sort, shall never repent
himself of his labor and pains bestovved thereon. This also is a common
practice amongste them, that addict themselves to any kind of superstitious
living, and of such also as are ^ude of speech, which because it is not in use
among the learned, are forced to take great pains to vnlearn their Barbarism.
In which practice, methinkes the mother and nurse of good learning, Italy and
the learned Greece are much to be praised: whose custom France and the Low
countries cease not to follow, in that they lay before their youth the best
patterns of learning. For by this means it falls out the^r youth are not
only endued with purity of words, and elegancie of speech, but also quickly
attain to the knowledge of the matter.

The Authors judgment on Heathen writers. Chap. 13.
ALbeit there be many unjust iudgers of causes, which do exclude and hiss
out of al schools profane Authors (as they improperlie call them) and will
not that any examples, either to file the tongue, or frame a good life to be
fetched out of them: yet are there Poets and Orators, both comical, tragical,
and historical, which may help the studious youth to the knowledge of words
and matter, to the noble and liberal Sciences, and to sound and perfect
discipline: yea, they do open a speedy and easy passage to all of them.
Deservedly therefore and for great cause, are these studies renowned, with
the names of humanity and more excellent learning, because they do indue our
tender and young youths with curtesy, meekness, and pleasing conditions. From
these studies also, men of more years and riper discretions, do gather honest
delights, and shake off the troubles of this life which are ready to
ouervvhelme them in their business. And hence it came, that Saint Basil
surnamed the great, invited and willed his cousins, not only to read holy
and sacred writers, but also earnestly to peruse the works of Orators and
Poets.

Of Poets, and what profit youth and age get by reading them. Chap. 14.
How exact an instructor of tongue and manners an Orators kinsmanne a Poet is
(by which name is meant a teacher of the liberal arts and of good life)
Horace in these verses follovving shows: Os tenerum pueri balbumque poeta
figurat, Lib. 2. ^d August.

Torquet ab obsoenis iam nunc sermonibus aurem,
Mox etiam pectus praeceptis format amicis,
Asperitatis, and inuidiae corrector, and irae,
Recte fact a refert, orientia tempora notis
Instruit exemplis, inopem solatur and aegrum.
which is: The Poet frames the tender mouth of every stutting child,
He turns his cares ^^o^ silthy words and makes his speech more
And after yt he frames h^s heart with precepts a^ a friend, (mild)
His churlish speech, his envious looks, and angry heart amends,
His good deeds tells, his youth instructs we patterns that be plain,
He comfort the needy man, and him that pines with pain,


And after he repeateth certain profitable precepts, as not to use youth too
severely, not with threatenings or imperiously, least they be weary of well
doing, but rather with that moderation and art, that horse keepers and
breakers do their stout horses, who by gentle handling and stroking of them,
do bring them to mount and rear under them, and with a kind of artificial
play, Vir. gec^g. 3
as Virgil says: Insultare s^lo, ac gressum gl^merare super^um, which is To
prance on ground, and amble out ave^^^ stately pace.

Neither do the delights of these studies stir up the minds and courages
only of young men, but is also of great use with the ancient, if at any time
they have leisure to breath themselves from their business abroad and to cease
from their serious and weighty assayres elsewhere. Cicero and Fabius do
witness, that there were an ancient kind of Poets, renowned in former ages
before Theophrastus: Iab. 10. cap. 1
for it is manifest they were the first that brought the rude, runnagate, and
wild men living like beasts, into a civil kind of life and society, In art.
Po^.
which Horace also finely expresses in theseverses: Syluestres homines sacer
interpresque Deorum,
Caedibus and victu foedo deterruit Orpheus,
Dictus ob hoc lenire tygres, rabidosque leones,
Dic^tus and Amphion Thebanae conditor arcis,
Saxa mouere sono testudin^s and prece blan da,
Ducere quo vellet. Fuit haec saptentia quondam
Publica priuatis secernere, sacra prophanis,
Concubitu prohibere vago dare iura maritis,
Oppida moliri, leges incidere ligno.
Hic honor and nomen diuinis vatibus, atque
Carminibus venit.
Good Orpheus th^nterpretor of all the gods did fear
The savage men from murdrous facts and lives that filthy were,
And for that cause was Lions fierce and Tigers said to tame,
And Amphion that builded Thebes has also had the name,
With sound of lute and pleasing words to move and stir the stones
And lead the^ where so ere he would: such force had wisdom once,
To sever each man's goods apart, the sacred from profane,
To prohibit adultery and wedlocks rites explane.
To build up towns and make good laws which were ingrau'd in wood.
And thus they honored Poets once and verses that were good.


Of the use and profit of Histories. Chap. 15.
SEeing that a history, that is, a faithful narration of things done, has
no less profit then delight: for besides the pleasure we take in reading it,
does it not bring unto us also most plentiful fruits of wisdom? Therefore
it is very meet and requisite that every man do exercise him self therein.
For that the fruit of a history is very great, Titus Liuius incidently
declares in these words. It is a history that in the knowledge of things is
most* profitable and fruitful: there may thou see and behold documents of al
examples laid up as it were in some excellent monument: thence may thou
gather that which thou thy self and thy family may imitate, and there may
thou find ways how to avoid bad enterprises, and dangerous events. And when
one demanded Zen^ by what means a man may be happy, if (says he) thou
behold attentively the age that went before thee, that is: If thou diligently
mark the Noble acts of thy Elders, and their excellent virtues. For a history
as Ci^ero says, is the light of truth, ye keeper of time, the life and
strength of memory, the mistress of our life and the messe^ger of antiquity, in
which al things are written finely and plentifully, and as it ought to be
faithfully according as it was achieved and done. And as for the holy
Bible, does it not lay open unto us a large field of Histories, and shevve
unto us plentifully things done of old? From whence we may gather
profitable instructions and fit patterns of a good life: of which many of
them do lay open to our eyes and understanding the vvonderfull judgments of
God, and do vvarne every one of us, how detestable a thing before God is
Idolatry, the contempt of gods word, the irreuerent regard of him, and the
trust in any other but him alone.

Of Comedies. Chap. 16.
A Comedy is a near kinsman to a history, and a glass of man's life, in
which one may see and behold his manners, affections, and the express image of
all his life, under the person of another man; and may mark and observe
thereby his own vices and virtues; yea, and that as Tullie says, after a
pleasant, elegant, civil, witty, and merry fashion: which kind of exercises
almost all Nations use in their own tongue: and that sometimes with such a
large scope and liberty of speech, that as Horace says, liberty among
players became a vice, because they were thereby more prompt to follovv vice.
For they did not in this their liberty, only defame the common and base sort
of people: but also disquieted rulers and great men, even in the open
Theaters of their Cities, and sharply taunted them in unseemly rimes. Yet if
they had done this thing without any reproach or stain of the good name of
them that were good, and had not so inueyed against them with their seditious
verses, but had sharpened their tongues against them only that had deserved
it, then might it seem tolerable: because the touching of such sores might
perhaps have brought the sick to repentance, and have put them in mind to have
regarded their duties. The Dutchman calls this license Batementen, (that is in
English, Private plays) and the rhyme or meter their Enterludes end in Rym often
Dychte (that is rhyme or meter.) Now these delights and pleasures of wit, ought
to be learned betimes while we are young, and not after we are stricken in
years: because these studies agree best with flourishing youth, albeit the
ancient may sometimes delight themselves therevvith, having had a good smacke
of it before in their youth. For those things that are wholesome and profitable
to virtue and honesty, let not him that is grown to a good age; no nor he
that is old and far stricken in years, be ashamed to learn: for to learn
good things there is no time too late, and to forsake vice never out of season.

Of eloquence, and the art of speaking which is needeful and profitable for all
men what Language soever he speak. Chap. 17.
Rhetoric or the Art of Oratorie, whose office is to speak aptly,
distinctly and finely; and with choice words and grave sentences to entice and
inflame the minds of his auditorie, is most needful and profitable for such as
execute the office of preaching, rule in a Commonwealth, bear the office of
Magistracy, for such as are appointed to be Majors or sherifes in Cities, and
which must live among discordes and strifes in a camp, sedition and vprores in
a City and Commonwealth, whose parts it is, and whose authority requires to
appease the furious minds of a ^ude multitude, and to rule them with good
counsel and words of authority. For subjects are not alvvaies brought to
obedience by threatninges, fear, violence, cruelty, svvord and punishment (no
they must not go so far unless the matter cannot be appeased without those
bloody remedies:) but they must be reclaimed from wicked enterprises to their
duties, by fair words, wholesome exhortations, and countenances full of gravity
and constancy. The selfsame wisdom and discretion ought masters of
families to use toward their servants, and teachers of children toward
their scholars.

To what Arts the studies of humanity do open us the way. Chap. 18.
THe studies of humanity and liberal sciences do not only polishe the tongue
with intising words and sweet sentences, but also avails to get the
pro^itable and necessari^ Arts of this life: to wit, Physic, Surgeri^, and
the Civil Law, and (in which the mind of man takes great joy and pleasure)
Phylosophie, not only human, but also Divine, whereby through Christ to
come to the knowledge, love, and Faith in God. For all Arts in which manne
diligently exercises himself, must be referred hither, and only aim at
this white.

The professors of vvorldelie wisdom cou^de never attain to this: who
wandering from the verity did thrust into men's minds falsehood for truth,
vain conceits for sound opinions, forgerie for synceritie, doubts for
certainty, and harms for helps: and all because they wanted the spirit of
God. Now seeing that among all other arts, there are only three which bring
not only honor and profit to the professors, (albeit profit should not
be so much regarded) but also is of great use to maintain the lives of the
common sort of people: thou must betimes deliberate which of them thou haste
a desire to follow, and to which by Nature thou art most apt and sit.
Theology (that is, the knowledge of Divinity, given by the inspiration of
the holy Ghost) frames the mind to godliness, and instructs thee which
way, or after what forte GOD will be worshipped, and painteth out unto thee
the way of thy salvation, which so it be soundly delivered) leaves all
other Arts so far behind it, as Heaven is distaunt from the earth, or as
strong things differ from the weak. That part of this knowledge which
indueth the mind with faith showed out to the World in the works of
Charity, is necessary for all men to obtain their salvation, as I have
elsewhere more at large shevved: For by faith in Christ, we have access
and entrance in one spirit unto the Father. Physic prescribing a spare and
temperate diet, provides for health by the use of wholsome receiptes, and
heals all diseases. This as Plutarch witnesses, is of such account amongste
the liberal Sciences, that for honor and pleasure, it is nothing at all
inferior to Civil and politic government. And it brings such profit
unto the students thereof, that besides the increase of all things belonging
unto house keeping, it is most healthful for the body, which is more
excellent then large possessions. But what delight and profit the diligent
se^ing into the nature of herbs brings, together with the knoledge of their
force and strength, and what pleasure and delight is in the anatomising and
cutting up of men and vvomens bodies, and in the diligent observation of their
parts: no man can be easily persuaded, unless by use and exercise he has
practiced it. Now the knowledge of the Civil law has always bin had in
great prize and estimation, whose office is to rule Cities by counsel, to
establish good Laws in them, and to correct and amend them with judgments.
Consulere in medium, ac r^bus succurrere fessis,
Parcere subiectis and debellare superbos. (...).

Which is, To counsel men indifferenthe, and bring the wronged to right*
To spare the humble and throw down proud trusters in their might.


Which order if any man think to contemn, he (as Cicero says) not only
violently takes away the bonds of true judgment, but also of common profit
and life. For by the help of the law we see Common wealths to be vpheld, and
all controversies betvveen Citizens and Country people, to be ended in peace
and tranquillity, and that only by the authority of good laws: whereby
princes and magistrates do exercise justice, and receiving power from God, do
punish malefactors and wicked persons: and on the contrary, defend those that
are good. And therefore it is, that God will have great honor and obedience
performed to kings, ^om. 13
such as govern the commonwealth, so they command things that be just and
agreeable with Gods word.

That we must cleave to some settled profession. Chap. 19.
Seeing the most delectable studies do so please many, that they only spend
their time and wax old in them, never bending themselves to any sound
profession: I thought it not amiss to advertise all men that desire to receive
any fruit by learning, and would not spend their cost and labor in vain, to
addict themselves to that profession whereunto they are most fit by nature,
least they should seem to attempt any thing altogether against Nature: then
earnestly to apply the studies of their professions whereunto they are
addicted, and with all their force to attain to the perfection thereof, that
applying their studies after this sort, they may (so it may be gotten) attain
to a full and perfect knowledge therein. And for other delectable studies, let
him prove them sometimes by fits, as it were breathing or resting himself
from his settled labor, and yet with such a condition, that he quickly return
again to the task and office of his undertaken profession, and call home
again his mind to his intermitted studies.

What studies and exercises are most profitable and fruitful, and what are
hurtful and pernicious. Chap. 20.
WE must also bevvare of that which diverse do practice in many professions,
which is, that we bestow not too much labor and pains about difficult,
obscure, and altogether unprofitable things: but if thou spend much care and
study upon things that be honest and worthy to be known, I will highly
commend thee. For there are some, which busying themselves in some studies,
bestow all their pains in those thing* which are full o^ toil, doubts, and
griefs, and yet return no profit to their labor: as is that over ^urious
marking and judging of the stars, a vanity fetched from the Chaldeans: to
which our rash professors leaning unto, do certainly tell what shall happen to
men, to what fortune they are borne, what shall be the end and success of
all their actions: never asking counsel at the Providence of God, by whose
will the whole world is governed: whose rash and doubtful predictions Esai^
quippeth, and laugheth to scorn such as ask counsel and demand an Oracle or
sentence from such deceivers. Cap. 44, 47
For thus he derideth them. Let the soothsayers which contemplate the stars
of heaven, salute thee, and let them reckon the months, and thence tell thee
things to come. Cap. 10
Iere^^e also does the like. Learn not of the Gentiles, nor fear not the
signs of heaven which the Gentiles fear, because the laws of them are
vain, and their demonstrations are deceitful and foolish. By which words, the
holy prophets do not altogether condemn and reiecte Ast^ologie, which has
also her use and profit: but they scorn such professors of it, who under
counterfeit and deceivable colors of Divination or telling of Fortune, do
blind the common sort of people, and deceive them that are credulous with a
vain expectation of things to come. A near kinsman to this is Chiromancie or
Palmestrie, which by looking on the lines and wrinkles of the hand, tells
woonders. The smoke and deceit also of Alcumistrie, where the trifling
Al^umist persuades himself he can turn silver, b^asse, and many other
things into gold. And which is worse then all these, Necromancie or
Coniuration: who are wont to raise dead bodies out of their graves, and of
them to ask Oracles and answers: 1 Kin. 29
as we read Phytonissa did, who to gratify Saul, brought Samuel or rather a
counterfeit and fained shape of Samuel, to be seen of him. Of the said nature
also, are those Diuinations, which call spirits to appear in water and fire,
which we may call Hydromancers and Pyromancers, and many other iuglinges of
diuelles and inchauntments of Sorcerers, Hariolation, Aruspitiation,
Auguration, Auspication, that is Divination by seeing into the bowels of
beasts, and foretellings by the chirping and songs of birds. To which also I
refer al such witches, wisardes, hagges and Sorcerers, as do hurt and annoie
their neighbors Cattle, and with the help of the Devil do steal away
their milk and butter, spoil their harvest and vintage, and take away
strength from men and makes them so feeble and weak that they are altogether
unable to perform the duty of marriage, of which strong men have often
complained to me* lamenting that they were become Eunuchs, and like
Geldinges, to their own shame and their Wives hurt and hinderance. To whom
I have labored to give remedies and preservatives, applying unto them such
herbs as by the gift of God, are very forceable and of great efficacy
against such inchantmentes. So that to tire the wits with these witcheries,
is not only superfluous and unprofitable, but also deadly and damnable. For
by the laws of God and man, Deuteronomy, 18
they ought to be punished with Death: and such as with the help and
furtherance of the Devil do exercise those wicked and ungodly Arts, should
be bound to a stake and burnt alive with fiery fagots. By what means these
enchantments may be resisted and expelled, I will show you in the end of this
book, where we will entreat of the majesty of the name of Jesus, least here
I should interrupt the order and course of my speech.

We ought to have no less regard to our minds and souls, then unto our
bodies. Chap. 21
SEeing man is compact and made of a soul and body, we must with all
foresight have a care of both. The soul is the chiefest part of man, and the
body is the house of the soul: we use for the most part the commandment of
the soul, and the service and ministry of the body; and therefore ought we
to have great care of both. For if we take care that our houses stand not in a
fennie nor plashie ground, and that the roof or top of it lie not open to the
wind and rain, nor that the wales do chop and chinke; and seeing that we
take care that our garments be not dustie, but that we air them, least mothes
and worms do overcome them: how much more ought we to provide for the body,
least the vices thereof by consent and law of fellowship infect the mind, and so
remove from one to the other. For Horace says: -- Corpus onustum
Externis vitijs, animum quoque praegrauat vna,
Atque affigit humo diuinae particulam aurae.
And if the body once with vice do outwardly abound,
It waieth down and fixes fast the soul unto the ground.


To which agrees that of the wise man, The body that is corrupt greeueth the
mind and humbles the understanding, thinking many things. Therefore some
thing must be given to the body, by whose help (as Pliny says) the soul
is sustained. And that did Paul very well perceive, 1 Timothy 5.
when he forbad Timothy to drink any more water, prescribing him a moderate
use of wine, wherewith he might strengthen his stomach, and be the more
cheereful in delivery of the Gospel. For the body being made perfect, is more
profitablie serviceable to the mind, not hindering or troubling it from
contemplating and studying of heavenly things. But our chiefest care must be,
to bring it an ornament to set it out, which may be done by no better means,
then by a firm and constant faith in God, which lifts up man to a certain
hope of immortality, and takes away from him the fear and terror of death.
And as food is the nourishment of the body: so is the word of God the food
and nourishment of the soul, whereby peace and tranquillity comes to the
mind, then which there can be nothing more to be wished and desired of man in
this life. But with what anguishe and disquiet of mind the wicked are vexed:
what bitter torture of conscience they feel, the very external habites of
their wicked bodies do testify. For wickedness is such a revenger of it
self, that look into what mind it has once entered, it never leaves it
void of care, but alvvaies vexes it continually with trouble. The which
Esaie expresses in an excellent similitude, Cap. 57
fetched from the rage and storms of the Sea, saying: The heart of the wicked
rages like the sea, whose affections abound with filthiness and villainy:
that is, their minds which are defiled with wickedness and villainy, are
alvvaies tumultuous, troublesome, and disquieted. For how is it possible that
he can lead a svveet and pleasant life, or that his mind should be at peace or
rest, who carries about with him a body infected with filthy and vicious
diseases, and a mind polluted with foul vices? Wherefore, seeing the greatest
part of evils do rise from the corrupt affections of the mind, we must by
all means possible abstain from them. Moreover, we must with the like care and
endeavor, deliver the body from al kind of diseases, least it carry any
blemishe or contagion to the soul. For seeing that filthy and corrupt humors
do bring hurtful vapors to the brain, they must of force provoke the mind
to many mischiefs.

What means a man may use to keep his body in perfect health. Chap. 22.
ASpare and temperate diet drives away all diseases, and keeps the body in
perfect health, by taking those things that are necessary to corroborate
strength and confirm health. Artis medi. 85
And these by Galen are called causes of conservation, because they are fit to
preserve the state of the body, so that we fitly and conveniently use them.
Our later Physicians term them unnatural causes, not because they are
against nature, but because they are without the body, and are not bred in
us as the humors are. In use and effect if we take them not orderly and in
good sort, they affect nature and her powers with sundry discommodities. And
of this sort is the air, meat and drink, sleeping and waking, fullness and
emptiness, the affections and motions of the mind: all which man's body
requires to keep and defend it. Now because the most powerful part of our
health does consiste in a good diet: we are greatly to regard what part
hurts and what profits the body. And because Gluttony is no less
loathsome then hurtful and pernicious to health: let us take no more meat and
drink then the necessity of nature requires, that ye strength of the body
may be nourished and not oppressed. For a moderation in diet is most
profitable and necessary for them that are studious of learning, and matters
of great importance, for those that watch long and endure labor, and for such
as execute public offices: for temperaunce brings health and strength; it
makes the spirits both animal and vital (which are ascribed to the heart and
brain) to be cheerful and lively: so that whatsoever a man conceiueth in
his mind, he may perfect and execute it speedily without any molestation.
But common experience shows by daily examples, that excess in diet, and
intemperancie of life bringes diseases, hinders good studies, troubles
honest cogitations, breaks vvatchfulnesse, cloudeth the cheerfulness of the
mind, quenches the power of the soul, makes men slothful, vnmanlie,
sluggishe, idle, sleepy, and to give themselves unto no excellent exercise.

Wherefore, whosoever addicteth himself to the study of learning, and
bends his mind to learn any matter of moment; must so moderate his affairs
that he do nothing after his own lust, but that his desire be subject to
reason, applying all things to the use and necessity of life and Nature.
Christ requires the same of his professors, and reclaimeth them in these words
to sobriety: Take heed least at any time your hearts be ouercom with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and ye day com suddenly
upon you: for it shall come as a snare upon all that dwell on ye face of the
earth. In which words he fasteneth sobriety in the minds of men, and
shakes off the love of earthly things, and will have them to continue in so
doing till the end of their lives, least worse things happen unto them.
That also is an excellent saying of Cornelius Celsus: (...). 1
When thou come to meat, too much sacietie is never profitable, and too
much abstinence is also as unprofitable. For neither hunger after fullness, nor
fulness and unmeasureable gluttony after hunger, are any way wholesome
Wherefore very fond are they and unadvised, who having been at a supper,
banquet, or feast, do so pine themselves afterward with hunger, that
oftentimes thorough faintness and weakness of spirit, they give up the ghost,
or at leastwise with sweet savors must be fetched again from their swounds.
Others again with overmuch fasting and pinching their bellies with hunger,
when they come to good cheer load themselves so full of meat and drink,
that unless they be unbraced, would very near burst: yet sometimes to sup
liberally, and to satiate him self at bankets in season and proportion, can
neither be hurtful nor worthy of blame: the rather, if it be don moderately
and in a mean, as kept within the bounds of temperance. For with such
refections, sorrovv and sadness is expelled, which with overmuch care do
dull and darken the mind, which makes melancholic students (their spirits
being weakened and spent) to be froward, silent, churlish, and estranged from
all good fellowship, and familiar conversation, which affections ought to be
most estranged from lovers of learning, politicians and scholars.

We must take our meat at the liberal and bountiful hand of God, with grateful
and thankeful hearts. Chap. 23.
NOw because thorough the bountifulness of God we do plentifully and
abundantly enjoy all his creatures, and that all of them from the beginning of
the world were appointed to the use and profit of man: therefore so soon as
thou art set down at the table, before thou touch either bread or meat,
lift up thy mind to the Creator of all things, and desire of him by prayer,
that all things which thou shall receive may be profitable to thee by faith,
and powerful to nourish and foster our bodies: for neither the nutrimentall
strength, nor vegetative force consists in brothes and meats, but in the word
of God, which indueth them with that virtue and strength. Wherefore let us refer
al things to God: for besides Paul, Prudentius also tells us from whom we
must look for our food and helps of this life, 1 Timothy 4 Romans 14 1 Cor. 9
to wit from God the father, by whom through Christ we obtain all things:
For thus does he direct his prayers to God: Christ prius genitore potens,
Huc nitido precor intuitu
Flecte salutiferam faciem,
Front serenus and irradia,
Nominis vt sub honor tui
Has epulas liceat capere.
Te sine dulce nihil Domine,
Nec iuuat ore quid appetere,
Pocula ni prius at que cibos
Christ tuus favor imbuerit,
Omnia sanctificante fide,
Fercula nostra Deum sapiant,
Christus and influat in patinas,
Scria, ludicra, verba, iocos:
Demque quod sumus at que agimu,
Trina superna regat Pietas.
Christ with thy father most of might
Bow down thy face that is so bright,
And look on us with thy clear sight
shine on us with thy face:
That through the honor of thy name
We may without deserved blame,
Prepare our feasts and take the same
in reverence of thy grace.
For nothing is without thee sweet,
To take our meat it is not meet
Unless Christ's favor first do greet
and bless our meat and drink.
For all our feasts should smacke of thee
Through faith whereby we holy be,
Then in our bankets we shall see
Christ joy to joy will link:
And to conclude what ere we are,
What ere we do, whet' eat or spare,
The trinity will have this share,
to rule us as he list.


After the refreshing of our bodies, he inciteth us again by the example of
Christ to thankfulness. Marth. 26 Mark 14
For our Savior after Supper, would not rise from the table till he had sung a
psalm: whereby he would have us to acknowledge all things to come from the
rich and bountiful hand of God; and by his good gift, become profitable unto
us. For thus does he further exhort us to thank God after meat.

Pastis visceribus ciboque sumto,
Quem lex corporis imbecilla poscie,
Laudem lingua Deo patri rependat.
Sic nos muneribus tuis refecti,
Largitor Deus omnium benorum,
Grates reddimus and sacramus hymnos.
Our bodies refreshed and meat once received,
The which our weak nature required to have,
Let not God the father of praise be bereaved.
So being refresht with the gifts we did crave,
O father the giver of every good thing,
We thank thee and dedicate to thee a hymn.
There are sundry patterns of this kind of prayer amongste the best
approved writers: there are also many such scattered here and there in the
Bible: but there is none of more force to obtain that we ask, then that
which is prescribed by Christ. For whatsoever we ask or conceive in mind,
Matthew. 6 Luke 11.
ought to be referred hither, or rather flow from this fountain. For although
it stand but of a few words, and is divided but into six or seven members,
yet is it so abundantly replenished with mysteries, that it comprehends in
it all things* which either belong to the glory of God, our own use and
necessity, or else to the utility and profit of our neighbors.

What regard we ought to have of hospitality. Chap. 24.
NOw as touching that which belongs to the intertaining and ordring of such
ghests as thou have invited to thy table, and of such also as haunt and
frequent to thy costs, thy feasts and bankets unbidden: thou must wisely and
circumspectly consider.

First therefore it is very meet that all men regard hospitality, Ro^. 1^ 1 Timothy 3 Titus 1 2 Pet. 4 Heb. 13 Luke, 14
which besides others the Apostles do commend, and Paul greatly requires it
in a bishop, and that our houses lie open for all honest citizens to come into.
For Cicero says, it is a very comely thing that great men's houses should lie
open for honest and well known guestes. In which duty of humanity to the
end ambition, ostentation, preparation, and respect of person should be
avoided: Christ commanded the poor and needy to be called to his supper,
hoping for neither reward nor recompense but only at the hands of his heavenly
father, who rewards al things with interest. But because there are some so
brazen faced and impudent, who past all shame and honesty do voluntarily
intrude themselves into bankets and feasts, and so soon as their panches are
filled depart secretly without taking leave of their host: I think it very
requisite you put a difference and make good choice of those you mean to make
your guestes, so that none but such as are modest and spare eaters be admitted
to your bankets. And let all greedy guts, cormorantes, gluttons, rauenors, and
table hauntors, which against the will of the master of the feast do impudently
come and thrust themselves into the house, be driven out of the doors, or
after some civil sort be put away; or if that cannot be effected, to twite
and floute them at supper with such notable sayings and merry quips as may put
them in mind of their duty. To which purpose as there might be many pretty
sayings alleged, so let this be fastened on thy door posts where thou
suppest, to the end that standing where they may read it, it may put them in
mind of decency, and make them ashamed. Vis conuiua meae accubare mensae?
Haec seruaparadoxa: Neminem nec
Dentatis salibus, nec inuido ore
Suggilla, appositis cibis palatum
Apta. Quem nequeas probare, noli
Nec traducere, nec calumniari.
AEquales cyathos cave propines.
Frontis pone minas seuerioris:
Et profer Veneres, iocos, lepores,
Grates solue Deo hospitirepende
Quod non messuit in suo nouali,
Haec fac, si cupias bis esse gratus.
That is: Will thou at my table come sit as a guest?
Keep well these precepts, them flout not at board,
Speak ill of no man, but eat the meat dressed,
Whom thou dislikest defame not in word.
Look that thou drink not nie cups always dry,
I brook not threatenings, nor brows that do frown,
Talk thou of wit, and iestes, and venerie,
Thank God th'host reapt not a bare fallow ground,
This do if thou will twice welcome be found.


Now that we ought not to neglect the familiar conversation of our bidden
guests, but seek to maintain the laws of humanity and friendship, this
proverb shows, thou shall not pass by my table nor pastime. For when our
ancestors banquetted one another by turns, they fostred and cherished their
new begun friendship with these notes, and confirmed it with common
hospitality. Wherefore our elders would blame them of disloialtie and
unfaithfulness, which vvoulde pass by their doors and not be partakers of
their pastime and good cheer: that is, break the badge of amity, and violate
the law of friendship: so that they were knit together by hospitality and
conversation, and by partaking one of another table. To this badge of
friendship belongs David's complaint: Psalm 4^. John 13
who taking upon him the person of Christ, accuses his friend that under a
fained show of honesty and color of godliness, shrouded disloyalty and
unfaithfulness. For after this sort does he expostulate and reason with
him. The man that I favored, in whom I hoped and put my trust, he who eat
of my bread: that is, lived with me and took part with me at meat, he lift
up his foot against me. Now I could very well have born it, and with less
indignation, if mine enemy crying open war by his heraults, had set upon me:
but for him that was my most familiar friend, and with whom I was wont to
communicate al my secrets, to intend craft, deceit, and guile against me, to
set himself against me and kick me with his heel, is so intolerable, that I
cannot endure it. In ye like manner is Christ moved, and for the same fact:
saying, He that eat bread with me, he has lift up his foot against me:
that is, My domestical enemy (then which there is none more dangerous) goes
about secretly and privily to oppress me. A metaphor borrowed from such
friends as at the f^st show seem to be friends indeed, but at length with
their deceiptfull poisoned hearts do so secretly strike one and spurn him
behind his back, that he cannot tell who it is that hurtes him. The
Dutchman terms this by a prouerbiall figure, To strike one with the edge
turned from him: that is, making a show of friendship before his face, but
behind his back an open enemy. For thus say they: Van vachten, end met de
cromme-pticke ^^^ken: (that is, A sleep or behind his back) David has
another complaint, much like unto this, where he lamenteth himself to be
injured by him, whose familiarity he most used, and who was ried unto him in
a most straight league of friendship, yea and the only partaker of all his
counselles, and to whom he only revealed his secrets, Psalm. 54
shaking him up thus for the greatness of his fault. If mine enemy had
spoken il of me I could have borne it, and if they that hated me had lift
them up against me, I could perhaps have hid my self from them: but thou
man that wast partaker of my soul, whom I took for my guide and only
friend, which eat at my table, and was conversant with me in the Temple of
God, etc. Which verses are very patheticall, that is, full of affection:
whereby he declares, how greeuouslie and with what indignation he did endure
him, that shrouding himself under the shape of a friend became unto him a
deadly enemy, that openly and privately sought his destruction. Wherein he
excellently painteth out a crafty and deceitful man, who under the visard of
a certain counterfeit love and friendship, does flatter his friend in word,
show, and countenances, when invvardlie he hatcheth poison to destroy him.
Which made him in these words to aggrauate his disloialtie: His words are as
butter in the mouth, but he pitcheth a battle against me in his heart: yea,
his words are as smooth as Oil, but his deeds are as sharp as swords or
darts. By which similitude, he painteth out faithless and malicious
friends, which utter one thing in words, and pretend another in their
hearts, which carry bread in one hand, and a stone in the other. Of which
disloyalty Judas Iscariot was a notable example, and many more by him learned
to deceive their friends.

Of the care and government of a house. Chap. 25.
TOuching that which appertains to Oeco nomie, that is, the government of a
house, which as Tullie says, is the servant and handmaide of the body to
strengthen and adorn it: it behooves every man to be wise and painful in
it, that the increase of it be referred to the necessary use and commodity
of this life, and not to prodigality and delicacie; not to great cheer and
unmeasureable making of bankets, which vvasteth wealth and consumes it be it
never so great. Wherefore in decking the table and making good cheer, good
husbandry and moderation of diet ought chiefly to be regarded, and all
provocation of gluttony and lust to be earnestly avoided; and to be short,
all banketting dishes and iunkets which are wont to be brought in at the end
of the feast when every man's stomach is satisfied, whereby we are afresh
provoked to eat. Ephesians 5
This prodigality and excess, besides the spending of a man's wealth, and
the bringing of many diseases: when the wine begins to warm us it stirs
us to wantonness, moves the loins to letcherie, and makes the secret and
hidden parts of man and woman, to be affected to lust, 1 Cor. 7 Romans 13
whereby we begin to itche or (that I may use the Apostles words) to burn:
that is, to be more forcibly provoked to venerie. Wherefore Paul would have
us do nothing to increase the lusts of the flesh, but to refer and do
althinges to the necessity and use of nature, and not to wantonness and
pleasure, which is hurtful both to body and mind. For there is no man that
does so much oppose himself against the sense of nature, that he could endure
his own body to be hated, but rather as Paul says, he nourishes it and
cherishes it, as Christ does his church. By which example, Ephesians. 5
the apostle would have husbands to love their vviues, and care for them as he
would do for his own body, performing those things to the^, y^ Christ does to
his well-beloved spouse the church. But in guiding a house well, and in seeking
the augmentation and increase of it, to the end al things may be done without
shame; thou must so order every thing, that thou neither incur the name of a
prodigal and wastful spender, nor of too covetous and near a niggard. For as
thou must increase thy stock with good husbandry, and augment thy wealth with
sparing; so must thou not bring it to such a straight, that thou defraud thy
nature of her right, nor pinch thy family with want and necessity, like the
filthy and greedy snudges of this world, nor yet be like to those bankerupt
belly gods, which spend their gains and patrimony prodigally, inuiting they
care not what spendthrift companions to aslociate them, till al be spent. But,
as Terence says, He must needs spend that gains: So as Plautus says,
There is no gain where expenses exceed. And as the Dutchman says, Stelt v
teringhe naer v neringhe: So I may say (in converting it to our English
proverb) Cut your coat according to your cloth. Whereby it appears, that we
must moderate our expenses, and square them out according to our gains, least
we wast our wealth and patrimony with too much prodigality. Wherefore the
duty of a painful housekeeper, is to bring out his provision as time
requires, and to store himself again when occasion is proffered, For as the
Proverb says: Sovve thrift in thy ground and thou shall reap it. But it
shall not be much from our purpose, nor from the profit of our commonwealth,
nor from the preservation of our substance: if we allege a Law that Amasis
king of the Egyptians published, Lib. 3. Fr^^^^p
and Solon the lavvgiuer of the Lacedemomans used, wherein it was decreed (as
Herodotus witnesleth) that all men as well borne at home as strangers, should
once a year show to the Rulers of their provinces, by what trade they lived,
and by what means they got their maintenance: and such as could not render a
reason of this, nor approve their lives to be lavvfull and honest, were
executed. By the severity of which commandment, they brideled the idle
persons from filching and stealing, unto which pasle are also brought such as
spend their patrimonies in dicing, whooring, and drinking.

Hence was it, that the Corinthians made a Law for spending against the
prodigal, and such as did lauishlie consume their goods; and such as
banquetted more sumptuously and vvastfullie then their yeerlie reuenevves and
callinges would afford: the which because Diphylis reports it in Atheneus
and Erasmus (who deserved well of all kind of professions) has turned them
into Latin verses, Lib. 6
I will not think much to set them down, to the end our Magistrates may
find means and ways to bring things to such a pass, that Cities and
country corpse may be less troubled with such sturdie beggars, as do day
and night steal the money and goods of honest men, and torment their
bodies, if they tell not where their treasures lie. This Law is described in
these words. Hoc lege cautum est hic apud Corinthios,
Si quempiam obsonare semper splendide
Videmus, hunt rogamus, vnde viuat, and
Quid faciat operis: Si facultates habet,
Vt reditus harum soluere expensas queat,
Perpetimur illumperfrui suis bonis.
Si forte sumtus superat ea quae possidet,
Prohibemus huic ne faciat hoc inposterum:
Ni pareat, iam plectitur mulctagraui.
Sin sumtuose viuit is qui nil habet,
Tradunt cum tortoribus. Proh Hercules!
Nec enim licet vitam absque malo vllo degere
Talem scias, sedest necesse aut noctibus
Abigere praedam, aut fodere muros aedium,
Aut haec patrantumiungier commercio^
Aut in foro agere sycophantam, aut perfidum
Praebere testem. Nos genus hoc mortalium
Eiicimus hac ex vrbe, velut purgamina.
It Is here at Corinth by this Law decreed,
If we perceive a man far over fine,
We ask him how he lives, and what is his trade,
And if we find he has sufficient wealth,
And his revenues will sustain that charge
We give him leave to use his goods at will*
But if by chance his cost exceed his state,
We warn him not to do the like again.
If he^esist, we plague him with a fine.
But if a beggar live deliciouslie
We presently commit him to the gaile:
For know that such a one lives wickedlie,
And either steals men's cattle in the night,
Orbreakes into their houses through the wall,
Or else takes part with them that do such deeds,
Or in the market plays the coosening knave,
Or else at Courts he does false witness bear:
Now all such mates we from our city chase,
E^ecting them as filthy excrementes.


Paul also the Apostle is a severe looker to men's duties, 2 These. 3
who commands that we shake off the drousie evil of idleness and
slothfulness, to take some pains in our handicrafts or occupations, whereby
we may maintain our family: which he vvoulde have so severely looked unto,
that he would have him eat nothing that labors not at all, nor looks to
ye maintenance of himself and his family, but like a d^oane Be lives of the
sweat of other men's brovyes, nay steals away the fruits of other men's
labors, living on the alms and liberality of other men; occupying
themselves about nicenes and curiosity. To which sharp and severe rule,
Paul also reclaimeth thieves, which filtch and steal away other men's goods.
From which he not only warns them to abstain, but that they should spend
upon and relieve the poor with that which they had gained with their honest
labor. So that if any ignominy or discredit come unto the^ by doing of
wicked and infamous crimes, they should take it away by requiting it again
with good deeds to the poor and needy: Luke, 19
as Zacheus did, who having got great wealth by usury, divided it afterward
unto the poor; so that he blotted out the faults of his former life with good
deeds and recompense made by virtuous living: to wit, he altered and changed
his old affections, and shook off the naughtiness and ill custom of his
nature.

We must keep a measure in sleeping and watching. Chap. 26.
LEarned men and such as deal in the government of the Commonwealth among
many other things, they ought to have a great regard of watching and
sleeping: for if these two be moderately used and in due season, they
profit us greatly in the maintenance of health. For besides this, that they
make the body lusty and strong, they also make the mind more prompte and
ready to perform any duty or function whatsoever: for immoderate sleep
makes men blockish, slothful, sluggish, forgetful, and not easily stirred to
take pains in any weighty matter. Wherefore these ought to be stirred up and
incited to take pains, that they might shake off their heaviness and
drowsinesse, and meditate on some thing worthy an honest man. As for sleep
at noone or in the day time, I would not vvish a young man to use it, unless
it be through wearines drawn by his labor and the heat of the vveather, or
else through over much watching the night before; for upon these considerations
he may do it without any inconvenience: otherwise if he use it, it weakneth
his memory, blunteth his understanding, and besides headache makes him blind,
especially if he sleep upon a full stomach. To which also happens this
discommoditie, that after such sleep, he shall be ready to vomit, and do
nothing else but gape, and use to stretch his members every way, whereby the
vapors dispearse themselves clean through the body with a certain
faintness and chilling of an ague, which the Dutchman calls Wanluste, and
the Latins Helucum, which is as much to say in English, as sick of
yesterdaies drink, or this days sleep at noone. But old men and such as are
well stricken in years, may safely sleep after their dinners, so that there be
a little space betvveene dinner and it, especially in the Summer time when
the vveather is hot, which intemperate season does make men drousie and
sleepie. Which sleep they must take either sitting in a chair, or else lying
on a bench, flockbed or mattrisse, laying their heads somewhat high on a pillow
or bolster. For by this liberty of sleeping their spirits both natural and
vital are refreshed and cheered, whereby the powers of the mind which are
resident in the brain receive nourishment. Now for overmuch and unseasonable
watching, as it is hurtful to al ages, so does it most anoy those that are aged
and so does famine also: both which bring drines to ye brains, causes frenzy
and dotage, and makes all the body dry, lean, and like a starueling. But if
through moderate watching, famine, unseasonable sitting up, too much labor and
immoderate venerie or carnal copulation thy strength be consumed, and thy
spirits almost spent, and that the lively sap and vital moisture be wasted
with leanenesse, refresh thy self with moist nourishment and sleepy potions as
Letices, Spinach and malowes al of like force, Atriplexe or Orage, Buglosse or
Burrage, young Poppy seeds, Waterlillie flowers, violet flowers, Pine apples,
sweet almondes, pistacke nuts, the thick juice of barley or strong be re, all
kind of reasins, but especially Reasins of the sun without the stones, and
Corans, Dates, Orenges, Limons and Orengadoes, for by these natural and vital
heat is restored, and the brain which is the seat of the mind is vvashed
with a dew and moist vapor which brings sweet and quiet sleep and rest.
But if a man be sleepy by nature and that his mind is not lusty to undertake
any notable exploit, let him continually give himself to labor and exercise,
let him anoid al meats that are cold and moist in operation, and eat such
meats as are naturally hot to dry up the moist humors which are the only
cause of sleep: of which sort are hisope, rosinary, sage, origane, sweet
Marioran, Sauery, Peniroiall, Coleworts, Ginger, Peper, Nutmeges, Cloves, and
many other which ease the head that is filled with vapors and moist humors,
and cleereth the mind that is clowded with thick mists and makes it fit and
apt to conceive honest cogitations.

What profit and disprofit comes by fullness and emptiness and by binding and
loosing the belly. Chap. 27.
THe like care ought to be of other things that be profitable or hurtful for
health: as fullness and emptiness, whereby the body is either refreshed with
meat and drink, or else being full of humors is emptied. But as a temperate and
spare diet is profitable for the studious and such as bear rule in the common
wealth: so by an over thin and spare diet the spirits are weakened. These men
also must diligently observe, whether their bellies be overmuch bound, or else
too loose: for both these if they exceed the mean, are alike hurtful to health:
for if it run and be more loose then it should be, it makes the body dry and
lean, takes away sleep, causes the brain to be dry and weakeneth the
memory. And if it wax over hard and be too much bound, it blunteth the memory,
blinds the eyes, and makes one sleep unquietly because of thick and foggy
humors it brings to the brain. Now such as make the belly loose, are
violets, Lettice, Spinach, Orange, Mallows, which Martial commended as very
effectual for this purpose saying. Exoneraturas aluum mihi villica maluas
Attulit, and varias quas habet hortus opes.
That is A country wench me mallows brought my belly to unloose,
And diverse other herbs which she did in her garden choose.
Buglosse also co^monlie called Burage, cheruile, beets,
blits, damask p^unes, reasins of sun, curra^s, mulberies.
and figs. Medicinable things of the same nature are Mercury, Fumitorie,
Polypodie or Okefearne, Seenie, Rubarbe, bastard Saffron* Dodder, Cassia, Manna
or ayerie honey: for Scamonie, blevv Dacis or Serapions Turbith, Mazereon or
pepper of the Mount, do purge away men's strength and weal eneth them, and
therefore are not administered but to strong men. For hard knots must have iron
vvedges. But if thy belly be more loose then it should, or then is good for
thy health: it may be stayed with red mints, which you shall find in the
Apothecaries shops, and make thereof a plaster, or else make a syroppe of it
to drink. A Quincepeare also binds and hardneth the belly, or any
confection made of it, red roses, medlars before they be rotten ripe, the hard
kerneld cornell, but not unsavory or unpleasant, yet somewhat sour and
bindinge red gooseberie (we call them Ba^beries) which do wonderfully
provoke an appetite, and expel the desire to cast, and strengthens the
stomach to retain his meat, especially in summer when choleric humors do
unloose the belly. The juice also of these being hardened with sugar, which
Auicenna calls Rob, is a present help, for it binds the belly though it
be wonderfully loose, and strengthens weak appetites: and so do Punicke
apples, which we commonly call Pomegranats, being full within of red colored
kernels, which are some sweet and some sour.

That students and such as have government in a Common wealth, must purge the
passages whereby the exerements are avoided. Chap. 28.
GOd the maker of all mankind has not in vain made so many passages and
ways to purge the humors and avoid the excreme^ts of our bodies, least the
abundance of them should be a destruction to man, or might perhaps be stifled
with the vapors that flow from them: so that the head is purged by the nose
and ears, the palate or roof of the mouth by hemming, hauking, and neesing,
the breast and lunges through the windpipe purges spittle by coughing, the
stomache or ventricle purge her filth by belching and vomit, the invvardes
purge themselves by and through the guts, by breaking wind and casting the
ordure backwarde, the reins and bladder do convey their urine thorough the
watrie conduits and passages, and the superhciall part of the body does send
out his svveatie mists and vapors through little holes dispersed in the skin,
which we call pores. Wherefore seeing the body cannot be in health unless all
his parts be in good order and perform their duties without offense: we must
have a special regard that no fault or intemperance do arise, that may
putrify or defile the actions of these Organes or any way hurt them. For the
mind it self uses their ministry to bring her weighty matters to pass.
If any disease grieve us, if the head be troubled with ache, if with the
Rheum, if with the stone or strangurion, if blindness or blearing corrupt
the eyes, if hands or feet be troubled with the Govvt, or as Horace says:
Simala quem scabies aut morbus regius vrget,
If filthy scabs or kings disease do any way molest:


Man's mind is thereby less able to execute her office and perform her
duty so soon as otherwise. Wherefore methinkes they do excellent well, who
taking great care to keep their bodies in health, do purge and cleanse them
and all their parts from all excrements: for by that means does the mind more
cleer^lie shine, and is made more fit for any notable action. But the
greatest number of men, neglecting all good order, and nothing regarding their
own health, do gape after riches, and apply all their studies in getting and
obtaining it, when as indeed ^elth is better than Gold, and nothing more to
be wished than tranquillity and peace of mind, which Horace confirms,
saying: Si ventri been, Lib. 1 ep^. 12
si lateri est, pedibusque tuis, nil
Diuitiae poterunt regales addere maius,
Non domus, aut fundus, non aeris aceruus, and auri
A Egroto domini deduxit corpore febres,
Non animo curas, etc.
If it be well with belly, legs, and sides,
The riches of a king can give no more,
For neither house nor land, nor heaps of gold
Can take away their ague sick lords sore,
Or case his grief, etc. The owner, etc.


And to the end he might reclaim all men to a sparing and moderate use of all
things, he adds to make up the former verse begun. -- Valeat possessor
oportet
Si comportatis rebus been cogitat vti. Lib. ^ apist. 2.

-- The owner must be well
If he will use his gotten goods aright.
The wise Solomon agrees with him in these words: It is better to be a poor
manne in sound and perfect health, Ec^les. 30
then a rich man with a diseased body. Health and soundness is better than
any gold, and a strong body then infinite riches. There are no better riches
the^ (...) health of the body, Sap. 4
nor any delight greater then the joy of the mind and gladness of heart.
Wherefore we must not measure our felicity by our abundance of wealth and
prosperous success in our affairs, but by the perfect health of our minds
and bodies. For it only lives and is in health, who without offense inioyeth
these two commodities.

Precepts no less profitable to the soul then to the body. Chap. 29.
THere are three things very requisite for health, which it is meet all men
should regard: To seed without sacietie,
Not to refuse labor,
And to keep the seed of Nature.
To which I will oppose as many unprofitable, which as they are causes of
diverse diseases: so do they hasten on untimely old age, and many times kill
men with sudden death: to wit, To be over stuffed with meat and drink,
To be dull with overmuch sloth,
And to be weakened with too much venerie and carnal copulation.
For as frugalitie contending with Gluttony, brings the body to perfect
health; and as exercise shaking off idleness and sloth, makes a man active
and nimble: so if it be lawful to learn instruction from horses.

Nullamagis animi vires industr^a firmat, Virg. lib. 3 Geor.

Quam venerem, and ca^ci stimulos auertere amores.
Nothing so much confirms the strength and courage of a horse,
As him ^^om sight and smell of mares to chase away by force.
Because intemperate, and lascivious you the does yield over to crooked old age
a weak and feeble body But as youth ought carefully to watch over their wanton
desires: so age ought to have a far greater regard to bridle and mortify
their lecherous lusts, and to hinder and withstand the very entrance to luxury:
For as lust is filthy in youth, so is it, as Cicero says, most odious in old
age. And as he that goes to war had need to be endued with force and
actiuity, to tolerate and endure out the labor thereof: so in love and in
performing the act of Venus strength is required to undertake night labors and
to sustain the greeuances that gaul a married man, to endure the niceness,
malepertnes, presumption and flattery of a proud, imperious and deceiptfull
wife. Wherefore neither war nor love is seemly for old men: because they both
carry with them so many dangerous griefs and discommodities, as old age is
very unable and unfit to endure, which Ovid elegantly expresses in these
words, Militat omnis amans, and habet sua castra Cupido:
Attice, ^ab 1. A^^^r. Eleg. 9.
creed mihi, militat omnis amans.
Qui bello est habilis, Veneri quoque conuenit atas.
Turpe senex miles, turpe senilis amor.
Militiae species amor est; discedite segnes.
Non sunt haec timidis signa tuenda viris.
Nox and hiems, long aeque viae, saeu^que labores
Mollibus in castris and dolor omnis adest.
Each lover goes to war, and Cupid has hi^tent,
Each lover Atticke credit me, is to a warfare bent.
He that is fit for war, is fit for venery,
Old soldiors and old lovers are most silthy things to see:
Love is a kind of war, old doting mates depart,
His banners must not be displaid by men of feeble heart.
Night, winter, and long wa^es, and labor without rest,
In lovers soft and fethered camps al kind of griefs are pressed.


For who does not consider how uncomely it is for a stale and withered old man
after a youthful manner to fall to kissing and clipping, seeing to perform the
rest he is altogether unable? So that Sophocles said very well who being
stricken in years and demanded of one whether he would use the act of venery
or not: No, God forbid (quoth he) for I have been always willing to fly from
it, as from a fearce and furious tyrant.

All men must have a diligent regard to keep a good name. Chap. 30.
THou must by all means study that those amongst whom thou live, may have a
good opinion of thee, and may give a commendable testimony of thy good name and
fame, and may think well and speak honorably of thee: And think it no shame
for thee to inquire and harken what good persuasion and conceit those with
whom thou art conversant have of thee, and with what affection and good will
they are inclined toward thee. For to be careless (as some pu^e folks would
have every one to be) what men speak and think of thee, is not only as Cicero
says, a note of pride and a^rogancy, but also of a very loose and dissolute
li^e. ^^b. 1. o^^ic. Ma^th. (...)
So we read Christ asked of his Apostles what opinion the very common forte of
people conceived of him, what they talked of him, and how they persuaded
themselves of the Messiah: not for any desire of ambition or glory, but to
make trial whether hearing so many wholesome sermons, and seeing so many
miracles, they esteemed any better of him then the common sort of people. And
therefore did he demand this, to the end he might draw from them a sownd
confession of their faith and how they profited in his heavenly doctrine, which
had neither deceit nor vanity in it, nor no craft or subtelty as the Pharisees
falsely affirmed, but altogether sound and sincere and delivered from the
truth it self, and from the ve^ie son of God our Savior expected from the
beginning. Which when Peter by the inspiration of God the Father had openly
confessed in the name of them all, and had constantly pronounced Jesus to be
the author of all health and salvation, and that man obtains redemption
through faith in him: Christ commends his profession to be inspired of ye
holy ghost, co^firming it to be so firmly laid that it should be invincible and
never overcome. Wherefore in every action and in all thy sayings and doings have
a care they be done orderly and decently, for that honesty requires, whence
rises this proverb. It is the chiefest part of science to do that which is
comely, that is, to do that which is sitting to nature, and agreeable to wit
and manners which the Dutch man expresses thus, Dat well voeght end betaemt.
For it is a short and speedy way to perfect glory if thou show thy self such
a one in deed, as thou would all men should account thee to be, which
Horace admonishes us of in these words saying. Turecte viues, ^^b. 1. (...).
17.
si cur as esse quod audis. That is. Thou shall ^ue well if thou be such as thou
hearst thy self abroad.

That is, as thou thy self say thou art, and as the people testify thee to
be, who if they take thee for an honest man, it is well, so thou deceive them
not, by putting on the visard of honesty as stage players do, which at the
first sight seem to be honest, when in the end they prove cosening and
deceiptfull people.

-- Nam front politi
Astutam vapido servant subpectore vulpem.
With fair looks in stinking breast they breed a crafty fox. Pers. Sa. 5.

Remember to bear this in mind that there are two especial virtues which are
most commended in youth, faithfulness and silence, to which if blushing
bashfulnes that lovely color in youth be added, whose redness ouerspread with
whitenes does set one out as with an ornament, there can be nothing more
excellent and comely to beawtifie the handsomnesse of a free liberal, lovely
and honest nature. And on the contrary, whosoever is destitute of this
towardnes and orname^t of youth, or has made shipwreck of or altogether
forsaken it, he or she may very well be accounted a lewd person and
naughtipack, and one that excels in dishonesty and impude^cy, whereby this
saying is truly verified.

Ego illum perijsse puto cui quidem per ijt pudor:
I think him lost where ere he be whose shame is clean decaid
For shamefastness and bashfulnes does so unspeakably commend young men, that
they seldom become profitable, or promise any hope of virtue and honesty, in
whom no spark of bashfulnes does show and manifest it self. So when Diogenes
saw a young man bashfully blushing: Take courage my son (quoth he) for this is
a badge of virtue, honesty and modesty. So also in Terence when Mitio conceived
a good hope of his son: Al is well (quoth he) for he blusheth. And it is a
great note and mark of innocence when one confesses with blushing any thing
he did not maliciously or of set purpose commit. But there are some bold
youths that in the impudency and obstinacy of their iniquity will look
grave men steadfastly in the face, and deny their deeds though they were done
so openly they could not be hid. Now to the end thou may get praise without
envy, and purchase many friends, accustom thy self as the comicall Poet
says, to suffer and endure the fashions of all men, Quibuscum versaris,
^^^ent. (...) act. 3. (...)
at que vna te iis dedere,
Eorum, modo honesta sint, obsequi studits,
Aduersus nemini, nunquam te praeponens vlli.
With whom thou art most conversant and leadest most thy life,
So they be honest, yield unto their studies without strife:
Be enemies with none that do converse and live with thee,
Nor yet prefer thy self before those that thy fellows be.


For it is a note of a noble mind to do much, and speak of himself but
little, as Iugurth did in Salust: and ^ot like to those Thrasonicall and
bragging Soldiers, who vvoonderfullie crake of their small dooinges, and make
narrations of their own slender deeds with vaineglorious ostentations.
Seeing then that vain ostentation is odious to all men, let no man flatter
himself, nor woman glory her self in her wit, eloquent tongue and wealth,
but so moderate al their actions, that they modestly and lovvlie think and
speak of themselves, Romans 12
least as Paul says, they seem to loath and despise others: and as Horace
says, Ne^ tua laudabis studia aut alienareprendes. ^^b. 1 (...). 19.

Thou neither shall commend thy self nor other men reproach.


Thou shall not once think with thy self to insult over other men's poverty
or misfortune, though he be thine enemy: but shall rather pity him, and
think his misfortune vvorthie to be lamented. For such are the checkes of
Fortune, that many from great wealth and large possessions have come to
extreme poverty and great misery, yea and many time^ made a very pitiful
end.

And again, there have been other that from lovv and base estate and from
miserable service and bondage, have risen to great wealth, honors, Eccles 10
dignities and authority. Wherefore the which thou would not should be done
to thee, do not thou to any other. Math. 7.
By this rule will Christ have al our actions squared when he says, Whatsoever
you would that men should do unto you, the same do you unto them, that is: Give
to every one honor, glory, help, aid and succor, and all other duties of
humanity which thou would have should be given to thy self. Be not hasty,
rash, and inconsiderate in thy speech, neither let thy tongue run before thy
understanding, neither speak that at any time which may repent thee to have
uttered. For there are a great many with whom we live that are very shppery
to trust, and less able to keep silence, who not only publish such things
as come from us unawares, but do speak ill, discredit and deface the good
name and estimation of their neighbors, whom Horace instructs with
wholesome doctrine: Protinus vt moan am, siquid monitoris eges tu, ^^b. 1. ^pi.
19

Quid de quoque viro, and cui dicas, saepe videto.
Percont atorem sugito; nam garrulus idemest:
Nec retinent patulae commissa sideliter aures.
Et semel emissum vocat irreuocabile verbum.
I warn thee evermore if thou do warning need,
That of whom and to whom thou speak, thou have a careful heed:
F^^e harkners after news, for they are teltales still:
Such wide earde blabs can nothing keep though told them for good will,
Such blabbings they do call words irreuocable.


By which verses he warns every one to speak sparingly and advisedly of
others, least any thing escape the^ unawares, that may afterward snare thee and
work thee hurt. To be short, he warns us to beware of scouts and spies,
who intrude themselves into al assemblies to hear and find some thing to
carry to those careful reformers of manners, that will not stick themselves
under foolish pretenses, to harken and listen in every corner: so that it shall
not be lawful for one so much as to whisper of any thing. And such is the
disorder of their government, that it shall not be lawful for any one to
pronounce boldly yt which the mind counsels, reason persuades, and true and
sincere religion allows, and ye only for fear of talebearers, who have
honors and rewards bestowed on them, to the end they show themselves wider
eared and eied, in that infamous business of spying, and most detestable work of
listening: who are hated of their suborners, although they use their
ministry. For talebearing and bringing of news pleases very many, who
extremely hate ye talebearers themselves: and though their so doing do please
them for a time, yet do they always distrust such of loyaltye and faith. Au.
Caesar has verified it unto us, to whom when Rhymirales K. of Thrace
insolentlie bragged what he had deserved: Indeed quoth Caesar I love to have
treasons revealed, but I abhor him that is the reuealer. For the same cause, as
Julius Capitolinus reports, did An toninus Pius the emperor root out
tale-bearers and accusers: that is, those kind of men who were wont to have
the fourth part of his goods that was accused, as a reward for his
tale-bearing. The Dutchmenne call these kind of men Aenbrengers, which are so
much the more hated of rich and poor, because they make men's deeds and words
a great deal worse then they be. Wherefore Marcus Philosophus the Emperor,
forbad the malicious reports and false accusations of these tale bearers and
accusers, branding them with a mark of perpetual infamy. Saturio the
parasite in Plautus, judges it to be a reproachful and detestablehing, to be
a talebearer: saying, he had rather by cogging flattery, fill his belly
after the manner of his elders, then by privy accusations and telling of tales
hurt other men's goods, good name, and life, to enrich himself thereby. And yet
those offices deserve no great praise among them that be wise, who will neither
give ear to those fantastical flatterers, nor let their minds be drawn
with fair words and inticements.

The pacisier of discords is to be praised. Chap. 31.
IF any discord or contention happen betvveene Citizens or neighbors, it is an
honest man's part according to his power and as far as in him lies, to quiet
them, to take away the offense, to compound their discord, least they grow
to outrage: to take away their strife and controversy: to reconcile them
together, to bring to unity and to ofter himself earnestly and faithfully
to pacify their difference. Our Savior Christ places this office of
humanity not in the lowest place of hap pinesse, when he graceth such as
desire to make peace with the title of Gods children. From these and many other
virtues wherewith Charity, that is, a desire to deserve well of all men, is
adorned, busy and troublesome folks are most alienated and estranged, with
whom all quietness is odious and hateful, but with a certain badnesse of
mind trouble all things, not going about to heal and salve matters corrupted
with rancor and malice, but provoking them with anger, do as the Proverb
says: Add oil to the Lamp, yea euenwhen kings and princes are provoked to
anger, whose minds by nature are stout and fierce; these with their wicked
counsels do more and more kindle and inflame them, then which kind of people
there is none more detestable and loathsome, especially in cases of Religion:
from which al wicked affections ought far to be removed, least through
fierceness and cruelty, men's minds be rather alienated from godliness and
piety, then any way with lenity drawn to love it. For whether we go about
to keep the old order of service in the time of popery, or whether we go
about to take away those errors which crept into the church by little and
little, and so to innouate or bring religion again to her purity: yet I
suppose al things should be done with sound judgment and advise, doing it
with reason, order and measure, least any tumultuous stirs rise thereof, as
it lately did in the Lovv countries, where the Citizens minds were drawn
into diverse factions, and Religion was brought in by force and strength,
which at the last came unto a lamentable issue. The stinking and venomous
backbiter is no less hurtful, then the talebearer, who with his slanders,
backbitinges, ill speeches, and reproachful words, bringes destruction to the
guiltless, and strikes him dead with his infectious tongue. Which kind of
people Horace notes in these verses and warns us to avoid.

-- Absentem qui rodit amicum, Lib. sermon. 1. Epist. 4

Qui non defendit alio culpante, s^lu^os
Qui captat risus hominum, ^amamque dicacis,
Fingere qui non visa potest, commissa tacere
Quinequit, hi^ mger est, hunc tu Roman caueto.
He that will speak ill of his friend or mate behind his back,
And will not fend him from those toungs that would his credit crack
But does entrap his neighbors mitth and every word he speaks,
Or forgeth nothing else but lies, or secrets always leakes,
Thou Roman take good heed of him, for he is very il.
Salomons admonition is much like unto this when he says: Remove far from
thee a wicked mouth, Prou. 6.4 Pro. 24 Eccles. 10 Exodus 22 Psalm. 70 and 100
Ezech. 22 ^acob 4 Romans 1
and let an evil tongue be removed away. And a little after, Have not to do
with evil speakers, because their destruction comes suddenly upon them. The
holy scriptures do in many places witness, that this fury of evil speaking
was detested and loathed. And it was so hated of Augustine himself, that he
caused these verses to be hanged on his parlor wall for all backbiters to see
and behold: Quisquis amat dictis absentum redere vitam,
Aut quem delec^at lubri^a verba loqui,
Aut plenis cyathis lepidos fatigare sodales:
Hanc mensam vetitam nouerit esse sibi.
Who ere he be that loves in words to carpe the absents life,
Or who so ere delights to speak deceitful words so rife,
Or else to tire his merry mates with whole and ful-sild cup,
Let them know they are all forbid with me to dine or sup.


For by this means he banished al such from his table and company, which were
either delighted with gluttony or backbiting, or such as delighted to speak
filthy and unchaste words over the table.

Let no man glory in his wealth, or despair in adversity, but let him
strengthen himself with Gods providence. Chap. 32.
SEeing that in the whole course of man's life nothing is sure and certain,
nothing keeps a mean or a continual or lasting course, but that by turn
now prosperity flattereth us, and by and by (all things being changed)
adversity oppresses us: we ought to strengthen our minds with that
constancy and indifferency, that we neither wax proud in prosperity, nor
yet be cast down or driven to despair by adversity, but which way soever
the world do bend it self (as some times it altreth in a little moment) let us
encourage and uphold our selves by the word of God and his providence, at
whose will the world is ruled, and at whose be^ke all things are perfected,
and to whom al events of prosperity and adversity should be referred, and not
to the inconstancy and rashness of Fortune. For God forbid that such as are
endued with the knowledge of God should think any thing to be done by chance
or Fortune, because God himself should be thought to be the only cause of
all things.

Beware of too much curiositte. Chap. 33.
Be not too curious a marker of other men's matters, but be careful rather to
correct thine own life, then to mark and observe another man's. 1 Cor. 5
Paul the Apostle exhorts every one not to gase on other men's actions, but
to be vigilant and watchful over his own, marking diligently whether he
do any thing that may deservedly be thought wicked of other men. For he
would not that any man should curiously mark and diligently consider other
men's dooinges that do nothing belong unto him, no though they commit notorious
crimes: because there are many so far from Christian profession that they
refuse al good counsel, and pursue those with deadly hatred, who level their
actions by a sou^der rule of living; much like unto those who are very sick and
yet despise the help of the Physician, and had rather rot in their own
corruption, then once to receive a profitable medicine. Wherefore seeing it is
not wisdom for a man to meddle with other men's matters, nor yet to be curious
in others affairs, the Dutch man quippeth these busibodies with this proverb
saying, Luttel onder wins maect veel vreed^s, that is, little meddling makes
much rest. 1 These. 4
Hence is it that Paul puts the Thessalonians in mind of their own
business, not permitting them to be ouerbusie in other men's affairs. For it
is a wonder to see how busy we are to mark others affairs, and how sharp
sighted to see into all that that they do; and how negligent we are to take
view of our own: vvandring in mind and cogitation abroad, when at whom
with the Fairies we are as blind as Moles.

Sic nemo in sese tentat descendere, nemo: Pers^saty. 4

Sed praecedentispectatur mantica tergo.
That none does go about to see into himself not one,
But al of us behold their scrips that are before us gone.
Like verses to these of Persius does Horace write when he says. Quum
tuapraeuideas ^culis mala lippus inunctis; Sermon. 1. (...). ^

Cur in amicorum vitiis tam cernis acutum,
Quam aut aquila, aut serpens Epidaurius?
-- Denique teipsum
Concute number tibi quid vitiorum inseuerit olim
Natura aut e^^am consuetudo mala, namque
Neglectis vrenda filix innascitur agris.
That is. Thou blear eye when thoushouldst foresee thy falts we smered eye
Why do thou int'thy neighbors falts so often severely spy,
As does the Fgle or the snake of Peloponnese in Greece?
But to conclude in this. Let every man search in himself where nature or ill
use,
Did any vice at any time sow in him by abuse:
For fearne which serves for the fire grows in neglected fields.


But seeing this vice of self love so much blinds the mind of man, and
darkeneth his understanding, ye he often flattereth himself in his sin: Math.
7. Luke, 6
Christ does sharp ly inuey against them, which look more narrowly into the
life and manners of other men, then they do into their own: and who can
curiously see the least mote in another eye, that is, the smallest falt in
another man's life and punish them grievously, when they neither see nor go
about to cast out the beam in their own: that is, the notorious vices they
themselves commit.

Keep a mean mattire. Chap. 34.
NOw as in the making of bankets thriftines and temperance in diet is to be
regarded: so in apparel and decking the body, a measure must be regarded, so
ye nothing be made for pride and vain glory, but al things cut according to
the use and necessity of this life: so that if comeliness and not an
ouercurious finenesse be added, I judge it to be every way tolerable. But
seeing ye women desire to be decked and trimmed above al other creatures, who
apparel themselves gorgeously, to ye end they may seem fa^e and beautiful to
men: 1 Pet. 3
the apost. Peter warns matrones, that they bestow not too much cost on their
world of furniture, nor prostitute or set themselves to sale to such as may see
them, nor to use curled and crisped hair, gold, precious stones, chains and
bracelets: but with modest attire, sober and not ouercutious apparel, to please
their husbands, Genes. 16
by seeking to get their favors and good wills, as those noble ladies Rachel,
Sara, Rebecca and Susanna, did. But there are many in ours and our forefathers
time who apparelling themselves with gorgeous apparel, and that after the
fo^ren and new cut, painting themselves like Pageantes, have brought themselves
to beggerie and extreme poverty, who are then flovvted of such as helped
them to spend their patrimonies, and of them also who by deceit, guile,
craft, cunning and fraud, have so scraped their wealth from them that they
have not so much as a farthing to bestow on the relief of the poor that are
brought to extreme penury and want. So that seeing there are so many prodigal
spenders, wasters and consumers of their own goods and hunters after other
men's: is it any marvel to see so many bankerupts and desperate debtors in all
places, not only of the base and common sort of people, but also of gentlemen,
Noble men, and such as carry the port of kings? who deceiving the fatherles and
widows have so stripped them of all their money, yt they are never paid again
during their lives, much less satisfied after their death, because they have
laid more to paune the^ their souls, which are condemned by their creditors.
So that a while after their deaths their goods are al set out to sale, and the
creditors strive who shall give most.

No man ought to despise his calling. Chap. 35.
BE content with that state and condition of life which is allotted unto thee in
this world, bearing it patiently and soberly for the time, what estate, place,
calling or degree soever it be. 1 Cor. ^
Paul requires the like of the Corinthians by bringing in an example of bond
and free, circumcised and uncircumcised, married and unmarried, exhorting
every one to bear his estate willingly, and not to fly from Christian
Religion for any calling whatsoever. For as he writes to Timothy, 1 Timothy 6
Godliness is great riches if a man be content with that which he has. But
there are many who repenting themselves of their calling and hating their
estate, would willingly change it and place themselves in some other vocation:
which if they cannot obtain according to their mind and desire, or if it be
not fit they should obtain it; there is no reason why they should pine
themselves with grief and sorrow, but should rather bear al things patiently
and quietly, neither resisting nor murmuring against God the guider of all
things, who with his singular providence guides the world and provides all
things for man, not only as Cicero says ingenerall, but also for every one
in particular. Psalm. 13
Which David also notes in many places, but especially when he says. It is
he that frames every man's heart, and it is he that understands al his
works. Wherefore let every man persuade himself of this, that God is the
guider of al things for the best, and that there is nothing but is done
according to his will, judgment and decree, that he marketh what every one
is, what he does, what he purposes* with what mind, affection, and piety,
he honors religion, and what is profitable and expedient for every one.
Wherefore if at any time things fall not out according to our desires, but that
our expectation is frustrated: yet let every man continue in that vocation
whereunto God has called him, until the favor and grace of our heavenly
father determine otherwise of us For he according to his will and pleasure
changes and alters the course of al things in this world: for he exalts
the poor and brings him to dignity and honor, 4. Reg. 20 Esaias. 38 Joshua.
10. Psalm 110. Psalm. 112
and he casts down the arrogante, proud and hawtie, and troubles their
seat of happiness: and he makes the barren to become fruitful and to bring
forth many children.

Wherefore let every one content himself with his own estate though
troublesome, constantly hoping it will turn to be better, trusting wholly in
God, and resting in him, who taken the chiefest care of man. To which also
belongs that of Esaias: Thus says the Lord God of Israel, your strength is in
silence and hope. As the Dutchman says: S^ ^cht end verwacht, that is, Hold
your peace and attend. By which words he shakes distrust out of the troubled
and unquiet minds of men, and exhorts them peaceably and quietly to expect
Gods help and assistance: for it may come to pass, that in due time they
shall obtain the things they desire, so they distrust not his promises. For
albeit it be sometimes long ere he help them, yet does he not deceive them
that seek unto him with a fervent hope and expectation. Sermon. 1. sa^. 1
And when Horace that curious marker of humane things, saw men inconstantlie
and with great toil troubled in that estate and course of life they were
entered into, and perceived their minds to be so wa^ering and unconstant, that
every one loathed his own vocation; the merchant would be a sould^or, and the
husbandman a civil Lawyer: he breaks out in speeches, and asks this
question: Qui fit Maecenas, Sat. ^
vt nemo quam sibi sortem
S^uratio dederit, seu sors obtecerit, illa
Contentus v^uat, laudet diuersa sequentes?
Maecenas, how comes it to pass that no man likes his lot,
Whether by reasons choice or chance it was acquired or got,
He lives not therewith pleased, but lauds those yt do follow change?


Which he profecuteth a little after with an excell^t proverb, metaphoricallie
taken from the labor of Cattle, saying: Op^at ephippia bos piger, optat arare
caballus. Lib. 1. epi. 14

The sluggish ox the saddle seeks, the horse would have ye yoke.


Whereby he notes that it is naturally ingrafted in the brain of man, to
repent him of his estate, desiring to change for another, and thinking those
things which he has not proved to be far better then those he is well
acquainted withal. In an other place he adds the reason why man's mind does
thus waver with lightness and inconstancy, by bringing in a contention, rising
about the delights of the Cuie and of the country, where one praises the
affairs of the city, and the concourse and stir of the people: and another
commends the quietness of the country and the pleasure of the woods. The
words wherewith they argue between themselves are these.

Rure ego viuentem, tu dicis in vrbe beatum,
Cui placet alterius, sua nimtrum est ^dio sors.
Stultus vterque locum immeritum causatur inique.
In culpa est animus qui se non effugit vnquam.
I say in country, thou affirmst thy self in City blessed,
He that an others life does like must needs his own deteft:
And both these folks without desert do fondly blame the place
When both their minds are in ye fault which change in every case.
Very truly in mine opinion does the Poet blame man's mind, and lays all the
fault upon his rashness and inconstancy: for when it is led by worldly
affections and not by reason, it is tossed no otherwise then a ship in the rage
and storm of the sea, which is every moment subject to change. Whereby it
comes to pass that what kind or trade of life soever he embraces does not
constantly continue therein to the end, but museth which way he may compass
another which he hops will be more profitable to him: whereas (...) cha^ ging
his state of life alters not his affections, nor takes away his cares,
because these things consist not in affairs of his calling, but do only rise
from the motions of his mind. For whether a man change his solitarines to
company, or alter poverty to riches and plenty, his mind is never the quieter,
because he has not put away those troublesome motions which are altogether
repugnant to reason. It happens to these men (as Plutarch and Basile affirm,)
Ad Lucap. 1
as it does to those that commit themselves to the main ocean sea, to the end
they may come to some wished port, for they are no less troubled with sea
sickness, lightness of the brain, and vomiting in a tal ship, the^ if they had
gone in a slender bark. So that their sickness is alike in both: because
phlegm and choler do accompany the^ in both. So those that would change their
state of life cannot obtain tra^quility of mind, unless they wholly shake off
their affections, and govern all their actions with the rule of reason.
Therefore Seneca says very well: I take the first argument of a stayed mind to
be ability, to stand at a stay with it self, wherefore I am glad Lucillus
(quoth he) that thou do not run about and wander here and there. For that man
that would be every where, is no where. So that it will nothing avail to go
beyond the sea, to change from one city to another, nor to follow sometimes
this, and sometimes that kind of life. For if thou would avoid those
discommodities (...) trouble thee, it behoues thee not to absent thy self from
that place where thou art, but to alter thy self from that which thou art,
pacifying thy mind, shaking off naughty affections, and guiding al thy actions
and studies with reason, counsel and wisdom. For Coelum non animum mut ant
qui trans mare currunt.
They change the air but not their minds which go beyond (...) sea


And we must fight against these troubled affections, which do distract our
minds into so many sundry opinions (...) leapeth back from his intended
profession up on every light occasion, with the word of God and his healthful
doctrine: because it only makes a staggering and wavering mind to become
constant, yea andc on tent also with a man's state and calling: so that we shall
neither forsake it, nor loath it, nor yet ambitiously or couetously enter into
any other.

Fly the company and fellowship of the wicked: Chap. 36.
Fly the fellowship of (...) wicked as a most dead ly pestilence: Lib. 3. de
ira.
for manners as Seneca says, are learned of our companions, and as the body
catches diseases, so vices by lewd speech do possess the mind and infect it,
in such sort that the air is not more healthful for the first, then honest
company is for the latter. Brute and wild beasts may serve us for a lesson:
for they being used and acustomed to the company of men become gentle and
tame: and as ye nature of honesty indueth her followers with virtue, so the
condition of naughtiness and dishonestie does corrupt and desile her lovers
with vice. 2 Cor. 15
Wherefore Paul the Apostle, least any one should be seduced from the truth,
the hope of salvation, the trust to obtain immortality, and from the sowndnes
of manners, diligently warns the lovers of religion that they conceive not
their opinion, to persuade themselves no part of man lives after corporal
death, nor that the whole frame of our bodies and souls do altogether perish
as the brute beast, which the wicked and such as are forsaken of God, do
earnestly put into the mind of the ignorant, and so by this most dangerous
opinion do turn their wavering minds from the certain, undoubted and most
wholesome doctrine of Christ. Whereby we may see the Apostle by all means
labors to draw Christians from the conversation of such, who by their
subtle doctrine do draw the ignorant into errors: for thus does he illustrate
and lay open his exhortation by a six footed verse of Menander.

Corrumpunt bonos mores colloquia praua.
Good manners are quickly defiled with filthy lewd speeches.
We must bridle our tongues not only from filthy, but also from idle words.
Chap. 37.
Now if we hear Christ condemn idle words, that is vnp^ofitable, vain,
frivolous, Math. 1^.
and to no purpose, and which are spoken to the profit neither of the hearer
nor speaker, Ephesians. 5
so that he will require an account of them in the day of judgment: how much
more then as Paul says, are unclean and scoffing words, filthy mirth,
dishonest iestes, and uncomely talk to be detested, which do greatly hurt good
manners. To be short, taunting mockes and biting speeches, which as they leave a
bitter remembrance of them in the mind, and like waspes flyinge away from us
do leave their stinges behind them in us, are the only causes of hatred
and debate amongste us. For as soon as the matter comes once to
multiplication of words, and figurative and crooked speeches are wrested to
and froe, it comes in the end to a bloody battle, and after that pricked on
with many accidents, they are stirred on to an extreme hatred and
unappeasable anger, which when it is once inwardly conceived, and deeply
imprinted in their hearts, then does it most show it self when all things
seem to be hushed and forgotten. Moreover, contentions, rage of evil
speakinge, and skoulding, do more displease the Apostle Paul then can be
expressed: Cap. 4
for he warns the Galathians to abstain from such vicious and naughty
affections, not suffering those biting quips to be used among the^, nor any
tauntes or desire to back bite, least while they one bite, quippe, and vex
another, they after the manner of beasts, do one tear and consume another in
pieces. 1. Cor 1.
He also does the same with the Corinthians, whom he lovingly exhorts to
mutual agreement in the name of Jesus Christ, exhorting the^ that through
hatred and dissension they fall not out among themselves, but that they agree
and be of the same mind and opinion. Paul takes his example from Christ,
which by so many means teaches them to be loving and charitable one toward
another, John. 15 Colo^. 3 Ephe^. 4
which is the only band of charity and fulfilling of the law. For there is no
need of the spurs of the law, where good will is practiced, and where one
freely and ardently loves his neighbor. But because lamentable, tragical,
and grievous hurliburlies have risen through the incontinencie of the tongue,
especially when one disgorgeth the poison of his anger toward another: Cap. 4
Paul does wholsomelie instruct the Colossians and in them teaches us what
measure we should keep in our words, saying: Let your speech be gracious
and seasoned with falte, that you may know how to answer every one, that
is, let not your talk be over merry and pleasant, least it turn to
wantonness, nor yet too severe, crabbed, and bitter, least it offend, and
drive away or alienate the hearers, but let your communication be lovely
seasoning it with the salt of wisdom. Tim. 3. (...) 1
Hence also comes it that he requires meekness and gentleness in the
Bishops and ministers of the Church, not suffering their flock to be chidden
and entreated roughly and vncourteouslie. For seeing that Paul in all the
course of our life, as well in words as in deeds, does measure and try
exactlie all things by the rule of comeliness and honesty: and seeing the
intemperance of the tongue, beside backbiting and evil speaking, deceit and
reproaches, does also with filthy and naughty words infect sincere and pure
minds, he also studieth to take away these vices from the minds of men.
Cap. 4
For thus does he frame the tongue of the Ephesians, and composeth their
minds. Let no unclean word or filthy speech (says he) come out of your
mouth, but that which is good to edification, so often as need requires, that it
may give grace unto the hearers, that is, that it may instruct the hearers
and profit them. Now because all vices are linked together, and one so
buddeth out of another, that all evil rests in the mind of man, he says:
Let all bitterness, envy, anger, hatred, chiding and evil speaking, be taken
away from you, and all iniquity; being courteous and merciful one toward
another, Cap. 1*
forgiving one another, as God through Christ forgave you. The same he also
teaches at large to the Romans, exhorting that their love be not in vain, 2
Cor. 8 Heb. 12 Deuteronomy. 3^
but that they pursue that which is evil with hatred, that they be ready to
love one another with brotherly love: that we go one before another with
honor; that is, in helping and per fourming our duties, let us one overcome
another, that they apply themselves according to the time, that they stay
themselves with hope, that they speak well of such as persecute them: not
wishing evil unto them, not cursing them; that they be like minded one
toward another, that they have no proud; conceit of themselves: that they
recompense not evil with evil: that they give place to anger, and revenge not
themselves, and that ouercomming their enemies with the duties of godliness,
they constrain them to amity again: Pro. 25
for this is to burn ones enemy, and to heap coals of fire upon his head.
And therefore among other things he there notes at large, he thinks it meet
that all men exercise the duties of godliness toward their neighbors, Lib. 1.
offi^.
applying it to every one. For as Cicero witnesses, Astability and courtesy in
speech does reconcile man to man: and obedience and desire to deserve well of
every one, gets a continual and lasting friend ship: which seeing it
maintains mutual love among ye heathen, it ought to be much more ardent
amongste those that are bound unto it by the law of Christ.

Deceit and dissimulation in our words and whole course of life is to be
detested. Chap. 38
Learn always to speak the truth, for it is a note of slavery and not
seemly for a free man to lie, and to speak doubtfullie, intricatelie,
confusedly, stuttinglie, and like a counterfeit. Wherefore Paul the apostle
says gravely and severely, Phil. 4
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are comely and honest,
whatsoever things are just and agreeable with the truth, whatsoever things
are pure and sincere, whatsoever things are apt to nourish love, whatsoever
things are of a good name: that is, that bring good report and estimation, if
there be any praise, that is, if there be any thing agreeable with virtue
and vvorthie to be praised, these things think, that is, let these things
be pleasant unto you, imprint these things deeply in your mind, let these
things be alvvaies before your eyes, let these be deeply set in your hearts,
and these things seek with tooth and nail to get and exercise them in your
lives and conuersations, and the God of peace shall be with you. Romans 8
For as the same apostle says: to such as love God, al things shall be given to
them for good, that is, they shall have good success.

Avoid self-love and the persuasion of perfect learning. Chap. 39.
SEeing an over ripe conceited opinion of learning is a great hindrance to
study, because it forefloweth and slacketh her proceedings: we ought
diligently to beware, least either in study or any other kind of art
whatsoever we go about to attain unto, that we have not this conceit in our
selves, to think we have gotten that, which indeed we come very short of, or
which is unknown to, or at leastwise not thorowlie known of us. For there are
many selfe-louers that do applaud and flatter themselves with a vain conceit of
learning, supposing there is nothing wanting to perfect their knowledge and
godliness, thinking themselves to have got the end of their journey, when they
have scarce attained the midwaie. Whereby it comes to pass, that many ripe wits
taking on them matters of great importance, never come to the perfection of
them. ^ib. 1. cap. 2.
Which when Fabius perceived, he required of al professors either to be
learned, or else not acknowledge themselves so. For there are none worse then
those persons, who having a little passed their A, B, C. conceive of
themselves a foolish persuasion of learning: for they will neither submit
themselves, nor give place to such as can skilfullie teach them, but with a
certain lostines wherewith they are puffed up, will proudly presume to teach
others their ignorance. And in our age there are a great many which
impudentlie leap into the pulpit unexercised in that practice, unfurnished
with force of speech, endued with no kind of knowledge, nor scarce any insight
into holy writ. Whereby it comes to pass that their greedy auditors are
neither refreshed with the food of wholsome doctrine, reap no comfort from
the word of GOD, nor any nourishment unto their souls, but only learn mere
trifles and old wives superstitions. I bring them also into the same rank, who
neither endued with reason or experience, do take upon them the office of a
Physician, and exercise the art of Surgerie, to the hurt and death of many a
man. Seeing therefore a bragging vain persuasion of learning is a great hurt
to excellent wits: the studious and such as desire a perfect knowledge in
learning, must labor by all means to get all the aids and helps that may
bring their studies to perfection, rejecting and casting off all conceit of
learning inoughe: so that if they have any thing profited therein, they must
not rashly desist from and forsake their purpose, but go on so long forward
till they attain the end: that so running out their race, they may at last
obtain the crown or at leastwise come near it. Let not, I say, that same
foolish and hurtful opinion to fine wits, once enter or at leastwise stay in
thy mind, who when they are once entered into the porch, entrance, or principles
of learning, think they have done the duty of good scholars, and obtained
that which indeed they come short of, and are far removed from, because it
vvor^eth this in the minds of men, that they wax lasie before they come to
their iourneyes end, do al things slackly, and proceed not on forward, but like
the sluggarde or trifler, who running in a race, does not cheerefullie make
have to get the goal, but looking back and standing at a stay, permits
another to win the price, to his great shame and reproach. In this case I
think it best to follow Paul's example, who in doing the duty of an
Apostle, and in setting out and publishing the doctrine of the Gospel wherein
our salvation stands, excellently confesses, he had not attained to that
he sought after, and yet lets slip no occasion to finish his course manfully:
laboring with all endeavor to obtain the mark set before him being the reward
of his heavenly calling: that is, the blessing of God prepared for every one
through Christ: so that he seemed to forget those things that were behind
him, which he had done, not willing once to call them to mind again, and to
set his mind wholly on those things that were before him, and which he had to
finish, casting aside all things that might hinder him from hastening to the
mark and reward of immortality. To this purpose also serves that saying of
our savior Christ: Luke, 5
Whosoever puts his hand to the ploughe and looks back, is not fit for
the kingdom of heaven. By which similitude taken from the labor of him that
plougheth and tilleth the ground, he warns us when we have once begun to
take unto us the business of our salvation, to continue and go on till we come
to the end, neither bending our minds to weak and frail things, nor to be
drawn away or of our selves desist from our purpose, but to perfect and
finish it being once well begun. For delaie and procrastination in matters of
salvation are dangerous: and a slack or slender proceeding in a thing well
begun, is worth nothing. 1 Cor. ^
Paul also preparing himself to such a journey as this, would not hinder his
course, or make any delaie, Virg. lib. 5 Ae^^i.
taking an example from those which in trying of maisteries desired the price:
where every one is purposed to try and suffer al things, yea and to pawn
down his life for praise, so he may get the price and applause of the people.
And Horace a heathen Poet, and yet a most excellent teacher of manners, when he
perceived what hurt slacknesse and delaie were in attempting any exploit, he
takes an example from an infamous act, to exhort us to profitable and
wholesome things, saying: Vt iugulent homines, Lib. 1. ^pi. 11
surgunt de nocte latrones,
Vt te ipsum serves, non expergisceris? at qui
Si nolis sanus, cur es Hydropicus? and cur
Quae laedunt oculos, festinas demere, si quod
Est animum, differs curandi tempus in annum?
Dimidium facti, qui been coepit, habet,
that is: Thieves in the night will raise themselves yt they may murder me^
And wilt not thou to save thy self awake out of thy den?
And if thou couet'st to have health, why art thou dropsy-ful?
And why those moats y^ hurt thy eyes do make such have to pull,
Since always thou defer^t to cure thy mind from year to year?
He that has well begun a thing, has half atchieu'd his gear.
This saying does Ovid thus interpret: Lib 2. reme. A^^r.
Vt corpus redimas, ferrum patieris and ignes,
Arida nec sitiens or a leuabis aquae.
Vt val^aes animo, quidquam toler are negabis?
At pretium pars haec corpore maius habet.
So thou may save thy corpse from death thoult suffer sword and fire
And though thou thirst yet wilt not quench with water thy desire:
But that thy soul may live in health thou nothing wilt endure,
Yet she is preferred before the corpse and reckned much more pure. Math. 24 Luke,
12



Christ also is conversant in the same argument pricking us on to diligence,
and provoking us to keep watch, bringing a parable from the unjust and
faithles husbandman, and from thieves and breakers into houses by night: for as
those are addicted to their profit, and take hold of every occasion to get
something, and to filtche and steal away other men's goods: so is it meet
that every one be watchful for his salvation, and let not opportunity slip,
whereby in time and season he may get those things for himself that make for
his salvation, and are profitable to his mind and soul.

Mike choice and trial of thy familiars and friends. Chap. 40.
THe proverb warns us not to admit any rashly into our friendship without
sufficient trial and choice made of them before: but only such whose virtues
are tried and honesties approved, for it says: Nec cuiuis dexteram inieceris,
which the Dutchman interprets thus, Siet wie ghy byder handt nempt, which
we may thus English: Let us not join hands (that is enter friendship) with
every man. A similitude borrowed from dauncers: for young men when they go to
dance reach not out their hands to every maid, but first weyeth and
considers whether they be base or noble, foul or fair, and then chooses
one of them. The same regard ought also to be observed in the fellowship of
this life and in entering into friendship with any. For there are many so
ignorant of the things of this world, that they being not able to put a
difference between true and fained friends, receive all without any
difference into most secret familiarity, yea and that before any trial made of
them, whom they afterward find to be mere sycophants and dissemblers.

Wherefore as it is meet thou should be faithful to al, so thou must not
rashly give credit to any, until (as the Proverb says) thou have eaten a
bushel of salt with him, that is, till thou have learned the whole course of
his life, and searched into and tried his manners and disposition. Eccles. 8
To which agrees that of the wise manne: Tell not thy secrets unto a stranger,
for thou know not what he will bring forth: that is, what trouble he
hatcheth. Open not thy mind to every one, least he requite thee with evil,
and reproach thee to thy face. The lightness and inconstancy of men is the
cause why the law of friendship is not everlasting: and therefore many persuade
themselves that we should so account of our friends, as those that may once
become our enemies; and so prosecute our enemies in our hatred and quarrels,
that when anger is past, we may receive them again to favor and friendship.
For thus does Martial affright us from too much friendship and familiarity
with any. Si vitare velis acerba quaedam, I^b. 12

Et tristes animi cauere morsus:
Nulli te faciaes nimis sodalem.
Gaudebis minus, and minus dolebis.
which is, If thou will escape from some bitter things,
And fly the remorse thy conscience brings:
See that thou be too friendly with none,
So shall thy joy be less, and less thy moan.


And their opinion is not altogether unreasonable, nor much disagreeing with
man's nature, who think debate and enmity should be mortal (that is, Offic.
2.
once have an end) and friendship that is linked together in a faithful
fellowshippe of minds and firm consent of wills, should be everlasting. For
they escape not the name of lightness and inconstancy, who rashly suffer the
bonds of friendship to be broken. Wherefore Cicero thought those friendships
yt were not thoroughly approved, should be dissolved by little and little, and
not violently broken.

Be surety for no man without consideration. Chap. 41.
OFfer not thy self to be surety for any man rashly or unadvisedly: for hurt
always happens to suretiship. For he that pauneth down his credit for
another, offers himself to danger. And if the principal fail the surety is
punished, and must pay the debt he assured for another. Prou. 6
Wherefore Solomon most skillful in all things belonging to man, affrighted
his son from being easily entreated to enter into suretiship, saying: My
son, if thou be surety for thy friend, thou have fastened thy hand to the
stranger, thou art entangled and trapped with the words of thy lips, and art
snared in the words of thy mouth, whe^for make have speedily (says he) to
deliver thyselfe from the hand of thy neighbor. But yet ought not this to be
too strickly observed, because we ought many times in matters of weight and
urgent causes, as need requires, to help our friends, and to do good to
those that are tied unto us by the law of nature, yea we must lay down our
credit, goods, and life to sometime for them, yet must we not for their sakes
decline from ye truth, nor do any thing for them contrary to honesty, but as
the proverb says, we must assist them til we come to the altar, that is, we
must not pass the bounds of religion to pleasure them: for there is no reason
why a man to profit his friend should hurt his own conscience or make breach
of religion.

Beware of flatterers which the Dutch man calls Pluy mstrijckers. Chap. 42.
SEeing that assentation and the knowledge or rather the craft of flattery,
through a certain artificious deceit of words beguileth such as are honest
simple men: I warn thee to take heed thou open not thy ears to their
flattery, nor suffer thy self to be tamed with their cogging and intycing
speeches. And that I may arm thee, these are the notes whereby thou shall
know a trusty friend from a false and deceitful flatterer, for the first will
freely and gravely admonish thee of thy duty, to whom he wishes all good
fortune may happen, Prou. 27. Esaias. 30
which Solomon places in the best part of friendship: But the flatterer will
always sooth thee up and claw thee, approving that thou do, reioiceth at
thy misunderstanding of his words, harkeneth unto thee in all things, and
frames his flattering words not only to thy will, E^^^ch. act. 2. Sc^^. 2.
but also to thy beck and countenance. Gnatho in Terence does excelle^tly
paint out these kind of people, who teaches this parasiticall discipline, and
shows how he was wont to win the hearts of men unto him, saying: Est genus
hominum, qui esse primos se omniu^ reru^ volunt,
Nec sunt. hos consector, hisce ego non paro me vt rideant:
Sed his vltro arrideo, and eorum ingenia admiror simul;
Quidquid dicunt, laudo; id rursu^ si negant, laudo id quoque.
Negat, nego, ait, aio: postremo imperaui egomet m^hi
Omnia assent ari. Is quaestus nunc est multo vberrimus.
There is a kind of men which would be chief of all,
And are not: these I haunt, not that I would be mocked:
But these I flout, and yet withal I wonder at their wits,
What ere they say I praise, deny they, yet I praise,
Their no is no, their yea is yea, and I command my self
To sooth up all, this gain is now become the greatest of al.


Wherefore, seeing flattering and fair speeches is detestable and odious with all men: albeit thy wealth be small and slender, yet never yield thy self to be
a parasiticall Gnatho, nor once purpose in thy mind to become a flatterer. For
that same tickling of the ears gets the favor of many for a time, but it
vanishes and lasts but a little while. And sometime gain is gotten thereby,
but it is with infamy and reproach: for in the end when the deceit is
discovered, it is very hurtful to his master, so that there is no
gentlemanlike man that is freely brought up, can endure to be branded with so
vile a mark. Old crafty foxes and wily companions, who with a foxlike
subtilty and deceit do circumuent and beguile the simple with their wily and
crafty cunning, are much like these flatterers, who like the Hyaena and
Crocodile greedily gape after other men's goods and wives, at the first sight or
show are flatterers, but afterward endeavor to hurt and destroy thee. Of this
brood also are these crafty and subtle fellows, who being very officious in
their duties, are ready at all assaies to show their obedience, and insinuate
themselves into the familiarity and custom of men's lives, with a mind,
intent, and purpose to scrape and get some profit from them. For taking every
opportunity proffered, their eyes and hands are ready to spy out and trusse up
something or other. Wherefore trust no man rashly, til thou have seen some sign
of his faithfulness and honesty.

Certain precepts applied to good life. Chap. 43.
AS there are many precepts given by learned men, how to lead a good and godly
life, so Martial has delivered some very profitable and honest: by which as
with the forefinger he shows by what means one may lead his life
profitablie, and not only auailable for the health of the body, but also for
the quietness of the mind, and these are the precepts: Vitam quae faciunt
beatiorem, Lib. 10

Iucundissime Martialis, haec sunt.
Res non parta labor, sed relicta,
Non ingratus ager, focus perennis,
Lis nunquam, toga rara, men's quieta,
Vires ingenuae, salubre corpus,
Prudens simplicitas, pares amici,
Conuictus facilis, sine art mensa,
Nox non ebria sed soluta curis,
Non tristis thorus, at tamen pudicus:
Quod sis esse velis, nihilque malis:
Summum nec metuas diem, nec optes.
Those things that make a happy life
are these my pleasant Martial,
Goods left by friends, not got with pain,
a fruitful field, fire diurnal,
No strife, small honor, quiet mind,
great strength, and body that is sownd:
Wise simplenes, and equal friends,
thin diet, no boords that abound,
No drunken night, but void of care;
No angry wife, but one that is chaste:
Let thy state please thee, covet naught,
Wish, nor be at Doms day aghast.


These commodities of this life if thou can not obtain altogether according
to thy wish and hearts desire, thou ought not to repine at it, and kill thy
self with sorrow: but rather refer al things to the will of God and his
providence, who is the only guider of all things in the world. Psalm. 30.
For so was David wont to do in all his actions, whether they happened to him
aduerselie or prosperously, where he subiecteth all things to Gods power,
nothing respecting chance or fortune, attributing all the course of his life to
him, and saying: The course of my years are in thy hands, that is, all my
days are guided according to thy will.

Of exercise, whereby the decayed strength both of body and mind is repaired.
Chap. 44.
SEeing that ma^s nature is not able to endure, unless it have breathing times
to refresh it with liberty: we must often times give over labor for a while,
least the strength of body and mind wax fainte, and be ruinated with too much
toil and business. And as quiet and seasonable sleep refreshes and
strengthens the members that are wearied with labor: so the slacking of
meditation does quicken the mind that is wearied with study and ouermutch
watching, and repaireth the sleepy and tired spirits. Our elders, if at any
time they could get so much leisure as to rest from the functions and public
business of the Common wealth, would recreate themselves with the exercise of
husbandry, taking therein no less profit then pleasure. For besides the
woods and meadows which are pleasant to the eyes, and besides arbors hedged in
with trees, and decked with young shoots, besides the commodities of manors,
fa^mes and pleasant howses in the Country, they reap such a gain by a well
tilled and plentiful ground, and by a fruitful harvest, and yearly
increase, as is both honest and plentiful. ^ib. 1. O^^ic.
For profit gotten with honesty and justice, is not to be blamed of any man.
And of al things as Cicero witnesses, whereby any gain is gotten, there is
none better then husbandry, none more plentiful, and none more seemly for a
freeman. Insomuch as Hesiodus thinks, there is nothing so kingly and
honorable, as the tillage of the earth, and exercise in the work of
husbandry. Whereby it came to pass that the Romans lothing the City, as it
were delivering themselves from bondage, would go into the Country. For
there many things are proffered unto thee, where with at certain times thou
may delight thy self: for now time and occasion affords thee to prune and
cut thy trees, by and by the pleasant spring inticeth thee to graft thy slippes
on some other trees, and a little after the season requires thee to trim thy
vines, when sprowting with their buds, they match the tops of the Poplars.

Nunc captare feras laqueo, Horat. in Od. ^^g. 1. Geor.
nun^ fallere vis^o,
Atque etiam magnos canibus circumdare saltus,
Insidias auibus meliri, incendere vepres.
Now may (...) catch wild beasts in sna^es, now take the^ in a net,
And often times we dogs go hunt through woods and forests great,
Now laying traps for little birds, now burning up the briers.
Birding and hunting is very profitable for young men that are come to their
full growth, yea it is a very fit exercise, and in no wise to be blamed, so
that they be not too much addicted, and spend not al their la bour in pursuing
and tearing wild beasts in pieces, neglecting in the mean time the
government of their howsen, or more weighty affairs. But to recreate ones
self in geographicall tables, and sitting quietly in a study, to travel all
over the whole compass of the world, and to measure the countries far and
near dispersed with a man's eyes and compasses, rather then with great wast of
wealth, travel them over with ones body, is a wonderful delight to the mind.
Among these maps and descriptions of the earth, I place those pictures that are
artificiously handled, and skilfully set out in diversity of colors, or such
as the Greeks call (...), that is, of one color like our antique work, which
delights the eye with no vain show especially if they be not superstitious,
but express lessons of virtue and godliness, such as are the histories of
holy Scripture. And therefore very well did our elders call paynting dombe
poetry: albeit in deed pictures can speak, and are lively, and not domb.
But the delight of Music, as it is honest, so is it passing plesaunt,
wherewith the mind when it is vvearie, is greatly refreshed and quickened:
for with the concent of voices, and the sweet noise of instruments, it does
not only delight the ears with the sweetness of the note, but the sovvnde
also spreading it self every way through the arteries, does stir up
both the vital and animal parts, shakinge off the dark mistes and clovvdes
of the mind, makes it much more active and prompt. Which was the cause that
Pythagoras would oftentimes awake his mind with his harp, when he purposed
to watch, that he might be more nimble in doing his duty and performing his
daily labors: and again when he went to bed, he would quiet his mind
with his lute, and pacify his troubled affections. We read also that
Epaminondas Prince of Greece, would sweetly sing to his Lute, and all Greece,
as Cicero witnesses, did think the depth of knowledge to consist in singing
and playing on instruments: Lib. 1. T^s^.
for whosoever was not skilful in that art, was accounted most unlearned. So in
old time they were wont to sing to the harp the acts of Noble men and
Kings, for thus says Virgill, -- Cithara crinitus Iopas
Personat aurata, ^ib. 1. (...)
docuit quae maximus Atlas.
Hic canit errantem Lunam, Solisque labores;
Vnde hominum genus and pecudes, vnde imber and ignis
Arcturum, pluuiasque Hyades, geminosque Triones:
Quidtantum Oceano properent se tingere S^les
Hiberni, vel quae tardis mora noctibus obstet.
Bushayrd Iopas played on harp that which great Atlas taught,
He sung ye labors which the sun and wa^dring moon has wrought,
Whence men and beasts, water and fire, did their beginning gain,
Arcturus, rainy Hyades and cake the Trions twain
And why the Northen stars make have into The Ocean sea to d^^e
O what is the hindrance that does us of longer nights deprive.


The use of this recreation was not wanting among the Hebrews: and that it was
regarded and much esteemed among great men, besides others, the history of
David does show it. For that Prophet used to sing psalms to his harp, and
with the sownde thereof to quiet the mad mind of Saul when it was vexed with
an evil spirit and black choler, 1 Reg 16.
and so to bring the king again into his right mind. And Elizeus the Prophet
being grieved with the importunate interruptio^s of the kings, 4. Reg 3
would take his psalterie in hand and quiet his mind with sweet harmony and
musical consent: and when all trouble was removed and his affections
quieted, inspired by the holy ghost began to prophecy the success of the
three kings. Moreover that music was used at bankets the scriptures in many
places do witness. For thus says the Wise man, Eccles. 32
taking a similitude from precious stones set in gold: As the Carbuncle
beautifieth the gold, so does music at a bankette with a little wine. And
in another place he says: As the Emeralde whose green color is bright and
delectable sets out the gold, so does the harmony of singing at a pleasant
banquet. But least any one should use and occupy these delights more then
necessity requires, he shows by the way what should be preferred
before it: saying, Wine and music rejoice the heart and mind, Eccles. 40
but the study of vvisdome more then them both. Truly Esaias blames the
drunken and such as are given to feastings, and to delight themselves with
musical instruments: but it is only for this cause, that they regard them
more than God, C. p. 5
because they give not thanks to God for any of those things they so
plentifully and abundantly enjoy. For thus he threatens them: Woe be to
you that rise up early to follow drunkenness, and to drink til the evening
till you chafe at the wine. The Harp, the Lute, the Organ and the pipe, is at
your bankets, but you nothing regard the acts of the Lord, nor yet consider
his handie work: that is, you lift not your minds and eyes up to him, from
whose bountifulnes and liberality these things come. Amos the prophet
speaks of the same matter, taunting the wanton and such as live prodigally
with threatninges, after this sort: Woe be to you that are rich in Sion, that
walk so lordelie, lying in iuory beds, and playing the wantons in the
streets: which sing to the sownd of the psaltery, drinking wine in full
cups, and anointing your selves with most costly ointments, and not one of
you pittieth the case of the poor, or greeueth at the misery of the afflicted:
there is no respect or heed taken of the needy, neither do you give God
thanks for his benefits. Wherefore the delight in music^e and vvithall a
moderate use of wine and meat, whereby the drovvsie and heavy spirits be
strengthened and refreshed, and vvhervvith the melancholic fumes be
dispearsed, are no way blameworthie: and therefore should not be condemned
with any severity, unless by abuse and overmuch use of them we prefer them
before heavenly things and our salvation. Among easy exercises and such as
are not combersome and laborious, riding is numbered, the which is done
either by horse, wagon, or barge. Also walkinge abroad in the air, such as
our green alleyes in gardens affoorde us, and under the Vine when it is carried
along upon poles: or under fair green arbours like unto a vaute or back of a
lute; such walks are no less profitable then pleasant.

Now if it so fall out that in thy walkings thou wax weary and faint, there
want not in a curious garden, banks and resting places to sit down on in the
shade, where by taking the cool air (...) may qualify thy heat; but when
it seems good unto thee to sit in the Sun, or walk abroad in the open
air: thou may do it either in the field or else in some high Gallerie or
Leads. And as among moderate exercises, reading with a loud voice and
declamations, are fit for such as are scholars and Ciuilians: so wrestling and
playing at Tennis, and all exercises of artillery or shooting, are good for
them that be strong and lusty, and approved by Galen in a little book that
he published: and so is sworde-playing, and running a Tilt, whereby the
natural heat is increased, and thereby dispearsing the blood into every
member, the body gets strength, whereby it comes to pass, that such as
use exercise, are better colored then others, and their skins are tainted
over with a sweet and delectable redness. But let such as practice these
exercises, remember this, that they do all things moderately, least violent
and ouerstraining actions bring their members or any part of the body out of
iointe, or with too sudden and hasty turning or winding, be removed out of
his place. Now as presently after meat the mind is not to be wearied with
study, to the end the ventricle may have the better digestion, before the
natural heat be scattered and dispearsed: so after a full stomach and great
dinner, thou must not addicte thy self to overmuch labor, for violent and
disordered motions do hinder digestion, and all immoderate actions of the
body, do draw the raw and half digested meat into the veins, which breeding
opilations and putrifactions, do minister occasion to all diseases. We call it
Cockal.
There is a play called Astragalismus among the Latins, or as the Dutchman
terms it Pickelen, which is done by the throwing of three small sheep
bones, cleansed and made dry, at which our Dutch maidens before they are
mariageable or ready for a husband will play, but so soon as they are married
they presently despise it. And our young men do play with certain bones that
are taken out of the feet of Oxen, which we Dutchmen call Coten, Much like our
coiles.
and exercise themselves at certain times in the year, and so they do nuts
and rackles, which childish plays when they com to more years, they little
regard: so that when they are past 7. years old, they think it vncomlie and a
great discredit to play with such trifles. For with children as Horace says: A
Edificare casas, ^ib. ^er. 2 Sat. 3
plostello adiungere mures,
Luderepar impar, equitare in arundine longa
Si quem delectat barbatum, amentia versat.
To build up housen and to join mice to a childish carte,
To play at even or od, and ride on horseback on a stick,
If one that has a beard delight, he seems more then mad.


Now there is also another ^ind of dice differing from that, which the
Dutchman calls Terlinghe: which is six square, and the other but four. The
abuse of this of six is so great and so used in all Europe, that diverse have
spent their patrimonies with it, and consuming their wealth have brought
themselves to beggeri^. But those kind of fouresquare dice which our Dutche
maids use, brings not the overthrow of their housen, because they play but
to pass away the time, and when it is lavvful for them to be idle, they
play for things of no great value: as Chestnuts, Filberds, pins, claspes or
some kind of pocketing stuff. But ye whipping of a top, and driving of him in
a circle till he sleep so that his motion cannot be perceived nor seen, young
men do therein cheerfullie exercise themselves, and that chiefly in the
Winter time to catch them heat. Which kind of exercise our forefathers used,
recreating themselves with it and many other besides, as Perseus witnesses in
these verses.

Iure etenim id summum, Sa^. 3
quid dexter senio ferret,
Scire erat in votis: damnosa canicula quantum
Raderet: angustae collo non fallier orcae,
Neu quis callidior buxum torquere flagello.
For rightly this was al my care, this did I desire to know,
What gain the luckie sife did bring, what loss the ace did pu^
And might not be deceiud with neck of narrow dicing box,
And none mig^^ drive a top with s^ou^ge so skilfullye as I,
Virgil also makes mention of this childish instrument, comparing Lauinias
mind troubled with the love of Turnus to a top, saying in excellent verse,
that she did no otherwise role and turn then a top driven too and fro with
whips and scourges: The Dutchman calls it also a top, but thus does Virgill
prosecute his purpose.

Tum vero infelix ingentibus excita monstris
Immensum sine more furit lymphataper vrbem, Virg. lib. 7 Aen^i.

Ceu quondam torto volitans sub verbere turbo,
Quem pueri magno in gyro, vacua atria circum
Intenti ludo exercent: ille actus habena
Curuatis fertur spatiis. stupet insciaturba,
Impubisque manus mirata volubile buxum.
Dant animos plagae: non cursu segnior illo
Per medias vrbes agitur, populosque feroces.
Unhappy she provoked on with great and monstrous rage
Unreasonably, without delaie runs mad about the town,
As sometimes does a top ye flies with lashes of a scourge,
Which boys when they are bent to play do in a circle drive
Upon a plain and empty floor, who forced with the whip
Is carried up and down the plain, the foolish boys amazed
And wondering at the rouling top, do with their childish hands
Apply their minds to whip him still: so with as swift a course
She Is carried all about the town among proud Citizens.
Children are wont to use these kind of plays for the most part: but when they
are older and begin to grovve to be fourteen years of age, they require more
comlie exercises and pastimes. For in all exercises wherein the mind and body
reap any profit, a great care and regard must be had, that they be comely
and honest. For that cause only did Sal^^^ praise the commendable towardnes
of Iugurth, before the time he was corrupted with ambition and desire to
rule: for he when he began to be manly, strong, beautiful, and witty, gave
not himself over to be corrupted with riot and idleness: but after the manner
of his country, to ride, cast darts, and run races with his equals: and
albeit he excelled them all for glory and actiuitie, yet was he beloved and
esteemed of all, because he would never brag of himself. But fly thou from
and eschew dice and cards, and all such exercises as delight idle folks, as
most hurtful and infamous, because in these exercises art and skill preuailes
not, but deceit, craft, subtletie and guile: for reason, counsel and
wisdom, bear no swaie in them, but chance, fortune and rashness. Moreover,
under this word alea or dice, is comprehended al plays subject to mutabilitie
of Fortune: as tray trip, mumchance, nouum, tables, and all other, wherein the
casting of dice is used, which are all disliked and blamed in us, though we
play like boys for pins and points, if we use it often, deceitfullie, or
contentiouslie. For thus says Martial very well: Alea parua, ^^b. 1 4.
nuces, and non damnosa videtur:
Sape tamen pueris abstulit illa nates.
To play at dice for nuts, seems nothing culpable,
Yet parents from their children take them oftentimes away.


Wherefore seeing that almost all things in this exercise is done couetouslie,
wickedlie and craftily: we must use this moderation, rather to follow delight
the^ gain. For it often comes to pass, that the simple and such as are
unskillful are wiped clean from al their money. And albeit a great hope of
gain does dravve the minds of many men to haunt these exercises, and gain is
a great comfort and delight to the winner, yet ought we to go about nothing
with an ardent hope and desire of gain, because exercise was ordained and
liberty to play licenced not for gains sake, but for bodily health and
delight: and to the end the vvearyed mind might be refreshed and recover more
strength to execute labors. But such is the nature and condition of
diceplayers, that when once that itching scab has possessed their minds, it
can hardly be expelled, because there are companions of the same stamp every
where dravving them on, and are every hour enticing them to those damnable
pleasures, which vice is also ingrafted in whoremongers. Wherefore Ovid says
very profitablie: Sperne lucrum, vexat mentes insana cupido,
Et reuocat trepidas alea sape manus.
Hate play because mad avarice so much torments thy mind,
And dice recals thy fearful hands often times to play to loss.


Truly in mine opinion no man ought to be blamed for laboring to increase and
enlarge his wealth, but yet is it meet he follow after gain that is profitable
and honest, and gotten with the hurt and injury of no man. Notable is Plautus
his proverb: It is requisite every one should be rather painful then crafty
in getting his gain, for goods got sinisterlie and wickedlie besides the ill
name they bring, they are also less permanent and stable, but are quickly
consumed, as goods gotten by craft, deceit, coosenage, cauilling and subtletie,
or by Usury, Tables and Cards. Therefore what companions soever thou haste in
thy exercises, labor by all good means to draw them from wicked things, and
to stir them up to honesty, comeliness, and virtue. For this is that
duty of humanity which not only is praised of wise men, but is also
acceptable and pleasing to God: Which he witnesses by Jeremy, Cap. 15
saying: He that seuereth the good from the bad shall be as mine own mouth.
Whereby he notes that man to have performed a notable exploite, to approach
near unto God, and to deserve divine honor, who brings himself or his
neighbor (for there is nothing more precious with God than man) from vile
deeds, a life most foul and defiled, and from a vvrong course, and is his
author and leader to soundness of life and good manners. To which belongs
that saying of James the Apostle: Cap. 5
Brethren if any among you straie from the truth, and another convert him,
let him know he has called a sinner from death and saved his soul.

In all thy actions let reason be thy counselor. Chap. 45.
IN every action and in all the affairs of this life, so govern all things
by reason and good advise, that thou do nothing this day whereof thou may
repent thee to morrow: for it is a filthy and foolish thing to do that
which after it is finished will compel thee to say, I had not thought. Against
this rock thou shall not offend if thou do nothing rashly and headlong, but
al things advisedly, vviselie, and with good judgment: leuelling all things
by the rule of reason. For so does Solomon teach us, when he says: Remember
the end and thou shall never do amiss. And Salust says rightly: Before
thou do begin any thing take advise, and when thou art well advised, then
make have to finish it speedily. And Cicero says: In all things whatsoever
thou go about, be first of all diligently prepared thereto. To which
purpose serves our proverb, Be not too hasty, for that is done soon enough
that is done well enough: and Solomon says, See thou one yt is hasty in his
business, there is more hope of a fool then of him.

Do nothing thou doubtest of. Chap. 46.
THou shall do nothing that breeds a scruple in thy conscience, or brings
such a doubt that thou can not tell wheth^r it be right or wrong, which thou
go about to do. For equity, as Cicero says, Lib. 1. O^^^^.
does manifest itself and is joined to virtue and honesty: but doubtfulnes is
near kinsman to injustice and all kind of vice. To which agrees that saying
of Paul: Romans 14
Blessed is he which judges not himself in that he allows, that is, which
in any thing he does, feels not his conscience bidding him stay. Which
sentence albeit the Apostle writ touching choice of meat, and avoiding of
offense (at I said before) yet may it be very fitly applied to other things.
For in every action we do, if it be not in faith and constancy, but in a
wavering and doubtful mind, we are condemned by the judgment of our own
conscience: because whatsoever is not of faith, wherewith we approve our minds
to God by the consent of our consciences, is altogether vicious and sinful.
For if any man doubting in his mind whether a thing be good or bad, and yet
does it; he shows the world that if occasion happened and opportunity were
offered, he would commit any notorious crime. But true godliness and perfect
wisdom attended on by faith and strengthened with the holy ghost, discerns al
things wisely, and undertakes nothing that carries with it any show of evil,
or may affect his mind and conscience with any grief.

That there are rewards both for vice and virtue Chap. 47.
THat which Cato the wise was wont to teach his fellow soldiers, the same
should be fixed in every ones mind: If thou atchieue any thing with great
labor that is honest, the labor goes from thee, but the virtuous deed abi
death with thee: but if thou do any evil with pleasure, as a thing of no
continuance, it flies away and quickly vanishes, but the evil and naughty
deed as a vice not to be blotted out, does always cleave to thee. To which
agrees the proverb: Once a Iester, and never a housekeeper. For whosoever in
a matter of discredit has made shipwreck of his good name and honesty,
shall hardly recover again the name of an honest man, though he grow to be
rich, and come to great wealth. With the like reason does Plato stir on
young men to come to happiness, by setting before their cies the image of
virtue and vicious pleasure: because sudden repentance, vexation of spirit, an
unquiet mind, and everlasting grief, do always accompany the momentanie
sweetness and inticementes of pleasure: but a quiet mind, rest of Spirit, a
safe conscience, and everlasting joy do always follow the short labors and
griefs of virtue. To which belongs this sentence: That which delights is
but for a time, but that which greeueth is everlasting.

A lour actions must begin with prayers to God. Chap. 48.
Whatsoever thou go about to attempt and effect, desire God almighty to
be thy counsailour. So that if thou determine to take any thing in hand, or
if thou execute any office private or public, call for his help, that by the
inspiration of his holy Spirit he may prompt and instill into thy mind that
which is best and most profitable for thee. For it cannot be expressed what
great help the making of our prayers to GOD does bring to the beginning of
all our actions, Cap. 30
and to the happy success and end of our labors. For most commonly our
labors fall out vnluckelie and unfortunately which are not begun with
invocation. From hence came that threatening of GOD by Esayas: Woe to those
traiterous children, which take counfaile but not of me, which prepare their
weapons but not by mie spirit. By which words he denounces an unlucky and
evil success to such as seek for help any where else then of God, and take
not him for their counsailor, nor seek oracles from him, to whom all things
are subject, and in whose power the rule and government of the whole world
does consist. For by him as Solomon says, Prou. ^
kings reign and law makers do the things that are right, by him princes
bear rule, and mighty men execute justice. For justice and counsel are his,
wisdom, strength, comlines and power, comes from him, whereby he establishes
the kingdoms of such as bear rule and keeps their subjects in obedience.
Wherefore seeing all things are done according to the will and iudge^ent of
God, and that he is the only cause of all things: from him therefore must we
with earnest prayers, crave the happy success of our labors, and al other
things that are profitable and necessary to live in perfect happiness. Which
Christ teaches us when he says, Matthew. 6. Luke 12.
first seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all these
things shall be freely given you, and shall be plentifully cast unto you for an
increase. And most fortunate is the beginning of that day which is taken from
the contemplation of heavenly things, from the doctrine of the gospel, and from
glorifying the majesty of God himself.

The fittest time to frame our minds and lift up our hearts to God is early in
the morning in the dawning of the day. Chap. 49.
THere is no part of the day so fit to lift up our minds to God as the dawning
of the day: for after the darkness of the night is past, the mind is more
Iustie and apt to conceive wholesome and good thoughts. That the holy prophets
did so, Psalm 5. Psalm. 16 Cap. 87. Cap. 26
the books of the Bible do every where testify: so David, being brought into
a strait, cried, My God, my God, early will I awake to thee. I will stand before
thee betimes and see. Farly in the morning shall my prayer come unto thee. And
Esaias faith thus. The Lord made me listen betimes in the morning that I might
hear him as a master, that is, a warner which waketh the ears of the
drowsy. Again, my soul desired thee in the night, but betimes in the morning
will I awake unto thee in soul and spirit. By which words the Prophet shows
all his mind, and the powers and faculties of his soul and spirit, both
vital and animal, and all that was within him, to be always fixed on God, so
that he passed no part of his life without the remembrance of him, but
referred to God all his words and deeds, and eueri^ thought that came into his
mind.

Call to mind at night the things thou did in the day. Chap. 50.
CAll to mind at night all the things thou have either done or said the day
before: and before thou go to sleep, take an account of thy self how thou
have spent the day: ask of thy mind what fault it has cured, and what vice
thou have resisted, which way thou have bettered thy life, what increase thou
have made of godliness, and how thou have profited in virtue.

Quo praetergressus? quid gestu^ in tempore? quid non?
Cur isti fac^to decus affuit? aut ratio illi? Virg in vi^^ (...).

Quid mihi praeteritum? Cur haec sententia sedit,
Quam melius mut are fuit? miseratus egentem
Cur aliquem fracta persensimente dolorem?
Wherein thou went too far? what is don in time? what not?
Why this thing was so comely don? why reason ruld in that?
What thing thou did let stip? and why that sentence did prevail
Which might have bin for better changed? and pitying the poo^e,
Why thou wast with a contrite mind so touched with his griese.
For it cannot be uttered how quiet and peaceable the mind will be, and how
sweet and pleasant a sleep will follow, after thou have once conceived in thy
mind a purpose to amend thy life. For with this very thought thou shall shake
off the clowdie fears of thy mind. And seeing that often times the things
which we have seen and done in the day time, do trouble us in our sleep:
let us carefully take heed that the day be spent in honest and virtuous
exercises: least any thing come to our minds that may disturb our sleep in
the night, and make it unquiet and altogether troublesome.

Let no man flatter himself in his sin, or any way seek to extenuate his
fault. Chap. 51.
IF thou chance to do any thing foolishlie, or turn thy will contrary to
reason, to execute that which is neither comely nor honest: do not persuade thy
mind to flatter it self in error, or to diminish thy fault by any excuses;
because the excuse of sin brings forth boldness, and ministers occasion to
commit the like again. Psalm. 140.
For when David marked what wickedness sprang from this fault of the mind: Thou
shall not incline my heart, says he, to frame excuses with naughty words for
my sin. In which words he prays that a wicked mind might be far from him,
wherewith the wicked being endued do add sin unto sin, diminish and extenuate
their faults, and will suffer no blame to be laid on them. By which their
blindness and ignorance it comes to pass that when their minds are once
hardened in sin, and are given over to evil affections, Pro^. 18.
become every day worse and worse, til at length they fall without any hope of
recovery. At which that saying of Solomon aims when he faith: The sinner
overwhelmed in the depth of his sin, des piseth, that is, persuades himself
he has done no evil, neither is he much moved with the remembrance of his
sin: but (faith he) shame and confusion follows such a one. Whereby he
shows him both to hazard his good name, and also to get such a note of
infamy, that he shall hardly again deserve the name of an honest and
praiseworthy man. They also are entangled in the same evil, who when they have
offended and fallen into sin, will not acknowledge their fault, nor by any
means be brought to confess it; no though their conscience, like a haugman do
almost wring out a confession, yet will they be silent and say nothing,
thinking to bury al things in forgetfulness: whose practice in this, is like
unto childrens, who cannot abstain from those things they are forbidden,
especially if there be any hope it will be kept secret and hid from their
parents. Of which we have examples in Adam and Cayne, and their posterity,
to whom that fault is fallne by inheritance. Therefore whosoever desires to
set their mind at rest and quiet, and to leaeu no tormente in their
conscience, let them not deny the faults they commit, nor attempt to cover
them over with silence, but let them be anatomysed and laid open before the
face of almightye GOD: because the acknowledging of sin, and the confession
of faults, may obtain pardon, and purge, cleanse, and purify the mind from
filthy pollutions: but keeping them secret, and dissembling them, makes the
crime a great deal worse. The which David tried in himself, saying: Psalm,
2^.
Because I held my peace, my bones consumed within me, when I cried all the
day. The torture and torment of his sorrow and grief made him to send out
howles and cries, but he did not declare or confess his fault, yet afterward
he thought to lay open his offense to God, whom he knew to be ready and easily
entreated to forgive sin, if he heartily repented and hated vice. Therefore
taking unto him faith, I said (quoth he) I would confess mine iniquity
against my self, and thou, O Lord, have forgiven me my sin. For such is
the love and gentleness of God toward man, and such is his mildness and
mercy, that whenever a sinner does repent him of his sin, he presently
pardons his offenses. The which he declares by Esaie in this sort. And it
shall come to pass that I will hear before they call, Cap. 65 Cap. 18
and whilst they are yet speaking I will bow down mine care. Whereby he
shows how prompt and ready his favor and grace is, that if a man do but
conceive in mind a purpose of amendment of life, he presently forgiueth him
his former transgressions: for thus says Ezech. At what time soever a sinner
does repent him of his sin, I will put it clean out of remembrance says
the Lord.

We must acknowledge all good things to come from the Lord. Chap. 52.
IF any great, noble, or honorable thing happen unto thee, in this frail and
weak body, or in this momentany and fleeting life, if y^ have country farms
and large fields thereto be longing, if wealth and riches abound and comelines
honesty, honor, dignity and glory, adorn these externalblessings, if thy mind
be endued with knowledge and science of many things, if thou have wit in thee
accompanied with wisdom; to be short, if thou have a body that is lusty and
strong, or if any good thing be in thee besides: (...) must acknowledge thy
self to have received al these things of God, thy most liberal father, 2
Cot. 4
from whom every good thing does spring and is derived. Paul call leth to this
place the proud, and such as swell with a vain persuasion of themselves, and
takes away from them their confidence in themselves in these words: What have
thou that thou have not received? and if ye have received it, why do ye brag
as if thou had received it not? God also himself urges the same, C^p. ^
teaching it to all men, by Jeremy saying: Let not the wise man rejoice in his
wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his strength, nor the rich man in his
wealth, but let him that glories rejoice in this that he knows himself. Let
him that glories faith Paul, glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1 2 Cor. 10
from whom we receive abundantly thorough Jesus Christ every good thing: who
was made of God for us wisdom, Justice, sanctification, salvation and
redemption. And to the end no man should rejoice and flatter himself, or
should wax proud, either of external or internal blessings, Paul exhorts
us to bear this treasure about with us in earthen vessels, that is, in this
frail and mortal body, to the end it may appear to al men, that this ought
to be given to the honor and glory of God, and not to the power of man. And
as all the perseverance that is in man, al his wisdom, virtue and justice
ought to be given to God, and the father of lights, from whom all indumentes
and gifts do descend, Cap. 1
as I ames the apostle does witness: so what vice or naughtiness soever,
whatsoever blindness and ignorance, whatsoever w^^kednesse and corruption is
in the mind of man, that wholy ought to be ascribed to our malicious will,
and not so much as the least fault to be attributed to God. For sin and the
transgression of the Law, Wi^d. 2
was the cause of all grief and sorrow, and of all diseases both of body and
mind, and in the end of death, planting all pronenes to evil in the mind.

Great consideration and difference must be had in choosing that kind of
life which a man means to live in. Chap. 53
IN making choice of that kind of life thou meanest to follow, and wherein
thou purposest to abide and quietly to continue all thy life, this ought
chiefly to be regarded, that thou undertake all things with good
consideration, addicting thy self rashly to no enterprice, of which
afterward thou may repent thee, but thou can not forsake it or wind thy
self out of it. For those that in an untimely age, before sufficient trial
and search be made of the aptness of nature, do suddenly take to themselves
any trade of living, and bind themselves unto it during life, they lead a very
unquiet life, full of grief and sorrovv: especially if it fall out (as
oftentimes it does) that they begin to loath their manner of living, or think
themselves unable to wielde that charge. Wherefore to the end no man do
unadvisedly trappe himself in this net, before he embrace any kind of life
whatsoever: let him take time to deliberate what course of life he were best
to follow or addict himself unto: In which deliberation, Cicero counsels
thee to take advise of thine own Nature, Lib. 1. (...).
to the end that applying all care to make choice of thy life, thou may
constantly continue in it with a resolute determination. For there are diverse
that undertaking the best trades, do miss of their purposes, not so much
thorough their vvilles, as thorough the error of their own living: and so
wandering from that mark which Christ set before them, fall into
superstition, that is, become falsely religious. Therefore ought we chiefelie
to ask the helps of our salvation from Christ, who alone being our pilot in
the Sea of this world, does guide and bring us to the desired port. John* 10
He is the door that opens us the way and entrance unto the Father: he is
the way, the truth and the life, from whom Satan goes about to seduce us,
who transforming himself into an Angel of light, by his false teachers
suggesteth false things for true, doubtful for certain, feigned for sincere,
and hurtful for healthful things, to the minds of men. And this was the
first deceit of our enemy, wherewith he set upon Adam and blinded his mind
with the mist of Ignorance, beguiling his careless incredulity with a show of
verity: so that he cease not to practice the same on al his posterity,
abolishing the true worship of God and perfect religion to bring in
superstition, Idolatry, false doctrine, and doubtful and dangerous
instructions: to be short, he omitteth no craft wherevvith he may lead al
mankind from the knowledge of GOD, quenching the light of the truth, dullinge
the sight of Faith, and indeuouring to bring blindness and utter darkness into
the mind.

Of the Lawful society of Wedlock. Chap. 54.
Matrimony is a lawful and inseperable conjunction of man and woman
ordained by God, partly to bridle lust and to avoid fornication and wandering
copulation, and partly for procreation of children. Lib. 12. cap. 1
And as Columella (besides Paul) shows out of the Oeconomickes of Xenophon,
marriage was devised of nature, to the end we should enter into a society of
life, which is not only pleasant but also most profitable: and least mankind
in protract of time should come to ruin, Genes. 2
it joined man to woman, with an infused blessing from above, that by this
inseparable conjunction there should not be wanting a help, wherewith besides
a love to get children, it might bind them together with a mutual
conjunction of life and goods. Wherefore seeing the haven of wedlock is the
safest harborough and surest road for mankind to lie in, in whom is
naturally ingrafted a desire to get children; that man provides best for his
own security which betaketh himself thereunto, especially if he be of
sufficient years, and gotten unto him a manly courage. But very
inconsideratelie do they and without regard of their years, who untimely and
unseasonably enter into it before their strength be tried, and the force of
nature approved. For there are some with almost never a hair on their faces,
who either through some inconsiderate rashness, or being provoked thereto by
the allurementes of women, or else by the compulsion of their parents, gaping
for some great dowry, do undergo this yoke: so that I have been forced to
use applications to strengthen and recover very many of them: but a little
while after their marriages, before one year was common about, they have been
so vveake and feeble limmed, and so consumed their lively moisture, that they
were scarce able to stand on their legs. Wherefore least children, or those
that have a little passed that age, should apply their minds to marriage: let
every one make trial of his strength, and see of what force he is in the
loins, and what he is able to endure. And whosoever purposes to give
himself to marry, let him mark this above all other things: that he take
one to be his yoak-fellovv, which is of an honest house, not so much for her
Dovvrie (albeit that is not to be refused when it is proffered) as for her wit,
honesty, chastity, bashfulnesse, and good manners. For a woman (as the
Comicall Poet says) has a sufficient Dowry, if she be endued with good
manners: And notable is that saying of Alcumena in Plautus, Amph. act. 1.
which ought to be perfectly learned of all maidens and matrones. I take not
that for a dowry which is so commonly called: but chastity, shamefastness,
a mortified lust, the fear of God, the love toward parents, brotherly
love, obedient to her husband, willing to do that which is good, and to
bridle ones self from doing of evil.

Wherefore let parents carefully labor prouidentlie to instruct that weak
sex, and ready to fall to destruction, especially when they begin to wax
ripe and ready for a husband, that they conceive no dishonestie, nor sustain
the loss of their chastity, Eccles 7
but rather to train up their daughters to honesty and virtue, and stir them
up to soundness of life and blameles manners. For there are many parents
which do so slenderly care for the perfection of their daughters, that they
corrupt them with ill examples at home, opening them the window to
drunkenness, boldness, and impudency: whereby it comes to pass, that
they accustom themselves by little and little to lay aside shamefastness and
make sale of their chastity, by suffering themselves to be easily overcome,
or at least they slenderly resist such as lie in wait for their virginity:
whose clipping, kissing and toying, they nothing abhor, neither take
greeuouslie, or gainesaie the flattery of those that embrace them. Among many
faults and errors which are wont to be committed in the entrance into this
estate of wedlock, there are three especially which in my judgment are to be
blamed, because from thence do many inconveniences arise. The first is, that
the most part of men and women do enter into this kind of life, rashly and
without consideration, having no regard of their natures, but at such an age
as is altogether unfit for it. Secondly, there are many that marry when it is
too late, and therefore out of season, because their age begins to wither, and
years grow fast upon them. Lastly, there are some that match themselves
unequally, as one that is sound and lusty, with one that is sickly and
vveake: a young man that marries an old woman for her Dovvrie, which is an
unequal match, and an old man matching with a young maiden, which is not so
much to be blamed as the other, because it is not contrary to the course and
order of nature: for there are many old men, who though they be crasie,
yet is their age so lively, that they want not ability to get children:
which is altogether denied to old and ouervvorne women. And as the overmuch
haste and celeritie of young men in thinking of marriage, is to be blamed: so
is slacknesse and delaie in those that are of years sufficient.

For those that suffer themselves to be tied with this yoke too hastily before
they are ready, and before their bodies are strong enough to endure it, it
cannot be, but after a brag or two, their courage is cooled and altogether
decayed: But those that by delays, let the lavvful time of marryage ouerslip
them, and defer their purpose to marry till they be old, they lead a filthy
and unpleasant life, yea and many times defile themselves with diverse and
unlawful copulations: and that do so many pockyfaced, so many diseased,
withered visaged, bleare eied, crooked, gowtie and swollen legged companions
show unto us: who afterward when their lives begin to be loathsome unto
them, and that it happen they join themselves in marriage, they fall into many
and great griefs and incombrances. For when they are spent and decayed, and
their strength consumed through the disorder of their forepassed copulations,
they are both grievous unto themselves, and frustrate the hope and desire of
their new married wives.

All society that comes not within the compass of Wedlock is vicious, and
altogether unlawful. Chap. 55.
SEeing that Christ and his Apostles do detest wantonness and filthy and
unlawful loves, Heb. 13
and pronounces that they shall be shut out of the kingdom of heaven which do
file themselves with adultery, and desire to go a whooring: I cannot see with
what face they can defend themselves, who hurting matrimony, think it better
to live looselie and without care at liberty. For there are some who without
the bounds of wedlock, give themselves for a time to some paramore, neither
decently, nor with a safe mind and quiet conscience. They forsooth follow
the profit of this life (as they persuade themselves) and will not be so much
addicted to one, but will change and forsake her at their pleasure: and yet they
oftentimes taste more bitter things, and are compelled to endure and abide
far more shameful things at the hands of a proud and a malepert lemman,
then (if they were married) of their lawful and honest wives. Moreover this
mischief also happens besides, because the continual custom of the lives
of these women does bring boldness and such a kind of audacious sauciness
and confidence, that if thou wax weary of the^, and art desirous to forsake
them, thou can not do it without very great trouble. For if it happen thou
make but mention of a divorce, or if they perceive thou art discontent with
them, and they begin but to fear thou will shut them out of thy doors, they
will confound heaven and earth together. Those familiar and domestical whores
which our mass priests received into their fellowship, do minister examples
very abundantly, who were forbidden to marry and commanded to live
chastely, a thing very painful and of too great a burden for them that were
strong and full of moisture to bear. Wherefore they err greatly and are
altogether blinded and deceived in the choice of so beastly a life, who judge
those to live profitably and quietly, who freeing themselves from marriage, do
either keep a whore at home, or hire one abroad, with whom they may delight
themselves and when it pleases them inioye her company: because most
commonly besides the disquiet of the mind and the gaul of their consciences,
there rises more grief and trouble, and more jealousy and suspicion from an
hired and time serving lemman, then from a lawful and trusty wife being married.
And albeit in this estate as in many other, pleasant things are mingled with
sower things, bitterness with sweetness, pleasure with sorrow, and grief
with joy, and that there is in marriage no want of brawles, contentions,
chidings, and jealous affections (as in deed there is no estate of life
whatsoever, every way perfect) yet is there no fault to be laid on the
institution of marriage. For albeit many discommodities attend on this estate,
and great sorrow, care, and trouble of mind both in bringing up their children,
and as Paul says) in ordering of a house: 1 Cor. 5
yet does mutual love mittigate and aswage all these sorrows, by procreating
of children according to the ordinance of God. For children are a great
reioicing and singular delight in marriage, by whose means the love of the
married is increased, and nourished, and a great comfort rises to them both.
But if it happen contrary to their minds and wills that they have no children,
and that they have no hope to leave a posterity behind them: yet must ye bond
of marriage be kept undefiled, and the society of this life main tained, one
propping and holding up the other, as fruitful trees set in a rank do the
vine, who leaning on them, and as it were marrying and fastening it tendrels to
them, climeth the very tops of them, and so spredeth it self abroad. For as
a vine destitute of props and bearers is weak and falls to the ground, so
marriage unless it be propped up with the mutual labor of man and wife,
decaieth and comes to ruin. And if there be any fault in this fellowship,
any disorder, suspicious falings out, and discords, it is rather to be ascribed
to the stubborn affections of the man or the woman, or both, then to this holy
and sacred ordinance: for these are not the faults of marriage, but of a
noughty nature and troublesome mind, drawn from the infection of original
sin, from whence all evil springs.

By what means a man forseeing death by nature may not be afraid of it. Chap.
56.
Seeing that of all things in this world, there is nothing certain and sure,
but that all things are vanishing, frail, and weak, yea the most beawtifull
things that are, must come to ruin: there is no reason why any one should so
greatly esteem them, or so greedily usurp them, or be more affected to the^
then necessity requires; but rather lifting up his heart and mind to heaven,
should meditate and look after things perfect and everlasting. For whosoever
has faith in GOD the Father through Jesus Christ, he is led with a certain
hope and expectation of immortality, and such a one fears no imminent
chances or discommodities, such a one fears no disease, calamity, danger,
no nor death it self, which is greatly feared of those that are destitute of
the spirit of GOD, and were never endued with any knowledge of his deity.
For such as put their trust in GOD, being strengthened by the holy Ghost, do
courageously and with stout stomachs resist all adversities, Romans 8 2.
Tim. 1. Galat 4 1. John. 4.
because we have not (as Paul says) received the Spirit of bondage and
fear, but the Spirit of adoption, and the Spiritte of power and love, by
which we boldly cry Abba Father. In this says John is our love perfect in
us, that we have hope in the day of judgment: Fear is not in love, but
perfect charity rejects all fear, because fear brings trembling and
torment. Wherefore to the end we may shake off all fear of death from our
minds, Colos. 2
and all terrors that it may bring unto us, let us cast all our cogitations,
hope, vows, and trust, on our merciful Father, and on Jesus Christ, who has
reconciled us with his blood: and has delivered us from sin and the tyranny
of death, blotting out the hand writing that accused us, whereby we were
bound and pledged to the Devil, and as the Dutch man says: In hem
ghehouden, Teghens hem verbunden, that is, held fast and tied to him. But to
the end Christ might strengthen our fearful and tymerous minds, and declare
all our hope and trust to consiste in him, he says: Be of good comfort,
John. 16 John. 12.
for I have overcome the world. Now the Prince of this world is judged, that
is, he that brought death into the world, is by my death overcome being
condemned in judgment, and strypped of his power to hurt. The Prince of this
world comes, but he has nothing in me. With which comfortable words he
declares Satan and those which are confederate with him in this world,
through sin to have no power, either against Christ or any of his members
that cleave unto him, and are ingrafted into him by faith. These saving and
quickening speeches do work this in the minds of men, which do lean unto
his help, that shaking off the fear of death do cheerfully arm themselves
against all troubles that happen unto them, which makes them invincible and
with bold courage, to break out into these words. Mine eyes wait always on
the Lord, Psalm. 3. Psalm. 22
because he has plucked my feet out of the snare. The Lord is my light and
my salvation, of whom then shall I be afraid? The lord is the protector of my
life, whom shall I then fear? If whole armies come against me, my heart shall
not fear, I will not be afraid of thousands of people that compass me
about: if war be raised against me in him will I trust, yea although I should
walk in the shadow of death, yet will I fear none evil, Job. 13.
because thou art with me. Albeit he kill me, yet will I put my trust in him,
that is, if he set before me the shadow of death, and that he take away my life
from me, yet will I trust in him, who with his providence will find some means
to preserve me. Psalm. 117. Heb. 11 Cap. 17
The Lord is my help, I will not fear what flesh can do unto me. And that
saying of Jeremy. Behold, they say where is the word of the Lord? let him
come, and I will not be troubled, following thee my shephearde. And thou
know I have not desired the day of a man, that is, I desire help no where
else then of thee: so that I lightly regard and nothing fear them which
threaten death. I am not afraid of thee which art my hope in the day of mine
affliction, let them fear, I am nothing afraid. Paul also inflamed with ye
same ferue^cy of faith, and trusting upon the help of God, boldly pronounces.
There is nothing so horrible and fearful, that can bring a terror into godly
minds, or can remove from the^ the love and trust in God. For I am certainly
persuaded, Romans ^
says he, that neither death nor life, neither Angels nor the invisible
creatures, neither principalities nor powers, neither things present, nor
things to come, nor any other creature can separate me from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, so that Paul boldly pronounces, Psalm. 50
that he which is grafted into God though Christ will boldly withstand all
terrors whatsoever happen unto him, against the rage and fury of the enemy,
against the horror of death, whether it be procured by the enemy or by
sickness, or whether it come by the course of nature. Seeing then there is
nothing of more force to take away the fear and terror of death out of men's
minds, then by a firm faith in GOD through Christ, by which we have a
certain hope of our resurrection, and an expectation of everlasting
happiness: hither should all men hasten and desire to come, every one should
embrace and follow this wholesome doctrine, imprinte it in their minds, and
strengthen themselves in all dangers when they are brought to extremities,
herewith should they quiet their consciences, and by thinking on this remove
all grief of heart, shaking off all sorrow and lamentation which comes to
them, by the death of their parents and friends. Hitherto tends that lively
comfort of Paul, These. 4.
wherewith he incourageth the Thessalonians with the expectation of the
resurrection, and a certain hope of eternity, willing them to stay their
tears and not to mourn for their friends departed out of this life, after
the manner of the Gentiles, saying: I would not have you ignorant brethren,
concerning them that are a sleep (as it were but fallen a sleep and not dead)
that you grieve not at them, as those that have no hope of the resurrection:
For if we believe that Jesus is dead and risen again, so also can God raise
them with him that are fallen a sleep, and bring them to their former estate.
Our conversation, says he, is in heaven, from whence we look for our Lord
Jesus Christ, who vvil transform our vile bodies, Phil. 4
and make the^ like to his glorious body, according to his power wherewith he
subdueth all things. In which words Paul vvarneth all men that they comfort
and strenthen then themselves in afflictions, with the love and desire of
immortality, and that they fear nothing in the whole course of this life,
that may withdraw them from a better life, to which Christ has opened us the
way, by the power of his resurrection. Wherefore, when we come to the last
day of our life and death presses upon us, which is fearful to al men
unless Christ do hold them up, or where there comes any thought of death
to them that are found and in perfect health, or if poverty oppress us, or
any disease, or any other discommodities of this life trouble us: let us cast
all our hope, desire and prayers on Christ, who has paid the punishment due
unto us by his death, who has pardoned all our offenses, who is the
propitiation for our sins, who is our advocate (as John says) and mediator
with GOD the Father, Colos. 3 1. John. 2. 1. Tim. 2 Esaias. 50 Ephet 2 Colol. 1.
John. 1
who is the reconciler of GOD and man, and who, as Paul says, has given
himself to be a redemption and sacrifice for us. In him stands our
salvation and the resurrection of life, by him we have access and entrance
in one Spirit to GOD the Father, by his bloudshedding we have obtained
redemption and remission of sins, because it pleased the father, that al
fullness should dwell in him, and make all things pleasing unto him by his
bloudsheading. Seeing therefore we have an high priest as the Author says
to the Hebrews, Heb. 4
who has pearsed the heavens, even Jesus Christ the Son of GOD, who tempted
in all things, and yet without sin, was affected with the feeling of our
infirmities: Let us come with says to that throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy of him that will help us in due season, being sustained with
the help of so great a guide, and attended on with so sure a guard, we shall
be able to resist the monsters of the Devil, who so soon as the light of the
Gospel appeared, vanished away, yea we shall prevail against sin, Death
and Hell, and shall be carried out of the uncertain state of this life, to
the desired haven, and to a blessed habitation.

And if it fallout in the course of this life, that any discommoditie or
misfortune happen unto thee, if it chance thou fall into any incombraunces of
this life, if oppressed with poverty, grieved with diseases, troubled with thy
enemies, if oppression and calamity come upon thee, if wickedness abound, if
the innocent be injured, and their lives taken away from them, if sound and
wholesome doctrine be contemned, if heresies and wicked opinions do bud forth
and naughty errors are sown abroad: in such a confusion of things we must
go unto Christ, and require of him the helps of our salvation, let us rest
wholly on him, let us as it were with an Anchor take fast hold on him. And to
be short, let us have that saying of David in our minds: Psalm. 15
I will always set the Lord before mine eyes, because he is on my right
hand that I cannot be removed. In which words he shows he had his eyes
always fastened on GOD, and trusted to his help, not doubting nor carried
away with every blast of doctrine, but was stable and constant, Ephe. 4.
Hebru 1; Psalm. ^^
and could not be removed from the faith he had in God, and that only for
this cause that he had tried GOD to be his propitiation, and to assist him
in all things: so that he boldly brake out into these speeches.

Behold the Lord is my help, my heart hoped in him, and he helped me, my
flesh reioiced in him, and I will willingly confess him.

Of the greatness of the name of Jesus Christ, his majesty and power,
wherewith we must only resist magical enchantments, and overcome the illusions
of the Devil or any other hurt that shall happen to body and mind. Chap. 57.
SEeing that a little before I have showed inchantmentes and magical arts are
to be rooted up, and no man should use sorcery and witchcraft: It remains
that I show by the way with what force and power, with what words and prayers
minds assailed, afflicted, and entangled in the iuglings of the Devil, may be
cured. Then by what means wichcraft may be taken away, which the ministers of
the Devil do bring upon men, and vex their minds and bodies. They enter
secretly into man's body, and do violently assail his nature, and spoil the
same of power or at least wise weaken it. These evil spirits do enter into our
meat and drink, and breath which we take from the air, and into such things
as we receive into our bodies, and wherewith we live, and all other things that
serve for our use to strengthen us, they do corrupt. Wherefore I thought it
worth my labor to show by what means these miserable men, may comfortablie
wind themselves out of those Labirinthes wherein they feel themselves
entangled and stayed. For the discommodities and hurtes wherewith they are
grieved, cannot be referred to any natural cause, neither can they be
remedied with such remedies as the common diseases are. If a man falsick of too
much surfeting, venerie, weariness, cold, heat, fullness, or emptiness;
every one of these may be cured with their proper remedies: but those diseases
which the evil spirit does bring upon us, do not altogether require natural
remedies, but heavenly and supernatural. There are diverse that wonder how so
great power should be in the devil and his ministers, that they should so vex
and torment men: but God does partly wink at those da^mages the wicked ones do
bring upon mortal men, suffering them to be tormented, and therein the reason
of his counsel and providence is only known to himself: and partly he
does provoke the Devil and his ministers to rage over some that have deserved
no less, abusing their malice to chastise the wicked ones, for so was the
evil spirit sent into the mouths of the prophets, 3 Reg. 22.
whereby king Ahab was seduced to the battle, wherein present destruction was
prepared for him. And oftentimes he permits these harms to be inflicted
on many, to the end he might try their faith and constancy: so did he suffer
Job not only to be spoiled of all his goods, Job. 2. James 4.
and stripped of his wealth, but he suffered his body also to be torn with
potsheards: the which God suffered partly to try his constancy, and to
excite others to bear such evils patiently, least they being cast down with
calamity should fall away from God; and partly to show his power wherewith he
comfort and supporteth all such as trust in him, raising such as are brought
to nothing, and restoring them again to their former estate. Now there must be
a diverse regard had of those that are commonly possessed with evil
spirits, and who are beset of the devil, or tormented in any part of their
bodies by him, because many of them are without sense and far from the
knowledge of God, over whom the Devil (as a fit instrument prepared for him)
does exercise his tyranny. So does Satan set upon such as are altogether idle,
idolatrous, and superstitious, in whose minds he does rather settle himself
then in those that are endued with the knowledge of GOD, and support themselves
with faith in Christ, whom he is afraid of, and dares not work his feats
on them, because his endeavors and practices should be altogether in vain and
without effect, in those that keep good watch against him, and trusting to the
help of God, care nothing for him. For as Towers and cities that are not walled
about, nor defended with ditch and rampire, nor strengthened with any garrison
of soldiers, are easily conquered and won, so those sluggish and slothful
minds, that are not strengthened with wholesome and heavenly doctrine, nor
fortified with faith in God, lie open to the subtletie of the Devil, and are
soon brought to ruin. And seeing Satan does most of all covet to abolish the
glory of God, that he might withdravve man from salvation, and stir him up
to rebellion: he cease not inwardly and outwardly to besiege him, and now
to intend the death of the body, now of the foul, and last of all, of both
their strength to bring them to destruction. Genes. 4 1 Reg 31.
Besides Caine and king Saul, Judas Iscariot may serve for an example: whose
mind when he had brought to distrust and desperation, then he forced him
being weary of his life, to hang himself, to his shame and confusion. Math. 29
But albeit Satan the enemy of mankind be furnished with a thousand practices
to infect and hurt us: yet is there one only thing able and of present force,
to overcome and oppress him, and that is faith, and a sure and steadfast trust
in GOD the Father through Christ, which the Dutchman calls Even vaste
gheloue, end even goedt betrovven op godt. By whose aid the Apostle Peter
counsels us to resist the ambushmentes, trappes, iuglinges, deceipts,
subtleties, rage and cruelty, with sobriety and watchfulness, supported and
propped by faith: for thus he waketh them that are idle: Be ye sober and
watch, 1 Pet. 5
because your adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion seeking
whom he may devour, whom resist ye being strong in Faith. For this, as John
says, 1 John. 5
is the victory that overcomes the world, even our Faith: for faith
whereby we lean to Christ and commit our selves wholly to such a defender,
gets us the victory over the devil the prince of this world: so that we
shall carry away rich spoils from our conquered and ouerthrown enemy.

When therefore it seems good unto us to attempt any thing against this
adversary, and to resist inchauntmentes and witchcraftes (which the Dutchmen
call Touerie) or to drive evil spirits out of men's minds: it must be done
by faith in Jesus Christ, Hebru. 5
contemning the vanity of the Gentiles, old wives superstitions, and all other
magical execrations. For God by his son, who is the brightness of his
glory and the very image of his substance, does all in all, and governs
all things with the word of his power. This prerogative did he obtain for
his singular obedience, humility, and modesty toward his father. For when he
was in the form of God, that is, like and equal with him, he thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2.
and yet he submitted himself and took the shape of a servant, and humbled
himself, and was obedient to the shameful and execrable death of the Cross,
wherefore God lifted him up into the highest heavens, and glorified him with
a name ye excelled al other names, that in the name of Jesus every knee should
bow both in heaven and earth and of things under the earth, and every tongue
shall confess and acknowledge, that Jesus is the Lord and the glory of God
the father, to whom all the glory of the son is referred and given. And
contrariwise. If therefore any man do attempt to do any thing, if to ease the
afflicted in mind, if to cast out devils out of the body, let him endeavor to
do it by calling on God the father by faith in the name of Christ, and so
shall he obtain all things, and shall not be frustrate of his desire. For by
the force of this wonderful and blessed name (so we doubt not nor distrust
the promises of God) diseases are healed, Mark. 16
afflictions and troubles of mind quieted, tempests and rages of the sea
mitigated, diuelles (as Christ promises ascending up into heaven) driven
out, poison denied his operation, serpents are made slovve and cannot hurt,
ignorance, terror, and fear driven from the mind, the fear of death shaken
off, hurtful thoughts dispearsed and made to vanish, and the mind gets
tranquillity and peace of conscience: so that nothing can happen unto us to
make us afraid if God the father through Jesus Christ uphold us by his
spirit. Wherefore our souls must be lifted up to the living God thorough
the guide of his son, and whatsoever we determine to take in hand, we must
remember to do it in the power of that wonderful name Jesus: Math. 28 Mark.
16 Acts 2
for to him is given all power both in heaven and earth: neither is there any
other name under the sun that brings salvation, the which is terrible to
the wicked, fearful to the devils, but to those that trust in him power, Acts
4 1 Cor. 1
wisdom, salvation, life and resurrection: who is appointed of God to be the
judge both of the quick and dead, even Christ Jesus the faithful witness,
the prince of the kings of the earth, Apoc. 1 Acts 10.
who loved us and washed us from our sins by his blood. To him, as Peter
says in the Acts of the Apostles, do all the prophets bear witness,
because who soever believes in him shall receive remission of his sins in
his name. John. 1^
This is the life eternal (which testimony Christ gives to his Father) that
they may know thee to be the only true God and him whom thou have sent
Jesus Christ, in whom is all the power of the Godhead, and whatsoever
wisdom may be ascribed and given to God.

Seeing therefore that this name is so renowned and holy, and of such majesty
and power: we must diligently take heed we use it not irreverently and
in vain, as those ridiculous exorcistes do, who with certain ceremonies and
conceived words, assaying by the abuse of the name of Jesus to cast out the
evil spirit to their own profit and ostentation (by which name Paul
wrought miracles) have cast themselves into great peril, Acts 19
and their adiuration or rather mockery, was hurtful to themselves, for the
possessed of the Devil ran on them and cruelly rent them, so that they
were glad to betake the^ to flight. There have bin also massepriests in our
days, whoindued with no faith in ye name of Christ, nor with any good manners,
have attempted the like, but have been so mocked and shamed by the Devil, that
leaving their business altogether undone, trembling with greatfeare have been
constrained to depart. But if any now will go about to bring such a thing to
pass, and to cast evil spirits our of the bodies of men: let him follow
the example of Peter and John, who using no ambitious words raised the lame
after this sort. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and
walk, Acts.
and he presently his feet and legs vvaxing strong, leaped up and
walked, and entered with them into the Temple, leaping, and walking, and
praising God. Seeing then that Jesus the only son of God, Col. 1 Hebru. 1
coequall and of like power with the father, in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, does guide all things by the word of
his power: it is meet we put and place all our trust in God, thorough Jesus
Christ, and that by the power and strength of him we resist Satan, sin,
hell, and al things whatsoever are hurtful to man.

But excellent is the greatness, strength, power and fortitude, which God
according to his power showed in Christ, as Paul says, when he raised him
from the dead, and made him to sit at his right hand in the heaven above all
power, principality, and rule, and above all that is named not only in this
world, but also in the world to come, and has put all things under his
feet, and given him to be chief of all things in his Church, which is his
body, and is the fulfilling and accomplishment of all things: that is, it is
Christ by whom God does fill up, Ephesians. 1
absolve, and perfect all things in all men; especially in them that believe
in him: And as Paul says, are sealed with the holy spirit of promise,
which is the pledge and earneste of our inheritance, into the redemption of
that purchased and gotten possession, to the praise of his glory. Wherefore
Paul who was accustomed to many conflictes, and constrained to bear many
proud bragges, does counsel every one, if dangers at any time hang over them,
if Death be at hand to kill them, if Satan lay siege to their minds: to
strive with and resist him with a bold and valiant courage, for so does he
encourage and exhort the Ephesians: Ephesians 6
saying, That which remains brethren, be of good courage, and shevve your
selves valiant in the Lord, and by the power of his strength, put on all the
armor of GOD, that you may resist the assaults of the Devil: because we
must not strive against flesh and blood, that is against weak and mortal men
(albeit they sometimes trouble us) but against the Princes of the World, the
rulers of the darkness of this world, against the spiritual craft of those
that fly in the air.

In which plenty of words and variety of sentences, and that elegant
Metaphor taken from a conflict and skirmishe with the enemy, he shows yt the
evil spirits with their attendantes and ministers, do go about with great
craft and warlike policy to beguile those that have addicted themselves, and
given their names to Christ. Wherefore seeing our enemies are so much to be
feared, and so furnished with spiritual craft: he shows by the way with
what weapons we are to resist him. Take says he, the whole armor of God (an
example taken from those that go well armed into the battle and stand on
their guarde) that you may resist the adversary and stand to him stoutly and
effectually, like those that shrink not, Ephesians. 6
nor are compelled to fly: stand therefore with your loins girte with the
svvorde of truth, putting on the breastplate of righteousness, and shoes on
your feet, that ye may be ready and prepared to the Gospel of peace: but above
all things take unto you the shield of faith, whereby you may quench all those
fiery darts of that wicked one. Take unto you the helmet of health, and the
svvord of the spirit, which is the word of God, to which he adds (as
substituted aides) petitions and daily prayers, who do so execute their
office, yt they obtain the victory: 1 Pet. 5.
And God (as Peter says arguing on the same matter) in so uncertain a
conflict, and (as it often proves) in so doubtful event of the battle,
refreshes, establishes, strengthens and supporteth those that are ready to
be overcome, and as it were brought to ruin. Now seeing in times paste there
was such authority of Pythagoras amongst his scholars, and his doctrine was
of such estimation, that they held it as an Oracle, or as it were spoken by
the vvifest man in the world, insomuch that when they would confirm any thing
without any long delaie, they would object to him that doubted their
arguments to be true, (...), that is, he has spoken, as though it had been
then a great offense to speak against it: so is it meet the like reason be
had of our religion, giving the same reverence to Jesus Christ, that in
alleging his doctrine to confirm the profession of our faith, we cry unto
the deaf and dull hearers (...), that is, believe, for our Savior has spoken
it: for his doctrine is not human, vanishing, and cold, but lively, saving,
forcible and divine, and which brings blessedness to man: which only we
ought to desire of Christ who is the fountain of all wisdom and goodness,
and in whom dwells all fullness of God corporally: by whom we are made
perfect: by whom as Paul says, God the father has delivered us from the
power of darkness, and has translated us to the kingdom of his beloved
son: by whom we have redemption in his blood and remission of our sins: who
is the image of the invisible god, and the first begotten before all creatures,
and by who^ all things were made both in heaven and earth, visible and
invisible, thrones, dominions, principalities, and powers. All things were made
by him and through him, and he is before all things, and by him all things have
their beginnings. He is the head of his body the Church, the beginning and
first begotten from the dead, that he might be chief in all things, and obtain
the souerainty, because it pleased the father to dwell in him, being the
fullness of all things, and to reconcile al things unto himself being
appeased in the blood of his cross. Seeing then that GOD the Father has so
plentifully and abundantly bestowed all things on us by Christ, let us strive
to come to that plentiful and euerflowing fountain, and let us presume through
faith to ask and hope for all things from, and in him assaie to do all
things. If it seem good unto us to cast out Devils, to heal diseases, to
deliver from perils, to kill venomous beasts, to purge away poison, and make
it ha^melesse, and to remove mountains out of their places: let us remember to
do all these things by the virtue and power of Christ and by faith in him. For
Christ promises to the faithful, that all things shall be plain, open, and
easy for them to do, if they have faith, which in his last sermon, before he
ascended up into heaven, he witnesses to the world, when he says: Mark. 6
Go ye over all the world and preach the Gospel to al nations, he that
believes and is baptized shall be saved, but whosoever believes not, shall
be condemned. Tell them that believe that these things shall follow their
faith: In my name, they shall cast out Devils, speak with new tongues, kill
Serpents, and if they drink any deadly poison, it shall not hurt them, they
shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall be whole, that is at the
present touch they shall be healed: these things shall be always ready with
them, where the increase and profit of the Gospel requires a miracle. But
these things can by no means be performed in the minds of them that now
profess the Gospel, until they have cleansed their hearts from all vices, and
through the force of the spirit and doctrine of salvation have healed their
minds of their faults, and that their hearts are freed from avarice, hatred,
anger, lust, deceit, backbiting, and other dangerous affections, and endue
themselves with gifts from above.

Whether herbs and precious stones have a power to cast out Devils and expel
noisome things. Chap. 58.
ALbeit that herbs have such especial use and excellent force, given by the
framer of Nature that they are applied to man's body for nourishment and
medicines sake, yet are there some roots commended by ancient writers which
resist inchaunt ments, and do beat back and drive away sorcery and witchcraft
of all sorts. These are called Alexicaca or remedies against al mischiefs, and
Amuleta, that is, Amlettes, or preservatives against witchcraft, which do
drive away and remove all things that are hurtful and noisome to men. This
force also besides herbs is attributed to Pearls and Precious stones, which
have gotten that power not by their first qualities, that is, the temprature of
heat and cold, dryness and moisture: but by a special strength, hidden
force, and secret property, whose cause cannot by any means be showed.

So does the Magnes and Loadstone draw Iron: The Gagates or Agath stone, and
the Amber draw strawes and moates. The Sapphire which is of a s^ie and gray
color defends chastity. The Iacincte and Chrysolite borne on the Ring
finger resists the plague. The Emerald and Prasius being stones of a green
color do make the heart merry. The Jasper, Sapphire and blew stone called a
Turcoise, keeps a man from sliding, falling and stumbling: or if any of these
happen, it keeps the body from hurt: Coral hanged about the neck drives
away troublesome dreams, and keeps children from fears in the night. The
Carbuncle or Sardine stone commonly called the Cornel stone, (taking that name
of a red berrie the Cornell tree bears) spreads the blood in the body,
and makes men merry and of an excellent color. There are also diverse other
stones of most excellent virtue to remove and drive away Hobgoblins,
Witches, Hags, and any ayrie Spirits, if we may credit ancient writers.
There are also herbs which resist those diseases, that are very near kin
to the vexations and tortures of the Devil, as melancholy, frenzy, madness,
the falling sickness, and other grievous diseases that happen to young
maids, and old widows, through the motion and affection of their womb: or
when their monethlie diseases have not their course, or when they are kept
longer from marrying then they would be: because from the fumes that disease
brings, and through black and thick fogges, their minds are so troubled,
that a man would think they were tormented of some evil Spiritte: yea they
themselves do persuade themselves that some evil Spiritte does possess their
minds, which brings them into many absurd and filthy imaginations, to
which disease after the incision or cutting of some vain in the feet, such
wholesome herbs are applied unto them that deliver them of these accidents:
and of this sort are these, Mugworte, Sauory, wild Betony, Maieram,
Penirioall, Origane and Clarie: But amongst herbs that are an ease to an
afflicted mind, or do safely keep a man from evil spirits, or from
thinking of them, or from those venomous fumes which do hurt the brain, these
are reckoned to be of force, Rue, ye sea onion, (of whose juice and sirrop a
vinegar is made) masterwort, which we commonly call Pelitory of Spain,
Angelica, or Lungwort, (a kind of Fenel giant, or Lascrpice) Alisson or Rubia
the less, which heals a man, dog, or those that be bitten with a mad dog,
which disease is not altogether unlike those which are vexed and inrage with
the Devil. Rosemary purges the house, whose root (or the root of Hogs
Fennel or Bearefoote) hanged in the entry of ye house, chaseth away evil
spirits, and the contagion of the plague. Also Ricine which is commonly called
Palma christi (because the leaves thereof are like to a hand when it is
stretched out) does the like. So Coral, Peony, the Misletoe bush, drives away
the falling evil, if it be either hanged about ones neck, or drunk in wine.
All which if any man think he may use in driving away evil spirits, let
vanity and the superstition of the Gentiles be far from him, let him use no
vain precations, or strange words which they use for the most part, who
practice inchauntmentes and profess the magical arts: but let him remember
that if herbs have any force (as experience teaches us they have) they have
it from the Lord. For all medicines and roots, which are applied to man's body
are of force, not in regard of themselves, but for yt they are given of God,
and by his means have that wholesome operation. Therefore if thou do determine
any thing with the help of herbs, trust not so much to the force of them, as
to God himself, and so in expelling diseases thy labor shall have a happy and
wished success, otherwise thy good endeavors turn clean contrary, and the
end deceive the expectation of the artificer, because he thought not on the
creator of who^ all things have their effect, or else he wanted faith in
Christ. 3 Reg. 15. 2. Paca 16
Hence it came that Asa king of Judah when he was greeuouslie afflicted with
the pain in the feet, and took not counsel of GOD, but only trusted to
the Physician, found no help in their application, but dyed of the gowte, as
the story says. For GOD does not forbid the help of the Physician, but
that we should not trust altogether in him, and have no regard of him which
is the Author of health, and by whose gift all things have their efficacy.
But they do very superstitiously, and commit a thing not far from Idolatry,
Psalm. 7
who apply to inchauntments herbs hallowed with certain fained prayers, and
proceed with them to vncharme diseases: for so do they apply Fearne about the
summer solstice, and Rue, Trifolie, and Veruein gathered in the beginning of
the night to serve their Magical sorceries withal, wherewith they beguile the
rude and unskillful sort of common people, and blind their eyes to get
something from them, and wipe them clean of al their money, and yet those
vain artificers never become rich. This I thought good friendly reader to
insert in this argument, to the end every one may beware of those magical in
chanters, and regard from whom we must look for our help and health of our
salvation (contemning the vanity and superstition of the Gentiles) and by what
means it becomes us to use remedies prepared for us, which are plentifully
granted unto us by the bounty of God.

Of the majesty and power of God, and how many names the essence of one God
divided into three persons, has; by thinking whereof man's mind receives
peace and comfort and perfect faith toward God. Chap. 59.
BEcause GOD that excellent and most powerful nature, that eternal mind
which is free from death, and stretches it self over all, is spread over
all, and rules and governs all things, and indueth them with his power:
therefore this one Godheade for the virtue and excellency of his works, is
called by diverse names, and revealed unto us by many notable terms, both
among the Hebrews, and also among other nations, to whom any knowledge of his
deity happened to come. So in the holy Bible he is called, Iehoua, El,
Eloim, Adonai, Emanuel, all which do signify a certain peculiar force and
virtue, and do give great power to God which he shows in things of this
world. Wherefore when he propounded the precepts of the Law to the Jews,
to be diligently observed, to the end there might be more authority and
reverence added to it, (...). 20 (...), 5
he says: I am I choua the Lord thy GOD, which brought thee out of the
land of Egypt, and out of the house of bondage, thou shall have non other Gods
before me* By which holy and wonderful name, he takes to himself the rule
and government of all things that have their being. For seeing he is the
fountain and welspring of all things in this world, and he only of himself
gives the force of being to all things, therefore is it meet that all men
should be obedient to his commandments, and submit themselves to his Laws,
and look for no other help of their salvation from any thing, nor turn
themselves to any other God, then to him that has his beginning from
everlasting, which the Hebrews call Iehoua, the Greeks (...), the Latins
existens, and the low Dutch Even cewich Goddeliick wesen, and we God.
Therefore the name of this divine essence is taken from many things, from the
first and everlasting power and force of being, eternity, magnificence,
majesty, rule and empire, to whom all things obey, and by whom all things
were made, and are guided by his great providence. He also takes his name
from peace, meekness, and clemency that he uses toward mankind, Ose 3
Iole. 2 Naum. 1
who in affliction and sorrow crave his help and aid. For El the Hebrew
word does express the mercy of GOD, joined with justice, wherewith he
vpholdeth and defends the godly, and punishes the wicked, or by putting
them in fear reclaimeth them from sin. Naum. 2 Ose. 11
Also from the light whereby he drives away the darkness, errors and
clouds of the mind, and inlightneth the ignorant with the brightness of his
knowledge and truth. For thus says Christ, John. ^
I am the light of the world, whosoever follows me shall not walk in
darkness. Also from fire wherewith he kindles and inflameth the godly with
the love of god linesse, and indueth their minds with wholesome and linely
doctrine, Deuteronomy. 4 Hebru. 13 Mich. 6 Ose. 2
but the adversaries and such as show no reverence nor fear to God, he
consumes and brings to nothing, as the sire does dry wood or straw.
Wherefore Moses and Paul do reverently and religiously exhort us to worship God,
to the end we may be acceptable to him, for says he, God is a consuming
fire, therefore let every one carry himself reverently toward him. Then
is also a name given unto God, from the bounty and liberality which he uses
toward those that are his, whom he will not suffer to be oppressed with
poverty nor pine away through want, but provides plentifully for them, and
abundantly bestows all things needful for their use, both external for
the body, and internal peace and quietness of the mind. Also from his
piety and Fatherly love, wherewith he embraces his children, providing for
their profit and health, and therefore is called Father. So says GOD by
Jeremy, thou shall call me Father, and shall not cease to go in after me.
Ietem. 5. Mal^ch. 1 Esaias. 63
And again I am become the Father of Israel and Ephraim my first begotten, I
will bring them thorough the Rivers of waters into the right way, and they
shall not dashe their foot against a stone, that is, they shall follow my
steps, accompany me, and do after my will, and I will keep them safe in
all their ways, that no hurt shall happen or come unto them, no wrong,
destruction nor calamity shall light upon them.

Moreover, ^say. 6
Esaie records honorable and triumphant titles which GOD the Father gives
to Christ, to the end every one should know what profit our Savior Christ
has brought unto us by his nativity, death, resurrection, and assension into
heaven: for thus does the Prophet declare the magnificence, honor, glory,
renown, power, and greatness of Christ, of which there is none but
redowndeth greatly to our use and profit where he is called Emanuell, that is,
God with us. Ierem. 5 Esaias. 7 ^say 9
A child is born unto us, and a son is given unto us, who is the chief of all,
whose name shall be called wonderful, Counsailour, the mighty God, the
father of the World to come, and the prince of peace.

Innumerable and infinite are the things that may be applied to his great
majesty, nay rather which he attributes to himself. Math. 9 Esaias 40 John.
10 Psalm. 78, 1 Pet. 2 John. 15
For he calls himself a physician, because he heals men's minds and
bodies, and cures both the inward and outward vices. He also calls
himself a shephearde, because with great care and watchfulness he ouerseeth
his flock, and gathers together the lost sheep, and feeds and nourishes
them with the wholesome food of his word. So Christ calls himself a
fruitful vine, his father the Husbandman, and we the branches cleaving to
the vine, whom he pruneth, and cutteth away the vnpro fitable branches: that
is, he cutteth off our vain lusts, to the end we might bring forth more
fruit: but those that he finds unfruitful and yielding no yearly increase
(by which metaphor he means those that bring forth no fruits of faith) as
unprofitable and dry branches having no sap, he casts into the fire. Paul
uses the like metaphor, taken from tilling the ground and building a house: 1
Cor. 3
for taking away and quenching the discordes wherein the Corinthians were
entangled and waxed proud with the names of their teachers envying one another
(as we see the like in this our age) he warns them all that if they had
learned any sound doctrine, they should not attribute it to the ministers, but
confess they receive it from God, the author of all good things: We, says
he, are fellowhelpers, and as it were laborers hired to do the work of the
Lord, let us approve our labor to him, and let our pains appear unto him:
Ye are the husbandry and ground of the Lord which we make fruitful with the
seed of sound doctrine: ye are the edifice and building which arises to his
glory. Moreover that we may speak more of that which belongs to the
greatness and majesty of God, there can nothing be thought upon or conceived
in mind so high, mighty, famous, excellent, notable and reverend, and to be
short, nothing for number or any other virtue so perfect, which may not
deservedly be applied to God. His wisdom whereby he rules all things in
this world, Psalm. 31, 32, 103, 146 Eph^^. 2 Esaias. 25 Prou. 1
preserving and keeping it by his unsearchable counsel and providence, is
incomprehensible, not to be expressed, infinite: so that the order and course
of so great things does ravish al men with an admiration and love of the maker.
His fortitude, strength, and power wherewith he overthrows the enemy and
vpholdeth the godly is unconquerable and cannot be overcome. For there is
nothing but yields to his power, there are neither castles, bulvvarkes, and
fortresses, be they never so strong but yield to his power. Psalm. 18.47, 84*
16, 22 144.
His judgment and justice wherevvith he distributeth to every one his own,
and according to his worthiness and deserts revvardeth him: is right,
lavvfull, holy, sincere, laudable, and of great equity: so that he deserves
blame of none, unless it be of such as are of a corrupt judgment. His mercy,
clemency and gentleness, which is largely declared by all the prophets,
Psalm, 32, 56 Col. 1
is endelesse and excels all his other virtues. For all those that fear his
justice fly to his mercy as to a sanctuary, and desire his aid: it takes
desperation from their fearful minds, by it the spirit the comforter does
make glad and uphold them that are ready to fall, and planting in them a hope
and faith to obtain salvation, drives them to the throne of grace where they
find mercy, and (as the Dutchman says) Remis end quiit scheldinghe van
misdaet: that is, Remission and forgiveness of sins, Hebru. 4
so that nothing can be imputed to them, nor accuse them to death. Which when
Paul did pro oue in himself, being made of a persecutor an apostle, he thus
strengthens the wavering and doubtful minds of men, provoking them by his
example to the mercy of God.

When first, says he, I was a persecutor, 1 Timothy 1 John 16
blasphemer and outrageous, I obtained mercy for that which I did ignoranthe
through unbelief, that is, vvanting faith, and not knowing the vvil of God.
For he thought he did God good service in persecuting the christians. But to the
end almenne might know the reason of their faith, and that every one might
be assured all sins are satisfied by the blood of Christ to them that
believe, Paul constantly and firmly pronounces: This is a true saying and
vvorthie of all men to be embraced, that Christ Jesus came into the world
to save sinners, whereof I am the chief. But therefore did I obtain mercy
that in me first he might show his clemency, to make me an example to those
that should after believe in him to eternal life: that is, in hope and
expectation of the kingdom of heaven.

Which benefit seeing it ought wholly to be attributed to our Heavenly
Father, we ought not to defraude him of his due praise and commendations, To
the king (says he) immortal of this world, invisible, and to the only
wise GOD, be all honor, praise, and glory, world without end, Amen. 1 Pet.
1.
Peter also gives ye like praise to god the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
for the mystery of our salvation, who according to his abundant mercy has
regenerated us into a lively hope, by this, ye Ie. Chr. is risen again from ye
dead into an imortal inheritance, undefiled, vncorrupt and laid up in the
heavens for us, Titus 3
that is, for our love. For after that the bounty, love, and humanity of our
Savior Christ appeared toward men, he saved us for no desert of ours, neither
for any works of justice that we have done, but according to his own mercy,
thorough the washing of regeneration and renewing of the spirit, which he
plentifully powered upon us by our savior Jesus Christ, that justified by his
grace we might be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. Which
saying is certain and undoubted, and by all means to be imprinted in the
minds of men.

Seeing therefore God bears so great love and good will to mankind, and that
his favor and hearty affection was so great, that besides the use and
commodity of all things he bestowed his only begotten son to be the
redeemer of mankind, that by the death and resurrection of Christ he might
obtain grace and reconciliation: it is very meet and the rule of equity and
gratification of a good turn received requires, that every one place all his
hope and trust in him: that we give him great praise, and ever to app^oue our
lives and manners to him, please him with a faith not vain and idle, but
guarded with the works of charity, consecrate our selves wholly unto him, by
denying ungodliness and carnal lusts, and walk soberly, justly, and godly
in this world, expecting the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the
great God, Titus 2
and of our savior Jesus Christ our lord, who has given himself for us that
he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purchase him a chosen people to
him self, Romans 5
making them followers of good works.

And then when we have laid this sure foundation to good life by the help and
comfort of the Holy ghost, we shall be at peace and quiet in our minds*
shaking off the terror and fear of death, making our entrance to immortality
and blessedness by the guide of our captain Christ Jesus. For death is not the
destruction of the body, but a renewing of it, not the que^ching of nature, but
the entrance into a new life, and the gate or first going into the heavenly
City and eternal life.

Of the certainty of which, no man should doubt or distrust the promise of
God: because the truth it self which cannot err, Psalm. 61, 115 Romans 3
perfourmeth faithfully that which he promises: for God is true and every
man a liar: that is, God deceives no man, fails no man, nor frustrateth
any that have a firm faith and trust in him, he promises not slightlie as men
do which break their promises, frustrate their couenantes, and with a
certain coosening deceit break their contracts; but he is constant, stable,
faithful, and pays and performs assuredly all the promises he makes: but
every man is a liar, that is, deceitful, crafty, unconstant, slipperie,
light, uncertain, mutable, doubtful, wavering, cousening, fraudulent, vain,
captious, disloyal, and which speaks one thing standing, and another sitting,
so vncertainlie, that one cannot rely upon him.

Which faults are far removed from his Divine majesty, as in whom no
human affections do abide: wherefore we must lean unto him with a certain
faith, and lay on him al our prayers, hopes, and desires, whether danger,
destruction, death or confusion hang over us. For all troubles by his favor
and presence are aswaged, all sower and bitter things are made sweet. Faith in
him drives away fear of death and all fear and trembling is taken out of
our hearts. For the love of him we despise and contemn all delights and
pleasures of this life. By his virtue and help we suffer sorrow and
discommodities, which compass us about every moment. Strengthened with a
firm hope and expectation of immortality, we cheerefullie depart the prison of
this world, and by the conduct of Christ are brought to a blessed habitation.
And with less grief are we separated from the socierie of this body and
abode in this life, and our last conflict with death does make us less
doubtful, wherein almost all men have a distrust, and a kind of desperation
besieges their mind, but that we are sure by the merits of Christ,
redemption and grace is prepared for us. For the mediator betvveene God and
manne Christ Jesus, has reconciled us and washed away our sins with his
blood, John. 1
and by the power of his resurrection, has brought righteousness unto us. For
Christ was delivered for our sins, Romans 4
as Paul says, and is risen again for our justification. So that confirmed
by the resurrection of Christ as with a pledge, we hope we shall be saved and
raised again by his power. Phil. 3
For he as the Apostle says, shall transform our vile bodies, and make them
like unto his glorious body according to his power wherewith he can subdue all
things. For albeit (according to the doctrine of Paul) the earthly house of
this our tabernacle must be destroyed as a ruinous building, 2 Cor. 4 and 5.
which by looseness of the iointes and fastnings, and by plucking away the
rafters is overthrown, which building we have of God, not made with hands but
eternal in heaven: for God that raised the Lord Jesus, will raise us also by
him, and will make us partakers of the glory of the general resurrection,
which most certain hope works this in us, that we suffer our selves to be
drawn unto him with less corruption, and void of all pollution.

Of the Nature, conditions, and manners of Women, and why that sex when they
are angry, are more fierce then Men, conceive anger sooner, chide more
vnmeasureablie, and are sooner overcome with any affection then men. And by the
way in what sense this saying of the Wise man it to be taken: The iniquity of
a man is better then the good deeds of a Woman. Chap. 60.
THe cause why not only comicall Poets, Orators, and Philosophers, who were
alienated from true religion, but also the Wisemen and Prophets of the Hebrews,
who were endued plentifully with the knowledge of Gods word, do so much every
where inueygh and speak against women: was because the wickedness and
dishonestie of diverse of them deserved it. And albeit all are not stained with
these imperfections, neither are all women found to be shrewes and skoldes
(for there are some matrones, who by the benefit of education, indewed and
decked with many great gifts of Nature, are nothing inferior nor give any
place to very excellent men) yet the indifferent sort of women, as Citizens
and country Gentlewomen, and the common scum of Women, as the basest sort; are
so proud, so foolish, so shrewish, so imperious our their husbands; Esdras 3.
Cap. 4
and for inticements of the flesh, and pronenesse to lust, of such an untamed
and unbridled concupiscence, that they may well be tired, but never
satisfied with the act of Venerie: yet so, that some are far more inclined
and their affections more addicted that ways then othersome are. And albeit
we see so many vices in this sex every where, that many married men have
complained and yet do complain of the shrewish conditions and natures of
women, and that weeping to their neighbors, do tell what and how many
grievous outrages they are compelled by them to suffer and endure: whereby
they give occasion to many men to abhor marriage, and rather to sequester
themselves from the society and secret fellowship with women, then to suffer
and submit themselves to the vvitlesse controulmentes and indiscreet threats of
a stubborn, brawling, malicious, outrageous and scolding wise: yet because the
order of nature, the necessity of life, and the love and desire to augment our
posterity, compels a man to get him a wife and provide him a helper, to
procure increase of children, they do well which marie: whereby they pass
away the course of this life in an inseperable society and mutual consent
both of body and mind, yea and if the woman be not too frovvarde both
pleasantly and comfortablie. For unless nature do supernaturallie abhor
marriage, the condition of man's life requires it, and the quality and
disposition of the body inciteth us to it.

And therefore did Metellus Numidicus make that commendable Oration to the
Romans, G^^. Lib. 1. cap. 6
wherein he exhorted his Citizens, least the Commonwealth should come to
ruin, to take each of them a wife. For* (says he) if man might live without a
wife, why every one of us would gladly be delivered from such a troblesome
evil: but because it is so ordained of nature, yt we can neither live well and
quietly with them, nor in any good sort without them, let us rather provide
for the safety of our commonwealth, then for our own short, momentanie and
private pleasure. For if the ministry of a quiet and honest wife be of great
use and profit to those husbands that are whole and sound in helping to order
their household affairs, and in handling of al things profitably at home: then
questionless her pains must be very comfortable and commodious about the sick
and diseased persons. Eccle. 36
And as the wise man says, where there is not an hedge the possession
diminishes, so where there is not a woman the sick must needs sigh, and he
that wants his helper ca^ be hardly supported. For a faithful wife does her
duty to her husband with a courage, carefully provides for her house and
family, huswifeth all things at home in her house, and has always her mind
and cogitations on her husband: so that if he conceive any disquiet, if he
^ustain any loss, if he be sick, if sorrowful and heavy; a good wife will
covet to lay the greatest part of his calamity upon her self, and grieve at
and sorrow for her husbands harms, as if they did properly belong to her
self. And this can by no means be effected, but by a mutual consent of their
bodies and minds which ioineth them together and of two makes one; and then
as Horace says notably, Genesis 2 Lib. carmin. (...) (...). 13
Faelices ter and amplius
quos irrupta tenet copula, nec malis
Diuulsus querimonijs
suprema citius soluet amor die.
They thrice and more are blessed whose marriage bed is chaste,
Whose love is not disioynd with brauls, but unto death does last.


But daily examples do testify that many women are not only subject to all
kind of affections and perturbations of mind, but also for the least occasion
that is, do outragiously wax mad with anger, so that the lowering and il
disposition of a woman, is nothing inferior to that of the air when it is
moved with tempests, light^ing and thunder. The which that the Heb^^es (and
others also that sought after wisdom) tried by daily conversation with the^,
and found true by observing the customs of their lives: their writing do
copiouslie witness and confirm. For I gather by their bitter inuectiues
against women, that they were exercised and taught by domestical, familiar,
and secret familiatity with them, Eccle. 29
what a wicked and malicious woman, when she is stirred up and provoked to
anger, is wont to attempt: what tragedies and lamentable accidents she will
cause: and how vehemently for a trifle she will rage and storm. For thus
does one of them amongst other things prosecute his speeches against them, by
taking a similitude from venomous and cruel beasts, saying. The greatest
wound is the sorrow of the mind, and the greatest mischief, the malice of a
woman: let me have any wound saving the grief of mind, and any mischief
saving the rage and wickedness of a woman. Nothing more hurtful for the head
then a serpent, and no anger exceeds the anger of a woman. It is better to
dwell with a Lion or a dragon, then with a wicked, naughty and brawling woman.
When woman was taken out of man, she was a quiet, mild, delectable, courteous,
delicate, and smoothe skind creature, ye desired to be ruled by man, and to be
subject to him: I wonder then whence she had this cruelty, desire to chide and
brawle, and all other her wicked and unbridled affections. Certainly I
conjecture al these things happen to this sex through the weakness of their
minds, and the imbecility of their understandings and judgments: whereby
it comes to pass that a woman incensed with anger, will be stark mad with
rage, and purposing or presusuming beyond her power, can neither tame her
lusts, nor bridle the troubled motions of her mind, no nor in any mean sort
resist them with wisdom and reason: but carries her self after the guise
and fashion of a little child, who altogether void of understanding and
reason, Gestit paribus colludere; and iram
Colligit, ac ponit temere, and mutatur in hora^: Hor^^e. in art po^.

Desires with his fellows often to play,
is soon displeasd
and soon appeasd,
Changing his mind each minute in the day.


For why a woman's mind is nothing so strong and valiant as a man's, neither
comes she any thing near him in wisdom, but upon every light occasion,
and for a matter of no weight at all, she so loses the rayns of reason, that
like a mad dog forgetting hirselfe and al honesty without any difference or
regard of persons, sets upon and teareth in pieces as well her friends as
her foes. And here if any man ask me why she is so furious, I take this to
be one natural cause, in that a woman has such soft, tender, thin and moist
flesh, that so soon as choler is kindled in her, it presently sets the
heart on fire, and is quickly dispersed over the whole body. For as fire does
quickly consume the light stubble, the which for the time makes a great
blasing flame, but soon goes out and quickelie vanishes: even so is a woman
soon kindled with anger, and once incensed does rage in extremity, and because
her body is neither strong nor coragious, her anger because of her moisture is
soon appeased and ended, quenching her fury with a few foolish and childish
tears. But if the cause of this their madness may be searched more near to
the quick, I find there is nothing so much incenseth their anger as that
venomous scumme and filthy sincke of humors, which they monthly gather and
purge according to the course of the moon. For if a woman happen near the time
of that disease to be provoked to anger (as small things then will greatly
offend them) the whole sink of that filth being stirred does fume and disperse
it self over the body: whereby it falls out that the heart and brain being
affected and troubled with the smoke and sparks of that most odious excrement,
the spirits both vital and animal that are serviceable to those parts, are
inflamed, when if you provoke and stir the^ on to anger, especially those
women that are young (for they that are old and ouerworne, and who are past
having such diseases, some of them are more quiet by reason of coldenesse,)
they will bark and brawle like snarling dogs, and clapping their hands
together, will not only show many indecent gestures, but also utter very
uncomely speeches. And because reason with them is of no force, their judgments
weak, and their minds feeble and infirm, they brawle and brabble with such
extremity that the rage of their minds can be by no good means quieted. And
by how much ye more base every one is in that sex, by so much the more
unhonestly will she braule with unappeasable anger. Hence comes it that
prostitutes and the base sort of women (for those that are of any calling will
sometimes regard decency, although at other seasons (by their leaves) they will
wrinkle their noses, or as ye countreyman says niule like a Mare eating of
thistles, and not answer their husbands so much as one word,) whose bodies
for ye most part are infected with il humors, do to their notable impudency
join the like malicions madness, that as it were carried headelong with the
Spirit of fury, they can neither be bridled by counsel, reason, shame,
and monitions, nor yet (wherewith the very brute beast is tamed and made
gentle) with fetters to leave their unseemly brauling, or to give over their
mad and outrageous railing. So that Terence faith notably of them. Neque ius,
neque bonum; aut aequum sciunt, H^^n t^n. Scen. 1 Acts 4

Melius, peius, profit, obsit, nihil vident,
Nisi quod libido suggerit.
That is,

They neither know what is right, what is good, or what is lawful, what is
best for them, or what is worst, what profits them, or what hurts, neither
will they see any thing but that which their lust provoke them unto: So that
forgetting themselves, they neither regard their faith, comeliness, shame,
good name, honesty, credit, nor chastity, but let them lie open to all kind
of dangers. To which purpose serves that diligent inquiry which Solomon made
of their dispositions, when he faieth, Eccles. 7
I called back my mind to search after those things that might be gotten by
reason, judgment and experience, that I might thoroughly know the wickedness,
rage, madness and fury of women, and I have found them to be more bitter the^
death it self, and who alone supply the place of many mischiefs. Their
hearts are like unto many nets, A good woman is a cares bird^.
and their hands comparable to many chains of iron: I have labored all the
days of my life to find a good and virtuous woman, and yet I cannot find her:
among a thousand men I have found some that are good, but among a thousand
women not one. Not altogether differing from this, is that question in the
Proverbs. Proverbs. 6.
Who shall find a valiant, industrious, constant, and* plain dealing woman?
As if he had said, One shall hardly find in any part of the world, or in any
corner of the earth, an honest and well manered wife. But if happily thou do
find out, and can show me such a one, she is far better then the most
precious stones, neither is any merchandise be it never so rare and sumptuous,
comparable unto her.

And here because I am fallen into this discourse, and have taken in hand to
show the nature of women, I will declare by the way what this saying of the
wise man imports. Melior est iniquit as viri quam mulier benefaciens, Eccle.
25. See the original.
that is. Better is the iniquity of a man then the good deeds of a woman. The
which sentence I expound to carry this fence with it. That a man be he never
so slothful, sluggish, sleepy, rude and unskillful in any action or trade
whatsoever, does more cunningly perform his business then a woman, who by
nature is heady and rash, and which undertakes all things with a vain
persuasion of wit, and a foolish presumption that she has more wisdom then
her husband. This woman I say does all things worse then a man, because
men (who are endued with better judgment) distrust their own ability, and
therefore do execute and perform all things vvarely and with great leisure, and
by taking the counsel of others brings his business to an end according
to his desire: and a great deal far better then if a proud woman that is
puffed up with an opinion of vvisdome, had taken the self same business in
hand. For the diligence and endeavor of women, the more labourously it is
intended, the less effectually do they bring it to perfection, and the more
earnest they are to bring it to good pass, the worser a great deal is the
event and success. Which makes us speak of women in the Dutch tongue, as it
were in a proverb after this sort. Het quaetste van even man, is beter dan het
best van even vrouwe: that is, the very worst action of a man is better then
the best of a woman. For if any work be brought to pass by the industry of
a woman, it deserves less praise then that which is rawly and rudely begun
of a man. Why a woman is not so wise as a man.
And that comes to pass both through the slownesse of their minds, and
weakness of their understandings by reason of the want of natural heat,
and also because their weak spirits lie hid and are drowned in abundance of
moiste matter, so that the powers of their souls do show themselves much more
slow, unable, unapt, and altogether unfitter then men's to undertake and
accomplish any matter whatsoever.

Wherefore the Romans who employed all their care to govern their howses in
good order, committed their wives in their absence to tutors only, (as Cicero
witnesses) because of the infirmity of their natures, Pro Mi^^a
contrary to the practice of some of our best Citizens, who make their vviues
not only tutors of their men servant to direct them in their business, but
ouerrulers of themselves, more like children then men. Clean contrary to the
doctrine of Paul, 1. Cor. 14.
who laboring to bring us to soundnes of faith and perfection in godliness,
commands women to keep silence in the presence of their husbands and
assemblies of men, and the reason is, because the impotency, yt is, the
affections of their minds are altogether departed from te^perancy and
moderation, and therefore will neither permit the^ to vsurp ye place of a
teacher, to reason or dispute in any assembly, to be present at ye election of
magistrates or to speak their minds in any company, if their husbands be
present.

Moreover, such and so great is the imperfection, frailty, and weakness of a
woman's nature, that Plato not without great reproach to the pride of some of
that sex, does almost deny them to have any mind, or to be any way worthy the
names of women. And yet least those that are virtuous in deed should be
unworthily scorned for the faults of the vicious, 1 Cor. 11
Paul in another place providing for the safty of household affairs does with
a fatherly care incite us to honor and highly esteem of those that are
virtuous, because such are almost of the same nature and worthiness that men
are of themselves, and almost partakers of the same benefits that man does
enjoy, only (to put her in mind of her obedience) she was taken out of man by
God, who was the maker of them both, Genes. 2
that as man is the glory and image of God, as the Apostle witnesses, so the
woman should be the glory of the man. For man was not made of the woman, but
the woman of the man, and man was not made for the woman's sake, but the woman
for the man's sake, Ephesians. 5
and yet neither the man without the woman, nor the woman without the man in
the Lord, who so rules the order of all things that he will have the woman to
be obedient to the man though proud gossippes presume to resist his power.
Colos. 3
For as the woman was of the man, so the man is by the woman in the act of
begettinge and brynging forth children. So that both ways is showed an
assisting society, a mutual help, love, consent and agreement between them.
1 Peter. Cap. 3
Where Peter thought it meet that as Women ought to be obedient to their
husbands, so on the other side husbands should be liberal and easily
entreated toward their wives, as knowing them to be the weaker vessel, not
only pardoning simple faults and forgiving light offenses, but also winking
at and saying nothing to some open and manifest errors. For it is not meet
that a man should be more cruel then is needful unto so vveake a creature,
nor be over imperious or too bitter, to so senseless a sex, especially if
they continue in their duties in any good sort, and permit not themselves to
transgress the bounds of chastity by playing the harlots. Which reproach and
discredit, albeit it more anger a man when he knows it, then it can any way
hurt him though he see or perceive it, yet shall the woman never clear her
self of infamy and dishonor, nor heal her wound again so long as she lives.
And yet if such a chance happen, that their furde gowns should lack a little
poking (as it is reported they sometimes say they do) yet christian charity
and their husbands love, should not be too rigorous and inexorable toward
them, because reconciliation and remission is in the power of God, who is wont
to be appeased with prayer and repentance, though he be provoked to anger by
wickedness, ungodliness and idolatry, pardoning the faults of the forepassed
life, so soon as a repentant mind does despise and detest his wickedness and
constantly intends to live better hereafter.

Another cause of unquietness and troubles in this sex, comes with
weariness of childbearing, The cause of women's stubbornes.
and tediousnes of giving suck and nursing of children. But the greatest cause
as is said arises from stopping the course of their monthly disease, the
which if it issue at the certain and appointed time, the rage of their anger
and brauling is quickly appeased, by turning from their hearts and brains the
smoke and fumes of that pernicious humor, and by avoiding the vapor and mist of
that troublesome excrement, which for that it fumeth up to their heads, is most
painful for them to avoid. When a woman is pleased.
But now on the contrary part, how quiet and merry a man shall find his
wife, if he endeavor to satisfy that which Solomon in the 30 of his proverbs
says has never enough, and with many and often imbracings desire to fill ye
insatiable gulf of her womb with endless copulations: it is better known to
them that find it by practice in marriage, then can be declared by words taken
from art.

And although I may be thought to expound this paradoxe of the Wiseman somewhat
more at large, then it is commonly used to be taken and understood: that is,
to give it an interpretation unlooked for, and much differing from the common
fence: yet do I see I may find out and give unto it another exposition, so
that it may also be taken to carry this meaning. The wickedness of a man, is
better then one that is now an honest woman, but a little after is the cause of
an ill name, by dealing with whom thou gettest thee a reproach, that it is
better to bargain and have business to do with a wicked man, then any way
to deal with a woman; who by nature is altogether deceitful. For albeit she
seem at the first sight and show to be an honest Woman, and of a good name,
and that in her outvvarde gesture she carries no show of crast or deceit, yet
afterward thou shall find her unconstant, crafty, captious, slipperie,
deceitful, fraudulent, and every way bent to deceive and beguile thee: so
that if one manne defraude or deceive an other in his business, this fraud and
deceit is justice in men, in comparison of the wickedness and deceit in women.
To this purpose we meet with many such sayings in the scriptures (being
arguments taken from the less to the greater) For after the same manner does
God by Ezechiell, Ez^^. 16
amplify the wickedness of the Jews to the full, pronouncing Sodom and
Samaria to be justified by her. Whereby he shows the Jews were more wicked
and went beyond the gentiles for dishonestie, naughtiness, and wicked deeds:
so that the Sodomites and Samaritanes may seem guiltless in comparison of
them. So in wicked opinions, and in setting abroche any pernicious sect or
schism, one is more hurtful and dangerous then another, insomuch that many
heretics may be thought to be true Christians, and to profess true and
wholsome doctrine, if thou compare them with others that publishe opinions
which be more absurd, impious, blasphemous and execrable, and as we commonly
say: Desee is even goddelick end heilich man by den anderen. That is, A godly
and holy man in comparison of the other: that is, albeit both be wicked and
ungodly, yet if thou measure al things by the rule of equity, and square them
out with the squire of Justice, one may be judged innocent and vvorthie to be
acquitted, if he be well compared with the wicked deeds of an other. After the
same sort is one manne more superstitious then another, and more estranged from
true godliness and religion then another. Sicplerumque agit at stultos
inscitia very, Hor. lib. 1. s^^.
et
Palantes error certo de tramite pellit:
Ille sinistrorsum; hic dextrorsum abit; vnus vtrique,
Error, sed variis illudit partibus omnes.
So for the most part ignorance does vex fools all their days.
And error drives al wandering mates out of their ready ways,
That some on left hand some on right do always go astraie,
And al is but one only vice, deceiving many a way.


So that though error, wickedness, shame and dishonesty, be both in man and
woman, yet that of the woman is most detestable and accursed. And thus you
see how the wickedness of a man is better then the good deeds of a woman,
or as the Dutchmanne says: De dencht van even vrowe is ergher dan even man^
bosheyt: that is, the virtue of a woman is a great deal worse then a man's
wickedness. By which proverb they aggrauate the ma^ici^^^ naughtiness of
that sex, that if one vice be compared with another, and then fall to examining
and balancing of deceiptes, crafts, guiles, and subtleties, thou shall find
that they weigh heavier, and are of greater force which come from a woman, then
those which are wrought and attempted by man.

FINIS.

