The women's sharp revenge: Or an answer to Sir Seldom Sober that writ those
railing Pamphelets called the Juniper and Crabtree Lectures, etc.

Being a sound Reply and a full confutation of those Books: with an Apology in
this case for the defense of us women.

Performed by Mary Tattle-well, and Ioane Hit-him-home, Spinsters.

Imprinted at London by I. O. and are to be sold by Ia. Becket at his shop in
the inner Temple-gate. 1640.

The Epistle of the Female Frailty, to the Mal-Gender, in General.
Reader,
IF thou be of the Masculine Sex, we mean thee, and thee only: and
therefore greet thee with these attributes following: Affable, Loving, Kind,
and Courteous: Affable we call thee, because so apt (I will not say to prate
but) to prattle with us: Loving, in regard that the least grace being from us
granted, you not only vow to love us, but are loath to leave us: Kind, that
you will not meet with us, without Congies, not part from us without Kisses:
and Courteous, because so willing to bring your selves upon your Knees before
us: more prone to bow unto Beauty, than to Baal; and to Idolatrize to us,
rather than unto any other Idol: and therefore our hope is, that what you use
to protest in private, you will not now blush to profess in public:
Otherwise in clearing our Cause, and vindicating our own virtues we shall not
doubt to divulge you, for the only dissemblers.

And in this case we appeal unto your own Consciences, even to the most
crabbed and censorious, the most sour and supercilious, which of you all has
not solicited our Sex? petitioned to our persons? praised our perfections?
etc. which of you has not met us coming, followed us flying, guarded us going,
staid for us standing, waited on us walking and ambusht us lying? use Women to
Court men? or have we at any time complained of their Coyness? Have we bribed
them with our Bounties? Troubled them with our Tokens, Poetiz'd in their
praises, prayed and protested, su'd and solicited, voted, and vowed to them? or
rather they to us: would you apprehend a new Antipodes, to make al things to be
carried by a contrary course, and run retrograde.

Then let the Raddish Root pluck the Gardner up by the Heels, and the
shoulder of Mutton put the Cook upon the Spit: for you as well may prove the
one, as produce the other.

Yet suffer you us to be reviled, and railed at, taunted and terrified,
undervalu'd, and even vilified, when among you all we cannot find one Champion
to oppose so obstinate a Challenger, but that we are compelled to call a Ghost
from her Grave, to stand up in the defense of so proud a defiance. Since then
you will not be Combatants for us in so just a cause, we entreat you to become
competent Judges, to censure indifferently betwixt the Accuser, and the
Accused; to punish his petulancy, and not to favor us, if we be found the
sole faulty.

So, if you shall give our defamer his due, and that we gain the Honor of the
Day: If you be young men, we wish you modest Maids in marriage; if
Batchellours, beautiful Mistresses; If Husbands, handsome wives, and good
huswifes: If widdowers, wife, and wealthy widows: if young, those that may
delight you; if old, such as may comfort you: and so we women bequeath unto you
all our best wishes.

From our Manor of Make-peace: Dated the third day of Gander-month, in the
year of Iubile, not of Juniper. Mary Tattle-well. Joane Hit* him-home.
Spinsters.

The Epistle to the Reader. Long Megge of Westminster, hearing the abuse
offered to Women, rises out of her grave, and thus speaks:
WHy raise you quiet souls out of the grave?
To trouble their long sleep? what peevish Knave
Has wakned my dead ashes? and breathed fire
Into cold embers? never to respire,
Till a new resurrection? so forced now:
(Through innocent Women's clamours) that I vow,
The Earth could not hold me, but I was compeld
To look on what ('it is long since I beheld)
The Sun and Day; what have we women done,
That any one who was a mothers son
Should thus affront our sex? has he forgot
From whence he came? or does he seek to blot
His own conception? Is he not ashamed,
Within the list of Mankind to be named?
Or is there in that Masculine sex another
(Saving this Monster) will disgrace his mother?
I Margery, and for my upright stature
Sirnam'd Long Megge: of well disposed nature,
And rather for mine honor, then least scorn
Titled from Westminster, because there borne.
And so Long Megge of Westminster; to hear
Our fame so branded, could no way forbear
But rather then digest so great a wrong,
Must to my ashes give both life and tongue.
And then (poor Poet) whatsoere thou be,
That in my now discovery, thy fault see.
Confess thine error, fall upon thy knees,
From us, to beg thy pardon by degrees.
Else, I that with my sword and buckler durst
Front swaggering Ruffians, put them to the worst.
Of whom, the begging soldier, when he saw
My angry brow, trembled, and stood in awe.
I that have frighted Fencers from the Stage,
(And was indeed, the wonder of mine Age)
For I have often, to abate their prides,
Cudgeld their coats, and lamm'd their legs and sides.
Cross me no Tapster durst at any rate,
Lest I should break his Jugs about his pate.
It Is known the service that I did at Bulloigne,
Beating their French arms close unto their woollein:
They can report, that with my blows and knocks
I made their bones ache, worse then did the Pocks.
Of which King Henry did take notice then,
And said; amongst my brave and valiant men,
I know not one more resolute, or bolder,
And would have laid his sword upon my shoulder,
But that I was a woman: And shall I
Who durst so proud an Enemy defy?
So famed in field, so noted in the Frenches,
A president to all our British Wenches,
Fear to affront him; or his soul to vex,
Who dares in any terms, thus taunt our sex?
Therefore relent thine error I advise thee
Else in what shape soere thou shall disguise thee,
I shall inquire thee out: nay, if thou should
Take on thee all those figures Proteus could,
It were in vain: nay, (which the more may daunt thee)
Even to the grave; I vow my ghost shall haunt thee.
Therefore, what is yet amiss, strive to amend,
Thou know thy doom, if farther thou offend.
The Table, and Heads of this Book.
THe Introduction. p. 1 The Title which we women do bestow upon our godson,
the Author of those Lectures. p. 3 The Names of those Books which we women do
answer and object against. p. 4 First opinion of the ^ury of women at their
first meeting. p. 11 The Names of those Women which are chosen for the Jury. p.
12 Their opinion of what trade the Author is, or was. p. 14 First they find
him no Scholar: and they prove him to be none. p. 16 Wherein his failing is.
p. 17 He is quite out in all the Cases. p. 18 First, in the Nomnative,
Secondly, in the Genative, and so in all the rest of the Cases. p. 20 He is no
Poet. p. 21 He is found guilty of detraction. p. 27 (...)
The women's sharp Revenge: OR, An Answer to Sir Seldom Sober, that writ those
scandelous Pamphlets, called the Juniper and Crab-tree Lectures.
AS from several causes proceed sundry effects, The Introduction*
so from several actions arise sundry honors with the addition of Names and
Titles annexed unto them: neither need we stand to prove that by argument,
which we find by daily experience. As for example, some are raised for their
wealth, others for their worth; some by the Law, others by their learning: Some
by Martial Discipline; and (by your favor too) others for malicious
detraction, as thinking to rise by others ruins, and by supplanting others, to
support themselves. In which number we must rank you Master Satyrist, the
passionate Author of those most pitiful pamphlets called the Juniper Lectures,
and Crab-tree Lectures; who by your mere Knavery, ambitious to purchase
Knighthood, and to add a sir-reverence to your name, A Title Which we women
bestow upon our Godson, the Author of those Lectures.
are now arrived to the height of your Aim, and from plain Seldom Sober, are
now come to the Title of Sir Seldom Sober, who we term so, for he is ashamed
to set his name to books; a Name fitting his Nature, and well complying with
his condition.

And as there have been formerly, by your means, Sir Seldom Sober, many
railing, bitter, invective Pasquills, and Scurrilous Libels, some written, some
printed, and all dispersed and scattered abroad, all of them made and forged on
purpose to callumniate, revile, despite, jeere, and flout women: and now
lately one or two of the sons of Ignorance have penned three several, The
Juniper Crab-tree, and Worme-wood Lectures.
sweet, filthy, fine ill-favored Pamphlets, which are Printed, and (out of the
most deep shallowness of the Authors abundant want of Wisdom) they are
called Lectures, And a new Lecture called the Bolster Lecture.
as the Juniper Lecture, the Crab-tree Lecture, and the Wormwood Lecture,
wherein they have laid most false aspersions upon all women generally: some
they have taxed with incontinency, some with uncivility, some with scolding,
some with drinking, some with backbiting and slandering their neighbors, some
with a continual delight in lying, some with an extraordinary desire of
perpetual gossipping: in a word, we are each of us accused and blazed to be
addicted and and frequently delighted with one grievous enormity or other,
wherein, although it be true, that we are all the daughters of Eve in frailty,
yet they might have remembered that they likewise are all the sons of Adam, in
failing, falling, and offending. We are not so partial in the defense of all
Women's virtues, that we thereby do hold none to be vicious. Some are
incontinent by Nature (or inheritance) from their Mothers; some through
extreme want and poverty have been forced to make more bold with that which
is their own, then to beg, steal, or borrow from others: Some (by the harsh
usage of their too unkind husbands) have been driven to their shifts hardly;
some having had the hard fortune to match with such Coxecombes, as were jealous
without a cause, have by their suspicious, dogged, and crabbed dealing toward
their wives, given too often, and too much cause to make their jealousy true.
And whereas a Woman's reputation is so poor, that if it be but so much as
suspected, it will belong before the suspicion will be cleared: but if it be
once blemished or tainted, the stains and spots are of such a tincture, that
the dye of the blemishes will stick to her all her life time, and to her
Children after her. But for the man he takes or assumes to himself such a
loose liberty, or liberty of licentious looseness, that though he be (as they
call it) a Common Town. Bull, or a runner at sheep though he pass the
censures of spiritual courses, or high Commissions, yet (by custom) his
disgrace will be quickly worn out, and say it was but a trick of youth: Nay
rather a whoremunger.
for the shame or scandal of a whoremaster is like a nine days wonder, or a
Record written in sand, or like a suit of Tiffany, or Cobweb Lawne, soon worn
out: but the faults of a weak Woman, are a continual alarm against her, they
are engraven in brass, and like a suit of Buffe, it may be turned, and scoured
and scrapt, and made a little cleanly, but it lasts the whole life time of the
wearer. But to come to the work in hand, as you you have a Title bestowed upon
you by your back friends, and we think deservedly.

So we have known some, who have arrived to that Worshipful Title through
favor also, rather than desert, and more by voices than their virtues, merely
by the mad sufrage of the many headed monster Multitude, which consists of
Man: yet upon better advice, and more Mature Consideration, when their merits
and misdemeanors have been more narrowly sifted, and looked into (being well
compared together) they have not only been disgraced, but degraded: so that
now that worshipful work for which you have been so much magnified by the
Masculines, being now called into question by a Feminine Jury of women. The
first opinion of the Jury of women.
It is thought after a true and just examination thereof to be merely
villified, and that it is nothing but a mere scandalous report, and therefore
most justly condemned by the unanimous assent of all our Sex; before whom,
your Bartholmew Fair Book, and most lying Lectures, has not only been
convented, but arraigned, lawfully convicted, and most justly condemned.

Now because no equal and indifferent censure shall any way justly except at
the Jury that went upon the cause: they were these. Twelve good women and true
which will give you in order.

The 12 women which are chosen for the Jury.
The fore-woman, who had the first and prime voice, who gave up the Verdict, was
Sisley set him out, Sarah set on his skirts, Kate call him to account, Tomasin
Tickle him, Prudence pinch him, Frank firk him, Besse bind him, Christian
Commit him, Parnel punish him, Mall make him yield, Beterish banish him, Hellen
Hang him.

Now if this be not a competent Jury, not to be excepted at, and a legal
Trial, no way to be revoked, we appeal unto you men, our greatest
adversaries, and most violent abaters of our injuries.

And yet further to make the cause more plain and evident of our sides, we
thought it good in our better consideration, not only to publish unto the
world, the calumnies and slanders asperst upon us: But our just Articles
objected against him, and by comparing them together, to distinguish so betwixt
them, that the truth may grow apparent.

Their opinion of what profession the Author was.
But first touching the person who put these foul and and calumnious aspersions
upon us: If he were a Tailer, most sure he was a woman's Tailer, or (if so) no
good Artist, because not being able to take the measure of a woman's body, much
less was he powerful to make a true dimension of her mind, (and therein you
are gone Master Tailor) nay, what Artist soever you were, (for in one I include
all) most of you have Wives and Children, and love them, and are indulgent over
them, and wherefore then do you encourage such invectives against us? If you
being of your selves lewd, we be loving: we well tutord, you untoward: we
familiar you froward: we doting, and you dogged: and what we get by spinning
in the day, you spend in the night, and come reeling from the Tavern or the
Alehouse: Is the fault ours? or are we worthy any to be blamed for this?

First they find him no scholar.
Next in our Curious Inquisition and search, we find him moreover to be no
Scholar at all, as neither understanding us in our Gender, Number, nor Case,
etc.

They prove him to be none
Not in one Gender, for in all the Creatures that were ever made, there is a
mutual love, and an alternate affection betwixt the Male and the Female: for
otherwise there would be no Generation at all. But this most approved
consociety* by all his industry and endeavor he striveth to annihilate, and
disanull, forgetting that even he himself by the same Unity and Unanimity,
had his first original and being.

Then he fails in Number, Wherein his failing is.
by making all of us in general, not only to be wayward, but wicked,
tedious, but troublesome, lazy, but loathsome, with many of the like
enormities: and indeed we know not what his inveterate malice or madness would
stretch unto: when, if perchance there may be found a singular Number of such
delinquents, yet there may be a plural, (and that stretches beyond all limit
and account) who never transgrest; or fell into those gross errors, of which
he so Satyrically accuses our Sex.

He is quite out in all the Cases
But in our Cases he is most horrible out, and directly opposes all the Rules
of Grammar. For instance.

First, in the Nomnative.
In the Nomnative, by calling us out of our Names, and in the stead of Maidenly
Modest, Matron-like, etc. to brand us with the Characters of scoulds, vixens,
praters, pratlers, and all the abusive Epithites that spleen or malice can
invent, or devise.

In the Genetive, Second, in the Genetive.
by making us to be loose, lascivious, wanton, wilful, inconstant,
incontinent, and the Mothers of misbegotten Children, by which he unadvisedly
brings himself within the doubtful suspicion of spuriousness and Bastardy.

In the Dative, Third, in the Dative
by giving and conferring upon our geneneral Sex, such strange and almost
unheard of aspertions: which as we have little desired, so we never deserved,
forgetting that he includes his Mother, Sisters, and Nieces, Daughters; nay,
his own bosom wife, (if he have any in the same Catalogue.)

Fourth, in the Accusative.
In the Accusative, by false calumnies, and injust Accusation contrary to all
Schollar-ship: as ignorant, that Foemineo generi tribuuntur -- Propria quae
maribus.

Fifth, in the Vocative.
In the Vocative, because it is like to the nomnative.

Sixth, in the Ablative.
In the Ablative, because he striveth to take away our credits, reputations,
Fame, good Name, etc. All which argue, and approve, that he was in a bad
Mood, and worse Tence at the Writing of those malicious Lectures.

A Poet sure he could not be: He is no Poet.
for not one of them but with all his industry strived to celebrate the praises
of some Mistress or other: as for example, Amongst the Greeks, Arisophanes,
Meander, etc. Amongst the Romans, Catullus his Lesbir, Gallus his Licoris, and
Ovid his Corina. Amongst the Spaniards, George de Monte major his Diana; and
Aulius March his Tyresa. Amongst the Italians, Petroch his Laura, etc. And of
our own Nation, Learned Master Spencer his Rosalinde, and Sam. Daniel his
Delia, etc.

They make the case plain.
Now to make the case more plain and evident of our sides, we have thought it
good to publish unto the World those matters of which he was arraigned, and
now justly convicted. The first was scoffing and taunting at our Sex in
general: now who knows not, but that Quips and Scoffs are nothing else but
the depraving of the Actions of others, the overflowing of wits, and the
superfluous scummes of conceit, and for the most partt, asking others of those
errors of which themselves stand most guilty; and he that plays the
scoffing fool best, though it may be in him a sign of some wit, yet it is an
argument of no wisdom at all. Adders keep their venom in their Tails, but
the poison of a Buffoone lies in his tongue, and faults wilfully committed by
mocking cannot be satisfied, or recompensed by repentance. But better it is for
a man to be borrne to be borne foolish, Better for a man to be borne foolish,
then to employ his wits unwisely.
than to employ his wit unwisely; for mockery is nothing else, but an
Artificial injury, and we find by proof, that there be more mockers, than
well meaners; and more that delight in foolish prating, then that practice
themselves in wholesome precepts; we must confess that to jest is tolerable,
but to do harm by jesting, is insufferable; for it is too late to prevent
ill, after ill committed, or to amend wrong after injury received. Many things
that are sweet in the Mouth, may prove bitter in the stomach and scoffs
pleasant to the ear, may be harsh to the better understanding. But whosoever
shall undertake in his curiosity of Wit, to deride an innocent, either with
flattery or foolery, shall but delude himself in his own insufficiency and
folly: for as the fairest Beauty may prove faulty, so even the wittiest scoff
may prove ridiculous: And nothstanding all those Fools bolts, so fondly aimed,
and so suddenly shot, we have this Sentence from one of the Wise men, to
comfort us, that loss which is sustained with modesty, is much better than the
gain purchased by impudence. Nay, to be accounted a Princes Jester, is to be
esteemed no better than a mere mercinary Fool. And this Railer being in a
lower rank, as having dependence upon none but his own defamatory Pen, what
Epithet had enough may we devise to confer upon him; but we remember thus
much, since we first read our Accidence.

Quae vult, quae non vult audiet, Thus Englished.

He that to speak will not forbear,
More (then he would have spoke) shall hear.
The second thing of which he stands convicted, The second thing he stands
convicted of is Detraction.
is detraction and slander, which is the superfluity of a cankered heart,
overcome with Choler, and wanting means and opportunity of desired revenge,
grows into scandalous and reproachful speeches. The Testates of Hate and
Malice, whose condition is to call Innocence into question, though not able to
prove ought against it: and such are worse to us than Vipers, for those when we
spy we kill them; but these when we cherish they kill us. It is observed that
the corrupt heart discovers it self by the lewd tongue, and those that
speak evil of Women, are held no better than Monsters amongst good men; but
such for the most part, who seek to bring others into hatred, have in process
of time grown odious even to themselves: but such may be compared to him,
which blows the powder that flusheth into his own face, and troubles his
seeing: nay, such are said to murder three at once; first, himself, next, him
that gives ear to his scandals and reports them after him; and lastly, him
whose good name he seeks to take away; not considering, that Nature has
bestowed upon us two ears, and two eyes, yet but one tongue; which is an
Emblem unto us, that though we hear and see much, yet ought we to speak but
little: They that can keep their Tongues keep their friends; for few words
cover much Wisdom, and even fools being silent have past for wise men. But
the Proverb is, that even those that but listen, or give encouragement to
scandal, or mis-report, deserve to lose their hearing, if not their ears.

And therefore, gentle Reader, believe not every smooth Tale that is told,
neither give too much credit to the Plaintiff before you hear the Defendant
Apology for himself, lest through light trust thou be deceived, and by thy
too easy belief, manifestly deluded.

But it is the fashion of all these calumniating Coxecombes, to bite those by
the back, whom they know not how to catch by the bellies.

The third thing objected, and proved upon him, A third thing objected and
proved against him.
is palpable lying; against which, the Egyptians made a Law, that who so used
it should not live. The like did the Scithians, the Garamants, the Persians,
and the Indians. Now how much he has belyed the worthiness of our Sex, I
appeal to any understanding Reader, who has purused his Books, if he have
not branded us with many a false and palpable untruth, as shall be made more
apparent hereafter, when we come to the enrowling of his Books, and anatomizing
his Lectures. But it is an old said Saw, and a true: We cannot better reward a
Liar, then in not believing any thing that he speaks: so odious is the very
name, that in the opinion of many, a Thief may be preferred before him: for it
is his property to take upon him the habit and countenance of Honesty, that he
may the more secretly insinuate, and more subtly deceive by his Knavery.

He was indicted also of Heresy, and false opinion, They indite him of Heresy
which has power to make men arm themselves one against another, and all of
them against us. It is borne of Wind, and fed by imagination, never judging
rightly of any thing as it is indeed, but as it seems to be, making what is
probable improvable; and impossibilities, possibilities: nay, it is of such
force, that it overthrows the love betwixt man and wife, Father and Child,
Friend and Friend, Master and Servant: nay more, it is as the Spring and
Fountain of sedition; and who knows not but all sedition is evil, how honest
soever the ground be pretended.

And last of perjury, They prove him perjured.
in making breach of that oath which he made when he was first married: for in
the stead of taking his Wife to have and to hold, for better and worse: with my
body I the worship, with all my wordly goods I thee endow, etc. he has run
a course clean contrary to all this, in taunting and scoffing, baiting and
abusing, railing and reviling at all our Sex in general, from which number
even his wife to whom he vowed all the former, and who nightly sleeps, or
ought to sleep in his bosom, is not excluded: or say that she was of a
perverse and turbulent spirit, a crabbed or cursed condition, or a dissolute and
divellish disposition. Say that she was given to gadding and gossipping, to
revelling or royoting (so that he might very well sing, I cannot keep my Wife
at home) or say that, not without just cause, she might make him jealous: what
is this to the generality of the Female Gender? one Swallow makes not a Summer:
nor for the delinquency of one, are all to be delivered up to censure? As there
was a Lais, so there was a Lucrece: And a wise Cornelia, as there was a wanton
Corina: And the same Sex that has bred Malefactors, has brought forth
Martyrs.

An this is an argument which we might amplify even from the Original of all
History; nay, Strong arguments.
and would not spare to do it, had we but the benefit of your breeding.

But it has been the policy of all parents, even the beginning, to curb us
of that benefit, by striving to keep us under, and to makes us men's mere
Vassailes even unto all posterity. How else comes it to pass, that when a
Father has a numerous issue of Sons and Daughters, the sons forsooth they
must be first put to the Grammar school, and after perchance sent to the
University, and trained up in the Liberal Arts and Sciences, and there (if
they prove not Block-heads) they may in time be book-learned: And what do they
then? read the Poets perhaps, out of which, if they can pick out any thing
maliciously devised, or malignantly divulged by some mad Muse, discontented
with his coy or disdainful Mistress; then in imitation of them, he must divise
some passionate Elogy, and pitiful ay-me: and in the stead of picking out the
best Poets, who have strived to right us, follow the other, who do nothing but
rail at us, thinking he has done his Mistress praise, when it may be he has
no Mistress at all, but only feignes to himself some counterfeit Phillis, or
Amarillis; such as had never any person, but a mere ayery name: and against
them he must volly out his vain Enthusiasmes, and Raptures, to the disgrace
and prejudice of our whole Sex.

The reason why women are not so learned as men.
When we, whom they style by the name of weaker Vessels, though of a more
delicate, fine, soft, and more plyant flesh, and therefore of a temper most
capable of the best Impression, have not that generous and liberal Educations,
lest we should be made able to vindicate our own injuries, we are set only
to the Needle, to prick our fingers: or else to the Wheel to spinne a fair
thread for our own undoings, or perchance to some more durty and deboyst
drudgery: If we be taught to read, they then confine us within the compass of
our Mothers Tongue, and that limit we are not suffered to pass; or if (which
sometimes happens) we be brought up to Music, to singing, and to dancing,
it is not for any benefit that thereby we can ingrosse unto our selves, but
for their own particular ends, the better to please and content their
licentious appetites, when we come to our maturity and ripeness: and thus if
we be weak by Nature, they strive to makes us more weak by our Nurture. And
if in degree of place low, they strive by their policy to keep us more under.

Now to show we are no such despised matter as you would seem to make us,
come to our first Creation, when man was made of the mere dust of the earth,
the woman had her being from the best part of his body, the Rib next to his
heart: which difference even in our complexions may be easily decided. Man is
of a dull, earthy, and melancholy aspect, having fallowoes in in his face, and
a very forest upon his Chin, when our soft and smooth Cheeks are a true
representation of a delectable garden of intermixed Roses and Lillies.

We grant it for a truth, In what the Women agree to.
that as there is no sword made of steel, but it has Iron: no fire made of
the sweetest Wood, but it has Smoke: Nor any Wine made of the choysest
Grapes, but it has Lees: So there is no Woman made of flesh, but she has some
faults. And I pray you are there any men, who are not subject to the like
frailties.

Aspertions laid upon Women.
Others have said that Closets of Women's thoughts are always open; and the
depth of their hearts has a string that reaches to their Tongues: and say
this be granted, may we not also say of men's breasts that lie unvaild to
entertain all vices: and whatsoever they cannot sufficiently twatle with their
Tongues, they cannot contain themselves there, but the must publish it with
their Pens: (one of the grand faults of which our arch Adversary at this
present stands convicted.)

I have heard from the mouth of the learned, Women the true glory of Angels.
that a fair, beautiful, and chaste woman was the perfect Image of her
Creator, the true glory of Angels, the rare miracle of Earth, and the sole
wonder of the World: Women are the best Creatures on earth.
and moreover that the man who is married to a peaceable and virtuous wife,
being on earth has attained Heaven, being in want has arrived to wealth,
being in woe is possessed of weal, and being in care enjoys comfort; but
contrarily of man, who ever gave such a Noble Character?

But I will not incist too long upon this argument, though it might be strong
there by the authority both of President and History, least we might be
Critically taxed of self-love and flattery. And yet that we may make a safe
fortification and Bulwark against our Adversaries so violent assault and
Battery, give us leave to proceed a little further.

If we be so contemptible grown either in Quality and Condition, What brave
men have writ in women's praise.
in Conversation or Deportment, in Name, or Nature, how comes it that so many
elaborate Pens have been employed in our praise, and there have been such
witty Encomiums Writ in our Commendation? such as have sweld Volumes, and
enricheth Liberaries. What Oades, Hymns, Love-songs, and Laudatories, in all
kind of sweet measure and number have not been by Poets devised to extol
the beauties and virtues of their Mistrisses? What power have they not called
upon? and what Muse not invoakt, that they might give them their full meed and
merit? by which only, diverse have attained to the honor of the Laurel,
amongst all Nations, Tongues, and Language in all Frequency from Antiquity.
Were it a thing new or rare, or of late birth, it perhaps might be called into
some suspicion and question: but carrying with it the reverence of Age,
Antiquity, and Custom, what can we hold him but some novice in knowledge, and
child in understanding, that shall presume or dare any kind of way to
contradict it.

But there are many malevolent and ill disposed persons, who having by all
crafty and subtle Trains insidiated the chastities as well of maids as
Matrons, making no distinction betwixt wives and Matrons, who being
disappoynted in their ill purpose, by the virtues of of those good Women, whom
they thought to vitiate, have presently grown into such a passionate Fury, and
melancholy madness, that having no other means to revenge themselves, they
have studied how by their tongues to trouble them, or by their penns traduce
them: And so, whose bodies they could not compass, their good Names they would
corrupt, and of such, this Age affords too many, which (alas the while) makes a
great sort of us much to suffer in our reputations: but we again comfort our
selves with this poor Cordial, That of sufferance comes ease: and though
truth may be blamed, yet can never be shamed.

Others there are, Other examples.
who of their ill fortune has been to light upon a bad match, a Shrow, a
Wanton, or the like, (as there are of all sorts in all sexes) they set down
their rest there, and seek no farther, but measure all other men's Corn by
their own bushel, as thinking none can be rich because he himself is a
Banquerupt; which is just as if a man that by chance shall cut his finger,
should ever after refuse the use of a knife; or having scorcht his hand, swear
never to warm him at the fire, or having bin pincht with a straight shoe, now
all his life time to go barefoot.

If women be so bad, why do men proffer their service and love to them.
Further, if we were such toys and trifles, or so vile and vicious, as our
adversary striveth to make the world believe we are; how comes this seeking,
this suing; this Courting, this cogging; this prating, this protesting; this
vowing, this swearing, but only to compass a smile, a kind look; a favor,
or a good word from one of us? can any be so simple to seek his affliction? or
so sottish to sue for his own ruin? what fool would trouble himself to find
his own torment? or what Coxecombe pursue his own confusion? Is he not worse
then frantic, that desires his own fall? and more than a mad man that
hunteth after his own misery? Then by consequence, if we be apish and
waggish, wilful and wanton; such cares, such burdens, such troubles, such
torments, such vexation, such Serpents, such Sirens, or such may-games, or
rather monsters as you would make of us: If men see such dangers in women, why
do they not let them alone.
why cannot you let us alone, and leave us to our own weakness and
imperfections? if then seeing such palpable danger before your eyes, and you
wilfully run into it; if you see Hell gates open, and you violently enter them:
are you not more simple than babes and Children? nay than Fools, Cockscombes,
Frantickes and mad men; Epithites attributes not without your own gilt, most
justly and deservedly thrown upon you.

And much good may they do you, I pray you wear them for our sakes as the
best favors you have merited from us; whilst we in the interim strive to
vindicate our Sex from all vainly supposed, but voluntary suggested calumnies.

We have heard of a Gun-pouder Treason plotted by men, but never heard since
the beginning of the world such a divelish and damned Stratagem devised by
women; Women were never Actors of Gunpowder Treasons.
and yet you are the Masculine milke-sops that dare do nothing, and we the
Feminine undertakers, that dare to enterprise all things. Can you read of any
female gilty of the like inhumane acts? or was any one of our Sex ever
nominated to be conscious of traiterous conspiracy against their King and
Country? Women have no hand in any Conspiracy.
nay rather, women have bin sorry, that through the lusts and importunity of
men, they have bin forced to be the mothers of such monsters: and therefore
Sir Seldom Sober, it may be presupposed, that when you writ this bitter
invective, you were either in your holyday and hic-up healths, in your bouzing
Cups, and bouncing Cans; and had got a politic pot in your pate, or you were
else in your deadly dumps and drowsy dreams, which were so violent at that
time upon you, that they made you destitute of knowledge, and quite void of
understanding.

It is further known, that when men out of their vain ambitious fooleries
have commenced War one against the other, Women never rebelled, or co^menced
Suites of Law against the King.
when a City has bin besieged, and the faint-hearted men have bin ready to
give it up to spoil and ransacke: The women have stood up, manned and
maintained the walls, and stopped and defended the Breaches, What brave actions
women have performed from time to time.
whilst your brave male Martialists have bin ready to beray their breeches;
beat the enemy out of their Trenches, saved their selves from prostitution,
their City from desolation, and their Husbands and Children from captivity and
bondage.

Nay more, it is authentically recorded, that when two Provinces of Greece
fought together, and the one party fled and gave way to the Enemy: The wives
and mothers of these which were distressed stopped them in their flight, and
showing themselves naked above the navell, called unto them and rated them for
their Cowardice, demanding of them whether they went to cover themselves, in
the places from whence they first came, and were first conceived, and to be
buried where they were borne; at which sight they were so abashed and ashamed,
that they took fresh courage; and turning their faces from them upon the
enemy, they gained thereby a great and glorious victory.

The reasons why women are accused for lying.
Some do accuse us to be much given to lying; indeed I must confess it to be a
fault in the most of the best Wives: yet I would have our detractor to know
that every excuse is not a lie, or if it be, then are most Husbands beholding
to their Wives for excusing them too often in lying to save their credits: for
alas (poor wretches) we are feign to hide and cover their faults and
imperfections with our poor excuses, as for example; if one of them be
crewell, crabbed, and currish, that he will snap, snarle, and bite with his
dogged language and conditions, then the poor woman (like a fool) reports him
to be a kind, loving, and affectionate husband, ergo she lies; another knows
her Husband to be a wicked Whorehunter, and that he does (in a manner) keep a
Trull or two under her nose; yet she will say her Husband is a very honest
man: ergo she lies too. A third spends most of his time in drinking or gameing,
and his poor wife is so kind, as to acknowledge him for a good painful,
sober, and civil Husband, and I am sure she lies abominable. I could insist
further into such particulars, but these are sufficient to show that the most
part of women being liars, is only out of their goodness to cover the faults
and abuses of wicked men.

Whereas they tax us of incivillity, No woman so full of inormities as men are.
I would have any indifferent man or woman to take notice, that it is a very
hard winter when one Wolf does eat another, or when the Kill does upbraid the
Oven for being burnt; for though we do not brag, or prate, (like the boasting
vainglorious Pharisee) that we are not like other folks in conditions, or
(in a word not worthy to compare with men for their unknown invisible good
parts and qualities) yet surely, we neither can, or do run headlong into such
impious inormities; with such uncontrollable violence as they do: as if they
were Created for no other use or purpose, then to swear, blaspheme, quarrel,
be drunk, game, Rore, Whore, murder, steal, cheat; and in brief, to be daily
practisers and Proficients in the most liberal seven deadly Sins: and these
are the excellent civil behaviors of those man-like monsters that do tax
women generally with incivillity.

If women be proud (or adicted to pride) it is ten to one to be laid, If we
women be adicted to pride, it is long of you men.
that it is the men that makes them so; for like inchaunters, they do never
leave or cease to bewitch and charm poor women with their flatteries,
persuading us that our beauty is incomperable, our complexion of white and red,
like Straberies and Cream; our cheeks like damask Roses covered with a veil
of Lawne, our lips are Coral, our teeth Ivory, our hairs Gold, our eyes
Crystal, or Sunns, or Load-stars, or Loves Darts: our glances Lances, our
voices, our breathes perfumed Music, our virtues Immortal, and our whole
frame, feature, and composure Celestial.

When I was a young maid of the age of fifteen, there came to me in the
wooing way, very many of those Fly-blowne Puf-past Suitors: amongst the rest,
one of them was as brave a Gentleman, as any Tailor could make him: he
under-went the noble Title af a Captain, and if I had made trial of him, I
doubt not but I might have found him a most desperate Chamber Champion, for he
did scent of the Musk-Cat instead of the Musket, he was an Ambergreace gallant,
that once was a valiant Tilting Rush-breaker at the married of the Lady
Iosinqua, daughter to the Duke of Calabria, verily he was a dainty purfum'd
carpet Captain, a powdered Potentate, a painted Periwig frizled, frounced,
Geometrical curious Glas-gazer, a combed, curled and curried Commander, a
resolute professed Chacer or hunter of fashions, and a most stiff, printed,
bristled, beard-starcher.

This Captain Complement, with his Page Implement, laid hard Siege to the
weak Fortress of my frail Carcass, he would swear that his life or death
were either in my accepting or rejecting his suite, he would lie and flatter in
prose, and cogge and foyst in verse most shamefully; he would sometimes salute
me with most delicious Sentences, which he always kept in sirrup, and he
never came to me empty mouthed or handed; for he was never unprovided of
stewed Annagrams, baked Epigrams, sows'd Madrigalls, pickled Round delays,
broyld Sonnets, pa^boild Elegies, perfumed poesies for Rings, and a thousand
other such foolish flatteries, and knavish devices which I suspected, and the
more he strived to overcome me, or win me with Oaths, promises and
protestations, still the less I believed him; so that at last he grew faint
at the Siege, gave over to make any more Assaults, and vanquished with despair
made a final Retreat. In like manner I wish all women and maids in general,
to beware of their gilded Glosses; an enamoured Toade lurkes under the sweet
grass, and a fair tongue has bin too often the varnish or Embrodery of a
false heart; what are they but lime-twiggs of Lust, and Schoolmasters of
Folly? let not their foolish fancy prove to be your braine-sicke frenzy; for
if you note them, in all their speech or writings, you shall seldom or never
have any word or syllable in the praise of goodness, or true virtue to come
from them; their talk shall consist either of wealth, strength, wit, beauty,
lands, fashions, Horses, Hawks, Hounds, and many other trivial and transitory
toys, which as they may be used are blessings of the left Hand, wherewith they
are entice and entrap poor silly young tenderhearted Females to be enamoured
of their good parts (if they had any) but if men would lay by their tricks,
slights, false-hoods and dissimulations* and (contrarily) in their conversing
with us, use their tongues and pens in the praise of meekenes, modesty,
chastity, temporance, constancy, and piety; then surely women would strive to
be such as their discourses did tend unto: for we do live in such an age of
pollution, that many a rich wicked man will spend willingly, and give more to
corrupt and make spoil of the chastity, and honor of one beautiful untainted
Virgin, than they will bestow (in charity) toward the saving of an hundred
poor people, from perishing by famine here, or from perdition in a worser
place: and because they say women will always lie, I do wish that (in this
last point I touched upon) they would make or prove me a liar.

Who but men have bin the Authors of all mischiefs? had that firebrand of Troy
(Paris) not stolen Hellen from her Husband King Menelaus, surely she had
remained a wife in Sparta, and never been strumpeted in Phrygia: the ten
years Siege and sacking of Illion was never sought by women, but wrought by
men: who but men are Traitors, Apostates, Irreligious, Sectaries and
Scismatiques? Alas, alas; these are vessels of vices and villainies, which the
weak hands or brains of women could never broach. Who but men are
Extortioners, Usurers Oppressors, Thieves, perjured persons, and Knights of the
Post? who but men do write, print, divulge and scatter Libells, Rimes, songs
and Pasquills against the known Truth; against Sovereign Authority, against
all Law, equite, and Conformity to Loyalty? who but men have, and do set forth
pestifferous Pamphlets, Emblemes, and Pictures of Scurrillity and nasty
obsceanesse? I am sure that Ovid, and Aretine were no women, nor was there ever
any Woman found to be the Authoresse of such base and vile inventions.

In one of their late wise rediculous Lectures, An Answer to the aspersion cast
upon women for being Gossips.
they do cast an aspersion upon us that we are mighty Gossips, and exceeding
Scolds; to the first I Answer, that the most part of our meetings at
Gossippings are long of the men, rather then to be imputed to us; for when
children are borne into the world (although men feel none of the misery) yet
women have a more known simpathy and feeling of one another pains and
perils; and therefore in Christianity and neighbourly love and Charity, women
do meet to visit and comfort the weakness of such, as in those dangerous times
do want it; and whereas they say that we tipple, and tittle-tattle more than
our shares, I shall (before this discourse is ended) cast that Ball back
again in their teeths, and emblaze them truly to be most vain and idle
talkers; and that no living thing Created is so sottish, senseless, brutish
and beastly, as most of them have bin, and are daily, nightly and hourly in
their drink: for their much talk (to no purpose) does show that there is a
running issue, or Fistula in their minds.

Man might consider that women were not created to be their slaves or vassalls,
Women are not borne to be me^ns slaves.
for as they had not their Original out of his head, (thereby to command him;)
so it was not out of his foot to be trod upon, but in a ( medium) out of his
side to be his fellowfeeler, his equal and companion: but as the Devil can be
(at one time) both the Prince of darkness, and an Angel of Light; so can
these double-hearted men bear fire in one hand and water in the other, so that
one knows not where to have them, nor how to find them; being neither hot or
cold, but like Lukewarm Laodiceans: for many of them are like the Cinamond
Tree, their Rind better than the Trunk: they are (too many of them) rare
Doctors of Divility, crafty Merchants, whose Wares are flatteries, congies,
cringes, complements, legs, faces, and mimmicke marmositicall Gestures, and
are fitter by half for stamps to Coin any current wickedness then any women
can be.

Every thing (but man) does naturally incline to be in his proper place, Every
rhing but man does Naturally incline to his proper place.
as for example: Lead, Stomes, or any ponderous or weighty matter or metal
will sink down, fire does mount upwards, Rivers run to the to the Sea, Trees
to the Earth, and Fowls to the Air: every thing does seek to be in his
natural place constantly, only men are inconstant, and seldom or never does
keep his constant course. Nay the very Beasts and unreasonable Creatures are
his Schoolmasters, and go beyond him in goodness: He may learn meekness
of the Lamb, simplicity of the Dove, diligence of the Ants, kindness of the
Stork, memory of the Ox and Ass, fidellity of the Dog, watchfulness of the
Cock, subtilty of the Serpent, magnanimity of the Lion: the Eagle (or Vulture)
does go beyond him in sight, or seeing; the Dog surpasses him in the sense of
smelling, Stags, Hares, and Birds do outgoe him in swiftness, Horses and
Elephants in strength, and Crows or Ravens in length of life: Besides every
thing (except man) has the wit to shun and avoid danger, as Sheep will run
from the Wolf, the Cat from the Dog, the Hare from the Hound, the Rat from the
Cat, the Chicke from the Kite, and the Dove from the Hawke; but man will not
avoid wickedness, nor run from the Devil; he is also so voracious and
insatiate, that though a Park will satisfy an Heard of Dear, a meadow will
suffice many Cowes and a Bull, a field will serve Horses, a Forest will feed
wild Beasts and Fowls, the Earth does content Worms and Vermin, the Sea
contains Fishes: And man (only man) is never contented; his ingurgitating Maw
is the Sepulcher of Fishes, Fowls, Beasts, Herbs, Fruits, Roots, and all
things else whatsoever that his Rapine can prey upon. Besides, he has in him
the pride of the Horse, the Lions fierceness, the Wolves ravening, the Dogs
biting more addicted to truculency then the Bear, more obstinate than the Ox,
more beastly rash than the Bore, more various than the Leopard, more mutable
than the Camelion, as deceitful as the Fox, as desperate as the Elephant,
fearful as a Hare, revengfull as the Cammell, as lascivious as the Goat, as
full of scoffing and jeering as an Apel, as uncleanly as a Sow, as silly as a
Sheep, and as foolish as an Ass. This Land has robbed and cheated almost all
other Nations of their vices, for we have gotton Gluttony from Greece,
Wantonness from Italy, Pride from Spain, Complement from France, Drunkenness
from Germany, Infidelity* from the Jews, They ^rove that ^ngland ^ath rob^ed
all Nations ^f their ^ices.
Blasphemy from the Turks, Idolatry from the Indians, Superstition from Rome,
Sects from Amsterdam, Errors from all places, makes Scismes and Divisions at
home. And these are the rare virtues, and admirable quallities of the most part
of such men as have (and do daily) enveigh and rail against women with their
scandalous tongues, and infamous abusive Libells; and in a word to conclude
this point, if any man be great in Office or Dignity, and that he has
uncontrollable power to do what he will; it is a hard matter for him to
restrain himself from doing much hurt, and little good.

Dogs do naturally bark and snarle at strangers, and such as they do not
know; Women were never so bad as m^^
and so those men that are ignorant in their malice, (or mallicious in their
ignorance) do Reprehend and abuse women, and in their railing they have the
uncharitable Art to make the small Mole-hills of our frailty appear like
Mountains; and with their inveterate spleen, they Metamorphose our Pigmey
faults into huge Giants: But let me be so bold (with leave) as to ask them, if
ever any women were such monsters as Nero, Heliogabalus, Caligula, Hamon,
Julian, Caine, Iscariot, Ahab, Achitophel, Rabsheka, Nabuchadnezer,
Hollophernes, Jeroboam, Pharaoh, Nimrod, Cham, Belshazer, ( or Baltazer)
Goliath, Esau, Achan, Gehezie, Absolon, Mannasses, Siscera, Shimei, Amon, Nabal,
Herod, Chaiphas, Annus, Pilate, Elimas, Domitian, Catiline, Silla, Marius,
Sardanapales, and thousands more such Commanders, inventers, maintainers, and
defenders of mischiefs, and all sorts of wickedness and villainies; of which
the Stories of their detestable lives, with their deserved deaths, do make
most horrible and loathed mentions: nor has these Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, bin always clear from the Tyranny of such, as the Chronicles will
witness of Mackbeth, and Richard the third: and I am sure that women were not
the Complotters, or contrivers of the Powder Treason; nor ever did any woman
devise Projects and Monopolies.

Thus any one that has but common sense or reason in him, He that rayles
against women, does forget that his mother was a woman.
may perceive that those who so bitterly rail against women, do forget that
Women were their mothers, or that they had their Birth (or secondary Original
being from women:) I will not be so lavishly or unmannerly invictive against
men, but that amongst them there have bin (and are, and I am not out of hope
there will always be) many of that noble Sex, that do scorn and despise
those scurrilous sordid Libells, who are no better than the Devils Penposts:
that have the Art to write by roate, and rail at random, without regard of
truth or equiry: (for a just and wise man deemes nothing to be reasonable that
has not equity in it) whose sweet stinking Poetical verses runs all manner of
feet without measure, rhyme, or reason; and Satan's cloven foot withal into the
bargain. I touch not any way upon good Poets, for to them Fortune is blind,
and (in her blind bounty) she returns a small share for Minerva, and vicious
greatness, golden foppery, and silken Ignorance are most deadly enemies to the
Muses: as eminent persons do not always carry Scales about them to weigh the
merits of deserving men; but I speak of our mungrill Rimsters, that with an
affectate overweening conceit of themselves, do imagine that they can cough
Logic, speak Rhetoric, neese Grammar, belch Poetry, piss Geometry, groan
Music, vomit Apothegmes, and squirt Oratory. These (and such as these) are
the most furious and fierce Pendragonists, these are the pestifferous
Iacksquiterers, that if they could, would blow and blast the fame of women:
None but Mungrill Rimers speak against Women.
These can change the shapes of their inventions according as the times and
purpose best befits their servile inclinations: for they have all got the
Theory of well speaking, (when they please) but if ever they busy themselves
with the practick of well doing, I will be at the charge to pay for their
hanging; for it is more easy to make a good nimble Footman of the running
Gout, than it is to make one of these an honest man.

Although some few, (and those few too many) women do profess goodness in
Hypocrisy, yet that is not a General disparagement to such as are truly
virtuous in sincerity; for if I may be so bold as to speak that which is
Recorded in holy Writ, I shall prove presently out of the best Authors that
ever lived, that women have been, and are, and will be, must be, and shall be,
either men's betters, or their equals; (or at the least) not to be so much
under-valued, as not to be abused, villified, and traduced by every idle and
paltry Pot-companions.

As for the first man, he was made of Earth, Clay; (yea of the very slime of
the earth) also he was created in the open wide field (as all other the rest of
earthly Creatures were:) and being made (I must confess he was perfect, and
full of perfection) yet does his very Name demonstrate that he was of a mean
and pure substance; for the Word (or Name Adam) does signify Clay, or red
earth: but when that earth and slime was purified, and made perfect (with being
fully possessed with a Reasonable Soul) then man being in Paradise, (a most
pleasant and delectable place) there in that choycest and principal Garden of
delight, (man being refined from his dross) was woman Created: there was she
named Eve, (or Hevah) which is as much as to say Life;) because she was the
Mother of all men and women that should ever live, or have living: she was made
out of the side of the man, (near to his heart) because he should heartily
love her: and as all the rest of the Creatures were created before man, to show
that he was not brought into a bare and naked world, (although himself was
so) but it was Gloriously and Magnificently adorned and beautified with all
things fitting for the the entertainment of so glorious an Image, (or Deputy
to the Greatest) yet in that great state he was alone, without any one to have
a participation, or joyful fellow simpatheticall feeling of his felicity. Then
did it please the Great Creator, to Create the noble Creature (Woman) to be
his Helper, associate, and companion; therefore I conclude, that as man was
made of pollution, earth, and slime; and woman was formed out of that earth
when it was first Refined: as man had his Original in the rude wide field, and
woman had her frame and composure in Paradise; so much is the woman's Honor to
be regarded, and to be held in estimation amongst men.

Diverse more examples I could produce.
To these few I could add infinite, but I study to avoid prolixity; only I
desire of you Sir Seldom Sober, and the rest of your most pitiful partisons,
to be resolved in this one Question; The World cannot subsist without women.
How comes the world to be thus peopled? and whence grows this goodly
Generation upon the earth, which from the first Creation has continued to this
present; and shall last to all Posterity: we are not like these swift Spanish
Genets, which (some Write) engender only by the wind? purperated without man:
do we the despised, sue to you the well disposed? or being the the Vessels,
petition to you the Proditors of your fames and honors? when was it known in
any Age, Women never seek and petition to men for love.
that our Sex have groaned at your Gates, and sat waking whole cold winters
nights at your windows? when sonnetted to your Signior ships, or love Lettered
to your Lordships? when haunted you in your Houses? and way laid you in your
walks? These you have done, and daily and hourly do to us; and i^ we have
bin either wayward in our words, or bu^ counterfeited a coyness in our
countenances; you^ brave high spirits have bi^ ready to homage you^selves, nay
some have done it really: as thinking to enter the strict way by a string: Nay
many times when you are denied the game, you have offered Fees; and by rape to
hazard the Gallows.

If the Husbandman Till, Plow, Sow, and Harrow his ground, etc. it is in hope
of an harvest; or if he labor and take pains; it is in hope of his hire: If
the Merchant hazard his purse, and person by Sea, it is in the expectation of
some great gain and profit: and can you wise men, take toil and travel; wake
and watch, rise early, and go to bed late; spend your time, wits, and money:
vow and protest, swear and forswear; engage your fortunes, and endanger your
lives; and all these for wily, wanton, wayward, wicked women; by gaining whom,
you can but loose your selves; and to purchase them, cannot be without your so
great prejudice. Most sure if this cause shall come before a just Judge, and
have the benefit of a considerate Censure; but we so much reproved and reviled,
shall be acquit by Proclamation, and you Sir Seldom Sober, with the rest of
your railing Society be found sole guilty of Calumny, scandal, and most
palpable Contradiction: Your intimations and intents, your proposition and your
purpose, your method and your meaning; having no coherence, or correspondence
the one to the other.

And therefore we weak women, Women able at all times to maintain their
undertakings when men are not able.
stand up against you mighty men; (for so you think your selves) when alas we
know by proof, that when you brave Masculines are at any time incountered by
our Femenine Sex, even in the first assault, you are as soon tamed as talked
with; and can scarce really tell us you love us, but you are as ready to turn
tail and leave us: and yet are not ashamed to animate your selves in your own
assemblies; and would make the world to believe, that you the first Cowards are
the sole Conquerours.

An Answer to the Prentises Lecture in the morning.
But forsooth when you fail in your prowess, you think to fit us in your
Proverbes; (which you privilege by their Antiquity) but indeed they are so
stale in their very Names, that they stink in our noses: for example, When the
Mistress calls up her Apprentice, she says if she be crossed, she will make him
leap at a Crust; as if Citizens kept such penurious Houses, that they were
ready upon the least occasions to starve their Servants: Nay, that she taking
her Husbands Authority out of his hands, will beat her Boy the Rogue; and bast
the Kitchin-maid who rules the Roast, till she make their bones rattle in their
skinns: and when she has gotten her will, then Rattle Baby Rattle.

An answer to the Lecture of the wife to her husband.
Then in your Lecture of the Wife to her Husband, Is the house a wild-Cat to
you? and why a Wild-Cat you tame fool? unless you study to set odds betwixt
man and wife, and to make them agree in a house like Dogs and Cats together.

An answer to the Country Farmers wives Lecture.
Then comes in the Country Farmers Wife, with her couple of Capons, when all her
she neighbors dare take their Oaths, that her Husband is a Cock of the
Game; yet she must call him Francis Furmity-pot, Barnard Bagg-pudding, or
Bacon-face, William Woodcocke, Durty Dotterill, or Dunstable, Harry Horsehead,
Simon Sup-broath, Ralph Roast a Crow, Tom Turd in thy teeth, and the like
beastly and bastardly names, merely of your own durty devising: as knowing
what belongs to your selves, when we cannot find in our hearts to foul our
mouths with any such filthy Language.

But sure Sir Seldom, (or never) Sober, your Father was some Jakes-Farmer, and
your Mother a Midwife, or he some Rake-shame, or Ragg-gatherer; and she the
daughter of a Dunghill, that their Son is forced to patch out his Poetry
with such pitiful Proverbes: and cannot we come upon you with the like? and
in tasking of your rudeness tell you, you should have talked under the Rose:
to punish your too much prating, tell you, Their answer to him, and the
proverbs confuted.
Little said, soon amended. In terrifying you from the like troubling of your
self, That there is a day to come, that shall pay for all; and to restrain
you within some regularity, A man may bring his Horse to the water, but he
cannot make him drink. In not sparing of your Spouse-breach, There is
False-hood in Fellow-ship. When we shall bury one untoward Husband, and take
another; Seldom comes the better. When you fool us with your flatteries, you
play with us at Wily beguile you: And to conclude with that most learned
Ballad, song about the streets, and Composed by your fellow Poet M. P. O such
a Rogue would be hanged. This we could do, nay this we much care not to do;
unless you moderate your flying Muse, and mend your manners.

How they would use him.
Nay we could Anatomize you into Atoms, and dissect you into Demunitives, to
make you less than nothing; but it it is the modesty of our Madam-ships, and
the patience that our Sex professes, to parley before we punish; and to hang
up a flagge of Truce, before we offer to Tirannize: but if you take heart and
hold out, and seem not sorry at this our first Sommons; we will not only
beat you, but batter you; bumbast and bafle you, Canvace and Cudgel you;
Brave you and Bastinado you: but leave you to the terrible Trophies of our
Victorious Triumph, and the remarkable memory of your most miserable, and
unpittied Massacre: Yet in all this we do not menace the men, but their
minds; not their Persons, but their Penns; the horridness of their humors,
and the madness of their Muses: which indeed toward us have been
insupportable, and intolerable: Therefore be advised and let us hear either
of your public acknowledgement, or at the least your private recantation;
either to us all in general, Their Cruel threatening of Sir Seldom Sober.
or some in particular, etc. or we will make thy own pen thy Poniard; thy Ink
thy banefull potion; thy Paper thy winding sheet; thy Standish thy Coffin; thy
Sand-dust thy Grave-dust, to bury thy shallow wit in, with thy face downe-ward;
which if we do not, let us for ever bear the burden with our faces upwards.

Now concerning your very passionate, but most pitiful Poetry, a question may
be made, whether you be a Land Laureate, or a Marine Muse; A Land Poet, or a
Water Poet; A Scholar, or a Sculler; Of Pernassus, or puddle Dock; Of Jonia,
or Ivy Bridge: But howsoever, it is not in the compass of our Reading, that
Mnemosyne ever lived at Milford Lane, or Terpsichore at Trigg Stayers, where
they say the Devil once took water.

Nay more then all this, a little further to magnify our Sex; are not the
four parts of the world, Asia, Africa, Europe, and America Deciphered and
described under the Persons of women, and their Gender? The nine Muses, (...)
the Twelve Sibells, were they not all women? The Four Cardinal Virtues,
Justice, Fortitude, Prudence, Temperance, Women? The three Graces, the
Handmaids to Venus, women? The three Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and
Charity, Women? nay Wisdom it self, In the praise of Women.
is it not Sapientia, and figured in the form of a Woman? Are not all the
Arts, Sciences, and Virtues, of what quality or condition soever, Portrayed in
the persons of women: whether then I pray you Sir Seldom Sober were your wits
wandeing, or went a Wooll-gathering, when you beat your brains about this
poor, and most pitiful Pamphlet? Have we claimed this to our selves? nay
rather has it not bin meritoriously conferred upon us by you men? had you
thought your selves worthy of these noble and brave Attributes, you would have
sequestered them from our Sex, and Celebrated them to your selves: but those
who thought themselves more VViser than you have showed your self, (in this
witty) of these Honors to support and maintain which they thought themselves
too weak: have both by their words and writings thought us worthy.

Now whether is the greater approbation for any Cause in question, or for any
person convented to be acquitted, by one single man, or by a whole Senate: by a
private censorious and supercilious Synicke, then by a full, free, and general
assembly.

Besides, We Women claim a privilege
we claim a further privilege, that is to be tried by our Peers, and grant
us but that, and then besides Keisars and Kings, Princes and Potentates,
Sovereigns and Subjects, Court, City, Camp and Country; we have the Graces
and the Goddesses, the Nimphs and the Meriades; the Virgins, the Vestalls, the
Wives, the Widows, the Country wench, the Countess, the Laundresse, the Lady,
the Maid-marrion, the Matron, even from the Shepherdess to the Scepter; all
ready to give up their voices of our sides, that his Crabb-tree Cudgel Oil,
and his Juniper sauce Lecture is false, foolish, sottish, superfluous Railing,
rediculous, absurd, nay more abominable.

Finally no Sentence of Condemnation ought to pass upon any, before a fair
Verdit be given up by twelve honest men.
All Sentences, and Condemnations go by a Jury of twelve, and they too ought
ought not only to be of understanding, but good men and true; and shall the
generallity of our Sex be convented, and convicted by one poor ignorant silly
Sot? Then we may say (and not to our small grief) that the woman called
Astraea, otherwise called Justa, has flowne up to Heaven, and left no Justice
abiding upon the Earth: had she bin still our Iudgesse, she would (no doubt)
have Censured; that as men have here to fore had the liberty to take many
Wives; so women might have now the privilege every one to take two Husbands at
least: till they could find any one woman, who could meet with two men of the
same mind with this Gregory, who would make himself a Grand Jury man. But Read
the wise Woman's Juniper, and she will jerke him for this.

Greek Poets that if they were living would defend the woman's Virtues.
But were there now surviving to vindicate our virtues, any of the Ancient
Greek Poetresses, A Nicostrate, or Caripena; A Musaea, or a Meroe; A
Sosipatra, or a Clitagora; An Aspatia Milesia, or Praxilla Sycomia; A Myro
Bizantia, or Cozinna Thebana. Or amongst the Romans; an Hortensia, or
Hyparchia; A Claudia, or a Cornelia; Apollo Argentaria, or Probavaleria; A
Vittoria Collumna, or Marcella Romana, etc. If (I say) any of these were now
surviving, what a pitiful thing would they make of this patulant Poet: and
with one of their invective Iambicks, to despair and hang himself: and in the
stead of a Juniper, read unto him a Gibbot Lecture.

How have you stuffed your Storehouse, with a Catalogue of common prostitutes
and Curtizans; which made me think when I first saw your Book, it had been
the Register of Bride-well: and I pray you who vitiated them, but you that that
would seem the virtuous? or who corrupted them, but you the male Crocadiles?
was there Gill without her Jack, or flirts without her Framion. As Parents
loosed the names of Father and Mother when their Issue fails them, and
Children are no more Sons and Daughters when they have no Parents to protect
them: so it is not possible, that the world could yield any one Branded with
the Name of a whore, In the defencr of us women.
but there must be Whooremaster to make her so. Moreover, there was never
Strumpet but had her Pimpe to usher her; nor any Madam Mackarell without a
Pander to man her.

You tell us a great many stories and to small purpose, of Hellen an Harlot,
who had no doubt lived in honest life with Menelaus her Husband, had there not
bin a bold-fac'd Paris to betray her. Of a Lais, a Famous Curtezan in Corinth,
who valued every nights lodging at a thousand Drachmaes: and why did she set so
high a price upon her prostitution? but the better to conserve her Chastity,
and fright away libidenous fools from hunting her Habitation: and so of the
rest, by which any indifferent Reader may perceive, that all things make with
us, which you maliciously have suggested against us.

I will not meddle with your pitiful Poetry, and rhyme Dottrell, borrowed out
of Ballads: and yet why should I say borrowed, when I can Answer them in this
one Distick: The women make rhyme of the Author.
Though borrowing now b^
into fashion grown,
Yet I dare swear, wha^
thou writst was thy own*


For indeed I know no^ who else will Challenge them.

In your Lecture of an old rich Widow to a young Gallant, An answer to the
Lecture of the rich Widow.
where you think to task her of her wit, what do you else but approve her
wisdom? who will not suffer her modest Gravity to be fooled by his youthful
Prodigality: and so what you strive to condemn as a vice, in effect you crown
for a virtue.

You make your Country Farmers wife, An answer to the Lecture of of a Country
Farmers wife.
to call wise-achers her Husband Wittall, Mopus and Moone-calfe, Hobbinot, and
Hobnailes, Lurden and Looby; Francis Fill-gut and Furmety-pot, Booby and
Blockhead, Dunce and Dotard Bull-beife, Barley pudding, Sim Slabber-chops and
the like; and like enough he may be all these, and she in this gives but the
Devil his due, and the Clownish Coridon his own true Character: And what
disparagement can this be to us? or what great honor to you of the Male Sex,
that amongst men there can be found such a monster?

An answer to the Lecture of the jealous old Women.
Can you blame the jealous woman for having such care over her Husbands health,
purse, and Person? for what is jealousy but a too much indulgence, and over
Love? and I fear ten at this time of twenty, are not much troubled with it.

Your Lecture of your kind loving wife to her Husband we allow, The woman they
approve of the Lecture of a kind woman to her Husband.
and none so shameless in their slanders, but sometimes or other are
constrained to tell truth and shame the Devil; and if you had only followed
the same Theme, you might have escapt from being thus threatened: but many who
have strived to make, have mard; and in shunning Scylla, have fallen into
Charybdis: and this our impudent Poet, has imitated such ignorant Pylots:
where if he had had the skill to steare his Vessel in the mild Channel, he
might have arrived at an happy Harbor, and so escaped that shame and
ship-wracke, which his fillinesse has made him to suffer. Had Icarus in his
Flight kept an equal distance, betwixt the Sea and the Sun, the one had not
melted his Wax, nor the other moistened his Wings: nor he been made a
wretched Prey to the Waters.

In your Widows Lecture to your Widower, An Answer to the Lecture of the young
Widow to an old Widower.
what terms does she use, but of your teaching; and what durty language but
of your own devising: I thought you would have told us a tale, wherein you
might have made them equal sharers, in their own simplicity: which was to this
effect.

A Widower and his widow sitting at Supper with a good joint of meat together,
and falling into some cross words, (before they had tasted a bit of it; and
having both good stomachs:) A poor man came to the door to beg an Alms for
Gods sake: The man not knowing which way more to vex his wife called to his
Servant, and cutting the meat in the middle, laid one half upon his Trencher,
and said; here take this and carry it to the poor man, and bid him pray for
the soul of my former Wife; which seeing she said nothing: but when the
Servant was returned, she took the other half that was in the Dish, and gave
it unto him saying; and I pray thee carry this to the poor man, and desire him
to pray for the soul of my first Husband: by which means both themselves and
their Servants, were forced to go to bed supperlesse: Now here the blame nor
burden could be great, because it was borne upon equal shoulders: but you (as
in all the rest) make the woman only to Rail, and the men like so many silly
Sots, to make no reply at all; as if we were all mad, they milke-s^ps and
mecockes, we froward, they foolish; we either sheepish or shrowish, and they
only simple and sottish; which how false it is, and far from any probability
of truth, common experience can testify: for whosoever shall observe his style
and method shall find, that what he so much boasts off he has borrowed from
the basest of our Sex; as being in all his Tinkerly terms more foule-tongu'd
than a Fish-wife, and more open mouthed than any Oysterwench.

A word or two more concerning the virtue and Chastity of Women, there was
never any man could generally compare with Women; No man whatsoever is
Generally to be compared to women for Virtue.
to speak of the best and most blessed (the one and only Virgin Mother, she
that was at one time Maid, Mother, Wife Child, and Sister to her Son; she that
most happily was elected) from all Eternity to be the blessed bringer forth of
a Savior, for all repenting and true believing sinners, she was so fully
filled and replenished with grace, that she is justly styled blessed amongst
women: and for a further proclaiming of her happiness, All Generations shall
call her Blessed: She was the Worlds only wonder, and most rare and
sovereign mirror of chastity. Many thousands more are mentioned for that
only famous virtue of Continency, in Divine and profane Histories, whose
honorable, and Venerable memories shall outlive time, and flourish in
Glorious Eternity. Besides, as there have bin and are innumerable of our noble
Sex, that have lived and dyed Virgins; so likewise millions of them who have
bin married, and after marriage became Widows, they have bin so inclined to
the love of chastity, that they would never be won to accept of a second
marriage: and for an inimitable example of a worthy Matron, it is Recorded,
that Anna the Prophetess was but seven years a married wife, but that after
her Husband was dead, she lived a Widow fourscore and four years: an example
above any you men can show.

Moreover women were so chaste, Women for the Love of Posterity do marry you
men, and for no other end.
tha^ though they did marry and were married, it was more for propagation of
Children, than for any carnal delight or pleasure they had to accompany with
men; they were content to be joined in Matrimony with a greater desire of
Children than of Husbands, they had more joy in being Mothers than in being
Wives; for in the old Law, it was a curse upon Women to be Barren: and surely
if there had been any lawful way for them to have had Children without
Husbands, there has been, and are, and will be a numberless number of Women
that would or will never be troubled with wedlock, nor the knowledge of man.
Thus good and modest Women have bin content to have none, or one man (at the
most) all their whole lifetime, but men have bin so addicted to incontinency,
that no bounds of Law or reason could restrain them: for if we read the Story
of the Kings of Judah, there we may find the wisest that ever reigned,
(Solomon) had no fewer than three hundred Wives, and seven hundred Concubines;
and that his Son Rehoboam had eighteen Wives and sixety Concubines, by whom
he begat twenty eight Sons, and threescore Daughters. There have bin some
good women, that when they could have no Children, they have bin contented that
their Husbands should make use of their Maidservants; as Sara and Rachell, and
Leah did; but I never heard or read of any man that (though he were old,
diseased, decripit, gowty, or many and every way defective, and past ability to
be the Father of any Child) that has bin so loving to his wife, as to suffer
her to made a Teeming Mother by another man. There was once a Law in Sparta,
amongst the Lacedaemonians, that if the husband were deficient, for propagating
or begetting of Children, that then it was lawful for the wife to entertain a
friend or a Neighbor; but the women were so given to chastity, that they
seldom or never did put the said Law in practice, and J am persuaded that that
Decree is quite abolished, and out of use and force all the World over.

The constant courage, and fixed Pious and worthy resolutions of those women
that are mentioned in the seventh of the second Book of the Macabees, is
Transcendent and suparlative above all men that ever were either spoken of or
Recorded in to which place I refer the Reader for larger Relations.

Holy Writ does nominate 5. famous women of the name of Mary; First the Blessed
Virgin. Secondly, Mary the mother of James the less; and Joseph and Salome,
and the wife of Cleophas, and the Virgin Mary's own Sister. Thirdly, the
Mother of John, and James the Sons of Zebedoe. Fourthly, the Mother of John,
Mark: and Mary Magdalen, who was the Sister of Lazarus; these were all women,
who were hardly to be equaled in goodness and virtue by men: they were the
loving Handmaides of the highest. And it would be tedious and needless to
name those worthy women in this poor Pamphlet, who are already Recorded in the
never ending Book of immortallity. Susannaes chastity, Lidias dilligent piety,
the bounty and charity of Dorcas, and the painfulness of Pheabe: all these
and many more are remembered in everlasting blessed Volumnes.

Thus have I truly and impartially proved, that for Chastity, Charity,
Constancy, Magnanimity, Valor, Wisdom, Piety, or any Grace or Virtue
whatsoever. Women have always bin more than equal with men; and that for
Luxury, Sarquedrin obscenity, prophanity, Ebriety, Impiety, and all that may be
called bad we do come far short of them. Now we think it meet only to
tell them a little of one fault, which we are sure they do know already; and
that our Repetition of it will be no means to Reform it: yet to show the
World that Women have great cause to find fault, and be discontented with
their odious general vice of Drunkenness. We will relate unto you the dellicate
dainty Foppish, and rediculous conceits of Sir Seldom Sober, with the most
foolish, idle, and sottish tricks and feats of his idle and Adle-pated
followers.

Several Questions propounded to Sir Seldom Sober, by the Women, viz.
Questions asked and put to Sir Seldom Sober by the Women.
FIrst, were Women ever since the Creation of the World, such notorious and
Capital offenders as you men have been from time to time; not only in
particular to your Wives and Family; but I mean in public against your Prince
and Country, being found Traitors, as our Chronicles can witness.

Secondly, were there ever any woman put in the Stocks, or set in the Pillory,
or had ever any hand in Coining, or Clipping, or Defacing their Princes Money.

Thirdly, do women do as you men do, who lie abed on purpose to invent
mischief, and plot how to get other men's estates into your hands by your slye
dissembling: and then either break and run away; or at the least compound
for ten Groates in the pound; and then set up again, and do as much more
within seven years after.

Fourthly, do Women become common Bail in Actions, for the value of twelve
pence, as you men do: Or be Knights of the Post, to swear and forswear in
many Cases, for a small sum of money: and in hyring Satin Doublets and
Breeches in Long Lane, and come in a Ruff to bear false witness against their
neighbor

Fifthly, did you hear that ever any women ran away from their Captains
Colors: but whatsoever they did undertake, they went through stich with it,
and not fly like Cowards, or fight in private Armor, or Coats of Male, as
you men have done? but women you have heard of, who have been forced to lie
and fight it out, and endure the brunt, when you men were not able to stand to
it.

Sixthly, do Women, as you men do, for the value of a dinner or Supper, become
bound in a sum of Money for other men, to undo their Wives and Children, and
run away into the Low Countries to be a Soldier, and there kill men for
three shillings a week.

Seventhly, when did you hear, or ever know Women, that make eight days in
the Week to deceive poor men of their pay as you men do?

Eighthly, when did you ever read or hear of any women that turned Projectors,
striving to undo Kingdoms, only to enrich themselves by their several
Monopolies and Patents: Patents did I say? indeed Patents, in my conceit,
should belong most properly to us women, who know how to use them: for your
men's Patents and Monopolies are hurtful to all, ours to none, but they are for
a general good, and to preserve our Healths, yours to ruin and beggar Men,
Women and Children.

Ninthly, how many women have you known or seen, that have been brought home
drunken in a Porters Basket, or led home between two Vintners Boys, or that
ever drank out their eyes, and left their wits behind them on a Tavern
Bench; or came home with their Legs or Arms broken by their excessive
Drinking, and ingurgitating of too much Wine.

Tenth, I pray you Sir Seldom Sober, tell us how many Women that ever you
heard of, that ran and hid themselves in a Cupboard when there came out a
Press for soldiers; or locked themselves up in some private place for fear of
the Press: when we women stand it out, and never fear, or once be afraid: let
there come a Press out night by night, or day by day, we women will never
run, or shrink our heads for it.

Eleventh, how many women did you ever hear of, that kept Horses to gallop
after Mutton; I mean laced Mutton: and then return again neither with good
Horse, or sound Reins; but creeping and halting, as if you had been shot in
some hot service of War?

Twelfth, how many Women did you ever hear of, that do drink so much, that
they do quarrel and fight, and tear one another Bands and Clothes; and
then be carried before a Justice, or else end the business by Arbitration, to
their loss both of money and time: or not so ended, do challenge the field,
and there sheath their swords in one another breast? All these are causes
enough to make a woman speak, whose Husband is thus in fault: and we ought to
speak, for we have nothing to offend (and defend our selves) but our tongues:
nay more, as you men have but five Senses, I will prove that women have six,
and that is our Tongues; and therefore we may speak and plead for our selves
with our tongues, and defend our selves by our tongues; and therefore Sir
Seldom Sober hold you your Tongue hereafter; for you know six to five is odds
at football; and you shall be sure to find it so, if ever you do come into
our quarters: but we hope Time will jerke your blind Cheeks for this, or
else you will get such a blow with a French Coulstaffe, that you will end your
Days in an Hospital. O that we had you amongst us but two hours, or
something which we could wish between a cleft stick, we would serve you but
as the Bakers Wife did the Devil, make you somewhat the lighter, the better,
and the more nimble for your next Summers Travail, and cause that Copper-Nose,
which has so many Colors as the Rainbow, to appear of another hew: but
wishes are in vain; and time and opportunity will bring things together which
were never dreamt of; so we leave you Sir Seldom, or never Sober; only we
will give you the Character of a Drunkard, and Drunkenness, and so conclude
with a few Tales to the same purpose.

SOme say, that the Science of Drinking Carrowses, and Drunken Healths was
brought into England by the Danes when they conquered this Kingdom: but from
whomsoever you learned the Mystery, it makes no great matter: It is apparently
known, that neither Dane, or Dutchman, True-man, or Welsh-man, can go beyond
you herein: for by your daily Documents (most Noble Sir Seldom Sober) men are
so perfect, that they are able to teach their Teachers, to master their
Masters, and to lay all Nations in the Dirt that dares oppose them: For the
which Cunning, they are all bound to you; and to manifest their thankfulness,
every day almost three quarters of the Masculine Sex do declare and show
themselves to be Sir Seldom Sobers Men. For his Followers, they are the only
Chimmists, and Hyperbolicall Artists below the Moone-shine, and they are of all
Callings, Functions, Arts, Trades, and Occupations: they are likewise of all
degrees; from the Monarch to the Miser; from the Lord to the Lowne, and of
either Masculine, or Feminine Sex or Gender. The force of Wine, or much
Drinking did often make Phillip King of Macedon to rage against his Foes; and
it caused his Son ( Alexander the Great) to kill his friends: most of them
are such Friends to Oblivion, that they will Drink, Smoke, and Pipe away
Time. Some are such Miraculous, strange wonder-workers, that they can turn
Night into Day, and Day into Night. It has made many a Soldier Metamorphose
the mettle of his Murrion and his Morglay into the Elixer or spirit of the
Buttery, and Clinking of Wine-pots, to renounce Arms and Blood-shead, except
the Clarret blood of Bacchus. It makes thousands of Merchant Adventurers every
day and night to the Toride Zone of Canarie: It is the Poets Nepenthe,
Aganippa, his Nectar, Tempe, Helicon, and Castelian fountain; and when his
Muse flags, it inspires her with such strains and raptures, that she Mounts
and Soareth higher, than Jupiters Eagle, or the Sphere of Saturn. It causes
the Grammarian to speak beyond his Rules. It fills the Logicianer With
Syllogismes, and Sophistry. It makes the Mathematician so skillful, that he
knows Charles his Waine from a Sedan, and the Antarticke Pole from a
Constables Staff. By the Inspiration of Drink, the most simple Arithmatician
will account past numbering, and number beyond all account. It causes the
Astronomer to play the Aleconers part, and search all the twelve Signs of the
Zodiac, to know what weight and measure they allow. It attires the
Rhetoricians speech with such Eloquent terms of Fustian phrases, that it is
beyond the Speakers understanding, and all men's else that are troubled to hear
him. Drunkenness is the most frequent and universal Trading in the World: it
makes (almost) every Man a Merchant or Chapman: for if you mark it, there is
of all Trades and functions that do every day go abroad from house to House,
for no other purpose but to buy Drink. It is Music of it self, and it is
composed, and consists of Frets, Stops, Clefts, Moods, Flats, Sharpes, Spaces,
and most strange Notes, Tones, and Tunes, Phrygian, Lidian, Dorian, nine points
above Ela, and two pots below Gamoth: For upon the Ale-bench, they are all
compacted of Quavers, Semiquavers, Sembriefes, Minnums, and Crotchets: One
squeaks shrill, like an, Owl, another Brayes the Descant, like an Ass, a
third bellows the Tenor, like a Bull, a fourth Barks the Counterpoint, The
women's examples and similies of drunkenness in a modest phrase.
like a Hound, a fifth howles the Treble, like a Wolf, and a sixth grunts the
Base, like an Ox: that what with the ravishing sound of Sackebuts, Canary
Pipes, Tobacco Pipes, Flouts, (or Fluits) Shames, Bad-pipes, weights, Hoboyes,
Clinking and Knocking of Pots, Stamping, Dancing, and Singing to confused
Noyses; there is daily such sweet and Contagious Harmony amongst them, that a
man cannot any way compare the deliciousnes of it to any thing more
significantly, than to most Eare-bewitching Caterwauling; or their rending and
tearing of tunes, are as delightful to the hearing, as the fat end of a
Pudding. And truly, you men are so experimented in the Trade of Bibbing, (or
Arti Bibendi) that the Spungy Dutch are most sober Catoes, in respect of you,
Apuleius Ass a grand Sophy, and the Wise men of Gotham would seem amongst us
to be the seven Sages of Greece. Drink is the Idol which you men adore, and
every day you do fall down to it: It is the Catalogue of all Faculties: It is
the rare Esculapian medicinable Antimonian Cup, for it cures all: It is (as it
were) the Midwife of Justice, for it brings forth all, and ofttimes it
restores both Principal and interest in a flood or inundation of Expression;
It makes a Man cast learnedly, like Homer: It multiplyes the eyesight, which
is the cause, that some Beer is called double Beer, by reason it enlarges
the capacity, and makes a man see every thing double; As one writ very
sententiously.

The Scribe, or the Clerk,
Whose sights are dark,
And the print of the Letters
does seem too small,
Will conne every Letter,
And read much the better,
If they glaze but their eyes
with a pot of good Ale.
Amongst you men it is the sweetest Life to be Dead Drunk, and a
well-seasoned Drunkard, is an unmeasurable merry companion, that holds the
great Barrel at Heidlebergh to be but a Bottle: nor does he hold it lawful to
look wisely, go steadily, stand firmly, or speak sense. Nor will he
dishonor the Calling with sleeping above once a Week, or a Fortnight. Many of
them are (...) so wary, and ^ealous of their Reputations, that they will pay no
Reckonings, because they hold it a disparagement to their Credits not to be
credited. Some are abhominably furnished with; Oaths, and Protestations of all
sorts and sizes, and for any special occasion, or company: As small mincing
Oaths for the City, Courageous Oaths for the Court, Hob-naild Oaths for the
Country, Cudgel Oaths to break a Creditors Pate, Rapier Oaths to run a
Sergeant, or a Bayliffe through, and Backe-sword Oaths to cross an Alehouse
score. And as an Ape will imitate a man, so a Drunken man will imitate a Beast.
Moreover, you shall have seventeene, or eighteen in one Room, at one and the
same time, all in most different and various Actions and Postures; one will
whoop and hollow, another sings, a third dances, a fourth weeps, a fifth
sleeps, a sixth leapes over Stools and Tables, and shows feats, a seventh
Knocks, Stamps, and throws pots down the stairs; calls the Drawers Rogues,
the Man of the House Cuckold, and his Wife whore, breaks Glasses, and
Glasse-windowes: another pulls out his sword, and to make valient proof how
well he can use it, he cuts, hewes, and slashes posts, doors, boards, and
stakes, the poor prodigalls picture in the painted Cloth; and in that vein
he is so Courageous, as to brandish his Blade against Hector singly, or (for a
need) you may turn him loose to combat with all the Nine Worthies. We saw
once one that was so Pot-valient, that in revenge, he with his sword thrust
poor Judith into the belly, because she killed Holophernes when he was
drunk: Some boast their Descent and Antiquity of their Housrs, and Gentry of
their Predecessors: Some brag of their wealth which, perhaps, their accursed
and miserable fathers did purchase either by buying and selling Justice, or by
Briberie, Extortion, or some other execrable way over the Devils Back, and
therefore their sons and heirs do take a mad or a drunken course to spend it
under his Dams Belly with Rorering and Whoring. Some in their drink do make no
bones to speak Treason, and indeed they make nothing to prattle and scribble
Scandala Magnatum* Some will utter all the secrets they know (and more too) and
by those means they have undone themselves, their Wives, Families, Friends,
and Neighbors; Some have foolishly (when the drink was in, and the wit out)
lent away all their money, or prodigally paid all the Reckoning, or run into
bonds for others, or been tempted and won to take up fine commodities (at
cheating deer rates) as Ginger-bread, Rattles, Mousetraps, Tormentours for
Fleas, Tennis Balls, and Mundunga Tobacco. Some have sold their goods and lands
(in their Ale) and they have been Beggars ever after being sober. To add to
this, many of Sir Seldom Sobers men have been so cunning as to transform
money, goods, lands, health, reputation, and liberty, all into drink, and with
a few words of their mouths, (like a Charm) they have turned their good
friends into most deadly and inveterate Enemies; Some are much inclined to
steal when they are drunk, and because they love to be in action or practice,
they will pick their own pockets rather then want work. And some of them are
such enemies to sloth that they will sleep upon an Alehouse or Taverne-bench
to avoid idleness.

Thus every day all sorts of people and Nations are drunk in several forms
and postures, as in one place one may find or meet a Dutchman bloated like a
stinking Herring: in another place a Welchman stewed as mellow as a Pruine: in
a third place a Scotchman mull'd with drink and smoke: in a fourth an
Irishman pickled in Vsquebagh, and lastly, an Englishman shall be all this and
more to, for he will be drenched, stewed, mull'd, pickled, stewed, and bloated;
there is no learned Pot-leech or Renowned Malt-worme, that is worthy to hold
the candle to an English Drunkard, for by the inspiration of his Tap-Lash, and
the infusion of the spirit of the spiggot, he is Geometrically skild to turn a
Quadrangle into a Circle, and to drink round at a square Table. The first
Health is called a Whiffe, the second a Slash, the third a Hunch, the fourth
Thrust, the fifth is called Pot-shaken, the sixth is seeing the Lions, the
seventh, he is Scratched, the eighth, his Nose is dirty, the ninth, he has
whipped the Catt, the tenth, he is fox'd, the eleventh, he is Bewitched, the
twelfth, he is Blind, and the thirteenth and last, he is drunk.

Drink is of that quickness in operation, and of such celeritie to inspire the
Brain of man, that I did once know a Gentleman that rode to the Universitie of
Oxford, who entered the City about two of the clock afternoon, and at his
coming thither, he could not speak any Greek or Latin at all, but by the
Enthusiasme of Drink, and drinking roundly and squarely, and with brief and
diligent potting and cupping, he profited so well, that in less then four
hours he had forgot all his English, and could neither speak or understand
any word of his Mother tongue. One boasted what a Traveller he had been, and
how he had been robbed and cheated in every Country where he came: As he had
the luck to lose his Manners in Barbary, the Wild Irish and Red-shanks, stole
his Civilitie, the Welshman gulled him of his truth. In Hungaria he was
bereaved of his Abstinence and Sobriety, in Sclavonia he lost his Gentility,
in Spain his Honesty suffered Shipwreck, and in Amsterdam he stumbled, and
(with the fall) lost his Religion, or shattered it into Heresies, Sects, and
Schisms; and all these losses and detriments happened to him in his drink, or
drunken madness. He brags further, that he has been at Terra Incognita, where
some Ladies do say their prayers; and many Courtiers do keep their words,
where the Usurers do lend and take no interest, and prodigal Gallants erect
Almshouses, where Scriveners and public Notaries do wear long ears, and
Townsmen have very short foreheads; all these Rarities he saw in a drunken
Dream. Besides, he said, that he was in England, and there he saw wonders,
as King Henry the 8 Cod-pisse, Charles Brandons Lance, Ancient Pistol's Sword,
Smugge the Smiths Cap, Sir John Falstaffs Pistol, Caesar Vandunks Bottle,
Queen Guinnivers Masque, Penelopes Fan, Lucretiaes Busk, Cleopatraes Fall, and
the Muffe of Semiramis: and all these and thousands more Whimseys,
Carwhitthets, Conondrums, and Aenigmaticall tricks and toys are daily done by
Drunkards.

And can any woman (that has reason) or any man that has sense blame us poor
weak Feminines, to be grieved at these enormities; I, with the best of all my
sex do appeal to all whomsoever have but indifferent capacity and
judgment, be they of what degree soever, either male or female.

But yet I remember a few mischeifs more which drunkenness has and does daily
overwhelme us with all; sometimes they quarrel, and not only quarrel but
kill on another in their drunken roaring vain, and oftentimes for very wicked
causes, these Tavern frayes or brawls have happened, as sometimes because the
one had not his Cup filled as full as the other, sometimes for not drinking all
out (which is termed, winding up your bottom) footing off your Bowl, sup up
your Cider) or some other such like learned phrase, and the casting away of a
small snuff has often bred a quarrel, or the not pledging a Health, which
was begun to some unworthy person: perhaps, some oppressing inhospitable Great
Man, or to a Begging-making Project-monger (whom a Commonwealth is bound to
pray for over the left shoulder) or the Health may be perhaps to some musty
Madam, or Muskie Gentlewoman, or to a common prostituted Whore, and such vile
occasions as these many men have stabbed and slain one another. There has been
two killed in the same unkind kind, within these few years, with only being
stabbed into the eyes with Tobacco pipes.

And likewise, or more properly) in the like foolish way, they have thrown pots
down the stairs, and a Drawer, or some other person (at the same time) has
bin coming up the said stairs, who has met the said pot (being violently
cast) with their faces or heads, and been killed out right: Thus have they by
these mad-braind courses too oftentimes made hazard of souls, by dispossessing
them from men's bodies so suddenly and unprepared, also they have run their
necks into the nooze of the Law, by making untimely work for the Hangman. And
lastly, (too many of them) have made forfeite of their estates, goods and
Lands, leaving their wives beggerd, and their children nothing but a scandal,
that their father died an ignominious death for killing of a man when he was
drunk.

But though this be bad which I have related, yet there is worse then this
behind, for as we are commanded to do no murder, (which is not to murder,
others) Then surely they are most inhumane and uncharitable, who do murder
themselves; which bloody and barbarous fact is not to be excused in such as
do wilfully drink themselves to death, as Master John Stowe, in the 385 page
of his Folio Chronicle, or Annals, does recite a lamentable and remarkable
accident, of 180 persons that died in their Drunkenness in less then three
days space, and in the 753 page of the said Book, he relates the like that
happened to our Englishmen at the siege of the Groyne in Gallizia, where many
hundreds lost their lives with drinking. And if you but consider and take
notice of our Weekly Bills for the Sickness, you shall find that every Week
some do end their days only having killed themselves with Surfets, of which
all men do know that drunkenness is the chief occasion. And in the General
Bill for the year 1636, it is set down, that within London and the Liberties
thereof, there died no fewer then 371 persons all of surfeiting, and also 24
starved with famine in the fields and streets, whom half the superfluous
expenses of those that killed themselves with surfeiting might have relieved.
There are three words or names of several things which do begin with the
letter H. All which are good (if well used, but as they are too much abused,
they have been the overthrow and ruin of many; they are Horses, Hawks and
Howndes; some Horses have prooved like Sinons jade to the Trojans, their hungry
entrails have devoured and destroyed their Masters Illion, and scarcely left
them a Cottage to hide their heads in, some have found their Hawks like the
Vulture to Prometheus, after they have muted away their substance, they have
preyed and tired upon their very Hearts. And some their have been so addicted
to Hownds, that in the end their Dogs have devoured them like so many Acteons.
Now likewise there are three other things, whose names do begin with the
letter D, of which (two of them never were, are or will be commodious for man,
and the third (which is most useful and necessary) is by the abuse of it) the
only bane of misgovern'd mankind; They are Drabbes, Dice, and Drink: I will
not say but Drabbes may prefer the Prodigal from the Palace to the Pig-stie,
where he (being leaden with want, misery, and diseases) may be brought to
learn and feel the virtue of repentance. Secondly, the Dicer may (by his
often slurring the bones of the dead) be brought to have a feeling
acknowledment of his own living and most wretched condition: But the Drunkard
is implacably obstinate to be so, he is, (as it were) riveted to drink, he is
inexorably rooted in his vice, and so unmovable in his affection to be drunk,
that though there be remedies for all other sins, yet there is nothing but
death it self that can turn an old Drunkard into a sober course.

Besides the most impudent and frequent offenders, that are addicted to any
other vice, be it what it will be, they have some show of modesty, or desire of
privatenesse in the acting or committing of any of their ingrafted or innated
enormitie. The theife will warily watch that he may not be seen when he
steals. The Whoremaster will be close, the Bawd will be secret, and though the
Whore be common, yet she trades privately. He that takes bribes will receive
them secretly, though the Projector do aim at every man's goods, yet he
covers his intentions, that it is for all men's good, though the cause went
against the Client, yet the Lawyer and his fee told him other ways at the
first, and though the Devil do day and night (with all diligence) seek our
confusion, yet he can sweetly allure us with covered slights and poisoned
baits, that he hides his ugliness under the shape of an Angel of Light. But
the Drunkard is more impudent and shameless then either Whoremaster, Whore,
Bawd, Thief, wicked Projector, corrupted Lawyer, or the Devil himself. For
although all these before named, are as bad, as wickedness can make them, yet
I did never read or hear of any of them that at any time were so foolishly
past shame, as to boast or glory in any of their villainies, as many Drunkards
will; I have heard some to brag, how many they have out-drank and drank drunk
in a day, as he paid one, he pepperd another, he sawced a third, he anointed
a fourth, he scowred a fifth, he drank 27 Glasses or Cups, and won the
Rumpe of a Goose, and bravely made all his Company as fox'd as fools, and as
beastly as Swine, and all the while this mighty and precious piece of service
was doing, he plyde it hard, and in conclusion, he was not much worse when
he ended, then he was when he began. And indeed, it is to be believed, that
as one days work cannot make him much the worse, so it is to be doubted, that
many days and nights, with the friendliest counsels, the godliest admonitions,
the sharpest reprehensions, the severest excommunications, the dreadfullest
execrations; all these can neither mend or move him; but that he has not only
resolved to be wicked, but also to continue so, and to boast and glory in it.
But to boast of sin is a degree beyond sin.

To lay these abominable enormities aside, if we should consider the good a
drunkard does, you will acknowledge him to be a most necessary evil: and (not
to bereave him of his due) though he be never well employed, yet he he is
never idle; and besides he sets many people a work, that would otherwise be
idle (or not have much to do:) As for example; He puts the Constable into
business, he keeps the Watch waking; he visits the Justice; he sees the
Clerk; he is profitable to the Chandler, Tobacco-Pipe maker, and potent
Patentee; he keeps the Drawer in perpetual motion; he is beneficial to the
Glasse-house; he enricheth the Wine-merchant, the Vintner, the Cooper, the
Brewer, the Victuler, the Sergeant, and the Jayler; and many times he is so
great an enemy to idleness, that he makes work for the Hangman.

And now (sweet Sir Seldom Sober) I pray your gravity to take it into your
consideration, that these forenamed virtues are no Women's Works. Alas, poor
silly Wretches as we are, our weak capacities can never reach to the height
of such worthiness, we have not the Art to swill and smoke away our husbands,
our own, our Children, our Families, and our Landlords food, health, raiment,
and rent. And when any of them are surfeited, and dangerous sick, what large
promises they will make, what reformed Men they will be, if ever they may
recover their Healths; and when many of them are well again, the most part or
great number of them do keep their words like men of Dursly. As a pretty Jest
happened lately at a Supper amongst some Gentlemen and Women, where one of the
gentlemen took a Cup in his hand, and said to a little Girl of 4. Years of
Age: wife I will drink to you: the Child answered him, saying, I will be none
of your Wife: Why, said he? Because you were drunk yesterday, said she: with
that they all laughed heartily. But the man replied, and said to the Child,
Sweetheart, you shall be my Wife for all that; for I will be drunk no more:
To whom she answered; So my Father said the other day, when he was sick, but
since he is well again, he has forgot his Promise, and is worse now than
ever he was.

It is reported, that a young fellow was told his Fortune once by a Witch, or a
Wizard; which was, that he should commit one of these three most wicked and
abominable Facts, and that it was in his choice to choose which of them he
would: the one was, he should kill his Father; the other was, that he should
defloure his Mother: And the third was, that he should be most deeply and
extremely Drunk: He in his Heart abhorring the two first, detesting to be
the Death of his Father, (from whom he had Life) or to pollute and defile his
mother that bore him: to avoid both which execrable deeds, he made choice to
be Drunk (as thinking it the lesser Crime of the three.) But being brutish
Barbarous, and beastly possessed with too much Drink, so that he knew not what
he did, or said, he then committed all the three faults, of which he made a
drunken shift to avoid but two.

And what woman can be such a Tame Fool, as to hold her tongue in her mouth,
and (like a dumb Beast) say nothing to her unthrifty Husband, that shall day
and night wash down his throat, with all, or the most part of their
maintenance, and piss against the Wall his health, wit, money, and credit; and
all her comfort is, that he comes home, stinking, spewing, Belching, spetting,
spawling, slavering, and (being once laid) snoring, like a Hog in a Stie: or
if he be not in that vein, perhaps he is in a worse mood to swear, curse,
fight, fling, and throw. As one of your Watermen ( Sir Seldom Sober) the
first letter of his name is J. came home Delicately mad Drunk, and plucked a
Ropes end out of his Pocket, wherewith he most sorely beat his wife; which
she poor woman was feign to suffer with grief and impatience: but within a
week after, they being friends, she provided him the same Ropes end for his
supper, boyld in Broth, like an Eele, and when he had eaten the Broth out of
the Platter, he took his Knife, with intent to cut part of the Eele, and
finding it to be hard for his cutting, he asked his Wife what it was? Truly
Husband, said she, it is no worse than what you gave me; and therefore I
thought good to make it ready, and Cook it for your Supper. Sir, it is a
grief to see, that a Gentleman of your great Calling, is so ill attended in
the forenoones: for commonly the greatest number of your servants and followers
do lie long a bed, so that you have but small and slender service of them,
till three or four of the Clock in the afternoon, and from that time, till
past Midnight: the Tavernes, Alehouses, and streets are furnished and
thronged with all sorts of people, that for your honor are sufficiently
Drunk, and for your further reputations, in all places by their drinking,
speaking, going, or any other action or posture of theirs they do declare
themselves to be Sir Seldom Sobers men.

And now I think it meet and convenient to Relate some few of their merry
Pranke and Feats which they have done in their drink.

1.
A Young Roaring Gallant had newly entertained an old Gray-bearded Serving-man,
whom his Master commanded to fetch him some Beer, for his Mornings draught;
for it is to be noted, that it is almost a general Custom or fashion to
drink nothing else but Wine all the day after. The old fellow having brought
the Beer delivered it to his Master; who said to him Thou have some experience
by reason of thy age, and therefore I ask thy advice, Whether it be better for
a man to take his mornings draught standing or sitting: the Servant answered,
that it is best to take it standing: Nay then I perceive thou art a fool, said
the Gentleman: for all Doctors, and Physicians, and other best approved
judgments do hold it meetest to drink it sitting: Truly, Sir, said the other,
I am of a contrary opinion, for I think it the wisest way to stand to my
drink in the Morning, and to sit down to it in the afternoon, when I cannot
stand.

2.
THere was on Richard Long, who was Yeoman Sadler to the King: The said Long
had made shift to be in a Tavern a long time, from one of Clock in the
afternoon, till Midnight: in which space he was grown very sufficiently
drunk; at last, taking his leave of his Comrades (the Sky being almost as
dark as pitch) so that Long was forced to grope and foot out his way, from
the Burrow of Southwarke to the Thames, to take a Boat: and as he past from
St. Margarets Hill, through a way which is called the Dead man's place: wherein
there are certain Posts driven to keep the Carts from the Foote-way. But Long
came stumbling, and blundring a good pace, and withal ran his face and
breast against one of the Posts, which he taking to be a man, up with his fist
and struck the Post, and with the blow broke his knuckles; whereat he was more
angry, and running violently to strike another blow, the Post repulst him so
stiffely, that Long staggard backward, and fell into a Ditch that was behind
him: in which Ditch there was a little dirty soft Mud, (for the water was at
that time ebbed out) Long being thus laid in a soft Bed, one Nicholas Bennet,
that dwelt near the Banke-side, a Needle-maker by trade, he came in stumbling
Post haste the same way, and for want of eyesight he shoulderd the said Post
so strongly, that he was made to recoyle in that manner, that he fell
backward into the Ditch also, and as hap was, he fell upon Long, who supposing
that he that assaulted him upon the way, had likewise pursude him in the Ditch;
he started up and said, Thou Rogue, what will thou rob or murder me, thou
troublest me in my going home, thou threwest me into this Ditch; and do thou
follow me hither to do me a further mischief? and with that he lays about
him, and heat poor Bennet, who cried out to him, Master Long, I do know you
well enough, as I am a Christian I fell in here against my will: I was driven
in here by a Post that stands in the way, I pray you hold your hands, for I
knew not of your being here in the Ditch: My name is Nick Bennet, a
Needle-maker. Upon which words the Battle was ended, and as they fell in and
out Post, they grew friends, and groap'd the way to bed by leisure.

3.
ANother that had been late at Foxe-catching, was going (or intending) home to
his Lodging, the Moon being at the full, shining very bright, so that the
shadow of a Signe-Post lay cross the Gentleman's way, that he by no means
could stride over: (for he imagined the shadow to be a high Rail) whereat he
offered, by lifting up his leg to get over, but could not lift high enough;
all this while the host of the house (that was the owner of the Inn and the
Sign) stood in the shade of his door, and noted what danger the Gentleman was
in, and stood closely smiling to himself; but at last the other espied him,
and asked him what he was, and who kept that house, that had dared to be so
bold as to rail up the streets, to debar Gentlemen of of their passage in
the Night, to their Lodgings: and withal he would know what Sign was over his
head, and to whom it belonged? To whom the Man answered, Sir, I am a man; I
keep not the house, but the house keeps me; I have not Raild up the streets,
but you have Reeld in the streets: and whereas you would know what Sign it
is, to tell you the truth Sir, it is the Gray-hound in Southwarke; but to
speak more properly, It is a Sign that you are Drunk.

And now I am in the Moone-shine, I remember a trick or two more of the same
kind: for once there stood a May Pole in the Strand, which had the shadow of it
cast quite thwart the street, which a drunken gallant being double-sighted,
supposed to be a broad ditch, over which he could not possibly get, till at
last he wittily threw his Cloak over the shadow, and after that he threw his
sword; and then going back again some dozen or twenty steps, he fetched a
Run, and rann^ with such great advantage, that he valiantly, and fortunately
Leaped clean over the May Pole dith Shadow, swearing that he would complain
to the Justices


