An Apology or defense against the calumnacion of certain men, which
preferring wylfull will and carnal reason before the plain truth of Gods
gospel, (do sclaundre those men, which for the better seruinge of God with a
more pure conscience, according to his holy word) have abandoned their liuinges
and vocacion, abydinge as exyles in poor estate out of their natyue cou^trye.

Exodi.xxxiij. O Lord let our hearts evermore joy in thy testimonies, follow
not the multitude to do evil.

Psalm.lxxiij. Like as when a man waketh there remains nothing of his sleep,
(how pleasant soever it was to the sleper.) So shall there be nothing left of
their Gods. Where through they thought the^ selves happy in this world. But
thou (O Lord) shall rather make eue^ their pictures to be abhorred of every
man in the City.

1555.

The mercy and favor of God our heavenly father, purchased to us by the
merits of our Savior Christ. Communicated to us by his holy spirit. I. T.
Wishes to the gentle Reader.
THe thing that moved me to undertake, to answer this sclau^dre (good friend)
was not. That I either thought or judged my self so wise or so learned, as ye I
could set it forth with such wysdom, or eloquenche: as so good a matter, and
true cause required, or as if some learned man had undertaken it: neither do I
write it, to the end it should be comen and received of all men, or have free
access into all places: but only to you my friend: and to that town where ye
presently habyte (the place of my birth and educacion.) As also for the excuse
of those good m^r, of that town, which in like manner with me have abandoned
and given over their rowmes, which men as in Greek and Latin auctours they be
ignorant. By reason whereof, they ca^ not explicate nor make known to you,
the cause why they have chosen this paynefull exyle: so they wish you, and all
other honest men, to know and understand: that neither lightness, rash will,
or i^constancie, has moved them there unto, (as some of that town, untruly
and against their own knowledge do surmyse and blow abroa^e.) But a good
zeal grounded up on Gods truth, confyrmed by the opinion of all good and
godly learned men: and that they might with the more pure conscience serve god
in the congregation of the godly, where Gods most holy word and Sacraments
are purely preached and ministered. In the which place as the Prophet David
says: It is better to dwell in a most poor degree, then to abide in wealth
and prosperous estate, among the wicked. Which mind and good purpose of theirs,
as a just excuse to satis^ye the minds of good and godly men which
principally they desire. They have earnestly desired me, to make known and to
put forth the same in writing: and to adresse this Apology to you: Knowig
right well, that although for lack of learning and wysoom, I shall not be
able to satisfye their expectacion, or set it forth according to the worthynes
of the matter. For that I never haunted scoles or any universities. Nor never
was brought up in any other state then with them, as a most poor man and
Soldier, (simple and unworthy) yet because they shall as well perceive my
good will and priest service toward them, as charity and our consuete
familiarity would, and compels me: as also for that my part is in it
participating, the life obloque and sclaundre with them. For that we have
wrought al one like fact, and attempted one entrepryse. These things wayed
and proponed, I have the more gladly granted to full fill their requests,
praying you my friend of charity to grant me thus much favor. That if I either
shall write or pe^ne any thig ye agrees not with your mind, and the opinion of
other me^, not to co^de^ne it at the first sight, because it makes not for
your purpose, but rather co^farre it with ye scriptures of God, the true
touchstone, which al men's works ought to be judged by, and to the which I pray
you submit your conscience: and if ye find yt it vary not from ye sacred word
of god, nor dissent from the mind of good and godly learned me^. The^ embrace
it as a manifest truth, desyring god ye father of al mercy for his sons sake
Christ, in the work of his holy spirit, to make you consent to it. And to
testifye our doings to be lawful and consonante to Gods gospel. Staying your
opinion with this our answer putting other men to silence by the same.

And now to come to the causes which ye proponed to me^ in my house, saying: ye
were sent from many good honest and godly me, which not a little merueled, yt I
had set away into flanders my wife and children: and much more that I my self
was also delibered to follow. Wherein, as ye alleged, they judged I wrought
unwisely and not according to knowledge, but rather preferred a will more
wilful, the^ godli wise, knowig as well my poor estate and little riches with my
great family, as also ye inciuil nature of this nacio^ with finale relief,
saying: wtin a short time begging to over take me, for ye I nether had art,
faculte, or occupacio^ to live by. More ye if god should turn ye impiety of
this time, I should never be able to recover the like rowme or office, and so
al my life wa^der in misery, which they as my very friends much lamented, with
many other causes by you alleged, thereby to stay my iourneye. Which
perswasio^s as to the flesh, they seemed hard and vneasi to be borne, and
tolerated of any worldly man. So I for my part do most heartily praise God,
whose good work it was: they not abashed me nor altered my purpose, as ye my
friend know right well.

Secondlye ye alleged against me the doings of other me^, which ye named both
good honest, and godly: and of an upright pure conscience, which men observed
the order of this time.

Thyrdely ye said that if my conscience were so straight laced, as that I could
not consent, to the putting of my name into the book among others, you for
your part judged it no sin, nor felt any repugnau^ce of conscience for your
so doing, whereby ye judged it no offense. And if it were sin, as ye said ye
doubted, yet it was a light sin, and easy to be forgiven saying: God must
remitte greater offenses, or else ye should never come in heaven.

Well, now my friend according to my conscience and little knowledge, received
from Gods word: I will answer your three causes alleged against me.
Prayinge you to accept the^ in as good part, as with an unfeigned heart and
good mind I do adresse them to you.

And as to the first cause which ye preferred to stay my going: whereas you
and many good men lamented that misery should oppress me, and that specially
in a strange land far from friends. Where I should be compelled either to
beg or labor, which I never had done nor was brought up in such extremity,
wherefore they feared I should not be able to endure it. I answer them with S.
Paul, I have learned in what estate soever I am, there with to be content. I
can do all things thorough the help of Christ. I also say with S. Paul,
Phil. iiij. Romans viij
shall tribulacion, or anguishe, or persecucion: either hunger, or nakedness:
peril, or sword, separate us from the love of God: Timo. vi Mar. viij
More the same Apostle says: Godliness is great riches, if a man be co^te^t
with that he has, for we brought nothing into the world, and it is a plain
case, that we can carye nothing out. What should it avail a man to win the
whole world, and lose his own soul: I most heartily rejoice in god, that I
have not received his gospel in vain. For I had rather with Lazarus enjoy a
poor estate, Luke. xvi
begging my bread in myserye with a quiet conscience: the^ with dyues to wallow
in wealth, and for pleasure sake lose the life everlasting. Christ Jesus the
alone Savior, Philip. ij.
our Lord and master, thought it no robberye, as S. Paul says, being very
God, to take our nature upon him, and for our sakes to become man in most low
degree. Who as a most pure pater^^ and godly example for us to follow, walked in
this vale of misery, in great humility and poor estate, saying: ye foxes
have holes, Luke. ix
and the birds of the air have nestes: but the son of man has not a place
to put his head in. O my friend these places of Scripture are not written in
vain, but for our learning: Roma. x^
that we through patience and comfort of the Scripture might have hope. It is
given us as S. Paul says: not only to believe on Christ: but to suffer for
his sake, if Christ Jesus my Lord and master walked in such poor estate, Wall
I a wretched sinner, being but earth and worms meat, hauig no certe^tie of my
life, Romans viij ij. Tim. 7.
for a little pleasure in this world lose ye life everlasting* God forbid,
remembering ye if we will reign with Christ, we must suffer with him. Now my friend
if I and other men should do as you and other do, what need we to suffer with
christ: For if, when as ye gospel by god his special mercy, and authority of
the king is set forth, I the^ embrace it as a truth in those days there is no
cause why I should suffer for ye gospel, as in ye time of ye godly Price king
Toward ye sixth. Psalm. lxvi Gapien. 3 Lcclesi. 2
But when for our vntha^kefulnes and wretched living, god does take his gospel
away from us, as it is come to pass in our la^d at this day, to make trial of
his elect according to this saying: As gold is tried in ye furneys, so god does
try his elect, if I then (as you and most men do now i these days) dissemble
with ye truth, which before I embrased, co^firming my self to ye impiete of
this time. There is the^ no cause why I should suffer with christ, no man will lay
any matter to my charge, if externally I observe ye law, and the^ were these
words of suffering with christ in vayn, and the gospel such a truth as I list
to make and apply it. If I shall persuade my self to please christ, and to be
in favor with God, and yet will not suffer with christ. My friend in mine opinion it
is not in our chose, to take up christ's cross as we lift, and ye way we
would: but as god our he aue^ly father in christ has destined and appointed us
unto: well, let ye man be ware which observes the order of this time,
maynteyninge his own doing, and co^de^ning other me^ for not doing the same,
and yet will say: he is gods seru^^t. Truly I will not co^de^ne hi, for God shall
be his judge: But surely I think he might as well say there were no god, for
god is none otherwise known and honored of him, but as his fleshly will list
to know and serve him, not captiuating his judgment to ye word of god, by ye
which word god is truly served and worshipped and not pleased as we imagine.
Mat. xvij
We are commanded to harke^ to ye voice of christ and to hear him, which
says: he ye will be my disciple let him forsake himself, and take up his
cross and follow me. Now if ye man which will live ^ al securite and pleasure of
this life, when God makes trial of his church, will nether suffer with him, Mat.
xvi.
nor take up his cross and follow him and yet will say he has right in his
doing, surely this place may be verified of him. Not al they which say, lord,
lord shall enter into ye kingdom of heaven, James.i. Roma. ij.
but he ye does ye will of my father which is in heaven: not ye hearers of ye
law, but ye doers shall be justified. Christ says: Zroade is ye way that leads
to destruction, and many go in thereat, but narow is ye way ye ledeth to
salvation, Mat. vij. Luke. xiij
and few there be which find it. Christ's flock is b^t a little flock. The cause
my fre^d, why it is but little and the narrow way not found out, is: because ye
of our nature we are sinful, and delight in ye corrupcion thereof, pleasing our
selves with corruptible things, not delighting in heavenly mysteries, for flesh
and blood is not capable of heaue^lye knowledge. Therefore has God given us
over to a lewd mind, persuading our selves to be in the right, when as
manifestlye we are in the wrong, according to the saying of S. Paul, Roma. i.
when as they knew God and did not worship him an god, the lord gave the^ over
to their own lusts And because that when we had ye light of Gods Gospel among
us, we embraced not, nor walked in the same. Therefore has God suffered
darkness and error to ouerwhelme us: and yet we will say, we are in the
right, and may dissemble for the time, saying: God knows our hearts. My
friend be not deceived: God requires ye whole man withal our powers to serve
him according to the first commandment, Exodus xx. Mat. xxij.
where it is written. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God withal thy heart,
soul, and mind, and withal thy powers. How we observe this precepte when as
we prostrate our selves before an Idol partaking with the ungodly: the Lord at
the last day shall reuele and make openly known. It is like as if a married
woman should submit her body to the use of another man: and when her husband
lays the offense to her charge, she au^swereth: husband be not angry for my
so doing, for although I abandoned my body to that ma^s use yet I reserved my
heart wholly to you. My fre^d I think there is no man, being of any godly
knowledge, could digest that answer of his wife, or take it in good part:
but condemning her as an aduoutresse would repudiat and forsake her. And shall
we persuade our selves to please God, Exodus xx. Deuteronomy. vi.
being a ialouse God (as the scripture calls him) who requires of us ye
whole man to serve him withal: when as we give the greater part of his
creacion to the seruinge of Idols, saying: God knows and has my heart. Well
God deal with us according to his great mercy, and give us an heart to repent
and knowledge our offenses, least we perish in our sins: for as God is
mercyful, so is he just. Christ says: Luke xiiij Math. x. Luke. ix.
he that sets more by father or mother, wife, children, lands, riches, or
cou^tryr, then by me, is not mete for me, nor worthy to be my disciple. Read
the whole Chap. in Luke, and examen what the buylding of the tower signifies.
Ye have heard often taught and preached, that, he ye will profess the Gospel in
time of prosperity should cast account with him self, what may happen to him for
the same, in the days of adversity. Or else in vain has he begone to buy lde,
and shall be called a foolish buylder. I think there be a great many of honest
and good men in that town, which in times past have been fervent Gospellers,
and yet at this day love the truth, sorowing in their hearts the impiete of
this time. That if it were not for fear to lose their liuinges, riches, and
country: and to become poor in a strange land, would follow and seek Christ
in the wilderness: Apoca. xij
searching with pain to seek out the narowe way. But alas so cold is our
love to Christ, which has so dearelye bought us, that we could be content to
love him so that we lose not by him. But these doubts to taste misery, poull
us from following poor Christ. So frail is our life, and such a lump of sin
and corrupt tabernacle, we are wrapped in. That seeing the best way and
knowing ye better part, we can not choose it, nor walk in the same. I pray God
this sentence be not verified upon us. Luke. xij
He that knows his masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with many
strypes. By many tribulacions must we enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Christ
says: Luke. ix.
he that puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is not mete for the
kingdom of heaven. mat. 24. x.
It is not enough for us to have begone in the knowledge of Christ, oneles we
persevere and follow him to the end. Closing our days in his peace, which peace
of Christ is better in a beggars bosom, at the hour of death, the^ a mountayn
of gold to a rich man with a troubled conscience. Christ says: my sheep hear
my voice: now my fre^d, because the voice of our shepeherde Christ, John. x.
is not to be heard in that town where ye dwell. Therefore I and other men of
that place, have abandoned our lyuinges and vocacio^, to seek our shepeherd
christ that we might hear his voice and participate his sacraments purely
ministered according to his holy word, and in ye place to our great comfort to
praise him: where, to our great consolacio^ we now remain. In the which
company how joyful it is to be among. The Prophet David describes in the
lxxxiiij Psalm, Psalm. 84.
which I most heartily require you, not only to read, but diligently to mark
and examine, what the Prophet means in the same, and by th^^ place to judge
whether we have right in our doyuges, or are justly to be condemned, O my
friend in that town where ye presentely inhabit, the gospel of Jesus Christ
has been most plenteously preached and purely taught ye space of seven
years. Mat. xiij. Mar. iiij.
And if there should no good ground appear after so much and long sowinge of
so good sede, to bring forth increase of good corn, it might well be called a
cursed place, and an ill soil. I say this my friend, if al me^ of that town,
which were called gospellers should observe ye order of this unhappy time,
submitting the^ selves to this ungodly religion. What a cause of triumph
should the papists have to rejoice: perswadig and blowing abroad no truth or
religion to be true, but only that which they now teach and set forth,
because all me^ observe the same. But for because they see a nou^bre of good
and godly learned me^ with the loss of their lives, and spilling of their blood,
to testifye it an untruth. As also a great nou^bre of honest me^ of good
co^uersacion do depart their country, leaving their riches and liuinges:
some of the^ begins to doubt, whether his religion be a truth or not. Other
which are of the worst sort of papists, and that most sets forth this
religion, be ashamed to make great boaste of their doctrine: for that in ye
time of the gospel, like dissemblers and hipocrites, they gave place to the
truth, and would in no wise suffer for their religion. And now they seeing men
to dye and suffer penury in a strange land, it makes them poul back their to
much boasting of their religion, so that by this means it appears most
plain to him that has but half an eye, that the gospel is a most manifest
truth and pure religion, in that men suffer for the same, which is promised to
all them, ij. Tim. i^
that will live godly in Christ Jesus. These causes my friend and many other,
moved me with other me^ to under take this painful journey, and grievous exyle.
Examen the book of genesis, and po^der well ye doing of ye old Patriarch Jacob,
who forsook no small substance and riches beside ye comodite of his country
and dwelling place, Gene. 43.
only as ye scripture says Because of famyne that occupied ye soil and land
where he dwelte, and in much pain and great travail in his old days with a
great family drew into Egipte, a people in manners and conditions, not
agreeyng with his nature. If our father Jacob did undertake this long and
painful journey, to seek meat for the body: consider my friend, how much more
we that are called Christians, and which have professed Christ, ought to seek
for the fode of the soul, which is the preaching of Gods holy word and
participacion of his holy Sacraments: by the which we wax strong in faith,
patience, and all good works, Mat. iiij.
as Christ our master says: Man shall not live by bread only, but by every
word ye proceeds out of the mouth of God. Christ commands by Esaias the
Prophet, Esaias. lij.
saying to his people: Away, away, get you out from thence, and touch no
unclean thing. Jeremy in another place cries, Ierem. li.
saying: Flee away from Babylon, every man save his life. O my friend do ye
think that the word of the spirit of God, speaking so earnestly and with such
vehemence, by the^ ^nouthes of those holy men: to command us to avoid the
company of Idolaters, is written in vain and to no purpose. Truly in my
simple judgment, and as my conscience testifies to me (ruled by Gods holy
spirit) They are written specially for our days, that we should be without al
excuse, when as God shall lay and make open every man's deeds. ij. Cor. vi.
S. Paul has the like saying: Come out from among them, and separate your
selves from them, says the Lord: read out the Chap. and note the words well.
And let your conscience witness with you, who has ye right. It is a thig
very difficile to touch pitch, Eccl. xiij.
and not to be defiled. I wylknitte up the first part of your matter objected
against me with this co^clusio^. The. viij. Chap. to the Romans, and so
consequentely all the whole Scripture through, does teach these two poinctes.
That first, God the father in his free mercy by hy^ son Christ has chosen
us, without any deserving on our parts, according to this saying: Those
which he appointed before, them also he called: and which he called, them also
he justified: which he justified, them also he glorified. Secondly, he did it
to this end: that as the scripture says: they might be made like to ye Image
of his son, in suffering with him. Now my fre^d, if we will pers^ade our
selfs, to be chosen in Christ: and will not suffer with him, and yet think to
raygne with him. I pray God we beguyle not our selves.

To come to the second part, In that ye laid against me the doings of other
men, which being both good and godly observed the order of this time. Laying
to my charge, why I should be more precyse and scrupule of conscience, then
other men they being godly.

To that saying I answer. The doings of men, is no presidente for a
Christen man to follow, how good soever they be called, onles they dyrecte
their ways, according to Gods holy word. Howbeit following the counsel of S.
Paul. I will report well of them, as Christen charity, would to judge the
best in hid things. Therefore for that I can not know with what mind they do
it, I must follow the admonicio^ of the Apostle, to think well of the^. Only
this I know, and am not ignoraunte of, and by experience do prove and taste in
my frail life and corrupt nature (which is altogether sinful) that terror
of laws makes us to stoop and decline to things, sinning against knowledge,
for the preseruacion of this uncertain life, and keeping of our goods. O that
we would remember this saying: i. Petri. i.
All flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man is as the flower of grass,
which sentence well wayed would keep us from dissembling in that thing whereof
our conscience accuses us: and to the which my heart in no wise can agree to
consent. Mat. xvi.
Christ says: who soever shall lose his life for my fake, shall find it. More I
am a ialous God, Exodus xx.
that cannot suffer my honor to be given to any other, nor no part thereof. The
Lord in these words does accommodate him self to us, as our weak nature
can know him. Our flesh is in no one cause so sone moved or provoked to wrath,
as in that fight that may stir us to ialowsye, which offense we can almost
by no intercession or suit skantly remitte or pardon. And God which sees al
our doings, and before whose presece al thiges are open, beholds how we
dissemble with his love making familiar friendship and league with his enemies. Well
these words I am a ialous god, require in us an upright pure, undefiled cover
sacio^, lest by our dissimulacion we provoke the lord to anger. i. Petri. i.
O my friend ye god which in his mercy has so dearly bought us (not with
corruptible gold or silver, but with his most holy and precious heart blood,
requires of us our whole man, with mind and co^uersacion to serve him, according
to this saying: ^e holy, Leuit. xix i. Petri. 1. ij. Cori. vi
for I am ho^^: be not partakers with ye ungodly: for what ^ncorde has Christ
with Belial (...) or how a^reeth darkness with light: Now thy friend ^amen
these words well, and judge whether it ^e the act or part of him, that would
^e repu^d and taken for a perfect Christen man, to com^unicate and be partaker
with ydolaters, and to ^^ire his ^a^^e into the book among them, to ye ^reat
sclaundre of Gods Gospel. In that the ^apistes may triumph, that all me (and
speci^lly such as were called Fervent gospellers) do ^mbrace and follow the
order of this unhappy ^yme: whereby they boas^^ and glory their reli^ion to be
most true. On the other part, consy^^e how ye wound and offend the conscience
of ^our weak brother, not yet grown to full per^ection of knowledge, who has
his eyes open upon you, who seeing you to do the same, thin^eth it a lawful
act, and so ye are the cause of his ^all. S. Paul says: when ye sin against
the ^rethren, and wound their weak conscience, i. Cor. viij
ye finne against Christ. Read the Chapt. if S. ^aul had that mind in lawful
things: that ^ather then he would offend the conscience of ^is weak brother,
he would never ^ate flesh while he lived, how much more my fre^d ought ^e to
have a conscience to offend your brother, ^n an unlawful thing: We be to him
says christ: that offends one of these little ones. It were better for him
to have a mylstone tied ^t his neck, and so cast into the sea. Luke xvij.
Call to your remembrance, and digest well the worthy commendacion given to
Elea^a^ in Gods book called the Bible. That were as his fre^des move with
peuishe pity (having no taste of an up right conscience) persuaded him for
the sau^ guard of his life to eat swynes flesh, 2. Mac. 6
which in no wise he would do, for that it was again^ the law^ of God, and his
conscience. And wh^^ his friends perceyned that for no persuasion he would not
eat it, they earnestly oportun^^ and counsayled him to make a countenance, a^
though he had eaten some, which dissimulaci^ Ele^azar knowing it to be against
Gods wo^^ as well fearing the ill president and example, the might grow thereof
to other men: being yo^ weak, and imperfect in Gods word, as al^ remembering
his honorable life, good conue^ sacion and old age, would in no case make coun^
nannce to eat, nor use any such dissimulacio^ but rather presar^ed to dye,
the^ he would co^ terfect such hypoc^isie. Look and read the ter^ calling for
wysoo and knowledge to God. Coming to the book with a pure my^de, and ye sha^^
easily perceive, whether the obseruers of the time walk in that purity of
life, which (...) ch^fely requyr^d in him, that in time past ha^^ been called
a gospeller. There is another no^ and lesson in Eleagar to be marked* that wh^^
his friends pa^aiued the constancy and pu^^ mind of him that he would in no
case co^sen^ to their persuasions and counsayl: they conu^^ted their amytis*
and frandyship into malice. S^^ if that El^^^ar had consented to that unpiet^
they had had a goodly close to maynteyne a^ color their between to be good,
with thy saying: Lo, such a man does dissemble, who ^oth good and learned: and
so they would have ^ustifyed their doings to be lawefull by hy^ example:
which Elear^r ^ercey^ing, constant^y to the death, withstode that colored
conscience, and vnpure mind of theyrs. My friend I write this because some men
of that town will report evil of me and other men which ^e gone away, not
for that they can lay any wictednesse or ungodly conversation to our charge
(God be glorified therefore,) but only of an ill mind: because we will not
consent to ^heyr doings, and join with them in obser^inge the order of this
religion. Well, let them ^ay what they lift. (...)
God from whom no secret ^s hyd, and which knows the hearts of al men, ^an
judge with what conscience we have abandoned our vocacions, and country: and
how glad we would be to have their good will and co^men^acion, doing also as
they d^, so we knew and were assured to please god. But thus much for ^n
answer to the second poyn^: I would if (...) pleased God, I had sufficient
learning and ^ype knowledge in his holy word, (...)
by the same ^o argue their ^oynges. But this much I write and think, that if
they be good men fearinge God, and of a good conscience, as ye say they ^e,
which observe the order of this ty^e, (and ^rnely I think they be so a great
noumbre of them,) then I say they have a prick of conscience, which ^estifyeth
to them, their doings ^o be unlawful. And which before God with ^eares and
sorrow of heart they do dewayle, (...)
^ot standinge in defense of their doings, as ^e my friend do, which in my
(...) d^^th agrauate* the offense before God (...) man.

To answer the third point, in that y^ make it so facill and light,
believing it to be no^ sin, saying* The Lord must remitte greate^ offenses.
Well, I pray God ye presume not to^ much in his mercy, for he is not mercy
full, bu^ to them that repent, their wickedues. I could somewhat more by the
scriptures dilate and approve the same, as unlearned as I a^^but the^^ few
leaves areynoughe, to him that has (...) good conscience* The Bible says
there is (...) way which seems right unto a man, but the end of it leads
to destruction. Deu. 5.12
Ye shall not (...) every one of you, ye se^eth right in your own eyes, but
that which ^^gumaund you, sayeth^ the Lord: because thy sy^^e is forgeuen thee^
Be no^ therefore without^ ^are, Ecclesi. v
neither heap^^ one sin upon another. And say not: tu^^e the mercy of the
Lord is great: he shall for^ give me my sins, be they never so many. For
like as he is merciful, so goes wrath from hyn^ also, Esaye. v.
and his indignacion comes down upon syn^ne^s. Woe be to them, that call evil
good, and good evil, which make, darkness light, and ligh^ darkness: that make
sour s^^ete, and swet^^ sour. Now my friend, if ye may do ye which ye commit
without offense, the^ ye have scripture to assure and warrant your d^ynge. Or
else you nor no ma^^ls, (be he never so well learned) ca^^ defend the same, but
to be sinful. For sain^^ Paul^ say^^h: Roma. 14
Whatsoever is not of faith, tha^ same is sin. Read the. x^. and.xix. Psalm
o^ David, judge your self by them. And where (...) be^wene sins of (...) the
(...). Kem^^^b^^, (...)
^sau sought (...) ^eares, and found it not: Iusti^^^. (...), least ye provoke
the Lord. (...). Lu. xviij.
The Publican confessinge his fawte (...): but the Pharise, justifying him
(...)* was condemned. The Prophet David (...) ^salmes desy^eth God to par^^^
(...) of those which fall of frayltie, (...) for vengeance, to fall upon (...)
^^folde, which sin of obstina(...) I pray* God the father of al mercy, and
Lord (...) consolacio^ for his mercy sake in the blood (...) his son Christ,
to make you withal them, (...) in this time of imp^ete fall through frail(...)
and for fear ^f laws in the noumbre of (...) man, which* (...) xxxij. Psalm
speaks of. (...) thus an end^* according to my one talente (...) Fare well in
the Lord Ies^ withal (...) that vnfay^edlye call upon the name of (...) Lord.

And thus my friend I end this (...) and ^^ple writing, praying^ ^^^not to
(...) with the same. And if ye (...) in it, which agrees not with your
^^^nion, and wherein ye think I err and straye (...) the scriptures,
aduertyse me ^^nd I shall ^^^ste gladly revoke and recante the same. But (...)
find that it agreewith the word of God, (...) I pray you c^ase to say or
think our do(...) to be ill, being a (...) and advocate for (...) to all good
men: which through ignorance (...) all sinesterly report of our going away.
(...) quiet my conscience;, and assure my (...) then the sclaunde^rous
(...)table (...)


