THE A, B, C, OF ARMS, OR, An Introduction Directorie; whereby the order of
Military exercises may easily be understood, and readily practiced, where,
when, and howsoever occasion is offered.

By I. T. Gent.

Nomen and officium militiae dehonestant imperiti. LONDON, Printed by W.
Stansby, for John Helmes, and are to be sold at his shop in S. Dunstane
Churchyard in Fleet Street. 1616.

THE A, B, C, OF ARMS.
IT was (nec immerito) objected to Machianel, as a token of extreme folly
(howsoever otherwise he was too well acquainted with Policy) that being a
penman by profession, he adventured so far upon reading, and hearsay: that
he prescribed rules, and dared to give direction to Mars and his followers: to
free my self from like imputation; know all such to whose knowledge, I desire
to be endeard (that is to soldiers and their loving friends) that howsoever
at this time (the heavenly powers so directing it) I practice in the Schole of
Peace and pro feodo punish others, qui vi and ^rmis, etc. yet heretofore I have
had a fellow-feeling of a Soldiers labor in the field: and for some years
been eyewitness of warlike designs: learning the duty of Obedience, and
practicing the action of Resolution (absit arrogantia veritatem dicere) as well
in Camp beleagring, as in City besieged. So that I need not doubt, but that I
may without just aspersion repeat the letters, though now no professed
Soldier, since I presume not to join the syllables of Arms. And whereas
First, it is curiosity to know only that they might know. 2. Vanity to know
to be known. 3. Lucre to know that they may sell knowledge. 4 Charity to know
that they may instruct. 5. Wisdom to know that their understanding may be
bettered.
S. Bernard decyphering five ends of knowledge, only approves these two,
wisely or charitably, thereby to better themselves or others: I have (me
iudice) squared some part of this vacation study according to the level of
this Directorie. And though in these Haltion days, wherein Peace and Plenty
lull us asleep in the lap of Security, Soldiers are out of request, and my
more profitable studies, necessitatis gratia, otherwise chiefly bestowed: and
no hope left for me this way to purchase either praise or profit: yet, that I
might not utterly forget, what formerly, not without some care and cost, I
learned: and that such my friends, as in this fair peaceful sunshine will not
altogether leave behind them, the cloak of Martial experience, which might
somewhat cover them, if a storm chance (as heaven forfend it should) to
trouble them, in their iourny here: I say, that al might in somewhat partake of
that poor mite of skill, which I formerly gained: which, were it less, might
by communicating it, profit some, but prejudice none: I have, and not without
some pains, contracted and briefly discovered, such terms of military
discipline, and words of art (whereof no one Gentle or other should be
merely ignorant) as now in our modern wars, are for the most part used;
being no other in truth then what Caesar, and the Romans long since taught and
practiced. Aeque pauperibus prosit: locupletibus aeque:
Aeque neglectum, pueris, senibusque, nocebit.
And though it be to be wished, that we, which have so long found the fruit of
Peace, should never feel the direful effects of War: yet may it likewise be
feared, that too much Security by lulling our senses asleep, may open a
passage to danger, if not further. The consideration hereof, together with that
precept of an ancient Father, Heu patimur longae pacis mala saeuior armis
luxuria incumbit.
Si non manu, mente tamen simus bellatores, (my natural inclination having
ever been more prone to the Pike, then to the Pen) has given me occasion, to
bestow some few loose hours, which some (I doubt not) will think, might have
been better spent, to endeavor to rub off the rust, which ease has bred upon
the swords of youth, and in short time, might (if it have not already) eat
off the edge of true courage And by reading over the A, B, C, of Arms, to a
Soldier, to sweep off those cobwebs of carelessness, that hang in every corner
of our thoughts, and have of late so clouded the face of Resolution, that a
Martialist which should be in pace decus, in bello praesidium, now walks,
tanquam piscis in arida, vnreguarded, and unrewarded: whereby being forgotten
(at least slighted) they grow forgetful, and fashioning themselves to the
times, they retain for the most part not so much as the remembrance of order,
or habit, befitting a Soldier, but turn the Pike to the Pot, and the Spear
to the Spindell, Consuming all the day, nay, all the year,
Loco galeae pilum castorium accipiunt.
In Cypr^ an d^lliance, and Belg^ck cheer.
Leaving the Drum, for a Drab; the Sword and Dagger, for Drink and Dice; so
that now (I blush to report it) a Swaggerer, a Swearer, and a Soldier, are but
appellations of one signification: Heu pudet dicere, Militia, which heretofore
was accounted, Reipublicae quies, and firmitas, and confirmatio militis, ad
robur, and virtutem, is now in these neglectfull times by the abuse of the
meaner, and disrepute cast thereon by the vulgar sort, accounted professorum
onus, not ^onos, yea a liberty of looseness: Venus Strumpets being more
followed then Pallas Trumpets, good discipline military now marching vn-kist,
because vnkent, standing like the poor men's Box in Churches, with a particle
of Scripture, inciting to Charity, written over head, but nothing but neglect
and contempt, I mean, dust and cob-webs within: Pride, and Epicurisme, the
lees of laziness, through want of employment, so dulling the courage and
resolution of a Soldier, that Actuitie and Industry, the essential parts of
a good Martialist are weakened, and well-nigh worn out: And thereby all means
almost taken away, whereby the knowledge of Arms, and principles of military
discipline, might be preserved in memory, and kept from oblivion. For redress
whereof, I have, pro posse, undertaken to recollect such observations in that
kind, as in my younger years, following the wars, I got by example; and since
the dis-vse of Arms, have gathered by precept, out of such Authors, as have
formerly treated of that subject; Breue iter ad militiam per exempla, longum
autem per praecepta. In which collection of mine, as a learned Writer of our
time said, though on another subject, I may truly say, Omnia nostra esse and
nihil. All things are mine, in respect of the gathering, or disposition:
nothing, or at least very little, in regard of the invention of the things
themselves: nihil quod non prius. Yet such as it is, for that if I flatter not
my self, it may serve for the A, B, C, Darian Tiro, for some instruction, and
stand to the veterane Soldier, and perfect Martialist, as a memento or
remembrancer to reuise what might for want of use be forgotten: And to both in
time of Musters or Traynings (the frequent use whereof is much to be desired)
may seem both pleasant and profitable I offer and present to all such as
either desire to deserve the name or title of a Martialist. or delight to
encourage others ( Age or Wedlock having crippled or with-drawne their proper
inclinations) to practice discipline, and no others: -- Non egoventose plebis
suffregia voenor: For, Odi profanum vulgus and arceo. --

To you therefore, Heroic Brutes, and truly entitled Gentlemen, that either
have, or hereafter intend in the Academie of valor and virtue (which Vigetius
styles the Camp) to bestow your worthy to be termed honorable endeavors: ^a
poor, Vnusauis^ fortunae suae faber.
but willing admirer of Arms, offer sand, in stead of silver, and more
acceptable and beneficial matter toward the not building, but repaying the
ruins of decayed Art military, -- Sit valuisse, sat voluisse.
Non quia posse fugit, me quoque velle sugit.
To crave pardon, or entreat favorable acceptance, were but to suspect your
generous dispositions: assuming therefore the confidence, which Innocence arms
resolution with all: like a Soldier, unwilling to provoke, yet not daring to
fear censure, I say, Either commend it, or, Come mend it; and so go forward.

From the Pike, or the Pen, only proceeds true Gentilitie: for non genus, sed
genius; non gens, sed men's, proclaymeth the merit of the person.

Laying hold then of the Pike, a weapon for a Prince to practice, why should
not all young Gallants iumpe with the Poet, Qui Veneri est habilis, b^llo
quoque conueni aetas. And having vigor and valor, enable themselves so far
to be acquainted with the use of this discipline, that what wind soever blow,
they may be freed from that aspersion, which wise Ulysses cast upon Ajax;
Neque enim clipei coelamina norit,
Or from the like tax, Postulat vt capiat qui non intelligat Arma.
If they should at any time, either for their own or countries good, attempt to
undertake command, or expect preferment by the wars: if either they disdain to
be taught, or shame to seem to learn, let them but remember, that qui breui
tempore disciplinam no^ patitur, omni tempore in pudore insipientiae
permanebit. Let them therefore practice, that they may be perfect: Paucos
fortes natura procreat: quamplures bona institutione reddit industria. It can
be no disparagement to blood, nor disgrace to birth, to manage or follow Arms:
for truly it is said, Virtus militaris praeest caeteris omnibus: and, iter ad
virtutem istam per artis regulas: Which as Vigetius prescribes, is, Militari
gradu ambulare, celeriter and aequaliter: locum destinatum non deserere:
ordinem non turbare: sed ad nutum ducis, sine tumultu respondere. All which may
full well and easily be learned, by frequenting such places where mustring
shall be, and remembering such terms of discipline, as are at this time
chiefly in use. For as taste cannot be tried by sounds: no more can direction
in trayning be understood by any, to whom the words of command are unknown. It
is therefore greatly to be desired, that all men would learn, how to receive
direction, by acquainting themselves with the terms. And that musters might be
often used, that every one might practice publicly, what they have privately
learned: And though some more curiously captious, then considerably politic,
seem to affirm, that it is dangerous as now, to disquiet the times with
trayning of Soldiers, or to awaken the security of peace with rumors of
wars: for that, as they say, it may give occasion of suspect to our
Neighbors, and may buzze conceits in green heads (quibus bellum dulce) which
may draw on further attempts, then stands with the quiet of our peaceful
government to admit, yet since it is aliud parare, aliud exercere belium, if I
may have leave to speak my opinion as a parcell-guilt Scholar, and a pen and
inke-horne Soldier, I doubt not but that it may stand with the policy of the
State, to admit more then yearly shows of Armor to be made, yea, I dare
affirm with Lypsius, Salus reipublicae, plus fortitudine quam concordia
consistit: And how can there be fortitudo, when a Soldier is little known,
less respected? And Martial discipline, without which a Soldier is no more
valiant then books not understood, is learning, neither used nor remembered:
wisely he said, that as in war, peace; so in peace, war, Bracton. l. t in
Rege qui recte regit. 2. sunt necessaria, arma and Leges.
is to be provided for: the true knowledge of this, conseruing the quiet of
that, and the due observance and execution of order in either, maintayning the
honor and estimation of both: And worthy the remembrance are those principles
of learned and judicious master Case, where he maintayneth a necessity in the
time of cessation of war, to exercise Military discipline, Sphaera Ciuitatis.
alleadgeing, Opportunius res bellicas tractari non posse, quam tempore pacis:
affirming further, Non altis moenibus Ciuitatum, sed expertis manibus militum,
Imperij salus, and tutela continetur: their experience being won by exercise
in the time of peace, and made perfect in the time of war: For as the
multitude of Pleaders and Physicions, is an argument of a riotous and
distempered City; so nothing, says Vigetius, Firmius aut foelicius est
Reipublicae, in qua milites abundant eruditi. Ars bellandi, says Cassio, si
non pace praeluditur, quan do fuerit necessarium, non habetur: discat ergo
miles otio, quod performare possit bello. Scientia rei bellicae, says
Vigetius, demicandi nutrit audaciam, nemo enim bello facile metuit, quod se
pace didicisse been confidit. The same Author goes further, and says, Qui
desider at pacem, praeparet bellum: qui victoriam cupit, milites imbuat
diligenter: qui secundos optat, euentus discat pace, vt dimicet art, non casu.
And says Seneca, Diu praeparandum est bellum, vt vincas caelerius. And, Sub
Clipeo tutius succedit pacis negotium: ac pace de bello melius consulitur. If
then it be not only lawful, but expedient, to have in peace expert Soldiers,
which can no ways be made so, but by those ordinary courses which our
Predecessors have invented: Ars tritos, vsus promptos, imitatio reddit
Artifices aptos.
and our bordering Neighbors do put in practice: that is, by instruction, and
convenient exercise, I hold it for granted, that to train and muster Soldiers,
and to instruct them with the terms of motion, and military principles, is a
thing most necessary, and in some sort commanded: For whereas a Soldier is
said, to be a Protector of his Prince, a Defender of liberal Arts, an
Vp-holder of the seat of Justice, a Resister of Forrainers, and a Represser of
domestic Enemies, a Maintayner of the Liberty, and quiet of his Country* It
is to be understood, of an expert valiant Soldier: for valor and discretion
in a Soldier are inseparable adjuncts: And without direction and obedience, it
is not possible for any military or worthy attempt, to be successful: For he
is no more a Soldier, Miles quasi vir ex milibus vnus.
that receives his pay, is enrolled in a company, and wears the abillime^t
of war, without knowledge of discipline, and observance of order: then Pilate
is a Saint, though he be named in our Creed. It behooves therefore every
person that intends to lead the life of a Soldier, at the entering of his
name in Bellonaes Register, to put on the first habit of a Soldier, which is
obedience: without which, whosoever endeavors to learn the use of Arms,
labors to make his skore the greater, by paying the reckoning with chalk: And
will as soon suck milk from a flint, as true merit in martial courses: for he
can never be able to command well, which has not first labored to obey: Summa
enim militiae laus, in obedientia consistit. And this obedience, in reuerentiam
exhibendo, in mandata suscipiendo, and in iudicium subeundo, plerunque sita
est. The Soldier shows his love, by using obedience to his Officer;
performs his duty, in doing what he is commanded by his Officer, and
proclaymeth his modesty, in not expostulating the reason, but willingly
undergoes the censure of his Officer or Captain: For every chief Commander,
as Captain and his Lieftenant, Ensigne-bearer, Seriants, and Corporalls,
either have, or ought to have in themselves, authority respectively to
command, and procure reverence, and obedience, from others, and experience, and
government to direct, and censure themselves, and others: Miles (says a
Father) mandatum ducis non procrastinat, parat aures auditui, pedesitineri,
manusoperi, and se totum intus colligit, vt mandatum peragat imperantis: he
says not linguam voci: for silence is the first lesson of obedience: and how
can he be said to obey, that will not silently attend when, and what, he shall
be commanded. Obedience having prescribed Silence: the next lesson a Soldier
is to learn, is to apt himself to manage and practice such weapons, as by his
Officer is appointed to him: for howsoever a natural inclination is in some
more then others, to use the Piece rather then the Pike, and so, etc. And
though that is soonest learned, to which a man by nature is most inclinable, yet
the weapon is appointed to, not chosen by the Soldier; howsoever it is to be
wished, that all such to whom the appointment of weapon does belong, would
observe in his Soldier, Quid valcant humeri fer^e, and quid ser^e recusant.

Now having his Arms, which are the members of a Martialist, they must be
always carefully kept clean from rust, both within and without, be it Piece
or Corslet, with all the furniture thereunto belonging, that is to say, to a
Musket, a Head-peece, a Sword and Dagger, a Musket carrying a Bullet, whereof
ten make a pound: a Musket Rest, Bandaleros, (the flaske being more cumbersome
and subject to firing, and therefore more dangerous) Bullet-bagge with Bullets,
Poulder, and Match. To a Pike-man, a Pike, a Sword and Dagger, a Head-peece, a
Gorget, a Breast Plate, a Back, with powldrons to the elbow. I set down these
furnitures particularly, the rather for that Count Morris, Anno 1598. gave
express order that none should pass the muster, except thus furnished.

Being thus furnished, it is requisite, that he acquaint his eye, and ear with
such signs and sounds, terms and words, as his Leader or Commander shall use
in his direction, or charge. And first, he must be perfect in every particular
sound of the Drum, as namely: first, a Call: secondly, a March: thirdly, a
Troop: fourthly, a Charge: and fifthly, Retrait: For the Battali^, Relief,
Battery, Parlee, and such like, I betray my ignorance to the World, I take to
be no other but one of the five first sounds, and not by the ear easily to
be distinguished, and therefore of no great importance to be observed.

The Drum (as a most judicious and painful Gentleman, whose industry and
experience discovers by practick, what I partly gleane from him in the
theorick, defines it) is an instrument, designed for the exercise of foot
Soldiers, resounding the command of the General, the which every soldier is
obliged to obey, and follow, without delay, as well as the voice of his
Co^mander: of the several sounds whereof, what Soldier soever is ignorant, it
is impossible he shall perform his duty in all points, and at all times: for
either he must do by the example of others, which perhaps at all times he is
not bound unto; or else expect his Commanders direction, whose voice cannot
extend to the hearing of all, and so become culpable in his duty: wherefore, as
it is most expedient, that every company exceeding the number of a hundred,
should be furnished with two sufficient Drummers, such as are able to beat
perfectly: So is it most necessary that every Soldier, at the first, and for
the first principle, should apply his ear, and study to apprehend, and learn
to understand, those several sounds: without the knowledge whereof, how does
any Soldier know of his own mere motion, when to march, troop, charge, or
retrait, etc. except only by the Drums direction, who is always at his
Commanders elbow, ready by the sound thereof to denounce his will?

As the ear by the Drum, so the eye must be directed by the Standard or
Colors: the one designing of the time, the other the place, whither to
repair, and where he is to attend the command of his Officer.

The Ensign is an ornament of Arms, first invented for direction, and
distinction. For direction, to the Soldier, whither upon all occasions to
draw, and where to abide: for distinction to be known from other Companies,
and other Nations: The colors whereof are at the discretion of the Captain:
either his own Colors, belonging to his house; if he be a Gentleman of
Coate-Armour, or what other his invention shall best like of. But always having
a red Cross therein, being the badge of an Englishman: St. GEORGES Cross being
peculiarly appropriated to that Nation: For as in old time: Phrysij suem,
Armenij ariete^, Scythae fulgur, Persi Arcu^, Scilices caput armatu^, Thrases
Martem, Phoenices Herculem, Aegyptij Ibidem, Milesij Leonem, Athemenses
noctuam, Corinthij Pegasum, Pelopo^nesi testudine^, Itali Equum, Venetiae
Leone^ cum libro, diuo Marco consecratum; Genoae sanctu^ Georgium equo
insidentem, Senenses Lupam, Florentini Leonem, Ita Angli crucem rubram pro
insigne habuerunt. And as Mr. Francis says in his Treatise, De insignibus
libro primo: Insignum singularis est vtilitas; ad gradus turmasque
distinguendas. Vexilla, says another, intuentur milites: ea sequuntur,
obseruant, tuentur, and little signibus, vt nauis gubernaculo diriguntur. Being
come to the Colors* that he may be able to perform what he shall be
appointed; he must be perfectly instructed with the true knowledge of Files,
and Ranks, Fronts, and Flanks, Leaders, and Followers, Middle-men, and
Bringers up, and not be ignorant of the chief principles of Action, (that is
to say) of Posture, Distance, and orderly Motion, the knowledge of which
warlike motions, may truly be said to be the art of War.

By Posture is understood the manageing of Martial weapons, either Standing,
Marching, Chargeing, or Dischargeing, the easiest and readiest way to offend or
defend: Si doctrina cessat armorum, nihil Paganus distat a milite.

Posture consists of Standing, Marching, Chargeing.

Postures of the Pike, In Standing are three, In Marching are six, In
Chargeing are three.

Of the Musket, in Standing one, Marching one, Chargeing eighteen,
Dischargeing twelve.

All which in sight are reduced to three.

Postures of the Pike standing, Lay down your Pike. Take up your Pike. Order
your Pike.

Thereof marching, Advance your Pike. Shoulder your Pike. Level your Pike.
Slope your Pike. Cheek your Pike. Trayle your Pike.

Posture thereof, chargeing, Port your Pike. Charge your Pike. Couch at the
foot, your Pike.

Of all foot weapons this is esteemed the most honorable, for that it can be
accounted no disparagement to a Commander, to traile his Pike under his
fellow-Captaynes Colors.

Posture of the Musket, standing, Rest your Musket.
Your Musket shouldred, Posture thereof, marching, Clear your Pan, Prime your
Pan, Close your Pan, Cast off the loose poulder, Blow your Pan, Cast about, and
traile your Rest, Open your charges, Charge with poulder.

Posture thereof, chargeing, Draw out your skowring stick, Shorten your
stick, Ram in your poulder, Draw out your stick, Charge with buller, Ram in
your bullet, Draw out your stick, Shorten your stick and put it up, Bring your
musket forward with the left hand. Hold it up with the right, and recover your
Rest.



Of which postures it is but idle to give advertisement, that the four, after
the chargeing with poulder, viz. to charge with bullet, is rather to be
conceited, how then practiced at these times, where to do it.

Postures of the Musket, discharging, Carry your Rest in the left hand, Rest
your Musket, Take your match in the right hand, Hold the match and blow it,
Cock it, Try it, Guard the Pan and blow it, Open the Pan, Present the Musket,
Give fire, Dismount it, Vncocke the match, and hold it twixt your fingers.

In fight only Make ready, Present, Give fire.

It is generally to be observed, that when you charge with your Pike, or
discharge your Musket, you place your left leg forward; but when you martch,
you begin with the right.

The next thing that is to be observed, Ordo est parium, dispariumque rerum
distributio.
is, distince of order.

By distance is meant a certain space between File and File, Rank and Rank,
in such order, and to that measure, as pleases the Commander to nominate. The
which if Soldiers observe not, then is that Company or Troop so exercised
out of order and discipline, more like men in rout and disorcer, then to a
perfect Battalia. Therefore, this distance ought to be such a competent space,
as is meet and convenient for motion For the station of Soldiers is not
always steadie and certain, but that they all interchange mutually one with
another: it consists of order in Files, and Ranks, of which distances the
Romans only observed these three.

1. Ordinatus miles. 2. Densatus ordo. 3. Constipatus ordo.
But at this day we generally practice four: Open order. Order. Close order.
Closest order.


Open order, six foot distant from his side-man, and reare-man.

Order, distant three foot.

Close order, a foot and a half.

Closest powldron to powldron with his sidemen, and to the Swords point of the
proceeding Rank.

There is to be kept the like distance of Files, as of Ranks.

After the knowledge of your distance, you must with diligent care mark the
motions of Files and Ranks several; and of both conjoined, which motion is
the actual operation of that body, which is moveable, whereof in this exercise
long since, and at this time there are four remarkable circumstances: 1.
Ante. 2. Retro. 3. Dextrorsum. 4. Sinistrorsum.
Either by moving forwards, as charging to the Front, back-wards by Retrait,
side-waies by Closing, Opening, or Doubling of Files to the right or left hand,
by Wheeling or Conuersing to either hand, the which is performed as occasion
presents, according to the will and direction of the Co^mander, observing it in
Order, true Pace, true Distance, and perfect Posture.

For any other kind of motion in a Battalia, or gross body, breeds both
disorder and confusion: Vbinullus est ord^, certus est horror. where on the
other side; Order is the Beauty of nature, Ornament of art, and Harmony of
the World.

Motion is in form of Files and Ranks conjoined.

Motion of Files in proportion apart, are five.

Of Ranks apart, si^e.

Of both conjoined, two.

Motion in form of Files several, may be comprehended in four, howsoever:
some by shortning and lengthning, and such like phrases of invention do make
nine.

Motion in form of Ranks several, are five: of both Ranks and Files
conjoined, are eight.

A whole company, as one body, being perfect by instruction and use herein,
and hereof, as occasion shall require, may be turned into diverse different
forms, for the more offense, of the assayling Enemy, and defense of
themselves and abettors.

Motion in different distances of Files close. Close your files to the left
hand. Close your files. Close your files to the right hand.

Motion in distances of files open Open to the right hand. Open to the left
hand.

Motion in distances of Ranks close. Close Your Ranks from the Front to the
Rear. Close From the Rear to the Front.

Motion in distances of Ranks open. Open Your Ranks From the Rear forward.
Open Your Ranks From the Front Reareward.

Motion in distances of ranks and files conjoined, Close. Open.

Motion in form of Files. Double your Files to the right hand Double your
Files to the left hand

Advance your Files to the Left hand. Right hand.

By division to the Right hand. Left hand.

Files rank by conversion to the Right hand. Left hand.

Files countermarch to the Right hand. Left hand.

After the manner of the Macedonians. Lacedaemonians. Persians.

These several manners of counter-marching, I find often cited by several
Authors by this term, Euolutio Macedonica, Laconica, Dorica: but confess my
ignorance, know not the difference, Ideo quaere. Motion in form of Ranks
double to the right hand. double to the left hand.



File by conversion, vt supra. Rank 7. 5. 9. etc.

Middlemen, double your Front to the right hand. left hand.

To both by division.

Countermarch from the right to the left hand, and by conversion, vt supra.

Motion in form of co^ioyned Files and Ranks, Faces to the Right hand. Left
hand.

To both by Division.

Faces to the Rear.

Wheel by Conversion.

Charge to the Right hand. Left hand.

To both by Division.

Charge to the Front. Rear.

To both by Division.

A perfect File is a sequence of men standing one behind another; back to
belly, and subsisting commonly of ten in depth, according to the modern use of
the Wars of the Netherlands, it was by the Romans termed Series, Ordinatio,
Decurio, it consists of Leaders, and Followers, wherein the Decurio and Tergi
ductor, amongst the Latins, but in our drilling the Leader, Middle-men, and
Bringer up, are principally to be regarded.

The Middle-man is either the fifth, or sixth man, uncertain which before the
motion be commanded: vt postea.

A perfect Rank is a stand or row of men, placed powldron to powldron, their
faces being directed al one way, which by the Romans was styled Ordo.

But when it is the first rank composed of Leaders of many Files, it was by
them termed Fro^s and Acies, but now usually the Front Van or Voward.

A Battalio is the connection of many Files together: whereof the first Rank is
termed the Front: the right side, the right hand Flank: the left side, the
left hand Flank: the last rank in depth, the Rear: the fifth, and sixth
Ranks, Middle-men: and all the remainder, Sidemen: so that where the faces
are directed, one way stands the Front, the Rear is where the backs are
turned: the two outmost Files, the right and left Flanks.

In a Battalio likewise you must observe, that from the Leader, to the Bringer
up, the whole distance between is called the breadth and Depth of Rank and
File.

It is requisite that in your martch and stand, you regard your Leader, and
Sidemen, such as in Rank shall be placed on your right and left hands, so
that always in File and Rank you may be found in the same Distance, wherein
you are commanded.

It is to be observed, that by these words (as you were) it is intended to
reduce the Soldier to the same place of order, wherein he stood before.

It is likewise to be remembered, that when you double your Files to any hand,
by doubling your Ranks to the contrary hand, they are as they were, and so of
Ranks, vt supra.

It is further to be remembered, that in chargeing with Pikes, only the first
five Ranks do charge: for the length of the longest Pike being but eighteen
foot long: the Pikes of the first Rank, can but reach over the shoulders of
the Front; so that if they should be driven to Retreat, all the Ranks
chargeing: the Subdiuision (which are the five Ranks on the Rear) rather
hinder, and hurt their Leaders, then do any service. It is therefore
convenient that the subdiuision, hold their Pikes ported, or advanced, for then
they are ready upon all occasions, to charge without any difficulty, or
prejudice to their fellows: for it is to be understood, that the most
exquisite Captains do hold in these days, what Caesar in his time practiced,
which is to martial the Companies in square manuples of hundreds, especially
Pikes, so that never or very seldom, they file their men but ten in depth.

If any shall question why in this A, B, C, I set down postures only for two
weapons, let him be pleased to receive this for satisfaction, all short
weapons as Targateers, Billmen, or Holbardeers, are in these times merely out
of use; and Archerie is so much controuerted by different opinions, whether
serviceable or not necessary for use, and is so strongly, and strangely
opposed, and so weakly, and waueringly defended; That were it not for those
two ever memorable victories, next under God, won by them, I mean Cressy and
Agincourt: It would grow questionable, whether ever it were in use amongst
Englishmen; But leaving that question undecided, I only affirm, as in all
other things, so in war there is a vicissitude of weapons, whereof I may
truly say, as one of words: Multa renascuntur? quaeiam cecidere, cadentque:
quae nunc sunt in honor, many weapons and instruments of war, which were
heretofore much praised and practiced, are by change of times, and benefit of
fresher invention, either cast clean out of doors, or at least permitted to
hang in houses, like monumenta adorandae rubiginis, retayning the bare name of
furnitures, without praise or practice.

And for your bare Pike, and Harcubuz, or small shot, they are included in the
tractate of Pike, and Musket, and excepting the use or practice of the Musket
rest, the Harcubuz and Musket, have* one and the same Postures, and frustra fit
per plura quod fieripossit per pauciora.

-- Amphora cepi
Institui: currente rota, nunc vrceus exit.
Opus and vsus, my more then ordinary visiters, knock at my study-dore and
command me (and the rather since in this ungrateful age, and amongst
thanklesse Plebeians all pains in this kind merit but mocks) to attend profit
private, not public, more magistrorum: Therefore, what I begun with iumps and
by fits, I end with, etc. etc.

Lingua in Consilio valet, in Certamine dextra. Ad Lectores prorsus indignos.
THere are some whom Nature begun, but never finished, whose heatlesse and
heartlesse trunkes, like ouer-growne Thistles in a fertile soil, heave up
their unprofitable heads, above the reach of better deserving persons, and like
Dogs in mangers, neither do, nor suffer to be done. But squaring all other
men's endeavors, by the crooked level of their pseudopoliticall conceits,
condemn what is most commendable in others, yet neither do nor say any thing
themselves worthy co^menditions: These Gallinaceus mushrumps, qui fungino
genere se totum caput tegunt: all head and no heart, lie snarling at Soldiers,
and the profession military, and not having grace enough to make a prologue to
a reasonable breake-fast, nor heart enough to oppose a Ginny-Hen, if her
feathers ruffle; do most of all, being sensible in nothing but blows, traduce
as vnchyistia^, the practice of military discipline, and term the Professors
thereof bloody and barbarous, such pusillanimous Plebeians, I bar by and
main, procul hinc procul ite profani. Yet if any such meticulous Buffone
chance to besmeare my well intended prevention of idleness, with the slime of
his calumny; let him be assured, that I rather pity his want of wit, then
fear his will or skill in railing, or reasoning against the man or the matter,
quod decuit tantos, cur mihi turpe putem? etc. I know the force of his
circumstances can never infer the conclusion he will labor for, but as he
begins with A. he will get but the addition of double S. and so I leave him,
and rest

A Friend to the Friend of a Soldier. I. T.


