The garden of wysdom wherein ye may gather most pleasant flowers, that is to
say, proper wytty and quycke sayenges of princes, philosophers, and diverse
other sorts of men. Drawn forth of good authors, as well Greeks as Latyns,
by Richard Tauerner. 1539

Sold in Lomberdstrete at the sign of the Lamb by John^ Haruye.

Richard Tauerner to the gentle readers.
YE have here (good readers) a gardeyn or a paradyse rather of net, propre,
quick, and grave sayenges of renowned persons, in which to recreate your
selfs, it shall be as I judge no les profitable, then pleasant unto you. I had
purposed to have made the book much longer, but being otherwise let, I was
compelled to cloose up my work. How be it, if I shall hereafter perceive,
that ye have any delight and pleasure in this kind of studyes, I woll not
stycke, when I shall have opportunity, to enlarge my garden, and add hereunto
the second book, If not, at lest ye have a token and signification of my good
zele holly bent to do you such pleasur and profit, as in my little power
lies. Fare you well. At London the third day of Apryll. Anno. 1539.

The garden of wisdom, conteynyng wytty and plesau^t sayenges of kings,
philosophers, and diverse sorts of men.
Agasicles.
AGasicles king of Lacedemon being demanded by what means a prince or ruler,
may saufly rule without any guard of men, to de fend his body, Answered: If
the prince so rules his subiettes, as a father his children. What thing
could be spoken of a panym more ehrystianly? Certes this saying to be true
pueth thexperience at this day of the most excellent prince our sovereign lord
King Henry the eight. Lord god with what inward joy, with what hearty love and,
reverence do al his liege subiettes embrace the majesty of his gracis person,
and not only his liege subiettes, but also even the very rank traitors,
which intended nothing else but sedicion, yet the incomparable majesty of
his own person they could not, but have in wondrous reverence? Whereof should
this come, but by reason that his grace bears him so benignely, so gentilly,
so louyngly to all his subiettes, that he may very well be called pater
patriae, the father of the country, or (to use the term of the prophet
Esaye) the noursynge father. Do ye not think, that this so excellent a prince,
so entier ly beloved of his subiettes, if it were not rather for fear of
foreyn enmies, then of his own subiettes, might ride and go, whereso ever his
hyghnes would, without any guard?

Agesilaus.
AGesilaus that great king of the Lacedaemonians, when he was asked, by what
means a man might attain to have an honest name among men, Answered:
If he speak that is best, and do that is most honest. What thing could be
spoken more briefly? and again, what more absolutely?

He was accustomed to say, that the office of a capytayne is against rebeiles
to use hardynes, and against his liege subiettes gentylnes,

When a certain unshame fast suter heng still upon him crauyng and saying
evermore unto him: Sir ye have promised me, ye have promised me. In deed, quod
the king, I have promised the, if the thing be lawful that thou ask, but if
not, I said it, but I promised the not. With this propre answer he shoke of,
the malapettnes of the suter: But when the fellow would not yet cease crauyng,
but answered again: It becomes kings to per form what so ever they
grant even with a beck of their hedde. Never a whyt more (quod the king) then
it become meth such as come to kings, to ask and speak that is lawful.

One praised a rhetoricien, because he made tryuynge matiers and things of
small importau^ce to seem weigh tie and great matters. I, quod Agesilaus, would
not judge him a good shoemaker, which for a little foot makes a great pair
of shoes. Undoubtedly in speaking, the troth is most allowed, and he speaks
best, whose tale is agreeable to the matier.

Agesilaus was wont very often to warn his sowldiours, that they torment not
their prisoners as felo^s, but save them as men. Also for children ta ken in
the wars he provided, that they should be brought together into one place, to
the intent that they perisshed not at the remouinge of the oost. The same
prouisyon and care he had for the decrepite and very aged persons, which were
taken prisoners, lest (because they were not hable to follow) they might be
torn in pecis of dogs and wild beastis. And this humanity gatte him a
wonderful benevolence, not only of others, but also even of captives and
prisoners. It is to be feared lest this Panym king shall rise at the great
day, and condemn a great nombre of christian princes and capitayns, which
spare neither virgyn, wydow, suckyng infantes, ne decrepit persons, but rauysh,
kill all, bren all, more like Turks then christians.

Agis.
AGis king of the Lacedemonia^s was wont to say, that the Lacedaemonians
ought not to ask, how many the ennemies be, but where they be. Signifieng,
that the victory hangs not upon the nombre of sowl diours, but upon their
hardynesse, courage, readynes and celeritie in setting upon their ennemies. I
trust in like wise that Englyshemen, when so ever the defense of our country
shall call us to war against our enemies, woll not cowardely ask, how many
they be, but like fyerse and hardy champyons, where be they that dare maynteyne
any false quarrel against our most drad sovereign lord, and his people? in
full a readiness at a beck to run, whether so ever his majesty shall
command.

When a certain rhetoricien praised his science of rhetoryke with high words,
saying, that nothing is more excellent, then an eloquent oration. Then, quod
Agis, when thou hold thy peace, thou art nothing worth. Meaning that it
is much more excel lent and gloriouse for a man to do worthy things, then to
have a tongue ready and swyfte to talk of worthy thyn ges.

Lycurgus.
Lycurgus, he that made laws for the Lacedemonia^s, when he was very desirous
to bring his cou^treymen from their corrupt and vicyouse manners, unto a more
temperate fascion of living, brought up. u. whel pes of one kind, of which
the one he suffered at home to eat deyntye meats, the other he used to lead
out in to the fyldes, and to exercise him in hun ring. Afterward he brought
them both forth into the Gyldhall before all the citizens, and caused to be
laid there certain delycate meats, and also by them thorns and breres:
forthwith he put forth an hare. So when either of the whelps ran to that he
was accustomed unto, the one ot the meat, the other upon the hare: Se ye not,
o friends, quod Lycurgus, these two whelps, that where as they be of one kind,
yet because of their diverse bryngyng up, they be now waxen and are become far
unlike one an other, and how exercise is of much more strength un to honesty,
then is nature? Assuredly, the thing that Lycurgus did in his city, is of
every howsholder to be done in his house, and of every gouernoure in his
flock. Nature (I woll well) is a thing of great might and efficacye, but
surely institution or brin gynge up, is much myghtier, which is hable to
amend, reform and streyghten a crooked and evil nature, and to turn the same
into a good nature. What manner children shall be borne, ly eth in no ma^s power,
but that by right bryngyng up, they may prove good, lies in our power.

Such citizens as abhorred marriage, and had lever live as bachelors,
Lycurgus forbad to be present ta sightes and enterludes, and added also other
shames and reproaches unto them, by this craft dylygently prouydynge, that the
citizens should imploye them selfs to begette children. For where as it was an
usage and law among the Lacedaemonians, that the yongers should give much
honor and reverence to their elders, this honor he plukt from them, which
by wedlock would not encreace the nombre of the citizens.

Lycurgus being demanded, why he made a law yt nothing should be given with a
maid in marriage, answered: By cause neither for poverty none might be left
unmarried, nor for riches any desired, but yt every young man having respect to
ye manners of ye maid, might chose her only by her vtuous co^ditio^s For this
same cause he remeued out of the city all painted colors and or namentes,
wherewith other women be wont either to set forth or to fashyon their beutie.

The same Lycurgus, where as he appointed a certain age for maidens and also
for young men to marye at, being demanded, why he did so, answered: To the
intent that the issue born of full grown parents, and which be of perfyte
age, may be strong and talle.

Demanded also why he forbadde the man to sleep all night with his wife, but
ordained that either of them should the most part of the day keep company
with their like, the manne with men, and the woman with women and with them
also should rest all the hole nyghtes, but with his spowse he should not have
to do, but by steithe, and shamefastly. First, quod he, that they might be
strong in bodies, accompa nyenge together but seldom. Second ly, that love
between them may alweys abide fresh and new. Thyrdly that they may engendre
the stonger issue.

Furthermore in those times ye chastytie of married women was so great and they
so far of, from the lite demeanor, which afterward they fell to, that at
beginning the sin of aduoutrie was thougth impossyble ever to have chanced
among them. And therefore when a certain ancient Lacedemonian named Geradas,
was asked of a stranger, what punishment aduoutrers should have among them,
for he could se no law made by Lycurgus in this behalf: He answered: O
friend there is none aduowtrer among us. When the other went fur there and
asked, what if there were any? Then, quod he, he shall give so great an ore, as
shall streache his neck over the mountaygne of Taygette, and drynk of the
floude of Eurota. When the other smyled and said, it was impossyble to find
so great an ox, And is it not, quod Geradas, as much impossyble that in our
city should be found any aduowterer, wherein riches, delytes, pleasures, and
all curiouse deckynges of the body be had in high reproach: and again
shamefastnes, de murenes, and due obedyence to publyque officers in high
estymacion and worship? This Geradas full prudently understood, that vices
could not there grow, where no beds to so we vices in, were suffered ne
admytted, and that those things lie as ded and despyced, which instead of
honor be had in despyte and skorne.

When one required him, that he would make and ordeyne in the city a
Democracie, that is to say, a governance of the people or commons, instead
of the governance of the lords: Ordeyne thou, quod he, first a Demoracie in
thy house. In few words he taught, that that fascyon of common weal is not
profitable to the city, which no man would have in his own family. Certes, a
city or a realm is nothing else, then in effect a great house.

Demanded why he inacted a law that in times of wars, they should oftentimes
change their tents and pauylyons: To the intent, quod he, we may hurt our
ennemies the more. The Lacedaemonians because they were nymble and lite, remeued
with no great busynes their oost: where as their enemies could not do the
same, without their great inco^moditie, and also with longer respyte: for as
much as they carried about with them so ma my baggages and burdens.

Demanded why he ordained that the Lacedaemonians should make their sacryfyce
and oblation with small and chepe things. Because, quod he, we should never
want wherewith to honor god. Who would not say, but that in solemn
worshyppynges of god, all royalty and sumptuouse magnyficence is little
enough? But this prudente panym understood that god delyteth rather in
frugalytie, then in fat sacryfices, lest under pretense of religion (as in
our days it was come to pass) all abomination should be maynteyned.

The same Lycurgus being asked why he forbadde that the city should be fensed
with walls, Answered: Because that city wants no walls, which is fensed
not with stones but with men.

Socrates.
SOcrates the Atheniense a great philosopher, and of most pure living, was
wont to teach, yt men ought to absteyne from meats that would provoke the
man not hungry to eat, and from drynkes that would allure, the not thurstye to
drink.

He said, the vest sauce is hungre, for as much as it both best sweteneth all
things, and is of no cost. And therefore he him self did ever eat and
drink with swetnes, because he bid neither of them, but when he hungered and
thursted.

Moreover he accustomed him self to bear hungre and thirst. For at what
times other men coueted most to drink, then would he never drink of the
first cup that was filled. And when he was demanded, why he did so, he
answered, because he would not accustom him self to follow his affec tions and
Iustes. He said, those that excercysed them selfs to chastnes of living, and
sobre diette, had both far more pleasure and less sorrow, then they that
with most a do sought all the pleasures of the world: for as much as the
pleasures of intemperate persons, besides the torment of their conscience,
besides their evil name and poverty, where unto they be at length brought,
do bring for the most part even to their bodies also more pain then pleasure.
On the contrary part, the things that be best, ye same be made also most
pleasant, if thou acquayntest thy self with them.

He said, it was an high reproach for a man by serving and obeynge wylfully
his inordinate pleasures, to make him self such one as no man would be glad
to have for the drudge or slave of his house.

When he was admonyshed by his friend, yt for the feastyng of his gestes, he
made very sklender prouysyon: he answered, if they be good men, it shall be
enough, if not, more then enough.

The same Socrates when he was asked, why he him self did not govern the
common wealth, sith he knew best how to govern it, answered, that he is more
profitable to his country that makes many good governors of the same, then
he which governs it well him self.

Demanded by what means a man might attain to an honest fame, If, quod he,
thou study to be such one in deed as thou would be counted in name.

He said it was far vnfyttynge, that where as no man professes or
practyseth any handy craft with out his great shame, onles he has learned it
before, yet to the governance of a common weal, men be admytted and appointed
which never employed their wits to lernyng.

He was accustomed to say, that no possessyon is more precyouse, then a true
and good friend to a man, nor that no greatter fruit or pleasure can be any
other where taken. And therefore he said, that many men do ouerthwartly and
clean out of order, which bear more grievously the loss of money, then the
loss of their friend, and which cry they have lost the benefit that they
have conferred and given for nothing, where as in deed they have with the same
gotten them a friend better than any gold.

He was wont to say, that he most resembles god, which needs fewest
things, for as much as god needs nothing at all.

He said, many lived to eat and drink, but he contrarily did eat and drink
to live, for as much as he used these things not for pleasure, but for the
necessity of nature.

Such as bought dearly things over tymely ripe, he said despayred, that they
should not live till the accustomed time of ye rypenes of things were come.
Else it were great folly to bye things both worse, and also dearer, where as
shortly after, a man may bye the same both better and for less price. Thus he
evermore called back again ye desires of men void of reason, unto sobre
judgment.

Also he used to say, he that has begone a thing has half done: meaning
half the work is done of him, that has ones set upon it. For there be many
that in taryenge and taking a breath, what is best to do, spend all their life
vaynly.

Demanded of a certain young man, whether he judged it better for him to
marye a wife, or not to marye. He answered: Whether so ever thou do, thou
shalt surely repent. Sygnifieng, that both syngle life and also wedlock
have their incommodities and displeasures, which to bear a man, must
first arm and prepare him self. Syngle life has these incommodyties,
solitariness, lack of children, extinguyshement of blood, a stranger to be
thine heir. Wedlock again has these, contynuall care, daily complayntes,
vpbraydynge of that she brought, the heavy looks of her kynsfolke, the
pratlyng tongue of thy mother in law, Cukkoldemakynge, the uncertain proof of
thy children, and other innu merable inco^modities. Wherefore here is no such
choice, as is between good and evil, but such as is between the heuyer and
the lyter inco^modities.

He would have men crave of god nothing but good things without further
addition, where as the people commonly crave rich maryages, treasures,
honors, kingdoms, long life, as though they would appoynte god what he
ought to do. But god knows best what is good for us, and what not.

He would that men's sacryfices, should stand them in very little or no
thing, because god as he needs not men's things, so he wayeth rather the
minds of the offerers, then the ry ches. For else where as the naughtyeste
persons do most flow in riches, it were very evil with mankind, if god
delyted more in the sacryfyces of the evil persons, then in the sacryfyces
of good men.

Like as we commytte the making of pyctures or images, said Socrates, unto
them whom alredye we know to have made very godly pyctures, so we ought to
admytte none into our amity and familiare acquayntaunce, but such as we have
espied to have borne them selves faithful and profitable friends toward
other.

Walkyng about through the mar ket, when he espied the great multitude of
merchaundyse, and things yt there were sold / he thus was wont to say with
him self. Oh how many things be here, that I have no need of, but other men
be vexed in mind, thynkyng thus: how many things do I lack. Socrates
reioysed with him self, that living according to nature, and accustomynge
him self to few things, he neither coueted nor yet neded gold, purpull,
precyouse stones, gorgyouse hanginges, and the rest of rich men's delytes,
which, he was wont to say, were more necessary for the playenge of tragedies
or enterludes, then for the behoufe of man's life.

He said, knowledge was the best thing a man could have, and again
ignorance the worste thing, for as much as who so ever does any vnryghtuose
thing, does the same because he knows not what his duytie is toward every
man. And they that be strong of heart, be therefore so, because they know that
such things ought to be done, which the common sort of people judge to be
eschued, and they that be intemperate persons, are herein deceived, that they
think those things to be sweet, pleasant, and combly, which be nothing so
in deed. Wherefore the best thing in the world (he said) is the knowledge what
things ought be desired, and what to be eschued.

To such as maruayled, why he disputed of good manners ever, and never of the
planetes and heavenly bodies, as the other philosophers were accustomed, he
answered. Those things that be above us, perteyne nothing unto us.

When on a time as he went in the streets, a lewd fellow gave him a blow on
the cheke, he answered nothing else but that men knew not, when they should
come out with their salettes on their heddes.

The same Socrates, when a verlet spurned him on the shynnes as he walked, and
his friends that were with him meruayled he suffered the injury so pacyently.
What would ye have me do quod he, they mouynge him to have the fellow to the
law. It were a mad nesse quod he, if when an ass should hytte me on the
shynnes, ye would say unto me, have him unto the law. He put no dyfference
between an ass and a brutyshe man furnysshed with no virtue, and he thought it
a great shame, man not to suffer that thing of man which he would suffer of
abrute beast.

He was wont to monishe his friend Eschines, which was pressed with po uertie,
that he should borowe of his own self, and showed him the way how, by
withdrawyng from him self superfluouse meats and other things, according to
the common proverb Magnum uectigal parsimonia, Sparyng is great rentes or
revenues. Certes, the most ready way to increase a man's substance is, to
abate his expenses.

Socrates whenne he had suffered his wife Xantippa a long season skowldynge
within the house, and at last for werynesse went and satte him before the
door, she being more out of pacyence by his quyetnes and gentle sufferaunce,
streyghte out of the wyndowe powered down a pyssebowle upon his hedde. At
which thing, whenne the neighbors and the passers by had good game,
Socrates also him self smyled, saying. I easyly gessed that after so great
thunderynges, we should have rain.

When his friend Alcibiades marueyled yt he could suffer in his house so
shrewed and skouldynge a woman, as was his wife, Xantippa, I quod he, am long
since so accustomed herewith all, that I am no more grieved; than whenne I
hear the noise of the whele, that draws the water up out of the well. For
this noise is very paynfull to such as be not used there unto, but he yt is
wont daily to hear the same, is so little dysquyeted therewith, that he
knows not whether he herd it or not.

Demanded the same questyon at an other time, he answered: She teaches me at
home pacyence, that I may use when I come abroad. For being well practiced
and used to her manners, I shall be the meeter, to suffer other men's fascyons.

Socrates met Xenophon in a cer tayne lane, and whenne he beheld the young
man to be of a very good natu rall disposition and wit, he held out his
staff and stopped him, that he could not pass / whereat when ye young man
steyed, he asked him where sundry merchaundyse were made and sold, which
commonly men do use. Where unto when Xenophon had redily answered, he demanded,
where men were made good. When the yongma^ made answer, that he knew not.
Follow me then quod Socrates, that thou may learn this. From that time
Xenophon began to be the heater of Socrates.

Socrates rebukynge very sharply his familiar friend at the table, Pla to
grieved her with, said to his master Socrates. Sir had it not ben better to
have challenged him of this between you and him secretly? To whom answered
Socrates. And had it not ben better Plato, that thou also had deste showed me
of this, between the and me secretly? Thus most wittyly he repreued him of the
same fault in him self, that he found in an other.

Demanded what was the pryncypall virtue of young men. Truly quod he, that
they attempt nothing over much. Signifieng that the heat of youth can
uneaths suffer them to keep measure in things.

Lettres which comenly men think were invented to help the memory, he said,
by occasyon did much hurt the memory. For in old time men when they hard
a thing worthy to be known wrote it not in books, but in the mind, by
reason of which exercise, their memory being establysshed and confermed,
they casyly held fast, what so ever they would, and what so ever any man
knew, he had it in a redynesse. But after that the use of lettres was found
out, while they trust to their books, they have not so greattely studied to
imprynte the things in their mind, which they have lerued. Thus it comes
to pass, that the exercise of the memory set aparte, the knowledge of things
is not so fresshe and ready, as it has been, and every man knows now much
less then in the old time they did, sithe that so much we know, as we bear
in mind.

He said, that men ought to obey the laws of the realm or cytte, but women
ought too obey the rytes, vsages and manners of their husbands with whom they
live. Certes, the rule of the wedded woman is the husband, and she lives
ryghtly if he be obedyent to the public laws.

Unto Euclides who was very stu dyouse of sophistical subtilties, he fayde. O
Euclides, thou may well use the company of Sophisters, but the company of
men thou canste not use. Meaning that sophistry is unprofitable unto public
affairs and to the comen felawshyppe of man, in which who so ever desires to
be con uersaunt must not play with his sophemes and quyddities, but fascyon
him self to the manners of men.

It was informed him of a certain person that spoke evil of him behynd his
back. By lyklyhode, quod Socrates the man has not learned to speak well.
Imputynge the vice of his tongue not to malice, but to rudenes, neither iud ged
he that it perteyned any thing unto him what other men spoke of him, which
spoke not of judgment but of ignorance.

ARISTIPPVS.
ARistippus disciple unto Socrates, a man surely of a very sharp judgment and
pleasant wit, when he was demanded what profit he took by the study of
wisdom, This profit, quod he, that with all sorts of men I can frankly and
boldly speak. For he neither feared the mighty, ney there yet thought skorne
of the basest sort. Because he bare a mind indyfferently free, as well from
hope as from fear: for he served noman, ne yet flat tered any person
otherwise, then his heart gave him.

Dionisius king of Sicill in whose court this Aristippus was of long season,
asked him how it chanced, that philosophers do hawnt the houses of rich men,
but the rich men hawnte not ye philosophers houses: To whom Aristippus made
answer in this wise. Because philosophers know what they lack, and rich men
know not. The learned men know they can not live without money, and therefore
they seek upon the rich men, which be able to give them the thing that they
have need of. But if the rych men knew as well yt they neded wisdom, they would
much rather hawnt ye houses of learned men, For the poverty of the mind is much
more wretched then is the pouer tie and necessity of the body, and so much
the more beggarly be the rich men, by cause they understand not, how preci
ous and how necessary a thig they want.

When on a time a certain person rayled upon him, he said never a word, but
went his way. But when the ray ler still poursued him, saying, Why do thou
flee? Because, quod he, thou have power to speak evil, and I have power not
to hear the. Most wyttyly he noted the man's vnshamfastnes, which where as he
took liberty unto him self to rail upon others, he would not yet grant this
liberty unto them to withdraw them selfs, to thente^t they might not hear
such shamfull raylynges.

Demanded, wherein the wise man differs from the unlearned: Send them both,
quod he, naked unto men un known, and thou shall se. Signifienge that the wise
man caryeth about with him in his breast the thing that shall commend him where
so ever he goes. Wherefore if ye send ye learned and the un learned togithers
naked into a strange country where either of them be a like unknown, the
wise man vtterynge his treasures shall find forthwith both livings and
friends, the other naked person shall be scorned for a mad man, and shall be in
ieopardye to peryshe for hungre.

It is skase credyble that Bion reports of him, when his servant bearing a
great sum of money in his journey, was sore pressed with the but then: Cast
away, quod he, that is to much, and bear that thou cannest.

On a time as this Aristippus sailed in the sees, and perceived that the ship
wherein he was carried was a pirates ship, he drew forth his gold, and began
to tell it, and forth with threw it in to the sea, and grievously sighed making
as though it had fall from him unawares, and against his will. By this deuyse he
saved his life taking from the pirates the occasyo^ of sleynge or byndynge him.

When Aristippus and Eschines were fallen out, one asked Aristippus Where is
now your frendshyp? Truly it slepeth, quod he, but I will awake it. So espyenge
a conueniente time, he came of his own mind to Elchines and said: Shall we
not incontinent be friends again, and leave our tryfelyng? Or shall we rather
abide that we may give men occasyon to speak of us two at alchouses and
tauerners? To whom when Eschines made answer, that with all his heart he was
contented to be at one again. Remember then, quod Aristippus, that where as I
am elder then thou, yet I came first to the. Then said Eschines: Surely, thou
art a man far better then I am. For of me began our falling out, and of
the our falling in again. By this means amity was renewed between them.

On a time when he sailed upon the sees with certain of his own countrymen,
the ship brake and they were cast upon land. And when he espied upon the
shoore certain mathematical figures drawn forth in the sand. Friends, quod
he, be of good comfort I see the steps of men, and entering into the next
city, he inquired out what learned men were there abydyng, with whom after he
had there a little while talked, they perceyuyng his excellent learning and
wysdom, with all courtesy entreated not him only but his company also, and
moreover vitayled them for their return. At last when they that came with
Aristippus dressed them selfs homewarde, and asked him whether he would any
thing to his friends and citezens: Bydde them, quod he, that they study to
get them such riches, as can not peryshe by shypwrecke, but escapes all
haser des with the owner.

Philip king of Macedonie.
PHilip king of Macedonie, father to Alexander the great, a man of no small
wit, and a great conqueror, When on a time he had purposed to take a
strong castle and hold, and his espyes had showed him that it was very hard
for him to bring to pass, yea and impos syble: He asked them whether it were
so hard, that an ass laden with gold might not come unto it. Meaning that
there is nothing so strong, but with gold it may be won.

There were some of his foreyn sub giettes whom he had found not ve ry
trusty, which complained and took the matier heuely, that his servants
called them traitors. To whom Phi lip made this answer. Truly my cou^ try
men the Macedonians be very homly men and rudely brought up, which can call
a mattok nothing else but a mattoke, and a spade a spade. Meaning that in very
deed they were traitors. Uplandyshe and homely persons can not qualify, but
call every thing by the proper name.

He counsayled his son Alexander, that such as were of any authoryte in the
common weal, as well the good as the evil, he should make them his fren des,
and that he should use the good, and abuse the evil. Certes, the chief feate
of kings is to reiecte none, but to apply all men's seruyces to the common
profit.

Sinicythus accused Nicanor to ye king, that without end he continued
raylynge upon him, when the kings friends moved him to send for the fellow,
and to punyshe him in example of other, Philyp thus answered: Nicanor is not
the worste of the Macedonians. It is good therefore to se, whether we have done
our duty in all things or not. So when he had serched out, that Nicanor was
greatly impouerished, and yet not rewarded for the service he had done him in
times past, he commanded a certain gift to be borne him home. This done, when
again Smicythus informed the king, that Nicanor now without ceasynge praised
him above all measure, ye se therefore, quod the king, that it lies in us to
be well spoken of, or evil spoken of.

He oftentimes exhorted his son Alexandre to give good ear to Aristotle his
scholemayster, and to employe him self to learning and wisdom, lest, quod he,
thou myghtest chance to do many things, which that I have done, now
repents me. The noble prince perceived, that no man without learning is mete
to govern a realm, and he was not ashamed to confess, that through error he
did many things a mysse, because from his chyldhode he was not ryghtly
instructed with learning.

Sitting in judgment he had the hearing of one Machetas matter, but being
somewhat heuie of sleep, he was not very attentyfe to the equity of the law,
and so gave sentence against Macheta. But when Macheta cried out and said, I
appele from this judgment. The king angerly (for it was strange to appeal
from a king) said, to whom do thou appeal? Truly quod Macheta, even unto
thy self o king, if thou wolt awake and hear the matter more attentifly. Then
the king arose, and after he had wayed better with him self the matter, and
understood that Macheta had wrong, the judgment which was given he would not
reuerse, but the money that Macheta was condemned in, he him self paid.

When on a time he was at debate with his wife and with his son, a certain
Corynthiane came unto him, whom he asked how the Greeks agreed together. In
deed, quod the Corynthian, thou carest much how the Greeks agree together,
when those persons that be most nere unto the, hear such minds toward the.
Here the king being nothing offended with the Corynthians free tongue, framed
him self to his sharp check, and layeng down his anger, fell in again
with his wife and son.

Alexander the great.
ALexander the great, king of Ma cedony, and son to the foresaid Philip
being demanded, where he laid up his treasurs, With my fre^ des, quod he:
Signifieng that a man can lay up his goods no where so sauely, as with his
friends: for when need reqyreth, he is sure to have them again with gaynes.

When he was informed that a cer tayne person had rayled upon him. Truly, quod
he, it is kyngly, when a man does well, to be reported evil.

Porus a king being vaynguished by Alexander, when Alexander after the fylde
won, said unto him. How shall I entreat the, Porus? kyngly, quod he. Again
Alexander demau^dyng him whether he desired any thing else. All tohyther,
quod Porus, is comprysed in this word kyngly. Alexander marueylynge both at
the wysdom and at the noble stomach of the man, enlarged his dominion over that
it was before.

A certain Indian which was noysed to be so cunning an archer, that he
could shote thorough a ryng, was taken prisoner in ye wars, and brought to
Alexander. Alexander bad him show a proof of his conning before him. Which
thing because he refused to do, the king being angrye, co^maun ded he should
be put to death. As he was led away, he say de to such as led hun, that he
had not used his feate of shotynge many days, and therefore he feared lest he
should have failed. When Alexander was informed hereof, that he refused not for
spite, but for fear of disworshyp, wonderyng at the man's wit so desirous of
glory, he let him goo not without a great reward, because he would rather
have dyed, then to have lost his renoume.

The same Alexander, when at the be gynnynge he satte as judge in causes
concerning life and death, stopped one of his ears against the accuser,
Demanded why he did so, The other ear quod he, I keep hole for the party
defendaunt.

ANTIGONVS KING
ANtigonus king of Macedonie, when one said that unto kings all things be
honest and just, Troth, quod he, unto Barbarouse kings, but unto us those
things be only honest which be honest, and those only ryghtefull which be
ryghtfull. He gravely reproved the flaterours saying, which would that all
things should be lefull for kings. For undoubtedly the king is not the rule
of honestye and justice, but the ministre of honesty and justice. And would god
the ears of chrystian rulers were not tykled with like tales, and if they be,
that they would with like severity reiecte them. For what other thing say
they, which sing them this note, Quod principi placuit legis, habet uigorem:
that is to say: That lyketh the prince has the strength of law? Which say
that the prince is not bound to laws, which give him two manner powers, an
ordinary power, and an absolute power, whereof the one can do what the laws,
pactes, and leages demand, the other what so ever it lusts.

When he hard say, that certain kings conspyred to muade him and put him
to deeth: He answered, that he would drive them all away, as birds that
pycke up seeds in the fylde with one stone, and one showte. So little the
valyaunte prince esteemed the malice of his enemies.

Thrasyllus a philosopher of the sect of Cynikes (which were not much unlike
to the friars of our time) asked an halfepenny of the king. That were not
gift for a king, quod Antigonus. Then give me an hundred pownde, quod the
Cynike. Nay, quod the king, it is not for a Cynike to take such a gift.
Thus both ways he shoke him of, whom he esteemed worthy of no benefyte.

After he was recovered of a grievous syckenesse, we are never a whyt the worse,
quod he, now. For this sycknes has monyshed us that we be mortal. How taught
the Panym king this phylosophye worthy for a chrystyane heart?

Marsyas the kings brother had an action at the law. He required the king
that the matier might be hard secretly at home. To whom Antigonus gave answer
in this wise. If we do nothing beside the law, it shall be done much better in
open court, and in the face of all the world, thanne in hugger mugger. For if
thou knew thy matter to be naught, why seweste thou? if thou know it to
be good, why fleest thou the hearing of the people, and would bring a matter
of open court into a secret chamber.

Augustus.
OCtauius Caesar Augustus emperor of Rome, when he herd say, that king
Alexander, being of the age of. xxxii. when he had conquered the most part of
the countries of the world, doubted what he should do all the rest of his
life, Won dered if Alexander iuged it not a grea ter work, well to govern an
empire or lordshyd that is gotten, then to get a great lordshyp. He ryghtly
noted the insacyable ambicyon of Alexander, which esteemed nont other function
worthy for a king, then to enlarge the limittes of his dominion, where as it is
far, both better and harder to fur nyshe the kingdom that is fallen to a
man, with right laws and good manners, tha^ by force of arms to ioyn kingdom
unto kingdom.

When the rumor of Herodes cruelte came to Augustus ear, that he had
commanded all the children of Jewrie of thage of two years and under, to be
slain, and among them that his own son was slain. It is better, quod
Augustus, to be Herodes swyne then son. Herod was a Jewe, and Jews absteyne
from eating of swyne flesh.

When one Paci^^us asked a reward of Augustus and said it was reapported of
every man that the emperor had given him money. But thou, quod the emperor,
believe it not. With a merry ieste signifienge that he would give him nothing.
The other waited that the emperor would remedy his shame, lest if it were
known yt the reapport were untrue, he should be lawghed to skorne. But Augustus
showed an other remedy.

Augustus made a law for aduowtrers, how they should be iuged. After ward
when a young man was accused and brought before him, that he should have to do
with Julia themperours daughter, he was in such fume that he ran upon the
young man, to have beaten him. But when the young man cyed out, Thou haste made
a law, o Caesar, the emperor was so sorye, for that he had done, that he
would eat no meat that day. So sorry he was that he obeyed not in all points
the law, which he had made to other.

Aeertayne Greek was wont thus to seek the favor of the emperor Augustus,
when he came down of his palace, he would present unto him some excellent verses.
Which thing when he had oftentimes done in vain, and the emperor saw he
would not leave him, him self wrote with his own hand, very neat verses in
greake: and when he esyyed ye Greek coming against him, he sent it unto him
by one of his servants. The Greek took and read it, and not only with voice,
but also with countenance and gesture of body, praised the verses with great
admiracyon. And forthwith approchynge nere unto the emperor, did put his hand
into his purse, and plucked out a few grotes, and offered them unto the emperor
with these words: It is no reward for your estate, O emperor, but if I had
more, more would I give. At which words, when all themperours company lawghed
ex cedyngly, the emperor called his purse bearer, and commanded a thousand
marks forthwith to be diliuered him.

One which was master of the horse, whom the emperor had put out of office,
begged a great fee of him under this color: not for the lucre of the money,
quod he, I desire this, but that it may be thought I gave over the office of
mine own mind, you being other ways my good and gracious lord. Tell every
man, quod Augustus, that thou have received this fee of me, and I will not deny
it. Thus pratily he could shake of, such worldly shames children.

Herennius a ryottouse yongman, soldier in his wars, he commanded to
depart the tents. The yongman besought him with much lamentation and weeping
saying: How shall I dare go home again, what shall I say to my father? Show
thy father quod the emperor, that I have displeased the. Because the young man
was ashamed to confess, that themperoure was displeased with him, he gave him
leave to turn the tale and lay ali the blame on him.

When Augustus was now forty and above, Cinna a young man of noble birth and
nephue to Pompey, was appeached of high treason, yt he lay in a wait with
his accomplices to kylle the emperor. It was told where, when, and how they
would have executed their felonye. For they purposed to have murdered him, as
he should have sacryficed. The sentence of condemnation was made ready: but in
the mean season, while Augustus the emperor perplexly spoke now this now that,
his wife Liuia, coming in, and seeing the case, Do, quod she, that the
phisicians be wont to do, which when ye accustomed remedies wol not help, do
assay the co^traries. With sharp ex ecution, thou have hitherunto done no
good, forgive, Cinna now bewreyed, can not hurt thy lief, thy fame he may
help. Forthwith he sent for Cinna alone to come speak with him, and when he
was come, he commanded an other chair to be set for him. Cinna (said ye
emperor) this first I require of the, that you interruptest me not in my tale,
a time shall be given ye to speak. Here when Augustus the emperor had rehearsed
his manifold benefits toward Cinna, how he had saved his life, when at his
conquest he was found among his enmies, how he had given him again al his
enheritau^ce and patrimony, how moreover he had promoted him to an high
rowine. he demau^ ded of him, why he purposed to have slain him. Cinna being
therwt sore troubled, the emperor thus ended his co^municatio^. I give the thy
life, Cinna, again, before mine enmye, now a co^ spirour of my death and a
traitor. From this day let amity begin between us, let us co^tende whether I
more faithfully have given the thy life, or thou do owe it me. And he offered
him the consulshyp of Rome. Woll ye know the end of this matter? Cinna euet af
ter loved Augustus best of al men: he made him his sole heir and executour.
Never after that time any man conspired his death.

Phocion.
PHocio^ a noble cytizen of Athens was of such constancy and per fection,
that he never was seen of any man, either to lawghe or weep. When Demosthenes
on a time said unto him: The men of Athens, o Pho cion wol surely kill the, if
they begin ones to rage: He answered in this wise In deed, they woll kill me,
if they begin to rage, but the, they woll kill, if they ones become sage, and
in their right wits. For Demosthenes spoke for the most part to currye
favor of the people, and his words were more sugered then salted, more
delectable then profitable.

Alexander the worthy conqueror demanded of the Athens men, certain ships
to be given him. Forthwith they asked Phocion his advise and counsel in this
behalf: Surely, quod Phocion, my counsel is, that either by force of arms ye
vaynquyshe him, or be the friends of the vaynquysher. Brefly he aduysed them to
deny nothing unto Alexander, unless they trusted to withstand his malice
with force of arms.

Demosthenes.
DEmosthenes the renowned orator of Athens, whenne he was spitefully rayled
upon of a certain fellow: Loo, quod he, I am put in to a contention and
strife; in which he that is superior is inferior, and he that overcomes is
ouercommen. Undoutedly in knauerye he that has the upper hand declares him
self the worste man.

A pore woman had received of two strangers money to keep with this condition,
that she should not deliver it again to the one without the other. One of them
within a while after fay nynge his fellow to be dead, came in mourning clothes
to the woman, and required the money. She thinking his fellow to have been dead
in deed, delivered it. Forthwith comes the other fellow and begins to sue
the woman at the law. She being now put in vttter despair, Demosthenes
comes to the bar, and thus defends the woman's cause against the
demaundant. This woman, good fellow, is ready to deliver the money that ye
delivered her to keep, but oneles thou bring thy fellow, she can not do it,
for as thou alledgest thy self, this condition was agreed upon between you,
that the money should not be rebayled to the one without the other. By this
witty answer he saved ye sely woman, and eluded the conspiracy of the false
harlottes, whose purpose was to receive the same money twyse.

Demosthenes on a time sailed to Corinthe, where was Lais the fairest harlot
then counted of al women in the world. He desired to lie with her a night But
when she demanded an excedyng great so^me of money for one nyghtes lodging,
he being thereat astonyed changed his mind, saying: I bye not repentance so
dear. Signifieng, that after dishonest pleasures, repentance follows at hand.

Dionisius.
DIonisius king of the Syracusans, when he perceived that his son, whom he
intended to leave king after him, had defiled a citezens wife: Being therewith
sore angry, asked his son, whether cuer he found any such thing in his
father. Troth, quod the young manne, for thou haddeste not a king to thy
father: Neither thou quod Dionisius, shall have a king to thy son, onles
thou leave these pagiauntes.

When he perceived that his mother well stricken in age, coueted to marye again,
He said: The laws of a realm, o mother, may be broken, but the laws of
nature can not. Signifienge, it is ageynste nature an old woman past child
berynge to marye again.

A certain stranger came to his court, and said, he would secretly common
with Dionisius, for he could show him, how he might know before, when any
went about to conspire treason against him. The king took the man unto him, and
(all the company voided) bad him say on. Now, quod the fellow, give me sir
king an hundredth pound, that thou may be thought to have learned the feate
of me. He gave the money and made as though he had learned it: meruaylyng at the
man's subtle deuyse. For this faynynge was not a little profitable to fear his
subgettes from conspyrynge his death.

Demanded of a certain person whether he were idle. God forbid, quod he,
that this thing should ever chance unto me: Meaning that it was a right foul
thing for heddes and mi nisters of commonweals, not to execute diligently
their office. But assuredly herin our most drad soueraygn^ lord king Henry
the eight, may be a myrrour and spectacle to all princes and other inferior
officers. For who ever either more prudently, or more vigilauntly has governed
a common weal?

When he hard that one of his sub gettes had hyd his gold in the ground, he
commanded, it should be brought unto him. But after that the man un beselyng a
little porcyon of the gold went and dwelt in an other city and there had
bought a piece of ground, the king called him home again, and restored unto
him al his gold by cause now he began to use his riches and left to make a
thing profitable unprofitable.

An excellent player upon instruments he allured with great promyses unto
him, and bad him sing and play in the best wise he could, For the more coningly
he played and sang, the greater reward he should have. When he had played before
the king a good sort of days very curyously, and the king gave him nothing, he
began to ask his reward. Why quod Dionisius, the reward that I promised the,
I have faithfully paid. How so, quod the fellow? there was not one penny given
me. yes I have given the, quod the king, pleasur for pleasur, For I have no les
delited the with hope, then thou me with syngyng.

The same Dionisius wonderynge at the excedyng faythfulnes of Damon and
Pithias: I pray you, quod he, receive me also in to your frendshyp. For
Dionisius had set unto the one a day of death, and when he desired leave for
a few days to goo home to his house to set all things in order, the other
becam his pledge upon this co^ditio^, if he returned not at the day set, his
felaw should dye for him. He came again, desyryng rather to dye, then to
deceive his friend. The king not only pardoned the man whom before he had
condemned, but also with great wonder desired to be the third friend among
them. Dionisius this man's son was expul sed his realm: So when one said un to
him: What does thy learning now help the? Truly, quod he, thus much it
helps me, that I can easyly bear so great a change of fortune. He dyed not
for thought, he killed not him self, as other men be wont in this case but went
to Corynth, and there taught a grammar schole.

Agathocles.
AGathocles had a potter to his father. Now when he had conquered Sicile, and
was proclaimed king: he was wont upon his table by his golden pottes to set
erthen pot tes, and showing them unto the young men, to say: Where before I
made such pottes (showing the erthen) now by my vigilaunce and prowess, I make
such pottes, poyntyng to the golden. He was not ashamed of his former state,
but thought it more gloriouse, by virtue to win a kingdom, then by
inheritance to receive that is leaft.

Archelaus.
KIng Archelaus, when at a feast one of his familiars, but somewhat
unshamefast, begged a cer tayne cup of him, commanded his servant
forthwith, to give it to Euripides, which also was there present. When the
other wo^dered at this deed Thou, quod the king, art worthy to ask, and not
to receive: but this man is worthy to receive without askyng.

Themistocles.
THemistocles that noble capitain of the Athenienses, being required of
Simonides the poet, that in a certain matter he would give for his sake a false
judgment, answered. Neither thou shall be a good poet, if beside the measures
of musyke thou make thy verses, neither I a good ruler, if I pronounce any
thing against the laws.

His daughter had sundry wooers, but he preferred an honest man of small
substance before a great rich young man. His fre^des meruelyng why he did so:
I had rather have, quod he, a man without money, then money without a man.

Aristides.
ARistides for his just and true dea lyng surnamed the rightuouse, administered
the common weal, always trustyng to him self only, not sekyug either
counsel or aid of any other. He much abhorred felaushyps, lest he might
be at any time inuegled by the force and power of friends to do any thing
otherwise, then the tenor of justice and honesty required. Lord god how
greatly did this man flee all parcyalytie and factions, which for none other
thing eshued frendshyps, but because he would not by them be enforced to do
any thing that were not right, or be constreyned to absteyne from that which he
iuged auailable to the common wealth.

He was at variaunce with Themistocles, with whom on a time when he was
coupled to go in embassage in to a strange country, as they were going: Wylt
thou, o Themistocles, quod he, that in these mountains we lay down our malice
and displeasure? For if thou wylt, at our return we shall take it again. He
preferred the com mon utility before his private affeccyons. For of theyse
commonly spryn geth all the destruccyon of man's life.

When the men of Athens, were so sore styred against him, yt they went about
to banyshe him, by a certain kind of condemnation, which they call led
Ostracismus, because every man should write in a shell, the name of him, whom
they would have exiled (for so commonly were men of great au thorytie among
them banyshed) a certain man of the country unlettered brought him his
shelle, and desy red him to write Aristides name in it: To whom Aristides said:
Why good fellow, know thou Aristides? When he answered no, but that it
grieved him, yt he should be called rightuouse, Aristides held his peace, and
wrote his name in the shell, and so delivered it the fellow again. So myldly
he bare his imuste condemnation. Certes, it was a right grave testimony of an
innocent life, that of so great a multitude, there was none, which could lay
to his charge, any other thing, then the surname of a rightuouse man, which
name yet he gave not him self, but his friends, yea the people them selfs gave
him it.

When he should go into exile, he held up his hands to the gods, and
besought them that they would so pro spear the matters of the men of Athens that
Aristides should never come in their minds. For in things afflict and
troublesome, the people be wont to flee, unto excellent wise and renou med men:
which thing came to pass. For the third year after his outlawrie, when
Xerxes went about to inuade^ Athens, Aristides was called home again from his
exile.

At a certain assemble, wherein Aristides withstode, but in vain, the rea sons
of Themistocles, departing away, with an open and clear voice he testyfied,
that the matiers and affairs of the Athenienses should never well prospere, ne
go forward, onles both he and Chemistocles were cast in to preson. He desired
rather to go to preson, then that for the debate and strife of two, the common
weal should be hyndered.

What time he sat as judge to determyn a certain matter, between par tie and
party, and the one party to the enten he would kyndle Aristides against his
adversary, made rehearsal beside his matier of many things, which the other had
spoken against Aristides, Aristides interrupting him said, Good fellow, let
these matiers alone now, and if he has any thing hur ted the, speak: For at
this present time I sytte as judge to the and not to my self.

Chemistocles said in a certain as semble where the citizens were gathered
together, that he had found out a counsayll, which hyghly perteyned to the
honor and dignity of the city, but the thing was of such sort that it might
not be publyshed and declared before them all. Here ye people agreed, that he
should disclose it to Aristides, and if he allowed it, they all would allow it.
Now whenne Chemistocles had declared unto Aristides that he thought of
burning the place where the Greeks ships stood (for so should it come to
pass, that the Athenienses should be rulers and lords over all Greece)
Aristides coming forth to the people, said, Undoubtedly nothing is more
profitable, then the counsel of Chemistocles, but again, nothing is more
dishonest then the same. Which voice when the people hard, they forbad
Chemistocles to make any mo words hereof. Assuredly here the citizens of Athens
(for in them then was the governance of the same) showed them selfs to be of
a wonderful noble courage, in that they abandoned, and utterly refused profit
joined with disworshvp, and therwithall declared also, how great the
authority of renowned virtue is in that they doubted not to commytte the
fortune of the hole comen weal, to the judgment of one man.

Aristides was choson on a time, to be tresaurour of the city, which office
when he had executed very purely and incorruptly, yet he was accused of
Themistocles, and condemned of extorcion. But through favor of the most
worshypfull and honest citezens, he was not only released of the amer ciament,
which was assesed upon him, but was appointed also again to the same office.
Which by simulation even for the nones, he so administered that omyttynge his
former severity and rowghnes, he showed him self gentle and facyle, to such
as loved to wax rich with the detryment of the common wealth. By whose labor
it came to pass, that the people ye third time with high favors assigned eft
sons the same office to Aristides.

Then spoke he and said: For the well executyng of mine office ye condemned me,
and now because contrary to equite I have granted many things to the
spoylers of the city, ye have judged me worthy of honor. Certes, this man
knew, by what means he might grow in favor with the people, save yt he had
rather be ryghtu ouse, then gloriouse.

When Aristides being wrongful ly condemned to dye, was led to exe cution,
one of his enmyes spat on his face: He did nothing else but wyped his face,
and smilyng said to the officer that went with him. Admonish this person,
that hereafter he gape not so vnmanetly.

Pericles.
PEricles the Atheniense, to his friend requyrynge him to bear false witness
for him, whereunto was knytte an oath, that is to say, a perturye, answered:
he would be his friend but unto the aultre. Signifieng, that so far forth a
man may do pleasure to his friend, as he go not beyond the bounds of religion
and honestye.

When the eclyps of the son suddenly chanced, Pericles seeing other very
many, but in especyall the gouer nour of the navy dismayed and sore astomed
thereat, with his cloak covered the governors face, and asked him, whyther he
thought this to be a strange token: when he answered no. what difference then
is there, quod he, save that the thing that now causes this dat kenesse is
greatter then my clooke. Meaning full prudently, that by the coming between
of the moon, the son is hid from us, even as the clooke being cast
between, let the other men's syghte, and that the thing which naturally is
done, is no strange token, or such monstruouse thing, as men should fear.

Diogenes.
DIogenes a philosopher of the sect of Cynickes, unto one which counsayled
him, that now in his age he should repose him self, and cease from labor,
answered: If I ran in a runnynge place for the maystrie, should I when I
were now nere the gowle, flacke my runnynge, or rather increase it? Rightly he
judged that the study of virtue the nerer one draws to his end, is so much
the more to be enforced and hasted, because it is a greatte shame, then to ware
faint and cold from an honest purpose.

He dysalowed the madness of men, that would bye and sell things precyouse for
least, and again the vilest things for most: For an image or picture, he
said, which was a very vile thing, was sold for much money, where as a
busshel of meal, which was a right precyouse thing, was bowght for very little
money. The image is nothing necessary to man's life, but without meal we can
not live. Wherefore, quod he, it were more convenient that meal were much
derer the^ images or pyctures. The philoso pher esteemed the pryses of things
by their natural use, where as the people estemeth them by folyshe persuasyon.

Alexander the great on a time came to Diogenes to se him, and thus he spoke
unto him: I am come, o Diogenes, to help the, because I se thou lackest many
things. To whom Dio genes made answer: Whether of us two is more nedye, I
which beside my scryppe and clooke desire nothing, or thou which not contented
with thyn own realm, that thy father left the, casteste thy self in to so
many hasardes, to get the a larger dominion, in so much that the hole world
semethe skase enough for thy insacyable coue tyse?

The superstytion of men that were feared with dreams, he thus mocked: The
things, quod he, that ye do waking ye nothing regard, but the things that
slepynge ye dream, ye carefully and busyly search out.

A certain rych man unlearned, but royally cladde, he called a sheep with a
golden fleese.

When Diogenes saw the officers led one, taken for stelynge a cup, out of
the treasorie: Lo, quod he, the great thieves lead the little thief. Would god
this could not be truly spoken upon some christen officers, by whom
otherwyles he is brought to the galowes, which have stolen the value of
twenty pens, where they wax rich with great theftes or pyllages rather and
extortions, without punishment.

What time Philyp king of the Macedonians had an army lyeng at Cheronia,
Diogenes came thither, anon he was taken of the sowldiours, and brought to the
king, which as soon as he saw Diogenes (who was unknown unto him) cried out
angerly a spy, a spy. To whom Diogenes forthwith answered: In deed Phylyp,
I am a spy, for I am come hither to espy thy madness, which not being
contented with the realm of Macedonie, by thy incrochynge of other men's realms,
put thy self in danger to lose both thyn own king dome and also thy
life. The king wonderynge at the man's frank speech, and boulde language,
commanded he should escape without any hurt to be done unto him.

He said, love is the busynes of ydell persons: forasmoche as this affection
commonly assayleth those that be given to ydelnes and ease. So it comes to
pass, that whiles they loyter in ydelnesse, they fall in to a thing most
full of busynes, and yet in the mean season they do no good thing at all.

He said, good men be the images of god: For as god is best, so it is his
property to do well to all men, and to hurt no man. This image shyneth and is
espted much better in wise and good men then in carved or graven stocks and
stones. For as much as god is without body.

He said couetyse is the mother city, and hedde of all euyls. Not much
swaruynge from Solomon which calls it the rote of all euylles.

Demanded, what beast has the most venemouse bytyng. If of wyld beasts,
quod he, thy questyon be, a backbyter, if of tame beasts, a flaterer. For a
backbyter outwardly prete^deth hatred, but the flatterer inwardly under the
personage of a friend, hurts much more grievously.

Demanded, what countryman he was, he answered, a worldly man. Signyfienge
that a wise man, where so ever in the world he be, lives in his own country.

Diogenes was asked how he would be buried, Cast my dead body, quod he, in the
fyldes without pomp of buryalles. What, quod his friends, to the fowls of the
air and to wild beasts? No not so, quod Diogenes, but lay my staff by me,
wherewith I may dry ue them away. How can that be? quod they, thou shall have
no feelyng A, nd how, quod he, then shall their pyckynge and tearyng hurt me,
if I feel them not?

To the redress of man's life he said, be requysite either feythfull friends
or sharp enemies, because the one do aduertyse, and the other re preue us: So
either of them by diverse ways but a like be profitable, while we learn by
them our defaultes and vices.

Aristotle.
ARistotle the philosopher master to Alexander the great, was wont to say,
that the rotes of lernyng were bitter, but the fruytes sweet and very pleasant.

Demanded, what thing waxes sone old, he answered, thank. Meaning that the
remembrance of iniurye sticks very fast, but the memory of a good turn is
gone anon.

He was accustomed to say, that three things be most necessary for the
obteynynge of wisdom, nature, doctrine, and exercise.

When Aristotle was informed that certain lewd felawes had rayled upon him.
As long, quod he, as I am not with them, let them beat me with whyppes, if
that can do them good. Signifienge yt those things ought utterly to be
despised of a wise man, which do nothing hurt him at all, onles he thinks
him self hurted.

Demanded, what a friend is, One soul, quod he, in two bodies.

He said that some men so spare, as though they should live ever, again, other
some so spend and lashe out, as though they should dye wtin an hour after.

When Aristotle was asked how much the wise and learned do dyffer from the
unlearned and ydiotes, he answered, so much as the quycke dyffre from the
dead. Meaning that a man without knowledge is a block rather then a man.

He said, beauty is of more strength and efficacy then any epistle or letters
to set forth or commend a person.

He had this often in his mouth. O friends, there is no friend. Meaning that
there be many friends in name, but few or none in deed.

He said, noma^ should either praise him self or dysprayse him self, because
the one utters a man's vain glory, and the other bewreyeth his folly.

The same Aristotle aducrtysed me^ to consydre and mark pleasours not coming
but departing, that is to say, not before, but behind. For when pleasures be
coming, with their peynted faces they flatter us, but when they depart, they
leave behind them repentance and sorrow.

When one blamed him because he gave his almoyse to an evil man. I pytyed,
quod he, not the manners, but the man. Assuredly a good man succourreth also the
wicked in necessity: For this duty we owe, though not to the merits of him
that is helped, yet to nature. Also it is possible he may be good, which now
is evil.

Thales.
THales being demanded what is oldest of all, answered, God, why so? because
he was without beginning. Demanded what is fairest of all, he answered, the
world, for it is the work of god, and nothing can be fayrer than it. What
greatest? place, for it receives al: what swiftest? the mind, for it runs
through all the thoughts of man: what strongest? necessity or destyney, for
it passes all: what wisest? time, for it finds out al.

He said there is no difference between life and death, because they be both
natural alyke, and death is no more evil then is the birth of man. And when
one asked him, why he then dyed not? he answered again, even because there is
no difference. For if I should rather desire the one then the other, so should
I make a difference.

Demanded what thing were hard, He answered, a man to know him self.
Undoubtedly the people iud geth nothing easyer then this. For we see other
men's things better then our own, and every man is a flatterer of him
self. Again when Thales was demanded what thing is easy, he answered, to
give good counsel to an other man.

When he was asked how a man might most easyly bear his mysfortune. If, quod
he, he would behold his en myes pressed with greater mysfortunes. For many men
by the contempla cyon of other men's felicite and wealth make their calamytie
more greuouse unto them.

When Thales was demanded how a man might best and most justly live: If, quod
he, the things which he rebukes in others, he commytteth not the same
himself.

Solon.
SOlon the sage was wont to say that tyrauntes friends be very like unto
casting counters, which be set at the pleasure of the caster of acco^ptes,
otherwhyles worth many thousands, otherwhyles very little, other whiles nothing.

Demanded how it might be that least wrong might be done among men: If,
quod he, they that suffere not the wrong woll be as sore grieved therewith, as
they that suffered it in ded for undoubtedly who so ever transgresses the
laws, hurts not one co^ moner nor subject, but the commone weal, as much
as in him is. But now while when other be hurted, we (though we be common
officers appointed to se due corretion for vices) either sytte still or rejoice
also thereat, without doubt we give audacitie and boldness to very many to
commytte all kind of myschyef, because either for folysh pytie or for lack of
christyan charity thynkyng the matter apperteyneth nothing to us, we woll not
see the good laws of good princes executed upon offenders.

Pittacus.
PIttacus made a law, that they which committed any crime in their
dronckenesse, should have double punishment.

He allowed victories gotten without shedynge of blood. For such as were
gotten with much blood of the citesens he judged no victories.

He was wont to say to such as went about to be married. Equalem tibi ducito,
Marie thy match or fellow. For he had learned by experyence what incommodities
commonly chance by over high marriages.

Antisthenes.
ANtisthenes the Atheniense being demanded what manner lernyng is most
necessary, answered, to vnlerne euylles. For that thing is not only first,
but also most hard.

He said that virtue is a thing of works and that it needs not many words
nor much learning.

He said a wise man lived not after the laws ordained of men, but after the
rule of virtue. Meaning that things be not therefore to be done or eschued,
because the laws bydde or forbydde the same, but because the self rayson
tells, that this is honest, this dishonest. Again the laws pre scrybe not
all things, but the rule of virtue techeth euerywhere what is ho nest, and
what otherwise. Certes, a co^ streyned virtue is no virtue.

Anacharsis.
ANathacsis the Scythian said, that a vine bears three cloisters, one of
pleasure, an other of dronkenes, the third of displeasure. Signifyenge, that a
moderate using of wine is pleasant, because it slaketh the thyrste, a larger
using gendreth dronkennes, and most large use of wine causes strife, murder,
and dyseases.

A certain man of Athens vpbray ded him, because he was a Scythian borne. My
country, quod he, is to me a reproach, but thou art a reproach to thy
country.

Demanded what in a man is the worst thing, and what the best, he answered,
the tongue. Meaning that the self same part of a man brings most utility,
if it be with right reason governed, and again is most peryllouse and
hurtful, if otherwise.

This Anacharsis was accustomed to say, that it were better for a man to have
one friend much worth, then ma ny friends nothing worth.

He was also wont to say, that laws be like spyders webbes, wherein the weakest
and most feeble beasts be chat ched and stycke fast, but the strongest break
out. So laws do by nde the poor and mean persons, but the rich cobbes
escape unpunished.

zeno.
ZEno Cittieus to a certain young man which was always pratlyng, said, I trow
(good fellow) thy ears be fallen into thy tongue. Declaryng herby, that it
should be a young man's property to hear much and speak little.

Demanded what is a friend, he answered an other I. Signifyenge that an
entier and hearty friend no les loves his friend then him self.

King Antigonus to such as won dered why he made so much of zeno, answered,
because where as he has received much of me, yet he lives never the softer a
life. When he hard that he was dead, he syghed, saying: What a loker and
examiner of my life have I now lost? Forzeno was a man of most sharp tugement,
and most far from all flattery. Zeno was a man of most sharp judgment,
and most far from all flat rye.

Zeno had a bond man which imbeseled awey certain things from him: he
commanded he should be whypped: When the bond man excused him self under this
color saying, It was his destiney that he should steal: which destyney it
lay not in him to withstand. It is also, quod zeno, thy destiney to be
whypped. The servant alleged the necessity of destyney to the excuse of his
fault, zeno returned that necessity also to his punishment, that that was
also his destyney.

A young man whose tongue never stinted babblyng, he took up with this propre
saying: For this purpose we have two ears and but one tongue, that we should
hear very much, and speak very little.

Cleanthes.
CLeanthes was so desirous of ler nyng, being a very poor man that he was
glad to draw wa ter and carye tankerdes at nights and marninges, to
the intent he might get wherewith to find him self to schole in the days. In so
much that on a time he said to his familiars, when he had gotten a little
money, by such occupations, and throwynge it down. Loo Cleanthes is hable to
find at schole an other Cleanthes, if him lusts.

When one did hytte in his teath, that he was very fearful. Therefore, quod he,
I sin very lyttel. Undoubted ly such fearfulness is good, which frayeth
men from foul things, and makes them ware and circumspecte.

When he reasoned with a certain young man, whom he saw, was not very attent,
ne ready to hear him: He asked, whether he perceived what he said, when the
young man said, yea, why then, quod he, perceive not I how thou doste perceive.

Isocrates.
ISocrates the Rhetoricien, who was so fearful and tymorouse of nature, yt he
durst never make oration openly in presence of the people, being demanded
why, sithe he him self was not able to make air oration in an assemble of
people, he yet taught other: Because whetstones, quod he, them selfs can not
cut, yet they make knyfes and weapons sharp and able to cut other things.

Demanded, what manner thing is rhetorike, he answered, To make of little
things great, and of great things little.

When Isocrates saw one Sopho cles the writer of Tragedies following after a
very fair person, with whose beutye he was taken in love: he said. O
Sophocles, a man ought not only to keep his hands co^tine^t, but also his
eyes. A saying, truly, not unworthy for a christen man.

Philoxenus.
PHiloxenus on a time being at supper with king Dionisius, when he espied
that a Mullette fyshe of an exceeding bygnes, was set at the kings mease,
where as a very little mullette was set before him, he took the little mullet and
laid it to his ears. At which deed when Dionisius the king had great
marvel, and demanded the cause, why he so did: Iu my hands, quod he, is
Galatea, concerning whom, I feign would have asked certain quetyons of this
fyshe. And he says, he knows as yet little or nothing, by reason of his
tender age, but he has a great graundfather he says, which lies now in
your dysche, who can tell very much of the matter, if I might talk with him.
The king being herwith delyted, and made merry, sent him his Mullet.

Here ends the first book.
Londini in aedibus Richardi Tauerneri. Cum priuilegio, ad imprimendum solum.

The second book of the Garden of wisdom, wherein are contained wytty,
pieasaunt, and net sayenges of renowned personages collected by Richard
Tauerner

Anno. M. D. XXXIX.

Cum priuilegio adimprimendum solum.


