THE END OF NERO AND BEGINNING OF GALBA.

FOUR BOOKS OF THE HISTORIES OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.

THE LIFE OF AGRICOLA.

M.D.LXXXXI.

TO HER MOST SACRED MAJESTY.
I Present here to your Majesty's view my imperfections in their own colors,
and the excellencies of anoth^r man with much loss of their lusty, as being
transported from their n^tural light of the Latin by an unskillful hand into a
strange language, perchance not so fit to set out a piece drawn with so
curious a pensill. The cause of undertaking a work of this kind was a good
will in this scribbling age no^ to do nothing, and a disproportion in the
powers of my mind, nothing of mine own invention being able to pass ^^e
censure of mine own judgment, much less, I presumed the judgment of others.
The cause that J published it under your Majesty's name and protection (beside
the testification of my bounden duty) was the great account your Highness
most worthily holds this Histo^ie in; hoping thereby, that as some for the
excellency of the wine, have liked also the lees, so it might peradventure
please you, to accept into some degree of favor this wor^e as it is, though by
change from vessel to vessel hauin^ taken wind and lost his pleasing taste
to the palate, yet retaining somewhat of his former strength, and much of his
substance. But the principal cause was to incite your Majesty by this as by a
foil to communicate to the world, if not t^ose admirable co^positions of your
own, yet at the least tho^ most rare and excellent translations of Histories
(if J ^ay call them translations, which have so infinitely excee^^d the
originals) making evident demonstration to all who have seen them, that as the
great actions of Princes are the subject of stories, so stories composed or
amended by Princes, are not only the best pattern and rule of great actions,
but also the most natural Registers thereof, the writers being persons of like
degree and of proportionable conceits with the doers. And so wishing your
Majesty either so ^uch leisure your self, or a Tacitus to describe your most
glorious reign, J commit this work (whereof I caime nothing to my self but
the faults) to your most gracous patronage, and the courtesy of the reader,
from whom, ^t least from his hands that shall finish out the rest, I hope o
find both pardon for my faults, and some pity for my pains.

The Almighty bless your most ^xcellent Majesty with a long, happy, and
prosperous ra^gne, and the only true means thereof, many vvatchfull ies to
foresee, many valiant hands to fight, and many ^odly hearts to pray for the
peace of your state.

Your sacred Majesty's most humble subject and servant HENRY SAVILE.

A. B. To the Reader.
THERE is no treasure so much enriches the mind of man as learning; there is
no learning so proper for the direction of the life of man as Histore; there is
no history (I speak only of profate) so well worth the reading as Tacitus.
For learning nature acknowledges a reason, by leaving industry to finish her
imperfect work: for without learning the conceyte is like a fruitful soil
without tilling, the memory like a storehouse without wares, the will like a
ship without a rudder. For History, since we are eassier taught by example
the^ by precept, what study can profit us so much, as that which gives us
patterns either to follow or to fly,, of the best and worst men of all
estates, cuntries, and times that ever were? For Tacitus I may say without
partiality, that he has written the most matter with best conceyt in fewest
words of any Historiographer ancient or modern. But he is hard. Difficilia
quae pulchra: the second reading over will please thee more then the first, and
the third then the second. And if thy stomach be so tender as thou can not
digest Tacitus in his own style, thou art beholding to Sauile, who gives thee
the same food, but with a pleasant and easy taste. In these four books of
the story thou shall see all the miseries of a torn and declining state: The
Empire usurped; the Princes murdered; the people wavering; the soldiers
tumultuous; nothing unlawful to him that has power, and nothing so unsafe as
to be securely innocent. In Galba thou may learn, that a good Prince
governed by evil ministers is as dangerous as if he were evil himself. By
Otho, that the fortune of a rash man is Torrenti similis, which rises at an
instant, and falls in a moment. By Vitellius, that he that has no virtue can
never be happy: for by his own baseness he will loose all, which either
fortune, or other men's labors have cast upon him. By Vespasian, that in civil
tumults an advised patience, and opportunity well taken are the only weapons
of advantage. In them all, and in the state of Rome under them thou m^iest see
the calamities that follow civil wars, where laws l^e a sleep, and all
things are judged by the sword. If thou mislike their waires be thankful for
thine own peace; if thou do abhor their tyrannies, love and reverence
thine own wise, just, and excelent Prince. If thou do detest their
Anarchie, acknowledge our own happy government, and thank god for her,
under whom England enioyes as many benefits, as ever Rome did suffer miseries
under the greatest Tyrant.

THE END OF NERO AND BEGINNING OF GALBA.
GAlerius Trachilus, The year of the City. 821.
and Silius Italicus being Consuls: Caius Juius Vindex, Lieutenant of Gallia
Lugdunensis, perc^iuing that private conspiracies against the person of Nero
had been often intended and ever discovered, determined to give the first onset
in arms, and openly go to he field. Vindex was by his father of a Senators
house, by birth French and extract from the line of their ancient kings, of
body puissant, quick of c^nceit, of a ready dispatch, skilful in arms and
bold to attempt* his prouinc peaceable, and therefore utterly disfurnisht of
forces: no Legion, no garrson under his government. Notwithstanding as in a
body corrupt, and ful^fill humors, the first pain that appears, be it
never so slender, draws o^ the rest, discloseth old aches and strains,
actuateth what else is unsound in ^he body: so in a state universally disliked,
the first disorder dissolueth the whole* yea and often so it happens in both,
the disease that grew first, and gave c^use to the other, being recured, the
rest notwithstanding work out the final ^estruction. Now Vindex, before he
declared himself, well weighing the weak^esse of his estate, and withal his
own person incapable of the Empire, as being but a stranger, without
followers, without friends or allies among the ^obility, deliberated to cast it
on some other man of more reputation, who a^^ by nearenesse and strength might
second his attempt. Corbulo was lately mu^dred by Nero; Vespasian far of
warring in Iewry: Suetonius Paullinus at h^me without army, the most famous men
of that age for militar matters. Of ^igh Germany Verginius Rufus was
Lieutenant, with three Legions, nex^ neighbor to Vindex, only of a mean
ge^tlemans house. In low Germany F^eius Capito with four Legions, and Clodius
Macer in Afric with a compe^nt army, neither of them likely to repair that
which Nero had ruined. Th^re remained then in arms Seruius Sulpitius Galba, a
man of great wealt^ and ancient nobility, who had been eight years
Lieutenant in nearer Spa^ne, to the reasonable conte^tment of the cu^trey, with
an host of one Legio^, and ^e Aides belonging thereto. Upon him Vindex finally
resolving, dispatcheth ^^to Spain, and other cuntreies adioining, secret
letters, declaring his purpos^ ^o the Lieutena^ts. Galba, in whom age had
abated the heat of ambition, exp^rience and dangerous times engendered a wary
and fearful proceeding, ^ought as then upon nothing less then diademes and
kingdoms, having g^^en himself over, for certain years past, to an idle and
obscure kind of ^ife, sequestered as it were, and retired from affairs for
fear of Ner^ under whom to do ill was not always safe, always unsafe to
do ^ell, and of doing nothing no man constrained to yield an account.
Whereupon the letters arriving, he stood much amazed, divided in mind what
course h^e should follow, to trust them? peradventure it was but a train. to
disclose them and send them to Nero? that were indeed to put in his head an
eternal ielosie, and himself into a needless peril: and perhaps also there
might be good meaning. VVhereupon in so doubtful a case, the extremes seeming
danger^us, he took the mean way, suppressing the letters, and not entering
into the ^ause any further, reserving to govern himself in the rest, as
events and ^ccurrents should lead and direst him. The other Lieutenants sent
all their letters to Nero, betraying Vindex, betraying the cause, whereof
themselves none were partakers.

Now Vindex certain days after the ^alends of March, though not fully
assured, yet hoping well of Galbaes int^^t, and presuming good luck to so good
a meaning, assembled them of his pro^^nce, such chiefly as were chief in
their country for credit, and chiefly had been touched in goods or in honor.
To whom recounting in order the tyrannis of Nero, namely his paring of Gallia.
France to the quick, to the utter destruc^ion of so many men, the universal
decay of so goodly a country, he exhorts hem all to take arms, to succor
themselves, to succor the Romans, and to free the whole world from so heavy a
yoke. Or if, which the gods forbid in so ^ood a cause, yet let us (quoth he)
sell him our lives in the field with honor seeing we cannot possess them
with safety. For another Prince (our brok^n state, and age void of virtue,
not bearing a free common wealth) we have here at hand a man of great birth,
great wealth, and great forces, one that has made honorable proof of
himself, at home, and abroad, in all resp^cts worthy the place, Galba
Lieutenant of Hispania Tar^^^onensis.
Arragon. Jf you like of the ma, there remains then only we muster the
country to the most that we may, without whose swords all talk of war
is but vain, and this per^icious. His demands being all accorded by common
consent, he leuieth a ^ower, many men, and few soldiers, taken up on the
sudden, not disciplined, ^ot trained to the order of service; he publishes
edicts diffaming the person and government of Nero. Then causing Galba to be
proclaimed, he writes h^^ a letter, now or else never, to declare himself in
favor of mankind against that monster of nature, to furnish the body of an
hundredth thousand Fren^h men in arms, and more if need were, of a head. The
Sequani, Aedui, Aruerni, Remi, and the flower in a manner of France, were all of
the party conferring men, horse, armor, money, and what else was requisite for
ser^ice in field. Ruf^nus, Flauius, Asiaticus with others were appointed
capt^ines, and Vienna seat of the war; whose next neighbors, and ancient
enemi^s, the Lugdunenses banded themselves against them, and the cause, or the
ca^se for their sakes. Many conflicts between them, and skirmishes during the
war, so thick, and so hoatly pursued, that one might perceive much private
choler pass under the shadow of public pretenses. The Lingones likewise and
Treueri, and some other cities, forsaking their fellows, lincked themselves
with the Legions confining. Three Legions, as before it is said, with their
Aides, Verginius had in his charge; who seeing all France on a fire, and that
now of force he must either rebel with the rest, or war with the rebels
(for so they were styled till they prevailed) in private beholder, for
public respects misliking of Nero, no admirer of Galba, with Vindex
proceeding highly displeased, the example being unseen, that a prouin^e
should be a Princemaker, thus unresolved, resolving this only, that he would
not be resolved by others, determined to stand on his guard, and gather^d his
men about him in have, valiant soldiers and expert in service, and likely to
sway where they went.

Of the other side the Lieuten^nt of Aquitania, against the troubles of France,
requested the assistance of Galba his neighbor, who then at new Carthage kept
a law day: but amne he perceived how that he had taken a wrong adresse. For
Galba receiving the letters of Vindex, and being advertised that vvarrant was
out f^r his death to the Procuratours, had debated the matter afresh with his
f^endes. Some unwilling to play their state at a cast, wished him to stay and
at^ende to what head the humors in Rome new stirred would gather: as for the
Procuratours they might be prevented, and warned is half armed To Titus
Vinius, then Lieutenant of the Legion, and anon chief in favor with Galba,
that course seemed unsafe. Armed indeed (quoth he^) for a while against a
Procuratour or two. nay, put case we could hang up these few in our places,
shall we live, do you think, for lack of a hangman? give us arms against
Nero, and then we are armed. But perhaps, since nothing is past on our part,
he may be persuaded to call in his sentenc^ again. Even good Princes are
ielous of sovereign points, and that string being touched, have a quick ear.
They have bought it full dear which ig^orantlie have sat in their chair of
estate, that have worn their diadem to keep it from wetting, or upon like
occasion. Germanicus, as some here man remember, because one or two in the
army had only a purpose to salute him Prince, was never well brooked, till
by his own death he had paid the pr^ce of other men's rashness. Corbulo, even
that Corbulo, which had quieted ^ermanie, subdued Armenia, broken the Parthia^
spirits, brought Arsaces ^ne on his knees before Nero, after he had so highly
deserved at his hands, i^ cost him his life, that some men in secret thought
him a man fit to succeed. We are, as they say, openly proclaimed, we have an
army in field. shall he then repent it, that never repented but when he did
well? Let him look that list for succors from Rome, where liberty is lost,
fit men to free others. Galba and Vindex their swords and their armies must
purchase our freedom. This opinion prevailing, as possible to prove, but of
force to be followed, a day was appointed by Galba, therein to dispatch the
freeing of slaves. The country came in at the day suspecting the matter, apt
to receive any new impression. And Galba having placed of purpose, before his
Tribunal, a many of images of great personages executed or banished in Neroes
time, and fetched from exile a young nobleman, out of the next islands, to
stand by his seat, his army about him, spoke in this wise. My fellow
soldiers and friends, we are at this present assembled to enfranchise our
bondmen, to bestow upon others that great benefit of liberty and freedom,
which we our selves, whom both nature and fortune has freed, this long time
have smallie enio^ed. The life J have led hitherto will sufficiently
discharge me from any aspiring conceit, and mine own conscience bears me
witness, that I speak not upon any malice, or private respects. It greeues me
to say: but it helps not to ^ide that which every man sees. has ever
bondsman under a cruel maste^ passed a year of harder service, then we have
done fourteen under Nero? that kind of exaction has he not proved to supply
with extortion that which with shame he has spent? what kind of cruelty has
he not practiced? if we should conceal or seek to suppress it, these dumb
stones would declare them. Behold, poisoned his father and brother, abused and
slain his own mother, murdered his wife, his master, and what else soever
valiant or virtuous in Senate, in city, in province, without any difference of
sex, or of age. I need not to speak of the sorrowful sighs and bitter tears
of so many young gentlemen bereft of their fathers, so many wives robbed of
their husbands, so many great men deprived of their country, which cry
vengeance upon such a Prince. (...) Prince? nay, an incendiarie, a singer, a
fiddler, a stageplaier, a cart driuer, a ^rier, no Prince, nay no man, that has
a man to his husband, and a man to his wife, but a monster of mankind; against
whom what Vindex in France h^th already intended I am sure you do know, and I,
for my part, am most sorry (...) hear. The whole course of my former life has
been otherwise removed from ambition in court, from aiming too high: and this
little that remains of my d^ies I could heartily wish were spent in more ease.
But since, I know not by wh^^ my misfortune, some have imposed upon me a part,
which I never meant to s^staine, and least of al at this age, I will not refuse,
if you also approve it, to sacrifice this old carcass of mine for the wealth
of my country, not as Emperor, (...) Augustus which sacred names I adore a far
of, not daring to approach the^, ^^t as -- The speech was not finished, when the
soldiers, and people, with one c^mon voice interrupting, saluted him Emperor.
Galba commending their zeal to the good of the Empire, and accepting the
substance refused the name, tearming himself Lieutenant of the Senate and
people of Rome. Next care was to muster more men, to make good the revolt. the
country was pressed, and soldiers came in of all hands. new Legions and Aids
were enrolled, and to help at a need, a ship of Alexandria, laden with
armor, without master, without mariner, without passenger, arrived at the port:
which accident, besides that the wrecke came in in good season, increast to the
cause reputation, as though against Nero the gods had furnished weapons from
heaven. Then he ordained a counsel in form of a Senate elected out of the
chiefest and grauest men of his train, and a guard of young gentlemen to watch
and ward at his lodging, he publishes edicts, and sendes them abroad to
every province, exhorting them all to take arms, and concur in common
against the common enemy. Many revolted from Nero and came to the side: M.
Saluius Otho with the first, then Lieutenant of Lusitania.
Portingall, bringing his jewels and plate, which Galba made into money.

Jn high Germany, the soldiers considering the weakness of Nero; that France
had already rebelled; that Spain made a Prince; that the rest of the
cuntreies were likely to follow, if not all for the same, yet all against
Nero; viewing their own forces, and strength now united, which before lay
dispersed in troops and in bands, strangers to Galba, and greatly disdaining
that one simple Legion should impose them a Prince, finally concluded to make
it their benefit, and bestow the Empire themselves. A fit man they needed not
seek far off: Verginius Rufus the Lieutenant, though of a gentleman's house,
and no higher, in strength of body, matters of action, and all other things
excelled Galba. in birth what if Galba were better? Catulus the top of his
kin fled dishonourablie away in the Cimbrian war, where Marius, baselier
borne then Verginius, worthily stuck to it, and saved the state. Hereupon
they go, and break down tumultuously the images of Nero, salute Verginius
Prince, inscribing his name in the banners. Verginius seeing the matter grow
to a tumult, and being unable to resist their violence, showed to yield in some
degree against Nero, but not for himself, much less any other named abroad.
For his part he said he had no need of the place, which all men beside so
greatly desired: nor was not to suffer, but such as by order of Senate should
be appointed. that they were the men, to whom that election belonged, whose
right he would surely maintain against vvhomsoeuer. The soldiers being in
part thus appeased, he commandes the inscription to be defaced, and with his
whole army enters France, pretending to war against Vindex. The city of
Bezanson, which first refused to receive him, he straightway beseegeth. Vindex
to succor the town and levy the siege, or bid him battle, if it might be
no better, with twenty thousand men comes against him. Lying encamped not
far asunder, there passed letters between them: whereupon they secretly met
and conferred together, none else being present of neither side. Their
conclusion was friendly, doubtless to join against Nero: some thought, to set
down Galba also; and it was not unlikely. Thus departing as friends, each to
his camp, Vindex secure as in a quarrel already composed, and nothing
attending less then the shocke, meaning to enter the town, and repose his
army, with all his men made toward the gates. The soldiers of Germany lying
at the walls, and perceiving the army approach, marching, as it seemed,
directly upon them, not privy to their Generals purpose, or not willing to
loose so fair an occasion, ran out without bidding, and falling upon them at
unawares and in disarray, not able on a sudden to remedy the error, as men
newly trained, and inexpert in war, slew them al in a manner, and spoiled the
carriage. Vindex seeing the unlucky success of this unlooked for battle,
having lost in a manner the flower of all France, and suspecting fraud of
Verginius side, as though he meant to entrappe him, and send him to Nero, ran
himself upon his own sword. many coming after bestowed their blows upon
the dead carcass, seeking a color for praise or reward if Nero prevailed.
After this slaughter, the soldiers pressed Verginius again to accept of the
Empire, and embassages came almost from every quarter requiring the same, with
assured promise of all possible assistance, if not, ready to return to Neroes
obedience: but Verginius bewailing the heavy mishappe of his unfortunate
friend, rejects the speech, and marches forward in France. This end had
Julius Vindex, a man in the course of this action more virtuous then fortunate;
who having no army provided, no legion, no soldier in charge, whiles others
more able looked on, first entered the lists, chalenging a Prince vpholden with
thirty legions, rooted in the Empire by four descents of ancestors, and
fourteen years continuance of reign, not upon private despair to set in
combustion the state, not to revenge disgrace or dishonor, not to establish
his own soueraignety, things which have moved most men to attempt; but to
redeem his country from tyranny and bondage, which only respect he regarded
so much, that in respect he regarded nothing his own life or security. For
when it was showed him, that Nero by public edict had prized his head at
That is, about fourscore thousand pound.
ten thousand thousand sesterces; Well, quoth he again, and he that killes
Nero, and brings me his head, shall have mine in exchange. And though in this
action fortune gave virtue the check, and by a strange accident, which man's
wisdom could not foresee, ouerturned the enterprise, yet must we confess,
that vindex first stirred the stone, which rolling along tumbled Nero out of
his seat.

Of Vindex revolt the first news came to Nero at Naples, about the twentieth
of March: whereof he made show so lightly to set, that he would not
vouchsafe once to intermitte his accustomed pastimes and pleasures, but rather
seemed to rejoice, and embrace the occasion, as falling out fittlie to convert
to his cofers by the law of arms the spoil of so large and so welthy a
country: at supper also receiving more letters of fresher advise, and certainer
danger, he wished them only ill chance, which thus by rebelling had troubled
his drincking, and so for eight days he neither wrote letter, nor gave out
order for any dispatch. At length through Vindex edicts, so thick and so
biting, being awaked, he warned the Senate by letter to avenge his cause, and
the common wealths, excusing his absence by reason of sickness. In Vindex
edicts, supporting the rest patiently, one thing above all troubled him most,
that his skill was impeached in playing: wherein he thought surely there was
not his peer; eft soones demanding of them about him, whether, without
flattery, they knew any in that profession more skillful then him. by this
then so manifest an untruth, in an art that he had so painfully labored,
so perfittlie learned, he willed them to esteem of the rest. The Senate,
receiving the letters, flattering and fearing, adjudged Vindex a traitor, the
self same men which soon after bestowed the like upon Nero. But urged by
news upon news, at last in a fright he repaired to Rome: where not calling
Senate, nor people together, but some principal men to the Palace at an
unseasonable hour of the night, as to consult of urgent affairs, he showed
them certain conceits, and new strange devises of music by water
instruments, discoursing of the manner and difficulty of each, and that he had
found out a way to make them sound both sweeter and louder, and shortly
meant to produce them in stage, if Vindex would give him leisure to do it. But
hearing that Galba and Spain had rebelled, he tare his clothes, beat his
head, and would in no wise receive any comfort, till such time as the Senate
by decree had declared Galba enemy to the state. Then resuming courage, and
somewhat revived with some rumors out of Germany, he returned to his riot
and careless licentious life, and putting Galbaes servants in prison seized
his goods and set them to sale. The like did Galba with Neroes in Spain, and
found a great deal more ready chapmen.

Anon as the tumult began, it is supposed credibly, that Nero had purposed
to have made away all the governors of armies and provinces as being
conspired against him; to murder all exiled persons, lest they should join
themselves with the rebels; all French he could find in the City, as being
friends to the cause; to poison the Senate in banquet; to set a fire the city,
turning in wild beasts among them which endeavored to stop the course of the
flame. But setting apart the devise, not as disliking, being so suitable to his
proceeding, but as despairing to bring it about, he determined a voyage in
person, sending before in the mean season Petronius Turpilianus, and Rubrius
Gallus with certain others against them. To furnish the iourneie his chieffe
provision consisted in carriage for playing furniture, in concubines shorn and
polled as men, armed with hatchet and target according to the Amazonian
fashion. For mustering of men there were but few able enrolled and most of
them bondmen. Money was hardly and with much ado a little extorted. For
whereas in time of civil sedition most need is of money, and a wise Prince
will least grieve the subject with new imposition, as seeming to stand in
some sort at his courtesy, and having to employ his body beside, Nero, in
peace no storer for war, was forced then to offend, when he should in
reason have sought to have vvunne, and yet raised less with more opposition
then ever, reputation now vvaining, a contrary faction being one foot. As
for policies, and plots of war, he told his familiar friends, he had one
most assured. As Soon as he entered the province, he would venture himself
unarmed amongst them, and with silence and tears move them to compassion,
and so they returning to former obedience without more ado, he would the
next day merrily sing, in that merry company, sonnets of victory, which he
willed to be composed out of hand against the time came.

As Nero was thus busily occupied in making provision for the war against
Galba and Vindex, letters were brought in at dinner of Verginius defection, and
the rest of the armies. VVhereupon in a desperate rage, he tare the letters,
ouerturned the table, dashed two cups on the ground, which he dearly
esteemed, and casting away all care of himself, notwithstanding the peril
pressed no nearer, he called for poison, which he put up in a golden box,
that his death at the least might be according to his estate, and so walked
forth into the Seruilian gardens. From thence he sent of his trusty servants
to Ostia to make ready the ships, purposing to have fled with his friends
into Egypt, and there to have taken himself to his music to get him a
living: sottishlie supposing in Egypt an imaginary surety to himself by his
music, when he could not live safely Emperor at Rome. To that purpose
sounding the minds of the Tribunes and Centurions of the Guard, and finding
them some to draw back, some flattlie refuse to go with him, one among
others directly to tell him, that sure his best way were to make an end of
himself, he was distracted into diverse opinions, casting about what course
he should follow. flee to the Parthian, whom of late he had pleasured? to
Galba, who peradventure might pity his estate? or were it else better in
lamentable sort and mourning weed to go out abroad, and in the Place of
common assembly, most humbly for that which was past demand pardon: or if he
could not obtain it, that at least they would grant him the government of
Egypt. This liked him best, and thereof he framed a speech, which afterward
was found in his papers: but fearing the people would pull him in pieces
before he came to the Place, he differred the matter till the next morning.

Nymphidius Sabinus and Sophonius Tigellinus were captains of the Guard,
preferred by Nero from nothing to that honorable place, and now the first to
forsake him. But Tigellinus, as a person infamous and generally hated,
prevailed not much: Sabinus had the credit with the soldier. who affirming
that Nero was already fled into Egypt, and promising donatiue in Galbaes
name 234.lib 5s 6d
of thirty thousand sesterces a man, and 39.lib 1s 3.d.
five thousand to the soldier abroad, much more then would or could be
performed, easily wanne them to leave him, who had as they thought already
left them, and so to pronounce Galba Emperor, not upon any especial liking
they had to the man above others, but whilst some doubted, some other denied,
Galba pretending directly the suite, and no countersuiter appearing, they were
content to accept him for Prince. Their fellows which warded that night
foreseeing the issue, and coveting in this creation of the new Prince a part
with the rest, left Nero a sleep alone in the garden. Who being awaked about
midnight, understanding his guard was departed, leapt out of his bed, and sent
about for his friends: from whom receiving no answer, he with a few went
to their lodgings himself. The great Monarch of the world, adored erewhile as
a god, attended upon and guarded by thousands of friends, of soldiers, of
servants, now as a page knocking at doors finds all shut against his
unfortunate state. Thus in adversity destitute of aid, of counsel or
comfort of friends, he returns home, where finding his chamber rifled, the
chamberlaines fled, his box of poison removed away, he sought for Spicillus
the Gladiator.
fencer or some of his sort, by whose hands he might be dispatched: and
finding none, vvanting alike both friends and foes, he ran desperately out,
as though he would have thrown himself headlong into the Tiber* but his heart
failing he repressed his pace, and thereupon requiring some secret place to
recall his wits, and resume courage again, Phaon his freedman offered his
house four miles of in the country, which Nero accepted; and so accompanied
with four men only, Phaon* Epaphroditus, Sporus and Neophytus flees away,
badlie apparrailed, and worse mounted, covering his head, and hiding his face
with a handkercheffe. As he was in his way out of the City, approaching the
camp of the Guard, he heard the soldiers showting and vvishing good luck
unto Galba, and ill to himself. Jn riding along his horse starting aside his
face was discovered, and he known and saluted by one of the Guard which met
him by chance. Whereupon forsaking horse and high way, through bushes and
breres he crept in at the last into a thicket of reeds on the backside of
Phaons ferme-house, who persuading Nero in the mean while to sit in a pit,
out of the which sand had been dug, he refused the favor, denying to
go alive under ground, and so cast himself down close in the reeds, till
they had beaten a hole in the wall, through which Nero upon all four crept
into the backside, casting himself upon a simple pallet in a back room.

VVhilest Nero thus lurcked, the Senate assembled in counsel declare him
enemy of the state and punishable more maiorum, sending out to seek him and
bring him alive. Concerning the choice of a new, although in their secret
opinions Verginius deserved to resume the benefit which he had put into their
hands, yet being not willing to enter into further troubles, and raise up a
new civil war, without which Galba, who had already foreprized the place
could not be set down, following the soldiers example they openly agreed
all upon Galba. By this time they about Nero were instant upon him to rid
himself quickelie out of the contumelies and indignities, which anon he
should be forced to endure. To whom yielding himself he commandes to make
ready for the funeralles, weeping and vvailing at every word, what great
pity it was, that so good a minstrell should be so cast away. Jn the mean
season, certain letters which were brought to Phaon from Rome he snatched
away, and finding therein the Senates decree demanded what more maiorum
meant, for that piece of law he had never perused: understanding it was, that
his neck should be locked in a forke, and himself vvhipped naked to death,
having in horror so shameful an end, he took up two rapiers which he had
brought with him, and trying their points how sharp they were, put them up
again, desiring some of them to begin and show him the way to be
manfull; but desiring a virtuous example out of so vicious a school, a court
so corrupt, he desired in vain. And now the horsemen sent by the Senate
approached, which Nero perceiving, by fear encouraged ran himself through,
Epaphroditus his Secretary at his request helping to dispatch him the sooner,
for which service he was afterward put to death by Domitian: who thought it
not meet to suffer any to live, which had in any sort lent his hand to the
death of a Prince. Thus Nero, a Prince in life contemptible, and hateful in
government, having thereby disarmed himself both of the love and fear of his
subjects, ended his days the eightth of June in the one and thirtieth year of
his age, and fourteenth of his Empire, at the first having ruled the state with
reasonable liking, insomuch that Traian was wonted to say, that even good
Princes were short of Neroes five years: but after breaking forth into all
infamous behavior, and detestable oppressions and cruelties, and being
withal a Prince weak in action, not of virtue sufficient to uphold his vices
by might, he was at the length thus overthrown.

Nero being slain, the people and Gentlemen, but principally the nobility,
the principal object of tyranny, sacrificed to the gods and feasted for joy:
some also ware Bonnets, as being newly enfranchised. The Senate assembled
again decrees thanks to Nymphidius in most exquisite manner, extolling his
high wisdom and tender care over the state: confirms to Galba all
princely prerogatives and imperial tiles; making thereof a public
instrument, which the Consuls sent him in post: and moreover concludes upon a
solemn embassage of honorable personages with instructions, beside
congratulations and complementes, humbly to desire with speed his presence
at Rome. Then was it proposed, that information might proceed against the
accusers. The matter concerned some mighty men, which had lived in times past
by the loss of their neighbors, and touched somevvhat a secret of state
overthrowing and abolishing the instruments of the Empire. Notwithstanding
their doings were so much detested, and the memory of their malice so fresh,
that the order passed by voices in Senate, making them all, with the rest of
the ministers of Neroes tyranny, punishable more maiorum: but was executed
only against some base persons, which had gained but little, and done little
harm: the principal malefactors brake through well enough and escaped the
danger.

While matters thus passed in France and at Rome, in Spain Galbaes soldiers in
part were in terms to forsake him, and hardly reclaimed. About the same time
also a freedman of Nero had bestowed upon Galba a present of bondmen prepared
for a practice: who according to their instructions watching opportunities, as
Galba by a narrow passage entered the bath, using their toungs, when time was,
for hands, and exhorting one another not to let slip the occasion, were
suddenly apprehended, and being examined what occasion they meant, and put to
the rack confessed the treason. Anon after these hazards so hardly escaped,
the news came to Galba of Vindex death, and that upon so great a victory most
men were vvilling Verginius should take the Empire upon him, or else would
return to Nero again. Galba extremely afraid writes to Verginius,
beseeching him most instantly to join in defense of the liberty and Empire of
Rome: himself notwithstanding as destitute and forlorn, and weary of the
world that went so against him, leaving Vinius Lieutenant in the army,
retireth to Clunia, repenting of that he had done, and wishing again his
private estate, as though in this case there were any mean between hiest and
nothing. Thus being distressed and anguisht in mind without any care of
himself or the cause, in very good season comes Icelus his freedman from Rome
in seven days thither, reporting that Nero being yet alive, but not to be
found, the soldier, the Senate and people had pronounced Galba Prince, that
straight thereupon Nero was said to be slain, but himself not believing it
went to the place, saw him lie dead, and so came his way. Two days after
Vinius came from the camp, declaring to him the particular points of the
Senates decree. Galba receiving the news with great joy, as greatly above
expectation, priuiledgeth Icelus to wear gold rings, aduanceth Vinius to
chief place in credit about him: and laying aside the name of Lieutenant,
assumeth the title of Caesar, prefers Cornelius Laco to be captain of his
guard, and judging his presence necessary to settle the state, gives out order
for his viage to Rome with his army by land.

Now at Rome Nymphidius making his count that Neroes fall was his only deed,
that no recompense is sufficient for bestowing the diadem but the diadem,
that Galba was old, and scarce could last out in a litter to Rome, not by
degrees, but with a maine course drew all to himself. The Guard in respect of
their donatiue, were at his devotion, to be employed as he should direct the^.
The Lords of the Senate courted him daily, and seemed to depend wholly upon
him. VVhereupon usurping authority undue to his place, he commands by and by
Tigellinus his companion to put off his sword and surcease from his office.
The Consuls upon a displeasure, that they had sent the public patents not by
his soldiers, nor signed with his seal, the curriers commission, he had once
determined to have deprived. And laying the plot for himself he bids to
ba^quet the principal me^ of the City: he settes under hand to put in the
soldiers heads to present supplication to Galba, to establish Nymphidius
captain for life without any fellow. To pleasure the people and get the good
will of the commons, he permittes them to vex and torment whom they could catch
of Neroes crew. Spicillus the Gladiator.
fencer they tied under the images of Nero, trailed him along through the
streets, and dispatched him in the Place of public assembly. Aponius an
accuser, they overthrew, and drew carts laden with stones over his body,
beside many other outraged and slain, and some, as it happens where the
reine is let loose to the furious multitude, innocently: insomuch that in
Senate a grave and honorable counselor openly protested, that in short time
there would be great cause to wish Nero again, as being more tolerable one
tiranne then many, and better to live where nothing then there where al
things were lawful. Thus Nimphidius, son to Nimphidia a libertine an old
servant in court and Martianus a fencer, secretelie aspired to the Empire,
vvorking in Rome by certain gracious women and Senators, and sending to
Spain Gellianus one of his friends to epsy the proceedings and actions of
Galba.

Macer in Afric, the state being troubled, mustered men, and pretended for
himself: but being for avarice and cruelty hated extremely, and finding no
followers, could neither maintain it with strength nor leave it with
safety. Galuia Crispinilla Neroes schoolemistresse in matter of pleasure and
lust, when Nero was dead, misdoubting mischances, sailed into Afric, by her
advise Macer beset the sea coasts, and forbad any corn should be transported,
meaning to famish the city of Rome. Fonteius Capito, Lieutenant of low
Germany, some thought had a meaning also for himself. Certain it is that
sitting in judgment, the party aggrieued appealing to Caesar, he skipped out
of the seat where he sat, into a chair of estate set up on high, and then bad
him tell on his tale before Caesar. But Fabius Valens, Lieutenant there of a
Legion, then greatly befrending Galbaes part, swear to him first he with his
company, and the rest of the army followed the example. Verginius, the only
concurrent of Galba in speech of the people, having overthrown Vindex and
mastered France, notwithstanding his soldiers, after the death of Nero was
known, pressed him again in such vehement sort, that one of the Tribunes
drawing his sword willed him to accept of it or the Empire, persisted
constantly in his first resolution: and receiving anon advise of the Senates
decree, himself most willingly, his soldiers hardly, and with much ado
were persuaded, since lower Germany had sworn to swear allegiance to Galba.
The rest of the provinces without any difficulty accepted him all.

Now Galba disposing as Prince the affairs of the Empire, fineth the cities
of Spain, which were not so forward to further the cause, and some he
dismantelleth: certain Procuratours and officers he puts to death, their
vviues and their children, a cruelty practiced no not by Nero, much less
expected in Galbaes beginnings. He directs out warrant to Trebonius
Garrucianus Procuratour of Africa to put Macer to death, dismiss the Legion
lately mustered, and quiet the country: and appointes in Verginius place
Hordeonius Flaccus Lieutenant in Germany. Then without coat armor on back a
sickly old man, himself and his men in warlike order march over the
mountains. The cities of France that took part against Vindex he punishes
with loss of reuenew and country: the rest were relieved, their tributes a
quarter abated, themselves made citizens of Rome by means of their money, and
Vinius; who carrying an ill mind, and serving in great place a weak master,
made open sale of his Princes free graces and favors. At Narbon the
ambassadors sent from the Senate met him in duetifull manner, whom Galba
received courteously with friendly and familiar speeches, and feasted in sober
sort all with his own, though otherwise he had plenty there of Neroes
vvaiters and service sent by Nymphidius. But anon Vinius, which wholy
possessed and governed the old man, counseled him to put of popularity, as
not beseeming his place, to accept of Neroes provision, and to become royal in
expense and service. Verginius having delivered the army to his successor met
Galba on the way, received of him not as in displeasure, and yet with small
honor so dangerous a point it is yea to have but only refused the Empire.

At Gellianus return Nymphidius hearing that Laco was captain already, that
Vinius had all the authority and credit, that his messenger was suspected and
watched of all, not suffered to talk with the Prince in private, not once to
approach to his person, was wonderfully moved in mind. Whereupon assembling
the chief of the Guard, he showed them, that Galba was for his own part a
good harmless old man, but misse-led by two persons much of Tigellinus
making, Vinius and Laco: and therefore it were not amiss to send one or two
in the name of the whole to make him remonstrance, that remoouing away those
two from about him he should be more welcome, and better accepted. This
speech seeming strange and absurd to prescribe to a Prince of those years, as
it were to an infant, his counsel and servants, he takes a contrary
course, and writes to Galba in terrifying manner, That the matters at Rome were
doubtful and dangerous, that Macer in Afric had stayed the ships, the
Legions of Germany stirred a new, the like was reported from Iewrie and Syria.
But perceiving that Galba gave to his tales small ear and less credit, and
having the soldiers all well affected, he determined to prevent and give the
attempt, notwithstanding that Clodius Celsus a sober wise man and one of his
friends plainly protested, that in his opinion scarce any three persons in
Rome would accept him for Emperor: but the rest skoffed it out, namely one
Mithridates of Pontus, Perhaps, quoth he, Galba seems some body now to the
Romans, whilst he is absent: but when they shall see that balde head, and
riueled face, he will seem the very reproach and disgrace of the days in
which he was Prince. And so they concluded at midnight following to bring
Nymphidius into the camp and proclaim him Emperor. But when the evening
was come Antonius Honoratus a principal Tribune assembling the soldiers
under his charge, demanded what evil spirit had bereaved them of
understanding, moving them so suddenly and without cause to change their
allegiance. If Nero deserved it, what mother, what wife, had Galba then
killed? or for what misdemeanour would they forsake Seruius Galba to prefer a
curtizans son? with whose blood they shouldere it were long if they would be
directed by him, both revenge Neroes death, whom he first betrayed, and show
themselves loyal to Galba against whom he intends: willing them lastly to
reckon in reason what success might ten thousand attend against the consent
of the Empire armed for Galba. His soldiers thus being persuaded, persuaded
the rest all in a manner to remain in Galbaes obedience. VVhereupon a showte
being made in the camp, Nymphidius supposing the soldiers had called him, or
hasting to confirm the wavering, and prevent the tumult, went thither himself
with torches and linckes, having learned without book an oration composed by
Cingonius Varro, to pronounce there amongst them. But finding the gates of the
camp made fast, and soldiers in arms on the walls, he seared the matter,
and drawing near demanded what they meant, and by whose warrant they had put
themselves so in arms. and when it was answered by all agreeablie, that they
knew not, nor would not accept other Prince beside Galba, Nymphidius finding
the peril joined with them and wished also long life and prosperity to
Galba Augustus, commanding his followers to do all the like. And so by the
soldiers, which guarded the gates, being admitted with a few of his train, he
was at his entry vvelcomed in with a dart hurled at him, which one Septinius
bare of with a buckler. But seeing so many at the receipt with naked swords
prepared against him, he fled, and being pursued was slain at the length in a
soldiers cabin. The day following his body was laid out to view in an open
place rayled about.

Galba being yet in his way and hearing of Nymphidius death commanded the rest
of his favorers and accomplices to be executed: among which Mithridates of
Pontus paid for his mirth, and Cingonius Varro who penned the oration. As
Galba drew near to the City at the Miluian bridge the Mariners met him,
whom, being by Nero taken from service by sea, and enrolled into a Legion,
Galba had commanded to return to their former estate. But they being many in
number, and loath to go back to the galleyes again, beset the hye way on
both sides, demanding their Eagle and enseignes tumultuouslie, and so without
order, that the Prince could neither be heard nor seen of the people making
his entry: neither could he appease the^ by putting them over to another time
of greater leisure and better audience, but taking differring as a kind of
denying, seditiously they murmured and followed with outcries. And some of them
also drew out their swords, as though they would obtain it by force, which by
fair means they could not. Whereupon Galba commanding the horsemen to ride in
amongst them slew of them being unarmed seven thousand, and of the residue
allotted every tenth man to suffer, putting the rest close up in prison, which
neuerthesse he after enlarged to his disadvantage.

Now Galba, being with general applause and great good liking of the Empire
placed in state, behaved himself under expectation. And though in most points
he showed himself a virtuous Prince, yet were not his well doings so well
accepted, as those disallowed which were otherwise. All persons unjustly
exiled by Nero, as well of the nobility as meaner sort, with their children
he mercifully restored again to their country and honor, though not to their
wealth. Contrarily Petronius Turpilianus, an ancient man and once Consul,
without form of process or order of law, he commanded to die, being charged
with no other crime, but only that he had been faithful to Nero and would
not betraie him as the rest did. Then was represented a plausible and
grateful spectacle, Elius, Polycletus, Locusta, Patrobius, Petinus and others
in fetters drawn through the City and publicly executed, as ministers of
Nero in mischieffes, whereas Tigellinns the Master, not without notable
incongruitie, was by Galba protected. And notwithstanding the people in
Theaters and all common assemblies ceast not importunately to demand his
death, as an accomplishment of due and exemplarie justice pleasing to God and
to man, yet gold with Vinius and Vinius with Galba weighed so much, that not
only he received undeserved protection, but also for his sake the people
were rebuked by public edict. VVhereupon Tigellinus solemnizing the feast of
his deliverance Vinius rose from supper with Galba and went thither with
Crispina his daughter to banquet, upon whom Tigellinus bestowed a courtesy of
That is, about eight thousand pound English.
a thousand thousand sesterces in ready money, and beside all the jewels and
Carcanets of his principal minion which sat there at table, by estimation
Almost five thousand pound.
six hundredth thousand sesterces. Beside Tigellinus one Halotus of all Neroes
instruments the most pernicious, was likewise by Galba protected, and
preferred also to an honorable office. Now for nearenesse Galba was noted
extremely, a vice though incident to age, yet doubtless in a Prince much
misliked, and in a new Prince dangerous. To a certain musician which had
wonderfully pleased he gave with his own hands out of his own purse Three
shillings English.
twenty sesterces: and to his steward at the making up of his books a reward
from his table. But that which was most material of all, and prepared the way
to his fall, was his hardness toward the soldiers: to whom large donatiue
being promised in Galbaes name, and requiring if not so much, yet so much at
least as they were wont to receive, he wholly refused the suite, adding withal,
That soldiers he took up in the muster, bought not in the market. A saying no
doubt fit for a great Prince in a more vetuous age, but not so in those seasons
for him, who suffered himself to be sold every hour, and abused to al
purposes; to be governed by three pedagogues, Vinius and Laco his favorites,
and Jcelus his man. To private men it is sufficient if themselves do no wrong:
a Prince must provide that none do it about him; or else he may look when the
first occasion is offered against him to be charged with all the whole reckening
together. To him that suffers the injury, it matters not much who made the
motion when he feels the hand that is heavy upon him. Thus Galba though
innocent of much harm which passed under his name, yet because he permitted
them to commit it, whom he ought to have brideled, or was ignorant of that
which he ought to have known, lost reputation, and opened the way to his own
destruction.

FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
I The Proeme of Tacitus, wherein he professes simple dealing without
partiality.
THE beginning of my work shall be at the year, The year of the City. 822
when Servius Galba was Tac. Ann. 1. veteris reip. prospera vel aduersa, claris
scriptoribus memorata sunt: temporibusque Augusti dicendis non defuere decora
ingenia, donec gliscente adulatione deterrere^tur.
seven hundredth and twenty years after the City was founded, Tac. 1. Ann.
p. 220. Non aliud discordantis patriae remedium fuisse, quam vt ab vno
regeretur.
meet for the peace of the state, was conferred upon one, those worthy wits
were no more to found, and withal the truth of the story was diuersely
weakened: partly Tiberij, Caijque and Claudij ac Neronis res, florentibus
ipsi^, ^b metum falsae, postquam occiderant, recentibus odijs compositae sunt.
Tac. 1. Ann.
flatter the Princes, or again to deface them. So between malice of the one
side, and awed partiality of the other, small regard there was taken by
either, how posterity should be truly informed. But that endeavor, to please
and win thanks, in a writer a man shall easily mislike, having in it the
foul note of seruility: detracting and enuyous carping, carrying a counterfeit
show of liberty, often finds a good and gracious audience. Now for Galba,
Otho, Vitellius, to me they are as unknown, for either benefit or wrong I have
found at their hands. My first rising, I will not deny, was under Vespasian,
my state bettered by Titus, and so further advanced by Domitian: but they which
make profession of the simple truth, may not say ought of any man for love, or
for hatred. Hereafter, if the gods spare me life, I purpose when I am old, to
set down the story of

II. A general view of the whole history following.
A WORK I take here in hand containing sundry changes, bloody battles,
violent mutinees, Chiefly referred to Domitians time.
peace full of cruelty and peril: Galba, Otho, Otho, Vitellius, Domitian.
four Emperors slain with sword, The first between Otho and Vitellius. The
second between Vitellius and Vespasian. The third of L. Antonius against
Domitian.
three civil wars, foreign many mo, Nobilitatus mutuis cladibus Dacus. The
words seem to import civil dissensio^s: or mutuis for alternis.
Dacian giving and taking notable overthrows: the Parthians also almost in
arms, Haustae sc. flamu: or generally (...), in what sort soever.
burnt or overwhelmed: the (...): says Xiphilinus of Nero, whom Domitian did
match in all kind of tyranny.
to have been welthy or nobly borne, was a capital crime; and horrible
calamities in the Roman estate, yielding proofs never more pregnant,

III. The state of City and provinces at the beginning of the year, when
Galba and Vinius entered their office.
THE death of Nero, as it was at the first very joyfully received, so wrought
it an one very diverse effects in the minds of the Senate at home, the people
and Circo ac Theatris.
Race and Theaters, together with the worst sort of bondmen, and those which
having eaten their own lived only now upon Neroes dishonours, hung down the
head, and listened for novelties. The City-soldiers possessed with the oath of
allegea^ce so many descents Tac. 14. Ann. Praetorianos toti Caesarum domui
ob^trictos.
to the house of the Caesar's, and to forsake Nero being wrought rather by art
and cunning persuasion of others, then of their own motion, when they saw the
donatiue, which was promised them in Galbaes name, not to be performed, nor
the like possibility and means of great deserte, and great gain in peace, as
in war; seeing also their thanks prevented by the Legions, who first
proclaimed the new Prince: upon these and the like respects being prone to
innovation; they were pricked forward by means of Nymphidius Sabinus their
captain, who by treason aspired himself to the Empire. And though Nymphidius
was in the very attempt suppressed, and the head cut off thereby of the
treason; yet there remained many of the soldiers guilty of the fact, and
hating him whom they had wronged. Moreover speeches were given out, noting the
age and avarice of Galba. His severity, which was wont to be highly commended
by In this verse reported by Sueteonius: Disce miles militare; Galba est, non
Gaetulicus. Galbae cap. 6.
the common voice of the soldier, was now displeasaunt to them, who were
generally weary of the ancient discipline, and so trained up by Nero fourteen
years, that now they loved their Emperors no less for their vices, then once
they reverenced them for their virtues. And Galba had let fall a speech
honorable indeed for the common wealth, but for himself dangerous, That
soldiers he took up in the muster, bought not in the market; for the rest of
his doings were not according. His two favorites, Titus Vinius, and Cornelius
Laco, the one of all mortal men most dishonest, the other most unable, with the
hatefulnes of their lewd actions surcharged, and with the contempt of their
insufficiency, utterly overthrewe the freely old man. His journey to Rome
Anno vrbis conditae. 814.
had been Consul, were both put to death: Cingonius, as an associate of
Nymphidius, the other as one of Neroes Against Galba. Zonaras.
captains: who, (...). Plut. in Galba, as it were translating this place.
howesoeuer they deserved it, dying as they did, not called, not heard, dyed
as guiltless. His entry into the city, when as so many thousands of unarmed
soldiers were put to the sword, seemed an unlucky beginning, and was had in
horror, even of those which executed the slaughter. The city was full of
extraordinary soldiers: Galba Aquinus and Fabius Valens Crimen ac dolum: in
another place, crimen ac mox insidias. p. 43. so that dolum co^positum esse
seems here to be equivalent to (...).
preferring accusation against him, and consequently killing him for the crime
whereof themselves were the hatchers: and so Galba either upon a fickle
disposition, or as being loath to search any deeper, did give allowance to that
which was done how soever, since it could not be undone: but surely both the
executions were greatly misliked, as in a prince once in obloquie, do he well
do he ill, al is ill taken. Now his freedmen being over mighty, made open sale
of al matters: his bondmen greedy upon present advantage, and hasty, as being
under a master that was old, and not like long to continue: in sum the faults
in the new court being but the same and of the like nature, yet were not
excused alike. the very age of Galba was matter of scorn and contempt to them
that were used to Neroes fresh youth, comparing the princes, as the manner is of
the common sort, in beauty, and comeliness of presence. And this was at Rome,
as in such a variety, the state of men's minds. Now for the Those he means,
as I think, that had given out he was a travtour, or otherwise consented to
^i^ death.
stomacked, that could not justly complain: only there wanted an head,
Verginius being sent for away under color of friendship: whom when they saw
not to be sent back, and moreover his doings Atque, etiam reum est: not
iudicially, that I can find. (...) says Plutar. p. 1505.
called in question, they took it all as their own case. The army of upper
Germany made light reckening of Hordeonius Flaccus their Lieutenant, a man
aged, and gowtie, without resolution, without authority, unable to rule a
quieter company; now being in fury, and finding him weak to govern the
bridle, they sturred and troubled the more. The legions of lower Germany were
a while without a Lieutenant general, til at length Vitellius came, sent by
Galba, the son of Vitellius which had been Censor, and thrice Consul: Id
satis videbatur: that is, to Galba to send him Lieutenant, or to the soldiers
to have a liking to make him their Emperor, being so well borne.
that seemed sufficient. The army in Britannie was quiet; and in truth among
all the legions, in all those civil troubles, none behaved themselves And yet
they joined themselves with Vitellius. p. 44. vliuncto Britannico exer citu
Vitellius. etc.
more innocently: whether it was, that they were far of, and severed by sea,
or that by continual exploites against the enemy, the malice of their humor
was spent otherwise. Illyricum also sturred not, although the legions which
Nero had called thence, while they lingered in Italy, had sent to Verginius to
offer their service: but the armies being far asunder (a point most
wholesome to keep soldiers in due faith and allegeaunce) could not join
neither faults, nor forces together. The East as yet was calm. Licinius
Mutianus with four legions ruled Syria, a man in the course of good and bad
fortune famous alike: in his youth he had to his cost wound himself into the
acquaintance of great men; anon wealth wearing away, his state decaying,
suspecting also the displeasure of Claudius, he withdrewe himself from Rome
into Asia, then as near to the state of an exiled person, as after he was to
the state of an Emperor: of riot, and industry; of courtesy and arrogancy;
of good and ill parts strangely compounded: pleasures excessive, when his
leisure served: when the case required, excellent virtues: openly praise
worthy, his secret actions were ill spoken of: but generally with them under
him, with them about him, with his companions in office, by diverse allurementes
very gracious; and such a one as could more easily deliver the Empire to
another, then obtain it himself. Flauius Vespasianus with three legions
governed the Jewish. war, appointed general by Nero; a man that wished to
Galba but well, and never meant to attempt against him; for he had sent his
son Titus to do him his duty, as an one in conueniente place shall be
declared. After the event we surely believed, that the Empire was by the secret
course of fate, by signs and oracles fore-appointed to Vespasian and his line.
(...). Sarabo. 17.
royal authority: for so it was thought expedient to bridle and Domiretinere
to keep them in awe, from gadding and seeking ^ide from abroad.
keep under a province of hard access, fruitful of grain, seditious, and
variable through superstition and wantonness, not accustomed to obey any law,
to agnize any magistrate. Tiberius Alexander illustris eques Romanus. Tac. Ann
15.
Tiberius Alexander, a man borne in the country, was governor there. Afric
and the legions there, Clodius Macer being slain, liked well enough of any
Prince whatsoever, having had Post experimentum domini minoris: petty Princes
belike are harddest masters to their subjects, and of Macer Plut. reports
that he was excercised (...).
trial of a meaner master. The one Mauretania and Tingitana and Caesaeriensis.
the other, Rhoetia, Noricum, Thracia, and the other countries ruled by
Procurators, as they lay near to any of the armies, were swayed to like or
dislike, as it liked their Tacitus in this book: facili transitu ad proximos
and validiores. p. 51.
betters that bordered about them. The provinces which were unfurnished of
forces, and especially Italy it self, lying open to be subdued by any, were to
become the prize of the war. And this was the state of the Roman Empire when
Seruius Galba second time Consul with Titus Vinius, began the year which was
last to themselves, and last almost to the common wealth also.

IIII. The adoption of Piso.
SOME few days after the beginning of January, letters came out of Belgica
from Pompeius Propinquus Procurator there, that the legions of upper Germany
without respect of oath and duty demanded another Emperor; and that this their
revolt might be the less hainously taken, had referred the choice thereof to
the Senate, and people of Rome. These news hastened the purpose of Galba, who
had already a good while before devised with himself, and with some near about
him, concerning the adoption. No speech was for the time more common and
curraunt in the whole city, partly upon a license and lust to talk of such
matters, and partly because Galba was spent and feeble for age: upon judgment
or love to the commonwealth very few, the most part upon secret hopes, as they
favored or followed this man or that, offered occasion to bring them in speech
for the succession. And now Vinius was grown into great hatred; who, as he
waxed daily more mighty, so daily more odious: for Galba with his too much
facility increased and nourished the greedy and gaping desires of his friends
never satisfied in so great means, and offending, as under a Prince weak of
body, and light of belief, with less fear, and greater advantage. The whole
power of the Prince was divided between Titus Vinius the Consul, and Cornelius
Laco captain of the guard. Neither was Icelus the freedman inferior in favor
with his master, Crispina.
his daughter being a widowr, and Otho an unmarried man; a matter wherewith the
ears of the prince, by reason oftalecariers in court, were not unacquainted. I
think also that Galba was touched in part with care of the common wealth,
which might seem in vain transferred from Nero, if it were to be left upon
Otho. for Otho had spent his tender years without Parhici gestamen Othonis.
Ivenal. Sat. 11
regard of his honor, his youth afterward in all dissolute disorder,
Perlibertinam aulicam insinuatus Neroni facile summum inter amicos locum
tenuit, congruentia moru^. Suet. Oath. c. 2.
through emulation of vice: and therefore Nero had left in his custody, as with
one that was Delapso Nerone in amorem Actae, assumpto in conscientiam Othone
etc. Ann. 13.
privy to his lusts, At Senecaes entreating: Plutar. p. 1503. Ann. 13.
Deijcitur familiaritate sueta, post congressu and comitatu Otho, and postremo
ne in vrbe aemulatus ageres, prouinciae ^usitantae praeficitur: vbi vsque ad
ciuilia arma non expriore infamia, sed integre, sancteque egit, proca otij and
potestatis temperan. tior.
away into Lusitania, coulorably to be Lieutenant there. Otho having governed
the province with all curtesy, and being the first that came in to Galba, and
therewith a man of action, and of those which were present during the war of
greatest account, readily conceived hope of adoption, and daily took himself
better of assured, being well favored of most of the soldiers, and greatly
beloved of Neroes court, as one like to their late master. But Galba after the
news of the German rebellion, although of Vitellius as yet he understood noe
certainetie, being doubtful to what issue this violent proceeding of the
armies would grow, and reposing no trust in the city-souldier, proceeds to
declare a successor, the only stay, as he supposed, of his estate. And
calling to him beside Vinius and Laco, Marius Celsus consul elect, and Ducenius
Geminus Praefectus vrbis.
Provost of the city, after some speech used of his age, Sueton. c. 17.
somewhat differing from Tacitus writes, Pisonem repent e media salutantium
turba apprehendit, filiuque appellani, in castra perduxit.
he commands Piso Licinianus to be sent for, either upon his own choice, or
as some have reported, at the instance of Laco: who cunningly preferred him as
a mere stranger to himself, whereas indeed they had in Rubellius Plautus
house, had long acquaintance together, and the good opinion which went
generally of Piso, gave credit to his counsel. Piso was son to Marcus
Crassus, and Scribonia, nobly borne on both sides; in countenance and presence
after the ancient sort, rightly to judge, severe; but to them which interpreted
al to the worst, seeming too sour. That quality of his, the more it was by
some men, careful in that behalf, misdoubted and feared, the better it
pleased the man, who was to adopt him. So Galba taking Piso by the hand, is
said to have spoken in this manner.

"If I should as a private man only, by an act of the Curiae, and assent of the
Priests, as the manner is, adopt you, it would be both an honor for me, to
take into my family the progeny of Marcus Crassus and Pompey, and a glory for
you, to adioine the honorable increase of the To this saying alluded, as it may
seem, Dagalaiphus master of the horse to Valentinian the Emperor, who being
demanded in counsel by his master, what partener he were best to assume of the
Empire, answered briefly, Si tu^^ amas habes f^airem, si temp alium quaere.
Marcellin. lib. 26. page 1719.
in the common wealth. Not that I lack some gifts of the mind, you for your
part, no doubt will retain as heretofore; but in others toward you, in respect
of your degree, you shall find it to be otherwise: flattery will break in,
and pleasing speeches, and the most pestilent poison of all true meaning,
private respects for private advantage. We two this day common plainly
together, others rather talk with our estate, then our persons: for indeed to
persuade a Prince that which is meet, is a point of some pain; to flatter any
Prince whatsoever, needs small endeavor. If this vast body of the Empire
could stand without governor, balanced in due proportion and order, the free
common wealth might worthily have taken beginning from me: but now it is come
long ago to that pass, that neither mine age can benefit the people of Rome
any way more, then in finding them a good successor, nor your youth, then in
yielding them a good Prince. Under Tiberius, Caius, and Claudius, we have been
as it were, the inheritance of one To wit sexta. Tac. 5. Histor. principem
Galbam sexte legionis autoritate factum. p. 210.
one Legion: neither was there before a precedent of any Prince by public
sentence deposed. We, that came in, not by descent, but called in by war and
opinion of desert, how honorably soever we carry our selves, yet shall we be
sure to have our enuyours. And yet be not dismayed, if in this troubled and
shaken estate of the world, one Legion or two be not yet settled: I my self
found not all so sure at the first: and when this adoption shall be heard of
abroad, I another Prince have allowed or blamed: for you have not here, as in
kingdoms, a certain race borne to souerainety, and the rest to be slaves; but
you are to govern a people, which cannot bear, neither bondage, nor liberty
mere without mixture.

These words and the like Galba used as That is, Galba by way of instruction:
the rest flattering and fawning.
creating a Prince, but the rest that were present, spoke as to a Prince
already created. Piso is said to have uttered no motion, as of a mind either
troubled or excessive in joy, neither then nor afterward when every man's eyes
were fixed upon him. His speech to his father, and sovereign was respective,
and reverent; concerning himself very modest: in countenance and gesture not
changed, showing himself rather Tac. 3. Hist. p. 127. de Iunio Blaeso. Nullius
repentini honoris, adeo non principatus appetens, us parum effugeret, quin
dignus crederetur.
able to furnishe the place, then desirous. Then consultation was had, where
the adoption should be pronounced; Pro ^ostris, that is, unto the people
assembled inconcione.
before the people, in the Senate, or in the camp. the camp was preferred, to
honor the soldier thereby, whose good will and favor, as it was by money and
crowching not to be bought, so got by good means would not be contemned. In
the mean season Public expectation, which suffers not any great secret
long to be secret, had, as it were, beset the Palace about: and the fame
finding an issue, was afterward by suppressing increased. The tenth of January
fell out to be stormy, with great thu^der, lightnings, and extraordinary
weather. in mind as in body, and his freedmen and servants, the nearest about
him, being brought up in more license then usually in a private man's house,
laid before him, who greedily gaped after such baits, the court of Nero and
riotous living, wives at will of his own, and of other men's, with such like
pleasures of Princes, as his own proper good, if he durst seize upon them; if
not, vpbraiding them to him, as left unto others. Principale matrimonium, i.
vxor principis as Tacitus speaks also, 11. Annal. At Claudius, matrimonij sui
ignarus, lasciviam populi severis edictis increpuit: that is, ignorant of his
wives behavior at home.
Princes wife can use: of which number Ptolemaeus, who followed Otho into
Spain, promised he should ouerliue Nero: and so by the event having won
credit, persuaded him further, by conjecture alone, and speech of people
comparing the years of Galba and Otho, that he should be assumed to the
Empire: but Otho embraced it as foretold by art, and by the forewarning of
fate; as the humor is of most men to believe that soonest, which they least
understand, or know what it means. Neither was Ptolemaeus behind for his
part, persuading him now to the point, in that kind of fact, which in a mind so
desirous is soon apprehended. But whether it came in his mind on the sudden or
no, to commit this foul act, that is not certainly known: certain it is, that
long before that, he had by all possible means practiced the favor and
goodwill of the soldier, either upon the hope of succession, or as preparing
the way to his treason: in iourneying, in marching, in warding, calling by name
such as were of greatest continuance, and tearming them mates, upon the
remembrance of living together in Neroes train; with some renewing
acquaintance; some calling for, and releeuing their needs with his purse, and
his countenance; inserting withal now and then complaints, and glauncing at
Galba with speeches of doubtful construction, or what otherway he could
bethink him to, stur up, and alter the vulgar sort. The travails in
iourneying, the straytnesse of provision, the hard hand held over them were
much mislikt of the soldiers: for whereas before they were wont to visit the
ease in their armor. The soldiers minds being thus already incensed, Meuius
Pudens an acquaintance of Tigellinus, ministered matter to inflame them further;
who alluring some unstaid heads, or such as were needy of money, and desperate
upon new desires, by little and little proceeded so far, that so often as Galba
was feasted at Othoes, under pretense of a banquet-beneuolence, he distributed
to each man of the cohorte which waited, Aureum vnu^ says Plutarch, and
Suetonius, that is, 15. ^ 7. d ob. Now this cohort or band co^sisted of a
thousand soldiers; so that his whole liberality that way cost him at one
dinner 781. li. 5. s.
an hundredth sesterces. which, as being a Publicam, (...), or rather (...).
public larges, Otho strengthened with secret rewards to particulare
persons: so confident a corrupter, that whereas Cocceius Proculus a Spiculator.
bilman of the Guard had a suite with his neighbor about a small parcel of
ground, which lay doubtful between them, Otho with his own money bought
the neighbors whole ground, and freelye bestowed it upon him: such was the
insufficiency of Laco the captain, grossly to ouersee not only close
practices, but even those dealinges, which all the whole world espied beside.
But at that time Otho appointed Onomastus one of his freedmen for master
woorkeman to contriue the treason, who bringing Barbius Proculus the
watch-worde-carier of the bilmen, and Veturius a Centurions lieutenaunt anon
to his master, after that Otho by sundry speeches, and much private conference,
perceived them to be crafty, and bold, fit for his purpose, he lades them with
rewards in hand, but much more with promises to come; giving them money to
assay the minds of more of their fellows: and so two common soldiers took
upon them to transfer the Empire of the people of Rome, and accordingly
performed it indeed. Few were by them made privy to the principal purpose,
and they by diverse devises incited the houering minds of the rest; drawing
into the association the chief of the soldiers preferred by Nymphidius, as
being suspect to the present estate; the meaner sort, and the rest, by means
of the anger and displeasure conceived upon despair of their donatiue so often
differred: some also there were, whom the memory of Nero, and desire of former
license did move: in general all were afraid they should find a change in
the service. This contagion infected also the Legions, and Aids, whose faith
was weakened already, when as they heard their fellows of Germany had left
their allegiance. And so ready were the bad to rebel, yea the good to
dissemble, that upon the fourteenth of January, they had determined, as Otho
returned from supper to have taken him up by the way, Suet. Oath. c. 6 yields
another reason: obstitit respectus cohortis quae tunc excubabat, ne oneraretur
invidia, quod eiusdem statione and Caius fuerat occisus, and desertus Nero.
Medium quoque tempus religio, and Mathematici exemerunt.
had they not feared such casual chances, as night might have bred; and by
reason the soldiers were lodged scatteringly throughout the whole town; and
that drunken men would a great deal more hardly agree; not for any care of
common wealth, which they purposed, when they were sober, to pollute with the
blood of their Prince; but least in the darcke by error it might chance, that
in steed of Otho some other man should be offered to the For before be had
said, that multie Germania and Illyrico electi remained in Rome.
Pannonian and German soldiers, and so be accepted for Emperor, the most part
of the^ not knowing Otho by sight. Many signs of treason even now as it were
discovering it self, were suppressed by the conspiratours: some other in
Galbaes hearing Laco the captain put away with a jest; a man little seen in
soldiers affections, and of any advise, were it never so excellent, whereof
himself was not auctour, an enemy, and against the skillful obstinately
contentious. The fifteenth of January as Galba was sacrificing before Apolloes
temple, Vmbricius the Priest, by view of unprosperous entrails, foresheweth
dangers at hand, and a home enemy in Othoes audience (for he was the next
man) who contrarily construed it as good luck on his side, and happy success
in his affairs. Anon after Onomastus brings in word, that the master
carpenter, and those which had undertaken the work at a price, stayed for his
coming: for that was the watchwoorde agreed between them, to signify that
now the soldiers were drawing together, and the conspiracy ripe. Otho
faining an answer to such as demanded the cause of his departure, that he
had certain old tenements to buy, which he suspected were ruinous, and
therefore would have them viewed before, innixus liberto
following his servant direction, went through Tiberius house into the
Velabrum, and thence to the Spiculatores
bilmen attending his coming salute him Emperor: and as he stood amazed,
trembling for fear at their fewenesse, they snatch him up hastily into a
chair, and with their swords drawn carry him away. As they went forward
toward the camp, about so many mo soldiers joined themselves, some acquainted
indeed with the cause, but most for the wonder and strangenes: part with
showts, and drawn swords, part holding their peace, meaning so to proceed, as
the event should direct them. Julius Martialis warded as Tribune that day in
the camp: who being either terrefied with the greatness of so sudden a
treason, or else fearing the camp was further corrupted, and death, if he
should make show of resistance, gave most men to misdeeme by his dealing, that
he was somewhat of counsel with the case. The rest likewise of the Tribunes and
Centurions preferred present security before duty with danger: and generally
after that manner were their minds and affections inclined, that into so
horrible a treason few only durst enter, more wished it so, and all were
contented to suffer it to pass. Galba in the mean while ignorant of al which
had passed, was busily occupied about his devotion, importuning the gods now of
another man's Empire, when as suddenly word was brought, that a Senator, they
wist not well who, was carried to the camp; and straightwaies that it was Otho.
Anon flocked thither out of all quarters, Vt quisque obvus fuerat, sc. Othoni,
or Othonianis, as I think.
as they happened to meet him, some making the fear more then it was, some
less, not forgetting even then to fall to their flattering biace. The matter
being consulted upon, it was thought convenient, to sound the mind of the
cohorte, which warded in the Palace, not by Galba himself, whose authority was
to be reserved intier for greater exploites, but by Piso: who calling them
before the stayres of the house, used this speech. "It is now,
fellow soldiers, six days, since that I was, not knowing what might after
befall, and whether this name were to be wished, or feared, adopted Caesar:
with what success to our house, or to the common wealth, that lies in your
hands* not that I am, for mine own particular, afraid of any heavy chance that
can happen: froward fortune I have proved with the most; and the good I do
take to bring no less danger: but my fathers case, the Senates, and the whole
Empires I lament, if this day of force we must either kill or be killed; a hard
choice for any good man. In the last troubles these comforts we had: the city
was kept clean without any bloodshed; the state passed over without any
discord; order was taken as it seemed, sufficient, by declaring a successor,
that hereafter alto there should be no new occasion of war. I will not
extol and magnify here mine ancient house, or modest behavior; neither in
the comparison with Otho, need we to reckon up virtues: his vices wherein
alone he triumphs, have ruined the state even then, when he was but a friend of
the Emperors. By his gesture and gate should he deserve to be Prince, or by
that womanish attire he wears? they are fowly deceived, whom riot deceaues
with show of liberality. to cast away and consume well may he be learned; to
give in good order he has not the skill: bodily pleasures and banqueting,
wanton daliance with women, these be the points which now he proposes
himself; these he accounts the prerogatives of Princes; whereof the lust and
pleasure shall be only his own, the shame and ignominy redoundeth to al: for
never any man yet used the Empire well, which he got by il means. The consent of
the world made Galba Emperor, and Galba by your consent made me. If the weal
public, the Senate, the people, be frivolous names, and no substance; yet for
your own interest provide, fellow soldiers, that the raskallest sort be no
Emperour-makers. The legions abroad have sometime mutined against their
generals; that has bin heard of: your truth and good name bath remained as yet
to this day untouched: and Nero also forsook you, not you Nero. Shall less
the^ thirty renegats and traitors, who^ none would permit to choose their
Centurion, or Tribune, dispose of the Empire? do you allow the example? do you
wink at their crime, and so make it your own? the provinces will usurp the like
license, and the end of these treaso^s will fall to our share, the end of those
wars unto yours. Nether is there more gotten by murdering your Prince, then by
keeping your hands innocent and clean: as well shall you receive of us a
donatiue for truth, as of others for treason. The Spiculatores
bilme^ being slipped away, the rest of the cohort seeming to be moved with his
words, more of fear, as it happens in tumults, and yet with some reason, make
ready their ensigns, which afterward men supposed was done for a color and
fraud. Marius Celsus also was sent to the selected soldiers of the Illyrian
army, encamped in Vipsanius cloister: and commandment was given to Amulius
Serenus, and Domitius Sabinus, which had bin Primipilares.
leaders of the principal ensign, to fetch forth the German soldiers e
Libertatis ^trio.
out of the court of Liberty. The legion of mariners Galba distrusted, as being
incensed against him for the slaughter of their fellows at his first entry.
Cerius Seuerus, Subrius Dexter, and Pompeius Longinus Tribunes were sent to the
Praetorian camp, to try whether the sedition might now at the beginning, and
before it were grown to a ripenes, by better advise be assuaged. Subrius and
Cerius with threats, and manacing were put by the soldiers to silence: upon
Longinus they lay violent hands, and disarm him, because he had come to that
place not by order of service, but by extraordinary favor of Galba; a man
faithful to his Prince, and therefore of rebels worse liked. The legio^ of
mariners without any stay joined themselves to the^ of the guard: the selected
of the Illy ria^ army, with darts bent upon him, drive Celsus away: the German
ensigns Surtonius somewhat otherwise, c. 20. omnes qui accer serentur, spreve
re nuntium, excepta Germanicorum vexillatione Hi ob recens meritum, quo se
aegros and in validos magnopere sovisset, in auxili um advolauere: sed serius,
itinere devio per ignorantiam locorum retardati.
were long in suspense, being as yet feeble in body, but in mind well
affected, for that being sent by Nero before to Alexandria, at their return
tired and sick with so long a cut they were by Galba carefully cherished. Now
was all the common people, and bondme^ withal assembled into the Palace,
requiring with tumultuous cries, as if they were to demand in the stage or Race
a pastime, that Otho might be pulled in pieces, and those other traitors
exiled; not upon then better to meet and encounter the danger: that would at
least breed Otho more envy, and were withal most for their honor. As Vinius
replied against the opinion, Laco, at the instigation of Icelus, persisting in
private displeasures to the overthrow of the public estate, begins to
charge him with manacing and threats: and Galba without any longer delay gave
himself wholly to follow their counsel, which had the fairer show in
appearance. yet first was Piso sent to the camp, as being a youngman of great
name and gracious, fresh in men's favor, and enemy to Vinius, either because he
was so, or that Vinius ilwillers did wish it to be so; and it is thought rather
he was so indeed. Piso was scant gone abroad, when firsl a flying rumor
without author was spread, that Otho was slain in the camp: anon, as in great
lies it falls out, some affirmed they were present, and saw it; a report which
men partly rejoicing, and partly not curious, Purposing only, as Plutarch
reports, to show himself abroad to the people, and do his sacrifice to the
gods for his deliverance, as making no doubt but that Otho was dead. (...):
but in the end he found himself bidden to another banquet.
puts on Thoracem. Sueton. Lorica^ linteam.
a brestplate, and being not able for body nor age to sustain the press which
came in upon him, was lifted up in a chair. In the Palace Julius Atticus met
him, one of the Spiculatores
bilmen, holding out a bloody sword in his hand, with which he cried alowde,
he had slain Otho. My friend, quoth Galba, who bad thee? a man of rare virtue
to keep in awe a licentious soldier, whom neither threats could terrefie, nor
flattering speeches corrupt and abuse.

By this time the soldiers were wholly agreed, with so great feruency
favoring Otho, that not content to assist him in companies with their bodies,
they cast a ring about him with banners, as he stood Medium inter signa. i.
medium inter milites subsignanos.
in the midst of the ensigns in the Tribunal, in which a little before the
image of Galba was planted in gould, not suffering the Tribunes or Centurions to
approach, yea and further the common soldier bidding beware of officers. All the
whole camp resounded with clamours, with tumult, with mutual encouragement:
none of those different chantings of dull flattery practiced among the popular:
but as they espied any soldier coming, they would take him by the hand,
embrace him in their armor, set him fast by them, begin him the oath,
recommending sometime their Emperor to the soldiers, and sometime the
soldiers to their Emperor. Neither was Otho slack for his part to stretch
forth his hands, to bow himself to every mean person, jacere oscula. (...).
Xiphilinus.
to throw kisses abroad, and what servile crowching else not for an Empire!
When the whole legion of mariners had sworn allegiance, trusting now to his
strength, and supposing it requisite to incense them in common, whom as yet he
had only incited in several, standing upon the rampire of the camp, he begins
in this manner. "I am come here, as you see, to your presence, my loving
companions: but what I am, that cannot I tell. A private man I will not be
termed, being named Prince by you; nor Prince well I cannot, whilst yet
another possesses the place: your name also, whether traitors, or true
subjects, shall be likewise in doubt, till it be decided what manner of man you
have in your camp, an Emperor of the people of Rome, or an enemy. Do you not
hear how my death, and your punishment are both For so Tacitus says a little
before: dissonus clamor plebis and servitiorum, caedem Othonis and coniuratorum
exilium poscentiu^.
required at once? so evident it is, that we can neither perish nor be safe,
but jointly together: and perhaps Galba, according to the measure of his
discretion, has promised it already, as one that could find in his heart,
vnaskt, unrequired, to murder so many thousands of most innocent citizens. A
horror perceth my heart, as often as I call to remembrance the dismal entry, and
that only conquest of his, when he did in sight of the city command to be
slain the tenth person of those, which upon their humble request he had
received into his protection. Such was his vnpros;perous entry: and what
glorious fact brought he beside to commend him withal to the Princes place,
saving the slaughter of Obultronius Sabinus and Cornelius Marcellus in Spain,
of Betuus Chilo in France, of Fonteius Capito in Germany, of Clodius Macer in
Afric, of Cingonius in the way, Turpilianus in the city, Nymphidius in the
camp? nay, what province is there, what camp any where, that he has not, as
he pretendes, amended and corrected, but in truth with cruelty misused and
stained with blud? Those things which other men account heinous faults, he
terms them gentle remedies: cruelty he clokes with the name of severity; and
wretched covetousness he terms provident sparing; your stripes and
indignities ancient discipline. Since the death of Nero it is scarce seven
months, and yet has one Icelus already raked more together, then all that
rabble, Polycletus, Vatinius, Elius was left by Nero, at his pilgrimage into
Achaia, as his vicegerent in Rome with absolute authority; and with him
Polycletus: which two as Xiphilinus witnesses, p. 191. (...). Of Vatinius
TAcitus makes mention. 15. Ann. p. 523. Vatinius inter faedissima eius audae
ostenta fuit, Sutrinae tabernae alumnus, corpore detorto, facetijs scurrilibus
primo in contumelias assumptus, deinde optimi cuiusque ariminatione ^o vsque
valuit, vt gratia, pecunia, vi nocendi etiam malis prae mineret.
Elius, and their fellows have done in so many years. And certainly with
less covetousness, and more respect would Titus Vinius have raged, if himself
had been Emperor: now he oppresses us as vassals, and holds us vile as
strangers: the only wealth of that man were enough for the donatiue, which
daiely is cast in your teeth, but never paid to your purses. And lest we might
hope to better our estate, at the lest when Galba were gone, he has fetched
out of exile one, that in cruelty and covetousness he judged likest himself.
you saw, fellow soldiers, by that notable storm, that even the gods much
abhorred that untoward adoption. The Senate, the people are of the same mind:
your part now only remains: your valor and virtue is looked for: you are the
men who ad strength to good causes: without you, be the attempt never so
worthy, it shall never take any worthy effect. I desire you not to a war, I
call you not to any dangerous exploit: the soldiers be all of our side, and
that one unarmed cohort, which waits upon Galba, endeavors not now to defend
him against us, but rather detaines him from scaping out from us: when you
shall come in their view, when they shall see my enseigne, this will be their
only contention who shall in my behalf do greatest service. No delay in that
enterprise is to be used, which never is commended, before it be Suetonius c.
6. adds: Ad co^ciliandor pollicitationibus militum animos nihil magis
proconcione testatus est, quam id demum se habitururm, quod sibi illi
reliquissens.
ended. Then commanded the armory to be opened: arms by and by were taken
contrary to custom, and order of service, where the Praetorian and Legionarie
man is severed by his different cognizance: with helmets and targets they
mingle themselves among the Aide-soldiers: no Centurion nor Tribune encouraging
them, they become captain and encourager, each man to himself; and that which
cheefely encouraged the bad, the good were discouraged, and quite out of heart.
Now Piso being scared away with the noise, as the sedition grew fuller and
hoater, with showtes resounding even into the city, by this time had joined
himself to Galba again, who was in the mean season issued out of the Palace,
and come near to the Place of public assembly. Marius Celsus likewise had
brought an heavy answer again: whereupon some thought it expedient to retire
into the Palace again, some rather to possess themselves of the Capitol,
some other to take the Rostra: but the most did only impugn the opinions of
others; and as often it chances in counsels crossed with evil success, that
way was commonly judged the best, whereof the time was forepassed. It is
reported that Laco, unwitting to Galba, had a meaning to have slain Titus
Vinius, hoping belike by his death to mitigate the soldiers, or mistrusting he
was confederate with Otho, or else upon private displeasure: the time and the
place bred scruple in the matter: for when men are set in a killing, it is not
so easy to stop when you list; and many other accidents stayed the purpose;
fearful messages, the slippings away of his friends, their courages being
all quayled, even of those which cheerfully at first made most oftentation of
loyalty and stoutnesse. Galba was driven to and fro with the crowde of the
company, as it waued up and down. The standing in Basilicae at templa: (...).
Plut.
temples and churches on every side were taken to view this lugubri prospectu,
for prospectui. Tacitus 2. Hist. 93. Luxu and saginae mancipatus. Plutarch
turns this place (...).
sorrowful sight: the people al mute, with countenances amazed, and listening
ears; no tumult, no quietness; such a silence as argued great fear, and great
anger: notwithstanding it was carried to Otho, that the common people were a
putting in arms: whereupon he For he himself remained still in the camp.
Suet. Oath. c. 6, while this tragedy was a playing; a circumsta^ce which in
reason Tacitus should not have toched so lightly.
commanded his men to march in all speed, and prevent the danger. So the
Roman soldiers, Equites. ^iso p^ccul Galba, (...) Sue^. ^. 19.
set spurs to their horses, and fiercely in arms rush into the Place of
assembly: neither did the sight of the Capitol, nor reverence of the temples
about, nor the Princes past and to come, terrefy them from committing that
abominable act; whereof the next successor is the revenger. The
enseigne-bearer of Galbaes cohort, Atilius Vergilio by report, as soon as he
saw a far of the armed men, marching in array, plucked down the image of
Galba, and dashed it against the pauement. by that it did plainly appear,
that all the soldiers were wholly for Otho. The people unbidden make away in all have, leaving the Place of assembly void, or if any seemed to linger they
were drawn upon by the soldiers. At Lacus Curtius Galba was tumbled out of his
chair to the ground, through the fearefulnes of them which bare it. His last
words are diuersely by diverse reported, as they admired or hated the man: some
say, he humbly demanded, what ill he had ever deserved, requesting only a few
days respit to pay their donatiue. The most do agree, that he offered stoutly
his neck, to do their pleasure, and strike, if it seemed so good to the
common wealth: it mattered not much to the murderers what he did say. The very
man that slew him is not certainly known: some say Terentius Euocatus; others
Lecanius: the more received opinion is, that Camurius, a soldier of the
fifteenth legion, pierced his throat with a sword: his arms and legs (
Thorace, or Loricae lintea: supra.
for his breast was armed) others did miserably mangle and hew: many stabbes,
upon a savage and beastly cruelty, were bestowed upon the headless carcass.
Next after Galba, they assailed Vinius, of whom likewise there is question,
whether the present fear wasted his speech, or else that he cried aloude, They
had no commandment from Otho to kill him: which, whether he fained for fear,
or confessed as associate of the conspiracy, the same of his lewd life does
make it more probable he was guilty of the treason, whereof he was Tacitus
supra. Galbam, Titus Vinius deterrimus morta lium, odio flagitiorum onerabat.
cause. At the first wound in his hamme he tumbled down before the temple of
Diuus Julius, and after by Julius Carus, a legionarie soldier, was thrust
through the sides. A worthy man that day our age did aforde, Both Plutarch and
Xiphilinus write that not Piso, but Galba was protected by Densus.
Sempronius Denfus a centurion of the cohort which guarded Galba, and by him
appointed to wait upon Piso, who Plut. notes that he first feared them with
the vine rod. (...).
with his rapier drawn encountering the armed men, and vpbrayding to them their
disloyalty, partly by deeds, and partly by words turning the blows upon his
own head, gave Piso, although he were wounded, time and space to escape away.
Piso recovering the temple of Vesta, and being received by the sextens
compassion, and hid in his cabin, not by the reverence of sanctuary, or sacred
ceremonies of the holy goddess, but only by hiding himself, differred
imminent death, when as straight there came thither, by Othoes express
commandment, hoatly bent by name for his blood, Sulpicius Florus, one of the
British cohortes, lately by Galba made citizen of Rome, and Statius Murcus a
Spiculator.
bilman: of these two was Piso drawn out, and slain in the gates of the
temple. No man's death did Otho so ioifully take; no head did he view and
reuiew so infatiably: whether it was that then first of all his mind was at
ease, and free to rejoice, lightened of al manner burden and care; or that the
remembrance of majesty in Galba, of acquaintance in Vinius, had struck a kind
of horror into his unmerciful mind: mary for Piso, his enemy and concurrent,
he thought he might justly with all reason rejoice at his ruin. Their heads
were planted upon spears, and carried among the enseignes of the cohortes,
near the Standerd Of what Legion? of the mariners as I think: for other
legion I find none in this action: and they received Aquilam and signa at
Othoes hand, as it may seem by Tacitus p. 57. l vlt. of Galba they demanded it
indeed at his entry, but they were paid with other money for their pains.
of the Legion, striving to show their bloody hands, they which had slain
them, they which were present, some truly, some falsely, all making their
vaunt, as of a goodly and memorable act. More then a hundredth and twenty
supplications, put up for some good service that day, were afterward found by
Vitellius, who caused the men to be al sought out, and slain, not in honor of
Galba, but upon a tradition received among Princes as an assurance of their
present estate, and a mean of revenge afterward. Now the Senate and people
were no more the same men: they run all by heaps to the camp, contending
and shouldring who should get foremost, defacing Galba, extolling the soldiers
judgment, kissing Othoes hand, and the less they meant it in heart, doing so
much the more in outward appearance. Neither did Otho reject any one though
coming single, moderating with speeches and countenance the greedy, and
manacing disposition of the soldiers; who demanded to the slaughter Marius
Celsus Consul elect, and to the last faithful to Galba, offended with his
sufficiency and innocence as capital crimes. A quarrel was sought apparently
to sack, and massacre, and to overthrow personages of honor: but Plutarch p.
1511. (...)
Othoes authority was not sufficiently grounded as yet to prohibit a
mischief, well might he command one: so making semblaunce of anger, he
wills them to put him in prison; that he would show at leisure exemplary
justice upon him, and so delivered him from present destruction. All things
beside were ordered according as the soldiers appointed. They elected
captains of the Guard Plotius Firmus in time past a common soldier, and then
captain of the watch, and in Galbaes life a favorer of Otho: to him they
adioyne Licinius Proculus, a near and inward acquaintance of Otho, and
therefore suspected to have been a furtherer of his proceedings. Flauius
Sabinus they ordained Provost of the city, following therein the judgment of
Nero, under whom he had obtained before the said charge, most men in so doing
respecting Vespasian his brother. With great instance was it demanded that the
fees By Suet c. 7. it appears that Otho was present in Senate. Vergen te iam
die ingressut enatum (Otho) positaque breui ratione, quasi raptus de publico,
and susci pere imperium vicoactus, gestu rusque cmmuni o^nium arbitrio,
Palatiu^ petiit.
to Otho is awarded Tribunitiall authority, and the name of Augustus, Crispina
paid for her fathers ten thousand sesterces: that is, 78. li 2 c 6. d
Plutarch. 1511
and redeemed their heads, which the murderers had kept to be sold. Piso was
when he died one and thirty years old, of better fame then fortune: his
brother Magnus was slain by Claudius, and Crassus by Nero: himself lived a
great while in exile, and four days a Prince, adopted in have before his
elder brother, with this only advantage, that he was thereby the first made
away. Titus Vinius lived forty seven years, not all after one sort: his
father was of a Praetorian house; his mothers father one of the e proscriptis.
s^ ab Octavio, Antonio, Leido, triumuiris reip. perdendae.
proscriptes. At his first service in war he became infamous: his
Lieutenaunt general Caluisius Sabinus wife, carried with an unwomanly desire to
view the site of the camp; and having in soldiers attire wantonly perused
the watch, and other campe-offices, in the very Principia the place in the
camp where the standerde and enseignes are pitched.
Principia forfeyted her honor; and the man accused of the fact was Titus
Vinius: whereupon by commandment of Caius the Emperor he was emprisoned, and
anon through change of times being enlarged he passed through offices of
honor without touch; first Praetor, then Lieutenaunt of a Legion with good
commendation: afterward he stained himself with a servile crime, conueying
away a golden cup from Claudius board; whereupon the day following Claudius made
him alone of all his guestes to be served in fictilibus.
earthen: notwithstanding being Proconsull of Gallia Narbonensis he governed
the country with great severity and sincerenesse: anon by reason of credit
with Galba being drawn to the place of dangerous downe-fall, he was bold,
crafty, active, and as he listed to bend his mind, mischievous or industruous
in equal degree. The testament of Titus Vinius his wealth made void; Pisoes,
his poverty ratified. Galbaes body long neglected, and in the dark
despitefully entreated, Argius his steward, one (...) Plutarch. p. 1511.
buried with small ceremony in his private gardens. His head by the lixae, qui
extra ordinem and sine armis exorcitum sequu^tur questus gratia. Polybius,
Festus
followers and calones, miliu^. servi; so called, because they carried clubs
after their masters, which the Graecians call (...). Servius. Festus.
rascalles of the camp, mangled and stabbed was found the day after before
Patrobius toombe, a freedman of Nero, whom Galba had executed, and so was put
with his body burned before. This end had Seruius Galba, having lived of it:
of other men's money not greedy, sparing of his own, of the common a niggard:
bearing with his favorites and freedmen, without reprehension, when they were
good; if they were bad, to his own shame ignorant of their ill doings: but
his honorable birth, and the dangerous times covered the matter, entitling that
wisdom, which in truth was but sloth: in his flourishing age greatly
renowned for service in Dio lib. 60. p. 460. (...) (which was the first year
of Claudius Empire) (...).
Germany: Afric he ruled as Pruconsull with great moderation: and growing in
years, the nearer Spain uprightly and well: seeming more than a private man,
whilst he was private, and by Ausonius. Spem frustrate senex, privatus ssptra
mereri Visus er imperio proditus inferior. Fama tibi me lior inveni sed iuctior
ordo est, Complacuisse de hinc, displicuisse prius.
all men's opinions capable of the Empire, had he never been Emperor.

VIII. After the death of Galba, the news growing hoater of Vitellius and the
German revolt, how the City stood. affected between him and Otho.
THE city thus terrefied, and having in horror both the haynousnesse of the
late fact, and the old conditions of Otho, was put in a further fear, by the
news of Vitellius revolt, which were in Galbaes time suppressed, that men
should believe no more had rebelled, save the army of upper Germany alone.
But then seeing Tac. p. 58. Vulgus, and magnitudine nimia curarum expers
populus: and yet expers not in all circumstances, as here may b^ seen, not of
all common cares: Plebscui vnica ex rep. annonae cura. says Tacitus elsewhere.
commons also openly began to wail and lament. Their talk was no more of
the fresh and bleeding examples of the late murdering peace: but of civil
wars recorded in ancient story, of the city so often surprised by her own
citizens, Italy wasted, the provinces spoiled; of Pharsalia, Phillippi,
Perusia, Mutina, At Phatfalia Caesar overthrew Pompey: an. vr. conditae 7^6. at
Phillippi Octavius and Antonius overca^e Brutus and Cassiu^: an. v. c 712. in
the Perusin war Octavius took arms against L. Antonius and Fulvia. Anno 713.
at Mutina the Consuls Hirtius and Pa^sa fought with M Antonius. an. 710
famous names of common calamities. The world was subverted almost, even when
good men strove for the state: notwithstanding there remained when Caius
Julius, there remained when Caesar Augustus was conqueror, the form of an
Empire. For admitting them before equal in vices, the victory it self would
corrupt the winner: vi^toria etiam egregios duces insolescere, says Tacitus
elsewhere.
worse then before. Some secretly wished Vespasian with the Eastern armies;
and as he was more liked then either of the other, so did they greatly mislike
to multiply wars and calamities: and again Vespasian was not altogether
without exception; the

IX. The revolt of the armies of both Germanies, and rising of Vitellius.
NOW will I set down the beginning and causes of Vitellius commotion. After
that Julius Vindex with all his host was slain, the praemia: as the sack or
spoil of a city or couet^ie. donatiues, or any other extraordinary librality.
rewards and booties, then ordinary pay they had passed before a long,
fruitles, and hard service there, partly through the ingenio loci coeliq. 2.
Hist. p. 97. Germanicae hiberna coelo, ac laboribus ^dura.
quality of the soil, and clymate, and partly through the straitness of
discipline, which in time of peace being rigorously observed, by civil wars
is utterly dissolved; corrupters being ready at hand on both sides, and
fugitives scaping as then without punishment. Men, armor, horses they had
sufficient for use, and ornament too: but before the Against Vindex.
war they had no further acquaintance together, but with the men of their
own troops, and companies: the armies lay severed And so remained, for ought
I know, in the war against Vindex, where only the upper army was present,
by the testimony of all writers, and Tacitus himself in many places.
in several provinces, then against Vindex the Legions being assembled in one,
and having proved themselves and the forces of Gallia, sought now a fresh
occasion of wars, and new troubles, not terming To wit, them of Gallia, with
whom they had sought.
them as they were wont, friends and allies, but enemies and conquered
persons. The tract of Gallia, which lies upon Rhene, having followed before the
soldiers side, auanced them selves then with the foremost to instigate the
armies against the Galbians: for so now they called them, disdayning the name
of Vindex as stale. Thus being incensed against the Sequani and Hedui, and so
further, as the towns were in wealth, they conceived in hope sacking of
cities, wasting of countries, rifling of houses, irritated next after
covetousness and presumption, principal vices of them which be stronger, by
the perverseness of them of Gallia foolishly bragging, that Galba had released
a fourth part of their tribute, and public. i. (...), for the primores of
Gallia had obtained the privilege before Claudius time. 1. Ann p. a 11.
priuores Galli^ fa^d^ra and (...) secu^^.
generally made them citizens of Rome in despite of the army. Moreover it was
given out craftily, and rashly believed, reports from Rome, the auiditate
imperandi.
upon an extreme desire of the Empire. Many in both armies there were, as
modest and quiet men, so likewise bad and valiant; by name among other Alienus
Caecina and Fabius Valens Valens in lower Germany where Vitellius: and Caecina
in higher, where Hordeonius Flaccus was Lieutenant general.
Lieutenants of Legions, in appetites immoderat, and singularly rash, Valens
offended with Galba, as being not reco^pensed according to his deserts for
discovering Verginius doubtful proceeding, and the oppressing of Capitoes
conspiracy, ceased not to urge and incite Vitellius; laying open before him the
soldiers fervent good will; the honorable report that went euerywher of his
doings: as for Hordeonius Flaccus that seely man could hinder but little, that
Britanny would ioin, the German Aids follow him, that the provinces were nor
assured; in fine that the old man was Emperor of curtesy and quickly would
lose it; let Vitellius only but open his bosom, make toward, and receive in
good fortune, as she offered her self: that Verginius indeed had good cause to
be doubtful, being only of a Gentleman's house, his father having not borne
office; the place was above his capacity, if he had undertaken it, and then
refusing it, he was out of danger: that contrariwise Vitellius father had bin
thrice Consul, Censor, collegium Caesaris. Suceon. Vitellio. c. 2. l.,
Vitellius imperatoris pater. cum Claudio principe duos or dinarios consulatus
censuramque gessis.
colleague with the Emperor: that these qualities in the father took long ago
from the son the security of a private person, and put upon him the dignity of a
Prince. His dull spirits were moved with these speeches rather to desire the^ to
hope. But in upper Germany Caecina a comply young man, of body big, and mind
insatiable, quick of speech, of gate stately, had maruelously won the goodwill
of the soldier. This youngman Galba promoted to govern a legion, for that
being Questor in Baetica, he came with out stay to his side: by and by being
convicted to have dealt false with the common treasure, he was by Galbaes
commandment endited of purloyning: Caecina taking heavily the disgrace,
determined to trouble the state, and with the calamities of the commonwealth to
cover and close up his own private wounds. Neither in the army wanted there
seeds of sedition: for they al had been present in field against Vindex, and
could not be brought to swear unto Galba, before they did know that Nero was
slain; and were also in taking the oath prevented by the enseignes of low
Germany. again the Treueri, Lingones, and those other cities, which Galba
had pinched with heavy edicts, or with loss of territory, lay near to the
standing camps of the Legions: whereupon grew seditious conferences, and the
soldier by conversation with the (...). Xiphilinus. 202.
a reason of the good will borne to Verginius to be employed for any other man.
The Lingones according to their accustomed manner had sent gifts to the Legions
2. Hist. p. 63. Centurionem Sisennam dextras, concodiae insignia, Syriaci
exercitus nomine, ad Praetorianos ferentem, varijs artibus aggressus est.
Right-hands in token of mutual love and hospitality. their messengers
purposely with sad cheer and heavy countenance, in the Principia, in the
soldiers cabins, lament and bewail, sometime the wrong done to themselves,
sometime the honor done to their neighbors, and perceiving their talk had so
ready an audience, they passed on further, incensing their minds, and
bewayling the hard hap even of the army it self, their dangers, and
contumelies. The matter thus growing toward a sedition, Hordeonius Flaccus
commands the messengers to get them away; and that their departure might be
the more secret, he commandes them to avoid the camp in the night season.
Thereupon a suspicion and grievous rumor arose, the most part affirming they
were made away: and that without doubt, unless they provide for themselves the
more surely, it would come to pass that those of the soldiers which were of
most courage, and most misliked the present estate, should likewise by night,
unawares to the rest, be secretly murdered. Upon this the Legions privily
conspire, and covenant together: the Ayde-soldier was made also of the party,
whom at first they suspected, as though with his cohortes and wings enuironing
them he meant them a mischief; but a none he appeared more earned then any, as
the bad agree better to broach a new war, then in peace to keep concord
one with another. Notwithstanding the Legions of lower Germany, the first day
of January, swear their solemn allegiance to Galba, with much ado, and
slow coming forward, some sew in the first ranckes yielding a weak applause;
the rest standing mute, each looking his neighbor should dare, as it is the
nature of men, to follow with speed that, which they are otherwise of
themselves loath to begin: but even the Legions were diuersely minded, the
first and the fifth rebelliously affected, so that some cast stones at Galbaes
images: the fifteenth and sixteenth murmuring and threatening, and daring no
further, stood waiting for others to show them the way. In higher army the
fourth Legion and the eighteenth, wintering both in one At Magnoiaown.
place, Statimque (says Suet. c. 16.) legationem ad Praetorianos cum mandatis
destinauerunt; displicere imperatorem in Hispania factum, eligerem ipsi, quem
cuncti ex ercitus comprobarent. But the embassage, as it may seem, upon the
revolt to Vitellius was revoked.
To the Senate and people of Rome, a style long ago ouerworne; no Lieutenant,
no Tribune laboring for Galba, yea some, as in tumultes it happens,
troubling more: nevertheless no man presumed to make any solemn oration
assembly-wise, or out of Tribunal; for as yet they had none to bestow their
benefit upon. Hordeonius Flaccus Lieutenant general stood by Yet was he left
by Vitellius Lieutenant of both Germanies. 2. Hist. afterward he favored
Vespasians side, and lastly was slain by his own soldiers. 4. Tistoriarum.
and looked on, while this pageant was playing, not daring nether to restrain
the rebellious, nor stay the doubtful, nor encourage the good; a timorous
slugge, and innocent, as being a coward. Four Centurions of the eighteenth
Legion, Nonius Receptus, Donatius Valens, Romilius Marcellus, and Calpurnius
Repentinus, endeavoring to save and protect the images of Galba, with the
soldiers violence were carried away, bound and laid up: neither did there
roman any more in any of them al any spark of faith, or allegiance, no
memory of the Which they had sworn to Galba, pressed thereto by Verginius
after Neroes decease.
oath before given; but as in seditions it happens, as the most part went so
did they all go. The same day at night the Aquilifer.
Standerd-bearer of the fourth Legion brings word to Vitellius, as he sat at
banquet in occupare muta^tem fortunam, is peradventure properlye to catch first
hold, or put you self in sure possession of fortune wavering, and now
standing in doubt, where she might best bestow herself.
to use the opportunity, and profer them a Prince. Thereupon Vitellius
dispatcheth in post to the Legions, and Lieutenants of his own province,
aduertising them that the higher army was revolted from Galba: wherefore either
fight they must against the reuolters, or if they liked better of peace, and
concord, set up an Emperor: and with less danger they might take a Prince,
then seek one. The first Legion lay nearest, and Fabius Valens Lieutenant, of
all the rest the forwardest man: who, the very day after, with the horsemen of
his Legion, and of the Aids, entering Coleyn, Sueron Vitel. c. 8. somewhat
otherwise: vix dum mense wis acto, neque dici, neque temporis habita ratione,
ac iam vispere, subito a militib. e cubiculo raptus, ita us erat in vest
domestica Imperator est consalulatus, circumlatusque per celeberrimos vitos.
Plutarch says it was at midday. p. 1506.
solemnly saluted Vitellius Emperor. The rest of the Legions of the same
province strove who should be foremost to follow the example: and the higher
army, laying aside those glorious titles, and goodly to show, of the Senate and
people of Rome, the third of January roundly come over to Vitellius side: a man
might easily perceive that the other two days they meant nothing less, then a
free commonwealth. They of Coleyn, the Treueri, and Lingones, were not
inferior to the soldiers in forwardness, offering aids, horses, armor,
money, as they were able in body, wealth, or wit. and not only the manipuli; i.
manipulares, in opposition to primores castrorum.
bands and common soldier, upon an instinct and heat of affection, and
covetous humor, gave up their money, and in steed of money their balteos. Varro
lib. 4 de ling. Lat. Balteum, cingulum e corio bullatum, usually trimmed with
silver or gold. Spartianus Hadriano. p. 804. vestem humillimam frequenter, and
sine auro balteum sumebat.
belts, their trappings, the silver trimming of their harnish. Vitellius having
greatly commended their cheerful willingness, commits the offices of court,
commonly supplied by freedmen, to Gentlemen of Rome; and paies the vacations to
the Centurio^s out of his cofers. The soldiers cruelty demanding many to death
he does often co^de scend unto: sometimes he deceiues them with show of
emprisoning. He that wrote the first news to Galba of the German rebellion supra.
Pompeius Propinquus, Procurator of Belgica, was straight put to death: Julius
Burdo admiral of the German navy he saved by sleight. the whole army was
incensed against him, as first an entiser of Fonteius Capito to rebel, and
then a great helper to make him away: well beloved was Capito, and gladly
remembered; and in that raging and bloodthirsty company a man might openly kill
whom he list, mary pardon or save but by policy he could not: so Burdo was
presently had into prison, and after the victory, the soldiers malice being
appeased, enlarged again. In the mean time Crispinus the Centurion was
yielded unto them, as an vt piaculum (...).
expiatory sacrifice, who had embrued his hands with Capitoes blood, and
therefore more in the eye of the soldier, and of less account For it might be
his own case.
with Vitellius. Next after was 2 Hist. p. 90. vita Agric. page 591.
Trebellius Maximus was Lieutenant general there, contemned and hated of the
army for his niggardly sparing and polling: and Roscius Coelius Lieutenant of
the twentieth legion inflamed them further against him, his ancient enemy, but
now by occasion of civil dissensions they were fallen out further, and brake
into more heinous terms: Trebellius obiecting to Coelius and charging him with
factious behavior, and dissoluing of discipline: Coelius again that
Trebellius had spoiled and beggered the legio^s: but in the mean time, the
lieutenants thus iarring, the modesty of the army was marred; the discord at
length growing so great, that Trebellius being railed away by the Aids also,
in cohorts and wings sorting themselves to Coelius side, was glad to give place
being forsaken, and flee to Vitellius. The province although the lieutenant
general was absent, remained in quiet, the Lieutenants of the Legions supplying
the charge, in right of equal authority; but Coelius indeed bare the most
stroke, because he was of most boldness. and wings, This number of forty
thousand far exceeding the number of a Legion in any age was made up by gelding
the other Legions of that province, yet leaving unto the^ their standerd and
their name, and by Auxiliaries of the Germans: as it appears by the words of
Tacitus.
forty thousand armed men. Out of higher Germany Caecina led thirty thousand,
the flower and strength whereof consisted in the one and twentieth Legion.
Moreover they had both assigned unto them Not only of the French side, but ^
Trans rhenanis; and such, I think, were principally meant in this place.
Aides of the Germans; out of whom Vitellius, who was to follow with the maine
weight of the war, furnished up his army also. Strange was the difference
between the army and their Emperor* the soldier was instant, demanding arms
whilst they of Gallia stood in a fear, whilst Spain in a doubt: as for the
winter, that was no let, nor such like excuses receueable, only in idle and
peaceable times: that Italy must out of hand be invaded, the city surprised;
that naught is more safe then speed in civil dissension, where dispatch is
more needful then long consultation: on the other side Vitellius, a man of
nothing, playing the Prince before hand in rioting and prodigal banquets,
drunck at noonday, and heavy with surfeit; but the soldiers forwardnes and
feruency fully supplied the place of the leader, as if he were present in
person, encouraging, or terrifiyng the valiant or dastard. When al was in order
ready to march, they call to sound the remove, increasing Vitellius style with
the In perpetuum says Suet. Vitel. c. 8. but Tacit. 3. Hist. teaches us
otherwise. Quin and Caesarem dici se voluit aspernatus antea.
he refused to be called.

X How Fabius Valens guided his charge of forty thousand fighting men from
Coleyn to the Cottian Alps.
THE very day of removing there appeared a by the which men assuage their
enemies anger; though war they had none, yet then were they forced to
purchase their peace. Valens in the Sueton. Vitellio c. 9. says that
Vitellius hard the news of Galbaes death before Valens departed.
city of the Leuci received the news, that Galba was slain, and Otho in
place: the soldier was neither gladder, nor sadder, having nothing but war
in his mind: the French thereby were For as long as Galbatheir benefactour
lived, they were loath any way, but enforced to aid Vitellius but now hating a
like Otho, and Vitellius, and fearing but the one, it was great reason to make
the most countenance thither, whence they feared most present danger.
resolved; Otho and Vitellius they hated alike, and Vitellius they feared
beside. The next city, was that of the Lingones, sure to the side: being
entertained there courteously, they requited it with modest behavior: but the
joy lasted not long through the disorder of those cohorts, which being
departed, as before I have said, from the fourteenth legion, Fabius Valens had
joined to his army* hard words grew at the first, then quarrelling between
the Batauians, and Legionaries: and as the rest of the soldiers suited on
sides, it had welny come to a hot fray, had not Valens in time, by punishing a
few, reclaymed the Batauians, who had now forgotten their duty. Against the
Hedui was sought, but in vain, some occasion of war: being willed to bring
in both money and armor, they brought also vittailes for nothing. That which
the Hedui did upon fear, the same did the Lugdunenses for joy, nevertheless
the Italian Legion and Taurin wing were taken away. The eighteenth cohort it
was thought convenient to leave there at Lions in the accustomed standing
camp. Manlius Valens Lieutenant of the Italian Legion, although he had well
deserved of the side, was not in any credit with Vitellius: Fabius by secret
sinister reports had defaced him unwitting, in outward speech commending him,
that he might be at more unawares circumuented. The ancient hart-burning The
discord, as it may seem was founded upon this ground. The first inhabiters of
Lions, had been driven by force out of Vienna, and therefore were justly to
hate them, as iniust usurpers of that which was theirs.
between them of Lions, and them of Vienna, was by the late war freshly
revived: much hurt was done on both sides, Municipalem aemulationem bellis
civilibus miscentes, as Tacitus writes 3. Hist. of Capua and Putcoli.
so often and in so cruel sort, that a man might easily see, they fought not
alone for Nero and Galba: and Galba by occasion of displeasure had confiscated
the reuenews of the Lugdunenses; contrariwise much honored them of Vienna:
whereupon grew emulation and envy, and inseparable hatred between them, whom
one river separated. Upon these causes, the Lugdunenses incited the soldiers
severally to the subversion of the Viennenses; showing unto them how they had
besieged Lions, furthered Vindex attempts, mustered of late Legions for Galba:
and having so placed in the first show the causes why justly they were to be
hated; then they suggest to the soldiers mind, what a rich and welthy pray
they might get: and so from secret exhorting proceeding to public requests,
they besought them to go and revenge so many wrongs, to raze the seat-towne of
the French war: that there was That is, 46. ^. 10.d ob. and so for 40000.
(for so many he had beside the eight cohorts of Batauians, the legio Italica,
and ala Taurina) 93750.li.
three hundredth sesterces a man. Then was the antiquity and dignity of the
colony respected: then were the words of Fabius, comme^ding unto them the
lives, and welfare of the Viennenses, patiently heard: being fined
notwithstanding to forfait their public munition, each man according to his
ability with private provision helped the soldier. But the report went
constantly that Fabius favor was bought with a large sum of money: the man, a
great while needy and poor, beco^ming now rich on the sudden, cloaked not well
the change of his fortune; exercising excessiuely the lusts and desires which
long poverty had kindled; and of a beggarly yongma^ a prodigal old. Afterward
the army marched on slowly through the territory of the Allobroges, and the
Vocontij, the General setting to sale the length of his iournies, and places of
lodging; bargaining shame lesly with the owners of the grounds, and magistrates
of the cities, and that in such threatening manner, that he offered to set

XI The journey of Caecina from Coleyn with thirty thousand men through the
Penine Alps into Italy.
CAECINA gained more spoil, and shed more blood. The Heluetians (a Liuy, lib.
21. fol. 131. seems to call them Semigermanos. Quae ad Peninum ferunt itinera
obsepta gentibus Semigermanis fuerunt.
of Gallia anciently in name for warlike men, and after for the memory of their
renown) having not heard of Galbaes death, and refusing to be at Vitellius
devotion, had exasperated his froward and troublesome disposition. The war
was co^menced (...) from the soldiers rage by a coulorable casting in prison,
to be sent for into the Capitol: his meaning was, by pardoning so noble a man,
so odious to the side, to purchase a name of merciful dealing. Celsus being
called, constantly confessed the whole accusation of faithfulness unto Galba,
affirming that Princes were not to

XIII. Tigellinus put to death. Crispinilla escapes.
LIKE joy was conceived upon causes unlike, when Tigellinus death was obtained.
virilia seclera, in opposition to foela pueritia. for all vices are not
incident to all ages.
riper years, corrupting Nero to al kind of mischief; some things atte^pting
unwitting to him, and at last a traitor, and backslider from him: whereupon
both the il and well willers of Nero, upon The il willers hating him as Neroes
chief instrument of al wickedness; the wel-willers as one that had left, and
betrayed his master.
diverse respects, cried out importunatly to make him away. In Galbaes time the
credit, and might of Titus Vinius did protect him, who pretended that
Tigellinus before had saved his daughter, as indeed he had done, not upon any
merciful mind, as having murdered so many, but only proiecting for time to
come a plot to escape: for the lewdest men misdoubting the present, and fearing
a change, prepare before hand private friends to set and oppose against public
hatred: whereupon it grows that no care is taken of innocent life, but only a
care to pass without punishment. But now for Vinius sake he fared the worse,
to his own ancient hatefulnes the others late envy being adjoined: insomuch
that the people running by heaps to the Palace, and Places of common assembly,
and where the commons are most in their kingdom, to the Race and Theaters,
ceased not seditiously to molest, til such time as message of death Plutarch.
Othone p. 1514. (...).
was sent to Tigellinus being at the bathes of A place of ordinary repair for
pleasure and health. Tac. 12. Ann. p. 446. Jn tanta mole curarum Claudius
valetudine adversa corripitur, refouendisque viribus mollitie coeli and
salubritate aquarum Sinuessam pergit.
Sinuessa, where, wallowing among his concubines, dallying and kissing, and
using dishonest delays, he cut his own throat at length with a razour,
fouling his infamous life a slow and dishonest departing. About the same time
Galuia Crispinilla was likewise required to the slaughter; but the Prince,
although with some obloquie, shifting it off, saved her life: one which had bin
in her time schoolemistresse of Neroes lusts; and after his death had sailed
into Afric to incite Clodius Macer to war, and evidently endeavored to

XIIII. Of the letters, messages, and practices that passed between the sides.
IN the mean time Otho sent to Vitellius many Suet Othone. c 8. Otho per
internuncios and literas consortem imperij generumque se Vtellie obtulit.
letters spiced with womanish persuasions, and The like conditions offered by
Flavius Sabinus in Vespasians name were accepted by Vitellius as much as in him
lay, had not his friends disturbed the bargain. 3. Hist. p. 139.
offering him money and countenance, and what place of rest he would choose to
pass therein his prodigal life: Vitellius quit him again with the like; at
the first in mild terms, with fond and uncomely dissembling on both sides:
afterward in scolding manner, obiecting each to the other vicious life, and
villainous acts: neither amiss. Otho reuoking the Embassage which Galba had
sent, sends a new in the name of the Senate to both the German armies, the
Italian Legion, and companies which remained at Lions. The Ambassadors that
went stayed with Vitellius, being as it seemed quickly entreated, and willingly
withheld. Those of the Guard, which Otho had assigned For in truth they were
sent to practice the legians.
in show to attend upon the Ambassadors, were turned home again, not suffered
to have conference with the Legions: Fabius Valens sends withal a packet in
the name of the German army to the Praetorian, and Urban cohorts, extolling the
strength of the side, and offering amity; blaming them beside, in that they did
convert upon Otho the title of the Empire, whereof Vitellius had so For
Vitellius was greeted Emperor the second of Innuary, and Othothe fifteenth.
long before the rightful possession. So were they with threats and promises
doubly assayed, as being in war not able to stand, in peace not likely to
loose: notwithstanding the Praetorians persisted for Otho. Plots also were
laid for privy attempts: Otho sent some into Germany, to practice against
Vitellius person, and Vitellius to Rome against Othoes. both missed of their
purpose: the Vitellianists missed the punishment, scaping vnspyed, as in so
great a multitude of men, where no body knows nor marketh another: but
Othoes men, among such as knew each other, were quickly bewrayed, as strangers.
Moreover Vitellius wrote letters to Titianus Othoes brother, threatening the
death of him and his son, is his mother and children took any harm: and so
To wit, of Vitellius and Titianus.
both the houses continued entier; for fear peradventure in Othoes time, but
Vitellius being conqueror, and without such a bridle, carried away the
undoubted commendation of clemency.

XV How the provinces declared themselves in favor or disfavour of the sides.
THE first advertisement which put Otho in courage was out of Illyricum, that
the Legions of Dalmatia, Pannonia and Moesia had sworn unto him: the like was
reported of Spain, and Cluuius Rufus by public edict solemnly praised; and
by and by it was certified that Spain had revolted to Vitellius. Aquitania
likewise, though having received the oath to Otho tendered by Julius Cordus,
remained not long in obedience: fidelity or love bare no where sway: by fear
and force they changed to and fro. The same fear brought to Vitellius the
province of Narbo^, a gentle passage, and easily made, unto the nearer and
stronger. The provinces which were far of, and all the armies severed by sea,
remained at Othoes devotion, not for love to the side, but the name of the
city, and show of the Senate did greatly countenance, and credit the cause: and
he had first possessed their minder, as being the former in speech. In Jury
Vespasian swear his army to Otho, and Mucianus the Legio^s in Syria: Egypt
likewise and Eastward the provinces were al possessed in his name: Afric also
in his obedience, they of Carthage being most forward; not expecting the
Proco^sul Vipsianius Apronianus authority Crescens a freedman of Nero (for he
was in those bad times become a part of public affairs) had feasted the
people for joy of the new Emperor, and the people hastened many things
disorderly. The rest of the cities followed the example of Carthage.

XVI Otho bestows offices: restores the banished: relieveth the provinces,
and erecteth the images of Poppaea his old love.
THE armies and provinces being thus distracted, for Vitellius it was needful,
if he would be Prince, to win it in field. Otho as in time of great peace
disposed the affairs of the Empire, some according to the dignity of the
state, and most otherwise, hasting and shuffling up as present necessity
forced. And first he declares It is indeed somewhat heart to believe, that
Otho should confer such a benefit upon the Lingones in France (for other I
know not) the chiefest) favorers of Vitellius cause, his only concurrent in
the matter of the Empire.
all the Lingones citizens of Rome; upon the province of Baetica bestowing in
pure gift the towns of the Moors; new liberties upon Cappadocia, and new
upon Afric, more for a show then for to continue. Among these things which
the necessity of the present affairs, and cares at hand made passable good,
Otho even then not unmindful of his oulde loves, by an order of Senate,
caused the images of Poppaea to be erected again. It was also supposed he
had a purpose to celebrate the memory of Nero, in hope to allure the hearts of
the commons: and some there were which set out the images of Nero; yea and
certain days the people and soldier, in their acclamations to Otho, as
though they merit to enable and honor him more, cried TO NERO OTHO: he
notwithstanding held it in suspense, ashamed to acknowledge, or afraid to
forbid it.

XVII. The Rhoxolani a people of Sarmatia vanquished, and slain by the
soldiers of Moesia.
MEN'S minds being set upon civil wars, external matters were lightly
regarded: by reason whereof the Rhoxolani a people of Sarmatia, having the
winter before slain two cohorts, ventured more boldlye to invade Moesia. Their
former exploite, and conceit of themselves had assembled nine thousand horse,
more minding the spoil, then provided to fight: whereupon the tertia legio:
peradventure it was written by Tacitus, tres legiones: for so many Legions were
at this present in Moesia and the Lieutenants of all the three Legions were
honored with Co^sular ornaments, and therefore present in the action; and in all
likelihood with the Legions under their charge.
third Legion with the Aids assailed them suddenly as they were straggled and
careless. The Romans had all things fitted for fight: the Sarmatians being
scattered, or through greedines of spoil heavily charged, their horses being
tired by reason of their burdens and slippery ways, as if their hands had bin
tied behind them, were hewed in pieces. It is wonder to see how all the
Sarmatians valor is as it were out of themselves: to fight afoote no nation so
cowardly, on horseback by troops they are hardly resisted: but then the
weather being wet, and the frost somewhat thawed, neither their staves, nor
long two-handed swords served in steed, through the sliding of their horses,
and great weight of their cataphracts; a kind of harnish, that Princes and
noblemen use, composed of iron plates or stiff bend-lether, which as against
blows is sure and of proof, so if one be borne down by the force of the
enemy it makes him unable to rise up again: beside they suncke into the snow
being deep, and not able to bear: contrarily the Roman soldier in his easy
lorica.
corselet nimble and light, a far of with a missili pilo.
dart, or with lance charging upon them, and with a light sword near at
hand, the case so requiring, gored so long the unarmed Sarmatian (for it is
not their manner to ward with their buckler) till at length a few which
remained fled to the marshes: in the one place the mortalnesse, in the other
the misery of their wounds wasted them all. When this was by certain advise
understood at Rome, Marcus Aponius Lieutenant general of Moesia was honored
with a triumphal image, Fuluius Aurelius, In the 2. and 4. book he is still
named Tertius Julianus.
Titius Iulianus, and Numisius Lupus Lieutenants of the Legions with Consular
ornaments; Otho rejoicing, and drawing the glory to himself, as if he also
were fortunate in war; and had by his leaders and armies enlarged the Empire.

XVIII A mutinee of the Gard-souldiers.
ABOUT the same time upon a small sparckle a flame of sedition arose, from
whence no danger was feared, to the destruction almost of the city. Otho had
commanded the seventeenth cohort to be called from Ostia to Rome, and charge
was committed to Varius Crispinus, one of the Praetorian Tribunes, to furnish
it with armor. Which that he might do at more ease, and without interruption,
the camp being quiet, at the shutting of the evening he opened the armory, and
commanded the carts of the cohorts to be laden. The time wrought suspicion,
Odyss. ^. (...) etc.
and weapons seen among drunken persons stirred up a desire in them to be
doing. The soldiers mutin and charge the Centurions and Tribunes with treason,
affirming they purposed to put in arms the Senate, and Senators men against
Otho; some upon ignorance, and overcome with drink, the worst seeking
occasion to spoil, the common sort (as it is commonly seen) desirous of
nouelty howsoever: and as for the better and sounder part, the darkness did not
permit them to show their obedience. And first they murder Crispinus the
Tribune, and the (...). Plut.
seuerest of the Centurions repugning to their seditious attempts: then taking
arms, and drawing their swords, on horseback they make Suet. Othone. c. 8.
cum arma in castris sub nocto^ promerentur, insidias quidam suspicati tumul tum
excitauerunt, ac repent omnes nullo cer to duce in palatium cucurrerunt,
caedem senatus flagitante^. repulsisque tribunorum, qui inhibere tentabant,
nonnullis, and occisi^, sicut era^t cruenti vbinam Jmperator esset requirentes
perruperunt in triclinium vsque, nec nisi viso destiterunt.
toward the town, and the Palace. Otho that night had the (...). Plu
principal men and women of the city at banquet: who standing amazed and
misdoubting what it might be, a casual rage of the soldiers, or a practice of
the Emperor; whether were more danger to stay and be taken, or to flee and
disperse; sometime make show of stoutnesse, sometime bewrayed their fear,
still casting an eye upon Othoes countenance, who, as it falls out where
minds yield to suspicion, did fear, and was feared. And fearing no less for
the Senators sakes then for his own person, he both sent by and by the
captains of the Guard to appease in some sort the soldiers anger, and (...).
Plut.
willed his guests to get them away in all possible speed. Then might one have
seen magistrates every where cast down the marks of their office, eschewing
the multitude of followers and servants, old men and women in dark without
torch creep this way and that, few to their own houses, most to their
friends, and meanest clientes where they least would be looked for. The
soldiers furiously break open the gates of the Palace, and thrust into the
banqueting place, rudely requiring a sight of Otho, having wounded a Tribune
Julius Martialis, and Vitellius Saturninus Praefectus legionis: a kind of
speech which I do not remember in Tacitus elsewhere.
Lieutenant of a Legion, as they endeavored to withstand their violence. On
every side arms and threats, sometime against the Centurions, and Tribunes,
sometime against the whole Senate, frantic upon a blind fear, and because
they could not name any one to the slaughter, demanding license indifferently
against all the Senate; till such time as Otho standing upon his dining bed,
contrary to the majesty of an Emperor, with tears and humble requests, at
last, though hardly, refrained their rage: and so they returned to the camp
unwilling, though after so much harm done. The next day, as if the town had
been taken, the houses were shut, small stirring in streets, the people all
sad, the soldiers hanging their heads, with many heavy looks and little
repentance. Licinius Proculus and Plotius Firmus the captains dealt with the
soldiers by bands, in gentle or rough sort, each after his nature: the
conclusion was this, that they should receive That is, 39.li. 1.s 3.d.
five thousand sesterces a man. Then Otho boldly entered the camp: the
Centurions and Tribunes come round about him, and "My fellow soldiers, I am
not come hither to incite you to love me, and less to exhort you to virtue
and valor; for of both you have great store and too much: but I come to
request a moderation of your valor, and a mean in your love toward me. No
hatred it was, no desire to have (which things have set many armies at
discord) no danger you feared and meant to avoyde, but a tender care, and
excessive affection it was toward me, more zealous then considerate, which
bred and excited the yeasternights trouble: for often the causes of things being
good, yet where judgment is wanting, pernicious ends do often ensue. We are
going to war. what? is it expedient that all messengers have open audience,
that all matters be handled in presence of all? the nature of warring will not
endure it, the swifte sliding away of occasions permits it not. I tell you
it is as behooueful that the soldiers should be ignorant of some things, as
know other some. The authority of Captains, the rigor of discipline is of
that nature, that many things must be only commanded and simply bidden by the
Centurions and Tribunes. If when things are bidden every one may demand, and
question the matter, obedience failing, government withal will fall to the
ground: or shall there at midnight likewise the alarm be given? shall a lost
and drunken companion or two (for I cannot believe they were mo which madded
in the last uproar) shall they dare to embrue their hands in a Tribunes and
Centurions blood? rush into their Emperors pauilion? you did indeed the same
for my sake: but yet in the dark, in such a confusion, occasion might also
have served against me. If Vitellius and his adhere^ts had choice to dispose
our minds as they listed, what else would they wish but sedition and discord?
that the soldier should not obey his Centurio^, the Ce^turion his Tribune,
footmen and horse confusedly should run to their ruin. Surely
fellow soldiers by duly obeying, not curiously scanning the captains
commandments, is al good soldiery and militare matters maintained: and that
army in danger is always most, valiant, which before the danger is most quiet
of al. Be you only well armed, and valiantly minded, to advise and direct your
valor leave that to me. The fault was of few: the punishment shall be only of
two: contend you the rest, to abolish and raze out of memory that dismal nights
work: such bloody words against the Senate, audeas.
let never any army once dare for to speak. The head of the Empire, the
ornament of al provinces, no not the very Germans themselves, whom Vitellius
specially raises against us, durst ever have demanded to death: and shall the
children of Italy then, and the true Roman race require to murder that
honorable order, through whose glorious brightness we dim and disgrace the
obscure baseness of Vitellius faction? Vitellius has indeed some countries at
commandment, he has a certain counterfaite of an army: but the Senate is of
our side; and therefore the state is of our side, traitors of theirs. What?
do you think this goodly fair city consists in houses and stones put
together? these are dumb and dead things, they may decay, they may be repaired
again, as it chances: the eternity of the state, the peace of the world,
your weldoing and mine, is founded upon the safety of the Senate. The father
and builder of our city did ^^spicato.
first by The oration thus framed to bite and to please the soldiers minds,
and the moderate severity used withal (for only on two justice was done)
were gratefully accepted; and they for the present composed, which hardly could
have been duly corrected. Yet was not the city thoroughly quiet: weapons
clashed, and to show it seemed a season of war; the soldiers in common
ceasing to trouble, but dispersed in houses in disguised apparel, maligning al
those whom nobility, or wealth, or some other special excellency had made the
matter of talk.

XIX Rome full of ielosies: the difficulty that was to carry a man's self
evenlie in the City and Senate.
IT was also supposed by many that some of Vitellius men were come to the city
to spy out and learn how the sides were affected: whereupon all grew full of
ielosies, and scarce were the secret closets free from fear: and abroad worst
of all, where according to the occurrentes which came they turned, and shaped
courage and countenance, fearing to seem, when matters went doubtful,
distrustful; or when they went well, not enough to rejoice: specially in Senate,
there was the hardness indeed to bear a man's self euenly in so nice and
ticklish a case: silence would be construed for contumacy; free speech had
quickly in ielosie; and flattering Otho would soon smell out, having passed
from private estate, and used the trade so lately himself. Wherefore they were
forced to toss and turn in and out their sentences, to wrest them this way
and that, calling Vitellius parricide and traitor; the wiser sort spending
upon him some few ordinary railing terms, some touching him nearer with viler
matters, and matters of truth; but then above al times, when for the great
noise they least could be heard, or when otherwise the most spoke at once, or
else by tumultuous heaping of words confounding their own disorderly tale.

XX Certain prodigious things which happened in Italy and Rome before the
war.
MOREOVER diverse miracles vowched by sundry persons terrifyed the minds of
men. In the entry of the Capitol the raynes of the coche whereon the image of
Victory stood were let slip: out of Iunoes cell started up a ghost taller
then any man: the image of Julius of sacred memory in the Island of Tiber
turned it self from the West to the East in a day which was clear and
without any earthquake: in Tuscany an ox spoke: ougly monsters were borne of
beasts, and many other like prodigious things were reported, by the old world
observed even in peace, but now not talked on, but in times of danger. But the
principal terror for the time to come joined with present damage was
Plutarch. (...). Plinius. lib. 3. c. 5. Quinimo vates intelligitur (Tiberinus
amnis) potius ac monitor, auctu semper religiosus verius, qua^ saeu^s.
the sudden swelling of Tiber, which waxing hugely brake down the Sublician
bridge, and by the ruins of it being dammed, reculing again, ouerflowed not
only the low and plain places of Rome, but those also which seemed safe from
such casualties. Many were carried away as they walked in the streets, mo
intercepted in shoppes and lodgings: Which penury grew by reason of the rising
of the river. Plutarch. p. 1516. (...).
dearth of vittayles, and no ways of winning, bredde a famine among the poor
people: the foundations of the Insulae dicuntur proprie, quae non iungun^ur
communib. parietibus cu^ vicinis; circuituque publico aut priuato cinguntur; a
similitudine viz. earum terrarum, quae fluminib. ac mari eminent, suntque in
salo positae. Festus.
isles, which the water by washing against them had weakened, after the river
returned became ruinous: and as soon as that peril was over past, the Primo
egressu inundationib. Tiberis retardatus (Otho) ad vicesimum etiam lapidem
ruina aedificiorum praeclusam via^ offendit. Suetonius Othone. cap 8.
stopping by casual, or natural causes, of Campus Martius and the Flaminian
way, by which the army should pass, at that time when Otho prepared to march,
was construed for an ominous sign of calamities to ensue.

XXI The provision of Otho for the war.
OTHO having lustrata vrbe.
hallowed the city, consulting how to manage the war, and seeing the Penine
and Cottian Alps, and the other passages of France stopped by Vitellius armies,
determined to invade Gallia Narbonensis with a strong nauye and partibus fida,
not because the new made Legionaries went with the navy (for surely the most
remained with Otho p 65, 18. 68, 10. 70, 24.) but rather for that the other
classiarij, which were kept still in the galleyes, conceived good hope of
preferment by the favor which Otho bestowed on their fellows.
sure to his side: for he had enrolled for Legionary soldiers the remnaunt of
those which were slain at the Miluian bridge, whom Galba had cruelly yet were
they lose at his death to do him a mischief, and made a Legion, as appears
before, so that the benefit of enrolling them was not Othoes, as it might seem
by this place, but Galbaes.
laid in prison; and the Scilices, they that remained still at sea-seruice.
rest of their fellows conceived thereby good hope of honourabler service
hereafter. With the navy he shipped Citty-cohortes, and many Garde-souldiers,
for a strength and support to the army, and for a counsel and guard to the
generalles. The general charge of this vyage was committed to Antonius
Nouellius, and Suedius Clemens ( Primipilarib. i. qui primos pilos duxissent:
as Consularis, qui Co^sul extitisses.
which had been chief Centurions) and AEmilius Pacensis, to whom Otho had
restored his Tribuneshippe, which Galba had taken away: Oscus his freedman was
Admiral of the vyage, being willed to watch how loyally honester men behaved
themselves. Of the footmen and horse Othoes captains in this war were six
or seven: Paullinus, Celsus, Gallus, Proculus, named here by Tacitus, Spurinna,
and Macer in the story p. 65. and Titianus his brother sent for afterward. p.
71.
Suetonius Paullinus, Marius Celsus, and Annius Gallus were appointed
governors: but his special affiance Profecto Brixellum Othone, honor imperij
penes Titianu^ fratrem, vis ac potesta^ penes Proculum praefectum. Celsus and
Paullinus cum prudentia eorum nemo vteretur, inani nomine ducum alienae culpae
praetendeba^tur. Tac. 2. Hist. p. 78.
was in Licinius Proculus captain of the Guard, who being a man serviceable
enough in citty-soldiery, but raw in the field, cauilling and carping at the
grave authority of Paullinus, the courageous quickness of Celsus, the
considerate discretenesse of Gallus, as each was in virtue, by lewdenesse and
craft (a matter not uneasy) bare it away from good men, and modest. About the
same time Slain afterward by Vitellius commandment. 2. Hist. p. 86.
Cornelius Dolabella was confined to Aquinum, without either strait or close
keeping, for no matter of crime, but only as an eie-sore for his ancient house
and kindred with Galba. Then Otho commanded many of the magistrates, and a
great part of those which had been Consuls, to be in a readiness for the
viage, not as to employ them in any charge in the war, but to accompany him
only: among other Lucius Vitellius also in like sort with the rest, neither as
brother of an Emperor, nor as brother of an enemy. Hereupon the cares of the
city revived: no state was void of fear or of danger: the chief of the
Senate weak for age, and with long rest unlusty; the nobility slothful, and
having forgotten the wars; the gentlemen ignorant in service: the more they
all sought to cover and hide it, the more they in sight bewraied their fear.
On the other side some upon a foolish vain glory bought them brave armor and
goodly great horses; some riotous provision for banquets and to feel by little
and little the smartes of the war, perceiving the money was turned all to the
soldiers use, and vittailes to grow more dear in the market; which evils in
Vindex commotion had nothing worn the commons so bare: the city was then out
of danger, and the war in the province, which being fought between the
Legions and them of France might seem in a sort external and forrayne. For
since the time that D. Augustus ordered the Empire, the people of Rome fought a
far off; the care and the credit belonged to one: under Tiberius and Caius
men feared alone the miseries of peace: Lieuetenant of Dalmatia. Dio. lib. 60.
page 463.
Scribonianus attemptes against Claudius were begun and dashed in a moment:
Nero was rather by news, and by rumors, then by force of arms cast out of
state: but now the Legions, the nauies, and that which seldom else has been
seen, the Guard and citty-souldier were brought to the field; the East, and
the West, and whatsoever was on both sides behind; matter for a long war,
Tac. 2. Histor. p. 78. Quod singulis velut ictibus transacta sunt bella,
ignavia principum factum est.
if other captains had warred. Some persuaded Otho, as he was now ready to
march, to stay yet a while, making a scruple that the and acclamations without
either measure or truth, contending to pass one another in applause and
wishes, as if it had been to Caesar the Dictator, or the Emperor Augustus;
neither for fear nor for love, but only upon a delight in seruility ( vt in
familijs, i. inter servitia; in opposition to plebs ingenua. 4. Ann. p. 344.
lin. 14.
as in private families) every man provoked by some private cause, no man
regarding the public dishonor. Otho departed from Rome, says Suetonius, die
quo cultores deum matris lamentari and plangere incipiunt, that is, the seven
and twentieth of March according to Marcellinus.
Otho departing away commended the quiet estate of the city, and cares of the
Empire to Saluius Titianus his brother.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
I Titus Vespasianus sailing toward Rome, hearing of Galbaes death at Corinth,
returns into Syria. The disposition of the Eastern armies.
NOW fortune in a contrary coast of the world prepared cause, and laid the
foundation for a new For the Empire of the Flauian familye.
Empire: which put up in sundry regions, and according to the different
government, became Acceptable and prosperous in the persons of Vespasian and
Titus: hateful and pernicious in the person of Domitian.
acceptable or hateful to the state, and to the Princes themselves prosperous,
or pernicious. Titus Vespasianus being sent by his father from Iewry, before
Galba was slain, gave forth as Josephus (...). 4. c. 29. adds further, that
Titus was sent to understand Galbaes pleasure concerning the Jewish matters,
(...).
cause of his voyage the doing of duty to the new Prince, and suing for
office, whereunto he was now by his years enabled and ripe; but the common
sort, ready to make and devise, had cast abroad, that he was sent for to be
Suet. Tito. c. 5. Galba mox tenente remp. missus ad gratulandum (Titus) quaqua
iret co^uertit homines, quasi adoptionis gratia arcesseretur.
declared successor. The age of Galba and lack of issue, and that intemperate
humor of the city, to name many til one be appointed, gave occasion and
ministered matter to the speech: the towardliness of Titus increast the report,
as being a person capable of any dignity were it never so great: the
comeliness also of his countenance with a certain majesty, the prosperous
proceedings of his father in Iewry, prophecies and oracles; and lastly, whenas
the minds of men were once inclined to believe, even common accidents were
reputed loco ominum etiam fortuna.
ominous, and helped to further the same. At Corinth a city of Achaia he
received certain advertisement, that Galba was slain, and some also were
there, who assured that Vitellius was in arms, and doubtless would proceed
to make war. Whereupon being perplexed in mind, calling some few of his
friends, he weighs the reasons on both sides in counsel: if he should
proceed in his journey to Rome it were but a thanckelesse office, being first
undertaken to honor another: and beside he should remain as an hostage to
Vitellius or Otho: if return back again, the winner without question would
be offended, but yet in some tolerable sort, seeing the victory as yet rested
uncertain, and the father afterward applying himself to the side, the son
would find an easy excuse: or if his father took upon him the state, then
care not to offend were to be forgotten, where open hostility must be
proclaimed. With these and the like discourses was Titus distracted between
fear and hope, till hope at the length prevailed. Some men supposed the
vehement love he bare to Berenice the Queen did alter his course: and in
truth his youthly affections were settled somewhat that way, notwithstanding
in no such degree, that it was any hinderaunce to his honorable actions: his
youthful years he passed in pleasures licentiously, of better behavior
Emperor then Suet. Tito, c. 1. Privatus, atque ^tiam sub patre principe, ne
odio quidem, nedum vituperatione publica caruit.
Emperors son. So coasting along by Achaia and Asia through the seas laeva
maris, for laevas maris parts, or laeva maris littora; those parts or coasts
of the Mediterran sea which are on the left hand in sailing from Corinth to
Syria.
on the left hand, he sailed to Rhodes and Cypres, and thence This opinion
Tacitus himself seems to follow. 3. Ann. p. 324 Exin Cyprij tribus delubris
(ius As^li petebant) quoru^ v^tustissimum Paphiae Veneri auctor Aerias posuisset
king Aerias, which some affirm is the name of the goddess: a later opinion
holds, that king Father to Cyprus, of whom some say the Island took
denominatio^. Eustathius in Dionys. (...).
Cinaras did consecrate the temple, and that the goddess, being conceived of
the sea, arrived there: but the skill and art of Haruspicine was borrowed
abroad, brought in by Thamyras the Of the Cilicians skill that way read Tully
de Divinatione, and others.
Cilician; and so it was accorded between them, that the government of the
ceremonies should belong equally to the posterity of both families: anon it
seemed absurd, that the blood royal should not have any prerogative above the
forrayne; whereupon the strangers gave place in the science, which they
themselves had induced; and so the Priesthood remained alone in Cinaras line.
Beasts for sacrifice, as every man liked to vow, only of the male kind were
chosen: the fibers of kiddes are esteemed of certainest credit: to power blood
on the altar is not permitted: Eustathius in Odyss. TH. speaking of the altar
of Venus in Paphos: (...).
any couerte, and yet never wet The like is reported by Polybius lib. 16. p.
268. and believed by others: (...).
with the weather. The image of the goddess is not of humane shape, but a or
spire fashion.
conicall fashion: the reason thereof is not known. When Titus had viewed the
riches of the place, the offerings and liberalities of Princes, and what else
soever the Greekish nation, delighting in antiquities, fabulously fathereth up
on times out of mind, he proposed demand first as touching his vyage by sea:
and when it was answered, that the way was open and passage prosperous, then
causing many beasts to be sacrificed, he enquired covertly concerning himself.
Sostratus (for so was the name of the priest) seeing the entrails fortunat and
agreeing, and perceiving the Goddess to give assent to his great deseignes, at
that present time made a short and ordinary answer; and ano^e requiring a
secreter co^fere^ce he opened to him his whole fortune to come. Thus Titus
increased in courage, returned again remaining then in Caesarea the head town
of Judaea. Joseph. 4. (...). cap. 29.
to his father, bringing great comfort to the minds of the armies, and
provinces that were suspe^sed and doubtful. Vespasia^ had vanquished the Jews,
and made in a manner an end of the war, it only remained to oppugn Jerusalem;
an enterprise of difficulty and hardness, more through the nature of the
people, and the obstinate persisting in their superstition, then for any
strength or ability they had to bear out the seege. Vespasian, as before we
have said, had three Legions trained in war, and Mutianus four governed in
peace, from whom notwithstanding emulatio^, and the glory of the army
adioining, drove away sloth; and as the one through labor with danger grew
stronger and more able of body, so the other became more lusty and fresh by
rest undisturbed, and peaceable labor: both had Auxiliary cohorts and wings,
both fleets and kings at commandment; both renowned alike upon causes unlike:
Vespasian a vigilant warrior, marching the foremost, choosing place for
commodious enca^ping, night and day giving out direction and order where it was
needful, and the case so requiring ma^fully fighting with hand; of diet not
dainty, apparelled as the common soldier, or not much otherwise; in all
respects, set avarice aside, comparable to the commanders of ancient times:
Mutianus contrariwise excessive in wealth and expenses, in all things
exceeding the measure of private estate; in speech the abler man, very expert
in the direction and foresight of civil affairs: a well sorted medleye of
princely qualities, if taking away the vices of both, the virtues alone were
laid together. But the one being Lieutenant of Iewry, the other of Syria,
countries confining, through emulation and envy certain ielosies were
between them: notwithstanding upon Neroes decease, they laid grudges aside,
and conferred counsels in common, first by friends interposed, then by
mediation of Titus, the principal assurance of true reconcilement; who being a
person by nature and art framed to wind in with Mucianus also, induced them
both to surcease from such hurtful contentions, with consideration of their
common vtility: the Tribunes, Centurions, and common soldier, by labor or
license, by virtues or pleasures, according to their several inclinations, were
drawn to the party. Before Titus coming both the armies had sworn allegiance
to Otho, the news of his being in state, as the custom is in such great
matters, being brought in great post, and civil wars ripening by leisure,
into which the East, that had a long time been quiet and peaceable, then first
of all began for to enter, for in time past the most mighty and puissant
civil wars, beginning in Italy and Gallia, were undertaken with the power
and strength of the West; and they which maintained them in the East, as
Pompey, Cassius, Brutus, Antonius, ended always unfortunately, and Syria and
Iewrie more often heard tell of then saw any Caesar's: the Legions had never
mutined, only sometimes were led out to brave the Parthian, speeding not
always alike: and during the last civil war, when the world was shaken
elsewhere, among them was assured tranquillity; then faith toward Galba. But
after it was publicly known, that Otho and Vitellius went about with impious
arms to pray upon the Roman estate, the soldiers began to storm, that others
Or lying out of the way from Vitellius and Othoes strength. seclusum.
shut up and yielding security in the mean season to prepare for the war.
The forwardness of the soldiers was not unknown to the Generals:
nevertheless it was thought expedient to attend the issue of the other war
then being on foot, since doubtless mutual ielousies, between the conquering
and conquered party, would never suffer any sound and perfect intelligence
between them: neither mattered it much whom fortune should favor, Vitellius
or Otho: even singular commanders by prosperity would grow insolent, much
less might good proof be expected of these, whom discord, sluggishnesse and
riot would ruin; whereof the war would overthrow the one, and the victory
the other, both of them through their own vices and faults. So till occasion
should serve, the open taking of arms was differred by Vespasian and Mucianus,
having entered but lately into these communications, whereas the rest had
conferred thereof long before; the better sort upon love to the common wealth,
the rest, some allured with the sweetness of spoil, some pricked thereto by
reason of their doubtful and decayed estate at home: so the good and the bad,
upon causes unlike, with like affection ardently all desired the war.

II A counterfaite Nero oppressed in the i will of Cythnus.
ABOUT the same time a false alarm was given to Achaia and Asia, as if Nero
were approaching: for the report going diuersely concerning his death, many gave
out untruly that he was alive, and many believed it. The adventures and
attempts of the rest of those counterfaits we shall hereafter declare, in the
process of this work. Now at that time a bondsman of Pontus, or, as others
have written, a libertinus.
libertine of Italy, skilful in instrument and voice, and thereupon, beside
some resemblance in countenance, being more fit to deceive, adioining unto him
certain fugitive and beggarly vacabond persons induced by great promises,
takes the sea: and being by violence of weather driven into the i will of
Cythnus, he associated to him certain soldiers which passed that way out of
the East, commanding the rest to be slain which refused; and spoiling the
merchants armed those of the slaves which seemed most puissa^t of body.
Moreover he assayed by sundry devises to practice the Centurion Sisenna, who
carried in the name of the Syrian army to the soldiers of the Guard,
Right-Handes in token of concord: until such time as Sisenna for fear, and
suspecting violence, left the island and fled secretly away. Thereupon the
terror was dispersed abroad, and the matter growing famous many lent their
ears willingly thereto, upon desire of change, and dislike of the present.
Thus reputation daily growing to the cause, it was by a matter of mere chance
wholly overthrown. Galba had granted the government of the provinces of
Galatia and Pamphylia to Calpurnius Asprenas: to waft him were allotted two
galleyes out of the navy at Misenum, with the which he arrived at the i will of
Cythnus. Upon his arrival the masters of the galleyes were summoned to come
unto Nero: who at their coming composing himself to heaviness, and
requiring, as their late master at his soldiers hands, their faithful
assistance and service, prayed them to set him aland in Syria or Egypt. The
masters, partly persuaded or else fraudulently, answered that first they would
talk with the soldiers, and so having prepared their minds would return:
but the whole was truly reported to Asprenas, by whose persuasion his ship
was forced and taken, and he, whatsoever he were, slain. His body was carried
into Asia, and thence brought to Rome, wondered at for the eyes, and hair, and
sternnesse of countenance.

III Annius Faustus, after much ado and some stir in the Senate, condemned
of promoting.
IN a dissentious state, and through the often changings of Princes, wauing
between license and liberty, even small matters were not shut up, without
great ado. Vibius Crispus, a man for money, might, and wit, accounted rather
among the great men then the good, called to his answer in Senate Annius
Faustus a Gentleman, who had made profession in Neroes time of accusing: for
immediately upon the election of Galba the Senators had ordered, that the
causes of the accusers should be heard and examined; an order diuersely
construed and drawn, and as against a weak defendant in force, so against a
mighty too weak. Beside Crispus employed the terror of his greatness, and the
uttermost of his might, particularly to overthrow him, as the accuser of his
brother, and had drawn a great part of the Senate into that opinion, to
require him to be executed, being neither defended nor heard: contrarily
others favoring the defendant, so much the more because the plaintiff seemed
too mighty, were of opinion, that a time should be granted, the crimes
specified, and the man, though culpable and odious, should notwithstanding not
be excluded from common right of being heard in his iustifications. Which
opinion prevailed at the first, and so the hearing of the matter was some few
days put over: but in the end Faustus was condemned, albeit not with that
general assent of all parts that his lewd conditions deserved: some men
disliking, not that the crime was so punished, but that it was done at his
suite, Tac 4. Hist. p. 175. in oratione Curtij Montani, and the page following,
where you shall find him sorted with Eprius Marcellus.
whom they well remembered to have exercised himself the same profession with
gain.

IIII The power of Otho by land.
THE And so out of Moesia likewise the Legions marched, but came noe further
then Aquileia. Tacit. page 99.
out of Dalmatia and Pannonia, being in number four, out of which two
thousand men were sent before, the Legions followed after with competent
iourneyes; the seventh lately gathered by Galba, the rest ancient, the eleventh
and thirteenth, and the fourteenth greatly renowned for their service in
repressing The story is at large in Tacitus 14. Ann. p. 494. and in the life of
Agricola. p. 591.
the British rebellion; and Nero had increased their glory, For his intended
expeditio^ ad portas Caspias, as I think, and upon the revolt of Vindex
retaining them still in Italy.
choosing them out as the most special men: whereupon they remained long
faithful to Nero, and were great favorers of Othoes proceedings. But these
Legions the more strength and forces they carried with them, the more confident
they were, and consequently the slower in coming forward: the Perchance
meaning of the two thousand mentioned before, perchance and rather of other
beside.
Auxiliary cohorts and wings came before, the corpse of the Legions followed
after. Moreover the city it self furnished good store of soldiers: five
Paetorian cohortes, and certain cornets of horesemen, the first Legion, and
beside two thousand Gladiatores.
fencers; Pompey in the civil war against Caesar intended the like: but being
advised by his friends, used them not, Caesar de bello civilly, lib. 3. ca. 4
civil wars used even by severe commanders. Annius Gallus with Of Vestricius
Spurinna see Pliny. li. 4. ep. 1. and 10. and 2. ep. 7.
Vestricius Spurinna were appointed to lead this power, and sent before hand
to put themselves in possession of the Howsoever it was in the determination,
in the execution, we find none garding the river, but the gladiatores
banckes of the Po: because their first determination had failed, seeing Caecina
had already passed the Alps, whom they hoped might have been kept within
Gallia. Upon Othoes person a choice company of Spiculatores
spearmen atte^ded, accompanied with the rest of the Praetorian cohorts, and
the old soldiers of the Guard, beside an excessive number of those which had
served at sea. His vyage was with diligence and speed as appertained, not
wastfully spent in riot and pleasures: himself with his iron brigandine,
marching before the enseignes on foot, not decked, not trimmed, but soldier
like, and unlike the name that went of him.

V The actions of Othoes fleet.
NOW fortune seemed to smile upon Otho and favor his proceedings; for the
greater part of Italy, by reason of his navy at sea, was possessed in his
name, eue^ to the entry of the Alps maritimae.
sea-Alpes. (...) of the Tungrian cohorts, having long maintained the skirmish,
were forced at length to yield up their lives: even to Othoes men the victory
cost blood, of whom diverse unadvisedly following were intercepted by the
horsemen turning upon them. And so, as if a mutual suspension of arms had
been concluded upon, with covenant on the one side that the fleet, on the
other that the horsemen should not attempt any sudden invasion, the
Vitellianists retired to Antipolis a freetowne of Gallia Narbonensis, the
Othonians to Albingaunum a colonie of Liguria interior.

VII. The estate of Corsica and Sardinia, and the rest of the islands
thereabout.
THE reputation of Othoes victorious fleet easily held Corsica, Sardinia, and
the rest of the islands thereabout in Othoes obedience. But Corsica almost was
ruined by the rashness of Decimus Pacarius the Procurator; who entered into an
action, which in so great a preparation for war, could nothing avail to
effecting the principal purpose, and yet served well enough to work his
destruction. For upon hatred against Otho, he determined with the strength of
the island, to aid Vitellius; an aid vain and to no purpose even if it had
succeeded. Whereupon calling the principal men of the island, he declares his
meaning, and commands Claudius Phirrhicus master of the galleyes there, and
Quinctius Certus a gentleman of Rome, to be slain, who opposed themselves
against his proceedings: by the death of whom the rest that were present
being terrefied swear allegeaunce to Vitellius, and consequently the inferior
sort partly upon ignorance, and partly to bear them company which did it
for fear. But whenas Pacarius began to take muster, to tire those rude people
in training and other militare duties, they waxing weary of that unwonted
labor fell to recount their own weakness: that it was but an island, which
they inhabited: that Germany and the Legionary power was far of: and that even
they were wasted and spoiled by the fleet, whom both cohorts and wings did
protect. whereupon their minds suddenly fell away, and so they conspired against
him, not by way of open rebellion, but by privy attempt against his person. for
which purpose choosing out a fit opportunity, as he was in the bath naked and
without help, the multitude that followed him being departed away, they slew
him and his company, and carried the heads of them, as of traitors, to Otho: by
who^ notwithstanding they were not rewarded, as also not punished by Vitellius,
in so great confusion and disorder of the state, passing among greater crimes;
and shadowed with other more heinous offenses.

VIII. Certain small actions of the Syllan wing in Italy before Caecinaes
entry.
NOw the Syllan wing, as before we have showed, had opened the passage into
Italy, and drawn the war over the mountains, the country favoring not
Otho, neither yet upon any special fancy to Vitellius; but as men whom long
peace had broken to all kind of slavery, they were easily possessed by the
first co^mer, and not curious to side with the better. The whole country and
cities 1. Hist. p. 48. quia praesidio alae vnius latissima pars Italiae defendi
nequibat, praemissae Gallorum, Lusitanorum, Britannorumque cohortes, and
Germanorum vexilla.
cohorts which Caecina had sent before him were now already come in. At Cremona
a cohort of Pannonians was taken, and between Placentia and Ticinum an
hundredth horse intercepted, and a thousand sea-souldiers: by which success
Vitellius men being animated could now not be stopped by bancke nor by river.
Moreover the inhabitants of Batauia and beyond the Rhene were enflamed the
more even by the very Disdayning that the Po should stay them who were
accustomed to swim, horse and man, over the great river of Rhene, and others
at home in their country. Tac. 4. Hist. p. 158. Batavi praecipuo nandi studio
arma equosque retinentes integris turmis Rhenum perrumpere.
sight of the Po; which they passed over against Placentia, and taking some of
the enemies spies so terrefied the rest, that being afraid they falsely
reported Caecina was come with his whole army. Spurinna, who then was within
Placentia, certainly knew that Caecina was not yet come, and if he did come,
was certainly resolved to keep his men within their defenses, and not to
hazard three Praetorian cohortes, and a thousand Vexillaries, with a few horse,
against an army of old and approved warriers: but Plutarch writes, that the
soldiers had almost slain Spurinna: but spared no manner of railing and
contumelious speech, calling him traitor, and a manifest marrer of his Princes
affairs. some also being drunk went in the night to his pauilion, dema^ding
to furnish the^ with money for their journey, which they me^t to undertake to
the Prince at Brixellum to preferie accusation against him for his traiterous
dealing.
the unruly soldiers and unskillful of service snatching up their enseignes and
banners rushed forward, and as the captain endeavored to stay them they bent
their weapons upon him, not respecting their Centurions and Tribunes, who
commended the captains circumspectnes, but the soldiers cried FOR OTHO, and
stuck not more over to affirm that Caecina was sent for under hand. Spurinna
yielded to follow their folly, by force at the first, afterward making show
as if he were willing that his counsels might carry more credit, if it
happened hereafter the sedition to cool. When they were in the sight of the
Po, and the night approached, order was given, that the camp should be
entrenched and staked. That labor strange and unusual to the city-souldier
abated their fierceness. Then they of the elder sort began to see their own
error, and correct their credulity; to lay-open the fear, and the danger, if
in those champion countries Caecina should with his army enuiron the^ being as
it were but an hand full: and now they began throughout all the whole camp to
use modest and dutiful speeches, and by means of the Centurions and Tribunes,
who insinuated themselves into their companies, to commend the wisdom of the
captain, in that he had chosen out, for the strength and seat of the war, a
colonie of that power and that wealth; and lastly Spurinna himself, not by
untimely exprobrating their fault, but by reason convincing it, wanne them to
his opinion, and leaving some behind for scouts brought back the rest into
Placentia less mutinous then before, and more at commandment. The walls were
made stronger, the number of bulwarks and towers increased, and provision made
not only of armor, but of subjection and love of obeying; the only point
which lacked in that side, whenas otherwise they had of valor sufficient.

IX. Caecina comes into Jtalie, and lies before Placentia in vain.
BUT Caecina, as if he had left on the other side of the mountains cruelty and
licentiousnes behind him, marched through Italy with all modesty, he and his
companies. His kind of attire the free cities and colonies construed as a
sign of pride, because he gave audience to men which came gowned himself
being in his short soldiers cote of changeable color, and wearing withal
breeches after the French barbarous fashion: and as though they had been
interessed thereby, they were grieved also to see his wife Salonina riding
upon a goodly palfray with a rich furniture of purple, albeit no man were
wronged therein: such is the nature of man, and so deeply is the quality
rooted in us, straightly to look into the late prosperity of others with an
envious eye, and to require a moderation of fortune, no where so much, as in
those we have seen in an equal degree with our selves. Caecina having passed
the Po, and assayed by parlees, and promises to weaken the loialty of Othoes
men, being quit with the like on their part, seeing that the plausible names of
peace and concord had often been spent between them in vain, converted his
counsels and cares to the besieging of Placentia in most terrible manner;
knowing right well, that as the beginning of the war should succeed, so for
the rest reputation would follow. But the first days work was conducted
rather by fury, then according to skill meet for men of so long experience in
service: without cover or defense they ve^tured rashly under the walls, their
bodies surcharged with meat and with wine. In that assault the Amphitheatre, a
piece of most curious workmanship standing without the walls, was burned, set
on fire either by the besiegers as they hurledbra^ds and balls of wildefire
against the besieged: or by the besieged as they hurled again. The townsmen
being ielous, and prone to suspicions, believed that matter was ministered to
the fire upon malice, by certain neighbor colonies, upon emulation and envy,
because no piece of work in all Italy was of that capacity beside: by what
chance soever it happened, whilst further danger was feared, it passed not
greatly regarded; when all peril was past, as if no greater misfortune could
have befallen, then it was much sorrowed for and lamented: but in the end
Caecina was repulsed with loss of many of his me^, and the night following was
spent on both sides in new preparations. The Vitellianists make provision of
With shame to be overcome, and glory of ouerco^ming.
with shame, and with glory, and several encouragements were used; the one side
exalting the Legions and strength of the German army, the other magnifiyng the
honor of the cittie-seruice, and of the Praetorian cohorts: the one reuiling
the soldier within as sluggish, and resty, and effeminated in the Race and
Threatres, and the other rebuking the enemy without as a forrainer and
stranger: assuming withal into part of the praise and dispraise the persons of
Otho and Vitellius, afoording indeed more plentifully matter of reproach then
of just commendation. The day was scarcely yet sprung, when as the walls were
replenished with men at defense, the fields did glister with armor and
soldiers; the Legionary densum legionum agmen: and yet Caecina had but one
Legion, namely vnacivicesima Rapax, as I take it.
with their thick and close ranckes, the Auxiliary loose and dispersed, they
attempt with arrows and stones a far of to disfurnish the highest parts of
the walls, if any place were neglected or decayed by age thither they make
nearer approches: Othoes men from above, with more peyze and certainty, hurl
darts upon the German cohortes, which rashly came under with a hideous note,
and according to their country manner, with bodies naked, shaking their targets
over their shoulders. The Legionary soldier, covered with plutei and crates,
undermines the walls, raises up mounts, and endeuoreth to wrest open the
gates: of the contrary side the Praetorian soldiers having milstones of huge
weight placed for the purpose, with fearful noise roll them down upon the
enemy: part which came under were overwhelmed, part wounded with darts, and
slain or mangled: and so as in a confusion and fear, the slaughter increasing
below, and consequently their fiercenes above, the Vitellianists retired with
decay of reputation to the side; and Caecina upon the infamy and shame of this
siege so rashly attempted, lest he should seem to sit still in the same
ground skorned and to no purpose, passes the Po back again with purpose to
go to Cremona. As he departed away Turullius For the sullet satisfaction of the
reader, it had been convenient to have declared whether they fled from
Spurinna, or Gallus, or some other, and by what occasion they were then in that
place.
Cerealis with many of the mariners revolted unto him, and Julius For the
sullet satisfaction of the reader, it had been convenient to have declared
whether they fled from Spurinna, or Gallus, or some other, and by what occasion
they were then in that place.
Briganticus with a few horse: Julius was by birth a Batauian and captain of a
wing, the other, having served as a principal Centurion in Germany, was easily
wunne to Caecinaes side. Spurinna, upon knowledge had what way the enemy took,
certifieth Annius Gallus by letters, that Placentia was defended, what had
passed, and what Caecina intended to do. Gallus, mistrusting lest those few
cohortes within could not endure a long siege, and the force of the German
army, was bringing the first Legion to succor the town: but when he received
advise, that Caecina was repulsed, and going to Cremona, he staieth the Legion
Perhaps to receive the Legions coming out of Dalmatia, and Pannonia, which, if
any where at all, came and joined themselves with Gallus, conducted percha^ce
by Paullinus and Celsus.
at Bebriacum being hardly withholden from mutining, because he would not
lead them to fight. Bebryacum (says the scholiast upon Juvenal: for so he
writes it) vicus est a Cremona vicesimo lapide.
Bebriacum is a village between Verona and Cremona

X. Macer skirmisheth with the Vitellianists. Otho, suspecting the rest of his
captains, commits the conduct of the war to Titianus his brother.
ABOUT the same time, not far from Cremona, Martius Macer had a luckly day
against the Vitellianists. For Macer being a man of courage and forward put
the Gladiatores
fencers in boats and landed them suddenly on the other side of the Po. There
the Auxiliaries of the Vitellianists were distressed, and the rest fleeing to
Cremona, those which remained behind slain: but the winners were nor
permitted further to follow the chase, lest the enemies strengthened with new
supply should turn head against them, and alter the fortune of the battle.
That fact bred ielosy in Othoes men misinterpreting all that was done howsoever
sinisterly, who egerly as each was in courage most dastard, most lavish in
tongue, so sought they by diverse misconstruing criminations to put in disgrace
Annius Gallus, and Suetonius Paullinus, and Marius Celsus, for them also had
Otho made Commanders. The principal firebrands of sedition and discord were the
murderers of Galba, who being transported by fear, and the guiltines of their
own conscience, disturbed and troubled all good course of proceeding;
sometimes breaking openly out into mutinous speeches, and sometimes by secret
aduertisements to Otho: who giving credit lightly to every base person, and
standing in fear of the good, trembled and quaked, a man in prosperity
uncertainly carried, and governing himself in adversity better.

XI. Paullinus and Celsus give Caecina an overthrow.
IN the mean season under the conduct of Paullinus and Celsus a notable
overthrow was given. Caecinaes attempts all falling to nothing, and the
reputation of his army now waning, much grieved his mind: he had been repulsed
from Placentia; his Auxiliaries lately slain; and when as the discouerers met
one another, in those ordinary bickerings rather then material he commonly
went to the worse: whereupon when Fabius Valens approached, lest the whole honor
of the war should fall upon him, he hasted with greater speed then good
counsel, to recover his glory. About a supply, if they should be distressed.
Before the ioining the Vitellianists turned their backs, and Celsus,
understanding the fraud, repressed his men. The ambush rising up rashly, as
Celsus gave ground, followed so far til they were circu^uented themselves: for
on the sides were the cohorts, and the Legion to meet them in face, and the
horsemen suddenly ranging out had enclosed their backs. Suetonius Paullinus at
the first delaied some time to give to his foote-me^ the sign of the battle:
for being a person naturally slow, and one who liked much better wary courses
with reason, then happy by chase, he commanded the ditches first to be filled,
the field to be made open and easy of passage, the battalions to be displaied,
supposing it seasonable enough to begin then to overcome others, when as order
was taken they could not be overcome themselves. By means of that delay space
was given to Vitellius men to flee into the vines, where, by reason of the
branches wrapped and knit one in another, it was troublesome to follow: and a
little wood adjoined which covered the^; out of which they issued eftsoon and
slew the foremost of the Praetorian horsemen. there King of what country? and
how came he thither? and what became of him afterward? great persons in a story
require, in my opinion, a more exact and particulare description.
king Epiphanes, fighting valiantly on Othoes side, was wounded. By that time
Othoes footmen pressed forward, and bare down by maine force the enemies host,
turning to flight even those also which came for to succor. for Caecina sent
not for his cohortes together, but one after another: which thing in the fight
augmented the terror: for the fear of them that fled carried away the
succors, which came dispersedly, and never so many at once, as to restore the
battle. In the camp also a mutinee arose, because they were fetched so
scatteringly, and Julius Gratus the Camp-master was put in prison, as though in
favor of his brother, who served under Otho, he intended some treason;
whereas the Othonians had, on the other side, committed to ward Julius Fronto
his brother, a Tribune, upon color of the same crime. But in truth every
where the fear was so great, in those which fled, in those which met them, in
the field and at the camp, that unless Suetonius Paullinus had sounded the
retrayt, not suffering his men to follow the victory, it was commonly talked on
both sides, that Caecina might have been destroyed with his whole army.
Paullinus pretended that he was afeard, lest, beside so much travail and so
great a journey, the Vitellian soldier should have issued forth of their
camp fresh against his men being tired, no supply remaining behind, if it
fortuned them to have been defeated. Some few approved that reason of the
General, but most men condemned the fact, and blamed him for it.

XII. The description of a mutinee which happened in Valens camp. Valens
comes into Jtalie and joins his power with Caecinaes.
THIS overthrow did not so much daunt the Vitellianists, as it reduced them to
a more modest behavior, not only in Caecinaes camp, who cast the fault on
the soldier more ready to mutin then fight; but the army of Fabius Valens also
(for now he was come to Ticinum) laying aside contempt of the enemy, and
desirous to recover their glory, began to show to their General a more
reverent and orderly obedience. For before a great and hoate mutinee had
happened out, which I will now set down from the beginning, albeit not in his
proper time, because it was not convenient to interrupt the course of Caecinaes
actions. The cohortes of Batauians, which in the war of Nero were departed
from the fourteenth Legion, and in their return toward Britannie, hearing of
Vitellius attempt in the country of Lingones, had joined themselves, 1. Hist.
p. 43. and 45.
as before we have showed, to Fabius Valens, began to wax proud and insolent,
vanting and brauing as they came to the tents of any of the Legions, that they
were the men which had ouerruled the fourteenth Legion, bereaved Nero of Italy:
that in their hands alone lay all the fortune and whole success of this
war. That seemed contumelious to the soldier, and highly displeased the
General, the discipline being by their wranglings and brawlings corrupted. At
the last Valens, by their insolent behavior suspecting perfidiousnesse also,
receiving advise, that the wing of the Treueri and Tungrians were beaten by
Othoes fleet, and that the province of Narbon was in some danger of invasion,
partly upon a care to defend his friends and allies, and partly upon militare
policy to disperse these Batauians so mutinously affected, and of so great
strength if they remained together, commanded part of the cohorts to go and
relieve them. Which thing when it was heard and noysed abroad, the Auxiliaries
mourned, the It seems strange, that the Legions should be displeased with the
departure of those, whose insolent and contumelious behavior they could not
abide, if Tacitus say true not past six lines before.
Legions stomacked, lamenting they should be deprived in such a time of so
maine an assistaunce of such valiant men: what? should those so experienced,
and conquerours in so many wars, whenas the enemies were within view, be
sent away, as it were, out of the field? if the province were a matter of more
consequence then the city of Rome and safety of the state, why did they not
all follow thither? but if the accomplishment of the victory, the strength and
stay of the cause consisted in Italy, what reason then to break off, as it
were, the soundest and strongest limbs from the body? upon these and the like
presumpteous speeches, whenas Valens by sending his sergeauntes among them,
went about to correct their seditious behavior, they offered violence to
himself, threw stones, and forcing him to flee, followed after; and crying,
that the spoil of France, the gold of Vienna, and the price of their labors
was by him embezeled, and hid, they spoiled his carriage, they pierced and
searched his pauilions, and the very ground it self with their lances and
darts: for Valens himself in a bondemans apparel lay unknown in the tent of
an vnder-captaine of horsemen. Then Alphenus Varus the Campe-master, perceauing
the heat of the mutinee past, and the soldiers by little and little to grow
colder, adioyneth a policy thereunto: brought of Caecinaes overthrow, and
the sedition was almost renewed again, as though by fraud and delays of
Valens they had been kept back, and come short of the battle. Whereupon
refusing to rest any longer, without staying for their General they march
forward, running before their enseignes, and hastening the enseigne-bearers:
and so in all speed join with Caecina. Valens was also disliked and generally
blamed in the army of Caecina: who pretended themselves to be aggreeued, that
they were left, being so far inferior in number, as a pray to the whole
power of the enemies; highly extolling withal the strength of the other army,
partly to excuse themselves, and partly to flatter their fellows, lest as
conquered and cowardly persons they should be despised of them: and albeit
Valens had more forces, almost double number of Legions and Aides to the other,
yet were the goodwilles of the soldiers more inclining to Caecina, beside
courtesy, wherein he excelled the other, by reason also of his flourishing age,
and tallness of stature, and upon a certain vain favor of men. Hereupon
there grew emulation between the two generalles. Caecina contemned the other,
as a lewd person of life and criminally noted: Valens scoffed at him as being
proud and vaineglorious: but reserving their hatred in secret they joined
openly both in the common cause, by many letters, without respect of pardon,
obiecting to Otho his infamous life; whereas the Generalles of Othoes side,
notwithstanding the argument yielded that way most plentiful matter, abstained
from all reuiling speeches against Vitellius: and in truth before their ends,
which on Othoes side was most commendable, of Vitellius most ignominious, the
drowsy pleasures of Vitellius were feared less, then the hot burning lusts
of Otho: and beside, the death of Galba had made Otho more terrible, and more
odious: contrarily no man charged Vitellius with beginning the war. Vitellius
in excess and bellicheere was an enemy to himself: Otho in riot, cruelty,
audaciousnesse, reputed more dangerous to the state.

XIII. Otho determines to commit the matter to the hazard of a battle, and
retireth himself to Brixellum.
THE forces of Caecina and Valens being joined together, the Vitellianists
refused not any longer to end the cause in a maine battle. Otho proposed the
matter in council, whether way were more expedient, to prolong the war, or
else to put it by and by to the fortune of a field. Then Suetonius Paullinus,
esteemed the most expert man of that age in militare affairs, supposing it
agreeable to his fame and renown, to discourse of the whole manner of
proceeding in this war, stood up, and declared his opinion to be; that
making of haste was profitable for the enemy, and delaying for them. that all the host of Vitellius was come, certain small forces remaining behind, which
could not conveniently be removed from the bank of the Rhene, for fear of
invasion of those fierce nations: especially France standing also in some
terms of rebellion: the soldier in Britannie had his hands full of the enemy
there, and was also stopped by the sea: that Spain had no great store of
soldiers: the province of Narbon was frighted, by reason of the late invasion
by sea, and the overthrow which they received; and that portion of Italy
beyond the Po, now in the possession of the enemy, was wasted with the passage
of their army, and having no help by sea, and by land shut in with the Alps,
could not be relieved from abroad: so that they could nowhere have corn for
their men, and an host without provision could not be entertained. Now the
Germans, which of all the enemies were most terrible, having foggy and waterish
bodies, would not, if the war were prolonged to the summer, be able to endure
the change of the soil, and the avre. that many armies whose fury at the first
rush could not be resisted, by delays and wearying out were brought unto
nothing. Contrariwise they had all things themselves, well stoared and well
assured unto them: Pannonia, Moesia, Dalmatia, the East, with their armies,
whole and untouched; Italy, and Rome the queen of the world, the Senate and
people, titles never darkened, though sometimes ouershadowed: wealth private
and public, and infinite masses of money, which in civil dissensions is of
greater force then the sword: the bodies of their soldiers were accustomed to
Italy, or to other hot countries: the river of Po lay Not at Bebriacum, where
the consultation was holden, but he means if they should, as he wished,
retire with their power in Cispadanam, and there stand upon their defense.
before them as a defense: their cities were safely manned and walled: and by
the holding out of Placentia it was clear to be seen, that none through
distress or despair would yield to the enemy: and therefore in his opinion
he was to protract the war. That within few days the fourteenth Legion
would be come, a Legion of great reputation, with the forces of Moesia: then
might he deliberate again, and, if it were liked to hazard the battle, fight
with more power and greater advantage. Marius Celsus approved the opinion of
Paullinus, and certain which were sent to Annius Gallus (who was hurt with a
fall of his horse a few days before) to demand his advise, brought word
that he also was of the same judgment. But Otho was willing to bring it to a
battle: his brother Titianus and Proculus captain of the Guard, hastening upon
ignorance and lack of skill, protested, that fortune and all the gods, with
the godhead of Otho, favored the counsels, and would without question
prosper the enterprise: descending to this gross kind of flattery, lest any
should dare to cross their opinion. After they had concluded to fight, a new
doubt arose, whether it were better, that the Emperor should withdraw
himself, or else be present in the field in person: the selfsame men taking
also herein a wrong course, without any more opposition of Paullinus and
Celsus, lest they should seem to hazard their Prince too venturously,
persuaded him to retire to Brixellum; and so being exempt from the doubtful
euentes of the field, to reserve himself for the maine chance of the state.
That day was the beginning of ruin to Othoes side. For with him a valiant
company of Praetorian cohorts, of Spiculatores
spearemen and horse departed away: and the rest which remained behind were
quite out of heart, as having no confidence in their Generals: and Otho, whom
only the soldiers trusted, because he trusted none else but the soldiers, had
not perfitely settled the Generals in their charges, but left their autorities
at large and uncertain.

XIIII. A skirmish between the Vitellianists and Macer with his fencers upon
the Po.
ALL that was said or done was carried by and by to the Vitellian side,
fugitives swarming as in civil wars, and the spies, upon desire to search
out and discover other men's counsels, disclosing their own. Caecina and
Valens lay still, quietly attending while the enemy should by his own rashness
miscary, meaning in liew of wisdom to use the va^tage of other men's folly.
And so beginning a bridge, lest their soldiers should be made worse with too
much idleness and ease, as if they had meant to have passed the Po, and forced
a band of Gladiatores.
fencers enca^ped on the other side, they commanded boats to be placed cross
the river, with their heads up the stream, in equal and convenient distances,
and joined them strongly together with plancks, casting anckers also to make
the bridge steady and firm: but the cable ropes were not tied short, but
played at length, that when the river should rise, the whole frame likewise
might rise without hurting. Upon the end of the bridge a tower was planted,
reaching to the uttermost boat, that out of it they might with their engines
and shot displace, and drive away the enemies: the Othonians also upon the
bancke had builded a tower, and did hurl stones and fire. In the middle of the
river there was an island, into possession whereof the fencers sought to put
themselves by boat, but the Germans by swimming prevented them; and when Macer
saw a competent number of them arrived there, embarking of his best fencers, he
puts over to assail them: but neither were the fencers of the like courage
in fight to the soldiers, neither could they, tottering out of their boats,
aim so certain a blow, as the other steadily standing did from the land: and
whenas through sundry steppings aside upon fear the rowers and soldiers,
which stood at defense, were confusedly mingled together and put in disorder,
the German soldiers leaping courageously into the shallow, and hanging at the
tails of the boats, either clambered up to the hatches, or by maine strength
ouerturned the boats into the water. All which things passing after this sort
in the view The one lay at Bebriacum, and the other by all conjecture at
Cremona, twenty miles asu^der.
of both the armies, as they were matter of great joy to the Vitellianists, so
to the contrary side they gave occasion to hate and detest him, who was author
and cause of the loss. And the skirmish was ended indeed by flight and the
breaking away of the boats which remained; but Macer was required to the
slaughter: and when they had wounded him with a darte a far of, they ran in
with their swords drawn to dispatch him, had not the Tribunes and Centurions
come in to protect him. A little afterward Vestricius Spurinna by Othoes
commandment, leaving a small garrison at Placentia, with his cohortes came to
succor them: and anon Otho sent Flauius Sabinus Consul elect to command
Macers companies, the soldiers being glad at the change of captains, and the
captains, by reason of so many mutinees, unwilling to enter into so dangerous
a service.

XV. That it is nothing probable, that in so corrupt an age, the soldier. would
of their own accord have surceased from civil war, and by common consent,
and advise of the Senate, deposing these two bad, have chosen a third good
Prince.
IN some writers I find it recorded, that the armies, either having in horror
the war, or loathing both Princes, whose shames and dishonours were daily
divulged more notoriously abroad, consulted among themselves to surcease the
contention, and that either they by common consent should choose a new Prince,
or refer it over to the Senats appointment: and that therefore the Generals
of Othoes side, Plutarch p. 1523. attributes it to Celsus not so probably.
namely Paullinus, had counseled to delay and protract, hoping it would fall
upon him, as being the most ancient Consulare, a famous Commander, and one
that in the wars of Britanny had won great glory and name. For my part,
although I could be induced to grant that some few peradventure secretly
wished quietness in steed of discord, and for two most lewd and wicked, one
good and innocent Prince; so I cannot be brought to believe, that Paullinus
being so wise a man would ever hope in a most corrupt age for such moderation
in the common sort, that whenas for desire of war they had troubled the
peace of the state, now for love of peace they would abandon the war: or
that armies in tongue and conditions so different, could condescende to so
great an agreement: or that the Lieutenantes and Generals, which for the most
part were persons drowned in riot, beggarly and guilty of most heinous crimes,
would ever have suffered any Prince but one polluted with the like vices, and
of their own creation, and therefore wholly obnoxious to them. That ancient
desire of dominion and rule engraffed now long ago in men's hearts, grew up
and shot out with the greatness of the Empire. For whilst our dominions
were strayt, an equality was easily maintained: but after we had subdued the
world, destroyed all cities, or kings which stood in our light, or might work
our annoiance; whenas we had leisure to seek after wealth void of peril,
there arose first hot contentions between the nobility and commons: sometimes
factious Tribunes carried it away: sometimes the Consuls held a hard hand and
prevailed: and in the city and Place of assembly, some little skirmishes, and
commencements as it were of civil wars, were attempted. Anon after Caius
Marius one of the meanest of the comminalty, and Lucius Sulla the cruellest of
all the nobility, by force of arms overthrowing the free estate, induced an
absolute government. After whom Cneius Pompeius succeeded, somewhat Salustius
apud Suetonium lib. de claris Grammaticis. Pompeius oris probi, animique
inuerecundi.
secreter, but nothing better: and after that time never was other question
debated by arms, but who should be sovereign Prince of the state. The
Legions in Pharsalia and Philippi, consisting of citizens, were not so
moderately minded: much less may we think the armies of Otho and Vitellius
would, of their own accord, have laid down their weapons. The gods were no
less incensed against us: men were no less mad and furiously minded: the same
vices reigning amonst us have induced the like dissensions and discords. That
the wars were decided, and ended as it were each at one stroke, we are to
attribute it to the cowardlinesse and faint-hartednesse of the Princes, and not
to the peaceablenesse of the armies. But the recounting of the dispositions and
manners, of present and ancient times, has carried me out of the way. Now I
return to the order of the story.

XVI. The great battle at Bebriacum: wherein Othoes side was overthrowen.
WHen to send for the companies which lay on the other side of the Po. Neither
can it so easily be discerned what had been best to have done, as that it was
the worst which they did: undertaking to go to the confluence of the rivers of
Po and Olium full sixteen miles from that place (a competent journey for an
army to march, and much too great for them which went to a battle) directly
against the advice of Paullinus and Celsus; who held it unsafe to hazard the
soldier, tired with the journey, and heavy laden with carriage, against an
enemy, that would not fail, being lightly appointed, and having come scarce
four miles, to charge upon them either as they marched in disarray, or else
at their sitting down as they dispersed themselves to fortify the camp. But
Titianus and Proculus, whenas they were overcome by reason fled to authority, by
virtue of their office commanding the contrary: and indeed there was come a
Great personages in those days had usually certain African or Numidian
horsemen to lead their train, or for other sudden dispatches. Seneca in
epistolis.
Numidian horseman in post from Otho with a sharp message, in the which, as
one that could not abide delays, and impatient to linger in hope, he checked
the Generals for their slacknesse, commanding them forthwith to put it to a
field. The same day as Caecina was busily occupied about making the bridge, two
Tribunes of Praetorian cohorts came thither, demanding to speak with him: and
being upon the point to give audience, and make answer unto them, the skowts
came running in have, signifying the enemy was at hand: whereupon the parlee
brake of, and so it remained uncertain what they intended, whether to lay a
train for Caecina, or to betray their own fellows, or else some other honest
devise. Caecina having dismissed the Tribunes, riding back to the camp,
found the sign of the battle already given by Valens commandment, and the
soldiers in arms. Whilst the Legions cast lots concerning their order in
marching to the field, the horsemen issuing out charged, and were beaten back
very strangely, by Othoes men being fewer in number, even into the trenches,
had not the Italian Legion manfully drawn their swords, and by fear forced
them to return and make head upon the enemy again. The Vitellian Legions were
ordered and put in array without tumult or fear: for the bushes and thickets
took a way the sight of the enemy, albeit he were near. Contrarily in Othoes
army the Generals with fear were put out of their skill; the soldiers neither
loved nor trusted their Generals; the wagons and idle followers of the camp
troubled the works of the soldiers, being confusedly mingled amongst them; and
the hye way deeply ditched on both sides was too narrow for an army, though
marching without fear of the enemy: some stood about, some sought their
enseignes, on every side there was a confused noise of me^ running and crying:
and as each was guided by boldness or fear, so pressed he forward into the first
ranckes, or retired into the last. Their minds being in this sort stricken
with a sudden terror, a falsely surmised joy abated their fierceness: for
some there were which untruly gave out, that the army was revolted from
Vitellius. That rumor whether it was dispersed abroad by Vitellius spies, or
rose otherwise among Othoes men, whether by frawd or chance, it is not
certainly known: but howsoever, thereupon the Othonians laying aside all edge
to fight, in steed thereof proffered after a friendly sort to salute them, but
were with unfriendly murmr entertained again: which salutation gave cause to
many of their own side, that were ignorant of the rumor, to fear treason.
Then the host of the enemies in good array, superior both in number and
strength, charged upon them: the Othonians, although in disarray, fewer and
weary, yet valiantly received the charge. And as in places troubled with trees
and vines the fight was not every where after one manner: but here near at
hand, and there a far of: sometime in squadron, sometime in triangle figure:
upon the height of the way ioining foot to foot, and bearing down with body
to body, and buckler to buckler: omitting the use of the dart, and with swords
and hatchets vnbuckeling and breaking helmets and corcelets: and the sides
knowing one another, and being seen of their companions, each contended to
show virtue and valor, as if upon their manhood had depended the event of
the whole war. It fortuned, that in open field between the Po and the high
way, two Legions met and fought together; for Vitellius the one and twentieth
surnamed Rapax, a Legion aunciently renowned, of Othoes part the first called
Adiutrix, one never before brought to the battle, but presuming greatly of her
self, and greedy, as in her first service, of honor. They of the first
Legion, beating to ground the stratis vnaetnicesimanorum principijs. Plutarch
in this place takes principia for the foreward, p. 1523. (...).
enseignes of the one and twentieth, took away the standerd by force:
whereupon the Legion incensed with grief both put them of the first in branle
slaying Orphidius Benignus the Lieutenant, and also took many enseignes and
banners from them. On the other side the thirteenth Legion was forced by them
of the fifth: and certain of the fourteenth hemmed in with multitudes of
enemies that came in upon them. And whereas the Generals of Othoes side had
left the field and were fled already away, Caecina and Valens yet strengthened
their side with fresh supply: and beside a new succor came in of Camp-master
in Valens host, p. 73. and now upon Caecinaes calling away lest to keep play
with the gladiatores of Othoes side, as it seems.
Alphenus Varus with his Batauians, after he had discomfited the band of the
fencers, who passing the water by boats were slain by the adversary cohorts
in the very river it self. So being victorious they invaded the flanck of the
enemies: and when once the middle battle was forced, the Othonians brake and
fled Being twenty miles of by our reckning, or according to Plutarch 150
stadia, which is about 19 miles.
toward Bebriacum. The way was long and almost stopped up with dead carcases,
the slaughter being the greater for that in civil wars there is no profit to
be made of the prisoners. Suetonius Paullinus and Licinius Proculus took
sundry ways and shunned the camp: Vedius Aquila Lieutenant of the thirteenth
Legion, supposing al other ways unsafe, through unadvised fear put himself
into the danger of the furious soldier. For entering into the camp a It is very
questionable how in one day an army could go 16. miles, join battle, break,
and fleeing away 20. miles of could come thither a great while before night
about mid-Aprill.
great while before it was night, he was exclaimed upon and railed at on every
side, with clamors of the most seditious and cowardly persons: who forbearing
to use neither tongues nor hands, reviled him as a fugitive and traitor, not
upon any specialty they could charge him withal, but after the manner of the
common sort, each man laying his own shames upon others. Titianus and Celsus
returned not before night, which served them to good purpose. for the watch was
now set, and the soldiers fury appeased by the help of never presented
themselves to the battle: that surely these at the lest had not been
overcome: and if so needs it must be, they should with more honor dye in the
field. Upon these and the like cogitations sometimes growing desperate, and
sometimes yielding to fear, through consideration of their own forlorn
estate, they were incited more often to rage then to relent. The Vitellian army
lodged five miles from Bebriacum, the Generalles not daring that day to attempt
the enemies camp: and beside a voluntary yielding was hoped for: where albeit
they could not entrench, as men that went out lightly appointed and only to
fight, yet their weapons in hand, and the victory they lately obtained, was a
sufficient defense. The day following those of Othoes men which had made show
of most courage, repenting and yielding, the whole army with one accord sent
an Embassage to the Vitellianists. The Vitellian Generals without any question
granted them peace: only the Ambassadors were stayed there for a season,
which bred a scruple in the minds of the other, not knowing whether they had
obtained as yet or not their request: but anon the Embassage returning, the
camp was set open. Then both the conquered and conquerers, breaking out into
weeping, with a woeful ioyfulnesse, detested the misery of civil dissensions:
and meeting in the same tents, some comforted their brethren, some their
friends which were wounded. Hopes and rewards were doubtful and in
expectation alone: burials and mournings were certain and sure before hand:
neither was there any so void of mischaunce, that had not to mourn for some
bodies death. The body of Orphidius the Lieutenant was sought out, and buried
with accustomed solemnity, and some few beside by their friends: the rest of
the common sort were left on the ground.

XVII. Otho understanding of the overthrow at Bebriacum kills himself. The
soldiers about him, when they could not induce Verginius to undertake the
place, yield themselves to the Vitellianists.
IN the mean while Otho at Brixellum waited for the news of the battle
without all passion of fear, and certainly resolved what he would do. And
first an uncertain report of ill tidings was muttered without head or aduow;
then they which fled out of the battle came and declared that all was
certainly lost. The soldiers ardent affection was such, that they stayed not
for any comfort or encouragement from their Emperor, but contrariwise they
comforted him, bidding him to be of good cheer: that there was yet new forces
remaining, and that they would hazard all perils and suffer all extremities for
his sake: neither was it flattery; but in unfeigned good meaning, upon a
certain instinct and fury, they mightily desired to go to the field, to set
up the side and recover their losses again. They which stood a far off
held up their hands and besought him: the nearest embraced his knees,
especially Plotius Firmus captain of the Guard, who besought him often and
instantly not to forsake his so well deserving soldiers, so loving and
faithful an army; auerring that it was greater magnanimity to endure then to
relinquish when fortune does cross: that stout men and valiant even against
fortune do rely upon hope, whereas the cowardly dastardes are hastily drawn
by fear to despair. As Otho seemed by his countenance to yield to these
speeches, or else to reject them, so were there diuersely showtinges for joy, or
(...), says Plu. p. 1526. (...).
gronings for sorrow. And not only the Praetorians, the most addicted and
partial soldiers to Otho, but those also which were sent before out of Moesia
affirmed, that the army which was expected would alike obstinatly maintain the
quarrel: and that the Legions already were come to Aquileia; so that without
all question a cruel and bloody war might have been renewed of doubtful
event to the one side and to the other. But Otho altogether aliene from any
purpose of war, "To hazard, quoth he, this virtue and valor of yours to
needless dangers, I account it too dear a price of my life. The more hope you
do show, if I listed to live, the more commendation will be of my death, as
being voluntary and not by constraint. Fortune and I have had good experience
the one of the other: and nothing the less for that my time has been short:
I tell you, it is harder to moderate a man's self in felicity, the which he
looks not long to enjoy. The civil war began on Vitellius party, and
thence grew the first occasion to contend with arms for the Empire: but to
contend no oftener but once, I for my part am purposed to give the example. And
hereby let posterity judge and esteem of Otho. Through my benefit Vitellius
shall enjoy his brother, his wife, and his children: I seek no revenge, I have
no need of such comforts. others have kept longer the Empire, but let it be
said, that none has ever so valiantly left it. Shall I suffer so much Roman
blood again to be spilt, and the commonwealth deprived of so worthy armies?
Let this mind accompany me to my grave, and so surely it shall, that you for
your parts would have died for my sake: but tarry you and live, and let not me
be any longer a hinderance to your obtaining of pardon, nor you to my
determination and purpose. To speak more of dying, or to use many words in
that argument, I take to proceed of a cowardely courage. This take for a
principal proof of my resolutenesse, that I complain not of any. For to
blame gods or men is their property that gladly would live. After these words
and the like, in courteous language, according to their age or degree, he
required the young men, and desired the oulde to get them quickly away and go
to the winner; lest by slacking the time they provoked his further displeasure:
rebuking eftsoons the unseasonable weepinges of those about him, without any
show of alteration in countenance, or sign of fear in his speech. Then he
commanded those which departed to be furnished of wagons and barges; burned
all books and letters containing any matter notably in favor of himself or
disfavor of Vitellius, and distributed money sparingly, and not as one that
should dye. Then he called unto him Saluius Cocceianus his brothers son,
being in the prime of his youth, and seeing him sore afraid and weeping, he
comforted him, notwithstanding the case touched nearer himself, commending his
kindness and natural affection, and reprehending his timorousness. What?
were it possible, that Vitellius should be so hard hearted, and cruelly minded,
as not to do him that one pleasure, whereas he had preserved for him his whole
house without harm? that at least by this hasty dispatch of himself he
deserved that some courtesy should be showed his kindred: especially having
forborne, for the love of his country, to seek his last and uttermost remedy;
not upon extreme despair, but then, whenas his army with instance demanded to
bring it to a battle again. but, he said, for his part he had gotten renown
enough for himself, and nobility for his posterity, after the Julian,
Claudian, and Seruian families, having first of al men brought into a house of
no great continuance the honor of having an Emperor: and therefore he willed
him with good courage to live and go on, neither forgetting at any time that
Otho was his uncle, nor yet too much remembering the same. After these things he
willed all to depart and give place, and gave himself a while to his rest: but
a sudden tumult interrupted the course of his last cares, word being brought
in of the disordered and outrageous behavior of the soldiers; who threatened to
kill all those which went away, but were most egerly bent against Verginius,
whose house being shut they beset round about. Whereupon Otho went out, and
having rebuked the principal mutins, returning again spent the time in talking
and comforting them which departed, until they were al safely conveyed away.
When it grew toward night, he quenched his thirst with a cup of cold water,
then two rapiers were brought in: and after he had tried their points he put
the one under his pillow: and having certain knowledge that his friends were
already gone, he passed the night in good rest, and as it is said not without
sleep: as soon as it was day he ran himself through the breast with the
rapier. upon his groaning, as he was dying his freed and bondmen, with Plotius
Firmus captain of the Guard, entered in, and found but only one wound. The
funerals were hastened with all speed, for he had most earnestly besought and
entreated to dispatch them, least his head peradventure should have been cut
off, and contumeliously used: the Praetorian cohorts carried the biere, with
praises and tears, kissing his wound and his hands. At the funeral-fire some
of the soldiers slew themselves, not upon crime, nor for fear, but for the
great love they bare to their Prince, and to imitate so honorable an example:
and afterward at Bebriacum, Placentia, and in other camps many did the like:
a tumbe also they At Brixellum, Plut. 1529.
erected for Otho with little cost and solemnity, and therefore the liker to
stand. In this manner Otho ended his days in the But borne at Rome.
originally descended from Ferrentium: his father was Consul, his grandfather
Praetor: his mothers blood Suetonius c. 1. calls her solendidissima faemina.
somewhat disparaging, but yet not base: in his tender age and youth such as
we have showed: one, that by two acts, the one most detestable, the other
most praisewoorthy, deserved with posterity good fame, in as great measure as
he did ill. As to heap together fabulous matter, and delight the readers
minds with tales devised at pleasure, I would account a thing little agreeable
to the gravity of my purposed work, so on the other side I dare not to detract
all credit, from things which are commonly spoken, and delivered. The same day
that the armies fought at Bebriacum, the inhabitants of Regium Lepidi report,
that a strange bird was seen sitting in a grove much frequented: and that she
could not be feared or driven away, by the resorting of men to the place, or of
birds flying about her, until such time as Otho slew himself: then she
vanished out of sight; and that conferring the times, they found the beginning
and end of the miracle to agree precisely with Othoes decease. At his funerals
the soldiers through sorrow and grief raised a new tumult, neither was there
now any to stay them. And setting upon Verginius manacingly they besought him,
sometime to take the Empire himself, sometime to be their spokesman to Caecina
and Valens: (...), says Plut. p 1529. (...).
but Verginius, as they were breaking into the house, deceived them, slipping
out privily at the back gate. So Rubrius Gallus carried the supplication of the
cohorts, which were at Brixellum, and straightwaies obtained their pardon.
Flauius Sabinus also came, with the of Gladiatores.
companies which he commanded, and yielded himself to the winner.

XVIII. The peril wherein the Senators stood which were left at Mutina, upon
the news of the overthrow at Bebriacum.
WHEN the war was euerywhere at an end, a great part of the Senate, which
accompanied Otho from Rome, and afterward stayed by order at Mutina, incurred
extreme danger. For when word was brought thither of the overthrow, the
soldiers rejected the news as false: and supposing the Senate to be enemy to
Otho, they observed their speeches, interpreting their countenaunces, and
external behavior to the worst; not abstaining at the last from reuiling, and
contumelious terms, and apparently seeking an occasion to begin a massacre:
whereas the Senators had beside to stand in fear another way, lest they
should seem not forward enough to like of Vitellius victory, with whom now
all the world was gone. Thus trembling, and between both being doubtful how
to carry themselves, they meet together, none daring to follow any private
direction, but associating himself with the multitude, presuming thereby of
greater security. As they were in this perplexity, the Ordo Mutine^si^^i.
Decuriones Mutinensium, as it were the common counsel of the town.
council of Mutina increased their cares, offering them armor and money, and
stiling them at every word, very unseasonably, Lords of the Senate. In that
assembly arose a hot contention. Licinius Caecina inueyed against Eprius
Marcellus, for that he seemed to speak ambiguously concerning the present
estate, whereas in truth neither did the other Senators plainly open their
minds: but Caecina picked out Marcellus among the rest, as a man exposed to
envy, and odious for his late trade of accusing, to the end that himself being
lately risen, and newly come into the Senate, might become renowned and known,
by entering into enmity with great persons. But by the moderation of the better
sort interposing themselves the matter was pacified: and so they went all back
to Bononia, there to deliberate anew, hoping withal in the mean season to
receive more aduertisements. At Bononia they set in several ways several
persons to enquire news of the passengers which latelyest came from those
quarters: by whom a freedman of Othoes being demanded the cause of his coming
away, he answered, that he had brought with him his masters After he had
dismissed all the senators, (says Suetonius c. 10.) secreto captato binos
codicillos exarauit ad sororem consolatorios: sed and ad Messalinam Neronis,
quam matrimonio destinauerat, commendans reliquias suas and memoriam: and some
thing to Vitellius also, says Zonoras, in favor of his friends.
last charge: that indeed he had left him alive, but without any care, save
only of posterity, and having renounced all delites of this present life:
hereupon they grew into admiration of him, and were ashamed to ask any
further: and now all wholly declared themselves for Vitellius. His brother L.
Vitellius was present at their consultations, and already offered himself to
be fawned upon, when suddenly Cenus, a freedeman of Neroes, with a loud and
desperate lie amazed them all, affirming that upon the arrival of the
fourteenth Legion, the forces which were at Brixellum being joined thereto, the
fortune of the sides was changed, and the conquerours were overthrown. The
cause of devising the rumor was, that the commissions of Otho for posts, which
began not to be regarded, might through so gladsome a message be revived
again. And so Cenus passed indeed in post to the city, but within few days
after by Vitellius commandment was executed. but the peril of the Senators
was augmented thereby. for Othoes soldiers believed the news to be true: and
that which made their cause worse was, that they were departed from Mutina, and
so the side seemed discountenanced and forsaken, as it were, by the council of
state. Neither did they after that time consult any more in common: every man
sought to provide for himself, until such time as letters sent from Fabius
Valens, and the death of Otho, the more praise worthy the sooner heard of, put
them out of fear.

XIX. The estate of affairs at Rome: and the insolences committed by the
Vitellian soldiers after the victory.
BUT at Rome all was quiet, without any trouble or fear. the Cerealia began
the 12. of April, and ended the 19. so that after the death of Otho at
Brixellum heard of at Rome Cereales ludi ex morespectabantur, the day of his
death, albeit the news came in post could hardly be so late as the 18. of
April, and not possibly so late as the 19.
plays of Ceres were sole^nely kept according to the custom: and when
certain word was brought into the Theater that Otho was dead, and that Flauius
Sabinus Provost of the city had sworn all the soldiers in the city to
Vitellius, in sign of joy the people clapped their hands and gave applause
unto Vitellius. Then they carried the images of Galba with boughs of laurel
and flowers about the temples, heaping up together in manner of a tumbe garlands
and coronets about Lacus Curtius, which place Galba at his death had embrued
with his blood. In the Senate al titles and honors usually conferred upon
other Princes by occasions, and after they had reigned many years, were
straightwaies decreed to Vitellius: and withal praises concluded upon for the
German armies, with solemn thanks for their good service; and an Embassage
sent to congratulate. Letters also were read; written by Fabius Valens to the
Consuls, in a style humble enough: yet Caecinaes modesty was better accepted in
that he wrote not at all. But Italy was now more grievously vexed, and cruelly
handled then during the war. The Vitellian soldiers dispersed in the free
towns and colonies pilled and spoiled, polluted and ravished without any
difference of right or wrong, holy or profane; but only following their
ravenous and insolent humor, or else by money bought out to forbear: and some
there were that counterfaiting themselves to be soldiers slew their particulare
enemies. The soldiers also themselves were skilled in the country, and
designed out the well stoared grounds, and well moneyed masters to pray upon,
or if resistance were made, to destroy them; the Generals being obnoxious and
not daring to prohibit it: Caecina was less covetous and more possessed with
vainglorie: Valens was for bribery and polling infamous, and therefore a winker
also at other men's faults. so many footmen and horse, so great violences,
da^mages and injuries, especially the state of Italy being already greatly
empouerished before, were hardly abidde^.

XX. Vitellius viage from Germany to Lions, and his actions there.
IN the mean season Vitellius, ignorant of his own victory, made
preparation as for a war new to begin, and carried with him beside eight
thousand soldiers of Britanny, the strength which remained of the German army:
few old soldiers were left in the standing camps, but new men leuyed in have
out of France to uphold the names of the Legions remaining behind: and the
charge of the militare affairs there was committed to Hordeonius Flaccus. When
Vitellius had marched some few days journey, he understood of the good
success at Bebriacum; then that Otho was dead and the war finished:
whereupon calling an assembly he highly extolleth the valiantness of the
soldiers. Primo imperij die, says Suetonius. c. 12. contrary to the
circumstances of this place.
After the speech, his army instantly requested him to create Asiaticus his
freedman a Gentleman of Rome: which shameful flattery he then rebuked; and
soon after upon a fickleness of wit, that which he had openly refused, he
privily bestowed in banquet, and honored with rings Asiaticus, a base abject
slave, and one seeking to rise by ill means. About the same time message was
brought that Albinus Procuratour of both Mauretanies was slain, and the
countries had sided themselves with Vitellius. Lucceius Albinus was by Nero
set over Mauretania Caesariensis, and Galba annexed the administration of
Tingitana; so that he had forces of good moment under his charge: 18. cohorts,
five wings, and an infinite number of Moors not unfit for the war, as men
that usually lived of stealing and harrowing their neighbors. When Galba was
slain he followed the party of Otho, and not contenting himself with Afric,
had a purpose for Spain, being disioyned from it by a narrow strayte. Hereupon
Cluvius Rufus was afraid, and commanded the tenth Legion to aproach to the
shore, as if he meant to have shipped over: sending before certain Centurions
to induce the minds of the Moors to favor Vitellius: neither was it hard to
effect. For the fame of the German army was great throughout all the provinces,
and beside a report was spredde, that Albinus contemning the name of a
Procurator, had usurped a royal diadem, and the name of The last king of
Mauretania, subdued by Caesar. anno vrb. cond. 708.
Iuba. So their minds being changed, thereupon they went and slew Asinius
Pollio captain of a wing, one of Albinus faithfullest friends, and Festus and
Scipio two captains of cohorts: Albinus himself as he went by sea from
Tingitana to Mauretania Caesariensis was slain as he landed, and his wife
withal, who voluntarily offered her self to the slaughter. These things and
all else that was done Vitellius passed over without due examination, as his
manner was with a short audience to turn (...) each striving to excel other,
induced some unthrifty young men to the like dishonor. Now Vitellius upon the
coming of his brother, and certain schoolemasters of tyranny creeping into
the court, waxing prowder and fiercer, commanded Dolabella, whom, as before we
remembered, Otho had confined to Aquinum, upon this occasion to be slain.
Dolabella, hearing that Otho was dead, was returned to Rome: whereof Plautius
Varus once Praetor, one of Dolabellaes most inward friends, accused him before
Flauius Sabinus the Provost of the city, as if he had broken prison, to the end
to make offer of himself for a head to the conquered faction: adding moreover,
that to that purpose he had felt the cohort, which was in garrison at Ostia:
but having no one proof of any of these so great crimes, he began to repent of
his wicked deed, and sought pardon, but too late, after the fact. As Flauius
Sabinus was in doubt how to proceed, in a matter of that wayght, Triaria the
wife of Lucius Vitellius, fierce and cruel above the ordinary of that sex,
terrified him; warning him not to affect the commendation of clemency by the
peril of his Prince. Sabinus a man of his own nature of a mild disposition,
but when he was put in a fear easy to be changed, and fearing to make
another man's danger his own, lest he should seem to have helped him up, as
he was falling pushed him forward. So Vitellius, partly upon fear, and
partly upon an old grudge, because Dolabella had taken Petronia to wife
straight upon her deuorce from him, called him by letters to him: and
commanding to avoid the beaten Flaminian way, and carry him by Interamna, he
gave commission to murder him there. that seemed too long to him who had the
commission: and therefore in an inn by the way, as Dolabella rested himself
on the ground, he cut his throat, to the great infamy of the new government,
whereof this was the first proof. This kind of behavior of Triaria was the
more odious, by setting against it the modesty of her next neighbor Galeria
the Emperors wife, heaping not sorrows upon the sorrowful, and the rare
virtue of Sextilia his mother, a woman of the ancient sort: who is also
reported to have said at the reading of her sons first letters, that a
Vitellius was borne by her and not a Germanicus: neither did she afterward
through any allurements of fortune, or courting of the city, participate any
thing else of her sons estate, save only the smarts of her house when it fell.

XXI. Vitellius viage from Lions into Jtalie by Turin, Pauia, Cremona,
Bebriacum, and so to Bononia, and the actions which happened in the mean way.
AS Vitellius was departed from Lions, Marcus Cluvius Rufus leaving his charge
in Spain ouertaketh him, carrying joy and gratulation in countenance, but
heaviness in heart, knowing that he had been shot at, and matter put up
against him. Hilarious the Emperors freedman had articled against him, that
hearing of Vitellius and Othoes contention for the Empire, he had endeavored to
erect a souerainty of his own, and assure to himself the possession of
Spain: and therefore had named in the beginning of his Diplomata; which
although granted and sealed by the governors of the provinces, yet the style
was, as from the Prince, and in the Princes name were the commissions directed.
commissions no Prince: certain points also of his orations he picked out,
and construed as tending to the defacing of Vitellius, and making himself
populare. But the credit of Cluvius prevailed so far, that Vitellius
contrarily commanded his man to be punished, and assumed Cluvius into his
train; suffering him withal to enjoy Spain, which he governed still
notwithstanding his absence, according to the precedent of Tac. 4. Ann. p, 387.
Lucius Arruntius, whom Tiberius Caesar retained for fear, but Vitellius kept
Cluvius upon no such jealousy. Trebellius Maximus had not the like favor: he
fled out of Britannie, because the soldiers were incensed against him; and
Vectius Bolanus was sent in his place.

Of all matters present that vexed Vitellius most, to see the vanquished
Legions retain their stomachs vnuanquisht: being dispersed through Italy
together with the winners, in all speeches they showed themselves affected as
enemies, and namely the fourteenth Legion; who carried the greatest stomach of
them all, denying that ever they were overcome: that in the battle at
Bebriacum the Vexillaries only were put to flight, the strength of the Legion
being not present. Wherefore it was thought expedient to send them back into
Britannie, from whence they were called by Nero; and in the mean time, that
they and the cohorts of Batauians should quarter together, by reason of the
ancient iarring between them. Neither could they, having both weapons in hand
and hating each other so deadly, agree long together. At Turin as one of the
Batauians quarreled with an artificer, as having coozened him, and a Legionary
soldier took his part, and defended him as being his host, their companions
sorting themselves each to their fellow, from bitter words passed to blows: and
a bloody battle had been fought, had not two Praetorian cohorts taken the
Legionaries part, and so much increased their strength, that the Batauians were
forced for fear to give over. Upon which accident Vitellius commanded to unite
to his train the Batauians, as wellwillers to the cause, and to send the
Legion away and conduct it over the Graian Alps, by the way that missed
Vienna; for they of Vienna also were had in a jealousy. That night the Legion
removed, fires being left here and there negligently vnput out, part of Turin
was burnt: which damage, as many other bad effects of that war, greater
calamities of other cities did utterly blot and put out of remembrance. The
Legion having passed the Alps, some of the most seditious among them carried
their enseignes toward Vienna: but by the consent of the better sort they were
stayed; and so the Legion was transported into Britanny. The next fear that
Vitellius had, was of the Suetonius Vitellio c. 10. reports the same and no
more: quicquid Praetoriarum cohortium fuit, vno exauctorauit edicto. but by the
new enrolment described in Tacitus. p. 104. it may seem that vrbanae cohortes
were also dismissed.
Praetorian cohorts. And first they were separated: then in good sort and
Missio alia honesta, alia ignominiosa, honesta ex valetudine, ex stipendijs
co^fectis, and in the free state, as I think, pro haereditate adeunda, pro
honoribus petendis, etc.
courteously cassed, with commandment to deliver up their armor to their
Tribunes; and so they remained until such time as the war was begun by
Vespasian: then they resumed arms and were the strength of the Flauian side.
Of the other Legions the first surnamed Classica was sent into Spain, that by
peace and rest it might wax tractable: the eleventh and seventh were returned
to their standing camps: the thirteenth set For some short time, and so sent
home again into Pannonia: for there we find it again in the beginning of the
revolt of Illyricum from Vitellius, p. 100.
a work to build Amphytheatres: for Caecina at Cremona, and Valens at Bononia
made preparation to set forth a show of fencers; Vitellius being never so
intentiuely addicted to serious affairs, that he would forget his pastimes and
pleasures. And thus with good moderation he set them asunder. In the winning
side a mutinee arose upon a sporting beginning, but that the number of them
which were slain made it a matter of earnest, and the whole war more odious.
Vitellius was in Ticinum at banquet, and with him Verginius. The Lieutenants
and Tribunes are frugal Tempestiui^ conuiuijs delectantur. convivia tempestina
those, which to make the work the longer, are begun before the ordinary
hour.
or riotous, according to the Princes dispositions: in like sort the soldier
severe or dissolute: in Vitellius train all was disorderly and full of
drunkenness, more like to Read Suet. Vitellio c. 10.
then to a camp where discipline should be. It happened that two soldiers,
one of the fifth Legion, another a French Auxiliary, upon a iolity challenged
one another to wrestle: and whenas the Legionary was thrown, the French man
insulting over him, and they which looked on dividing themselves into sides, the
Legionary soldiers taking themselves to their weapons made havoc of the
Auxiliaries, and slew two cohorts of them. The remedy of this tumult was
another tumult. dust and glistering of armor was seen a far off: and
suddenly it was noised in the army, that the fourteenth Legion was returned
with intention to fight: but it was their own riereward; which being perceived,
that care was ended. In the mean season, as one of Verginius servants by
chance came by, the soldiers charge and accuse him, that he was set to kill
Vitellius, and rush thereupon into the banqueting place requiring the death of
Verginius. No man doubted of Verginius innocency, no not Vitellius himself,
although otherwise very suspicious and fearful: and notwithstanding they
demanded the death of so honorable a personage, and one which had once been
their General, yet were they hardly appeased. Neither was there any man so often
shot at as Verginius in all seditions and mutinous assemblies: the admiration
and fame of the man remained amongst them; but they hated him deadly, because
he had contemned their offer. The day following Vitellius gave audience to the
Senates Embassage, which he willed there to attend him; and going from thence
to the camp, he spoke to the soldiers, commending their dutiful disposition,
and tender carfulness over his person: but the Auxiliaries fretted and fumed
to see the Legionaries grown to that height of insolency, and no punishment
inflicted upon them. Whereupon the cohorts of Batauians, lest they should
attempt some desperate act, were sent back again into Germany, the course of
affairs fatally tending to minister matter, as well Raised by Ciuilis and the
Batauians, and continued by the rebellion of the French, Tac. Hist. 4. and 5
to a foreign war, as to a civil. The French Auxiliaries also were turned
home to their countries; an excessive number, and straight at the first reuoult
assumed by Vitellius into the cause, for an idle complement of the war. Now
to the end that the treasure and revenues of the Empire, though minished and
wasted, might suffice for his excessive and prodigal donations, he commands
to lessen the number of soldiers in the Legions and Aids, forbidding supplies
to be made, and offering dismissions indifferently: which action of his proved
pernicious to the state, and unpleasant to the soldiers. For fewer now bare
the same burdens; and perils and labors came thicker about; and their strength
was wasted with riotous life by reason of such abundance, contrary to the
ancient discipline and usage of our forefathers, under whom the Roman estate
was governed and stood, by virtue better then money. From thence Vitellius
turned to Cremona: and when he had seen Caecinaes plays, he was desirous to
go to Bebriacum and view the place with his eyes of the late victory. The
spectacle was ougly and grisly to behold: within forty days after the battle,
bodies Xiphilinus. p. 205 writes that in the battles about Cremona on both
sides 40000. me^ were slain. Tacitus, following the precept of Salust, never ^.
most seldom sets down the number.
torn a pieces, mangled limbs, figures of horses and men putrified, the
ground imbrued with corruption and blood, the country miserably wasted, the
trees and corn trodden down and spoiled: that also was a point of inhumanity
that they of Cremona had strowed the way And not new in the Roman Princes, if
Suetonius deceive not in Galba c. 18. per omne iter dextra sinistraque
oppidatim victimae caedebantur.
as the manner is to kings passing by: which things, albeit they pleased them
presently, turned afterward to their ruin. Caecina and Valens were by, and
showed the places of the conflict: from this place the Legions went out and
charged: from hence the horsemen arose: from thence the Auxiliaries closed
about. Now the Tribunes and captains extolling each his own prowess, with
many a lie mingled some truethes, or made of the truth more then it was. The
common soldiers also with clamor and joy step out of the way, call to
remembrance the ground they had trauersed, behold and wonder at the heaps
of armor, and bodies: and some there were whom the changeable fortune of
humane affairs moved to pity and tears. But Vitellius as a man without all
compassion turned not away his eyes, nor had Suetonius Vitellio. c. 10. adds
further, vt campos in quib. pugnatu^ est adijs, abhorrentes quosdam cadaverum
tabem, detestabili voce confirmare cusus est, optimeolere occisum hostem, and
melius ciuem.
not in horror to see so many thousands of unburied citizens: but contrariwise
iocunde, and ignorant of his own lot which followed so nearely, he makes a
solemn sacrifice 3. Hist. p. 727. of Fabius Valens, multo, ac molli
concubinarum spadonumque agmine.
and droues of eunuchs, and the rest of the buffons of Neroes court. For
Vitellius was an admirer also of Nero himself, and was wont to attend Read
Suet. c. 4
and follow him as he did sing, not by compulsion as many a good man, but
selling his honor to nourish his riot and feed his belly, to which he had
wholly enthralled himself. Now that Valens and Caecina might obtain some
void months that year to be Consuls in, certain others coarctati aliarum
consulatus some indeed were stricken out: but every one, as it may seem,
accomplished his ordinary time of two months. see the annotation upon the
first book.
were abridged of their time: M. Macer was passed over because he had been a
captain of Othoes side: Valerius Marinus whom Galba appointed was put over to
another time, not upon any dislike, but because he was of a soft nature, and
would gently put up a wrong. Pedanius Costa was omitted being dislikt of the
Prince, because he had attempted against Nero, and pricked Verginius forward:
but Vitellius aledged other causes; and according to the servile custom of
that time great thanks were given him beside.

XXII. One Geta a bondsman counterfaiting himself to be Scribonianus Camerinus,
and associating others unto him, was taken, brought to Vitellius and hanged.
ABOUT the same time a certain fable, believed at first, and running without
controlement at the beginning, ended within a few days. A certain man
counterfaited himself to be Scribonianus Camerinus, and that he had lain in
Neroes time for fear secret in Histria, because there the vassals and
possessions of the old Crassi, and the affection toward the name did remain.
so certain lewd persons being assumed to furnish the play, the credulous
common people, and some of the soldiers, upon ignorance of the truth, or else
desirous of troubles, began to associat themselves unto him apace: but their
captain was entrapped anon and brought before Vitellius, and being examined
what manner of man he was, whenas they found no truth in his answers, and that
he was owned by his master by name and quality Geta a fugitive bondsman, he was
executed after the manner of slaves.

XXIII. Vespasian swears to Vitellius: then takes upon himself the Empire
in Jewrie.
IT is scarcely credible, how greatly Vitellius grew in pride and
slothfulness, whenas the soldiers sent for that purpose brought word out of
Syria and Iewry, that the East had sworn allegiance unto him. For Vespasian,
albeit only upon a flying report without any certain author, was in every man's
mouth, and commonly spoken of, and oftentimes as he was named Vitellius would
startle. Then he and his army, as being without any concurrent in cruelty, in
lust, in oppression, brake out into barbarous and foreign behavior. But
Vespasian in the mean season laying his plot for the war, entered into
consideration of the forces both near and far of. His own soldiers were so
ready in his behalf, that when he began them the oath and wished all
prosperity to Vitellius, the soldiers answered with silence, without either
good wish or good word. Mutianus was not aliene from Vespasian, and toward
Titus very well affected. Alexander the governor of Egypt had entered into the
confederacy. The third Legion, because it was transferred out of Syria into
Moesia, Vespasian reckened as his own: and the rest of the Illyrian Legions it
was hoped would follow. For the insolent behavior of the soldiers which came
from Vitellius, with their proud gestures and looks, and rude speeches,
despising all others as base and inferiors, had wonderfully offended all the
armies beside. But to enter into so weighty a war was a point not so quickly
resolved upon: and Vespasian albeit he hoped the best, forecast sometimes the
worst in his mind: what a day would that be for him, in the which he should
commit to the mercy of the war himself of threescore years of age, and his
two sons in the flower of their youth? that in private attempts a man might
proceed and stop where he listed; but to them which desired the Empire there
was no middle course, between the estate of a Prince and the death of a
traitor. Furthermore he laid before him the puissance of the German army; a
matter well known unto him Viro militari. for Vespasian before he was sent
into Iewry had been Lieutenant of a Legion in Germany, the^ in Britannie,
where he fought 30. battles, took above 20. towns, and adjoined the i will of
Wight to the obedience of the Roman Empire, whereupon he received triumphalia
ornamenta. Suet. Vesp. c. 4.
being a martial man: that his Legions had never made trial al of themselves in
a civil war, whereas they of Vitellius had been conquerours therein: and the
conquered party abounded more in complaints then in forces and strength.
Moreover that in civil dissensions the faith of the soldier was fleeting: and
that there was peril to be feared from every particular man. For what would
cohorts and wings avail, if one or two, to attain the reward proposed by the
otherside, would desperately venture to kill him? so Scribonianus was slain
under Claudius, and so his murderer Volaginius of a common soldier was
preferred to the highest places of service. that it was a more easy matter to
incite all in general, the^ to beware of eueryone in particular. As he seemed to
waver moved with these fears, both the other Lieutenants with the rest of his
friends sought to confirm him, and Mutianus after many and secret
conferences, now also in open council spoke to him in this wise. "All men,
which are to enter into great and important actions, ought to weigh with
themselves, whether that which is undertaken be profitable to the common
wealth, honorable for themselves, and easy to be effected, or at least not
greatly difficult: withal the party that persuades unto it is to be
considered, whether beside bare words and advise he adioine his own peril
thereto, yea or no: and if fortune do favor the attempt to whom the
principal glory accreweth. I call you Vespasian to the taking of the Empire,
a matter as much for the safegarde of the common wealth, as for your own
honor. Next after the gods it is in your hand to attain it: and fear not as
though I said it to flatter: it is more near a disgrace then a praise to be
chosen after Vitellius. We rise not against Augustus, a man of that deep
insight, not against the wary old age of Tiberius, nor against the house of
Caius, or Claudius, or Nero rooted by so many descents in the Empire: you gave
place also to the ancientnes of Galbaes house: to sleep any longer and abandon
the state to be in this sort polluted and ruined, were a sloth and cowardice,
yea although to live in that slavery were as safe for you, as it is
dishonorable; which indeed is not so. The time is already Abijs iam and
transuectum est tempus quo posses videri concupisse. confugeindum est ad
imperium.
gone and forepast when you might seem to have for ambition desired the
Empire: the Empire must now be your sanctuary and refuge. Have you forgotten
how Corbulo was murdered? a man of greater lignage then we are, I grant: and so
was Nero likewise then Vitellius. He that is feared is always noble enough in
his conceit that does fear: and that a Prince may be made by the soldiers
abroad, Vitellius himself has showed the way; a man otherwise which never
served in field, never attained to any militare renown but preferred only upon
a dislike of Galba, and now so disliked himself, that Otho, whom he overcame,
not by strategeme or strength, but by his own hasty casting away of himself,
is become a notable Prince and much wished for: whereas Vitellius in the mean
time disperseth the Legions, disarmeth the cohorts, and ministers daily new
matter of war. His own soldier if he had any courage or edge, it is dulled
and worn away, in tippling and brotheling houses, and following the Princes
example. You have out of Iewry, Syria and Egypt nine complete Legions in
readiness, not wasted by war, nor corrupted with mutinees; but a soldier
confirmed with practice and use, and hartened with happy exployts against
forrayne enemies. We have nauies, wings and cohortes to strengthen our cause,
and kings beside most faithful unto us: and that which is above all, your own
experience and skill. Of my self I will not say much: this only that I am not
inferior to Caecina and Valens: disdain not Mutianus for a helper, because
you have him not a competitour: I prefer my self before Vitellius, and you
before me. Your house is beautified with triumphall ornaments, and adorned with
two goodly youngmen, the one already About twenty seven years old.
capable of the Empire, and in his first service renowned among the armies of
Germany also: it were absurd for me not to yield up the Empire to him, whose
son I would surely adopt if my self were Emperor. Now as concerning the
reward and the peril, they shall not be equally parted between us. For if we
do overcome, I shall have that honor which you will affoorde me: the danger
and peril shall be alike to us both; or as it is better, rule you these armies
here, and commit over to me the war and uncertain events of the field. The
conquered side lives this day under better discipline, then the conquerours;
anger and hatred, and desire of revenge inflaming them to valor, whereas the
other through pride and breach of discipline wax dullish and blunt: whose
secret and swelling wounds the war of it self will open and disclose.
neither do I repose my self more upon your vigilant, frugall and discreet
dealing, then upon the sluggish, doltish, and cruel proceeding of Vitellius.
And beside all this our cause is more justifiable in war then in peace: for
they which deliberate to rebel, have rebelled. After the oration of Mutianus
the rest came more boldly about him, exhorting and persuading him, and laying
before him the oracles and prophecies, and the favorable aspects of the
heavens: neither was Vespasian void of that kind of superstition. For
afterward when he was Emperor, he had openly about him one Seleucus an
Astrologer, to foretell and direct his affairs. Moreover certain old and
ominous presages came to his remembrance. A notable Suet. Vespasiano. c. 5.
tall cypres tree was in his ground, which suddenly fell downs, and the day
following rose up again upon the same root and flourished, growing higher and
better spredde then before. That thing by the consent of the Haruspices
foreshewed great and prosperous matters: who assured him, when he was very
young, of most high and honorable preferment. But at the first the Quem
gessit, says Suetonius, per duos novissimos annimenses, about the later end
of Claudius time.
Consulshippe, and triumphall ornaments, and the glory of the Jewish victory
seemed to have fulfilled the prophecy: when he had attained to them, he
believed then the Empire was portended therehy. Between Iewry and Syria lies
the mount Carmelus, and so the god also is called, to whom according to the
custom anciently received an altar is erected, and all deuoutnesse and
reverence showed, but without either image of temple. As Vespasian sacrificed
there, fraught with secret hopes in his head, Basilides the priest often
viewing and marking the entrails, Suet. Vesp. c. 5. apud Judaeam Carmeli dei
oraculum consulentem (Vespasianum) ita confirmauere sorts, vt quicquid
cogitaret volueretque animo, quamtumlibet magnum, id esse peruenturum
pollicerentur.
Whatsoever it is, quoth he, o Vespasian which thou intendest, whether it be to
build a house, or to enlarge thy possessions, or to increase the number of
servants, it shall be effected: the gods do grant thee a great room, large
limits, and many men. These dark speeches were straightwaies noted and
published, and now by the common voice of the people applied and construed:
neither was there any thing more vulgar in every man's mouth, and especially in
his own audience; as to them which depend upon hopes, such kinds of
speeches are most used. From this conference they departed with full
resolution, Mutianus to Antiochia, and Vespasian to Caesarea, the one being
the head town of Syria, the other of Iudaea. Suet. Vesp. c. 6. says the
matter was first broched and begun by the Jllyrian army.
The matter was first published, and Vespasian named Emperor at Alexandria by
Tiberius Alexander, who made the most have, and ministered the soldiers their
oath upon the first day of Iulie, which day afterward was reputed and
celebrated as the first day of his reign, although his own army of Iewry
began not before the 5to. Nonas. Suet. 5to. Jdus, which is the eleventh day.
third of the same month: and then in his presence they swear with such
affection and heat, that they did not attend the coming of Titus his son
out of Syria, who was a messenger of all matters between Mutianus and his
father. The The soldiers affection toward Vespasia^, and the manner and
circumstances of his assuming the Empire are well set down by Josephus (...).
4. c. 36. (who was present at the action) with some particularities not touched
by Tacitus here, noted by Egesippus also li. 4. c. 27. if it be the ancient
Egesippus, and not rather an extract of Josephus.
violence of the soldier ouerruled the whole action: for no assembly being
called; the Legions not met together; the time and place not agreed of, nor the
man determined upon, a point in that case of most difficulty, that should
speak the first word: hope and fear, reason and chance, diversely distracted
their minds. Matters standing in these terms, as Vespasian came out of his
chamber, a few soldiers after the wonted manner stood on a row, as to salute
their General, but they saluted him Emperor: then the rest ran to, and
heaped upon him the names of Caesar and Augustus, and al titles of sovereign
powerd. His conceits rose from apprehensio^ of fear to the consideration of
his fortune, notwithstanding there appeared in him no token of pride or
arrogancy, nor change in so great a change; but being amazed at the sudden
sight of so great a multitude, as soon as he had recovered his spirits he spoke
unto them soldier like: and being received with a joyful applause, he sent
word to Mutianus of the success. Mutianus at Antiochia receiving the message
which he looked for, called the soldiers to the oath for Vespasian, which they
most willingly accepted. Then he went to He came out of Iewry with Titus when
he was sent by his father to Galba: and when Titus upon the message of Galba^s
death returned back again from Corinth, Agrippa notwithstanding, says
Josephus li. 4. c. 29 (...), vt apud novum principem locaret gratiam, says
our common Hegesippus. lib. 4. c. 21.
from Rome unawares to Vitellius, and sailed hastily home: and likewise the
queen Berenice with all her might furthered the side, a queen in the flower
of her beauty and youth, and well beloved of the old Vespasian also, in
respect of the great and rich gifts which she gave. All the provinces which
bordered on the sea, as far as Asia and Achaia, and all the inlandes to Pontus
and Armenia, received the oath: but the Lieutenants thereof were without armies,
for as yet

XXIIII. The preparation of Vespasian and his side for the war.
BERYTVS one another made show of a Princes estate. The first provision for
war was to leuy more men, and revoke the old soldiers which were
discharged: certain strong cities were appointed out to make armor therein:
at Antioche gold and silver was coined: and in all these several works great
speed and diligence used by the means of good overseers. Vespasian also
would go in his own person and encourage them, inciting the good by praise,
the slow by example rather then correction, more ready to conceal the vices
of his friends then the virtues: many he rewarded with captains and
Procuratours places, many he advanced to be Senators, excellent men and of
great virtue, and which afterward attained to highest degrees, although in
some fortune supplied the want of good qualities. As for donatiues to the
soldier, neither did Mutianus in his first oration make any mention but
sparingly thereof, nor Vespasian make any offer of greater in civil war,
then others were wonted in peace; a man notable and firm against these
lauishings to soldiers, and therefore having his army better in order.
Moreover Ambassadors were sent to the kings of Parthia and Armenia to conclude
a surceance of arms, lest whilst the Legions were intentive upon the civil
war, those nations should assault the frontiers behind. It was agreed that
Titus should prosecute the Jewish war, and Vespasian should put himself in
possession of the Claustra Aegypti. Josephus, (...). lib. 4. c. 37. opens
this matter at large of the necessity of the country to the vittailing of
Italy, of the strength on every side, and hardness of access either by land
or by sea, and especially of the da^gerousnesse of the haven at Alexandria a
very particulare description. nevertheless Vespasian, after this consultation
at Berytus, according to Josephus c. 4, went to Antiochia before he went into
Egypt.
strength of Egypt. Against Vitellius it was thought sufficient to send a
part of the host, and Mutianus to lead them, and the name of Vespasian, and
the favor of fate, which finds or makes a way through all lets. Then
letters were written to all the Lieutenants and armies, and order given out to
inuit the Praetorian soldiers, which hated Vitellius, upon promise of
restitution to their places. Mutianus with an army not encombred with carriage,
bearing himself rather as the Emperors fellow then as a servant leave
Moesia, Having set forward Mutianus in his way, here he returns again to
talk of the preparation somewhat disorderly, and peradventure to draw in that
saying of Mutianus, Pecunias esse belli civilis nervo^.
provinces were busily occupied in provision of ships, men, and armor; but
the greatest difficulty was to get money: which Mutianus affirming to be the
sinews of civil war, respected not law or equity in judgments, but only
what way to procure masses of money. Crimes were daily devised, against men of
most wealth, and they spoiled: which manner of dealing being of it self
grievous and intolerable, but in some sort excusable by the necessity of the
war, remained also in peace afterward. For Vespasian himself, albeit at the
beginning of his Empire he was not so obstinately bent to obtain unreasonable
matters, yet upon his continual prosperity, and taught by ill masters, he
took forth a bad lesson, and used it boldly. With his own purse also
Mutianus furthered the war, conferring privately that, which he would in more
ample measure repay himself out of the common. The rest following his example
in contributing of money, few or none had the grace to receive it again with
the like vantage.

XXV. The armies in Moesia, Pannonia and Dalmatia adhere to Vespasian.
THE affairs of Vespasian were in the mean season hastened forward by the
Suet. Vesp. c. 6 writes that not the 3. Legio^s, but 2000 out of the 3.
Legions ca^e forward to Aquileiat no doubt erroniously.
to Aquileia; at which place misusing the messengers that brought word of
Othoes overthrow, and tearing the banners wherein Vitellius name was
inscribed, and lastly taking a sum of money by violence and parting it
amongst them, they showed themselves open enemies to the cause. Whereupon they
feared displeasure, and upon fear devised, that this kind of dealing, which
to Vitellius must have needed a long and solemn excuse, might to Vespasian be
set up and reckened as a favor and benefit. So the three Moesian Legions, thus
concurring in one, by letters invited the Pannonian army to the cause, or if
they refused, prepared to force them. In that tumult Aponius Saturninus
Lieutenant general of Moesia endeavored to commit a most wicked act, sending a
Centurion to murder Tertius Iulianus Lieutenant of the seventh Legion, upon
private grudges, pretending the public cause of the sides. Iulianus
understanding of the danger, and taking guides skilful in the country, fled by
the deserts of Moesia, beyond the mount Hemus, and afterward was not present
in the civil war of the one side or other: protracting the journey he took
to Vespasian by diverse delays, and as the occurrences were, making less
speed or more. But in Pannonia the thirteenth Legion, and seventh surnamed
Galbiana, retaining the anger and grief of the lost at Bebriacum, without any
stay joined themselves to Vespasian, at the incitement principally of Antonius
Primus, a man attainted in law, and in Neroes time Tacitus 14. Ann. p. 497.
convicted of forgery, but among other miseries of war and a troubled state
he recovered his place in the Senate, and by Galba was made Lieutenant of the
seventh Legion. He was supposed to have written diverse letters to Otho,
offering his service for a captain to the side; of whom being not regarded, he
was not that war in any employment: but when as Vitellius state began to
decay, following Vespasian he added great weight to the cause, being a man
valiant of his hands, of a ready utterance, a cunning craftesmaster to make
others odious, in dissensions and mutinees powerable, a violent spoyler, a
wastful spender, in time of peace and quiet government insupportable, in war
not to be contemned. The Moesian and Pannonian armies, being thus joined
together, drew anon the Dalmatian soldier, albeit the Lieutenaunts general
sturred nothing at al. Titus Flauianus was general of Pannonia, and Pompeius
Sullanus of Dalmatia, two wealthy old men: but there was in the country
Cornelius Fuscus the Procurator, a man in the principal strength of his age,
and of noble birth; who in his first years upon desire of ease, had renounced
his place in Senate, and afterward being captain of his colony in favor of
Galba, by that means attained a Procuratorship. This man, entering into the
cause for Vespasian, became a principal firebrande of the war, seeming to
delight not so much in the rewards of perils, as in the perils themselves, and
in steed of certainties, wherewith he was anciently endued, choosing new and
doubtful uncertainties. So he assaieth to shake and stir up whatsoever there
was any where discontented, writing into Britanny to the fourteenth Legion,
into Spain to the first, because they both had stood against Vitellius for
Otho: letters also were sent abroad into France: and so in one moment there
brake a great and mighty war out, the Illyrian armies thus plainly
reuolting, and the rest inclining to follow, where fortune should favor.

XXVI. Vitellius makes his entry into Rome.
WHILST these things were a working in the provinces, by Vespasian and his
adherents, Vitellius growing every day more contemptible and slothful, staying
upon every place of pleasure in town and country, with his troublesome train
marched toward the city. but the greatest slaughter was seven miles from the
city. At that place Vitellius distributed to his soldiers, according to the
fashion of Suetonius c. 11 says plainly he did so: vrbem ad classicum
introiit, paludatus ferroque succinctus inter signa atque vexilla, sagulatis
comitibus, ac detectis commilitonum armis. for this seems to have been the
manner of entering a town taken by force. Josephus. 4. (...). c. 35 describes
also this entry.
as into a town taken by foce; but being advised otherwise by his friends he
laid aside his militare attire, and taking his robes marched with his men in
peaceable manner. The living: and lastly without any care at all of their own
health many quartered in the pestilent places of the Vatican, whereupon the
death of many common persons ensued: and the Germans and Frenchmen lying by the
Tiber, and being otherwise subject to diseases, utterly overthrew the state of
their body, with too much swimming in the river, and impatience of heat.
Moreover the citty-souldiery was through vndiscreetnesse or ambition corrupted.
Sixteen Praetorian cohorts and four urban were enrolled, containing a
thousand men a piece. In preferring to those rooms Valens presumed to bear
greater stroke, as being the worthier man, and having redeemed Caecina
himself out of peril: and in truth by his coming the side was revived, and
with so happy a battle he cancelled the hard opinion of his slow coming
forward: and all the soldiers of low Germany followed Valens and depended
wholly upon him: upon which causes it is supposed that Caecinaes faith began
first to be fleeting. Notwithstanding Vitellius yielded not so much to the
captains, but that he yielded much more to the soldiers pleasures: every one
chose his own place of service: were he never so unworthy, if he liked it
better he was deputed to the city service: again those which were fit were
suffered, if they listed to remain in their former estate among the Legionary
or Auxiliary soldiers: which diverse were willing to do being molested with
sicknesses, and not able to endure the heat of the country. Notwithstanding
the Legions and Aids were drawn of their principal strength, and the beauty
of the Praetorian camp blemished, by this confusion rather then choice of
twenty thousand out of the whole army. As Vitellius was making a solemn
speech, the soldiers required Asiaticus, and Flauius, and Rufinus, captains
of France to be executed, because they had taken arms in Vindex behalf:
neither did Vitellius restrain such speeches, besides that he was a man of
weak resistance by nature, knowing also that the day of his donatiue was at
hand, and the money wanting. Wherefore he granted liberally all other requests
to the soldier: and to supply that defect the freedmen of the former Princes
were commanded to contribute, according to the number of their bondmen: whereas
Vitellius without other care, save only to wast and consume, builded up
stables for charet driuers, filled the Race with spectacles of fencers and
wild beasts, and as in greatest abundaunce cast money most idly away.
Furthermore Caecina and Valens with great preparation, and such as before that
time was never seen, celebrated the birth day of Vitellius, with shows
Gladiatores
of fencers in every street throughout the whole city. One thing much grieved
the good, as it cheered the bad, that Vitellius erected altars in Campus
Martius, and there celebrated solemnly the Suet. c. 11 and ne cui dubium foret
quod exemplar regendae reip. elige^et, me dio campo Martio, adhibita publicorum
sacerdorum f^^quentia, inferias Neronidedit.
exequies of Nero. the beasts for the sacrifice were publicly slain and
burnt: Read Suet. Vitellio. c. 12.
Asiaticus Vitellius freedeman had fully done as much harm, as ever had any
Polycletus, or Patrobius, or whatsoever most odious name in former courts. No
man in that court sought to rise by virtue or ableness: the only way to
credit was with prodigal banquets, and sumptuous cheer to satiate the
insatiable appetites of Vitellius; who contenting himself to enjoy the
present, and caring not any further, is thought in so few months to have
wasted That is, according to our positions, seven millions thirty one thousand
two hundredth and fifty pound sterling.
nine hundredth millions of sesterces: a great and a miserable city, which in
the same year supported an Otho and a Vitellius; and that which is more
insupportable, a Vinius, a Fabius, an Icelus, and an Asiaticus, in great
variety of most ignominious sorts, until such time as Mutianus and Eprlut
Marcellus, a great orator, an instrument of Nero against Thrasea and others,
and generally in favor with all the Princes, under whom he lived, as a
smoother of their actions. read Tac. 16. Ann. 2. and 4. Hist. etc.
Marcellus, and rather other men then other manners succeeded in place.

XXVIII. The preparation of Vitellius against Vespasian.
THE revolt of the third Legion was first of all other certefied to Vitellius
by letters, written by Aponius Saturninus, before that he also associated
himself to Vespasians side. But neither did Aponius write all, as a man
afrighted with the sodainnesse thereof, and beside the friends of Vitellius
flatteringly sought to extenuate and lessen the matter: that it was but a
mutince of one Legion alone; a matter of noe moment, seeing all other armies
remained in obedience. After the same style Vitellius also spoke to the
soldiers, inueying against the lately cassed Praetorians, by whom he affirmed
false rumors were spread, and that there was no danger of civil war,
suppressing the name of Vespasian, and setting underhand soldiers abroad in
the town to restrain the speeches of the common people: which thing was a
principal means to nourish the fame. Nevertheless he sent for Aids out of
Germany and Britannie, and the Spaines, coldly and dissembling the necessity:
the Lieutenants and provinces on their parts used the like coldness again.
Hordeonius Flaccus Lieutenant of Germany suspecting already the revolt of
Batauia, had a war of his own to care and provide for. Vectius Bolanus
governed in Britannie, a country never so in quiet, that he could conveniently
spare any number of soldiers: and beside neither of them were greatly fast to
the side. Out of the Spaines also small have was made: at that time there was
no Lieutenant general there, but only the Lieutenants of three Legions, of
equal authority; who as in Vitellius prosperity they would have contended who
should have been foremost, so now in his declining estate they equally drew
back. In Afric the Legion and cohorts leuyed by Clodius Macer, and
straightwaies dismissed by Galba, began by Vitellius commandment to resume
their service again: and withal the whole youth of the province voluntarily
gave in their names to be soldiers: for

XXIX. The setting forth of Caecina against the Jllyrian armies, and the
beginnings of his treason.
AT length Vitellius terrified with the breaking in of the enemies upon the
frontiers of Italy, and fearful messages from every quarter, commands
Caecina and Valens to make ready for the war. Caecina was sent before, but
Valens stayed behind by reason of his weakness in body, being lately
recovered of a dangerous sickness. Now the German army going out of the city
made a far other show then it did at the entry. No quickness appeared in
their bodies, no courage in their minds; marching slowly and thinnely: the
armor decayed, the horses unlusty: the soldier impatient of the sun, the
dust, and the weather; and the more dull to sustain travel, the apter to
mutin. And beside, the qualities of Caecina wrought no small prejudice to the
cause: his ambitious and populare proceeding, an old fault of his: a sluggish
and dull disposition, lately sprung up: whether it were that too much favor of
fortune turned his edge and caused him to degenerat to riotous life, or that
intending even then treason in his mind, he thought it good policy by that
means to weaken the valor and force of the army. Many have believed that
Caecinaes mind was shaken and altered first by a practice of Brother to
Vespasian and Provost of Rome.
Flauius Sabinus, Rubrius Gallus carrying the message between them, and
promising that Vespasian should ratify all covenants made and agreed in case of
revolt: and withal he was put in remembrance of the hatred and emulation
between Valens and him, and that seeing he had not like part in Vitellius, he
should do wisely to purchase credit and might with the new Prince. Caecina
taking his leave of Vitellius, and dismissed from his presence with great
honor, sent part of his horsemen before to put themselves in Cremona. Straight
after the Vexillaries followed of the Read fifteenth, one of the four Legions
of low Germany. for the 14 was sent away into Britanny p. 90. as enemy to
Vitellius cause.
fourteenth and of the sixteenth Legion: then the fifth Legion and the
eighteenth Legion: and lastly the one and twentieth surnamed Rapax, and the
first called Italica with the Vexillaries of the three British Legions, and
the choice of the Aides. When Caecina was gone, Fabius Valens wrote to the
army, which before belonged to his charge, to stay for him in the way: that so
it was agreed between him and Caecina: who being present, and therefore of
greater authority, falsely alleged, that upon later advise that purpose was
changed, to the end that resistance might be made with the whole forces united
against the enemies coming. So the Legions were commanded to make speed to
Cremona, and part to go to Hostilia. Caecina himself turned out of the way to
Rauenna, upon pretense to give direction to the navy: and so to Padoua, where
secretly the treason was contrived between Lucilius Bassus and him. For
Lucilius Bassus after the captaineshippe of a wing, being made Admiral of both
the fleets at Rauenna and Misenum, because he was not by and by created
captain of the Guard, revenged his unjust anger with wicked disloyalty:
neither can it be certainly known, whether he drew Caecina into the action, or
the same vile mind induced them both, as it happens often lewd persons to
be of like conditions. The histories written of this war, under Vespasian and
his children, have delivered false and flattering causes, as that desire of
peace and love of the common wealth moved them thereto. To me it seems,
beside the inconstant disposition of the men, and the small account of their
faith, which once being falsed to Galba, afterward they never respected; that
upon emulation and envy that others should go before them in the Princes
favor, they compassed the destruction of the Prince himself. When Caecina had
overtaken the Legions, he sought by sundry subtle practices to weaken the good
wills of the Centurions, and of the soldiers which were obstinately bent for
Vitellius: Bassus attempting the like found not the like opposition, the navy
being easily induced to change their loialty, upon the memory of their late
service for Otho.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
I. The consultation of the Flauian captains, at Petouio in Pannonia,
concerning the manner of proceeding in the war. Sextilius Felix sent into
Noricum.
WITH better fortune and faith the Flauian captains conducted their warlicke
affairs, assembling in council at Petouio, the standing camp of the
thirteenth Legion. There was it debated, whether it were safer to stand upon
their defense, and fortify themselves by It seems they were stopped before.
li. 2. p. 106 Deinde Pannonicae Alps praesidijs insessae nu^tios retinebant^
but perhaps it was but only so far as to stay the posts from passing that
way, not to guard it against an army of men.
stopping the passage of the Pannonian Alps, until their whole forces behind
were come forward; or else were it more manfull and resolutely done, to march on
and fight for the winning of Italy. They which persuaded to stay for more
succor, and protract the war, amplifyed the same and force of the German
Legions, and further, that Vitellius had also brought with him the flower and
strength of the army of Britannie: that their own Legions were both fewer in
number, and lately beaten; and though they spoke biggely, yet the party
overcome retained the less courage. But in the mean while if the Alps were
possessed Mutianus would shortly come on with the power of the East: and
Vespasian beside had at will sea and nauies, and the goodwill of the provinces,
sufficient furniture for a new war if need were: so by staying a little this
advantage would grow, that new forces would come, and the old not diminish. To
this Lieutenant of the seventh Legion surnamed Galbiana.
Antonius Primus (who was the chiefest inciter of the war) replied; That
speed was the thing that might most help them, and most hinder Vitellius. As
for the victory they lately obtained, they were grown more in careless sloth,
then courage thereby: not keeping in camps as men of war, always ready to
fight, but lying in the good towns of Italy, loytering and disporting
themselves, feared of none save only their hosts: and the hardlier kept and
fiercer they were before, now giving themselves the more greedily over to
enjoy their unaccustomed pleasures. Moreover the theatrum and circus.
theaters and places of sports, and other delights of the city, had effeminated
their minds, or diseases utterly wasted their bodies: but if respite were
given, through warlicke exercises they would recover their strength: and
besides, Germany was not far of, from whence they might be supplied with new
forces, and Britannie but a small step beyond: France and Spain were hard
at hand to furnish them of men, horses, and money: beside Italy it self, and
the wealth of the world in Rome, all wholly at their disposition. And if they
list to begin and assail us, they have (quoth he) at commandment two nauies,
and the whole Illyrian sea free: what will it then profit us to keep the
straytes of the mountains? or what can it avail us to differ the war til
another summer? and whence shall we have money and vittailes in the mean time?
nay rather why take we not this opportunity present, since the Pannonian
Legions, thinking themselves rather beguiled then beaten, are so instant and
earnest to have their revenge, and the armies of Moesia are yet entier and
vnfoiled? if the number of soldiers be reckened rather the^ the names of
Legions, our side has more strength and much less disorder; and the very
shame of the late overthrow has greatly amended our discipline: and yet our
horsemen even then were not defeated, but contrarily scattered Vitellius
troops, albeit the maine battle went against us. Two wings of Pannonia and
Moesia were able at that time to break through the enemy: now the enseignes of
sixteen wings united together, with their sta^ping and sound, and the very dust
of their feet, will doubtless be able to cover and ouerwhelme both the horses
and horsemen of our enemies, who have now almost forgotten to fight. For my
part (if I may be permitted) as I am the first to give the advice, so I will be
the first to execute the same. You, whose condition gives you free choice of
either, lie still and keep your Legions at home: some few Expeditae co^ortes,
that is, without cariages, absque impedimentis.
light cohorts shall serve my turn: as soon as the war is begun, you shall
hear that Vitellius state will decline, and then you will take pleasure to
follow and tread in the steps of my victory. This and more to the like
purpose Antonius uttered with burning eyes and fierce shrill voice, that he
might be heard further (for some of the Centurions, and of the soldiers also
had intruded themselves into the counsel:) and the speech moved greatly even
the wariest amongst them and doubtfullest to enter into danger. But the common
soldier and the rest magnified him, as the only man of courage, and the only
captain; despising the cold and sluggish proceedings of the other. This good
opinion he first wan through a speech he made in the assembly, when Vespasians
letters were first openly red, in the which he did not (as the most of the
rest) deliver his mind in doubtful and ambiguous terms with a meaning to
interpret them afterward as he should see best for his purpose, but seemed
directly and resolutely to enter into the cause, and therefore was a great
deal better liked of the soldiers, as one that made his fortune common with
theirs both in the danger and honor of the attempt. Next after him Cornelius
Fuscus the Procurator was of chief authority amongst them. For he likewise was
wont to inuey bitterly against Vitellius, and thereby had left to himself no
hope of pardon if the enterprise failed. Titus Lieutenant general of Pannonia.
Ampius Flauianus, both by nature and by reason of his age being slow in
proceeding, gave occasion to the soldiers of suspicion, as if he had respected
his affinity with Vitellius: and because he had withdrawn himself out of the
camp when the Legions began first to revolt, and afterward came again of his
own accord, it was thought he did it to seek some opportunity of treason. For
indeed Flauianus had once relinquished his province of Pannonia, and retired
himself out of danger into Italy; and afterward by desire of novelty was
brought to take upon him his government again, and become a medler in civil
wars, through the persuasion principally of Cornelius Fuscus; not that there
was any great need of Flauianus abilities, but that the name and countenance
of a Lieutenant general might give reputation to the side, that was then but in
rising. Then letters were written to Aponius Saturninus Lieutenant general of
Moesia, to make haste, and back their passage into Italy with his army. which
held for Vitellius, being governed by Porcius Septinius the Procuratour, a most
faithful servant unto him. So Sextilius Felix was sent with the Aurian wing,
and eight cohortes, and the youth of the country of Noricum, to plant himself
against him along the bancke of the river Enus which divides Rhoetia and
Noricum asunder: where they remained skirmishing one with another, whilst in
the mean time the maine matter was decided elsewhere.

II. Antonius Primus marches forward, and having taken Aquileia, Opitergium,
Altinum, Padoua, Este, settleth his maine camp at Verona.
NOW succeeded so prosperously, two Legions, the seventh surnamed Galbiana, and
the thirteenth called Gemina And Titus Ampius Flauianus Lieutenant general of
Pannonia.
with Vedius Aquila Lieutenaunt thereof, came to Padoua cheerfully, and full of
courage. There some few days were spent in reposing the army, and Minucius
Iustus campe-master of the seventh Legion was saved from the fury of the
soldier, and sent to Vespasian, because his government was straiter and more
severe, then the nature of a civil war would support. At what time also
Antonius supposing it a plausible action, and for the credit of the side, if
Galbaes government should seem to be liked, gave commandment through out all
the free towns, that the images of Galba, which upon change of times and
dissension in state, had been broken down, should be restored a new: a thing
very long and greatly desired, and therefore interpreted gloriously in the
highest degree. Then was it proposed and disputed, what place were best to be
chosen, for seat as it were of the war. Verona seemed fittest, the country
about it being champion, and commodious for horsemen, wherein consisted their
principal strength: and beside to dispossess Vitellius of a town of such
wealth and importance, would both be commodious and bring reputation to the
cause. In the passage thitherward they took Vicenza a thing of it self not
greatly material, as being a town of small forces; howbeit because Caecina was
borne there it seemed a matter of consequence; when men began to recount, how
that the General of the contrary part had lost his own country and home: but
the getting of Verona was worth the pains taking. For both the side was
relieved with their wealth, and the example was a good precedent to others: and
the army lying there opportunely in the way, between Germany and Vitellius
powers, did shut up the Rhoetian and Julian Alps, and cut of all hope of
passage for the Germans that way. All which proceeding was either unknown to
Vespasian, or expressly forbidden by him: his commandment was to march no
further then Aquileia, and there to expect Mutianus; adding also a reason
thereof, that seeing Egypt, the garners of the city, the revenues and tributes
of the richest provinces were in his hands, Vitellius army might through lack
of pay and vittaile be constrained to yield. To the same purpose also Mutianus
advised them often by letters, alleging what a glory it would be to obtain
a victory without blood, and whereof no mourning ensued, with such other
pretenses; whereas he did it indeed upon ambition, and coveting to reserve
the whole renown of the war for himself: but by reason of the great
distances counsels came after the factes. Antonius having thus seated
himself in Verona issued forth on the sudden, and gave the alarm to the
enemy, where trying their manhood together in a light skirmish they departed
on even hand. Anon Caecina encamped himself between Hostilia, a village of
the territory of Verona, and the marshes of the river Tartarus, in a safe and
defensible place; his back being guarded with the river, and the flanckes with
marshes: who if he had meant truth, having all his masters power under his
hand, might with great facility either have surprised two simple Legions (the
army of Moesia as yet being not joined) or at least beaten them back, and
forced them to flee, and with shame forsake Italy. But Caecina omitted
traitorously all advantages, which at the first were offered, spending the time
in trifling delays, and rebuking them by epistles, whom with like facility
he might have repulsed with arms: until by messengers passing between the
bargain was driven, and the couenantes for his treason agreed upon. In the
mean time Aponius Saturninus came with the seventh Legion surnamed Claudiana:
the Legion was governed by Vipsanius Messalla a Tribune, a man nobly descended,
and of noble qualities himself, the only virtuous man and without note, that
entered into that action. To this army, nothing comparable to his own (for as
yet there were but three Legions) Caecina sent letters, blaming their rashness,
that being once overcome they durst put themselves again into arms: and
withal he extolled the valor of the German army; of Vitellius making small
mention and in common terms only, without any reproachful word against
Vespasian at all: in sum writing nothing that might either corrupt the enemy
or terrify him. The captains of the Flauian army, omitting to speak of
their former misfortune, returned answer concerning Vespasian in hawtie and
glorious terms, showing themselves very confident in their cause and secure
of the event; reuiling Vitellius as enemies, and bragging of the Moesian army,
as being hitherto never overthrown; seeking Praesumpsere parteis. (...).
moreover to weaken the faith, and win the good will of the contrary side, by
putting the Centurions and Tribunes in hope of retaining their places, and
favors which Vitellius had bestowed upon them, and exhorting Caecina himself
in plain terms to revolt. Both the letters were solemnly readde to the
Flauian soldiers: which thing increased not a little their courage and
confidence; seeing Caecina to write humbly, as fearing to offend Vespasian,
and their Generalles contemptuously, as it were, insulting over Vitellius.

III. Amutinee of the Pannonian soldier against Flauianus their General, and
another of the Moesian against Saturninus likewise theirs.
SHORTLY afterward the third and eighth Legion came; the one commanded by
Dillius Aponianus, the other by Numisius Lupus: whereupon they began to make
show of their forces, and determined to cast up a Vallum militare, in
oppositio^ to vallu^ rusticum, or fossa agrestis.
militare trench about the town of Verona. By chance it fell to the Galbian
Legion to work in the foreparte of the trench toward the enemy, and some of
their own horsemen appearing in sight a far of caused a vain fear, as if
it had been the Vitellian power. By and by they laid hold on their weapons,
and their blood being stirred sought to discharge their choler and rage upon
Flauianus, accusing him of treason without either proof or probability: but
the man was before odious unto them, and therefore his death was now violently
required. They cried out against him that he was allied with Vitellius, that he
had been a traitor These particularities are not declared, as in my opinion
they ought to have been, in the former story: seeing here they are thought
worthy the remembrance.
to Otho, and intercepted their donatiue. No answer would be heard, albeit he
be sought them holding up his hands in most humble manner; lying for the most
part prostrate upon the ground, with his garments rent, weeping and sobbing
pitifully: which kind of behavior provoked their rage the more, as if this
his ouergreat fear had certainly argued a guilty conscience. Saturninus
endeavoring to speak in his defense was still interrupted by the soldiers
outcries: and the rest likewise were rejected with noise and clamor: only to
Antonius they were content to give ear; for he was both eloquent and skillful
to please a multitude, and beside of most authority amongst them. When the
sedition waxed hot, and passed from words and ill speeches to weapons and
blows, he commanded Flauianus to be laid in chains. The soldier perceived
the So Vitellius saved Julius Burdo. 1. Hist. p. 45. and Otho Celsus. p. 36.
slight, and breaking through those that guarded the Tribunal, they were at the
point to have slain Flauianus: but Antonius opposed himself with his sword
drawn, protesting that if they would not desist, he would either dye by their
hands, or by his own: and withal desired the assistance by name of all that he
knew, or were of note otherwise for their degrees and places in service. Then
turning himself to the Conversus ad signa and belloru^ deos, that is, ad signa
which the Roman soldiers adored as Gods.
enseignes and gods of war, he besought them to send such fury, such
discord, into the minds of their enemies rather: till at length the sedition
growing cold, and the day being spent, the soldiers slipped away each to his
lodging.

IIII. The revolt of Lucilius Bassus the Admiral, and of the fleet at
Rauenna. The treason of Caecina general of the army by land.
OF Vitellius side also matters were no less disquiet, the dissension being
more dangerous, as proceeding not of soldiers ielosies, but of the treason of
the Generals. Lucilius Bassus, Admiral of the navy at Rauenna, had wunne to the
Flauian side the minds of his soldiers, being somewhat inclinable thereto of
themselves, because the most of them were of Dalmatia and Pannonia, which
cuntreyes held for Vespasian. The time for accomplishing the treason was
appointed in the night, that whilst the rest knew nothing of the matter, they
only of the conspiracy might assemble themselves in the Principia. Bassus
either for shame, or doubt what would be the issue, kept himself within his
house. The captains of the galleyes in the mean time with great tumult brake
down Vitellius images: and some few which resisted being put to the sword,
the rest of the multitude upon desire of change was easily induced to favor
Vespasian. Then Lucilius coming abroad auowed the whole fact as done by his
authority, and the navy in his place made choice of Cornelius Fuscus for
Admiral; who came with speed thither: and This revolt of Caecina is described
in the like manner by Josephus, libro quarto, capite quadragesimo primo.
the chief of the Centurions, and some of the soldiers, the rest being
dispersed and busied in their ordinary militare duties, into the Principia,
purposely choosing the most secret corner of the camp. There he greatly
extolled the valor of Vespasian, and the strength of the side, declaring also
that the navy was already revolted, the only support of Vitellius provision:
that France and Spain were turned against him: that in the city there was
nothing to be trusted unto; and generally aggravating all to the worst against
the person and state of Vitellius. Whereupon some that were privy to the plot
beginning to swear to Vespasian, the rest amazed at the strangeness of the
matter followed the example: immediately Vitellius images were broken down,
and messengers sent to Antonius to declare what had passed. But as soon as this
revolt was bruted through out the camp, and the soldiers coming into the
Principia saw Vespasians name set up, and Vitellius images cast under foot,
they were mute at the first, then all at once they brake out with indignation.
Is then the glory and fame of the German armies now come to this? that without
battle or any blow stricken they should thus bind their own hands, and
yield up their weapons? for else what power was there of the other side to
compel them? only the Legions which before they had overcome, and yet the
flower and strength of them absent, to wit, the Prima Adiunix sent into Spain,
and Quartadecimae into Britanny.
first and fourteenth, which yet they had likewise overthrown in the same
field with the rest: and all be like to this end, that so many thousands of
valiant soldiers should afterward, like a drove of bondslaues, be bestowed as
a present upon Antonius an Tempore Neronis says Tacitus, 2. Hist. page 100.
falsi damnatus, and so perhaps exiled.
exiled person: as though eight Legions were to be the dependence of one navy*
but so was the pleasure of Bassus and Caecina, after they had robbed the Prince
of his houses and gardens, and treasure, to bereave him also of his soldiers,
albeit never touched nor wounded, and so to make them contemptible and vile,
even to the Flauianists also. for what could they say being required an account
of their prosperity and adversity? To this effect every one by himself and all
together crying out, as grief and anger wrought in their minds, the fifth
Legion being most forward, they set up Vitellius images again, and laying hold
upon Caecina put him in fetters, and appointed Fabius Fabulus Lieutena^t of
the fifth Legion, and Cassius Longus the camp-master Generals in his place:
killing certain galley-soldiers, which by chance arrived there in il hour,
though utterly ignorant and innocent of that which had passed. Then leaving
their Jnter Hostiliam and paludes Tartari fluminis.
camp, and breaking the bridge they returned to Hostilia, and from thence to
Cremona to join with the first Legion called Italica, and the one and
twentieth surnamed Rapax, which Caecina had sent before, with part of his
horsemen, to put themselves in Cremona.

V. The skirmish of the Flauian and Vitellian horsemen between Bebriacum and
Cremona.
WHEN Antonius had understanding hereof, he determined whilst the enemies were
at dissension, and their forces not joined together, to use his advantage and
assail them, before either the Generals could ground their authority, or the
soldiers frame themselves to a new obedience, or the Legions recover courage
by uniting together. He gessed that Fabius Valens was already come out of Rome,
and would make great have, as soon as he heard of Caecinaes treason: and Fabius
was known to be a man faithful to Vitellius, and not unskillful in service:
besides a great power of Germans was feared by the way of Rhaetia, and
Vitellius had sent for Aids out of Britannie, France and Spain: enough to
have maintained a mighty and puissant war, had not Antonius upon doubt
thereof hastened the battle, and before hand obtained the victory. So with
his whole host he removed from Verona, and the second night sat down at
Bebriacum. The next day employing his Legions in fortifying the camp, he sent
out his Auxiliary cohorts into the territory of Cremona, to the end that the
soldiers, under color of providing necessaries, might be enured and fleshed
That is, in spoils growing by reason of civil wars
in civil spoil. He to safe conduict the forragers advanced himself with
four thousand horse eight miles forward from Bebriacum: and the skowts in the
mean time, as the manner is, pricked on further. About the That is, as we
account, eleven of the clock, or there about.
fifth hour of the day one came riding in post, to give intelligence that the
enemies were hard at hand, that some few marched before, but the noise and
trampling of the whole army on every side was clearly to be heard. Whilst
Antonius was deliberating what was to be done, Arius Varus, desirous to do
some piece of service, brake out with certain of the forwardest horsemen, and
made the Vitellianists recule, and slew some few: for by and by more of their
fellows coming to help, fortune changed, and they that were most forward
before in pursuing, were now left last in the flight. This have was against
Antonius will, who supposed the event would be such as it was: but seeing it
could not be undone he encouraged his men to fight valiantly: and dividing
his troops in two parts, left a lane in the middle to receive in Varus with his
horsemen* word also was sent back to the Legions to arm, and the alarm was
given to those that were forraging abroad, that every man should leave of
spoiling, and repair with all speed the next way to the fight. Now by this
time Varus in a great fear was retired within his own troops, and induced
thither a general terror* the wounded and unwounded were beaten in together,
and greatly distressed through their own fear, and the straytnesse of the
ways. In all which confusion and tumult Antonius omitted no part either of a
resolute General, or valiant soldier, encouraging those that were dismayed,
staying them that shruncke; where most need was, whence any hope appeared,
there busying himself, with direction, hand and speech, in the view of the
enemy, in the sight of his own men, growing at the last to that heat, that
with his lance he ran through a guidon bearer who was fleeing away, and
taking his guidon turned it against the face of the enemy: whereat for very
shame there stayed about an hundredth horse. That which principally helped was
the quality of the place, the Arctiore illic via: and yet a little before he
says Angustijs viarum conflictaba^tur.
way being there somewhat narrow, and the bridge broken of the river that ran
behind them, whose unknown channel and steep banckes stopped their further
flight. That constraint or chance recovered the field that welny was lost. For
knitting themselves strongly together, with thick and close rancks, they
received the Vitellian soldiers coming on loosely without any order. Which
thing the less it was looked for, amazed them the more. Whereupon Antonius
finding them yielding pressed the more instantly upon them, overthrowing all
that came in his way: and withal the rest as their inclinations were, some
fell to spoiling and catching, some to take armor and horses: even they which
before were broken, and scattered abroad in the fields, hearing the joyful
cry of their fellows, returned then back to take part of the victory. About
four miles from Cremona, the enseignes of two Legions, Rapax and Italica,
appeared, having marched so far upon the success of their horsemen at the
beginning: but when fortune turned, they were so far to seek, as that they
neither did open their ranckes, and receive their distressed fellows within
them, nor yet went forward to assail the enemy tired already with fightting
and following so far. Thus being by chance overcome, they found in adversity
the lack of a leader, which in their iolity they cared not for. As the Legions
stood wavering in terms of breaking, the Flauian horsemen charged upon them:
and Vipsanius Messalla the Tribune was at their heels with the Moesian Aides,
who in militare renown, albeit lately enrolled, were nothing inferior to the
Legionary soldiers. So horsemen and footmen mingled together did easily
break the Vitellian Legions, and the town of Cremona lying so near gave them
less mind to resist, and more hope to escape: neither did Antonius press any
further, considering the travail and wounds, which both his horsemen and
horses had taken, in so dangerous a skirmish, albeit the end went on his side.
Toward the shutting in of the evening the whole power of the Flauian army
arrived: who as soon as they troad among the heaps of dead bodies, in the
fresh steps of so late a slaughter, as if the whole war had been ended,
cried to lead on out of hand to Cremona, and take by surrendre or force those
conquered persons. These gay speeches were in their mouths and openly
pretended, but secretly every one cast thus with himself; That a town seated
in the plain might be wunne easily at a push; that their courage would as well
serve them to enter in the night, and their liberty to spoil would then be
much greater: but if they attended till day, then would there come
supplications and entreaties for peace, and so for their labor and hurts they
should carry away the vain smokes of clemency and glory, and such other
titulare matters, but the wealth and riches of the town would cleave to the
captains and Lieutenants fingers: that the spoil of a city taken by force
fell to the soldiers, but of a city surrendered always to the captains
alone. Hereupon the persuasions of the Tribunes and Centurions, as persons
suspect, were rejected: and because no man's speech should be heard, they ratled
their weapons, threatening if no man would lead them beside, to guide and
conduct themselves. Then Antonius insinuating himself among the common
soldiers, after he had with the sight of his person, and reverence of his
place, procured silence, protested unto them, that his meaning was not in any
sort to defraude so well deserving soldiers, either of honor or reward*
notwithstanding the captains and soldiers duties were of different nature: a
soldier ought to be fierce and desirous to fight, but in captains a wary
foresight and deliberate kind of proceeding is rather commended* and more often
times profits and helps he by protracting, then venturing rashly. For his
part as he had to his power with weapons and hand furthered the victory, so
would he likewise help now with direction and counsel, peculiare qualities
to a General, and the place he sustained. And surely if they list but a little
consider, the dangerousnesse of the enterprise was very apparent. it was now
night, the situation of the town was unknown, within nothing but enemies, and
every cornerfit for an ambush: nay if the gates were wide open, yet were it not
safe for to enter, no not in the day time, but upon good discovery before hand,
and assurance that al coasts were clear. what? would they begin an assault
when they could not discern the best place of approach, nor the height of the
walls, whether it were best to attempt them by discharging of shot a far of,
or by engines at hand, or by mine? then turning himself to particulare persons
he demanded of them severally, whether they had brought their secures and
dolabrae.
hatchets and axes with them, and all other tools necessary for an assault:
and when they denied, What, quoth he, then, are any men's hands in the world of
that force, and strength to break down walls with iauelins and swords? what
if it fall out that we must of necessity raise mounts, cover our selves with
hurdles and frames of boarde? shall we not then be forced to stand like good
silly fools gazing and gaping at the height of their towers, and the strength
of their fortificatio^s? nay rather let us stay for one night, and fetch hither
in the mean time our engines and instruments of battery, and so carry the
victory surely before us. And herewith he dispatched the cal^ne^ and ^ixa.
servants and followers of the camp, and the freshest of his horsemen to
Bebriacum, to bring vittailes from thence, and all other necessary provision.

VI. The great battle at Cremona between the Flauianists and the
Vitellianists. Cremona sacked and burnt.
THE soldier discontented thereat and repining, was growing toward a mutinee,
whe^as their horsemen having scowred to the very walls of Cremona took
certain stragglers of the town, by whose confession it was understood, that
six Vitellian Legions, and the whole power that lay at Hostilia, hearing of the
defeat of their fellows, had marched thirty miles that very day, and prepared
themselves to fight, and would by and by be upon them. That terror opened
their minds, which before were closed against all their Generals good
counsel, and so he commanded the third Legion to make stand upon the or ridge.
cawsey of the Post-humian way: fast by it on the left hand stood the seventh
surnamed Galbiana in a plain field: then the seventh called Claudiana having
before it a agrestis fossa.
common ditch for a kind of defense, as the place chanced to yield: on the
right hand stood the eightth Legion in an open ground: then the thirteenth in
a thicket somewhat disunited by reason of bushes and shrubbes. In this sort
stood the standerds and enseignes of the Legions, but the soldiers were
blended together, as it chanced in the darcke. The band of Praetorians stood
next to the third Legion, the Auxiliary cohorts were placed in the wings, and
the horsemen guarded the flanckes, and reareward: Sido and Italicus the Sueuians
with the choice of their country men served in the foreward. On the other
side, the Vitellian army, whose best course doubtless had been to have taken
some rest at Cremona, and refreshed themselves with food and sleep, and so
the next day to have given the onset upon their enemies, starued with hunger
and cold, for lack of a leader and want of direction, about the third hour
of the night dashed them selves upon the Flauian army, who stood now in array
strongly prepared to receive them. The order and standing of the Vitellian army
I dare not for certain avouch, being doubtless disordered through anger and
darkness. Some affirm that the fourth Legion called Macedonica stood in dextro
cornu.
in the right wing: the fifth and fifteenth Legions, with certain companies out
of three British Legions, the ninth, second, and twentieth filled up the
middle battle; the left wing consisting of the tenth Legion, the two and
twentieth and the first: the soldiers of Rapax and Italica dispersed themselves
through out al: the horsemen and Aides chose their own standing. The fight
continued al night very doubtful and cruel, with great mortality sometime on
the one side, and sometime on the other: courage or strength auailed little in
the dark, where the eye could not discern a friend from an enemy. On both
sides was the same kind of armor and weapons: by many mutual questions each
knew others watchword: the banners also were mingled together, as it happened a
band to take any from the enemy and carry them to and fro. The seventh Legion
lately levied by Galba was pressed most hardly: six of her principal Centurions
were slain, and some enseignes taken away, the standerd it self was hardly
defended by Attilius Verus the chief Centurion; who with great slaughter of
the enemy, and his own death in the end, notwithstanding saved his charge. The
Flauianists thus going to the worse, Antonius reinforced and strengthened the
battle by sending for the Praetorian soldiers, who as soon as they undertook
the fight repulsed the enemy at the first, and anon were repulsed themselves.
For the Vitellianists had brought their engines of war, which before were
dispersed and discharged against bushes and trees, without any hurt to the
enemy, and placed them upon the cawsey of the high way to have an open passage
and free scope to shoot out; among the rest a Balista, says Veg^tius li. 4.
c. 22, ^^^nibus nervin^^ ^hordisque tendi^^^, quae qu^^^ proli^io ^a brach^^^
tha^^^^, ^ani^ spicula l^ngius ^^n^^tti^, and si iuxta arte^^ m^chanicam
temp^rour, and (...) ex^r^^ta^^ (...) ^ui mensur^m (...) v^tecolleg^ ^nt, (...)
pene^^^ q^^d^^que pere^ss^^^^^. (...) the fall of (...) Balista drew with it a
great part of the wall of the camp at Cr^^^^^
Balista of a wonderful greatness, belonging to the sixteenth Legion,
shooting out huge and mighty stones galled them sore, and had made a far
greater havoc amongst them, had not two soldiers undertaken an honorable
exploite, and taking up targets among the dead bodies gone unknown, and cut
the cords and waightes of the engine: whereupon they were by and by cut in
pieces, and so their names are not known; of the fact there is no question.
Now the battle continued doubtful, and fortune indifferent to both sides,
till at far in the night the already your shame. Great crying and noise there
was on every side, when as the third Legion, as the manner in Syria is, with a
great showte saluted the sun rising: upon which accident, or by the Generals
policy, a general rumor was spread through the host, that Mutianus was come,
and the armies had met and saluted each other. Whereupon as supplied with new
forces, they pressed forward and gave a fresh onset, the Vitellian ranckes
growing now thinner, as being without all direction, and banding together or
disbanding as their own courage or fear did induce them. When Antonius felt
them weak in the shocke, and yielding under his hand, with a company firmly
compacted he charged and disordered them. The ranckes once loosed brake, and
could not be reunited by reason of the cariages and engines, which hindered the
matter. The conquerours hoatly pursuing the chase dispersed themselves along
the high way. The slaughter was the more famous, because in the same it
happened the son to kill his own father: the thing and the names of the
persons I will set down, as Vipsanius Messalla has reported it. Julius
Mansuetus borne in Spain, and called to serve in the Legion surnamed Rapax,
left a son at home under years, who growing afterward to man's state, and
being enrolled by Galba into the seventh Legion, by mere misfortune here met
and encountered with his own father; and having wounded him deadly, going about
to rifle him, came into knowledge of him, and was likewise known by him
again. Whereupon embracing the corpse, which now was without sense or life,
with tears and lamentable voice he be sought his fathers ghost, not to impute
this impiety unto him, nor abhor and detest him as a parricide: that it was
the public act of the cause: and what a small portion was one soldier of
these civil wars? And withal he took up the body, made a pit in the
ground, and performed his last duty toward his father. This was perceived by
them which were next, and then by more also: in the end the fame of this
strange chance went through the whole army, and much complaining there was, and
detestation of so cruel, and wicked a war: and yet they continued nothing
the less to kill and to spoil both kinsmen and friends, and even their
brethren also. they talk what a wicked fact was committed, and in the mean
time commit it themselves. Whenas they came to Cremona, there appeared a new
and no small piece of work yet behind. For in the war against Otho the
German soldiers had cast their camp about the walls of Cremona, and about their
camp ra^piers and tre^ches, which they had now lately augme^ted. At the sight
whereof the Flauianists were at a stop, the Generals being doubtful what to
appoint. to begin the assault the army being tired with the travail both of
the day and the night, were a difficult matter, and having no place of retiring
at hand dangerous too: to return to Bebriacu^ were intolerable pain, the way
being so long, and besides, all they had done would be lost, and the victory
made void: to sit down and entrench, that also were a thing full of danger,
and to be feared, lest the enemies being so near should sally out, and breed
some disorder as they were dispersed, and busy at their work. But above al
these respects the Generals stood in most fear of their own soldiers, who
would sooner abide any danger, then any delay: all that tended to safety was
unsavory; in precipitation was their hope; the greedy desire of the spoil made
al killing, wou^ding, shedding their blood to be matters of nothing. To this
resolution therefore Antonius finally inclining, commanded to enuiron the
tre^ches with soldiers round about. And first they fought aloof with arowes
and stones on both sides, but with disadvantage to the Flauian part, upon who^
the enemy discharged from above: then approaching nearer he distributed to the
Legions the tre^ches and gates, appointing to each their several quarter, to the
end the labor being thus divided, the difference between the valiant and the
coward might be perceived, and mutual emulation of honor should excite the^ to
virtue. The third and Galbiana.
seventh Legion were assigned the quarter next to the way, which leads from
Bebriacu^: the eightth and seventh surnamed Claudiana took up the trenches on
the right hand: the thirteenth was carried with a fury to the gate toward
Brescia. After this they pawsed a while, till they had fetched out of the
fields thereabout, some of the^ ligones.
spades and dolabrae.
axes, some others Falces. Vegetitius lib. 4. c. 14. Falx, trabs ad^^nco
praefixa ferro, vt de mu^o extrahat lapides. but here perchance it was but some
common hook.
hooks and ladders. Then with a strong prevail but a little, showed unto the^
the town of Cremona, as the price of their victory. Whether this was Hormus
devise, as Messalla reports, or Caius Plinius be rather to be believed, who
casts the fault upon Antonius, I cannot easily determine; this only, that
whether Antonius or Hormus were author of this most bad part, it was not
unsuitable to neither of their former infamous lives, and behauiours. But
hereupon no danger of limme or life could stay the Flauian soldiers, from
breaking down the trenches, and beating open the gates, even with their
showlders; and some climing up by a double target fence took hold on their
enemies weapons, and caught the^ by the arms: so the wounded and not wounded,
the half dead and dying, came down tumbling together, and perished some after
one fashion, and some after another, representing al diversities of deaths.
The seventh and third Legion fought most bravely, and gave the sharpest
assault, and Antonius the General himself, with the chose^ men of the
Auxiliary soldiers, had bended his forces that way. The Vitellianists
perceiving themselves not able to sustain any longer the force, and fury of me^
so obstinately bent, and that whatsoever they cast down upon them slid away
upon the target fence, without doing any harm, resolved to roll down at the
last a great balista.
engine upon the^ as they approached: which indeed for the present overwhelmed
those that were under, but withal in falling it drew the battlements with it,
and uppermost part of the rampire: and at the same time a tower adioining being
battered with stones fell down. At which breach as the seventh Legion assaied
to enter, in a pointed battle, the third Legion in the mean season brake
down the gate with their swords and axes. It is agreed upon by all writers,
that the first man which entered the trench was Caius Volusius, a soldier of
the third Legion, who presently going to the rampire tumbled down all that
resisted, and aduauncing himself in sight proclaimed the camp was taken: and
as the Vitellianists were now beginning to faint, and leap down from the
rampire, the rest brake in. All the space between the trenches and the town
was filled with dead bodies. And there again appeared a new work, and
another labor: the walls of the city were high, the towers all of stone, the
bars of the gates of iron, the soldier ready with weapon in hand on the
walls, the townsmen many and sure to Vitellius; beside a great number of
strangers assembled out of al places of Italy thither, by occasion of a fair
usually holden there at that time. But that as it was a help to the defendants
in respect of the multitude, so was it a provocation to the assailants in
respect of the spoil. Antonius commanded to take fire and burn certain most
goodly buildings, standing without the walls, if peradventure the townsmen
upon the loss of their substance would be induced to yield. The houses that
were near to the walls, and exceeded them in height, he replenished with the
valiantest soldiers he had; who with blocks of timber, and tiles, and
firebrandes, bet away the defenda^ts from the walls: by this time also, the
Legions had cast themselves into a target fence, and others shot stones, and
arowes against them on the walls. Then the Vitellianists hearts began by
little and little to fail them, and every man as he was first in degree was
likewise the first to yield unto fortune, lest if Cremona also should be taken
there would be no hope of pardon remaining, the whole wrath of the winners
being like to turn not upon the poor and beggarly soldier, but upon the
Tribunes and Centurions, by whose death some gain might be gotten: contrarily
the common soldier not searching into sequels, and in less danger by reason of
his baseness, persisted still for Vitellius: and wandering in the streets, or
hiding themselves in houses would not sue for peace, even then whenas they had
left off to make war. So the principal men of degree in the army razed
Vitellius name, and defaced his images, and loosing Caecina, who then was in
bands, desired him to become intercessour in their behalf. As he made dainty
to do it, and bare himself proudly against them, they besought him instantly
even with tears (a misery of all miseries, so many valiant men to implore the
aid Velamenta and infulat.
sacred veles and infules, in sign of submission. Whereupon Antonius
commanding his men to surcease all hostility, they brought out their enseignes
and standerds: the Vitellian Legions followed; a heavy company, unarmed, and
casting their eyes to the ground. the Flauianists closed about them, and first
outraged them in speeches, and seemed to threaten violence unto them: but when
they saw them not moved thereat, but patiently to endure all indignities,
according to the circumstance of their present fortune, they began to call to
remembrance, that even those were the selfsame men, that had a little before
at Bebriacum used their victory moderately. But when Caecina came forth as a
Consul in his robes, with his sergeants before him making way through the
press, the conquering soldiers lost all manner of patience, obiecting unto him
his pride, and his cruelty; yea and his treason too: so hateful are vices even
where they are profitable. But Antonius interposed himself, and sent him
safely guarded away to Vespasian. In the mean season the people of the town,
among so many armed men, were greatly annoyed, and they escaped nearely of a
general massacre, had not the captains entreated, and somewhat appeased the
soldiers wrath. Antonius calling a full assembly made a solemn oration,
speaking in glorious terms to the soldiers of his own side, and in courteous to
those of the other, concerning Cremona ambiguously. The army was doubtless
earnestly bent to the destruction and sack of the city, beside a natural
desire of spoil, upon an old conceived displeasure against them: for in the
war of Otho also they were thought to have bestedde and helped Vitellius
side; and afterward the thirteenth Legion being left there to build an
amphitheatre (as commonly these townesme^ are naturally malapert) they had
iested and scoffed at them many other circumstances made their case also the
harder, as that Caecina had in that town exhibited his show of Gladiatores
fencers in honor of Vitellius victory: that it was chosen now the second time
for the seate-towne of the war: that they had helped the Vitellian army with
vittailes: that some women were found slain, which for extreme love to the
side had come out to the battle: and not least because the fair time had
filled the town, being otherwise wealthy, with show of more wealth. And thus
stood the soldiers for their part affected. As concerning the Commanders, the
behauiours of the rest were not much marked: Antonius by reason of his fortune
and his fame was principally eyed: who as soon as he entered the town went
presently to the bath to wash of the blood, and finding it somewhat too cool,
let fall a word which was quickly taken up, that ere long it would be made
hoater. This base jest turned the whole blame upon him, as if he had given
thereby a watchworde to set Cremona on fire, which to say the truth was
burning already. Forty thousand armed men were broken in, and of servants and
followers of the camp both a greater number, and a great deal more disordered
in all kind of licentious and cruel demeanor: neither age, nor honorable
calling could warrant any from violence, but without respect of either they
abused their bodies in villainous manner, and slew them indifferently. Aged men
and old women, naught worth to be sold, they haled in a iolity for pastime
and sport: if any maid of competent years, or bewtifull yongman fell amongst
them, in striving who should carry them away, they pulled them asunder and tare
them in pieces; and thereupon growing in choler turned to kill one another.
Whenas any had gotten and carried away for himself money, or the gold and
jewels out of the temples, being met by a stronger, he left behind him both
his life and his booty: some contemning that which they found ready and open,
compelled the owners with torture and stripes, to confess and yield up their
hidden riches, and treasures buried under the ground. The soldiers walked with
firebrands in their hands, which as soon as they had emptied the goods, they
hurled in a sport and wantonness into the void houses, and empty temples.
And as in an army diverse in language and manners, compounded of Romans,
confederates, and strangers, their lusts and desires were diverse, and
something held lawful by one, something by another, and nothing unlawful to
all. Four whole days Cremona ministered matter to sack and to burn: and all
things beside both holy and profane being consumed into ashes, the temple of
The goddess of ill savors.
Mephitis without the walls remained untouched, either because it stood out
of the way, or by reason of some divine virtue of the goddess. In the year of
the City 536. and the first year of the second Punicke war
year that Tiberius Sempronius and Publius Cornelius were Consuls, when
Hannibal was about to come into Italy, for a bulwark against the Frenchmen
beyond the Po, and if any other power should break in by the Alps. So by
reason of the number of inhabitants, commodity of rivers, fertility of the
soil annexed, and affinities contracted with other people, it grew up and
flourished, in foreign wars untouched, unfortunate in civil. Antonius
ashamed of this foul act, which daily grew more and more odious, made
proclamation, that no man should keep any citizen of Cremona as his lawful
prisoner: and all Italy with one general consent refusing to buy any of them
for slaves marred the soldiers market: who thereupon began to murder their
prisoners. Which being once known, their friends and kinsfolks secretly came
and ransomed them. In short time after the rest of the people returned to
Cremona. The public places and temples were reedified at the charges of the
townsmen, and upon Vespasians special encouragement. For the present, the
ground being infected with the noisomeness of the dead carcases, suffered not
the Flauian army to dwell long upon the ruins of the razed city. So they
removed three miles of, and there reduced the Vitellianists, being disbanded,
and trembling for fear, every soldier under his colors, and anon afterward
sent them away into Illyricum, lest during the time of the troubles they should
fortune to work innovation. Into Britannie and Spain messengers were sent
with the news of the success: and for a proof of their victory, into France
they sent Julius Calenus a Tribune, and into Germany Alpinus Montanus captain
of a cohorte, because Alpinus was of Triers, and Calenus an Aeduan, and both
had followed Vitellius side: and withal they kept and fortified the passages
of the Alps with garrisons, fearing the descent of the Germans that way in
favor of Vitellius.

VII. Fabius Valens sets forward. Vitellius blockish behavior. The death of
Junius Bloesus.
BUT Vitellius, having within few days after Caecinaes departure set forth
Fabius Valens also to the war, as if nothing else were now to be done, laid
aside all care of affairs, and betook himself to his riotous life. He made
no provision of armor, confirmed not the soldiers with comfortable speeches,
or militare exercises; he conuersed not in public in the face of the people
(like those sluggish creatures, which if you supply with food lie carelessly
stretched along) lurcking in arbours and places of pleasure, he had cast of al
memory alike, of past, present, and to come. Thus wallowing in sloth, and
languishing in the groves of Aricia, the heavy news came unto him of the
treason of Lucilius Bassus, and of the revolt of the navy at Rauenna: soon
after the sorrowful tidings mixed with some joy concerning Caecina came, both
that he had revolted, and that he was put in bands by the army. His blockish
and dull disposition apprehended more the joy then the care, insomuch that with
great triumph he made his return unto the city, and there in a solemn
assembly commended, and highly extolled the dutiful affection of the
soldiers. Then he commanded Publius Sabinus captain of the Guard, because
he was inward with Caecina, to be committed, substituting Alphenus Varus in
his room: immediately going to the Senate he made there a stately and
magnificall oration unto them, and was requited of them again with all kinds
of exquisite flatteries. Then proceeded a heavy sentence against Caecina, In
amplifying the great bountifulnes of Vitellius, toward a man in all respects so
unworthy as Caecina, they uttered indeed their own grief, that so leude a
person should be so highly preferred, and yet seemed to complain in Vitellius
behalf.
pronounced first by Lucius Vitellius, and so by the rest of the Senate in
order: who as in the Princes behalf uttering their own grieffe aggrauated his
fact with terms of affected indignation, That a Consul should betray the
common wealth, a General his sovereign lord, and a man so greatly advanced in
riches and honor his sole aduancer and maker; without any touch at all or
injurious speech against any of the Flauian captains, but only blaming the
error, and oversight of the armies: and for Vespasians proceedings, with great
caution touching that string, and always sparing his name. Then Roscius
Regulus presented petition, and by humble suite obtained, a ridiculous thing
both to give and to take, the Consulship for one only day which remained
behind of Caecinaes time, and so the last day of October he entered and
resigned his office. It was observed by men skillful that way, that never
before was there any such substitution seen, but either upon error in the
creation, or an express law for that purpose enacted. For Of whom that jest
of Tullie is remembered: Quam vigilan ^em habemus consulem, qui toto consulatus
sui tempore sommum oculis non vidit.
Caninius Rebilus had likewise been Consul for one day alone, at the time
when Caius Caesar was Dictatour, Or, who being beholding to many, had many to
pleasure.
and the service of many in the civil war required much speed in rewarding.
About the same time the death of Iunius Bloesus was openly known and much
talked of abroad: the circumstances whereof, as we have received them are
these. Vitellius lying sick of a grievous disease in the Seruilian gardens,
chanced to espy in a turret not far of many lights burning in the night
season, and demanding the cause, they about him made answer, that in Caecina
Tuscus house there was a solemn feast, and much company met, whereof Iunius
Bloesus was the principal guest; amplifying the sumptuousnes of the
entertainment, and the mirth, and the wanton solacing themselves, and such
other matters far above truth: yea and some stuck not directly to accuse
Tuscus himself and others; but aggrauated most against Bloesus, that had so
good leisure and lust in the Princes sickness, to banquet and pass the time
so merrily away. When they found Vitellius humor once sharpened, and it was
clear to them, that see deeply into Princes dislikes, that Bloesus might be
overthrown, the promooting and prosecuting against him was committed to Lucius
Vitellius: who upon a sinister emulation malicing Bloesus (because he was so
famous a man, and himself by desert so infamous) entered into the Emperors
chamber, and taking his little son in his arms fell down at his feet. When
his brother demanded the cause of this his confusion, I come not (quoth he) for
any fear or care of mine own, but my humble suite is, and these tears are
shed in your own behalf, and your childrens. In vain do we stand in fear
of Vespasian, whom so many Legions as we have of our side, so many provinces of
valor and trust, and so great and infinite distance by sea and land does
withholde and keep of: we had more need to take heed of an enemy at home in
our bosom, who vaunts of the By reason of both which names he might claim to
be lineally descended of Octavia, sister to Augustus Caesar, as by their
petigree it may appear.
Iunij and By reason of both which names he might claim to be lineally
descended of Octavia, sister to Augustus Caesar, as by their petigree it may
appear.
Antonij for his progenitors, and makes all demonstrations of courtesy and
bountifulness toward the soldiers, as one descended of the imperial blood:
that way all men's minds begin now to bend, whilst your majesty in the
mean time, careless of the estate both of your friends and foes, nourishes a
concurrent, that takes delight, out of his banqueting house to behold his
Princes sickness and griefs. Vouchsafe, I beseech you, for his unseasonable
mirth, to render him a sad and sorrowful night, whereby he may both know and
feel, that Vitellius lives and rules, and if ought should befall him but
good, has a son to leave in his place. Vitellius standing in dread between
the fear of differring, and the open auowing so wicked a fact, lest the one
might breed his destruction, the other procure great envy and slander,
finally resolved to attempt it by poison: the suspicion whereof was strongly
confirmed, by his going in great joy to visit Bloesus as he lay a dying; and
moreover a most savage speech of his was ouerheard, wherein he vaunted (for I
will report his own very words) that he had fed his eyes in beholding his
enemies death. Bloesus besides his honorable birth and courtly conditions,
was loyal and fast to Vitellius. For before Vespasian put up, whenas matters
were yet entier, being solicited by Caecina and the chieffest of the side, who
began now to wax weary of Vitellius, he stiffly resisted; a man of upright
conversation, not turbulent, not desirous of hasty rising, and so far from
ambitious aspiring to the Empire, that in many men's opinions he was esteemed
not unworthy of it.

VIII. The proceedings of Fabius Valens, and his taking.
IN the mean season Fabius Valens marching forward, more slowly then was
convenient in going to war, with a great and effeminate train of concubines
and eunuchs, was advertised in post of the treason of Lucilius Bassus, with
the loss of the navy at Rauenna: and if he had followed with expedition his
purposed journey, he might either have prevented Caecinaes falling away, or
overtaken the Legions before the battle was given. And some persuaded him to
take a few of his trustiest friends, and so avoiding Rauenna by secret
bywayes to go in all speed to Hostilia, or Cremona: others were of opinion to
send for the Praetorian cohorts out of the city, and so by strong hand to
make passage. But Valens using delay, to the great hurt of the cause, spent the
times of action in consultation: and then rejecting both the aduises, and
taking a Of Praetorians it should seem: and yet p. 134. we find 14 more
Prae^orian, and there were but 16. in all. 2. Hist. p. 104.
three cohorts were sent with the British wing, a number neither fit to pass
secret withal, nor sufficient to break through by force. But Valens even
then, amidst so great danger, abstayned not from his old intemperate living;
but was diffamed, and noted to take by force his lewd pleasures, and pollute
his hosts houses, wheresoever he came, with adulteries and other unlawful
lusts: he had both might and money, great means to induce; and the last lusts
of fortune beginning to fall, now at the farewell showed themselves most
outrageous. When the horsemen and footmen were come, then appeared the
weakness and fault of that counsel. For neither could he with so small a
company, though they had been most trusty, pass through the enemies, neither
yet were they fast and trusty indeed: but for a while shame, and the
reverence of their General being present, restrained them, bonds of no long
continuance with men into Vmbria, and from thence into Etruria. Where
understanding the event of the battle at Cremona, he entered into a notable
determination, and if it had succeeded, of great consequence; To betake
himself to the sea, and setting on land in some part of the province of
Narbon, to raise France and the nations of Germany, and so stir up a new
war. As Soon as Valens was gone, Cornelius Fuscus came with an army upon
them at Ariminum, and bestowing his ships not far from the town forced the
soldiers for fear to yield, and made himself master of the plain of
Vmbria, and the country of Picenum all along the seaside: and so all Italy on
the one side of the Apennine mountains was under the subjection of Vespasian,
and on the other side under Vitellius. Valens having embarked himself in the
bay of Pisa was driven by the violence of the sea, or contrary winds, into the
port of Hercules Monoecus. Not far from thence Marcus Maturus Procuratour of
the sea Alps remained, a man very faithful and constant in Vitellius cause,
notwithstanding al thereabout had declared themselves for the contrary side;
who intertaining Valens with all kind of courtesy, and warning him, not rashly
to enter into the province of Narbon, with this admonition struck a terror
into his mind, and withal the rest of the company began to faint for fear,
and stagger in their allegiance. For Valerius Paulinus a Belike in Gallia
Narbonensi.
Procuratour, a valiant soldier, and a friend of Vespasians before his
advancement, had sworn the cities round about unto him, and gathering all
those, which being Mont, as I take it, of Othoes old Praetorian soldiers only
other dismissed by Vitellius I find not: and mention is made by and by expressly
of the Praetorians
dismissed by Vitellius of their own accord resumed arms, kept the colonie
of Forum Iulij, being the keie of the sea, with a garrison: his dealing therein
carrying the more credit, because he was borne in that town, and was highly
esteemed among the Praetorian soldiers, whose Tribune sometimes he had been;
and the townsmen also upon favor to their cuntreyman, and hope of greatenesse
hereafter, endeavored to further the side. This strong preparation being
reported in the amplest sort to the Vitellianists, who already were wavering
in mind, Fabius Valens retired in all speed to the ships, accompanied
only with four Spiculatores
Spearemen, three of his friends, and as many Centurions: Maturus and the rest
were at their liberty to stay behind, if it liked them, and swear to
Vespasian. But as the sea was safer to Valens then the shore, or towns, so
floating thereon unresolved, and seeing rather what to shun then what to
follow, he was at the length by contrary weather cast upon the Stoechades
islands, upon the coast of Marseils; from whence Paulinus sending out of his
ships fetched him in.

IX. The estate of the provinces abroad upon the troubles in Jtalie.
AS SOON as Valens was taken, all the provinces turned themselves to
Vespasians side, the matter beginning in Spain at the first Legion surnamed
Adiutrix; which upon the memory of Otho was enemy to Vitellius, and drew with
it the tenth and sixth Legion also. Neither did the provinces of France make any
stay. And for Britannie, the great favor and reputation in warlicke affairs,
that Vespasian had gotten being Lieutenant there of the second Legion under
Claudius, did easily win that Legion unto him, albeit not without some stir
of the rest, whereof many Centurions and soldiers, who had been advanced by
Vitellius, were unwilling to change the Prince, whom they had proved already.
By means of which dissension and continual rumors of civil wars, the
Britans took heart and rebelled, through the procurement e Iugan^^n civitate.
12. An nalium.
of Venusius; who beside a natural fierceness of courage, and hatred of the
Roman name, was incensed particularely, by a private unkindness between him
and the queen Carthismandua. Carthismandua was queen of the Brigantes, of
high and noble lineage, who upon the delivery of king Caratacus, whom she took
by ^2. Annal. p. 432.
fraud, and sent to furnish and set out the triumph of Claudius, wanne favor
with the Romans, and greatly increased her strength: whereupon ensued wealth,
and of wealth and prosperity riotous and incontinent life: insomuch that
casting off Venusius, who was her husband, she joined her self in marriage
with Vellocatus his harnish bearer, and crowned him king: which fact was the
overthrow immediately of her house. The good will of the country went
generally upon the lawful husband: but the queens intemperate affections were
peremptory and violent in maintaining her minion. Whereupon Venusius by the
help of his other friends, and the revolt of the Brigantes, made war upon
Carthismandua, and brought her into great extremities: then praying aid at
our hands, our cohortes and wings were sent to defend her, which after sundry
skirmishes with diverse event, delivered her person out of peril, but the
kingdom remained to Venusius, and the war unto us. About the same time our
affairs in Germany, through the insufficiency of our captains, and
seditiousnesse of our Legions, foreign force assailing us, and our allies
betraying us, were reduced to those desperate terms, that we stood in danger
of leesing the country: but that war together with the causes, and
particular euentes thereof (for it continued long) I lib. 4.
will hereafter declare. The Dacians also stirred, a nation never loving us,
and as then, our army being withdrawn out of Moesia, not fearing us neither.
When the first alterations and troubles began, they held themselves quiet,
and looked but on: but whenas they perceived Italy to be all in arms, and
between the sides every where open hostility, forcing the standing camps of
the cohorts and wings, they put themselves in possession of both the banckes of
Danubius, and were now at the point to baue razed the camps of the Legions,
had not Mutianus, having knowledge before of the victory at Cremona, opposed
the sixth Legion against them, lest two foreign powers should have broken in at
one time, the Germans and Dacians, from two diverse coasts. As often
heretofore, so now specially fortune was favorable to the Romans, bringing
Mutianus with the power of the East to arrive there at that instant; and that
in the mean time the matter was so dispatched at Cremona. Mutianus departing
away left Fonteius Agrippa, who had been one year Proconsull of Asia,
Lieutenant general in Moesia; assigning him sufficient forces out of the
Vitellian Legions, whom it was thought a point both of policy and peace to
disperse abroad in the provinces, and keep occupied in foreign war. Neither
were other nations at quiet. In Pontus a barbarous bondeman, which sometime had
been Admiral of the kings navy, raised up a sudden war in the country:
his name was Anicetus a freedman of the late king Polemo, sometime of great
credit and power, and now since the kingdom was In Neroes time.
reduced into a province displeased and grieved with the change. Whereupon
having associated unto him in Vitellius name the nations that dwell upon
Pontus, alluring the poor and neediest sort with hope of booty and spoil, he
became in short time Commander of competent forces; with which he suddenly
invaded and brake into Trapezus, a very ancient city built by the Graecians,
in the uttermost borders of Pontus: where a cohorte was slain, which in time
past was in the service there of the king, but being afterward made citizens
of Rome, had taken enseignes and armor after our manner, retaining the
slothfulness and dissolute life of the Greeks notwithstanding. He burned
also the navy there, doing his pleasure on that sea, which as then was
unguarded, by reason that Mutianus had given order for the best of the galleyes,
and all the soldiers to meet him at Byzantium: upon occasion whereof (...).
Strabo lib. 11.
Camerae, of narrow sides and broad bottoms, wrought and joined together
without any brass or iron, and when the sea goes high, as the waves rise they
raise also the sides of the vessel with boordes, until they close and cover
it above like a house, and so the boats tumble up and down in the middle of
the waves, having a prow alike on both sides, and ready to row either way
without any danger, as it shall fall out for their purpose. These things moved
Vespasian to assign unto those parts some Vexillary soldiers out of the
Legions, and Virdius Geminus for captain, a man of good proof in service: who
setting upon the enemies being in disarray, and dispersed in seeking of spoil,
drove them to their boats, and then causing some galleyes to be built in
have, pursued and ouertooke Anicetus in the mouth of the river Cohibus, being
there under the protection of the king of the Sedochezi, whom he had wunne by
money and gifts to undertake his defense. And indeed at first the king
threatened to protect his suppliant with force of arms: but whenas he saw
himself put to the choice, to accept either reward for yielding him, or war
in defending him, as an unconstant and disloyal barbarian, upon composition
he surrendered Anicetus to dye, and delivered the fugitives, and so an end was
made of that servile war. Vespasian being joyful upon the obtaining of this
victory, all things succeeding unto him above his own wish, was certified
soon after being in Egypt of the battle at Cremona, which caused him to
make the more have to Alexandria, that seeing Vitellius army was defeated and
broken, he might press also with hunger the city of Rome, standing
altogether upon foreign provision. For so likewise he made preparation to
invade Afric, situate on the same coast, both by sea and land, meaning to
cut off the two storehouses of corn from the enemy, and so procure famine,
whereof consequently dissension would grow.

X. Antonius Primus marches from Cremona to Fanum Fortunae. his tarring with
Mutianus.
WHILST in these general alterations, through out the whole world, the state
thus altered and passed, Antonius Primus leaving Cremona, left also his former
care of well carrying himself, supposing the war to be at an end, and no
difficulty in that which remained: or else peradventure prosperity, in a man of
that disposition, discovered the secret and inward faults of his mind, as
covetousness and pride, and other vices that were suppressed before. Italy he
harried as a conquered country: the Legions with all kind of courtesy he
sought to assure to himself: in sum by all speeches and deeds he made the
way to his own greatness. And to give the soldier the more his own will,
and leave him the bridle at large, of his mere motion he granted unto the
Legions the choice of Centurions in their rooms that were slain: by which
kind of election the busiest and troublesomest fellows were chosen; and
generally the soldier was not governed by the direction of his captain, but
the captain drawn by the violence of the soldier. After these points
tending to faction and corrupting of discipline, he converted himself to the
pray, nothing dreading Mutianus at hand, which was a more heinous offense,
then to have contemned Vespasian himself. Nevertheless the army marched on,
without cariages, because the winter was near, and the fields overflowed with
the Po. The enseignes and standerds of the conquering Legions, and the aged or
impotent soldiers, with many sound also, were left at Verona. It seemed
sufficient, now the war was in so good a forwardness, to take only the
cohorts and wings, and certain chosen men out of the Legions* unto this
company the eleventh Legion also adjoined themselves, who at the first had
made some delay, but seeing the good success of their fellows were sorry it
was their ill hap to be absent: with it there came also six thousand
Dalmatians newly leuyed. Poppaeus Siluanus was Lieutenant general: but the
whole direction of matters rested in Annius Bassus Lieutenant of the Legion,
who with great industry and quietness disposed of all that was to be done, and
under color of obedience governed Siluanus peaceably, being a man of no
action in militare service, and trifling out the times of doing in talking. To
this power were adjoined the best of the mariners at Rauenna requiring
Legionary service, and in their rooms the Dalmatians were sent to serve at
sea. At Fanum Fortunae the army and the leaders were at a stop, being in
doubt concerning their principal purpose, because they had heard the
Praetorian cohorts were already set forth out of Rome, and presumed that the
passages of the Apennine hills were fortified and guarded against them. But
that which caused most fear was want of provision, in a country wasted and
consumed by war, and the seditious cries of the soldiers demanding
Clavarium, a donatiue to buy them caligares claui; as Calcearium in Suetonius
Vespasiano. cap. 8. to buy them shoes.
Clauarium (which is the name of a donatiue) of them who had neither provided
money nor corn: and the too much have of the soldiers hindered greatly,
whilst that which in due order might have been taken and served somewhile,
was in a moment spoiled in snatching. It is reported by most credible writers,
that among the winners there was such a contempt of common honesty, and such
unnatural dealings against al laws humane and divine, that a common soldier
among the horsemen was not ashamed, openly to profess, that he had slain his
own brother in the last battle, and to require recompense for the same at
the captains hands: who neither willing to reward the fact in regard of
common humanity, nor daring to punish it in respect of the nature of the
present war, differred the matter, pretending that he had deserved much more,
then they were presently able to give: how it was ended I find not recorded;
notwithstanding in former civil wars I find the like to have happened. For
in the battle fought against Cinna at Ianiculum, one of Pompeyes soldiers
slew his own brother, and when he saw what he had done, slew himself also,
as Sisenna reports: so much have our ancestors exceeded us, not only in
glory of their virtues, but in grief for their faults. These and the like
drawn out of ancient history it shall not be amiss to remember, where the
place and matter requires to set down either exempla recti, aut solatia mali.
examples of that which is good, or comforts for that which is bad. Now
Antonius and the Flauian captains being at Fanum, thought it expedient to
send some horsemen before, and search all the coast of Vmbria, to find some
easy and gentle passage over the Apennine: and withal they determined to send
for the standerds and enseignes, and all the soldiers that remained at Verona,
and to replenish the Po and the sea with store of provision. There were of the
Commanders which sought al means to delay: for Antonius was nimius iam
Antonius.
grown now too intolerable, and certiora de Mutiano sperabantur.
better hope was conceived of Mutianus: who being inwardly vexed that the
victory was so speedily gotten, and fearing unless he were present at the
taking of Rome at the least, he should have no part neither of the war, nor
the honor, wrote unto Primus and Varus ambiguously, sometime persuading to
follow with instance, and sometime discoursing of the profitablenesse of
delaying; framing his speech in such sort, that if things fell out ill, he
would clearly disclayme them, if well, he might take them upon him: but to
Plotius Griphus, whom Vespasian had lately made Senator and Lieutenant of a
Legion, and the rest of his trusty friends he gave plain direction to stay
till his coming: all which persons returned unto him a plausible answer, and
greatly blamed the heady proceeding of Primus and Varus. Those letters Mutianus
sent to Vespasian, and so procured that Antonius devises and doings were not
accepted according to his expectation. Which thing Antonius took very
impatiently, and imputed the fault thereof unto Mutianus, by whose
calumniations he conceived his dangers had grown: neither did he forbear to
use hard speeches against him, as a man of an intemperate tongue, and not
accustomed to acknowledge any superior. He wrote also letters unto Vespasian
in a more hawty and arrogant style, then beseemed a subject to his Prince, with
secret glances and nippes at Mutianus: That it was Antonius and no body else,
who first put in arms the Legions of Pannonia, and brought them into the
field: that by his procurement and woorking the captains of Moesia were first
stirred up to the war: by his resolutenesse the Alps were passed, Italy
possessed, and the aid of the Rhoetians and German nations cut of: then, that
Vitellius Legions being at discord and dispersed the vantage was spyed, and
they overthrown first by a furious charge of horsemen, afterward by a power of
footmen for a whole day and a night together; that was indeed the brauest
point of the service, and his only doing: as for the mishappe of Cremona, it
was a mischance of war; and that the deciding of other civil dissensions in
former ages had cost the common wealth much dearer, even the subversion of
many great towns. that he served his Prince not with sending of messages and
writing of letters, but with his person and weapon in hand: neither did he envy
or hinder their glory, that in the mean time had quieted Moesia: they regarded
the peace of Moesia, and he the conservation and safety of Italy. by his
persuasions France and Spain, the most puissant parts of the Empire, were
joined to the side: but all his pains and travail were in vain, if they
alone should reap the rewards, which had no part in the peril. Mutianus was
advertised of all this proceeding, and there upon ensewed great enmity, which
Antonius prosecuted simply and soldier like, but Mutianus closely, and
therefore the more irreconcileably.

XI. Vitellius proceedings and behavior after the loss at Cremona. The revolt
of the navy at Misenum.
BUT Vitellius having received so great a blow at Cremona, concealing the
news, and foolishly dissembling the matter, differred the remedies of his
evils, not the evils themselves. For if he would have plainly confessed it, and
taken advise thereupon, he had both hope and strength enough and too much
remaining: but whenas contrarily he feigned that all went on his side, by that
untruth he marred his own case, and cut of from himself all means of
recovery. In his presence there was no mention of war, but a wonderful
silence that way: in the city all speeches of it were forbidden, which caused
the more: and they, which if it had been lawful would have talked nothing but
truth, being restrained gave out much more then it was. The captains also of
the Flauian side helped to increase the fame, carrying Vitellius spies, as they
chanced to take them, round about the camp, to see and view the strength of
their victorious army, and so dismissing them back to their master. All which
at their return Vitellius, after secret examination had, commanded to be made
away. But above all other the Suetonius Othone. c. 10. Xiphilinus. p. 205. and
after him Zonaras, reports this in the story of Otho, in the former war,
with some small difference of circumstances.
constancy and resolutenes of the Centurion Julius Agrestis was most notable;
who after much speech tending to incite Vitellius to virtue in vain, at the
length obtained that himself might be sent to view the forces of the enemy,
and see what had passed at Cremona. For the performing whereof he sought no
corners, but addressed himself directly to Antonius, and openly professing
what charge he had from his Prince, and what was his intent, he required he
might be permitted to take a perfect survey of all things. so some were sent
with him, which showed him the place where the battle was fought, the ruins
of Cremona, the conquered Legions. Agrestis went home again, and making
relation, whenas Vitellius would not believe his report, but charged him with
untruth, and further that he was hired thereto: Seeing then (quoth Agrestis)
no mean proof will serve, and neither my life nor my death can now stand you
in any other steed, I will give you an assurance which you may believe; and so
departing from him, he sealed his sayings voluntarily with his blood. Some
write that he was slain by Vitellius commandment, but of his fidelity and
constancy they report the same. Now Vitellius being as it were awaked out of
sleep, commanded Julius Priscus and Alphenus Varus with fourteen Praetorian
cohorts, and all the wings of the horsemen to keep the streits of the
Apennine. after them followed a Legion of Seamen; a power both for number and
goodness of men and horses sufficient (if another had been General) to make
war offensive, not only to stand upon their defense. The rest of the
cohorts were committed to Lucius Vitellius his brother to guard the city
withal. Himself abating nothing of his wonted riot, and hasty through
distrust, hudled up the election of officers, wherein he declared Consuls for
Suetonius Vitellio. c. 11. comitia in december annos ordina vit seque perpetuum,
consulem.
many years to come. Moreover and obnoxious to unfaithful counsels. As he
was speaking to his soldiers in public assembly, it fell out so many unlucky
birds to fly over his head (a monstrous matter) that the day was ouercast, as
it were with a black cloud: and another no Taking some with him to Rome, but
principally in that he sent away with his brother, as appears anon, six
cohorts and five hundredth horse into Campania out of this army.
dispersing his forces, and so abandoned his best and faithfullest soldiers,
whom he left thereby to the enemies mercy, and delivered them as it were into
their hands; contrary to the opinion of the most expert Centurions, who
disliked greatly the disuniting, and if their advise had been asked, would
have told plainly their mind: but Vitellius inwardest friends hindered them
from access, the Princes ears being so framed, that he accounted all sharp
that was wholesome, and liked of nothing but that which was presently pleasant,
and afterward hurtful. But the navy at Misenum (so much the audaciousnesse
even of one single man in civil dissensions may work) was brought to revolt by
the means of Claudius Fauentinus, a Centurion ignominiously cassed by Galba,
who counterfayting letters from Vespasian, with hope of reward induced them to
change their allegiance. The Admiral thereof was Claudius Apollinaris, a man
that neither constantly kept his fidelity, nor stoutly maintained his treason:
and Apinius Tiro, who had been Praetor, and was then by chance at Minturnae,
offered himself for a head to them which revolted; by whose means the colonies
and free towns were drawn to the side, the Puteolani showing themselves most
forward that way. But Capua on the other side, persisted firm to Vitellius:
whereupon there passed, under color of the public cause, much private
choler between the two towns. To the pacification of these troubles Vitellius
chose out Claudius Iulianus (who had lately been Admiral of the navy at
Misenum, and governed himself in that charge with great mildness) as the
meetest man to appease the soldiers minds; assigning unto him a power of one
cittie-cohort, and the Gladiatores
fencers which were under his charge. As Soon as the camps approached the one
to the other, Iulianus without any great stay turned to Vespasians side, and so
jointly they took Tarracian, a place of great strength in regard of the
walls and situation, if the men within had been faithful and good. Upon
knowledge whereof Vitellius leaving part of his forces at Narnia, with the
captains of his Guard, sent his brother Lucius Vitellius away with six cohorts
and five hundredth horse, to manage the war of Campania. Himself being
greatly perplexed in mind was yet somewhat revived with the earnest goodwill
of the soldiers, and clamours of the town people requiring armor and weapons;
whom being naught else but a cowardly company, whose boldness never went
beyond words, he called by the false title of armies and Legions. At the
persuasion of his freedmen (for of his friends the greatest men were least
trusty) he commanded the tribes to be called, and swear them which gave in
their names: too many presenting themselves, he divided the charge of the
muster between the two Consuls, and assessed the Senators at a certain
number of bondmen, and quantity of silver. The Gentlemen of Rome made offer
both of their service and money, even the Libertini requiring of their own
motion they might be admitted to do also the like. This counterfayt
forwardness made the offices, that were done for fear, be thought to proceed
of goodwill. And indeed many pitied not so much the man, as the place he
sustained: and Vitellius himself ceased not by his countenance, speech and
tears to provoke compassion and pity, promising largely, and (as the nature
is of men in great fear) without measure. Moreover he took then upon him
(which he had refused before) the style of Suetonius Vitellio cap. 8. seems
to say otherwise. cognomen Germanici delatum ab vniuersis cupide recepit,
Augusti distulit, Caesaris in perpetuum recusavit.
Caesar, upon some superstitious conceit of the name, and because in a time of
fear, the counsels of wise men, and prattlings of the people are heard and
respected alike. But as all actions entered into upon heat without
consideration are strongest in the beginning, and afterward fade and decay, so
here the Senators began by little and little to shrink, and the Gentlemen
likewise; at the first with some respect and in Vitellius absence, but
afterward more openly, being afraid and pensive for the danger which was like
to ensue; till in the end Vitellius seeing the attempt not feasible, for shame
was contented, not to demand that he could not obtain.

XII. The Flauianists pass over the Apennine. the Vitellianists at Narnia
yield themselves. the death of Fabius Valens.
AS the possessing of Meuania by the Vitellianists had wrought great terror in
Italy, seeing another war as it were sprung up a fresh by that means, so of
the contrary side the departure of Vitellius in so fearful manner procured
great credit, and good to the Flauian cause. For presently thereupon the
Samnites, and Peligni, and Marsi revolted; and upon emulation that Campania had
prevented them, to recompense their slacknesse, as men newly come to a new
master, showed extreme diligence in furthering the service. But in passing the
Apennine the army by the fowlenesse of the winter weather was greatly
distressed, and marching with all liberty and quietness could hardly wrestle out
of the snow, so that it was clear to be seen, what danger they must needs
have sustained, if fortune, to which the Flauian captains were more often
beholding, then to their good guiding and skill, had not turned Vitellius back
home again. In the mountains Petilius Cerealis met them, who in clownish
apparel through knowledge of the country had escaped Vitellius hands.
Cerealis was of near affinity with Vespasian, and of some name for matters of
war, and therefore was assumed among the Leaders. Many write that Flauius
Sabinus and Domitian might also have easily escaped, and certain it is, that
diverse messengers sent by Antonius by sundry cunning sleights came to their
speech, pointing the place, and offering them means for their safety: but
Sabinus alleged that his crazy body was not to undertake a matter of that
pains, and such an audacious attempt. Domitian would gladly have ventured, but
he feared the keepers whom Vitellius had set about him, although they offered
to accompany him in his escape, lest peradventure it had been a snare to
intrappe him: and indeed Vitellius himself, in regard of his own
kinsfolks, intended no cruelty against Domitian. When the Flauian captains
were come to Carsula, they stayed there a few days to repose their army, till
their Legionary power should overtake them: and the place of the camp in it
self was delitefull, with a large goodly prospect, and very safe for the
provision of vittailes, having so many of the welthiest cities, as it were
store houses behind them. And besides they were in some hope that the
Vitellianists, which were not distant above ten miles, would fall to some
parle, and so from a parle to a revolt: which thing the soldiers could not
abide to hear of, but desired an end rather by conquest, then by peace: even
their own Legions they were unwilling to stay for, loath to have more fellows
in the spoil, when they needed none in the danger. But Antonius calling them
publicly together, showed unto them, that Vitellius had yet some forces
remaining, wavering perhaps and unconstant if they might have time to
consult, but of fierce stomach if they were driven to despair: that the
beginnings of civil wars were to be permitted to fortunes deciding, but the
accomplishment of the victory was to be governed by reason and wisdom: that
the navy of Misenum, and the most flourishing country of Campania were
already revolted, and there remained nothing of all the world unto Vitellius,
save only so much as lay between Tarracina and Narnia: and surely they had
wunne honor sufficient in the battle at Cremona, and blame too much by
destroying the town. therefore they should not now desire to take Rome, but
rather to save it: their reward would be greater, and their glory most great,
if they wrought the safety of the Senate and people of Rome without bloodshed.
With these and other like speeches their minds were mollified, and soon after
the Legions came. The Vitellian cohortes terrified with the same of the army
so much increased, began to waver, no man animating them to the war, but
many to revolt, who desired to make a present of their bands and cornets unto
the conqueror, to purchase favor hereafter; and gave also advertisement, that
fast thereby at Interamna was a garrison of four hundredth horse. Whereupon
immediately Varus was dispatched with a band of men lightly appointed, and
slew some few that made resistance: but the most part laid down their
weapons, and yielded themselves to his mercy: some fled to the camp at Narnia,
and filled all there full of fear and terror, extolling above truth the
forces and valor of the enemies, to diminish their own dishonor in losing
their fort. Neither was there any punishment for offenses among the
Vitellianists; on the other side the rewards were apparent of those that
revolted: so that from thence forth the contention was, who should be most
traitor, and daily some of the Tribunes and Centurions fled to the enemy: for
the common soldier was obstinately bent for Vitellius, until Priscus and
Alphenus Generalles forsaking the camp upon fear, and returning to Vitellius,
discharged the rest from all blame of treason. About the same time Fabius
Valens was put to death in the prison at Vrbine. His head was openly showed to
the Vitellian cohortes to put them out of all hope: for before they believed
that he was escaped into Germany, and putting in arms both old and new
soldiers there: but when they saw he was dead they began to despair. The
Flauian army also took a wonderful conceit as if his death were undoubtedly
the end of the war. Valens was borne at Anagnia, of a gentleman's house,
loose in conditions, and not without grace in seeking by wanton ieastes the
name of a pleasant conceit. In the games of Iuuenalia in Neroes time he Mimos
actitavit.
played a part, first as it were by compulsion, then voluntarily, with more
dexterity then credit. Being created Lieutenant of a Legion he both sought to
prefer Verginius to the Empire, and then to discredit him. Fonteius Capito
his Lieutenant general, either because he was entered into treason, or because
he could not induce him to treason, he murdered and made away. A traitor he was
no doubt to Galba, and true to Vitellius, a virtue in him so much the more
eminent, because so many others were false. Now the Vitellian soldiers seeing
all their hope cut off, going to yield themselves to the contrary part, even
in that also had a care of their honor, and came down into the plain under
Narnia under their enseignes and banners displaied: the Flauian army stood
armed with their weapons bent, as in battle, in thick ranckes along the way
side. So the Vitellianists were received into the middle, and being so enclosed
about, Antonius entertained them with comfortable and gracious words, and
appointed some of them to abide at Narnia, and some at Interamna, leaving some
of his own Legions withal, without molestation to them if they were quiet,
and yet of force sufficient to repress them if they rebelled.

XIII. Vitellius upon composition with Flauius Sabinus Vespasians brother
offreth to resign up the Empire. Sabinus by the soldiers is driven into the
Capitol, and there besieged. The Capitol is burnt: Sabinus taken and slain.
DVRING their abode at Carsula, Antonius and Varus sent continual messages
unto Vitellius, offering him, if he would surcease arms, and yield himself
and his children to Vespasians mercy, life, money, and what secret place he
would choose of Campania to retire himself into: to the same effect Mutianus
wrote also unto him: and Vitellius oftentimes gave ear thereunto, entering into
speech about the number of his servants, and the choice of the place. So great
a senselessness had possessed his mind, that if other men had not remembered,
that he had been once Prince, and therefore was not to look for security in
private estate, he himself would have quickly forgotten it. But the
principal men at Rome secretly incited Flauius Sabinus being Provost of the
city, to put himself into the cause, and undertake part of the victory and of
the honor: making remonstrance unto him, that the city cohortes was his own
peculiare soldier, the cohortes of the Watchmen would questionless take his
part, and their own retinue of bondmen should be at his disposition, beside
the fortune of the side, and the easy course of proceeding they find, that be
in train of winning. that he should not yield the honor of the action to
Antonius and Varus: that Vitellius had but few cohorts in number, and those
discouraged and trembling at the evil news that came out of all quarters: the
common people was fickle and changeable; and if Sabinus would present himself
for a head, they would use the same flattering terms for Vespasian, which now
they did to the other. as for Vitellius he was a man not able to govern
himself in prosperity, much less sufficient to wielde and wind out of his
declining estate: that the honor of finishing the war would be his, who
first should take possession of the city; and so were it fit in all congruity,
both for Sabinus to reserve the Empire to his brother, and for Vespasian to
esteem of all other men's service secundarily to Sabinus. These warlike
speeches made but a slender impression in his feeble old mind, and some did
secretly suspect and charge him, that through envy and emulation he sought
rather to hinder his brothers good fortune. For Flauius Sabinus was the elder
brother, and exceeded Vespasian both in riches and authority, whiles they were
both private men, and was thought to have saved his credit, and kept him from
breaking, by lending him money, but taking in morgage his house and lands for
repayment thereof: whereupon albeit in outward show they continued friends,
yet some secret ielousies were feared between them. But the better
interpretation was, that being a mild man he abhorred from slaughter and
blood, and therefore treated diverse times with Vitellius of a peaceable
composing of matters upon conditions. And after diverse meetings at his house,
at the last a capitulation was concluded upon (as the fame went) in the temple
of Apollo, only two persons, Cluuius Rufus and Silius Italicus, being Salutem
sibi and millies HS. a Flauio Sabino Vespasiani fratre pepigit, says Suet.
Vitel. capit. 15. that is. 78 1250. li.
witnesses of their words: their countenances were noted a far off by the
beholders: Vitellius seemed abject and base, Sabinus not insulting, but pitying
rather. And if Vitellius could as easily have persuaded his friends, as he was
ready to yield himself, Vespasians army had entered the city without
bloodshed: but the loial and faithful servants of Vitellius flatly rejected all
speech of peace and conditions, declaring the danger and dishonor thereof, and
that the performance consisted only in the winners good pleasure. Nay, said
they, Vespasian will not be so confident, as to suffer Vitellius to live, though
in a private estate: or if he would, yet your very own soldiers and friends
will not abide it: and so through their pity your life shall come in danger.
You are old, and therefore for your part, as one that has had his fill of both
fortunes, are content to accept of conditions; but what title and state shall
your little son Germanicus have? now they offer money, servants, and the
pleasant places of Campania to solace you in: but when Vespasian shall once be
settled in the Empire, neither he, nor his friends, nor his soldiers will think
themselves safe, while so great a concurrent does live. Even Fabius Valens,
whom they had in prison, and reserved in store if ought should go wrong, was
too heavy for them to endure: much less are we to think, that Antonius and
Fuscus, and the chieffe flower of the side Mutianus, will otherwise deal with
Vitellius, then to make him away. Caesar left not Pompey alive, nor Augustus
Antonius: unless perhaps Vespasian carry a brauer mind, the meanest among
many of your fathers followers and clients, when he was fellow in office with
Claudius the Emperor. nay rather as it beseems you being son of a thrice
Consul and Censor, as it becomes so many honorable titles of your most
noble house, let despair at the least arm you to courage and boldness. The
soldiers persist still for you: the good will of the people continues yet
very fervent: in sum no greater harm can happen, then that which we run
into voluntarily dye we must if we be overcome, and dye we shall if we yield:
the difference only is this, whether we should end our lives virtuously and
with honor, or with shame and perpetual reproach. But Vitellius ears were
stopped against al manful cou^sailes: his mind was overcome with care and
pity, lest with too long resisting he should leave the conqueror less
merciful to his wife and his children. A Sueton, Vitell. c. 14. Suspectus and
in mortem matris fuit, qua si aegrae praeberi cibum prohibuisses, vaticinante
Catta muliere, cui velut ora culo acquiescebat, ita demum firmiter ac
diutissime imperaturum, si superstes parenti extitisset. Alij tradunt ipsam,
taedio praesentium, and imminentium metu, venenum a filio impetrasse haud sane
difficulter.
mother also he had of great years, but she died some few days before, very
seasonably not to see the ruin of her house, having gained nothing by her
sons preferment, but sorrow and a good name. Upon the eighteenth day of
December, hearing of the revolt of the Legion and cohorts at Narnia, he
departed out of the Palace in mourning weed, with his servants all sad and
weeping about him, and withal in a small Lecticula.
chair was carried his little young son, as it were to his burial. The
people in passing used their accustomed flatteries, being as then out of
season: the soldier kept silence, but seemed to carry wrath in his countenance:
neither was there any man so senseless, or unmindful of humane instability,
which was not moved with that sight. An Suetonius Vitellio. c. 15. somewhat
otherwise.
Emperor of Rome, a little before Lord of the whole world, to abando^ the seat
of his state, and through the people, the city to go out of the Empire! The like
was never seen, never heard of before. Sudden violence oppressed Caesar the
Dictator, and secret conspiracy Caius: night and the obscure corner of a
cu^trey house covered Neroes flight: Piso and Galba died as it were in the
field: but Vitellius in the assembly of his own people, amidst his own
soldiers, women also looking out of their windows, after he had uttered some
few (...) who^ he had with falsehood be guiled, nor against Vespasians young
son (for what would the death of an old man and one child avail?) but let
him go out and encounter the Legions, and there try the maine matter: other
things would follow the event of that battle. To this charge Vitellius in
great fear made answer, with some words in excuse of himself, and laying the
blame upon his soldiers, whose too much vehemence, his modesty, he said, was
unable to bridle; and withal advised Martialis to convey himself out of the
house by a privy way, lest the soldiers should murdre him as a negotiatour of
the peace, which they so greatly detested: and indeed Vitellius was now but a
cipher, neither able to co^mande nor forbid, not Prince in effect, but only
matter of war. Martialis was scarce returned into the Capitol, whenas the
Vitellian soldiers, in a great fury were also at hand, without any leader or
captain, but every man of his own head: leaving with speed the Forum and
temples upon it behind them, they set themselves in array and marched up the
hill, even to the first gate of the Capitol. There were in old time certain
open galleries upon the side of the cliffe, on the right hand as a man goes
up: from the tops whereof the defendants with stones and tiles bet the
Vitellianists down, who had in their hands nothing but swords, and to stay
while engines and shot were fetched seemed lost time: wherefore they took
firebrands and hurled them into the uttermost gallery, and following the fire
were at the point to have entered the gate of the Capitol being half burned,
had not Sabinus plucked down all the images and glorious monuments of our
progenitors, and in the entrance of the gate made as it were a countermure of
them. Then they assayed to make their entry on the other side of the Capitol by
Lucus Asy li, and by the Stayres of a hundredth steps, in the ascent to Rupes
Tarpeia. At both these places the assault came unlooked for, but the nearer and
hoater was that by the Asylum: neither could they be stopped from climing up by
the buildings that touched together, which as in a time of long peace were
raised to the height of the floor of the Capitol. Here it is doubted whether
the assaylers fired those buildings, or (as the more received opinion is) the
defendants thereby to repulse the^ which pressed forward, and were come so
far on: but how soever it was, the fire there beginning, from thence ran
along to the galleries that joined to the temples; then the Eagles which bare
up the Or the lover. sustinentes fastigium Aquilae. peradventure so called
because they were carved to the likeness of Eagles.
roof being of old dry timber drew and mayntained the flame. And so the
Capitol, the gates being shut, no man defending it, no man attempting to
spoil it, was burned to ashes; the most lamentable mischance, and detestable
fact, that ever befell the people of Rome since the city was founded:
especially no forrayne enemy inuading, and the gods most plentifully pouring
their benefits upon us, if our own evil conditions would have permitted us to
enjoy them: the seat of the The foundation of it, according to Dionysius lib.
3. p. 149. and lib. 4. p. 190. was (...)
great god Jupiter founded by our ancestors with the approbatio^ of the gods,
Jn bello civili Syllano, anno vrbis conditae 671. Scipione and Norbano Coss.
Appian. 1. (...). p. 192, (...).
civil war, but by private malice: now it was publicly besieged, and
publicly burned: and that not in honorable defense of our cu^trey, which might
somewhat lighte^ the loss, but in the ambitious upholding of partialities and
sides. The Capitol was Dionysius. l. 3. p. 149. Liuy lib. 1. folio. 9. and 12.
vowed first by king Tarquinius Priscus in the war against the Sabins, Three
years after. Dionys. lib. 5. p. 224. Liuy. lib. 2. fo. 16. puts the
dedication in the first Consulship of Horatius, in the first year of the free
state, contrary to Dionysius and Tacitus here.
after the kings were driven out, Horatius Puluillus in his second Consulship
dedicated it, in that magnifice^t and sumptuous sort, that the excessive wealth
of the Romans, which afterward followed, per chance might adorn and beautify the
work, but did not augment it. Four hundredth twenty and five years afterward,
when Lucius Scipio and Caius Norbanus were Anno vrbis cond. 671.
Consuls, it was burned and builded again upon the same foundation. Sylla
after he had gotten the upper hand took the care of it upon him, yet did he
not dedicate it: this point only he wanted to make him indeed, as he was in
Occiso demum C. Mario Voelicis nomen ad sumpsit Sylla. Velleius l. 2. Ap pia^.
1. (...). p. 197 (...). Plut. Sylla. (...).
name, perfectly happy: but Lutatius Catulus name remained to be seen, among so
many works of the Emperors, even till Vitellius time. That building then was
fired, which dismayed more the defendants then the assaylers. for the Vitellian
soldiers lacked neither skill, nor resolution in cases of difficulty: but of
the other side, the soldier was fearful, the captain without courage, and
as a man half distract, had neither the use of his tongue, nor his ears, not
governing himself by the advice of others, and yet not able to resolve of
himself, but running about from one place to another, at every cry of the
enemy, forbad that he had commanded, and commanded again that he had
forbidden. Anon, as it happens in lost and desperate cases, every man was a
commander, and no man a putter in execution: at the length casting away their
weapons, they began to devise how to flee and escape secretly away. Then the
Vitellianists brake in and killed, burned, and slew: some few militare men
that offered to fight were slain: among whom Cornelius Martialis, Aemilius
Pacensis, Casperius Niger, Didius Scaeua were the most of note. Flauius Sabinus
was beset and taken, being neither armed, nor attempting to flee, and Quintius
Atticus the Consul, a man of special mark by reason of his office, and
through his own vanity and folly, having published edicts in honor of
Vespasian, and to the disgrace of Vitellius. The rest made sundry shifts to
escape, some in bondmens apparel, others were hidden by their clients, and
conveyed away amongst the stuff: some there were also that had learned the
Vitellianists watch-worde; whereby one of them knew another, and so asking and
answering accordingly, used boldness in liew of a hole to lurk in. Domitian
at their first breaking in was hid in the sextens house, and there by the
policy of his freedman put in a linen garment, as the ministers of the temple
did wear, and so escaped unknown, and lay secret at the house of Cornelius
Primus, one of his fathers followers, near to the Velabrum. Afterward when his
father came to the state he pulled down the sextens lodging, and builded there
a little chapel in honor of Jupiter his Preserver: and also erected an alter
and caused this history to be cut in marble: and when he came to the Empire
himself he built a great temple to Jupiter his Keeper; and consecrated
himself in the lap of the god. Sabinus and Atticus being laden with irons,
and brought to Vitellius, were neither received with il speech, nor ill
countenance; whereat they which challenged to kill them, and reward for their
service, fretted and chaffed: and so the next beginning the cry, the rascal
sort of the people demanded Sabinus death, mingling threats and flatteries
together. And as Vitellius presented himself upon the stayres of the palace
to entreat for his life, they forced him in the end to desist: then they
stabbed and mangled him, and cutting of his head trailed the body into
Gemoniae. This was the end of Sabinus, a man surely not to be contemned. He had
served in public place thirty five years, and was greatly renowned both for
matters of peace and of war: for integrity and upright dealing no man could
touch him: somewhat he was too full of words; the only thing blamed in him
during the seven years that he ruled in Moesia, and the twelve years that he
was provost of the city: in this last act of his life some judged him
cowardly, others moderate rather and sparing of his citizens blood; but of this
all men agree that before Vespasian was Prince, the reputation of the house
rested in Sabinus. It was thought that Mutianus was glad of his death: and many
were of opinion, that it fell out not ill in respect of quietness, al strife and
emulatio^ being thereby taken up between two, whereof the one was the Emperors
brother, and the other carried himself as his fellow. But Vitellius when the
people required also Atticus the Consuls death plainly withstoode them
himself, being somewhat appeased, and in some sort to requite him, for that
being examined, who had first fired the Capitol, he took upon him the matter
himself, and by that confession, whether it were true indeed, or fained only
to serve the present purpose, seemed to take upon him the blame of the fact,
and clear Vitellius and his adherents.

XIIII. Lucius Vitellius takes Tarracina.
IN the mean season Lucius Vitellius pitching his camp at Feronia, pressed
sore upon Tarracina to take it, having shut into the town the Gladiatores
fencers and mariners, who durst not come out of the walls, nor hazard
themselves in the field. Their captains (as we have remembered before) were
Iulianus over the fencers, and Apollinaris over the mariners, men both in
dissoluteness and insufficiency more like fencers then captains; observing no
order in watching and warding, nor repairing the weak parts of the walls, but
passing both nights and days in wantonness and melody, upon those pleasant
sea-shoares, and dispersing the soldiers abroad to make provision for their
riot, never talking of war, but in banquet. Apinius Tiro was departed some
few days before, and with his extortions and sharp dealing in the free
towns, purchased more ill will then strength to the side. In the mean time a
servant of Virginius Capito fled out of the town to Lucius Vitellius,
promising him, if he would allow him sufficient men, to deliver secretly the
castle being vnmanned, and accordingly in the dead of the night he brought
certain light armed cohorts, into the place standing upon the top of a hill,
over the enemies head. From thence the soldiers ran down rather to a butchery
the^ a battle, killing some unarmed, others beginning to arm, some newly
awaked out of sleep, distracted and confounded with fear, darkness, the
sound of trumpets and noise of enemies. A few of the Gladiatores
fencers made resista^ce, and were slain, albeit they sold their lives dear:
the rest ran headlong to the ships, where through the like fear all things
were in the like confusion; or so much the more because the townsmen were
gotten in amongst them, whom the Vitellianists also did kill without any
difference. Six ships upon the first notice of the surprise escaped, and
with them Apollinaris the Admiral of the navy: the rest were either taken upon
the shore, or else suncke in the sea, being ouercharged with the company that
leapt into them. Iulianus was brought to Lucius Vitellius and scourged, then
slain in his presence. Diverse have accused Triaria Lucius Vitellius wife,
that girding her self with a sword like a soldier, she should have demeaned
her self cruelly, and insolently amidst the pitiful cries, and lamentable
destruction of the poor town. Lucius himself sent a laurel in token of
victory to his brother, requiring withal his further pleasure, whether he
should return presently to Rome, or stay and subdue the rest of Campania: the
interposing of which little time fell out greatly for the good both of
Vespasians side, and of the state. For if the soldiers presently after their
victory had directly repaired to Rome, whiles they were in courage and heart, by
reason of their late good success, beside a natural obstinatenesse in them,
the matter would not have been ended so quickly without much ado, and the
evident destruction of the city. For Lucius Vitellius albeit he were infamous
otherwise, yet was he industrious, and powerable not as good men by virtues,
but by vices as the worst sort.

XV. The Flauian army enters the city. the Praetorian camp is taken by
force. Vitellius is slain.
WHILES these things were a doing of Vitellius side Vespasians army removed
from Narnia to Otriculum, and at good leisure celebrated the Saturnalia begin
the 17. of December, and continue till the 24. of the same month.
Saturnalia there. The cause of this harmefull delay, was to stay for Mutianus:
some impute it to Antonius, as done with a traitorous intent, upon letters
received from Vitellius, wherein he offered unto him the Consulship, and his
daughter in marriage with a great dower, if he would revolt, in reward of
treason: others affirm, that all this was falsely surmised, and maliciously
spread to please Mutianus withal. Some are of opinion, that it was the purpose
of all the Commanders rather to put the city in fear, then to seek to take
it by force, seeing the most and principal cohortes had already relinquished
Vitellius, and now all his strength being cut off, it was likely he would
resign the Empire without further coaction: but all that course was crossed,
first by Sabinus have, and then through his cowardlinesse; who rashly taking
arms was not afterward able to keep a fortress of that strength, and which
even great armies could not have taken, against three only cohorts. But the
fault cannot well be imputed to one, which was common to all. For both
Mutianus was some occasion of stay, by means of his doubtful letters, and
Antonius by his preposterous obeying, or in seeking to avoid envy, deserved
great blame, and the other Commanders presuming the war to be finished,
made the end of it more notorious. Neither did Petilius Cerealis (who was sent
before with a thousand horse, to coast through the country of the Sabins, and
so to enter the city by Via Salaria) make that have as the matter required,
till in the end the news of the siege of the Capitol made them stir al at
once. Antonius came forward by the Flaminian way to Saxa rubra late in the
night, and too late to succor. For there he understood that Sabinus was
slain, the Capitol burned, the city in great fear, and al things went il: it
was also declared, that the people and bondmen were arming for Vitellius. And
besides Petilius Cerealis had received a blow in a skirmish of horsemen, by
running headlong and charging rashly upon the enemy, presuming them conquered
persons: but the Vitellianists, with horsemen and footmen interlaced together,
valiantly received the charge. This skirmish was not far from the city,
among the buildings, and gardens, and crosselanes, wherewith the Vitellianists
were well acquainted, the other not: which was an occasion to dismay them the
more: and besides all their horsemen were not of one mind and affection, some
being of those that having lately yielded at Narnia kept aloof, meaning
afterward to close with the winner. Tullius Flauianus captain of a wing was
taken prisoner, the rest ran away dishonourably: but the Vitellianists
pursued no further then to Fidenae. By this success the affection of the
people was greatly augmented, and immediately the townsmen took arms: few
had any militare targets, but the most took up whatsoever weapons came to
their hands, and forthwith required the sign of the battle. Vitellius thanked
them heartily, and willed them to issue out with all speed in defense of the
city. Then he called a Senate wherein Ambassadors were appointed to the
armies, which as in the name and under the color of a common weal, should
persuade them to peace and agreement. The hap of the Ambassadors was not al
alike: For they which met with Petilius Cerealis incurred extreme danger, the
soldiers refusing utterly al conditions of peace, and Arulenus Rusticus the
Praetor was wounded, which beside the enormity of the fact, in the person of an
Ambassador and a Praetor, was also more heinous, in regard of the worthiness
of the man. His train was dispersed, and one of his sergeants next before him
slain, for presuming among armed men to make way through the prease for his
master: and unless they had been defended by a band that the captain
assigned to guard them, the right and privilege of Ambassadors, reputed sacred
even among strange nations, had through civil fury been violated by murder,
even at the very gates and walls of the city. But they which came to Antonius
found more courteous entertainment, not because those soldiers were ciuiller,
but because the General was of greater authority. Into the company of these
Ambassadors Musonius Rufus inserted himself, a gentleman of Rome addicted to
the study of philosophy after the way of the Stoics, who thrusting himself
among the companies of the soldiers began to discourse of the good of peace,
and danger of war, and to school men in arms: at which many scoffed, more
grew weary of it, and some forbear not to push and spurn him away, til in the
end by the advice of the discreeter sort, and the threats of the other, he was
persuaded to desist from his unseasonable wisdom. The Vestall virgins also
were sent with letters from Vitellius to Antonius, requesting him to differ
the battle for one day: by means of that little delay with more ease would
all points be agreed upon. The virgins were sent home with honor, and answer
was made to Vitellius that by the murder of Sabinus, and the burning of the
Capitol al parle of peace was cut off, and al extremity to be looked for:
notwithstanding Antonius calling his army together assaied to pacify them thus
far, that they would be content to encampe themselves for that present at
the Miluian bridge, and not to enter the town before the next day: the reason
of the motion was, lest the soldier having his blood heated in skirmish,
should afterward spare neither people nor Senate, no not the churches and
temples of the gods. But they misliked and suspected all delaie as a hinderance
to the victory: and withal certain banners glittering upon the side of the
hills, albeit followed by none but towne-people, and men of no service, made a
show of an army. Whereupon the Flauianists dividing themselves into three
companies, made their approach to the town: one part as it stood along the
Flaminian way, another close by the bancke of the Tiber, and the third by Via
salaria toward the gate called Collina. The towne-people was immediately
broken by the horsemen, but the Vitellian soldier made head, dividing (...),
in all fifty thousand persons if Josephus say true. 4. (...). c. 42.
also themselves into three several bands. Many skirmishes passed between
them before the town, and with diverse event, but more commonly to the
advantage of the Flauianists, who had more sufficient men to their captains.
They only of that side were distressed, which turned upon the left hand
toward the Salustian gardens, through narrow lanes and slippery ways: where
the Vitellianists standing aloft upon the walls of the gardens, with stones
and iauelins repulsed them, till it was toward the evening, whenas the
horsemen that in the mean time had entered at Collina were at their backs and
surprised them. In campus Martius also there were hot skirmishes between
them. The Flauianists had the favor of fortune, and the vantage of so many
victories: the Vitellianists ran headlong and furious, supported with only
despair: and albeit they were defeated and broken, yet did they rally
themselves again in the city. The people stood by and looked on as they
fought, and as in a pastime or game clapped their hands, and encouraged
sometime the one, and sometime the other: and when either side turned their
backs, and hid themselves in houses or shoppes, they cried to have them
plucked out and killed, and so attained themselves the greatest part of the
pray: for whiles the soldiers minded nothing but slaughter and bloodshed, the
spoil fell to the common peoples share. Over all the city a cruel spectacle
and shameful was to be seen: in one place fighting and wounding, in another
tippling and bathing: here streams of blood, and heaps of dead bodies, and
hard by it strumpets and strumpets fellows: in sum all the licentiousness
of a dissolute and riotous peace, and the misery of a most cruel captivity: so
that a man plainly would judge one and the same town, both extremely furious
and raging, and extremely drowned in pleasures. There had before times passed
great conflicts between armed powers in the city, twice when Sylla, and once
when Cinna overcame, and the cruelty then was no less: but this was an
unnatural brutish security, that men for one moment of time would not intermit
their accustomed pleasures, but as if this had given them further occasion of
joy amidst their festival days, clapped hands and rejoiced, without care of
sides, at the public calamities. But the greatest difficulty of all was in
taking the Praetorian camp, unto the which the valiantest amongst the
Vitellian soldiers had betaken themselves, as to their last refuge, and
therefore the Flauianists were the more earnest to assalt it, especially the
old Praetorian cohortes, employing all means devised for the taking of most
fortified towns, as the target fence, engines of battery, mounts, and
firebands, crying alowde that that one work was the accomplishment and
perfection of all the travels and dangers, which they in so many battles had
passed; that the city belonged to the Senate and people, and the temples to
the gods, and both were restored to their owners: but the soldiers honor was in
the camp, that was his country, and his dwelling place, which unless they
could straightwaies recover, they must and would lie al night in their armor.
On the other side the Vitellian soldiers, although inferior both in number and
fortune, disturbed the course of the victory, hindered the peace, polluting the
houses and altars with blood, and embracing the last comforts to conquered
persons. Many lay gasping and died upon the towers, and battlements of the
walls. When the gates were broken up, they that remained alive presented
themselves to the conquerors, and died al with their face toward the enemy, and
wounded upon their forepartes: such care they had, seeing they must dye, to dye
in most honorable manner. Vitellius whenas the city was taken, conveyed
himself in a carrying Sellula. Suet. Vitell. c. 16. gestatoria sella.
chair, by the backegate of the Palace, into his wives house in the mount
Auentine, intending if he could have lien secret that day, to have fled by
night to Tarracina to his brother and the cohorts there. Anon changing his
mind, and as it falls out to men in a maze, fearing all things, and most
disliking the present, he returned into the Palace again now vast and
desolate, even his basest servants being either fled away, or else purposelie
shunning his presence. This great solitariness, and silence in those places
astonished him: whereupon he assaied to open that which was shut, and was
amazed finding all void. After much pitiful wandering about, being wearied he
cast himself into a In cellulam i^nitoris, says Suetonius. c. 16. religato
pro foribus cane, lecto que and culcitria obiectis.
base corner: whence Julius Placidus Tribune of a cohort pulled him out, and
led him along through the city with his hands bound behind him, and his
garments all torn, a most ignominious spectacle, many reuiling him, and no man
pitying his case: the dishonourablenesse of his end had taken away all
compassion. Being led in this manner, one of the German soldiers aimed a
blow, whether intending to strike at Vitellius upon some quarrel, or because
he would sooner rid him from shame, or else at the Tribune it is uncertain,
certain it is that in striking he cut off the Tribunes ear, and was
forthwith slain himself. Then forcing Vitellius with the points of their
swords sometimes to look up and abide all indignities, sometimes to see his
own images breaking their necks, and many times to behold the Rostra, and
the place where Galba was slain, they haled him along, and at the last thrust
him into the Gemoniae, where the body of Flauius Sabinus had lain. One word he
was heard utter not proceeding from an abject mind, in answer to the Tribune
who insulted over him: That he had yet sometime been his Prince: and so after
many wounds received he fell down dead: and the common people as much without
reason railed upon him when he was dead, as they flattered him being alive. He
was son to Lucius Vitellius: about seven this man with all his cowardely
sloth: notwithstanding there was in him plain meaning and liberality, which
without discrete handling turn often to a man's ruin: faithful friends he
deserved rather then found, because he sought them more by great gifts, then
virtuous behavior. It was a singular benefit to the common wealth, it cannot
be denied, that Vitellius was put down; but they which betrayed him to
Vespasian Especially some of them who were afterward traitors to Vespasian
also, as Caecina by name. Suetonius. Tito. c. 6. Xiphilinus. etc.
have small reason to reckon it among their good deeds to the state, being the
same men that had also revolted from Galba before. That day the Senate could
not be called, because it was already far spent, and the magistrates and
Senators upon fear had withdrawn themselves out of the city, or else lay
hidden in their clients houses. Domitian when all fear of hostility was past
presented himself to the Flauian captains, whom the soldiers straightwaies
saluted Caesar, and armed accompanied him to his fathers house.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
I. The behavior of the Flauian soldiers in the city, after the death of
Vitellius.
VITELLIVS thus being slain, the war was rather ended then peace begun.
For the conquerours with implacable hatred, pursued the contrary side
throughout the city in arms: the streets were strawed with dead carcases,
the temples and common places embrued with blood; every one lying slain, where
it was his chance to be overtaken, without distinction of place: and anon
licentiousness growing, they began to search houses, and fetch forth such as
were hid: if they saw any man look like a soldier, personable of stature, and
of years not disagreeing, were he soldier or citizen, they murdered him:
satiating themselves at the first, whilst their malice was fresh, with nothing
save blood. But anon the heat of their choler assuaging, they converted their
cruelty into covetousness: suffering no closet to escape vnrifled, no hidden
place any where to be secret, pretending the Vitellianists lay lurcking
therein: that was the color to break up men's houses, or, if resistance were
made, an occasion to slay them. Beside the soldiers, the rascals and beggarly
scumme of the people, now with the foremost, helped to sack and to spoil: and
some of the lewdest bondmen voluntarily discryed their wealthy masters; some
were detected by their own friends: every where lamentations and outcryes were
to be heard, and the miserable state to be seen, and face, as it were, of a
city taken by the enemy: insomuch that the insolent, and riotous soldier of
Otho and Vitellius, so much detected before, was now in comparison much wished
for again. The Commanders of the side were indeed sufficiently able to kindle
a civil war, but unable to moderate the victory. For to stir up dissensio^s
and troubles, the worst man most commonly bears greatest stroke; but peace
and quietness are not established, but by men of rare gifts, and excellent
virtues. Domitian Transferring himself belike, e paternis penatibus, whither
he was conducted by the soldiers, in Palatium.
had already possessed himself both of the title and lodging of Caesar: not
bending his studies as yet to matters of state, but in Tac. in vita Agricolae.
admodum iuuene Domitiano, and ex paterna fortuna tantum lice^tiam vsurpante
adulteries, and dissolute demeanure behauing himself as an Emperors son.
Arrius Varus was captain of the Guard: but the whole power, in effect, and
direction of affairs, rested in the hands of Antonius Primus; who at his
pleasure took money, and servants out of the Palace, with the like liberty, as
if it had been the spoils of Cremona. The rest, either for modesty, or because
they were not of name, as in war they passed vnrenowned, so at this time they
went unrewarded.

II. Lucius Vitellius yields himself, and his soldiers to the Flauianists.
THE city fearing new troubles, and ready to submit themselves to the present
possessour, required that Lucius Vitellius, as he with his cohorts returned
from Tarracina, might be surprised, and so all remnants of civil wars
utterly extinguished. Whereupon the horsemen were sent before to Aricia, the
Legions going not beyond Bouillae: but Vitellius incontinently, with out
further delay, yielded himself and his cohorts to the discretion of the
conqueror: his soldiers likewise threw away their unfortunate weapons upon
indignation, rather then fear. Then they were marshalled in length and led
through the city, as it were, in triumph, guarded with armed men. Not one of
the^ showed any sign of submissenes in countenance, but all sad and stern,
not moved with the showtings, and taunts of the multitude insulting over them:
only some few, through impatience breaking out, were beaten down by their
guard, the rest committed to prison. Not one of them let fall any unseemly
word, but even in the midst of adversity they retained their honor and fame.
Then Lucius Vitellius was put to death; a man in vices equal to his brother,
howbeit in his brothers reign the more vigilant man: and not so much partaker
with him in prosperity, as violently carried away with the current of his
adversity.

III. Lucilius Bassus sent to quiet Campania, the servant of Verginius Capito
hanged.
ABOUT the same time Lucilius Bassus, with certain light horsemen, was sent to
quiet the cu^try of Ca^pania, where the free cities were at discord rather each
against other upon private quarrels then any against the Prince upon rebellious
intent: but at the first sight of the soldiers they were straightwaies
appeased. And the lesser colonies escaped unpunished, only 2. Hist. p. 135.
Capua Vitellio fida etc.
Capua was appointed to lodge the third Legion that winter, and some noble
families by This affliction surely was very short. for it could not begin
before the very later end of Dece^ber, and in the beginning of January, tertia
legio, familiari^ Arrio Varo miles, in Syriam remissa. Tac. p. 173. 18. unless
he forgot himself in the one place or the other.
reason thereof were afflicted: whereas on the contrary side, the
Tarracinenses, who for Vespasians sake had endured so much, were no ways
relieved. So much are we proner to requite injuries then good turns: for
thankfulness is a burden, revenge sweet and reckened as gain. Notwithstanding
it was some comfort unto the^, that the servant of Verginius Capito, who
betrayed the town, as before we have showed, was hanged with the same rings
on his fingers, which he had received from Vitellius, as a reward of his
treason.

IIII. Matters concluded upon in the Senate, after the death of Vitellius.
Now at Rome, whatsoever honors, and preeminences were usually united to the
Emperors person, the Senate A fragment of this Senatus consultum is extant ad
verbum among the decayed antiquities of Rome.
bestowed upon Vespasian, joyfully, and conceyuing assured hope of future
traquillity. For seeing the contagion of civil dissension, beginning in In the
war of Galba and Vindex against Nero.
France and Spain, had passed to the German soldiers, then taken a course to
Illyricum, and lastly infected Egypt, Iudaea, and Syria, in sum all
provinces, and armies; they were to presume reasonably, the whole world being
thus purged, and cle^sed, that the humor was spent, and civil wars, and
calamities were at an end. Which hope and gladness of theirs was increased by
certain letters received from Vespasian, endited as if the war had yet been
on foot; for so they showed at the first sight: notwithstanding he spoke in all
points as their Prince; modestly indeed of his own person; and of the
weale-publicke magnifically: howbeit the Senate was not slack in declaring
their obedience. To himself with Titus his son was awarded the Co^sulship,
to Domitian the Pretorship and Consulare imperium. Dio. lib. 54. p. 358,
specifieth 2 points of it. (...).
Consulare authority. Moreover Mutianus had written letters to the Senate, which
thing ministered matter of speech: If he were a private man, why should he write
thus in public to the Senate? he might have spared his pen, and within few
days after have uttered the same there in person, as one of the house. like
wise his inueying against the Vitellianists was misliked, as coming too late,
and carrying no show of liberty now: but specially that seemed arrogantly spoken
against the common weal, and contumelious against the Prince, where he
vaunted, that the Empire was in his disposition, and by him was collated upon
Vespasian. Nevertheless covering their disdain in secret, they flattered
openly, and in most ample and honorable terms awarded him triumphall
ornaments; indeed in respect of his service in the civil war, but an
expedition against the Sarmatians Consul designatus was ordinarily the first
that did speak to the matter proposed by the Consul in Senate.
designed Consuls oration; to whom the rest assented, the greater part with
countenance and wagging of hands, some few either chief in place, or chiefly
exercised in the art of flattery, with set orations and speeches. But when the
course came to Heluidius Priscus, who was designed Praetor, he uttered his
opinion, in terms honorable enough to a good Prince, yet without all flattery
or glozing: a thing much commended and allowed of greatly by the Senate: and
this was the day which especially procured unto him, both great offense and
great glory. The matter seems to require, seeing we are 2. Hist. p. 103. for
otherwise in the Annals he is mentioned often beside.
once again fallen to mention him, who^ many times hereafter we shall have
cause to remember, that we should at this time briefly record what life he had
led, what studies he had followed, and what fortune he had proved. Heluidius
Priscus was borne in the first region of Italy, in the free city The Stoics,
out of whose school these opinions had their beginning. Laert: Zenone. lib. 7.
Cicero Paradoxis, and others.
masters, which define that only to be good which is honest; that only ill
which is dishonest: other qualities not inhere^t in the mind, as powerablenes,
nobility and such like, neither good nor evil. When he had only been Questor,
Paetus Thrasea made choice of him for his son in law. Of his father in laws
conditions he borrowed nothing so much as liberty: in quality of citizen,
Senator, husband, son in law, friend; in all parts and offices of life he was
always one, and the same man: a contemner of wealth, stiff in a good cause,
not remoueable for any fear: to some me^ he seemed too desirous of glory: and
indeed that passion, amongst all other, even of wise men is last laid away. At
the fall of his father in law he was Tacit. 16. Annal. p. 558.
driven into banishment, and returning under Galba he called Eprius Marcellus,
who had informed against Thrasea, to his answer. This attempt, of so great,
and so just a revenge, notwithstanding divided the Senate into parts: for if
Marcellus were overthrown, then whole troops of others, which were in the
same case, must needs go to wrack. At the first the contention was hot and
fierce, and maintained of both sides with notable orations: but when Priscus
perceived that Galba was doubtful in the point, at the entreaty of many
Senators, he desisted from following the suite; diverse men, according to
their several dispositions, diuersely interpreting his fact, some commending
his moderation, others misliking his inconstancy. But that same assembly when
the Senate confirmed the Empire to Vespasian, withal an embassage was agreed
upon, to be sent to the Prince. Hereupon arose taunting, and bitter words
between Heluidius and Marcellus. Heluidius opinion was, that the ambassadors
should be elected, and named by the magistrates being first sworn to choose of
the fittest: Marcellus required they might be chosen by lot, to which purpose
also the designed Consul had spoken before: but the principal cause, which
pricked Marcellus so forward that way, was the shame which might redounde to
himself, fearing, lest others being chosen, he should seem to be, as unworthy
rejected. And so, after some few brawling words interchangeably used, by
little and little they fell to continual, and bitter orations: Heluidius
demanding, what caused Marcellus so much to fear the judgment of the
magistrates, seeing he excelled many other, both in eloquence, and wealth,
things which might easily move them to that choice: unless peradventure the
remembrance of his own manifold misdeedes drove him to distrust them. that the
lot made no difference between the good and the bad, but suffrages and the
judgment of the Senate were devised to enter into every man's fame, and
behavior. that it greatly appertayned, both to the commodity of the common
wealth, and to Vespasians honor, that those of the Senate should be sent to
meet him, which were best accounted of for innocence, and integrity of life,
who might season (as it were) the Emperors ears, with good and virtuous
speeches. that Thrasea, Soranus, and Seutius had been of Vespasians old
friends, and acquaintance, whose accusers if they must not be punished, much
less sent and showed in places of credit: and that by this choice of the
Senate, the Prince should, as it were be admonished whom to like, and whom to
eschew. For no greater instruments, or helps of good regiment can there be,
then good friends. that Marcellus had done for his part sufficiently, having
induced Nero to the destruction of so many innocents: let him enjoy his rewards
and impunity, and leave Vespasian to better directors. Marcellus replied, that
not his opinion, but the opinion of the designed Consul was impugned, and the
ancient precedents, which committed the choice of ambassadors to lot, to take
away al occasion of suiting and debate: that there was no new cause, that he
knew, why so old a custom should now be abolished, or why this honor done to
the Prince should be turned into a dishonor to any considering that every man
was sufficiently able to carry that message, and do a low reverence to him in
the name of the Senate: nay rather they were to beware, lest through the
perverseness of some the Princes mind might be offended, being now at his entry
full of ielosies, and marcking not only words, but also al gestures and
countenances. that, for his part, he well knew the quality of the times wherein
he was borne, and what form of government our fathers, and grandfathers had
established: That is, the time of the free state.
beyond he honored and admired, but professed to follow the present estate that
he prayed and wished indeed for good Princes: but if it were otherwise, would
tolerate such as they were. As for the overthrow of Thrasea, why should he give
account of accusing, whenas the Senate gave none of conde^ning? not his
orations, but their voices wrought his undoing: but so was Neroes manner, with
such shows to color his cruel proceedings; whose favor and friendship
anguished his mind peradventure as much, as banishment did some other men's.
Finally, that well might Heluidius in constancy, and courage be equal to Cato
and Brutus: for his own part, he was one of that Senate, which were but
servants, as well as himself, and would likewise Senem triumphalem. for his
service in Britanny in Claudius time Vespasian had obtained triumphalia
ornamenta, says Suetonius Vespasiano, c. 4.
having attained to those years, and that honor, and having beside so goodly
an issue. For as wicked Princes love to rule, and reign without limitatio^: so
even the best would have their subjects use a mean in their liberty. These
things, argued thus to and fro with great heat, distracted the Senate into
diverse opinions; notwithstanding that part prevayled, which allowed of lot,
not only the worst, but the middle sort striving to retain their ancient
custom; yea and the greatest inclined that way, for fear of displeasure, and
envy, if they themselves should be chosen. After this there followed another
contention. The Pretors of the common treasure (for at that time the common
treasure was governed by Pretors) complaining of the emptiness of their
bags, presented request, that some restraint might be made, to abridge the
public expenses. This proposition, both for the greatness of the charge, and
difficulty of the remedy, the Consul designed thought good to reserve to the
Prince: but Heluidius would have it decided in Senate. And as the Consuls
proceeded in asking of voices, Vulcatius Tertullinus Tribune of the people Or,
interposed his negative.
interceded, forbidding that any thing of so great moment should be determined
of, the Prince being absent. Heluidius also, declaring his mind in the Senate,
was of opinion, that the Capitol should be builded again, at the charges, and
in the name of the co^monwelth, and Vespasian should help. Which speech of his
the modestest sort passed over the with silence, and afterward forgot; howbeit
some there were that remembered it well. The^ Musonius Rufus commenced an action
against Of audience for such matters, for it was neither the next day, nor
simply the next session of the Senate. read. p. 173.
next session was appointed for the hearing of the cause: but the whole company
seeing that matter revived, and men's minds bent to revenge, looked no less for
Heluidius and Marcellus, with others at that time, then for Musonius and Celer.

V. The entry of Mutianus into the City, and his actions there.
THINGS being in this state, the Senators iarring one with another, the
conquered part being full of malice, the conquerours wanting authority, no
laws regarded, no Prince present to govern the state, Mutianus made Josephus
(...) 4. c. 42. makes Mutianus entry on the very next day to Antonius, which
is contrary to the circumstances in Tacitus, yet entering before the beginning
of January he was not many days behind and Tacitus. p. 154. 2. pancos pose
dies.
his entrye into the city, and with a maine course drew the whole manage of
affairs into his own hands. Antonius Primus, and Varus were soon out of
credit, when it was perceived, that Mutianus loved them not, although in
countenance he pretended otherwise: but the citizens, having a quick eye to
see into secret dislikes, espying the truth, turned themselves quickly
about, and went to Mutianus: he alone was courted, and followed of all. Neither
was he, for his part, negligent in using al means to retain his souerainty,
being continually guarded with soldiers, and for his pleasure changing of
houses and gardens; in his provision, his gate, his train, and warders,
keeping the state of a Prince, although he forbear the title and name. And
first he commanded Calpurnius Galerianus to be slain, which stroke an
exceeding great terror into men's hearts. He was son to Caius Piso, and had
not entered into any attempt, but being of a noble house, and a comely youngman,
he was greatly talked of by the common people: and as in a city unsettled,
and among a people gladly embracing new tales, some there were, which vainly
named him to the Princes place. Wherefore, at the commandment of Mutianus, he
was committed to a guard of soldiers: and lest his death in the face of the
city should have been more offensive, forty miles off, in the Appian way he
was put to death, by letting the blood out of his veins. Julius Priscus, who
had been captain of the guard under Vitellius, killed himself, rather for
shame, then upon necessity. His fellow Alphenus Varus ouerliued his honor, and
saw himself counted a cowarde, and a person infamed. Asiaticus, for his lewd
credit under his master, made satisfaction now as a freed-man with a servile
death.

VI. The rebellion of the Batauians and Caninefates through the instigation of
Julius Ciuilis.
AT the same time the news of the overthrow in Germany was rife in the city,
and the city nothing troubled thereat (Every man talked how the armies were
slain, the standing camps of the Legions taken by the enemy, how France had
revolted,) as if it had been news of a strange country, not a calamity that
touched themselves. That This war is shortly set down by Josephus (...). 7.
c 11. and touched by Frontinus Strateg. l. 4. c. 3. and Sarisburiensis in
Polycratico.
war, upon what causes it arose, and with how great banding it was
maintained, both of our allies, and of foreign nations, I will now declare
from the beginning. The Batauians, whilst they dwelt beyond the Rhene, were a
part and member of the Catti; and being thrown out by civil sedition, they
seated themselves in the uttermost limits of France, which then lay void of
inhabitants, and took in withal the island that is situate in the flattes,
and has the Ocean before, behind and on either side the river of Rhene. And
albeit they were confederate with the Romans much mightier then themselves, ye
were they not, as it happens in such ouermatches, spoiled of their riches and
wealth, but only bound to minister men and armor to the behoof of the Empire,
and so for a long time they were employed in the German wars. Afterward they
became more famous, by reason of certain cohortes of them sent over into
Britannie by the Romans, under the leading of certain noblemen of their own
nation, according to their ancient order: and beside, there remained behind in
the country a company of chosen horsemen practiced especially in swimming, so
that they would in whole troops pass over the Rhene in harnish and governing
their horse in their hands. The principal men among them, and far excelling
all other, by reason of their royal parentage, were Julius Paulus, and Tacitus
himself, 1. Hist. p. 43, Plutarch (...), Frontinus and Sarisburiensis call him
Julius Ciuilis, but howsoever their names were, it seems by Tacitus. page 169.
5. that Paulus and Ciuilis were brethren.
Claudius Ciuilis, whereof Paulus was lately put to death by Fonteius Capito
under color of a falsely surmised rebellion: Ciuilis was sent in chains unto
Nero, and acquitted by Galba, and again under Vitellius 1. Hist. p. 43. 25.
escaped narrowly, the army instantly demanding his death. Upon these causes
his anger was founded, and upon our troubles his hope. But being of a crafty
and subtle wit, above the ordinary of those barbarous people, and carrying
himself rather like a Sertorius, or an Hannibal (as indeed in the maime of his
face he was not unlike) fearing lest if he should make open defection, our
armies would advance themselves against him as an enemy, he covered his
dealing with love to Vespasian, and favor toward the side. And in truth By
this circumstance we may gather, that the German rebellion began about the
beginning of winter. for Tacitus in noting both places and times, is in my
sense, too negligent.
Antonius Primus had sent certain letters unto him, wherein he willed him to
divert away the Aides Tac. 2 Hist. p. 105. 22.
sent for by Vitellius, and under show of trouble in Germany to stay the
Legions there. The same advise also Hordeonius Flaccus had given him by word
of mouth, partly upon good will to Vespasian, and partly upon a care of the
state, which seemed to be in evident peril of utter destruction, if a new
war should begin, and so many thousands of armed men pass into Italy.
Thus Ciuilis being resolved to break, and yet concealing his purpose, as
meaning to govern himself in the action by the event, began after this
manner to work innovation. At the commandment of Vitellius, the able men of
the Batauians were summoned to be pressed to the war: which being of it self
a burdensome thing, was made much more insupportable, by the avarice and lewd
disposition of the officers, who billed chiefly such as were old or impote^t
persons, and the^ for money released the^: again such as were under age, and
fair (as many of their youths are of a comely tal stature) the^ they carried
away to abuse their bodies. At these dealings the country being highly
offended, certain factious heads were suborned, to persuade them to refuse to
be pressed. Whereupon Ciuilis assembling into a sacred wood under pretense of a
banquet the nobility of the nation, and the chief of the co^munalty, when he
saw them, at far in the night, merry, and warmed with wine, he begins a
solemn oration: recounting first the praises, and glorious acts of the nation,
and then discourses unto them of the injuries, insole^cies, and other miseries
whereu^to they are subject, that are subject unto a strange nation: for that
now they were not with the Romans in state of friends and allies, as in former
times, but flat servants and slaves; and that not under a Lieutenant general,
which were more tolerable, albeit they come with a chargeable train, and a
proud and disdainful kind of commanding: but they were delivered into the
hands of petty captains, and Centurions, whom when they had filled with
spoils and blood, then were they removed, and straight ways fresh hungry
masters set over them, and new devises of polling invented. that now the day of
the muster approached, when children should be drawn from their parents,
brethren from brethren, never to see one another again: and that, which might
the rather encourage them, the Romans were never in so poor a case, having
nothing in their standing camps, but a rich spoil, and old men to guard it:
wherefore they should only lift up their eyes, and not be afraid them in like
cases, in a firm association together. Straightwaies messengers were
dispatched to the Cani^ fates, to induce them also into the league. The
Caninefates inhabit a part of the island, of the same language and race, in
valor equal to the Batauians, but inferior in number. Then Ciuilis sent
secret messages to solicit the Whereof mention is made 1. Hist p. 43. 27. 45.
27. 2. Hist. p. 72. 7.
Batauian cohortes, which had served as Aids in Britannie, sent into Germany,
as before 2. Hist. p. 91. 1.
we have showed, and at that time remaining at Magontiacum. Among the
Caninefates there was one Brinio, a wild and foolehardy brain, howbeit of a
high and noble stock, whose father, having sundry times invaded our borders,
and done many acts of hostility, boldly contemned those mocke-expeditions of
Caius the Emperor: wherefore being descended of so rebellious a kindred, in
that respect they liked him best of all others. And thereupon setting him,
after their country manner, on a target, and bearing him round about on their
shoulders, they elected him General: and he forthwith associating unto him the
Tac. de moribt Germ. p. 576.
Frisians, a nation beyond the Rhene, invaded the standing camp of For within
the island no Legion was encamped, but only some cohorts.
two cohorts adjoining to the Ocean. The Roman soldiers, neither foresawe this
sudden invasion of the enemy, neither, if they had, were of sufficient force
to repel it: so the camp was taken and spoiled, and the vittailers and
merchants, wandering securely abroad as in peace, cut of. Then they drew forth,
to make their approches to the castles, and holds, which by the captains of
the cohortes were set on fire, because they were not defensible: the enseighes,
and bands, and such soldiers as were left, gathered themselves, under the
leading of Aquilius a chieffe Centurion, Nearer to Vetera, where two Legions
lay, quinta, and quintadecima.
into the higher part of the island, composing an army, rather in name then
in power: for Vitellius at his departing drew away the chieffe strength of
the cohortes, and for supplye took out of the nearest villages, of the
Neruians and Germans, a raw company, whom he loaded with armor. Ciuilis,
supposing it surest to work by fraud and deceyte, blamed the captains, for
that they had forsaken their castles: assuring that he alone, with the cohorte
under his charge, would easily repress the tumult of the Caninefates: and
therefore willed them to return every man to his own place. It was perceived,
that his counsel proceeded not of good meaning, but tended only to this end,
that the cohorts being severed might be overthrown with greater facility: and
by many apparent arguments, and speeches of the Germans themselves, a nation
joyful of war, and not concealing long their own joy, it was discovered
daily more and more, that Ciuilis, not Brinio, was the head and contriuer of
this Conspiracy. Wherefore, seeing his secret plots took none effect, he fell
to plain force, and cast his power consisting of Caninefates, Frisians, and
Batauians into three pointed battles, each nation by themselves. The Romans
opposed their forces against him, not far from the river of Rhene, directing
also their ships, which after the burning of the castles, they brought to that
place, against the enemy. After a little skirmishing, a cohort of the Tungrians
fled to Ciuilis: whereupon our soldiers, discomforted with the sudden treason,
were on al sides beaten down, both by their false fellows, and enemies: the
like perfidiousnesse was also on the water. A great part of the rowers (being
Batauians borne) faining vnskil in handling their oar, hindered both the
mariners, and soldiers in doing their duty: anon without dissimulation they
wrought directly against them, and forced the ships to the enemy side, killing
the Masters and Centurions, that would not condescend to their treason. And so
the whole fleet, of four and twenty barks, either fled to the enemy, or was
taken by force. This victory both presently wanne great reputation, and
afterward stood in great stead: for they got both armor and ships, which
before they wanted; and throughout France, and Germany, they were highly
renowned as the authors of liberty. The Germans by and by sent Ambassadors
offering them aid: and Ciuilis, by policy and gifts, endeavored to win the
hearts of the French, sending the captains, whom he had taken, gently home,
and giving the cohortes free choice, either to abide with him, or at their
pleasure to return to their country: if they would tarry, he offered them
honorable reward for their service; if otherwise, at their departure he
bestowed upon them the spoils of the Romans, withal admonishing them in
secret of their calamities sustained so many years, and of their miserable
thraldom falsely entitled a peace; showing them how the Batauians, though not
charged with tributes, as they, had notwithstanding taken arms against them,
which tirannized over them both. that the Romans, at the first encounter, were
put to the flight by them, and discomfited: what were then to be hoped, if all
France should join to shake of the yoke? Italy was disarmed, and could of it
self, neither conquer nor keep; but with the provinces blood were the
provinces won. that they should not be discouraged with the remembrance of
Vindex misfortune: for the Batauian horse were the men, which defeated him and
his army; and among the Aids of Verginius there were beside some French out
of Belgica, and in true account France was ruined by her own forces. But now
if it pleased them to join with him in this action, they both should make but
one party: beside that they had seen and learned the best of the Romans
militare discipline: moreover those old experienced Batauian cohorts, before
whom Othoes Legions could not stand, no doubt would go with him. let Syria,
and Asia, and the East, used to serve kings, be slaves if they list; in France
many men were yet alive borne before tributes And Tributes began above six
score years before. so that many in France be like were long lived.
began: neither could it be denied, that Germany of late, by the overthrow
and death of Quintilius Varus, had given a check to the Romish usurpers,
banished servitude, and provoked to the field, not a Vitellius, but a Caesar
Augustus. that liberty was granted by nature to dumb beasts also, but virtue
and valor were peculiare ornaments of mankind, and to the valiant alone the
gods gave their assistance. Wherefore, since they were at good leisure, and
fresh, he willed them to set courageously upon their busily occupied and tired
enemies: whiles some leaned to Vespasian, some claue to Vitellius, undoubtedly
harm might be wrought against both. Thus Ciuilis, laying the plot for France
and Germany, aspired, if his purpose took effect, to the monarchy of those
most mighty, and most welthy cuntreyes.

VII. Hordeonius Flaccus, Lieutenant general of both Germanies, lying at
Magontiacum, commands Mummius Lupercus, who with two Legions, the fifth
and the fifteenth, lodged at Vetera, to go forth against Ciuilis and the
Batauians: but the Romans lost the battle, and fled back into Vetera their
standing camp.
BUT Hordeonius Flaccus, who at the first by conniuence nourished Ciuilis
attempts, now receiving fearful aduertisements, that the Castra sc. cohortium.
camps were surprised, the cohorts defeated and slain, not one Roman left in
the whole Batauian island, commanded

VIII. The eight Batauian cohorts, which had served the Romans so long in
Britannie, against Otho, and elsewhere, solicited by Ciuilis forsake
Magontiacum, make their way at Bonna by the sword, and so join to Ciuilis.
IN the mean season the messenger sent by Ciuilis to Magontiacum, to solicit
thither, and found them in readiness, by Vitellius commandment, to march
toward Rome. Upon that message received, forthwith they waxed proud, and
intolerable, crying out (or else refusing to march) for their donatiue, for
double wages, for an augmentation of the number of their horsemen, things
indeed promised by Vitellius, but demanded by them, not in hope to obtain,
but to pick an occasion of mutinee: and Flaccus, yielding to diverse of their
demandes, gained naught else, but that they more instantly craved those things,
which they knew he could not but deny. So setting Flaccus at naught they
took up their ensigns, and marched toward low Germany, to join themselves
with Ciuilis. Hordeonius calling the Tribunes and Centurions also to council,
debated the matter, whether he should by maine strength seek to enforce them,
which so contemptuously brake away: anon, partly of his own cowardly nature,
partly through the timorousness of the officers, who trusted neither the faith
of their Aides, nor the force of their At Magontiacum then with Hordeonius were
abiding two Legions; quartae, and duodevicesima alias ducetvicesim^.
Legions, being gathered in have of men unskillful in service, he resolved to
keep his soldiers within the trenches, and let the Batauians pass.
Afterward, repenting himself of that resolution, they also blaming it, which
were chief autours thereof, as if he meant to pursue them, he wrote to
Herennius Gallus governor of Bonna, and Lieutenant of the first Legion, which
wintered there, that he should stop the Batauians from passage, promising
that he, with his whole power, would not fail to be on their backs. And so
verily they might have been defeated and slain, if Hordeonius of the one
side, and Gallus of the other, had brought forward their power, and enclosed
them in behind and before: but Flaccus changed his purpose again, and in
other letters of later date willed Gallus, not to stay their passage.
Whereupon suspicion arose, that the Lieutenaunts of set purpose stirred up and
fostered these wars; yea all the mischieffes, which either had chanced
already, or were feared hereafter, were imputed, not to the cowardlinesse of
the soldier, or strength of the enemy, but only to the fraud and falsehoode
of the Leaders. When the Batauians drew near to the camp at Bonna, they sent
before certain messengers, to declare to Herennius Gallus the intention of the
cohorts: that their meaning was not to make war with the Romans, in whose
behalf they had so often borne arms; but forasmuch as they were wearied with
along and fruitless service, their desire was, quietly to live at home in
their country. And therefore, if no man made opposition, their passage should
be harmless: but if any hostility were offered, they would make their way with
the sword. Whilst the Lieutenant stood divided in mind what to do, his
soldiers urged him to put it to the fortune of a field. There were in his camp
three thousand Whereas the full and just number of a Legion should be 6000. or
5000. at the least.
Legionary soldiers, and certain tumultuary cohorts of Belgians, and withal a
number of pezants, and followers of the camp, brave men before the danger
approach, in the danger but cowards. Out they issue at all the gates of the
camp to enclose the Batauians, whom they knew to be far inferior in number.
The Batauians, mindful of their old order in service, set themselves in array
in pointed battles, standing on every side close together, and having their
front, their flanckes, and their back surely guarded, and so with great
facility brake through our thin companies. The Belgians first gave ground, and
then our Legionaries were beaten back, and ran for fear toward the
trenches, and gates of the camp. There the most slaughter was committed: the
fosses were filled up with dead bodies, and many dyed in the throng, by
tumbling one over another, and running upon their own weapons, as well as slain
by the enemy. After this victory the Batauians went forward, leaving Coleyn of
the right hand, and attempted no act of hostility in the rest of their journey,
but excusing the battle at Bonna as a thing done by constraint, and for their
own safety, whenas they entreated for peace and it would not be granted.

IX. Ciuilis colourably swears his men to Vespasian: then with his Batauians,
and the assistance of certain German nations, he besieges Vetera; gives an
assault, and is repulsed.
CIVILIS, upon the coming of these old cohorts, had now under his conduict a
full and complete army: nevertheless wavering in mind, and standing
irresolute, consideting the puissance of the Roman Empire, he caused all his
men to swear to Vespasian, and sent forth with ambassadors to the two
Legions, which being defeated by him in the former battle were fled to
Vetera, requiring them also to take the like oath. Their answer was, they
would not be advised neither by traitor, nor enemy; that Vitellius was their
Prince, to whom alone they owed their faith, and would stand for him in arms
to their last breath: wherefore let not a fugitive, and faithless Batauian
carry himself as vmpier of the Roman affairs, but rather look for condign
punishment for his desert. Ciuilis being greatly incensed with this answer,
brings the whole nation of the Batauians into the field. The Bructeri and
Teucteri associate themselves, and messengers were sent into Germany, who
raised the whole country, some to win honor, and some to gain spoil.
Against these great threatenings and bandings of so many enemies, Mummius
Lupercus, and (...): for Lupercus alone duarum legionu^ hibernis praeerat. p.
161. l. 20. and that Numisius was not in Vetera, but rather was Lieutenant of
the sixteenth Legion, whose standing ca^pe was at Nouelium, it may be gathered.
p. 185. 10. and 192. 9.
Numisius Rufus, Lieutenants of the Legions, fortifyed their trenches and For
the hiberna, or standing camps of the Legions, were in these later times
walled as towns.
walls, and razed the buildings, which in so long a peace were erected, not
far from the camp, in manner of a town, lest they should be a harbor for
the enemy. But through oversight they omitted to convey the vittaile, and
other provision therein into the camp, suffering it to be taken at discretion:
and so in few days that was riotously consumed, which by good order would
have relieved their needs a long time. Ciuilis led the middle battle
himself, wherein was the flower and strength of Batauia: and on both sides of
the Rhene, to the end the sight of his army might strike in the greater
terror, he caused the regiments of the Germans to march, the horsemen
galloping about the fields: and withal the ships were brought up the
stream. So on the one hand the ensigns of the old To wit, the Batavians.
cohorts, on the other the pictures and images of wild beasts taken out of
their woods and consecrated groves, according as every nation uses to bear in
the field, amazed our men, and terrifyed them doubly, with the show both of an
external, and civil war. Moreover the great compass of the trench made the
attempt of the besiegers more feasible and increased their hope. For whereas it
was made to contain two Legions, at that present it had scarce five thousand
armed men to defend it, beside the followers of the camp, which upon the
breaking up of the peace gathered thither, and there remained doing them some
service in the war. A part of the camp was situate upon the pendant of an
easy hill, and part stood upon the plain ground. That standing camp
Augustus settled there, supposing it sufficient to watch over, and as it were,
to besiege the cuntreyes of Germany, never imagining that the world could go
so far otherwise, as that they should presume to begin and assail our
Legions: whereupon the less cost was bestowed, either to help the site of the
place, or the strength of the bulwarks: men and armor alone were thought a
sufficient defense. Now to the end, that being severed in place, the prowess
of each nation might more distinctly appear, and be seen, the Batauians, and
the Germans which dwelt beyond the Rhene, took standing each by themselves,
and began to dart at our men a far of. But whenas they saw most of their
weapons sticking in vain in the turrets, and pinnacles of the walls, and many
of themselves wounded with stones thrown from above on their heads, leaving
that kind of oppugnation, they suddenly with great force, and outcry assayed
to scale the trenches, the most part by setting up ladders, others climing over
the heads of their fellows upon a target fence. And as some were now clamering
up, they were beaten down headlong with swords and push of pike, and so with
clubbes, and darts overwhelmed, being men otherwise hot in the beginning, and
too too courageous when fortune favors, but then for desire of pray they
tolerated all hardness also: yea and that which with them is unusual, they
endeavored to prove with engines, whereof they had of themselves neither
experience nor skill, only some fugitives and captives taught them to frame
timber in med^m ^on als.
in Balistae.
engines, battered down their rude and ill framed work. And whenas provision
was made of Crates and vintae.
hurdles and planckes to cover them in giving the assault, our men shot burning
spears, and fired the works; assayling with fire even their assaylers; who
despayring at length to effectuate any thing by force, deliberated to lay a
lingering siege thereunto, knowing that they had but few days vittaile within,
and many unprofitable mouths to consume it, and hoping withal, that of want
of food treason would ensue; that the faith of bondmen always fickle would
now be fleeting, beside the casualties, which usually happen in war.

X. Hordeonius dispatching Vocula before remooueth from Magontiacum with his
power to Bonna: and thence to Coleyn. where he resigneth the execution of his
charge to Vocula: following notwithstanding the army from thence to Nouesium,
where, as it seems, he stayed till his death. At Nouesium Gallus is joined in
commission with Vocula: and so they removed forward to Gelduba* where being
encamped, Vocula wastes the Gugerni, and Gallus is beaten by the Germans.
IN with Flaccus then the other: laying the fault of their late overthrow
wholly upon him: auerring that they at his commandment marched forth against
the Batauians, assuring themselves, upon his promise, that his Legions from
Magontiacum should assail them behind; and so no supply coming from thence,
they lost their lives through his treason: that these matters had never been
notified to the rest of the armies, nor to the Prince, or else by the help and
assistance of so many cuntreies this sudden rebellion might have been
quenched in the beginning. Whereupon Hordeonius caused the coppies of all the
letters, which he had sent into France, Britannie and Spain, requesting their
help, to be red to the army, and began a very ill example, that all letters
sent from abroad should be delivered to the standerd-bearers of the Legions,
who red them to the soldiers, before they came to the Generals hand. Then he
commanded one of the most factious to be apprehended and bound, rather to put
his right in ure, then because the fault was but of one man alone: and so he
Taking along with him the first Legion, or a great part thereof, as it does
appear. p. 172. etc.
removed with his army from Bonna to Coleyn, where many Aids resorted unto him
of the French nation, which at the first with all their power assisted the
Romans, till afterward seeing the Germans prevail, many of them took arms
against us in hope of freedom, and that point attained, for desire of
souerainty. But the wrath of the Legions still increased, neither could one
soldiers imprisonment terrify them: nay even the party imprisonned impeached
the General of treason; alleging that he had been messenger between
Ciuilis and him, and therefore a color was sought to make him away, lest he
should declare, and testify the truth. Then Vocula, with marvelous stoutnesse
ascending into the Tribunal, commanded the soldier, as he exclamed and cried,
to be apprehended, and carried away to execution: which thing so terrified the
bad and seditious, that the sounder sort without impeachment fulfilled his
commandment, and anon by common consent they demanded Vocula to be their
General: which place Flaccus willingly resigned unto him. But their minds were
already mutinously affected, and many new occasions of more rage were
presented; as want of pay, and provision of corn; And yet not ten lines before
he writes, affluentibus auxilijs Gallorum, quae primo rem Romanam enixe
iuvabant.
France refusing to yield soldiers and tributes; the Rhene also by reason of
drought unusual in that country hardly able to bear any vessel; scarcity of
vittailes; garrisons of men placed along the bancke to keep the Germans from
passing the river; and so less corn, and more men to consume it. Among the
ignorant and simpler sort the lowness of the water was held for a prodigious
matter, as if the rivers also, and the ancient defenses of the Empire had now
forsaken us, and that which in peaceable times would have been counted chance,
or proceeding of natural causes, at that time was called a fatal matter, and
gods indignation and wrath. At Nouesium they assumed the sixteenth Legion; and
Herennius Gallus Lieutenant of the first Legion was joined with Vocula in part
of the charge: yet durst they not go to find the enemy, but encamped
themselves at a place called Gelduba. There they trained, and practiced their
soldiers in ordering of battles, in fortifyng, entrenching, and other militare
exercises. And to the end that they might by booties and spoils take courage
and heart, Vocula led forth part of his army into the country of the Gugerni
adjoining, who had allied themselves with Ciuilis: part remained behind with
Herennius Gallus. And as by chance, not far from the camp, a barge laden
with corn, was run upon a shelfe, the Germans espying it labored to draw it
to their side of the water; which Gallus would not endure, but sent a cohort to
the reskew: the Germans also increased their number, and so by little and
little, supply resorting on both sides, a battle was fought: wherein the
Germans, after the slaughter of many of our men, by force haled the boat away.
Our soldiers, being thus put to the worse, according to their custom there,
blamed not their own cowardlinesse, but the treason of the Lieutenant, whom
they drew out of his tent, tare his clothes, and bet his body, commanding him
to tell upon what price, and with what accomplices he had thus betrayed the army.
But Who, as it seems, stayed behind at Nouesium.
Hordeonius was charged with the whole envy of the fact; him they termed the
contriuer of the mischief, Gallus only the instrument; till at length Gallus,
being terrified with their threatening of his destruction, to save his own
life, was content to charge Hordeonius also with treason. Then was he put in
bands, and afterward, at the return of Vocula loosed, who the next day
following put to death the autors of the stir. So strange diversity there was
in that army, both licentiously to commit all enormities, and patiently to
abide all correction. The common soldier was firm to Vitellius; the
principal men more inclined to Vespasian. Hence came

XII. Montanus a captain of Vitellius side, and borne at Triers, brings
word to Nouesium of the event of the battle at Cremona: whereupon they there
and the rest at Gelduba swear to Vespasian: and sent Montanus to declare the
same to Ciuilis, willing him to desist from hostility: but contrarily Ciuilis
wrought Montanus to his purpose, and laid the plot of the rebellion of
France, which shortly after ensued.
THIS was the effect of that which passed in Germany before the Which was
fought about the later end of October, as it is declared elsewhere.
battle of Cremona: the event whereof Antonius Primus signified by letters
directed unto them, sending withal Who as Consul published belike some edict
in favor of the Flauian side.
Caecinaes edict: and Sent by the Flauianists. 3. Hist. p. 125.
Alpinus Montanus captain of one of the vanquished cohortes, by word of
mouth, confessed the overthrow of the side. Hereupon ensued diversity of
affections. The Auxiliary soldiers of France, which served without al
partiality, and neither hated nor loved the one faction nor the other, at the
persuasions of their captains, were content forthwith to forsake Vitellius:
but the old soldier stuck at it, till upon Hordeonius tendering, and the
Tribunes urging they took the oath; albeit neither in countenance, nor mind
seeming to be fully resolved, but pronouncing roundly the rest of their oath,
and at the name of Vespasian either stopping, or tripping it lightly over, or
skipping it quite. Then were the letters of Antonius to Ciuilis red in the open
assembly, which raised many suspicions in the soldiers heads, because they
seemed to be written as to one of the same faction, and spoke hardly of the
German army. Anon word was carried to the camp at Gelduba, where the like was
both spoken and done; and thereupon Montanus sent with charge to Ciuilis, to
warn him to desist from making of war; and that he should not cloak any
longer open rebellion with the color of following sides. if he sought to
help Vespasian, his desire now was accomplished, and his purpose performed.
To these allegations Ciuilis replied, first in subtle and crafty terms;
afterward perceiving Montanus to be of a hoate and fierce disposition, and
ready to accept any new impression, he begins with a complaint of the
manifold perilles, which for twenty five years space he had endured in the
Roman service: A worthy, and just reward (quoth he) have I had of my
travails, the death of my brother, mine own imprisonment, and the bloody
words of this army, of whom being demanded to the slaughter, by the law of
nations I do, and may justly seek my revenge. But as for you For Alpim^ was
borne in Trier^. 3. Hist. p. 125.
Treueri, and the rest of servile souls, what reward expect you of your blood
so often shed for their sakes, but fruitless service, continual Tributes,
whippes, gibbets, and slavery under proud insolent masters? Behold I a
captain of one cohorte, and the Caninefates and Batauians, a small portion of
Tacitus, in some other places, seems to comptize them under the name of
Germans.
France, have Those in Holland.
destroyed and overthrown those vast and vain camps of theirs, and do Meant
of Vetera.
besiege them with famine and sword. to conclude, if we venture, we shall
either recover our liberty, or if we leese, be in the same state we were in
before. Ciuilis having thus incensed Montanus, dismissed him away, howbeit
willed him to make a more favorable report, who accordingly at his return
only signified, that he had not sped in his embassage, dissembling the rest
which straight after brake out.

XIII. Vocula overthrows two captains of Ciuilis, sent against him as he lay
at Gelduba.
CIVILIS retayning part of his host, sent the old cohortes, and the forwardest
of the Germans, against Vocula and his army, under the leading of Julius
Maximus, and Claudius Victor his sisters son. In the way they took up and
spoiled the standing camp of a wing sited at Asciburg, and so suddenly
assaulted the enemies camp at Gelduba, that Vocula had no leisure to speak to
the soldiers, or to display the ranckes: thus much only, as in a tumult, he
warned to strengthen the middle battle with Legionarie soldiers, and the
Auxiliaries to cast themselves about on every side. Then our horsemen brake
forth, and seeing the enemy in good order and array to receive them, they
turned their backs, and fled toward their footmen: whereupon a slaughter
ensued and no fighting. The cohorts also of the Neruij through fear or
falsehood fled, and bared the sides of our men; and so way was made to our
Legionary soldiers, who began now to be overthrown within the trenches, and
to lose their enseignes, whenas suddenly with a new supply the fortune of the
battle was changed. For certain cohorts of Vascones leuyed by Galba, and
then From whence? Nouesium, Bonna, Magontiacum? or from what coast of the world?
sent for, coming near the camp, and hearing the noise as they fought,
assailed the enemies backs being intentive another way, and caused a greater
terror then so small a number could otherwise have done, had not the enemy
believed, some of them, that the rest from Nouesium, and some, that the whole
power from Magontiacum was come. That error also increased the Romans courage:
and whilst they presumed upon other men's strength they recovered their own.
The most valiant of the Batauian footmen were slain, the horsemen escaped with
the enseignes and captives that were taken in the first conflict: on our side
that day were slain mo in number, but men of small service; the Germans lost
the very flower, and strength of their army. Both the Generals by like default
deserved the overthrow in reason alike: and winning were negligent both alike
to follow their fortune. For if Ciuilis had furnished his side with greater
forces, they could never have been by so few cohorts enclosed about: and the
camp of the Romans being, as it was, by force broken up, had doubtless been
utterly razed. Vocula likewise lacking scowts abroad to signify the enemies
approach was suddenly surprised; and so in one moment went out to fight, and
was overcome: afterward winning more by luck then desert, and not trusting his
own victory nor using the benefit thereof, he vainly trifled out many days
before he would march toward the enemy; whom if he had presently followed, and
pursued the course of his victory effectually, he might at that blow have
raised the siege of the Legio^s at Vetera.

XIIII. Vocula puts Ciuilis to flight, and enters Vetera.
CIVILIS in the mean time had assayed to induce the Legio^s to surrendre, as
though the Romans had been quite overthrown, and his men obtained an entier
victory. for prooffe whereof he commanded the Roman enseignes, and banners to
be carried about, and the prisoners produced in sight, whereof one ventured
worthily, and declared alowde how the whole matter had passed, and was killed
in the place by the Germans, which thing caused them within to believe his
relation the better, and withal by the wasting and burning of the villages
they might discern, that their own victorious army was coming. When Vocula
came near unto Vetera he commanded the enseigns to be pitched in the sight of
the camp, and a ditch and trenche to be cast round about: that laying aside
their baggage and needelesse furniture in place of safety, they might fight
more lightly and less encombred. Whereupon the soldiers began to exclame,
crying to go to the battle, and now they were grown to that custom to
threaten their Leader. So without taking so much time as only to set the
battle in array, disordred, and tired, they began the fight; for Ciuilis was
ready to present them the battle, reposing no less affyance in the follies
and faults of his enemies, then in the virtue and valor of his own people. Of
the Roman side the matter went doubtful and hard, and the most mutinous
proved the most dastards: some there were which mindful of the victory
lately obtained kept their standing, galled the enemy, and animated themselves
and their fellows. The battle being thus brought back again, which
erewhile in a manner was lost, they held up their hands to them in the camp,
that they should not neglect to use the opportunity, who beholding all things
from the walls, issued forth at all the gates, and by chance Ciuilis being by
the fall of his horse overthrown, of both sides was thought to be wounded or
slain; which greatly dismayed his men and caused them to break, and
contrarily put courage in ours. But Vocula pursued not the chase, but entering
Vetera only augmented the rampires, and towers of the camp, as against a new
siege, being had in a ielosie, by this kind of cold dealing, to desire the
continuance of the war: and not without cause, having so often marred the
victory for want of good following.

XV. Vocula vittaileth Vetera, and returns to Gelduba, and thence to
Nouesium: where Hordenius in a mutinee is slain. Vocula with his power goes
to relieve Magontiacum besieged by the Germans. The faithfulness of the
Treueri to the Romans at the beginning of these troubles.
NOTHING distressed our soldiers so much, as lack of provision and food.
Whereupon the cariages of the Legions, with a weak, and unserviceable company,
were sent to Nouesium, that from thence by land they might furnish the army
with vittailes; for the enemies were masters of the river. The first conuoy
passed peaceably without molestation, Ciuilis being not yet recovered of his
hurt: but an one understanding another company was sent to Nouesium, and
certain cohorts assigned to conduct them, marching as in time of great quiet
carelessly, not keeping themselves to their ensigns, but casting their armor
and weapons into the wagons, and rouing about licentiously, he sent before to
take up the bridges and straites, and then in good order charged upon them. The
pugnatum long^ agmine.
battle was fought with troops displayed out thinnely in length, and
continued doubtful, until the night took up the quarrel. The cohorts
proceeded forward to Gelduba, the camp standing there as it was, guarded by the
soldiers which Vocula had left. There was no question what peril there would
be in the return, the forragers being but few, and heavily laden: whereupon
Vocula determining to go out and relieve them, increased his army with a
thousand men chosen out of the two Legions, which were besieged at Vetera, the
first and fifteenth, a stubborn and hedstrong soldier, and hating his
captains. More went then were commanded, at their going openly murmuring, that
they would no longer endure famine, nor be obnoxious to the secret practices
of the Lieutenants: but those which remained behind complained, that they, by
carrying away so many men, were forsaken, and left as a pray to the enemy.
Whereupon a double mutinee grew, the one part recalling Vocula seditiously, and
the other in like sort refusing to return again to the camp. In the mean
season Ciuilis besieged Vetera. Vocula marches to Gelduba, and leaving Gelduba
(which Ciuilis straight way took up) from thence to Nouesium, not far from
whence, shortly after, his horsemen skirmished with the enemy prosperously. But
prosperity and adversity inflamed alike the soldiers to seek their captains
destruction: and the Legions being augmented, by that increase out of the fifth
and fifteenth Legion, more insolently required their donatiue, understanding
that money was sent from Vitellius. Whereupon Hordeonius, without further
delay, divided the money amongst them in Vespasians name, which was the
principal thing that ministered matter, and fed the mutinee which followed. For
the soldiers, having idle spending money, gave themselves to riot and
banqueting, and assemblies by night, and by that means renewed their former
wrath and displeasure against Hordeonius, whom they haled out of his chamber
and slew, none of the Lieutenants or Tribunes daring to gainsay, or withstand
them being hardened, by reason of the night season, against all modesty and
shame. The like was intended against Vocula, if he had not in a bondmans
attire escaped unknown in the dark. As Soon as the heat of their fury was
past, they fell to consider the danger wherein they did stand, and sent by and
by Centurions with letters to the cities of France, desiring supply of money
and men, themselves when Ciuilis approached, as the common sort without head is
headlong, fearful, and sluggish, rashly took up their weapons, and soon
laying the^ down ran away. Adversity bred discord, those of the upper army
disioyning their cause from the others. Notwithstanding the images of Vitellius
were set up again in the camp, and in the cities of Belgium adjoining,
whenas Vitellius himself was now down. Then the soldiers of the first Legion
and the fourth and eighteenth upon repentance came in, and submitted themselves
unto Vocula, at whose hands receiving again the oath to Vespasian, they were
led forth to raise the siege at Magontiacum. The army which besieged it
(consisting of Catti, Vsipij and Matiaci) was already departed away laden with
spoils, and being by our men met with on the way scattered and at unawares,
was in part put to the sword. Moreover the Treueri along their confines cast a
trench with a Loricam, vallumque
parapet, and with great slaughter on each side skirmished against the Germa^s,
until shortly after reuolting, by that odious fact, they defaced all their good
service done heretofore to the Romans.

XVI. The disposition of the common people of the City, at the beginning of
the year. The ordinary Senate upon the first day of January. Mutianus
supplanteth Antonius Primus.
IN the mean season Vespasianus second time Consul and Titus in absence
entered their office, The year of the city. 823.
the city being in great anguish and diuersely perplexed, besides the
miseries which presently they felt, upon a false alarm of the revolt of
Afric, and the rebellion of Piso Proconsull there, a man of mild and quiet
disposition: but because through the te^pestuousnes of the winter the ships
came not home, the poor people which day by day were accustomed to buy bread,
and cared for nothing else of common affairs but corn, feared that all the
ships of that coast were purposely stayed, and the corn detained, and
fearing quickly believed it. In which imaginary conceyt the Vitellianists also
confirmed them, who had not as yet wholly left of their former affections and
humors. Neither was the rumor displeasing unto the winners, as hoping to make
their profit thereby, whose insatiable lust and desires no foreign war, much
less any civil victory could ever fill or content. The first of January the
Senate was assembled by Julius Frontinus the To whom it belonged, in the
absence of the Consuls, to assemble the Senate.
Citty-pretor, and solemn thanks with praise concluded upon to the Lieutenants
and armies, and kings which frended the cause. The Pretorship also was taken
from Tertius Iulianus, because he had forsaken his Legion applying it self to
Vespasia^s side, and bestowed upon Plotius One of Mutians fauorits. 3. Hist. p.
133.2.
Griphus. Hormus was made a Gentleman of Rome, and straightwaies Frontinus
resigning, Domitianus Caesar took the place. In his name all letters were
written and edicts published, but the power and direction of affairs rested in
Mutianus, save that Domitian either pricked forward by his friends, or upon his
own pleasure, and lust presumed to do many things of himself. But Mutianus
principal fear was of Antonius Primus and Arius Varus, whom, beside that they
were greatly renowned for their late famous exploytes, and in great credit with
the soldiers, the common people also loved well, because they had slain none
but in the field. Moreover it was given out by some, that Antonius had
solicited Scribonianus Crassus, a man of great honor, both in respect of his
worthy ancestors, and of his late Piso, whom Galba adopted.
brothers high place, to take upon him the state, assuring him of a sufficient
number of accomplices to uphold and maintain it, had not Scribonianus refused
the offer; a man so greatly fearing uncertainties, that even an assured
certainty could not easily have sturred him. Therefore Mutianus, because
Antonius openly could not be put down, spent upon him many good words, and
great commendations in the Senate house, and secretly laded him with promises,
putting him in hope of nearer Spain, which by the departure of Cluuius Rufus
lay void, and bestowed upon his friends Tribuneshippes, and Captainshippes
liberally. And when Mutianus had filled with these winds of hope and desire
his empty vainglorious mind, he proceeded suttelly to infringe his power, and
utterly put him out of his strength, by dismissing unto their wintering place
the Septima Galbiana.
seventh Legion, which did most earnestly affect Antonius. The third Legion
also that depended upon Atius Varus was sent, away back into Syria: another
Sexta and octaua de victricibus. Tac. p. 190.
part of the army was carried into Germany. So the city being disburdened of
those which were prone to breed trouble, recovered her former estate, the laws
took their due course, and the magistrates resumed their charge.

XVII. Certain matters which passed in the Senate.
THE day that Domitian, after his new honor came into the Senate, he made a
brief and courteous speech concerning his fathers, and brothers absence, and of
his own green years and lack of experience, with a comely grace and decent
behavior: his often blushing and being out of countenance, his qualities being
not yet known abroad, was reputed modesty and bashfulnes. Whenas he proposed
that Galba should be restored to his honor and dignity, Curtius Montanus was
of opinion, that the memory of Piso also should be solemnized, the Senators
allowed of both: howbeit concerning Piso it took none effect. After this,
certain were allotted to see restitution made of those things, which had been
by force taken away in the war; and some others to view and set up the brazen
tables of the laws, which by By the burning of the Capitol melted, says
Suetonius Vespasiano. c. 8.
tract of time were decayed; and others to reform and purge the public
records, and registers, which by flattery of times were corrupted, and to
moderate and stint the public expenses. Tertius Iulianus was restored to his
Pretorship, after it was known that he fled to Vespasian: notwithstanding
Griphus kept his room too. Then the Senate awarded, that the cause between
Musonius Rufus, and Publius Celer should be revived and determined: and so
Publius was condemned, and satisfaction made to the soul of Soranus. In this
days work as the public severity of the Senate was notable, so privately
Musonius wanted not his due commendation, for having iudicially prosecuted so
just a revenge: as contrarily Annal. 16. p. 558. 22. Sueron. Vespa. c. 13.
Xiphil. p. 223.
Demetrius the Cynicke was generally blamed, for that ambitiously, and without
regard of his credit, he had lent his hand to protect a manifest offender: for
Publius himself had neither spirit nor tongue to plead his own cause. When
the sign was given, and a flagge of revenge, as it were, set out against the
accusers, Iunius Mauricus requested Domitian, that it would please him to
communicate a copy to the Senate of the Princes records and papers, whereby
they might be certified particularely, who had required to have the accusing
of whom. Answer was made, that the Princes advise was to be asked in a case of
that weight: whereupon the Senate, the principal personages beginning the
example, conceived a form of oath, which all the magistrates swear, contending
who should be foremost, and the rest, as their voices were severally asked,
solemnly protesting, and calling the gods to witness, that they had never
attempted nor done any act against the life of any, nor reaped commodity or
honor by the calamities of others, they which were guilty that way pronouncing
it faintly, and mincing the oath, and diuersely wresting and changing the
words. The Senators allowed of them which swear truly, and openly reproved
the others perjury: which reproof lay most heavily upon Sariolenus Vocula, and
Nonius Actianus, and Cestius Seuerus, persons infamous for their often
accusings under Nero: and beside, which aggrauated his case, Sariolenus had
lately attempted the like with Vitellius: so that they bent their fists against
him, and ceased not to offer violence, until he departed the house. From him
they went to Pactius Africanus, seeking to throw him out likewise, because he
had given information against the Scribonian Xiphillin: Nerone. (...).
brethren, renowned both for their wealth and mutual agreeing together, and
procured their destruction with Nero. Africanus neither durst confess the
matter objected, nor could well deny it: but turning himself to Vibius
Crispus who pressed him nearest with his interrogatories, he on the other side
challenged him of the like, seeking to shift off the odiousness of that, which
he could not directly defend, by joining the plaintiff in the same crime.
That day Vipsanius Messalla wanne himself great credit, both for eloquence
and good nature, undertaking, being under Senators age, to make intercession
for his brother Omnium bipedum nequissimus, as Pliny the younger calls him, a
most pestilent instrument of tyranny in Nero and Domitians time. lib. 1. ep.
5. etc.
Aquilius Regulus. Regulus was extremely hated, because he had wrought the
overthrow of the noble houses of the Crassi, and of Orphitus. he was at his
own suite appointed by the Senate to be their accuser, and undertook that
odious charge voluntarily being very young, and not, as some others, to avoid
danger that in refusing might grow to himself, but in hope of rising higher
thereby. And Sulpicia Praetextata wife of Crassus, with four of his children
presented themselves in a readiness to prosecute the matter, if it would
please the Senate to take knowledge thereof. Messalla, neither justifying the
cause nor the man, but opposing himself against the perils of his brother, had
moved some to compassion. Then Curtius Montanus replied with a bitter oration,
proceeding so far, that he charged Regulus with giving of money after Galbaes
death to him that slew And yet he got a legacy at Verania^^ hand, Cuius
marito, says Pliny, lib. 2. ep. 19. inimicissimus, ipsi invisissimus fuerat.
Piso, with biting of Pisoes head being dead. these things (quoth he) I trow
Nero never constrained you to do: neither saved you either your life, or your
honor by such savage cruelty. Let us grant their defense to be tolerable,
which chose rather to bring others into ruin, then themselves into peril, for
your part you had nothing to leese: your father going into banishment left you
void of all danger that way; his goods were parted amongst his creditours: and
your age as yet not capable of honors: you had nothing that Nero should either
desire from you, or fear in you. Nay it was your own blood thirsty humor,
and gaping for gain, which caused you to employ your gifts, being as yet not
known nor tried in defending any man's cause, to the destruction of the
Nobility: when at one blow you ruined and overthrew innocent children,
reverend old men, honorable women, and by this good service in destroying
the commonwealth merited Consulare spoils, That is, 54687. li. 10. 2. sterling.
seven thousand thousand sesterces, and an honorable Priest hoode: when you
blamed Neroes slack and remiss kind of proceeding, that he went house by
house and tired out both himself and the whole company of the accusers,
whereas he might with like facility and speaking of a word subvert the whole
Senate. Keep I pray you (my Lords) and make store of a counselor of so good
a dispatch, that every age may be furnished: and as our old men imitate
Marcellus and Crispus, so our young may do Regulus. Dishonesty even when it
thriueth not, finds followers, what will it do then when it does prosper and
flourish? and whom we dare not offend having been but Questor, what shall we
do when he shall have passed the higher offices of Praetor and Consul? or do ye
think that Nero shall be the last tyranne? indeed so they also believed, which
ouerliued Tiberius and Caius, when in the mean time arose another more cruel
and detestable then either. We fear not Vespasian; his age warranteth us, and
his moderate disposition: but precedents dure longer then dispositions. We are
waxen cold (my Lords) neither are we now the same men, that as soon as Nero
was slain required these promooters, and al other instruments of tyranny to be
punished more maiorum. After the decease of an ill Prince the first day is
always the best. With so great applause and liking of the Senate Montanus was
heard, that Heluidius conceived hope of the possibility of overthrowing
Marcellus also. Therefore beginning his speech with the commendation of Cluuius
Rufus, who being as rich, and as famous for eloquence, had notwithstanding in
Neroes time never procured any man's danger, he pressed Marcellus both with his
own fact, and with the others example, and the Senators fingers even tickled
against him. Which when Marcellus perceived, making semblance of departing the
house, We are gone Heluidius (quoth he) and leave to you a Senate of your own:
take your pleasure, and Or, exercise your kingdom when the prince returns.
regna praesente Caesar^.
exercise your kingdom in the presence of the young Prince. After him
follows Vibius Crispus, both well warmed and nettled: Marcellus with a
threatening countenance, Crispus half smiling, but at the entreaty of friends
they came again to their places. And so the contention growing hoater, and of
the one side many and good, on the other few and mighty banding together, and
inueighing despitefully one against the other, that day was consumed in
brawlings. The next meeting Domitian beginning to persuade, that old griefs
and grudges should not be revived, but buried together with the memory of the
late times, wherein men were forced to do many things against their own
minds, Mutianus continuing the speech opined at large in favor of the
accusers, gently admonishing withal, and as it were entreating them, who
seemed to resume their actions which they had discontinued. The Senators, when
they saw they were crossed in following their liberty, meddled no further, and
Mutianus, lest the judgment of the Senate should seem to be little regarded,
and a general pardon as it were proclaimed of all crimes committed under Nero,
commanded Octauius Sagitta and Antistius Sosianus, Senators by calling, which
were without leave returned from exile, to be reduced into the same islands
again. Yac. 13. Ann. p. 470.
Octauius had frequented with Pontia Posthumia another man's wife adulterously,
and because she refused after to mary him, he slew her upon extreme passion of
love: Sosianus by his lewd qualities had been the ruin of many: both of them
had been condemned and banished by a heavy sentence of the Senate, and others
being restored they were left still in the same penalty. But Mutianus could
not with all this wipe the ill opinion away of his former dealing. For Sosianus
and Sagitta were men vile and of no account, neither mattered it where they
lived: but the accusers great gifts, great wealth and great power, being men so
well seen in all lewd practices, were feared not without cause. The Senators
minds were anon in part reconciled by means of a certain cause heard in the
house, and decided according to ancient custom. Manlius Patricius a Senator
made complaint, that in the colonie of Siena he was beaten of the multitude at
the magistrates commandment, and not contented with this outrage they Nec
finem iniuriae hic stetisse: planctum and lamenta and supremorum imaginem
presenti sibi circun dat^.
mourned and wailed, and made show of celebrating his funeralles in his own
sight, with many skornefull and reproachful speeches redounding upon the whole
Senate. The parties accused were called, and upon due examination convicted,
and executed, and an act made to admonish the people of Siena to behave
themselves in modester manner hereafter. At the same time Antonius Flamma was
condemned of extortion, at the suite of the Cyrenenses, and exiled for his
cruel behavior, and shedding of innocent blood.

XVIII. A view taken of the Pretorian soldiers. A loan motioned in the Senate.
The funerals of Flauius Sabinus.
AMIDST these things there had welny broken out a sedition of the soldiers. The
Garde-soldiers dismissed by Vitellius, and assembled in favor of Vespasians
cause, required their former place: likewise the Of the Flaeuian side, as it is
not unlike that many Legionaries were the more easily induced to enter into the
cause, upon hope of that preferment.
soldiers, which upon hope of the same room were chosen out of the Legio^s,
demanded performance of promise. Neither could Vitellius guard well be removed
without much bloodshed. So Mutianus, coming to the camp to the end he might
better view their years of service, appointed the winners severally to stand,
with their enseignes and weapons, a little distance asu^det. Then he willed the
Vitellian guard, as well those which yielded themselves at Bouillae, as others
sought out within the City and about, to be produced in a manner unarmed,
then to be divided, and those which were chosen out of the German and British
armies, and so of the rest, if any were, to stand each by themselves. The first
sight hereof did straight amaze them, to see the contrary side as in a pitched
field flourishing with their weapons and darts, and themselves without armor,
deformed, and in poor miserable state closed about. But when they began to
be drawn, and distracted hither and thither, they trembled all, especially
the German soldiers, as if the separation tended only to sort them out to the
slaughter; whereupon they fell to embrace their companions, to hang on their
necks, to kiss them as for their last farewell, beseeching not to leave them
alone, and that in the like cause they might not abide harder fortune then
others; with obsecrations sometimes to Mutianus, sometimes to the Prince that
was absent, sometimes to the gods and the heavens to relieve their distressed
estate; till such time as Mutianus calling them all liege men of one sovereign,
and soldiers of the same Prince, eased them of this vain fear; the rest of
the soldiers present with a showte furthering their tears, and declaring
themselves to favor their cause: and so for that day the matter was shut up.
Some few days after Domitian in an oration made offer unto them of land and
possessions, who being now assured and out of all fear did boldly refuse it,
praying to have their former service and wages again. it was but a prayer,
mary such as could not be denied: and so they were received into the Guard.
Afterward they which had served their years, and accomplished their just
number of stipends, were honorably dismissed: some others criminally, and for
their misdemeanour singled out one by one: the safest remedy to weaken and
dissolve the consent of a multitude. Then a motion was made in the Senate,
whether upon necessity indeed, or because they would Initio statim principatus
professus est Vespasianus quadringenties millies. HS. opus esse. vt resp. stare
posset, says Suetonius. c. 16. one of the greatest sums I remember any
where named, amounting to above three hundredth millio^s of pounds
have it to seem so, that a loan should be made, by private men to the
Public of That is, 468750. li. ster.
sixty millions of sesterces, and the charge thereof committed to Poppaeus
Siluanus: but shortly after the necessity ceased, or the false semblant. Then
by a law proposed by Domitian the Consulshippes conferred by Vitellius were
disanulled: and Flauius Sabinus

XIX. The death of Lucius Piso Proconsull of Afric.
ABOUT the same time Lucius Piso Proconsull of Afric was slain: the truth
of which murder I will briefly set down, resuming first certain former
matters, which may seem to have ministered chiefly occasion, and cause to such
like inconveniences. The Legion in Afric, and the Aids assigned to guard the
frontiers of the Empire that way, in the time of Augustus, and Tiberius, were
under the government of the Proconsull, till Caius a Prince of a troubled
brain, and having in jealousy M. Silanus, who then was Proconsull of Afric,
removed the Legion from the Proconsull, delivering it to a Lieutenant sent for
that purpose. The parting of an office thus between two without subordination,
and their charge and points of commission lying intermingled, and running
jointly together, bred and nourished, as was intended, discord and quarrels:
and so through sinister emulation the Lieutenants office incroched and grew,
either because they continued longer in charge, or because inferior persons
commonly take more pain, and delight in contending with their superiors, the
greatest men of the Proconsuls seeking rather safety then might. Now at this
time Valerius Festus was Lieutenant of the Legion there, a riotous youngman,
and one that gaped after great matters, but much perplexed in mind, by reason
he was so nearely allied to Vitellius. This Valerius in his often conferences
which he had with Piso, whether he persuaded him to take upon him the state,
or opposed himself against Pisoes soliciting it is uncertain (for at their
secret communication none was present beside: and when Piso was slain most
men inclined to favor the slayer) certain it is, that the province and
soldiers were ill affected toward Vespasian. And some of the Vitellianists
escaping out of the City, laid down before Piso the great possibility of
effectuating that purpose: that France was in terms of reuolting, Germany
ready to side themselves with him, adjoining the danger wherein he stood for
his own person, and that in a suspected peace open war was the only safe
course. As these things were in doing, Claudius Sagitta captain of the Petrin
wing came thither, having out-sayled Papirius a Centurion sent by Mutianus, and
auowched that the said Centurion had commission to dispatch Piso: that his
kinsman and son in law Galerianus was already dispatched in Rome; so that
the only hope of safety consisted in venturing boldly: and of venturing there
were but two ways, either straight to take arms, or sailing into France to
offer himself there for a head to the Vitellian armies. Notwithstanding all
which allegations Piso persisted immovable: and anon the Centurion sent by
Mutianus came; who, as soon as he arrived at the port of Carthage, proclaimed
Piso Emperor, wishing to him as Prince all success and prosperity, and
requiring all that he met, being amazed at the wonder, to join in the same
cry. The credulous common people flocked in the market place and demanded the
presence of Piso, filling the city with showts and acclamations of joy, partly
upon negligence to search out the truth, and partly upon a pleasure in
flattery. But Piso, whether upon the intimation of Sagitta, or of his own
modesty, refrained from going abroad and committing himself to the peoples
discretion: and examining the Centurion, perceiving it was but a snare to
entrap him, and so to make him away, he commanded him to be slain, not so much
for hope of escaping himself by so doing, as upon just indignation against the
Centurion, because the same man had been one of the murderers of Clodius
Macer, and meant to bring his hands lately embrued with the blood of a
Lieutenant now to the slaughter of a Proconsull. Then he checked the
Carthaginians with a sharp and severe edict, and ceased to execute even the
usual points of his office, keeping still within doors, lest any occasion of
new commotion by mischance might arise. Festus understanding how the people was
daunted and dashed, the Centurion slain, and other occurrencies part true,
part false, or enlarged and amplifyed, as fame feeds in going, sends
certain horsemen to murder Piso; who making all have in the dawning of the
day brake into the house of the Proconsull with drawn swords, the most part
not knowing Piso by sight, being Auxiliaries of the country, and Moors picked
out for the purpose. Whereupon meeting one of his servants, not far from his
bedchamber, they asked him who he was, and where Piso was to be found: the
servant perceiving his masters danger, notably and resolutely answered, that
he was Piso, and so was presently slain in the place: by and by after Piso
himself was massacred. For there was in the company Bebius Massa, one of the
Procuratours of Afric, that knew him; even then a woorker of good men's
destruction, and one that often will fall into the course of this story, as an
instrument of the mischieffes, and a cause of the miseries that we sustained
In Domitians time. Tac. in vita Agricolae. Plinius in epistolis.
afterward. Festus in the mean time stayed at Adrumetum to watch how the
matter succeeded, and from thence went to the Legion, where he commanded
Cetronius Pisanus the Camp-master to be committed toward, upon private
displeasures between them, pretending that he was an abettour, and complice of
Piso. Some soldiers also and Centurions he punished, and some he rewarded:
neither of them for any desert, but because he would seem to have ended a
war. Then he took up the debates between the or, Oe^nses.
Ophenses and Leptitani, which of small beginnings, as robbing of cattle and
corn from the cuntrey-men, were now by force of arms maintained in the field.
For the Ophenses being the weaker side had called the Garamantes to aid them,
a savage people and altogether given to robbing and stealing upon their
neighbors: whereupon the Leptitani were hardly bestedde, and their fields
being round about wasted, trembled for fear within the walled towns, till
such time as the cohorts and wings came, who put the Garamantes to flight, and
recovered all the spoil, save only that which certain out-riders had carried
further into the country, and sold there among their wild inaccessible
cottages.

XX. Vespasian at Alexandria receives advertisement of the death of Vitellius.
The embassage of Vologesus king of the Parthians to him. Titus speech with his
father. Corn is sent to Rome. The foundation of the Capitol is laid.
^. AFTER the battle at Cremona, and good news from all quarters, many of all
sorts hazarded to put themselves upon the rough winter seas, and sailed with
safety to carry Vespasian the news that Vitellius was slain: and king
Vologesus ambassadors were there offering forty thousand Parthian 40. millia
sagi^ tariorum, says Suetonius. Vesp. c. 6. not disagreeing from Tacitus: for
the Parthians were (...).
horsemen to aid him. It was a glorious and joyful thing, to be sought unto
with offers of so great assistance, and yet not to need them. So thanks were
given to Vologesus, and he willed to send an embassage to the Senate, and
assure himself of peace with the Romans. Vespasian converting his cares upon
Italy, and the affairs of the city, was advertised somewhat hardly
concerning Domitians dealings, as if he had Vno die, says Suet. Domitiano. c.
1. super triginta vrbana ^ssicia atque peregrinae distribuit, miraerise
Vespasiano dictitante quod successorem non and sibi mittecret.
passed the bounds of his age, and carried himself above his compass, rather
like an Emperor then an Emperors son. Therefore the most serviceable part
of his army he delivers over to Titus willing him to prosecute and finish the
Jewish war. It is reported that Titus before his From his father at
Alexandria: for thither he accompanied his father, and from thence returned
back to Caesareas which viage is particularely described by Josephus in the
last words of his fourth book (...).
departure used long speech and entreaty with his father, desiring him not to
believe lightly, or enter in choler at the tale of every backbiter, but rather
to reserve himself free for an indifferent audience, and carry a placable mind
toward his own son. For neither were Legions nor nauies so strong defenses
and rampires of a Princes estate, as the multitude of children. Friends with
time and fortune, sometimes by unadvised desires, or ouersights, decrease, fall
from us and fade, whereas a man's own blood cleaves fast, and cannot be
disioyned: especially in Princes, whose prosperity as well may others enjoy,
but their adversity touches none near, but their nearest in blood: and how
should they two being brethren agree, if the father gave not first an example.
Vespasian not so much pacifyed toward Domitian, as delighted with the good
nature of Titus bad him be of good comfort, and look to his charge in
advancing the weal public with arms in the field; himself would take order
with matters of peace, and domestical affairs. Then he committed to sea,
which as yet was tempestuous, his best ships of sail fraught with corn: for
the City was in such distress, and stood in those terms of famishing, that
when the corn came from Vespasian, they had not at all in their storehouses
above ten days provision. As concerning the setting up of the Capitol again,
he Cic, de diuinatione. cu^ impera tor exercitum, censor populum lustraret,
bonis nominibus qui hostias ducerent eligebantur: quod idem in dilectu consules
obseruant, vt primus miles fiat bono nomine.
names had lucky singnificatio^s entered in with fortunate boughs. Afterward
the Vestall virgins, with boys and girls which had both father and mother
alive, washed it with water fetched from rivers, and springs, and running
streams. Then Heluidius Priscus the Praetor, Plautus Elianus one of the chieffe
Priests going before him, hallowed the floor with a sole^n sacrifice of a
swine, a sheep and a bullock, and laying the intrayles upon a green turfe,
calling first upon Jupiter, Juno, Minerua, and the rest of the gods protectours
of the Empire, that they would prosper the work, exalt and advance this their
own habitation, begun by the devotion of men, with their divine and
celestial power, he put his hand to the fillets and ropes, wherein a huge
mighty stone was fast tied, and withal the rest of the magistrates and
Preests, the Senate and Gentlemen, and a great part of the people preasing with
great desire and joy, drew the stone to the foundations, throwing in withal
ingots of gold and silver, and oar never tried in the furnace, but raw as it
grew* for the soothsayers forewarned that the work should not be defiled with
stone, or gold which had been destinated to any other use. only the roof was
made hyer: that alteration alone was not disallowed by the gods, and the former
temple, for want of proportion that way, was thought to lack stateliness, and
majesty convenient for a building, wherein such a mass of men should be holden.

XXI. The Treueri and Lingones, at the instigation of Classicus, Tutor, and
Sabinus, assembling secretly in counsel at Coleyn, determine to revolt from
the Romans. Vocula remooueth from Magontiacum to Coleyn. Claudius Labeo makes
a road against the Caninefates without great effect.
WHEN the death of Vitellius was heard of in France and Germany, it doubled
the war. For Ciuilis now laying aside dissimulation declared himself, and
made open war against the Roman Empire. The Legions which had served
Vitellius wished rather foreign bondage, then to have Vespasian their Prince.
The Frenchmen conceived courage, and hope of freeing themselves from the yoke,
supposing that the same fortune was befallen to our armies in all places alike:
and indeed a rumor was noysed that our standing camps in Pannonia and Moesia
were straightly besieged by the Sarmatians and Dacians: the like was reported of
Britannie. But nothing persuaded them so much to believe, that the Roman Empire
was come to an end, as the burning of the Capitol. For the city had been
once before taken by the French, but the seat of Jupiter then being untaken
the Empire stood and remained: whereas now by this fatal fire a manifest
sign of the gods heavy wrath, and displeasure was given. And the Druides out
of their vain superstitious learning did prophecy that the Empire of the
world was to pass, and be seated beyond the mountains. Moreover a common
fame went, that the Primores Galliarum ab Othone aduersus Vitellium missos. who
these primores Galiiaru^ were, and when and from whence sent by Otho against
Vitellius I conceive not: unless it be meant of the Roman Senators, whereof
many were French by birth, whom Otho assumed into his train against Vitellius:
but men of their quality me think should have no great cause to seek so great
an alteration.
noble men of France, when they were sent by Otho against Vitellius, did
covenant together before their departure, that in case the Roman common wealth
ceased not thus to be torn by multiplying of civil wars, and domestical
troubles one straight succeding another, they would jointly attempt to recover
their ancient liberty again. But before the murder of Hordeonius Flaccus
nothing brake out whereby the conspiracy might be perceived: after his death
there passed messages, between Ciuilis and Classicus captain of the wing of
the Treueri. Classicus in birth and wealth far exceeded the rest of that
quarter. he was extract from the line of their ancient kings, his ancestors
renowned in war and in peace, and himself boasted to be descended of enemies
to the people of Rome, rather then friends. Unto him in this action adjoined
themselves Julius Tutor, and Julius Sabinus, the one of Triers, the other a
Lingon. Tutor was appointed by Vitellius ouerseer of the bancke of Rhene.
Sabinus besides a natural vanity was pricked forward with the vain glory of
a supposed kindred; that his great grandmother for her beauty had pleased Julius
Caesar, when he warred in France, and was by him carnally known. These three
by secret conferences searched the minds and inclinations of the rest: and
when they had made acquainted, and associated to them such as they supposed fit
for the purpose, they appointed a meeting in Coleyn, in a private house: for
the public state of the city utterly abhorred all such attempts.
Notwithstanding certain of the Vbij and Tungri were present at the
consultation: but the strongest part and that which carried the matter was of
the Treueri and Lingones. Neither made they any long deliberation, but all with
one voice cried amain, that the Romans did nothing Joseph. lib. 7. (...). c. 2.
but rage in civil dissensions, that the Legions were stayne, Italy wasted,
and the city of Rome even taken; that all the armies were held occupied
every one with their several wars: and if the Alps were fortifyed with good
and sufficient garrison, and so their liberty wunne and assured, then might
France determine at leisure what course to take of further proceeding, and how
far they list to enlarge. This was no sooner said then allowed: a scruple
remained concerning the remnant of the Roman soldiers. Many were of mind that
they were to be put to the sword, as mutinous, and faithless persons, and
polluted with the blood of their leaders: but the opinion of sparing them
prevailed, lest hope of pardon being taken away they would become desperate. So
it was thought more convenient by fair means to allure them to the party, and
that the Lieutenants alone being made away, the common soldiers would easily be
wunne to the side upon guiltiness of their own misdeeds, and hope of
impunity. This was the form of their first consultation, and some were sent
abroad into France to kindle and stir up the war: they themselves pretended
all subjection and obedience to Vocula, that they might oppress him at the
more unawares. Vocula had secret intelligence hereof, but he had not forces
to punish it, his Legions being both thin, and unsteadfast. So between unsure
soldiers, and secret enemies, supposing it the best way that now he could take
to use their own arts against them, he dissembled the matter and went down
to Coleyn. Thither Claudius Labeo was escaped, having corrupted his keepers;
who as before we have said was taken, and confined out of the way into Frisia,
and promising that if he might have men he would go into Batauia, and
reunite the greatest part of the country again to the Roman Empire: having a
pretty company of horsemen and footmen assigned, he durst not enterprise any
thing amongst the Batauians, but drew certain of the Neruij and Bethasij after
him into the field, and rather by stealth, then by way of open invasion, made
some incursions upon the Caninefates and Marsaci.

XXII. Classicus and Tutor corrupt Voculaes soldiers. Vocula at Nouesium is
forsaken by his soldiers, and slain, who immediately swear fidelity to the
Empire of France.
VOCVLA allured by the fraud of the Frenchmen remooueth toward the enemy.
When they approached to Vetera, Classicus and Tutor pricking before under color
of discovering met with the German captains, and concluded the bargain, and
thereupon encamped their companies with a several trench from the Legionarie
soldiers. At which sign of manifest contempt and revolt Vocula conceiving
great indignation, cried alowde, that the Roman state was not by civil wars
brought yet to so low an ebb, as that the Treueri also and Lingones need to
despise it: so many cuntreies continuing faithful, our armies being
victorious, the fortune of the Empire standing entier, and the gods ready to
revenge this perfidious part: so In the fourth year of Tiberius Caesar. Tac.
3. Ann. p. 314.
long ago Sacrouir and the Aedui, so of late Vindex and France were
overthrown, each at one blow, and now also the perfidious breakers of treaties
so solemnly sworn were to look for again the same gods and the same fall.
Julius and Augustus knew better their crooked inclinations: A plain (...) in
Tacitus. for Galba did not diminish but rather increase the tributes of the
Lingones and Treueri, and diversely afflict them. to some other cities of
France true it is, that he abated a fourth part of their ordinary tribute, but
that was nothing to this audience.
Galba, and the abatement of their tributes has made them our enemies. Now
they are foes because their yoke is too gentle, but when they shall be
ransackt and stripped of their wealth, they will be our friends and subjects
again. When Vocula had thus spoken with great spirit and courage, seeing
Classicus and Tutor notwithstanding to continue in their traitorous purpose,
he retired back to Nouesium. The Frenchmen sat down two miles from the
town in the fields, to which place the Centurions and soldiers resorting
from Nouesium were bought, and corrupted to a villainy never heard of before,
that a Roman army should swear allegiance to strangers, and for a pledge of
so wicked a part, either kill their Lieutenants, or deliver them prisoners.
Vocula, albeit many counseled him to withdraw, choosing rather to stick to it
manfully, then cowardly to flee, called an assembly, and spoke to them in this
manner.

"I never at any time spoke unto you, either more careful for you, or
careless for my self. That my destruction is purposed I am well contented to
hear, and accept death in these troubles as an end of my miseries. Of you I
am ashamed, and you do I pity, not because any martial exploite, or matter
of arms is intended against you; for that were agreeing to a soldiers
profession, and according to the law of the field at an enemies hand: but
because Classicus with your hands hops to fight with the Romans, and abuses
your simplicity with the goodly oath and imaginary Empire of France. Adeo nos,
si fortuna in praesens virtusque deseruit, etiam vetera exempla deficiunt?
Are we so far now fallen, not only from our fortune and courage, but even
from our ancient precedents too? For how often did the Roman Legions choose rather
to dye then to yield one inche of ground to the enemy? Our allies have many
times suffered their cities to be razed, themselves, their wives and their
children to be consumed to ashes, without gaining other reward, save only to
keep their faith and their same. The Legions at Vetera support with all
patience hunger and siege, and yield neither for fear nor fair words. We,
besides men and armor, and a camp strongly fortified, have provision and
vittailes sufficient for a long war, if need were. Money lately we had, not
only for pay, but also to serve for donatiue too: which whether you list to
accept as coming from Vespasian, or from Vitellius, sure both ways it came
from a Roman Emperor. If you do it for fear of the battle (albeit it be no
admittable reason in you who have foiled so often at Gelduba, at Vetera, and so
many times overthrown the enemy) we have trenches, and walls, and ways to
prolong till more strength and supply come from the cuntreyes about us. If it
be for displeasure at me, you have other Lieutenants and Tribunes, nay
Centurion or common soldier, make your choice of any so he be a Roman to lead
you. Let never for shame so prodigious a thing be bruted throughout the whole
world, that Ciuilis and Classicus should invade Italy, having a guard of Romans
attendant. What if the Germans and Frenchmen should lead toward the walls of
the City? will you fight against your own native soil, and sharpen your
spears against the womb of your mother? The only conceit of so great an
impiety strikes a horror into my mind. Shall Tutor of Triers have watch and
ward as a Prince? shall a Batauian give you the sign of the battle? will you
be carried about for supplements to the German regiments? and what end will you
find of your treason? when the Roman Legions shall march out against you, what
shall become of you then, but of fugitives to be fugitives again, and traitors
of traitors, between your old oath and your new an abomination to the gods
and to men? O thou most mighty and merciful Jupiter, whom with so many
triumphs these eight hundredth and twenty years we have adored and worshipped:
and thou Romulus the founder and father of the City, I pray and most humbly
beseech you, that if it be not your heavenly pleasures, that under my hand and
government this camp should be kept uncorrupted and clean, yet at least you
will not permit it to be polluted, and stained by Tutor and Classicus: and that
it would please you to inspire to the Roman soldier, either a mind to follow
honorable courses, or else a speedy and harmless repentance. The oration was
diuersely taken, as of men diuersely affected between fear, hope, and shame.
After the speech Vocula withdrewe himself, and consulting upon his end was by
his freedmen and bondmen stayed from voluntary preventing of a most shameful
death: for Classicus sent by and by AEmilius Longinus a fugitive of the first
Legion to dispatch that piece of service. As for the Lieutenants, Herennius
Lieutenant of the first Legion, whole standing camp was at Bonna, and Numisius
of the sixtee^th at Nouesium.
Herennius, and Herennius Lieutenant of the first Legion, whole standing camp
was at Bonna, and Numisius of the sixtee^th at Nouesium.
Numisius, it seemed sufficient to put them in prison. Then Classicus assuming
the marks and ornaments of the Roman governors, came into the camp: and
albeit he were hardened to all kind of desperate mischief, yet would not his
utterance then serve him any further, but barely to recite the words of the
oath. All that were present swear fidelity to the Empire of France. Then he
aduauced the murderer of Vocula to a higher place, and the rest he rewarded,
each according to the lewd service they did.

XXIII. Tutor brings Coleyn and all upper Germany to the oath of France. The
Legions of Vetera surrender the place to Ciuilis with condition only of saving
their lives: which notwithstanding is not performed.
AFTER these things Classicus and Tutor divided charges. Tutor with a strong
power lay about Coleyn, and brought both them, and all the soldiers which lay
upon the upper bancke of the Rhene, to the same oath, slaying the Tribunes at
Magontiacum, and driving away the Campemaster which refused to swear.
Classicus suborned certain of the lewdest companions of those which had
yielded themselves, commanding them to go to Vetera, and there to proclaim
pardon to all those, that would submit themselves to follow the present course:
otherwise to look for no hope but sword, and famine and all extremities. They
which were sent used also their own example as a motive unto them. On the one
side the respect of their loialty, on the other their present necessity,
distracted the persons besieged, between the two courses of honor and shame.
While they delaied to resolve, their food failed them both usual and
unusual: they had eaten their mules and horses, and other creatures, which
being otherwise abhorred and loathed, hunger had made fauourie and sweet: and
lastly feeding of branches, and sprigges, and pulling of grass which grew in
the walls, they were a pattern of misery and patience, till such time as
sending Ambassadors to Ciuilis for life, they stained their honorable actions
with a shameful and dishonorable end. Neither was their petition admitted,
before they swear fidelity to France. Then he granted them life, reserving the
spoil of the camp to himself, and appointed keepers to stay the money, the
servants, and stuff, and others to conduct the soldiers empty away. About
five miles of the Germans lying in ambush, rose suddenly and set upon them
unawares: such as were most valiant and made resistance were slain where they
stood: many were cut off in the flight, the rest recovered the camp.
Whereupon Ciuilis made complaint and rebuked the Germans as having wickedly
broken their faith: whether it was but a countenance of his, or else he could
not bridle them in their fury it is not assuredly known. When the camp was
ransacked they set it on fire, and all the men that escaped in the field, were
burned therein.

XXIIII. Ciuilis upon performance of his vow cutteth his bearde. Of Velleda
queen of the Bructerians. Two Legions of them which forsook Vocula and
yielded themselves to Classicus, namely the sixteenth and the first, the one
from Nouesium, the other from Bonna their standing camps, are by commandment
transported to Triers.
CIVILIS upon a barbarous vow when first he entered war with the Romans,
suffered his yallow hair to grow long without barbing, and now, as upon Tac.
de mor ib. Germ. p. 575. Alijs Germanorum populis vsitatum rara and privata
cuiusque audentia apud Cattos in consen sum vertis, vt primum adoleverint,
crinem barbamque summittere, nec nisi host caeso exucre vot vu nobligatumque,
virtuti oris habitu^
accomplishment thereof caused it to be cut, when the slaughter of the Legions
was performed: and it was reported, that he set up as marks certain of the
captives, for his little son to shoot and darte at in sport. Nevertheless
neither did he swear, nor caused any Batauian to take the oath of France,
trusting in the strength and assistance of the Germans, and if there should
happen hereafter contention to grow with the French about the Empire,
accounting himself both of more name and ability. Mummius Lupercus the
Lieutenant of a Legion among other presents was sent to Velleda, a virgin of
the Bructerian nation, and queen over many cuntreyes: for so the old manner of
the Germans is, to believe many of their women to be prophetesses, and so,
superstition increasing, goddesses. And at that time the authority of Velleda
was grown in more reputation, by reason that she had told before hand the
Germans should prosper, and the Roman Legions should be destroyed. But Lupercus
was slain in the way: a few Centurions and Tribunes French borne were reserved
as a pledge of alliance and amity. The standing camps of the cohortes, wings
and Legions, were overthrown and burned, those only excepted which were at
Magontiacum and Vindonissa. The sixteenth Legion with the Auxiliaries, which at
the same time yielded themselves, was commanded to depart from Nouesium to
Triers, and a day set down, before which they should avoid the camp. The
mean time was spent in sundry cares. Some of the cowardeliest were terrified
with the late example of them which were slain at Vetera, in their issuing
out; the better sort blushed for shame, to think of the infamous and
dishonorable journey, whom they must follow for guides, and how al things
should be at the simple pleasure and discretion of those, whom they had made
lords over their life and death: others without respect of dishonor packed
about them money and such things as were of most price: others made ready their
harness and buckled themselves to their weapons as though they were going to
field. While they were thus musing, and casting their cards, the hour of
remove was come, more grievous and doleful then was imagined. For within the
trench the deformity of the spectacle was not so apparent: the field and the
day discovered the shame, the images of the Emperors being plucked out of
their places, the enseignes tied up; whereas contrarily the French banners
glistered and played on every hand: in sum a silent and sorrowful troop,
and as it were a long funeral pomp. The conductour Claudius Sanctus augmented
the indignity, one eied, ill favored in countenance, and weaker in wit. The
dishonor was doubled, when as the first Legion relinquishing their camp at
Bonna, upon the like commandment adioined themselves to the other: and the
cuntreymen, that a little before quaked for fear at the very name of a Roman,
when the fame of the Legions captivity was noised, ran out of their houses,
and fields from al quarters, to gaze and feed their eyes with so strange a
sight. The Picentine wing could not endure the joy, and insulting of the
people, but neglecting as well the threats as the promises of Sanctus, turned
to Magontiacum; and meeting by chance in the way Longinus the murderer of
Vocula with their darts slew him for a beginning of future amends. The
Legions went forward in their purposed journey, and sat down before the
walls of Triers.

XXV. An embassage of the Tencterians to them of Coleyn. Coleyn yields to
Ciuilis and Velleda upon reasonable composition.
CIVILIS and Classicus puffed up with prosperous success made a question,
whether they should permit the city of Coleyn to be sacked by their soldiers.
Their natural inclination to cruelty and covetousness drew them that way, but
the policy of war was against it, and especially the opinion of clemency
needful in those which are to found a new Empire: the remembrance also of a
private benefit made Ciuilis more tractable toward them, because in the very
beginning of the troubles taking his son in their town they committed him to
honorable custody. Notwithstanding the nations beyond the Rhene enuyed the
riches, and growing of the city, and judged there could be no end of war,
unless that town were either made a common habitation for all Germans
indifferently, or else razed to the ground, and so the Vbij also dispersed.
Wherefore the Tencteri, a people only severed from them by the river, sent an
embassage, with instruction to declare their charge in the common council of
Coleyn, which one of the most imperious among the ambassadors uttered in this
peremptory manner. "We thank our gods and yours, and Mars chieffe of all gods,
that you are returned into the corpse and community, and name of Germany; and
we rejoice for your sakes, that you shall at length live as freemen among
freemen. For hitherto the Romans have shut both water and land, and in a manner
the very heaven it self between you and us to hinder our conferring and
meeting, or else which is more contumelious to martial men, that we should
never have access to your city but unarmed, and naked almost and that guarded
and paying a toll. But now, to the end that this mutual league of alliance
and frendshippe may stand and continue for ever, we require of you to pull
down the walls of your town, the bulwarks of your bondage: for even wild
beasts shut up forget their accustomed valor and virtue. Next we require you
to kill all the Romans within your territory: liberty and Lords cannot dwell
together. Then to bring out all their goods and divide them in common, that no
man should hide any thing, or seek to sever his cause from the rest. Moreover
that it may be indifferent both for us and you, as it was in times past to our
fathers, to converse and inhabit upon both sides of the river. As nature has
communicated the day and the night to all men, so has she laid open all
lands of the world to valiant minds. Resume your ancient customs and laws,
laying aside all your effeminate pleasures, by which means, more then with
arms the Romans subdue nations and cuntreyes. So shall you be a people
vncorrupt, without admixtion of forreyne manners or blood: so shall you forget
servitude, and either live in liberty, or be lords over others. The
Agrippinenses taking a time to deliberate: seeing neither future fears would
permit them to yield to the conditions, nor their present estate plainly to
refuse them, made answer in this manner. "We have taken, you see, the first
opportunity of recovering our liberty, perchance with more have then good
speed, that we might be joined with you, and the rest of the Germans our
kinsmen: but seeing the Roman armies do gather of all sides against us, it is
meeter and safer to strengthen, then to pull down the walls of our city. As
for strangers, Italians or other, which lived amongst us, either they are
slain in the wars, or fled home to their cuntreyes. To them which be ancient
inhabitants amongst us, and are lincked with us in marriage, and to their of
spring, this country is their own native soil: neither do we think you so
unreasonable as to wish us to kill our parents, our brethren, or children. For
tax and tallage we acquit and discharge you for ever: you shall pass and
repasse without all impeachement, but only in the day time, and unarmed, till
our raw and new amity be joined, and confirmed by continuance and custom.
Ciuilis and Velleda shall be arbiters: to their knowledge we refer the
cause, and the conclusion of the whole treaty. The Tencteri being thus in part
pacified, ambassadors were sent to Ciuilis and Velleda with presents, who
obtained all things as they of Coleyn desired: only they were not admitted to
have access, or speech with Velleda, nor suffered to see her, for more keeping
of state, and to maintain a more reverend conceyt in the hearts of the people.
She was lodged in a high tower, and one of her kindred appointed to carry as from
a goddess her oracles and answers.

XXVI. The Bethasij, Tungri and Neruij yield to Ciuilis.
CIVILIS thus strengthened with new increase of confederats, resolved to
associate the cities adjoining, or to war against them if they resisted. So
he took in the Sunici, and composed their able men into cohorts: but as he
purposed to have passed further, Claudius Labeo with a raw company of
Bethasij, Tungri, and Neruij, having seysed upon the bridge of the Mose, and
trusting to the advantage of the place, opposed himself and stopped his
passage. The event of the skirmish was doubtful in the straytes, till the
Germans swimming over the river came upon Labeoes back: and withal Ciuilis,
whether upon a bold venture, or upon a set match, rushed into the midst of
the Tungri, and with a loud voice protested, that the war was not undertaken
to that end, that the Batauians and Treueri should be sovereign lords over
all other nations: Far be all such arrogancy (quoth he) from our thought:
only receive us as your good friends and allies. Lo here for my part I commit
my self to your hands, employ me as you list, either for a captain or a
common soldier. The common people was much moved at these words, and put up
their swords, and Campanus and Iuuenalis chieffe men of the Tungrians yielded
the whole nation unto him: Labeo before he was compassed in fled away. The
Bethasij also and Neruij yielded themselves: whom Ciuilis adjoining to his
power became very puissant and strong, all the cities either fearing, or
favoring him voluntarily.

XXVII. Julius Sabinus with his Lingones gives battle to the Sequani, and is
overthrown.
IN the mean season Julius Sabinus, breaking down the monuments and records
of the Roman alliance, took upon him the style and title of Caesar, and led
after him a huge and rude company of his country folks, the Lingones, against
the Sequani, a state bordering upon them, and faithful to us Neither did the
Sequani refuse to wage battle; wherein fortune favored the better side, and
the Lingones were discomfited. Sabinus as rashly he enterprised to give
battle without due circumspection, so without fear of shame he ran
cowardly away: and to raise a rumor that he was dead, he set on fire the
house, into which he was known to have fled, and there was supposed
voluntarily to have ended his life. But hereafter in convenient place we will
show by what means, and secret Xiphilin. p. 219. (...). Plutarch. (...); p.
1371. sets down at large the whole story with many notable circumstances.
shifts he prolonged it, for the space of nine years, and withal the rare
faithfulness of his friends, and the memorable example of his wife Epponina.

XXVIII. A Diete of the cities of France summoned at Rheyms. The preparations
at Rome for the war against the Batauians, Treueri, and Lingones. The Diete
at Rheyms resolves upon peace, notwithstanding the embassage of the Treueri
and Lingones, and the allegations of Tullius Valentinus to the contrary.
THIS success of the Sequani rebated and stayed the violent course of the
war. The cities began to consider better of matters, and to remember their
covenants and leagues with the Romans, at the motion principally of the Remi,
who sending messengers throughout France summoned a Diete, to deliberate what
course they should take, keep peace or seek liberty. Al these things reported
at Rome to the worse, troubled Mutianus, lest the captains whom he had chosen,
Annius Gallus and Petilius Josephus (...). 7. c. 11. differs from Tacitus in
some little circumstances, and no doubt erreth: as that Cerealis, (...) was
sent Lieutenant in to Britanny ((...)) and in his way finding the Germans and
French revolted, composed the matter,
Cerealis, albeit excellent men, should hardly be able to wade through so mighty
a war. Neither was it expedient to leave the city without a governor and
head, and yet not in Domitians hand, whose wild and unbridled affections were
greatly feared: especially Antonius Primus, and Arrius Varus, as before we
have showed, being suspected not fully to favor the state. Moreover Varus was
captain of the Guard and strong, as having so many soldiers at commandment.
Therefore Mutianus before his departure displaced him from the room, and lest
he should be discontent altogether, made him chieffe officer for the provision
of corn: and to pacify the mind of Domitian, that bare some good will unto
Varus, he set in his place over the Guard Aretinus Clemens, one nearely allied
to the house of Vespasian, and dearly beloved of Domitian; alleging that his
father had worthily performed the same place under Caius the Emperor. The
name was acceptable to the soldiers, and the man, though a Senator by
calling, was thought sufficient to discharge both the rooms. The greatest men
of the City were willed to provide for the viage of France: some others were
taken in by especial suite. Suet. Domic. c. 2. expeditione^ quoque in Gallia^
Germaniasque neque necessaria^, and dissuadentibus paternis amicis, inchoavie
(Domitianus) tantum vt fratri se, and operibus, and dignatione, adaequaret.
Domitian and Mutianus both of them prepared for the journey, but not both
minded alike: Domitian hastening forward upon hope, and young blood: Mutianus
seeking delays to retain the fierceness of Domitian, lest if he put himself
in possession of an army, through the heat of youth and ill counselors, he
should disturb both the peace and the war. The sixth and Vide annot. 5.
eightth of the victorious Legions, of the Vitellianists the one and twentieth,
the second of the lately enrolled, were Some before Cerealis, and some after
him, as it appears in this book and the next.
conducted part over the Penin and Cottian Alps, part over the Graian: and
more over the fourteenth Legion was sent for out of Britannie, the sixth and
tenth out of Spain. Now the cities of France partly upon the fame of the host
approaching, and partly of their own disposition inclining to the milder
course, met in counsel at Rheyms, where an embassage of the Treueri attended,
whereof Tullius Valentinus was the chieffe man, a principal firebrande of the
war: who with a premeditate oration applied to the Romans all those
objections, wherewith mighty monarchies are usually charged, sparing no spite
of words, nor art to aggrauate matters against them; a factious person and apt
to stir troubles, and willingly heard of the multitude, by reason of his
eloquence such as it was. But Julius Auspex, one of the noblemen of Rheims,
discoursing of the puissance of the Roman power, and the great commodities of
peace, and affirming that war might be commenced by cowards, but must be
fought with the hazard of the most valiant men; and that even now the Roman
Legions were upon their backs, by this grave speech stayed them all: the wiser
sort with respect of duty and faith, the younger of danger and fear. And so
they commended the courage of Valentinus, but followed the counsel of Auspex.
It is certain that the Treueri and Lingones had the worse audience in France,
because in the commotion of Vindex they had sided themselves with Virginius.
Many were discouraged by reason of the emulation that would ensue between the
provinces; what should be the head of the war, from Vnde ius auspiciumque
peteretur.
whence should law and souerainty be derived; and if they did conquer which
should be the seat-towne of the Empire. They were not yet conquerours, and yet
were they at discord brawling about the preseance: some alleging their
treaties and ancient leagues, some their riches and present strength, and some
their antiquity. Whereupon the whole council detesting the future confusion,
affirmed and ratifyed the present estate. Letters also were written unto the
Treueri in the name of the common council of France to desist from arms,
whilst pardon might be easily obtained, and many would become suitors in their
behalf if they repented. But Valentinus refused the courtesy, and at his
return stopped the ears of his city against this good motion, being a man
rather plentiful in orations and speeches, then careful for other provision
of war.

XXIX. The one and twentieth Legion surnamed Rapax comes into Germany.
Sextilius Felix with his cohorts overthrows Tutor and the Treueri. Valentinus
returning from the Diete stirs up the war again. The two Legions
transported from Nouesium and Bonna to Triers depart to the Mediomatrici.
IN like manner neither did the Treueri, nor Lingones, nor the rest of the
states that revolted, carry themselves as the weight of the cause and the danger
required: even the captains themselves conferred not counsels together. But
Ciuilis wandered about the wilds of Belgium to catch Claudius Labeo, or else to
chase him out of the country: Classicus lay for the most part idle and lazy,
and as it were took the fruition of his supposedly gotten kingdom. Tutor also
slacked to make himself strong upon the upper bancke of the river, and with
garrison to possess the passages and heights of the Alps, whilst in the
mean time the one and twentieth Legion brake in from Vindonissa, and Sextilius
Felix, with the Auxiliary cohorts by the way of Rhoetia: unto whom a wing of
horsemen called Singulares (who marching at the first by Vitellius appointment
toward Italy revolted afterward to Vespasian) adjoined themselves. Their
captain was Julius Briganticus Ciuilis sisters son, mortally hating his
uncle, and hated again: as commonly the enmities of nearest kinsfolks, if
once they fall out, are most dispitefull and deadly. Tutor increased his power
consisting of Treueri with a fresh supply of Vangiones, Caracates, and Triboci,
and that which added most strength with old experienced Legionary soldiers,
both footmen and horse, some corrupted with hope, and others awed with fear:
who at the first killed a cohort sent before by Sextilius Felix, and anon when
the Roman captains and armies approached, redeeming their former fault fled
over to them, and were followed by the Triboci, Vangiones and Caracates. So
Tutor being left alone with his Treueri eschewing Magontiacum fled to Bingium,
trusting upon the strength of the place, because he had broken down the
bridge of the river Naua: but Sextilius with his cohortes following his
footesteppes, and finding a forde discried his power, and overthrew it. This
discomfiture utterly discouraged the Treueri: and the common people casting
their weapons away returned to their husbandry. And certain of the nobility
that they might seem to be foremost in laying hostility aside, fled to those
cities for refuge which had not broken with the Romans. The Legions, which, as
before we declared, went by commandment from Nouesium and Bonna to Triers,
voluntarily resumed the oath to Vespasian. These things were done in the
absence of Valentinus: who at his return, in a desperate fury and rage stirred
the coals, and kindled the fire anew. Whereupon the Legions got them away to
the Mediomatrici, a state in league with the Romans: and Valentinus and Tutor
persuaded the Treueri to take up their weapons again, and go to the field,
having first killed Herennius and Numisius the Lieutenants, to the intent that
being without all hope of pardon, they might be more fastly united together in
their wicked conspiracy.

XXX. Petilius Cerealis overthrows the Treueri, takes Valentinus alive,
adioyneth the two Legions from the Mediomatrici, and makes an oration to the
Treueri.
THIS was the state of the war, when Petilius Cerealis came to Magontiacum,
and by his presence raised great expectation, and hope of our side. Cerealis
himself was desirous of the battle, and having a better grace sometime to
contemn the enemies, then always to beware them, with lusty courageous
words he inflamed his soldier, as purposing, so soon as he could overtake
the enemies without delay to join issue in field. A supply of soldiers sent
out of France he turned home again, willing them to signify so much to the
rest in his name, that the Roman Legions suffized for the defense of the Roman
Empire: and that al our good friends and allies should return to their
peaceable business, without further care, assuring themselves that the war,
now that the Romans personally undertook it, was as good as already
dispatched. That increased the obedience of the French: for having received
their men back again, they supported more easily al taxes and tributes, and
were the more ready to perform all points of their duty, because they saw
their help was not needed. But Ciuilis and Classicus, whenas they heard of the
overthrow of Tutor, the slaughter of the Treueri, and the good success every
where of their enemies, all in a fright and have seek to unite their dispersed
powers, sending messengers in the mean time to Valentinus one after another,
warning him to take heed to the maine chance, and not rashly to venture and
hazard the battle. With so much the more expeditio^ Cerealis dispatched to the
Mediomatrici, lying nearer upon the enemy, certain to lead the two Legions
thence to assail them on that side: and assembling all the soldiers at
Magontiacum, and the power which he had brought with him over the mountains,
himself marched forward, and at the third remove came to Rigodulum, a place
naturally strong by reason of the high situation, and the river Mosella closing
it in: where Valentinus with a great power of Treueri was encamped, and had
made it stronger by art, casting trenches and ditches about it, and mighty
huge stones to hinder the passage. But these fortifications terrified the Roman
captain nothing at all, but boldly he bad the footmen break through, and
appointed his battle of horsemen to clime up the mountain, despising the
enemy, whom he knew to be raw, and unskillful in service, and not to have that
advantage by the difference of place, that himself had by the difference of
men. At the going up of the hill some little stay was made, until the enemies
had spent their arrows and darts: then coming to handy strokes, they were
driven down headlong, and tumbled one over another, as it were stones at the
fall of a building: and part of the horsemen fetching about by easier ascents
took many of the chief nobility of Belgium prisoners, and amongst others
Valentinus General that day of the field. the next day Cerealis entered the
town of Triers. The soldiers were extremely desirous to raze the city,
alleging, that here Classicus, here Tutor was borne: here were the men
through whose wicked conspiracy the Legions were besieged and slain. what had
poor Cremona deserved so greatly, as to be rooted out of the body of Italy,
because it differred the victory only one night? here in the confines of
Germany stood the seatetowne of rebellion entier, and triumphing with the
spoils, and slaughter of our armies and Generals. As for the spoil he might
at his pleasure dispose of to the Princes behoof, they could be contented with
the burning, and ruins of that rebellious colony, to requite thereby in some
part the destruction of so many camps. Cerealis for fear of infamy, if he
should be thought to noosell his soldiers in licentiousness and cruelty,
repressed their anger, and they obeyed, being become now they had left off
civil war, of more modest behavior also in foreign. Then the miserable and
pitiful spectacle of the Legions, which came from the Mediomatrici, drew men's
minds to the consideration thereof. Upon the guilt of their offense they stood
with a sad and sorrowful countenance, casting their eyes down to the ground,
no joyful greeting when the armies met, nor answering ought to those that
sought to encourage and comfort them, but hiding themselves in their tents, not
abiding to look on the light: not so much amazed with danger or fear, as with
the shame and discredit. and even the conquerous were astonished at the sight,
who not daring to speak, begged their pardon with silence and tears, till
such time as Cerealis with comfortable words revived their spirits; affirming
that those things, which indeed came to pass through the mutinousnesse of the
soldiers, or the dissension of the leaders, or the malice of the enemies, were
but fatal mischances, which could not be escaped: and therefore that day they
should account the first both of their service, and oath: their former facts
neither the Prince, nor he would remember. Then were they received into the
same camp, and a proclamation made throughout all the bands, that no man in
contention or anger should object to any of them their misdeedes or mishappes.
Then calling the Treueri and Lingones to an assembly, he spoke unto them in
this wise.

"I was never practiced in the art of speaking: my profession is arms, and
with arms I have made good proof of the virtue of the Romans. But because
words prevail so much with you, and I see you esteem good and evil, not by
their own natures, but by the speeches of factious persons, I thought it
expedient to say some thing, which now that the war in a manner is finished
may be more behoouefull for you to hear, then for us to speak. The Caesar
lib. 1. de bello Gallico. c. 7
Romans, their Captains and Leaders, entered your country and the rest of
France, not pricked by any desire of theirs, but requested thereto by your
predecessors, at what time civil dissensions had tired and ruined them, and
the Germans called in by one side brought both into thraldom. How many
battles we have fought against the Cimbri and Teutones, what pains our
armies have taken, and with what success we have handled our selves in the
German wars for your sakes, it is notoriously known; neither do we
therefore with so much expense of money and men guard the Rhene for the safety
of Italy, but lest some other Ariouistus should pass and conquer the
kingdom of France. Or do you think your selves better beloved of Ciuilis and
the Batauians, and the Germans over the Rhene, then your fathers and
grandfathers were of their predecessors? the same causes still are remaining,
and so will be for ever, to move the Germans to pass into France; to wit,
satisfying of their pleasures and lusts, avarice, and desire of changing seat,
that leaving their mires and deser^es, they may take possession of this
fruitful country, and you the inhabitants thereof. yea but liberty and
glorious shows are pretended. Where was ever any, I pray you, that sought to
enthrall or usurp over others, but he cloaked his purposes with such goodly
titles? France never was without petty tyrannes and wars, till ye came under
our jurisdiction. We, albeit we have been often provoked, have put that only
as conquerours upon you, whereby peace might be maintained. For neither peace
can be maintained without arms, nor arms without wages, nor wages without
tribute: all other things are alike to us both. you commonly govern our
Legions, you are the Presidents of these and other provinces, no prerogative is
kept from you, or reserved for us. Again they which dwell far off, feel the
commodity alike of a good Prince, whereas tyrannes oppress most the nearest.
As you endure and support with patience a barren year, if it happen, and
unseasonable weather, and such other defects of nature; even so tolerate a
little and bear with the riotous life or avarice of governors. Faults will be
so long as there be men: but neither are they continual, and amends is
commonly made by better which follow. Unless peradventure you hope for a more
moderate, or easier government under the reign of Tutor and Classicus, or
that with less tribute, then now is paid, armies can be maintained to hold
out the Germans and Britans. For if the Romans, which the gods defend, should
be dispossessed, what else can ensue but wars of nations against nations, and
the confusion of the whole world. This frame is the workemanshippe of eight
hundredth years, good fortune, and discipline, which cannot be dissolved
without the destruction of the dissoluers; but your danger, which have gold
and riches the chiefest causes of war, of all is the greatest. Therefore
embrace you peace, and love that city whereof both you and we are members
alike. You have proved both fortunes: let them be a warning unto you to choose
rather subjection with safety, then rebellion with ruin. With this speech he
settled their minds, and lightened their hearts, who feared a heavier doom.

XXXI. Ciuilis and Classicus write to Cerealis.
AT the time that the Roman army was within Triers, Ciuilis and Classicus sent
letters to Cerealis. The contents were, that Vespasian was dead, although the
Posts concealed the matter: that Rome and Italy were consumed and wasted with
inward war. As for Mutianus and Domitian they were nothing else, but vain
names without forces: if Cerealis list undertake the Empire of France, it were
his best course, and they would not be against it, contenting themselves with
their own cities and confines, or if battle pleased him better, even that
they would not refuse. To these points Cerealis answered nothing to them, but
sent the messenger, that brought the letters, away to Domitian.

XXXII. Ciuilis with his confederates overthrown by Cerealis at Triers.
IN the mean season the enemies began to march, and approached on every side in
several companies: whom Cerealis permitting to join, was blamed by many for
suffering the^ to unite, with whom he might have fought single, and defeated
them easily being divided. The Roman army cast a ditch and trench about their
camp, in the which they were before unadvisedly lodged without any defense.
Among the captains of the other side there was diversity of opinions, and the
matter debated both ways. Ciuilis thought it expedient to stay for the Germans
coming which dwelt over the Rhene, the terror of which nations would tread
underfoot the Roman powers: as for the Frenchmen it mattered not much what way
they went, being naught else but a pray to the conquerours; and yet the strength
of France, the Belgians, had either openly declared for them, or at least
secretly wished them well. Contrarily Tutor affirmed, that by delay the Romans
would grow and increase, so many whole hosts coming in from every side, one
Legion being already transported out of Britannie, others sent for out of
Spain, and many Legions at hand out of Italy, not of raw soldiers, but old
and well expert in war: as for the Germans they looked for, what were they
else but a kind of unprofitable troubles of a camp, out of all awe and
obedience to superiors, that would not be commanded nor ruled, but do all as
they listed themselves? Now for money and gifts, the only means to corrupt
the Germans, the Romans had more abundancee, and no man was so hasty to fight,
but would rather choose quietness then danger with the same hire. Whereas if
they would presently fight, Cerealis had no other Legions as yet, but only the
remnants of the German army enta^gled with an oath to the Empire of France. And
moreover this their late unlooked for success against Valentinus, and his rude
untrained company, would be a bait unto them and their General to further
rashness, and therefore they would without doubt venture again, and so fall
into the hands not of an unskillful youth, better seen in words and babble,
then arms and militare feats, but of Ciuilis and Classicus; at the very sight
of whom the enemies would tremble, calling to remembrance their former fears,
and flightes, and famines, and how often they had been taken and pardoned their
lives. Neither do the Treueri and Lingones keep in with the Romans now upon
love and goodwill, but for fear: which take ye away and they will resume their
weapons again. Classicus approving the opinion of Tutor decided the
controversy, and forthwith they proceed to execution. The middle battle was
assigned to the Vbij and Lingones, on the right side stood the Batauian
cohorts, on the left the Bructeri and Tencteri: in this array partly from the
mountains and part "Whereupon being full of indignation and wrath, You forsake
not (quoth he) Hordeonius or Vocula, you can allege no falsehood or treason
in me: neither ever did I commit any act that needed excuse, save only in
affirming you had forgotten your oath to France, and remembered your allegiance
to the Roman Empire. I shall, and so am contented to be numbered with Numisius
and Herennius, that al your Lieutenants may be said to have dyed either by the
hands of their own soldiers or else of the enemy. Go tell Vespasian, or which
is nearer Ciuilis and Classicus, that you have left your General in the field:
Legions shortly will come, doubt ye not, which shall neither suffer me to be
long unrevenged, nor you unpunished. The accusation was true, and the Captains
and Tribunes spoke, and urged to the same purpose. So they rallied and made
head by cohorts and bands, for the whole battle could not be displayed,
partly because the enemy was upon them, and partly by reason of their tents and
stuff, which hindered them greatly fighting within the trenches. Tutor and
Classicus and Ciuilis each in their several quarters animated their men to
fight, the Frenchmen for liberty, the Batauians for glory, and the Germans for
spoil: and all went with the enemy, till the one and twentieth Legion
knitting together in a more open place then the rest, valiantly received the
adversaries charge; and recharging by and by drove them from their ground. It
was not without the special help of the gods, that our enemies being
victorious so suddenly altered their minds, and turned their backs. They
affirmed afterward the sight of the cohorts terrifyed them, which at the first
joining being defeated united again in the hill tops, and seemed a new
supply in their sight. But indeed the chieffe impediment of their victory
was, that they left of to deal with the enemy, and quarrelled foolishly among
themselves for the spoil. Cerealis as he had almost undone all by negligence,
so by diligence and constancy he recovered it again, and following his
fortune took the same day, and razed the enemies camp.

XXXIII. They of Coleyn kill the Germans which they find in their town: and
cut a cohort of Ciuilis lying at Tolbiacum in pieces. The Caninefates fight
prosperously against the fleet of Britanny, and Ciuilis against some of
Cerealis horsemen.
THE soldier without any long intermission was straightwaies called to a new
service. They of Coleyn requested their help, and offered to surrendre the wife
and sister of Ciuilis, and the daughter of Classicus, which were left with them
as pledges of mutual amity, and in the mean season slew the Germans which
lay dispersed in their town: whereupon growing into extreme fear they had
just cause to cry for aid, before the enemies gathering new strength should
resume courage, or prosecute the revenge. For Ciuilis also purposed
thitherwarde, beside other competent forces, upon confidence principally of
his most courageous cohorte composed of Chauci and Frisij, which was not
present in the overthrow, and lay at Tolbiacum in the territory of Coleyn, but
he was diuerted from that determination by a sorrowful message, that the
cohort was massacred by the fraud of the Agrippinenses, who when the Germans
had filled themselves with wine and good cheer, and so were laid to sleep,
shut up the doors, put fire to their lodging, and burned them alive: and
withal Cerealis was come himself with speed to relieve them. Moreover
another fear troubled Ciuilis mind not a little, lest the fourteenth Legion
together with the navy of Britannie should wast and spoil the Batauian border
that lies upon the Ocean. But Fabius Priscus the Lieutenant, having crossed
the seas at the shortest cut, led forth the Legion by land into the coasts of
the Neruij and Tungri; and those countries yielded themselves to the Romans. As
for the navy, the Caninefates venturously made out against it, and took or
suncke the greater part of the ships: and the same Caninefates defeated a
multitude of Neruij, voluntarily gathered together to fight in favor of the
Romans. Classicus also against certain horsemen, which Cerealis sent before to
Nouesium, skirmished prosperously. Which small but often losses did dim and
diminish the glory of the victory lately obtained.

XXXIIII. The son of Vitellius is slain. Antonius Primus discontented
saileth from Rome to Vespasian lying at Alexandria.
ABOUT the same time Mutianus commanded the son of Vitellius to be slain,
pretending that a perfect union could not grow, unless all seeds of war
were utterly rooted out. Moreover he would not permit that Antonius Primus
should be assumed into Domitians train in the vyage of France, having him in
jealousy, by reason of the soldiers love toward him, and because of the man's
hawty proud nature, who could not abide any equal, much less a superior. So
Antonius mal-content went to Vespasian, who received and intertayned him in
good sort, albeit not according to his expectation. The merits of the man, by
whose conduct doubtless the war was consummate and ended, distracted him one
way, and Mutianus letters another: and withal the rest put forward, inueying
against him as an insolent and intolerable person, joining thereto the faults
of his former life. And he for his part by his arrogant behavior ceased not
to provoke displeasure, odiously inculcating at every word, what things he
had done, and how greatly he had deserved of the cause, despising the rest as
men of no service in war, and Caecina as a dishonored captive, and yielded
person. Whereupon by little and little he began to be in less credit, and
lightlyer esteemed of the Prince, notwithstanding outwardly he countenanced
him as before.

security, as being more addict to pleasures the^ to devotions, neglected the
matter and cast his cares otherwhere, until the same vision appeared in more
terrible and vehement manner, denouncing destruction peremptorily to him and his
kingdom, if he performed not his commandments. Then Ptoleme sent an embassage
with presents to Scydrothemis the king of Sinope, willing them at their
departure to go by Delphos and ask counsel of Apollo. Their journey by sea
was prosperous, and Apolloes answer without ambiguity; namely that they should
go forward, and bring with them away his fathers image, but leave his sisters.
When they came to Sinope, after they had presented their gifts to Scydrothemis,
they declared at large their commission, and what the king their master
requested at his hands. Scydrothemis was doubtful in mind: sometimes he
feared the wrathful displeasure of the god, sometimes the threats of his
subjects, who were utterly against the granting of it, and sometimes he had a
favorable respect to the presents and promises of the ambassadors. And so
three years being spent in this negotiation, Ptoleme notwithstanding
continued an earnest suitor sending more honorable ambassadors, mo ships,
and more store of gold. At the last a fearful and threatening vision
appeared to Scydrothemis, charging him no longer to hinder that, which the god
had determined: and as notwithstanding he protracted, many mischieffes befell
him, and diverse diseases, and the manifest wrath of the gods vexed him daily
more and more. Then calling an assembly of all the people he declares unto
them the will of the god, his own and Ptolemes visions, and also the
mischieffes which otherwise hung over their heads. The common people withstoode
the motion, envying at Egypt, and fearing their own state, and so beset the
temple about: whereupon a strong report goes, that the god without hands
conveyed himself into the ships, which lay there at ancker: and, which is
marvelous to be reported, sailing from thence through so vast seas, they
arrived the third day at Alexandria. So a Dionysius (...).
temple was built answerable to the magnificence of the city, in a place
called Rhacotis, where had been a chapel of ancient time consecrated to Or
rather to Osyris and Jsis, or else we shall have a Sarapis before Sarapis came,
which perchance were an inco^^enience.
Sarapis and Isis. And this is the most famous opinion concerning the original
of the god and his transportation. I know that some hold he was brought from
Seleucia a city of Syria, in the reign of Ptoleme the Surnamed (...).
third: others that the same Ptoleme was the transporter, but it was from
Memphis a famous city, in ancient times the glory and strength of old Egypt.
The god himself many suppose to be But whatsoever god he was indeed, the
Egyptians called him usually Sarapi^. (...), says Plut. li de Iside and
Osiride. (...).
Aesculapius because he cures diseases; some Osiris the oldest god known of
those nations; many Jupiter, as sovereign lord over all; most Pluto, by notes
that manifestly appear in him, or otherwise by collection gathering arguments
of their conjecture.

XXXVI. The viage of Domitian and Mutianus with their train to Lions.
BUT Domitian and Mutianus before they came to the Alps received the news of
the prosperous battle against the Treneri: and for a sure proof of the
victory Valentinus the General of the enemies was withal delivered into their
hands, who in his adversity retained his former courage, declaring in
countenance what stomach once he had borne. He was permitted to speak for
himself, only that his nature and gifts might be seen, and so adjudged to
dye. At his execution one vpbraided unto him that his country was taken, then
shall I dye, quoth he, with greater contentment. Then Mutianus cunningly
induced speech as proceeding from the present occasion, being indeed that
which long time he had proiected before: that seeing through the great Joseph.
^. d. (...). c. 11. falsely and flatteringly attributes the glory of finishing
this war to Domitian.
favor and goodness of the gods the forces of the enemies were broken, it
were unseemly for Domitian, now that the war was almost at an end, to
intercept the glory of another man's travails: if the case stood so that the
state of the Empire or safety of France were in danger, it were requisite that
the Princes son should stand in the field: but to fight against the
Caninefates and Batauians would be committed to Commanders of lower degree;
he himself should stay at Lions, and from thence in a reasonable distance
make show of the Princely puissance and state, neither venturing his person in
matters of small moment and if any greater should happen, ready at hand. The
art was understood, but seeming not to understand it was a point of
obedience. And so they came to Lions; from whence it is thought that Domitian
sent a secret message to Cerealis, to prove his loyalty, whether if he came
thither in person he would deliver him his army and government: what he
intended thereby, to make war with his father, or to strengthen and fortify
himself against his brother when the time should serve, it is not certainly
known: for Cerealis with good and discreet answer shifted off this fond and
childish request. Domitian perceiving his Being about seventeen or eighteen
years old at that time.
youth contemned of the elder men, ceased from meddling any more in affairs of
estate, even of the meaner sort, and such as before usually passed through his
hands: withal, under color of simplicity and modesty, sequestring himself
to a close and solitary kind of life, pretending desire of learning and love
of poetry, thereby to cover his disposition, and avoid all emulation and cause
of unkindness with his brother, whose unlike and far more courteous nature he
construed contrarily.

THE LIFE OF JULIUS AGRICOLA WRITTEN BY CORNELIUS TACITUS.
TO report and deliver to posterity the doings and demeanours of excellent
personages, a thing usual in ancient times, even our age, though careless
otherwise of her own, has not omitted then and so often whenas any great and
eminent virtue has ouergrowen two vices, to little and great common wealths
common alike, saw the highest pitch and perfection of liberty, so we of
seruility, being deprived by intelligencers and spies of the commerce of
hearing and speaking together: yea memory also, as well as tongue we had lost,
had it lain in our power as well to forget as it did to keep silence. Now at
the length our former spirits begin to revive: howbeit although Prince Nerua,
straight at the first entry of this most happy age, has wisely matched and
mixed together two things heretofore insociable, the souerayntie of one with
the liberty of all; and Traian his son, proceeding in the same train,
makes the Empire daily more supportable and easy; so that not only we may
hope and conceive prayers for the public security, but see and touch the
effect of our prayers assured and confirmed unto us: yet notwithstanding by
proof it is found (such is the nature of man's imbecility) the remedies to be
of slower operation, then were the diseases. And as our bodies wax and gather
strength by leisure, perish in a moment; so good wits and good learning are
sooner cut down then raised again. For the sweetness and pleasing of
idleness, and of doing nothing, creeps into our senses: and slothfulness
which at the first we detest, by custom obtayneth our favor and love: to
omit that in For so long Domitian was Emperor.
fifteen years, a great part of man's age, many have been wasted by casual
chances, the most sufficient and forward by the cruelty of the Prince, a few
of us only remaining that have ouerliued, as I may say, not only others, but
also our selves, having so many years subducted out of the midst of our life,
in which we proceeded in silence from youngmen to aged, from aged almost to
the grave. And yet peradventure it shall not repent me to compose, though in
rude and vnframed speech, a By a memory of their thraldom, he means, as I
suppose, his books of Hist: by a testimony of their present felicity, a
volume intended by him of Nerua and Traians time (as it appears in the preface
of the history) but never, I think, performed.
memory of our late thraldom, and a testimony of our present felicities. In
the mean while this treatise I have specially vowed to the honor of Agricola
my father in law; and therefore as being in discharge of duty, and carrying
profession of kindness, it shall either abroad purchase praise, or be
covered at least with some courteous excuse.

CNEVS JULIUS AGRICOLA was borne in the ancient and noble colony of Seneca de
benefic. lib. 2. Si exemplo magni a nimi opus est, vtemur Groecini Julij vi^i
egregij, quem C. Caesar occidit ob hoc vnum, quod melior vir esset, quam esse
quenquam tyranno expediret.
Julius Groecinus was by calling a Senator, for eloquence and wisdom famous:
by reason of which qualities he incurred the displeasure of Caius the
Emperor, being willed by him to prefer accusation against Marcus Silanus;
which because he refused he was put to death. His mother Iulia Procilla, a
mirror of rare chastity: under whose wing and motherly care Agricola being
brought up, passed over his infancy and youth in the exercise of all good
qualities and arts. And beside his own disposition clearly and wholly given
to good, it was a good means to withholde him from the allurements of vice,
that he happened to have the town of Strabo. lib. 4. (...). and in another
place he attributes to the Massilians the commendation (...).
Massilia for the place of his first aboade and study in youth, a city
compounded of Greek ciuility and provincial frugality well sorted together. I
have heard him say, I remember, that being young he had addicted himself to
the study of philosophy in earnester sort, and beyond the measure of a Roman
and Senator, had not the wisdom of his mother corrected and cooled the heat
of that humor. That noble and hawtie mind of his was carried to embrace, with
more feruency then discretion, the bewty and gay show of that high and
glorious profession: but reason anon and riper years reformed his judgment:
and so he retained, a point most hard to be kept, of wisdom a mean.

His first service in war was in Britanny under Suetonius Paullinus; into
whose train being assumed he was of that diligent and discrete leader well
liked: not spending the time in riot after the manner of youths, which convert
warfare into wantonness; nor accepting the title of Tribuneshippe without
skill in the service, as a calling of ease for pleasure and gadding abroad;
but wholly directing his mind to know the province, to be known of the
army, to learn of the skillful, to follow the best, to desire no employment
upon vain glory, to refuse none for fear, jointly to show himself both
careful and earnest in action. Never did our affairs in Britannie stand at
any time in the like terms of doubt and distress: our old soldiers were
slain, our Camalodunu^ and Verulanium: but this later was municipium and not
colonia in the straitness of terms.
colonies burned, our armies entrapped, then we fought for to live, afterward
for to win. All which exploites, though performed by the counsel and
conduict of another, and consequently the credit of the cause, and glory of
recovering the country appertaining to the Lieutenant, yet were they occasions
to increase in the young man skill, experience, and desire of militare renown,
a quality not so acceptable in those seasons, wherein great virtues were
greatly suspected, and a great fame endangered more then a bad.

From Britanny departing to Rome to bear offices he joined himself in
matrimony with Domitia Decidiana, a woman of honorable birth: which marriage
was a countenance, and a strength to his further purposes: and they lived
together in marvelous unity with mutual love, and Or, following another sense
of the latin word, which may seem doubtful, and each preferring the other
both virtuous alike, saving that the commendation is so much the greater in a
good wife, as the reproach is the more in a bad.
yielding preeminence the one to the other; a point otherwise not greatly
material, saving that a good wife is a great commendation, as well as an ill a
reproach. Being Questor his lot fell in Asia with Saluius Titianus the
Proconsul. Neither was he withdrawn by that means from his wonted integrity,
although both the province was rich and readily ministered matter to offend,
and his Proconsull a man of insatiable greediness would with any remissness
willingly have redeemed at his hands mutual conniuence and covering of
faults. There his wife bare him a daughter both to his stay and his comfort,
for the son she brought him before was already deceased having lived but a
little. After his Questorship till he was created Tribune of the people, and
the year also of his Tribuneship he passed over in rest and quietness, well
weying the nature of Neroes time, Tacit. 1. Hist. speaking of Galba, and the
same times. claritas natalium, and metus temporum obtentui, vt quod segnitia
erat sapientia vocaretur.
wherein sloth was a virtue, and to do nothing the greatest wisdom of all.
His Pretorship also he passed over in the same sort, with the like silence: for

The year following wounded his mind, and plunged his house in a heavy
mishappe. For Of this matter we read in Tacitus. 2. Hist. page 66.
Othoes fleet rouing at large licentiously, in wasting Intemelium a part of
Liguria, slew the mother of Agricola in her own grounds, spoiled the grounds,
and carried away most part of the wealth which was the cause of the murder. As
Agricola went to solemnize the funeralles he received advise, that Vespasian
was in arms for the Empire, and without more advise joined himself to the
side. Domitian as yet was but young, and challenged not, as an Emperors son,
any thing else save only licentious life. The affairs of the Empire and state
of the City were governed at the beginning, and wholly directed by Mutianus
alone. By commission from whom Agricola being sent to take musters, and
behauing himself in that charge with great integrity and courage, he was by
the same Mutianus, upon message received of the seditious demeanure of Roscius
Coelius, made in his place Lieutenant of the twentieth Legion, a Legion which
slowly had sworn to Vespasian, and was out of awe, or awed much rather even
the Lieutenants General; much less was the Legions Lieutenant of power to
refrain them, whether through the weakness of his own arm, or hard mouth of
his soldiers, it is not assured. Thus being elected both to succeed and
revenge, he showed an example of most rare moderation, in choosing to seem
rather to have found, then to have made, them dutiful soldiers. At that time
Vectius Bolanus was Lieutenant of Britannie, governing in a gentler and milder
manner, then was fit for so fierce a country. Under him Agricola cunningly
conforming himself to that humor, and not unlearned to join profitable
counsels with honest, tempered the heat of his nature, and restrained from
growing his hawty desires. Soon after Petilius Cerealis was appointed
Lieutenant General there: under whom the virtues of Agricola had a large field
and free scope to show themselves in. For Cerealis communicated and imparted
unto him, first himself and his counsels, then actions of labor and danger,
and lastly glory also; committing oftentimes for a proof to his leading some
portion of the army, sometimes many more, according to the success. Neither
did Agricola at any time brag of his doings as seeking to win fame for
himself, but humbly always as a minister referred to his superior, and
General, the good fortune and honor of all his exploites. So by his virtue in
valiantly doing his charge, and his modesty in sparingly speaking thereof, he
was without envy, but not without glory.

Upon his return from the Lieutenantshippe of the Legion, Vespasian of sacred
memory elected him into the company of the are come, like fear in refusing:
saving the Britans make show of more courage, as being not mollifyed yet by
long peace; for the French also were once, as we read, redoubted in war,
till such time as giving themselves over to peace and idleness cowardice crept
in, and shipwreck was made both of manhood and liberty together: and so it is
also befallen to those of the Britans which were subdued of old; the rest
remain such as the French were before. Their strength in the field consists
in footmen; some cuntreyes make war in wagons also: the greater personage
guides the wagon, his wayters and followers fight out of the same. Heretofore
they were governed by kings, now they are drawn by petty Princes into
partialities and factions: and that is the greatest help we have against
those puissant nations, that they have no common council together: seeldome it
chances that two or three states meet and concur to repulse the common
danger: so whilst one by one fights, all are subdued. The sky very cloudy
and much given to rain without extremity of cold. The length of the days
much above the measure of our climate. The nights light, and in the furthermost
part of the island so short, that between the going out and coming in of the
day the space is hardly perceived, and when clouds do not hinder they affirm
that the sunneshine is seen It is marvel how it can be night; when the
sunneshine is seen. but you must bear with a man out of his profession. for
that which he adds, non occidere, and exurgere, sed transire, is true in
summer in the clima^e of (...): but no part of Britannie reaches so far.
in the night and that it neither sets nor rises but passes along: because
belike the Empire patiently and willingly if insolences be forborne,
indignities they cannot abide, being already subdued as to be subjects, but not
to be slaves.

The first of the Romans which entered Britannie with an army was Julius Caesar,
who although he terrifyed the inhabitants with a battle which went on his
side, and gained the shore, yet may seem rather to have showed the place to
posterity, then delivered to them the possession thereof.

Then civil wars ensued, and bandings of men of great quality against the
free state, and long after that lay Britannie forgotten, even in peaceable
times. Augustus termed it

That Caius had a meaning to invade Britannie it is certainly known: but his
rash running head and hasty repentance, and chiefly his great attempts against
Germany turning to nothing, euerted that purpose.

Claudius Who being requested by one Bericus a fugitive of Britannie sent
Plautius before, of whom, and of the acts of Claudius in Britannie read Dio.
li. 40. p. 466. where mention is made also of Vespasian.
did first with effect prosecute the matter, transporting Legions and Aids,
and assuming Vespasian into the action, which was the beginning of the greatness
whereunto he after attained: some cuntreyes were subdued, some kings were
taken, and Vespasian made known to the world.

The first Lieutenant General was Aulus Plautius, then Ostorius Tac. 12. Ann.
p. 430. etc.
Scapula, both excellent warriers: and so by little and little was the nearest
part of the island reduced to the form of a province; and besides a
Camalodunu^. 12. Ann. p. 431.
colonie of old soldiers established there. Certain cities were also
bestowed in pure gift upon king Cogidunus (who remained most faithful even to
our days) according to an old Perseus in his embassage to Eumenes
complains, Pop. Romanum regum viribus reges oppugnare. Atta^o adiutore patrem
suum oppressum: Eumene adiuuante, and quadam ex part Philippo patre suo,
Antiochum oppugnatum: in se nunc Eumenem and Prusiam armatos esse. Liuy. lib.
44. f. 372.
custom anciently received of the Romans to use even kings themselves for
instruments of bondage.

Then Didius Tac. 12. Ann. p. 434. where also he calls him A. Didius.
Gallus succeeded in place, who kept that which his predecessors had gotten,
and builded some few castles further in the land, to win by that means a
fame of augmenting the office.

After Didius succeeded Yac. 14. Ann. p. 491.
Veranius, who died within one year.

Then Of the success of his affairs read Tac. 14 Annalium where they are
more largely described. p. 492. etc.
Suetonius Paullinus for two years space behaved himself fortunately,
subduing the nations and establishing garrisons. Upon confidence whereof going
to assail the i will of Anglesey.
Mona, which ministered supply to the rebels, he disfurnished the country
behind, and laid it open to all opportunities of the enemy. For through the
absence of the Lieutenant, the Britans free of fear began to discourse the
miseries of bondage, to lay their injuries together, and aggrauate them by
constructions. that their patience had profited them nothing, save only to
draw heavier burdens upon them, as men that would gently bear. that whereas
in former times they had only one king, now were there two thrust upon them,
the Lieutenant to suck their blood, the Procuratour their substance: whose
disagreeing was the torment of the subjects, their agreement their undoing; the
one vexing by soldiers and captains, the other by wrongs and indignities.
that now their covetousness and lust laid hold, without exception, of all:
and whereas in field he that spoyleth is commonly stronger, now were they by
cowards and weaklings for the most part dispossessed of their houses, bereft of
their children, enjoined to yield soldiers for other men's behoof, as though
they were men, that knew how to do any thing else, save only to dye for
their own country. For otherwise what a small handful of soldiers were come
over, if the Britans would fall to reckon themselves! that In the battle
against Quin^ilius Varus.
Germany so had shakt of the yoke, having no Ocean sea, but only a river, for
their defense. that their causes of taking arms were urgent and just, their
wives and children, their parents, and country, whereas the Romans had
nothing to move them to war, but their own covetousness and wanton lust:
and that they would doubtless depart, as Caesar Julius had done, if the
Britans would imitate the virtues of their progenitors, and not be dismayed
with the doubtful event of one skirmish or two. that men in misery had more
courage and vehemency to attempt, more constancy to continue: and now even
the gods seemed to pity the poor Britans estate, having sent the Roman
Captain out of the way, and confined the army, as it were, into an other
island. that now being assembled to aduize and deliberate together, they had
attained the hardest point, in an action of that nature, wherein without
question it were more danger, to be taken consulting, then doing. With these
and the like speeches inciting one another, by common consent they resolve to
take arms under the conduct of 14. Annal. her name is written Boodicia, and
page 494. Boudicea, in Xiphilinus copy (...). page 173.
Voadica a lady of the blood of their Kings: for in matter of governing in
chieffe they make no distinction of sex. And first pursuing the soldiers
which lay divided in garrisons, and winning the fortes, they invaded anon the
colonie it self, as being the seat of their slavery: in sacking whereof no
kind of cruelty was omitted, which either anger or the rage of victory might
induce a barbarous people to practice. And unless upon knowledge had of the
revolt Paullinus had come to succor with speed, Britannie had then been
lost, the which with one prosperous battle he restored to her former
obedience, and patient bearing the yoke, some few keeping out and remaining in
arms, whom the guilt of the rebellion excluded from all hope of pardon, and
some fear also of the Lieutenants private displeasure: who though otherwise a
singular man, yet seemed to show too much hautie and hard dealing toward
those which yielded themselves, and to revenge in a sort his own injury.
Whereupon Tacit. 14. Ann. p. 496.
Petronius Turpilianus was sent in his place as a more intreatable person, and
a stranger to their faults, and therefore more ready to receive their
repentance: who having composed the former troubles, and daring no further,
delivered Trebellius Maximus the charge.

Tac. 1. Hist. p. 44.
Trebellius a man unfit for action, and altogether vnexperte in service, by a
kind of courteous and mild regiment entertained the country in quiet. For now
the Britans also had learned the good manners, not rudely to repulse the sugared
assaults and flatterings of vices; and the disturbance of civil dissensions
ministered a lawful excuse for his doing nothing. But the soldier accustomed
to warfare waxt vvanton with ease, and grew to be mutinous. Trebellius by
fleeing away and hiding himself eschewed their first indignation, and anon
resuming his place without majesty, without authority, he ruled by way of
entreaty, and at his soldiers discretion: and so coming as it were to a
capitulation, the army for license to do what them listed, the Captain for
safety of his own life, the mutinee ended without any bloodshed.

Tacit. 2. Hist. page 90.
Vectius Bolanus succeeded in place, and in the same looseness of discipline,
the civil wars continuing still, like default against the enemy, like
license in the camp, saving that Bolanus a good honest man, not odious for any
crime, in steed of obedience had gotten goodwill.

But whenas Vespasian with the rest of the world recovered Britannie also,
great Captains, good soldiers were sent, and the hope of the enemy was
greatly abated. For straightwaies Petilius Cerealis struck a terror into
them, by inuading upon his first entry the Brigantes, the most populous state
of the whole province. Many battles were fought, and some bloody, and the
greatest part of the Yorkshire, Lancashire, Westmerland, Cumberland, and the
Byshopricke of Durtham.
Brigantes either conquered or wasted.

And whereas Cerealis would doubtless have dimmed the diligence and fame of
another successor, Julius Frontinus a great man, as he might after that
predecessor, sustained the charge with reputation and credit, subduing the
puissant, and warlicke people of the Silures: where he had, beside the virtue
of the enemy, to struggle with the straites and difficult places.

In this estate Agricola found the province, and the wars thus far
proceeded in, whenas about the midst of the summer Agricola went into
Britanny, as it may be gathered by some circumstances in this book, in the
very year before Vespasian died, and returned about fifth or sixth of Domitian,
of whose gests in Britannie, beside Tacitus, Xiphilin. Tito. p. 227. 228.
makes honorable mention, and others.
he passed the seas: at what time the soldier, as if the season were past,
attended an end for that year of his travail, and the enemy a beginning to
hurt. The Ordouices a little before he entered the land had cut a wing almost
wholly in pieces, which lay in their borders. Upon which beginning the country
being awaked, as men desirous of war, allowed the example: some stayed to see
how the new Lieutenant would take it. Agricola although the summer was spent,
and the bands lay dispersed in the province, and his soldiers had fully
presumed of rest for that year, which hindered much, and crossed directly the
undertaking of war, diverse also being of opinion rather to keep and assure
the places suspected, all this notwithstanding he resolved directly to encounter
the danger: and gathering the ensigns of the Legions, and some few
Auxiliaries, because the Northwales.
Ordouices durst not descend into indifferent ground, himself first of all,
to give others like courage in the like danger, led up to encounter the enemy.
And having destroyed almost the whole nation, knowing right well that fame must
with instance be followed, and as the first should fall out so the rest would
succeed, he deliberated to conquer the island of Mona; from the possession
whereof, as before I have rehearsed, Paullinus was revoked by the general
rebellion of Britanny: but as in a purpose not purposed before, ships being
wanting, the policy and resolutenesse of the Captain devised a passage,
commanding the most choice of the Aids, to whom all the shallowes were known,
and who after the use of their country were able in swimming to govern
themselves with armor and horses, laying aside their carriage, to put over at
once and suddenly invade them. Which thing so amazed the enemy attending for
ships and such like provision by sea, that surely believing nothing could be
hard or invincible to men which came so minded to war, they humbly entreated
for peace and yielded the island. Thus Agricola at his first entry into his
province (which time others consume in vain ostentation or ambitious seeking
of ceremonies) entering withal into labors and dangers became famous indeed
and of great reputation. Neither did he abuse the prosperous proceeding of his
affairs to vanity or brauing in speeches. He termed it not an exploite or a
conquest to have kept in order persons subdued before: he A thing usual in
those dispatches wherein any notable victory was signified, as it appears by
Liuy. l. 45. in the beginning, and Ammianus Marcellinus. li. 16. p. 1491.
bedeckt not with laurel his letters of advertisement, but stopping and
suppressing the fame he augmented the same, when men began to discourse upon
what great presumptions of future success, he should make so light an account
of such great actions already performed.

Now as touching his civil government, Agricola knowing right well the
disposition and mind of the province, and taught also by experience of others,
that arms avail little to settle a new conquered state if injuries and wrongs
be permitted, determined to cut off all causes of wars and rebellions. And
beginning at home, his house first of all he reformed and restrained, a point
of more hardness to some then to govern a province. He committed no manner of
public affairs to bondsman or freed: he received no soldier near to his
person upon private affections of partial suitors, nor upon commendation or
entreaty of Centurions, but elected the best, presuming the same to be the
most faithful. He would see into all things, not exact all things to the
rigor: light faults he would pardon, and the great severely correct: not
always proceeding to punish, but often content with repentance: choosing rather
not to prefer to office and charge such as were like to offend, then after
the offense to condemn them. The augmentation of tribute and corn he
mollified with equal dividing (...) and castle: so that the Romans were
absolute lords of all on this side, having cast out the enemy, as it were,
into another island.

The fifth year of the war Agricola first taking sea went over, and subdued,
with many and prosperous conflicts, nations before that time unknown, and
furnished with forces that part of Britannie, which lies against Irelande,
more in hope then for fear. For Irelande if it might have been wunne, lying
between Britannie and Spain, and fitly also for the French sea, would aptly
have united, to the great advantage of the one and the other, these strongest
members of the Empire together. In bigness it is inferior to Britannie,
howbeit bigger then the islands of He means the Mediterran, and the islands
there, as Sicilie. etc.
our sea. The soil and temperature of the air, the nature and fashions of the
people, differ not much from the British. The ports and places of access are
more known, by reason of more frequenting of merchants. Agricola had received
before a Prince of that country driven out by civil dissension, whom under
color of courtesy and friendship he retained till occasion should serve. I
have heard him oftentimes say, that with one Legion and some few Aids,
Irelande might be wunne and possessed, and that it were also a strength for our
British affairs, if the Roman forces were planted ech-where, and liberty, as
it were, banished out of sight. Now in the summer, which began the sixth year
of his office, because a general rising in arms of all the further nations
beyond Bodotria was feared, and passages were all beset with the power of the
enemies, he manned a fleet to search the creekes and harboroughs of the ample
region beyond it, backing then first of all with a navy the rest of his
strength, and with a goodly brave show bringing war both by land and by
sea. And often so it chanced, that the horseman and footeman and the sea soldier
met, and made merry in the same camp, extolling and magnifying each their own
prowess and adventures: making their vaunts and comparisons soldierlike, the
one of the woods and high mountains, the other of dangers of tempests and
waves: the one of the land and the enemy, the other of the Ocean, subdued.
The Britans, as by the prisoners it was understood, were amazed also at the
sight of the navy, as though now the secrets of their sea were disclosed, and
no refuge remained if they were overcome. Whereupon the Caledonians arming with
great preparation and greater fame, as the manner is of matters unknown,
assailed our castles as challengers, brauing and putting in fear: insomuch
that some of our side, which would seem to be wise being dastards indeed,
counseled the General to retire on this side Bodotria, and rather to depart
of his own accord, then to be repelled with shame. In the mean season
Agricola has knowledge, that the enemies meant to divide themselves, and to
give the onset in several companies. Whereupon lest he should be enclosed
about, and intrapped by their multitude and skill in the country, he marched
also with his army divided in three. Which when it was known to the enemy,
changing advise on the sudden, and uniting their forces together, they jointly
assaulted by night the nienth Legion, as being of weakest resistance: and
having slain the watch, partly asleep and partly amazed with fear, brake
into the camp. And now were they fighting within the trenches, when Agricola
having understood by spies what way the enemies had taken, and following their
footsteppes, commands the lightest horsemen and footmen to play on their
backs and maintain the skirmish, and anon the whole army to showte. And when
it drew near to be day, the glittering of the enseignes was seen. So the
Britans being quayled with a double danger, the Romans recovered courage
again, and being out of peril of their persons, fought now for their honor;
freshly assayling their late assaylers, and driving them to the gates: where in
the strayts the conflict was sharp and cruel, till in the end the enemies
were forced to flee, whilst both our armies contended, the one to seem to
have helped their fellows, the other to have needed none other to help them:
and if the bogges and woods had not covered their flight, that victory had
ended the war. Upon this battle so manfully fought, so famously wunne, the
army presuming that to their prowess all things were easy and open, cried to
lead into Caledonia, and to find out the limit of Britannie with a course of
continual conquests: and those which erewhile were so wary and wise, waxt
forward enough after the event, and grew to speak bigly: such is the hard
condition of wars: if ought fall out well all challenge a part, misfortunes
are only imputed to one. Contrariwise the Britans presupposing that not
valor, but the cunning of the General, by using the occasion, had carried it
away, abated no whit of their stomach, but armed their youth, transported
their children and wives into places of safety, and sought by assemblies and
religious rites to establish an association of the cities together. And so for
that year both parties departed incensed away.

The same summer a cohort of Vsipians, leuyed in Germany, and sent over into
Britannie, committed a heinous and memorable act. For having slain a Centurion
and certain soldiers set over them for direction in discipline, they fled and
embarcked themselves in three vessels, compelling the Masters by force to
execute their charge: and only one doing his office, the other two being
suspected and thereupon slain, this strange going out, the fact being yet not
noysed abroad, was gazed and wondered at. Afterward being driven uncertainly
hither and thither, and assayling the Britans which stood in defense of their
own, often preuayling and sometimes repulsed, they came at the last to that
misery, that they were enforced to eat one another, first of the weakest, then
as the lot lighted. And thus floating about Britannie, and leesing their
vessels for lack of government, they were intercepted first by the Sueuians,
and then by the Frisians, as pirates and robbers, and some of them being bought
by merchants as slaves, and by change of masters brought to our side of the
river, grew into a name by giving first notice of so great and so rare an
adventure.

In the beginning of the summer Agricola was deeply touched with a grievous
mischance, which happened in his own house: for he lost his own son being
about a year old. Which unfortunate hap he neither bare out, as some great
men have done in the like, vaingloriously, nor took it again so impatiently
as women are wont: and amidst his mourning and sorrows used the war as one
of his remedies. Therefore sending his navy before, which by spoiling in sundry
places should induce a greater and vncertainer terror upon them, he made
ready and followed himself with his army, joining thereto some of the
valiantest Britans, whom by long experience in peace he had found most
faithful, and so arrived at the mount Now called Grantzbaine.
Grampius, where the enemies were lodged before. For the Britans not daunted
with the event of the former battle, and attending for nothing else but
revenge or servitude, and being taught at the length that common danger must
be repelled with concord, by leagues and embassages had assembled the power
of all the cities together, above thirty thousand armed men, the view being
taken, beside an endless number of youth, which daily flocked to them, and lusty
old men, renowned in war and bearing the badges due to their honor: at what
time Galgacus, for virtue and birth of all the leaders the principal man,
seeing the multitude hoatly demand the battle, is said to have used this
speech. "When I view and consider REND="margQuotes" the cause of this war,
and our present necessity, I have reason, me seems, to presume, that this day,
and this your agreeing consent, will give a happy beginning to the freedom of
the whole island. For both have we all hitherto lived in liberty, and beside no
land remains beyond, no sea for our safety, the Roman navy thus, as you see,
surueying our coasts: so that combat and arms, which men of virtue desire for
honor, the dastard must also use for his security. The former battayles, which
have with diverse event been fought with the Romans, had their refuge, and
hope resting in our hands. For we the flower of the British nobility, and
seated therefore the furthermost in, saw never the coasts of the cuntreyes
which served in slavery, even our eyes are kept unpolluted, and free from all
contagion of tyranny. Beyond us is no land, beside us none are free: us
hitherto this corner and secret recesse has defended. Now the uttermost point
of the land is laid open: and things the less they have been within
knowledge, the greater the glory is to atchieue them. But what nation now is
there beyond us? what else but water and rocks, and the Romans Lords of all
within land? whose intolerable pride in vain shall you seek to avoid by
service and humble behavior: robbers of the world, that having now left no
land to be spoiled, search also the sea. If the enemy be rich, they seek to
win wealth: if poor, they are content to gain glory: whom not the east,
not the west has satisfied: the only men of all memory that seek out all
places, be they wealthy or poor, with like ardent affection. To take away by
maine force, to kill and to spoil, falsely they term Empire and government:
when all is waste as a wilderness, that they call peace. His children and
blood each man by nature holds most dear: those are pressed for soldiers,
and carried away to be slaves otherwhere. Our sisters and wives, though they be
not violently forced as in open hostility, are in the mean while under the
color and title of friends and guests often abused. Our goods and substance
they draw for tribute, our corn for provision: our bodies and hands they
wear and consume, in pauing of bogges and of woods, with a thousand stripes
and indignities. Slaves which are borne to bondage are sold but once, and
after are fed at their owners expenses: but Britannie daily byeth, daily
feeds, and is at charges with her own bondage. And as in a private retinue
the freshman and last commer is laughed and scoffed at by his very
fellow-seruants, so in this old servitude of the whole world our destruction
only is sought, as being the latest and most vile in account. We have no
fields to manure, no mines to be dug, no ports to trade in: and to what
purpose then should they reserve us alive? Moreover the manhood and fierce
courage of the subject pleases not much the ielous Sovereign: and this corner
being so secret and out of the way, the more security it yields to us, in
them it works the greater suspicion. So seeing all hope of pardon is past, at
the length take courage, to defend and maintain your safety as well as your
honor. The Brigantes led by a Voadica, who^ Tacitus himself makes wife to
the king of Jceni, people of Norfolk etc, and not of the Brigantes. 14. Ann.
p. 492.
woman fired the colonie, forced the castles: and if such a lucky beginning had
not ended in sloth and security, they might have with ease shakt of the yoke.
We as yet never touched, never subdued, and borne to be free, not to be slaves
of the Romans, let us show straight in the first joining what manner of men
Caledonia reserved in store for her self. Or do you think the Romans to be
as valiant in war as they are wanton in peace? No, not by their virtue, but
by our iarrings and discordes they are grown into fame: and the faults of
their enemies they abuse to the glory of their own army composed of most
diverse nations, and therefore as by present prosperity holden together, so if
fortune do frown it doubtless dissolueth: unless you suppose the Frenchmen
and Germans, and, to our shame be it spoken, many of our own nation, which
now lend their lives to establish a forreyne usurper, and yet have been
enemies longer then servants, to be led and induced with any true hearted and
faithful affection. No, it is terror and fear, weak workers of love, which
if you remove, those which shall have ceased to fear will straight begin
for to hate. All things to incite to the victory are on our side. No wife to
encourage the Romans: no parents to vpbrayde them if they flee: most have
either no country at all, or some other: a few fearful persons, trembling
and gazing at the strangeness of the heaven it self, the sea and the woods:
whom the gods have delivered mewed up, as it were, and fettered into our
hands. Let not the vain show and glittering of gold and silver terrify us,
which neither defends nor offends. Amongst the enemies we shall find of our
side: the Britans will agnize their own cause: the French will remember their
freedom and former estate: the rest of the Germans will leave and forsake
them, as of late the Vsipians did. And what else then have we to fear? the
castles are empty, the colonies peopled with aged and impotent persons; the
free cities discontent and in factions, whilst those which are under obey
with ill will, and they which do govern rule against right. Here is the
General and here the army, there tributes and mines, and other miseries
inseparably following them which live under subjection of others: which whether
we are to continue for ever, or straight to revenge, it lies this day in this
field. Wherefore going to battle bear in your minds, I beseech you, both
your Your ancestors, which lived in the happy estate of liberty: and your
successors, which unless we show valor this day shall live for ever in most
miserable servitude.
ancestors and your posterity. This speech was cheerfully received, with a
song after their barbarous fashion, with confused acclamations and noyses. And
as the companies clustered together, and glistering of armor appeared, whilst
some of the boldest auanced forward, and withal the ranckes were putting
themselves in array, Agricola albeit his soldier was glad of that day, and
scarce could with words be withholden, supposing yet best to say somewhat,
encouraged them in this wise. Fellow Soldiers and companions in arms, your
faithful service and diligence, these And yet this was but the seventh year
of his office, as appears before.
eight years so painfully showed, by the virtue and fortune of the Roman
Empire has conquered Britannie. In so many iourneyes, in so many battles we
had of necessity to show our selves either valiant against the enemy, or
patient and laborious above and against nature it self. In which exploytes we
have borne us both hitherto so, that neither did I desire better soldiers, nor
you other captain. We have exceeded the limits, I of my predecessors, and you
likewise of yours. The end of Britannie is found, not by fame and report, but
we are with our arms and pauilions really invested thereof: Britannie is found
and subdued. In marching, when the passing of bogges, or mountains, and
rivers, troubled and tired you out, how often have I heard the valiant soldier
say, When will the enemy present himself? when shall we fight? lo they are now
put up out of their holes: and here they are come: your wish lo here, and place
for your virtue, and all things to follow in an easy and expedite course, if
you win; if you leese, all against you. For as to have gone so much ground,
escaped the woods, passed over the firthes, is honorable forward, so if we do
flee, the vantages we have this day will become our most disadvantage. For we
are not skilled so well in the countries, we have not the like store of
provision, but hands we have and weapons, and therein all things included. For
my part I am long since resolved, that to show their backs is neither safety
for soldier nor General: and therefore a commendable death is better then
life with reproach; and surety and honor are commonly dwelling together: or if
ought should mishappen, even this will be a glory, to have dyed in the
uttermost end of the world and nature. If new nations, and soldiers unknown
were in the field, I would, by the example of other armies, put you in courage:
now recount you your own victorious exploytes, and ask your own eyes. These
are the same men, which the last year assailed one Legion by stealth in the
night, and were by a blast of your mouth overthrown: these of all other
Britans have been the most nimble in running away, and therefore have escaped
the longest alive. For as in forests and woods the strongest beasts are chased
away by maine force, the cowardly and fearful are scared by the noise of the
hunters, so the valiant of the British nation we have already dispatched, the
rascal heard of dastardly cowards only remains: whom at length you have
found, not as having intended to stay and make head, but as last overtaken, and
by extreme passion of fear standing as stocks, presenting occasion to us in
this place of a worthy and memorable victory. Make an end therefore of your
warfare, and to From the first entry of Claudius into Britannie seems not to
have been above four or five and forty years.
fifty years trauayles let this day impose a glorious conclusion. Approve to
your country, that the army could never justly be charged either with
protracting the war, or pretenses for not accomplishing the conquest. As
Agricola was yet speaking, the soldiers gave great tokens of feruency, and
when he had ended accompanied the speech with a joyful applause, and ran
straightwaies to their weapons. Agricola seeing them sufficiently animated, and
rushing furiously forward, ordered his men in this manner. With the Auxiliary
footmen, being eight thousand, he fortified the middle battle: three
thousand horse he put on both sides in the wings; commanding the Legions to
stand behind, before the trench of the camp, to the greater glory of the
victory, if it were obtained without Roman blood, otherwise for assistance and
succor, if the vantgard should be repelled. The Britans were marshalled in the
higher ground, fitly both to the show and to terrify, the first batalion
standing on the plain, the rest in the ascent of the hill, knit and rising as
it were one over another: the middle of the field was filled with the
clattering and running of Couinarius. Mela. lib. 3. c. 6. Dimicant Britanni non
equitatu modo aut pedite, verum and bigis and currib. Gallice armati, couinos
vocant, quorum falcatis axib. vtuntur. by Caesar and Tully they are called
essedarij.
charets and horsemen. Then Agricola perceiving the enemy to exceed him in
number, and fearing lest he should be assailed on the front and flanckes both
at one instant, displaied his army in length: and although by that means the
battle would become disproportionably long, and many aduized him to take in
the Legions, yet being more forward to hope, then yielding to fear, he
rejected the counsel, and leaving his horse auanced himself before the
enseignes on foot. In the first encounter, before the joining, both sides
discharged and threw: wherein the Britans employing both art and valor, with
their great swords and little targets, avoided our throws, or shook them
off, darting withal great store against us of theirs: till at length Agricola
spying his vantage exhorted three Batauian cohorts, and two of the Tungrians to
press forward, and bring the matter to handy strokes and dint of the sword; a
thing which they in respect of long service were able readily to perform, and
contrarily to the enemies prejudicial, and hurtful by reason of their little
bucklers, and huge swords: for the swords of the Britans, being blunt
pointed, were no way fit for the close or for open fight. Now as the Batauians
began to deal blows, to strike with the pikes of their bucklers, to mangle
their faces, and having ouerborne in the plain all that resisted, to march up
the mountains, the rest of the cohortes gathering courage upon emulation
violently bet down al about the^, and many half dead, or wholly untouched,
were left for have of winning the field. In the mean time the charets mingled
themselves with the battle of the footmen, and the troops of the horsemen
began for to flee: who albeit they had lately terrified others, were now
distressed themselves by the unevenness of the ground, and thick ranckes of
their enemies. Neither was the form of the fight like a loose skirmish of
horsemen to and fro, but standing still and maintaining their places they
sought by maine weight of horses, to break and bear down one another. The
wandering wagons also, and masterlesse horses afrighted, as it happened them by
fear to be guyded, ouer-bare many times of their friends which met them, or
thwarted their way. Now the Britans, which stood aloof from the battle on
the height of the hills, and at their good leisure disdained our fewness,
began to come down by little and little, and to compass about the backs of
our men, which were now in train of winning the field: but Agricola
suspecting as much, opposed against them four wings of horsemen purposely
retained about him for sudden dispatches, and chances of war, and repulsed
them back as sharply, as fiercely they ran to assail. So the counsel of
the Britans turned upon their own heads: and the wings were commanded to
forsake the battle and follow the flight. Then might you have seen in the
open fields a grievous and pitiful spectacle, pursuing, wounding, taking, and
killing of them which were taken when others were offered. Now whole regiments
of the enemies, according to their several dispositions, though armed and more
in number, turned their backs to the fewer: others unarmed sought their own
death, offering themselves voluntarily to the slaughter. Every where weapons
lay scattered and bodies, and mangled limbs: the ground every where imbrued
with blood: and sometimes even in them which were overcome, appeared now at
their end both anger and valor. When they approached the woods, uniting
themselves, they intrapped unawares some of the foremost of our men, which
vnaduizedly followed, not knowing the country: and unless Agricola had with
his presence euerywhere assisted at need, setting about them of his brauest
and most ready footmen, as it were in form of a toil, and commanding some
of his horsemen to leave their horses where the passages were narrow, and
others where the wood was thin to enter on horseback, no doubt we had taken
some blow by our overmuch boldness. But after they saw our men again in
strong array to follow the chase in good order, they fled, not in troops as
before, and attending each other, but utterly disbanded and single, eschewing
all company, toward the desert and far distant places. The night and our
fullness of blood made an end of the chase. Of the enemies side Tacitus
seldom tells the number, and beside both he and Salust, as Orosius
witnesses, forbid it in history. but professione pietatie he must be excused,
in transgressing his own rule.
ten thousand were slain: three hundredth and forty of ours; amongst whom was
Aulus Atticus captain of a cohort, upon a youthful heat, and through the
fierceness of his horse, being carried into the midst of his enemies. That
night the winners for their parts solaced themselves with the victory and
spoil: and the Britans being utterly broken, crying and howling, men and women
together, take and draw with them their hurt persons, call the not hurt,
forsake their own houses, and in despite also set them on fire themselves,
choose out holes for to lurk in, and straightwaies forsake them, communicate
some counsels together, and then have some glimring of hope: sometimes at the
sight of their dearelyest beloved they are moved to pity, more often stirred
to rage: and certain it is that some, as by way of compassion and mercy, slew
their own children and wives. The day following discovered more plainly the
greatness of the victory. Every where desolation and silence: no stirring in
the mountains: the houses fired and smoking far of; no man to meet with our
spies; who being sent abroad into all quarters found by their footsteps the
flight was uncertain, and that they were no where in companies together.
Whereupon Agricola because the summer was spent, and the war conveniently
could not be divided, brings his army into the borders of the Now called
Anguse, as some suppose.
Horrestians, where receiving hostages he commanded the Admiral of the navy to
sail about Britannie, lending him soldiers and strength for that purpose, and
the terror of the Roman name was gone already before. Himself, with easy
and gentle iourneyes, to terrify the new conquered nations with the very stay
of his passage, disposed his footmen and horsemen in their wintering places:
and withal the navy with prosperous wind and success arrived at the port
Some read it Rhutupensis, which is supposed to be Richborow near Sandwich.
Trutulensis, from whence it Or, departed coasting along the nearest side of
Britanny, and so returned thither again.
departed, and coasting along the nearest side of Britannie returned thither
again.

This state of affairs in Britannie Agricola signified by letter, without any
amplifying terms, to Domitian: who after his manner with a cheereful
countenance, and grieved heart received the news, being inwardly pricked to
think, that his late Xiphilinus Domitiano. (...). The like Suetonius reports
of Caius. c. 47. conuersus hinc ad curam triumphi, praeter captiuos and
transfugas barbaros, Galliaru^ quoque proceris simum quemque, and, vt ipse
dicebat, (...), ac nonnullos ex principibus legit ac seposuit ad pompam,
coegitque non tantum rutilare, ac submittere comam, sed and sermone^ Germanicum
addiscere, and nomina barbarica far.
cou^terfaite triumph of Germany, wherein certain slaves bought for money
were attired, and their hair dressed as captives of that country, was had in
derision and justly skorned abroad, whereas now a true and great victory, so
many thousands of enemies being slain, was current and famous in every man's
mouth: that it were indeed a most perilous point, if a private man's name
should be exalted above the name of the Prince. In vain then had he
suppressed, the study of Oratory, and all other worthy politic arts, if he
should in militare glory be disseised by another: for other matters might more
easily be passed over, but to be a good commander of an army was to be above
private estate, that being a virtue peculiar for a Prince. With these and the
like cares being tormented, and musing much in his closet alone, which was a
token and sign of some cruelty intended, he thought it yet best for the
present to dissemble and put over his malice, until the heat of his glory
and love of his soldiers were somewhat abated; for as yet Agricola remained in
charge. Wherefore he commanded that all the honors of triumphall ornaments,
Illustris statuae honorem. 1. Hist. triumphalis statua.
image triumphall, and what else usually was conferred in liew of triumph,
should be awarded unto him in Senate in most ample and honorable terms: and
sending a successor caused withal a brute to be spread, that the province of
Syria, which then lay void, by the death of Atilius Rufus the Lieutenant, and
was reserved for men of great quality, was purposed unto him. And a common
opinion went, that Domitian sending one of his most secret and trusty
servants to Agricola, sent withal the patent of Syria, with instruction, that
if he were in Britannie it should be delivered: and that the same man meeting
Agricola as he crossed the seas, without speaking unto him, or delivering his
message, returned again to Domitian. Whether this were true, or feigned and
surmized probably, as correspondent to the Princes disposition, I cannot
affirm: but in the mean season Agricola had delivered to his successor the
province in good and peaceable state. And lest his arrival at Rome should be
noted, by reason of the multitudes of people which would go out to see and to
meet him, cutting off that courtesy of his friends, he entered the city by
night, and by night, as he was willed, came to the Palace. Where being
admitted to the Princes presence, and received with a short salutation and no
speech, he sorted himself with the rest of the waiters. Now to the end he
might temper and qualify with other good parts his militare renown, a virtue
unpleasant to men of no action, he gave himself wholly to quietness and
meddling with nothing; being in apparel moderate, affable in speech,
accompanied usually but by one or two of his friends: so that many, which
commonly judge of great men by the outward appearance and pomp, seeing and
marking Agricola, missed of that which by same they conceived, few aimed
aright at the cause. Often was he in those days accused to Domitian in
absence, and in absence acquitted. The cause was neither matter of crime, nor
complaint of party aggrieued, but the renown of the man, and the Princes
disposition hating all virtue, and Suetonius Domitiano. c. 10. complures
senatores, in his aliquot consulares interemit, in quibus Ciuicam Cerealem in
ipso Asiae proconsulatis.
Ciuica, neither could Domitian fail of example to follow, nor Agricola of
direction what he should do. Some also privy to the Princes secret intents
offered speech of themselves, and asked him whether he could be content to
accept of the government: commending at the first a far off a quiet life and
void of business, and proffering anon their mediation to the Prince to allow
his excuse. At the last declaring their purpose in plain terms, by persuasion
and threats they induced him to become a direct suitour in that behalf to
Domitian: who setting a fained countenance upon it, and composing himself to
keep majesty and state, both heard his humble petition excusing himself from
that charge, and when the excuse was admitted suffered himself to be solemnly
thanked, and was not ashamed of so odious a benefit. Howbeit the pension,
which was wont to be offered to men of that quality, and by him had been
granted to certain, he did not bestow upon Agricola: either being offended it
was not sued for, or upon the guiltiness of his own conscience, lest thereby
he should seem to have bought out That is, his going into the province.
that thing, which he had forbidden. It is the property of man's nature to hate
those whom he has hurted: beside Domitian was prone and headlong to anger, and
the more close the more irreuocable, yet was he notwithstanding altered and
mollified by Agricolaes discretion and wary behavior: for he did not with
obstinacy, nor vain ostentation of liberty, neither hasten his fame nor his
fall. Let them well know that are wont to admire those things alone, which
are done against the stream of the time, that great men may be found even
under bad Princes; that dutiful obedience and modesty, if industry and valor
be joined, may attain to that degree of praise and renown, which some
following dangerous courses have aspired unto by an ambitious death, without
any further profit at all.

The end of his life brought mourning to us, and grieffe to his friends, and
even by strangers and persons unknown was lamented: the common sort also, and
this retchles people of ours, both came often to his house, and in all public
places and meetings had it in speech, neither did any person, when he heard of
his death, either rejoice or suddenly forget it. And that which procured the
greater compassion was a constant report, that he was made away by poison. Of
mine own knowledge I dare assure nothing this only, that during the time of
his sickness there came from Domitian, oftener then usually are wont from
Princes, who visit by others, both of his secretest servants and nearest
phisicians to see him, whether as of carefulnes, or only to spy I leave it
uncertain: certain it is, that the day of his death, every degree of his
going away was carried in post to the Prince; and few men believed the news
should be hastened so much, that he would be sorry to hear. Notwithstanding he
made show of sorrow in mind and in countenance, being now out of danger That
is, of the virtuous qualities of Agricola.
of that which he hated, and one that more easily could dissemble his joy then
his fear. When Agricolaes testament was read, wherein he made Domitian
coheire with his most dear wife and most duetifull daughter, it was certain
he greatly rejoiced thereat, as if it had been a sign of honor, or
proceeded of judgment: so blinded he was, and so greatly corrupted by
continual custom of flatteries, that he could not perceive, that no good
father did ever appoint for his heir any Prince but a tyranne. Agricola was
borne the thirteenth day of June, Caius Caesar being third time Consul, and
dyed the Four and fiftieth, at the most for from Caius Caesar. 3. cons. to
Collegae and Priscus Consuls were no more but fifty three years, but so is the
fashion not only of Tacitus, but of other History-writers, to misrecken in a
manner always to the more.
six and fiftieth year of his age, the four and twentieth day of August,
Collega and Priscus being Consuls. Of personage (if posterity desire to be
informed thereof) he was rather well proportioned then tall, with an
assuredness and great grace in his countenance: Then it must be by way of
prophecy, not of discourse: for in Domitians time there was no likelihood at
all of that succession.
Traian established Prince, so his hastened death had this great comfort, that
he lived not to see that last and most miserable time, in the which Domitian,
not at seasons and by fittes, but with a continual course and at one blow, as
it were, ruined the state. Agricola lived not to see the Senate House beset,
the Senate environed with soldiers, and all in one fury the death of so many
Consulare personages, the banishments and flights of so many great women. Carus
Carus and Messalinus instruments of Domitians cruelty: and so was Massa
afterward. Plin. l 1. ep. 11. and. 4 ep. 22. Juuenal.
Metius had obtained as yet but one conquest, and Messalinus bloody sentences
kept themselves within the manor of Alba, and Massa Bebius himself was then
De repetundis: the province of Baeticae being plaintiff, Senecio and Pliny
accusers: as the same Pliny writes, lib. 7. ep. 33.
called in question. Anon after our hands led Heluidius into prison; the
sight of Exiled by Domitian, and restored under Nerua. Plin. li. 4. ep. 22.
Mauricus and Rusticus pierced our hearts; Senecio besprinkled us with his
guiltles blood. Yet Nero withdrew his presence, and commanded cruelties, looked
not on: the principal part of our miseries under Domitian was to see and be
seen; when our secret sighs were registered, when that cruel countenance and
red visage, with which he armed himself against blushing and shame, could
endure to note and mark the fears and palenesse of so many persons. Thrice
happy then may thou, Agricola, be counted, not only for the renown of thy
life, but also for the opportunity of thy decease. Thou did as they do
affirm, which were present at thy last speeches, accept thy death most
patiently and willingly, as though for thy part thou would have cleared the
Prince. But I and thy daughter, beside the loss of so dear a father, we have
a further cause to be grieved, that it was not our chance to be by in thy
sickness, to cherish thy weakness, to satisfy and content our selves with
seeing and embracing thee. Some counsel no doubt, and some precepts we
should have received in charge to print and engraue in our hearts: this is our
grieffe, this our special misfortune: to us, in respect of our long absence
four years before, thou wast lost. And albeit thy most loving wife the best
of all mothers sat by, and furnished no doubt all things in most honorable
sort, yet wast thou laid up with fewer tears, and at thy last hour thine
eyes missed somewhat. If there be any place for the ghosts of good men, if, as
wise men define, the souls of great persons die not with the body, in peace
may thou rest, and recall us thy posterity from impatient and womanish
waylings to the contemplation of thy virtues, which are in no sort to be
sorrowed for, or bewailed, but rather admired. * * * * * * * * This is true
honor indeed, and this is the duty of nearest kinsfolks. So I would
counsel thy daughter and wife to reverence the memory of their father and
husband, with often remembering his doings and words, recognizing the glory
and image of his mind, rather then of his body: not that I dislike of images
cut in marble or metal, but as men's faces, so the images of faces are mortal
and frail; the shape of the mind is eternal, which we may represent and
express, not by matter and art borrowed abroad, but by our own manners
within. That of Agricola which we did love, which we admired, remains, and
so will remain, in the minds of men, in the continual succession of ages, in
fame and renown. For many of the ancients shall lie buried in obscure and
inglorious oblivion, but Agricola shall live recommended to posterity, and
continue for ever.

FINIS.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE first book of Tacitus.
WHEN SERVIVS GALBA was second time Consul) Cornelius Tacitus, whom Vopiscus
calls scriptorem historiae Augustae, wrote two several volumes of histories:
one from the death of Augustus, as it may seem, to the Calends of January next
after the death of Nero, comprehending Tiberius, Caius, Claudius and Neroes
time, and the greater part of Galba; another from the said Calends to the
death of Domitian. Of this later volume in order of time, howsoever it was in
order of writing, the first four books comprize the history of one year and
some months only, from the beginning of January, when Galba and Vinius
entered their Consulships, in the year ab vrbe condita 822. according to
Tacitus, or rather the consent of the Empire in that time. Claudio Casare
quartum, Vitellio tertium coss. says he, 11. page 405.
Annalium, just two and twenty years before Galba and Vinius, ludi seculares
octingentesimo post Romam conditam anno spectati sunt, which account exceeds
the Capitolin (as they call it) by one year, and agrees fully with
Censorinus, c. 21.
Varro, Bruto.
Cicero, lib. 8. cap. 7.
Pliny and lib. 40 pa. 77. and li. 52. pa 314. and li. ^ 6. pa. 470.
Dioes reckening. Now although the Prince and an officer may seem in one
person incompatible qualities, yet the custom of that state bears, that the
Emperor the first year of his Empire of order, and eftsoons upon pleasure
supplied the one Consuls place. The reason is in Appian. 1. (...). p. 200. That
is, S^lla albeit he was Dictator, yet for a cool u^ and show of popular
government was content to be made Consul again with Metellus Pius, and from
hence it proceeds peradventure, that even at this day the Roman princes, when
they name Consuls for the state, diverse times pronounce themselves also, not
disdaining even with their sovereign authority to join also the title of
Consul.
(...). Now the first Consulat of Galba was Tac. 6. Ann. p. 381.
four years before Tiberius death, obtained by favor of Liuia Augusta,
says Plutarch in Galba; (...): which I think is an oversight* for she was
dead four years before, in small favor with her son, and they in smaller,
that sought by her means to rise in honors. Tacit. 5. Annalium. p. 369. Quin
and part eiusdem epistolae increpuit Tiberius amicitias muliebres, Fufium
consulem oblique perstringens. is gratia Augustae floruerat, apt us alliciendis
foeminarum animis etc. Neither was it Tiberius manner to bestow offices so long
before hand. Tacit. 2. Annalium. p. 271.

2. Many excellent men) principally meant, as I take it, of Liuy, although his
story reach somewhat further, of whose eloquence, those works are witness
that remain: and of his liberty, Tacitus 4. page 347.
Annal: in the oration of Cremutius Cordus. Titus Livius eloquentiae ac fidei
praeclarus in primis Cn. Pompeium tantis laudibus tulit, vt Pompeianum eum
Augustus appellarit, neque id amicitiae eorum offecit. Scipionem, Afranium,
hunc ipsum Cassium nusquam latrones and parricidas, quae nunc vocabula
imponuntur, saepe vt insignes viros nominat.

3. Because having no part in the state they were ignorant: Inscitia reip. vt
alienae) Aliena ignorantur, either because we cannot, or because we care not to
know them. The first seems here to have place; for whereas before the people
and Senate of Rome took knowledge of all that was done wheresoever, now the
most important affairs of estate passed through fewer fingers, in more secret
sort. Dio. lib. 53. That is, The most part of affairs began in secret sort to
be dispatched, whereof the certain truth to no man lightly knew, except the
doers themselves.
(...).

4. Prince Nerua of sacred memory: Principatum Diui Neruae and imperium
Tratani) To certain Emperors the Senate, for their good government, or
importuned by their successors, awarded templum and coelestes religiones, and
the title of Diuus. And not only to the Princes themselves, but sometimes to
their wives, mothers, and children also; as we read in the stories. Appianus.
2. (...): That is, From Julius Caesar downward all the princes except they we
tyrannes, or extremely vicious, were by the Romans deified after their deaths
(...) (speaking of Diuus Julius) (...) As of the 12 first emperors five
only, Julius, Augustus, Claudius, Vespasian, and Titus, were canonized: the
other seven as being (...) were not vouchsafed the honor.
(...), says Appian: Nam Deum honor Principi non ante habetur, quam agere
inter homines desierit. 15, Ann. p. 543.
Tacitus. And therefore in this place he names Traian, who then lived, simply
without addition: the other that was dead, Diuum Neruam. The ceremonies of this
(...) or canonizing, as being in part conformable to the use of some cuntries
in our time, I will here briefly set down out of lib. 4. p. 476. 477. 478.
Herodian, and others, at least the principal points. After the Princes death,
the body being buried honorably, and in sumptuous sort, according to the manner
of other men, they framed an image of wax resembling in all respects the party
deceased, but palish and wan as a sick man: and so being In our time afte^ the
death of the last Charles in France, his image was laid in a r ch bed, in
triumphant atti^e, with the c^^wne upon his hea^, and the c^ller of the ^^ de^
about his ne^ke, and ^^ty days at ^^^anry hours d^nner and su^per was ser^ed
in with al accustomed c^remonies, a^ sewing, water, grace car^i^g, say taking,
etc. all the Cardinals, prelates, lords, gentlemen and officers atte^ding in
far greater solemnit^ then if he had been alive.
laid at the entry of the Palace in Xiphilinus, p. 316 317. 318, notes some
other particularities not specified in this narration.
an iuory bed covered with cloth of gold, the Senate and ladies assisting in
mourning attire, the phisicians daily resorted unto him to touch his pulse, and
consider in college of his disease, doctorally at their departure resolving,
that he grew in worse and worse terms, and hardly would escape it. At the end
of During that time, says Xiphilinus, there stood also a page with a san of
Pecocks f^athers to keep away the flies from his face, as if he were but a
sleep.
seven days they opined, and found by their learning, the crisis belike being
bad, that the patient was departed: whereupon some of the Senate appointed for
that purpose, and principal gentlemen, taking up the bed upon their shoulders
carried it through Via sacra into the Forum; where a company of young gentlemen
of greatest birth standing on the one side, and maids of the other, sung
hymns and sonnets, the one to the other, in commendation of the dead Prince,
entuned in a solemn and mournful note, with all kind of other music and
melody, as indeed the whole ceremony was a Hero^ian. lib. 4. (...). Dio,
lib. 56. in epitapino Augusti: (...).
mixed action of mourning and mirth, as appears also by Seneca, (...), at the
consecration of Claudius. Et erat omnium formosissimum (funus Claudij) and
impensacura plenum, vt scires Deum efferri, tibicinum, cornicinum, omnisque
generis aeneatorum tanta turba, tantus conuentus, vt etiam Claudius audire
posset. Afterward they carried the hearse out of the City into Campus Martius,
where a square tower was builded of timber, large at the bottom, and of
competent height to receive wood and fagots sufficiently, outwardly bedeckt and
hung with cloth of gold, imagery work, and curious pictures. Upon that tower
stood a second turret in figure and furniture like to the first, but somewhat
less, with windows and doors standing open, wherein the hearse was placed,
and all kind of spiceries and odours, which the whole world could yield,
heaped therein: and so a third and fourth turret, and so forth, growing less
and less toward the top: the whole building representing the form of a
Pharus.
lantern or watchtower, which gives light in the night. Thus all being placed
in order, the gentlemen first ride about it, marching in a certain measure:
then follow others in open coches with robes of honor, and upon their faces
vizards of the good Princes, and other honorable personages of ancient times.
All these ceremonies thus being performed, the Prince which succeeds takes a
torch, and first puts to the fire himself, and after him all the rest of
the company: and by and by as the fire was kindled, out of the top of the
highest turret an Diodi 56. in fanere August.: (...).
eagle was let fly, to carry up his soul into heaven: and so he was afterward
reputed, and by the Romans adored, amoung the rest of the gods* mary, which I
had omitted almost, before consecration it was usual, that some gentleman at
least should bestow an oath to prove their deity. Suetonius Augusto: Nec
defuit vir Praetorius, qui se effigiem cremati (Augusti) euntem in coelum
videsse iurasset. The like was testified of Drusilla Caius sister by one Liuius
Geminius a Senator. Dio. lib. 59. That is, One Liuius Geminius a Senator
swear that he saw Deusilla ascending up into heaven, and conuersing with the
gods, wishing to himself and his children utter destruction if he spoke an
untruth, calling to witness both sundry other gods, and especially the
goddess herself of whom he spoke, for which oath he received a million of
testerces* which makes 7812. b. 10. shillings sterling.
(...). whose tale, for all it was well paid for, men believed never the
better. Seneca, (...): Postquam in senatu iurauit se Drusillam vidisse coelum
ascendentem, and illi pro tam bono nuntio nemo credidit, quod viderit, verbis
conceptis affirmauit, se non indicaturum, etiamsi in medio foro hominem
vidisset occisum. This lesson they may seem to have learned of Proculus
Julius, who took an oath not much otherwise for Romulus deity, whom the Senate
murdered and made a god: from whence this race of the Roman gods may seem to
have taken beginning. Tully also had a meaning that way for his daughter
Tulliola, as appears by his epistles ad Atticum, but worldly troubles put out
of his head those heavenly cogitations. From C. Caesar, Augustus, Claudius,
Vespasian, Titus, in a manner without interruption, the custom dured so long,
that many also of the Christian Emperors enshrined in this sort their fathers
and predecessors. And this was the honor done to the good Princes after their
death: as for the bad, they lacked not likewise the Senates reward vt nomem
fastis eximeretur, vt statuae deiicerentur, vt corpus vnco traheretur in
Tiberim. etc.

5. And often both at once: Ac plerumque permixta) Both at once, or perchance
both in one, as in Antonius Primus army at the taking of Cremona, cui ciues,
socij externi interessent. Tacitus 3. page 124.
Hist. and in the same book: Principes Sarmatarum Iazygum in commilitium
asciti. trahuntur in parts Sido atque Italicus reges Sueuorum. so that this
war, and such like, though in respect of their captains civil, by reason of
external helps might be called permixta.

6. Illyricum troubled) As in Othoes time by the Rhoxolan^. Tacitus in this
first book p. 50. in Vitellius, by the Daci: Tac. 3. Hist. p. 129. in
Vespasians by the Sarmatae; Josephus (...). 7. c. 12. and generally the nations
upon that border invaded the Romans under Domitian. Tacitus in the life of
Agricola. p. 605.

7. Brittanny all conquered etc. Britannia perdomita: and statim missa coborte
in Sarmatarum ac Sueuorum gentes) Some learned men correct this place, which no
doubt is corrupted, thus* perdomita Britannia ac statim amissa: coortae
Sarmatarum ac Sueuorum gentes. perdomita Britannia is meant by Julius Agricola
in Domitians time. Tacitus in vita page 588.
Agricolae: Quia tum demum perdomita est Britannia: now must it be lost again
in the same Domitians time (for this history passes no further) which can not
be proved by any story, no not by any slender conjecture. Tacitus writing the
life of Agricola in Traians time, Ea insecuta sunt, says page 605.
he, reip. tempora, quae sileri Agricolam non sinerent: tot exercitus in
Moesia Daciaque, and Germania, Pannoniaque, temeritate aut per ignauiam ducum
amissi: tot militares viri cum tot cohortibus expugnati and capti* nec iam de
limite imperij and ripa, sed de hibernis legionum and possessione dubitatum.
the loss of Britanny if there had been any such, had much better becommed
this place, then any other calamity that he could have told us. But
Tradideratinterim Agricola successori suo prouincia quiciam tuta^que Tac. p.
604.
Agricola left the country in good quiet, and so no doubt it continued all
Domitians time. As for any matter happening under Adrian (which yet was no
loss of the country, but some disorder) being out of the compass of this
history, and as it is likely, of his life that wrote it, I will easily believe
it was not intended to be briefed in this place. More according to the story,
and with less change in the letter we may thus amend it. Britannia perdomita
and Or partim missa.
statim missa (^missa facta, (...)) coortae Sarmatarum ac Sueuorum gentes, to
signify that all Brita^ny was conquered, but not all retained. App. p. 5. That
is, Of the Island of Britanny the Romans possess the best part, about half of
the whole i will, not caring much for the rest. For even of that which they have
they reap no great profit.
(...), says he, (...).

8. Abused by a countersaite Nero) This happened in Titus time. Zonaras tomo.
2. That is, In Titus time there arose a counterfaite Nero called indeed
Terentius Maximus, by birth of Asia, and much resembling Nero both in
countenance and voice, skilled also on instrument. This fellow got in Asia some
followers, and going forward to Euphrates many more. At length he fled to
Artabanus king of the Parthians, who bearing ill will to Titus gave him
entertainment, and made provision to reduce him to Rome.
(...). Suetonius Nerone seems to make it in Domitians time. Quum post
viginti annos, (after Neroes death) says he, adolescente me extitisset
conditionis incertae, qui se Neronem esse iactaret, tam fauorabile nomen eius
apud Parthos fuit, vt vehementer adiutus, and vix redditus sit. Tacitus 2.
Hist, and the abridgment of Dio p. 204 make mention of another which in Othoes
time was slain in Cythno insula by Calpurnius Asprenas.

9. The most fruitful tract of Campania, and the city of Rome wasted by fire)
Suet. Tito. c. 8. Quaedam sub eo fortuita ac tristia acciderunt, vt
conflagratio Vesuuij montis in Campania, and incendium Romae per triduum,
totidemque noctes. page 228. 229.
Xiphilinus the abridger of Dio describes this burning of Vesuuius at large
with all the circumstances and miracles, among the rest, that the ashes
thereof were dispersed into Afric, Syria and Egypt: And at Rome filled all
the air about the city and dar^kened the son.
(...). Plinius Secu^dus in an Lib. 6 ep. 16.
epistle to Tacitus sets it out upon occasion of his uncles death who was
stifled there with ashes and smoke. In the later Emperors time the same
mountain burned again in such vehement sort that they at Constantinople were
choked all up with the ashes that issued from it, if we may safely believe
their own stories. Now for the wasting of Rome by fire, Xiphilinus, p. 230,
delivers it at large. That is, The year following that of Vesuuius, an other
fire wasted very many parts of Rome. For it consumed the temple of Serapis,
that of Isi^, the places called Septa, the temple of Neptune, Agrippaes bathes,
the Pantheon, the Ditibi^orium, the Octauian buildings with the books,
moreover the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus and his fellow gods.
(...).

10. The islands etc. Plenum exilijs mare) Mare pro insulis. So Tacitus, 4. Ann.
p. 342. calls Seriphus, saxum Seriphium, by way of contempt: for such
commonly were the ila^ds, into which the relegati were sent. The usual islands
of deportatio^ were Pandateria, Planasia, Cercina, Seriphus, Gyarus, Cythera,
Amorgus, Donusa, Trunerus, Baleares, Sardinia, Naxus, and perhaps others.

11. The cliffes etc. Infecti caedibus scopuli) The relegati in insulam were
commonly upon a second message led aside to some creek or promontory, and so
quietly made away, or peradventure scopuli is taken here pro insulis as mare
was before.

12. Or forbear them) Xiphilinus Domitiano makes mention of Herennius
Senecio, whom Domitian put to death, (...). but Tacitus himself in the preface
of Agricola alleges another reason because he published a book in praise of
Heluidius Priscus.
because after the Questorship he had not demanded in all his life any hyer
office. Tacitus in vita Agricolae p. 605. Salarium tamen proconsulari solitum
offerri, and quibusdam a seipso concessum Agricolae non dedit (Domitianus) sieve
offensus non petitum, sieve etc.

13. As spoils.) In Tiberius time, when Libo Drusus was accused of treason,
bona damnati inter accusatores diuidebantur, and praeturae extra ordinem datae
iis qui senatorij ordinis erant. Tacitus 2. Annal. Again 3. page 364.
Annal. Hunc (Titium Sabinum) Latinius Latiaris, Porcius Cato, Petitius Rufus,
M. Opsius praetura functi aggrediuntur cupidine consulatus; speaking not of the
time here intended, but of the same manner of proceeding; rather of other men,
then other manners.

14. Procuratorships.) Procurator, says Cicero pro Caecina, dicitur is, qui
omnium rerum eius, qui in Italia non sit, absitue reip. causa, quasi quida^
pene dominus est, h.e. alieni iuris vicarius. Appian, p. 282, translateth it
(...). From this general notion, the word was afterward particularly applied
to certain offices, which were appointed in every province (beside the
Presidents, or Lieutenants) as it were, Treasurers or Receivers to gather up
the revenues of the Empire. Dio. l. 53. That is, Procuratore, we call them
which receive, and according to their co^missions pay out the common revenues.
(...). Tac. in vita Agricola brings in the Britans complaining: singulos
sibi olim reges fuisse, nunc binos imponi, e quibus legatus in sanguinem,
procurator in bona saeuiret. Tac. 16. Ann. p: 551. Mella petit^one honorum
abstinuerat per ambitionem praeposteram, vt eques Romanus consularibus potentia
aequaretur. simul acquirendae pecuniae, per procurationes administrandis
principis negotijs, breutus iter credebat.
An office of gain, rather then honor, supplied by the gentlemen of Rome, or
by the Princes libertines, generally by his most assured, and trusty
seruitours. And this was their first institution. Beside this they were set
also to spy the Lieutenants actions, and sometime they had special commission
to murder them. Sometime they were sent into smaller provinces as governors
with jurisdiction, then called procuratores cum potestate, or vice-praesides.
Tac. in this book: Dua Mauretaniae, Rhoetia, Noricum, Thracia, and quae aliae
procuratoribus cohibentur, vt cuique exercitui vicinae, ita etc. Claudius
especially enlarged the office, cuius, says 12. Ann p. 443.
Tacitus saepius audita vox est, parem vim rerum habendam a procuratoribus suis
iudicatarum, a^ si ipse statuisset. Ac ne fortuito prolapsus videretur, senatus
quoque consulto cautum, before quam antea and vberius. And in Tiberius time
Pontius Pilatus, who put Christ to death, was but only procurator, not
Lieutenant, or President. Tacitus. 15. page 528.
Ann. Auctor nominis eius Christus, qui Tiberio imperitante, per procuratorem
Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus erat.

15. Inward credit.) Such was the credit of Maecenas with Augustus, and of
Salustius Crispus, who as Tacitus Ann. 3. pa. 309.
reports. Quanquam prompto ad capessendos honores aditu, Maecenatem
aemulatus, sine dignitate senatoria multos triumphalium, consulariumque
potentia anteiit incolumi Maecenati proximus, mox primus, cui secreta
imperatorum innitere^tur* in sum, such as cared not to bear office of
honor, but otherwise governed the Prince peaceably, in quality of favorites,
or minions, as they call them.

16. The bondme^) In ancient time by a decree of the Senate the bo^dma^ could
not be put to the torture in caput domini: but Tiberius, says Tacitus. 2.
page ^68.
Ann, callidus, and noui iuris repertor mancipari singulos actori publico
iubet: scilicet vt in dominum ex seruis saluo senatusconsulto quaereretur.
Afterward indicia seruorum without torture were usually received as good
evidence, and largely rewarded. Tac. 16. page ^5^.
Ann. in the cause of Petronius; corrupto ad indicium seruo.

17. That the Gods are careful rather etc.) Titus the Emperor, having shipped
away all the informers and promoters, ingenti ammo securitati nostrae
vltionique prospexerat, ideoque numinibus aequatus est, says Pliny in his
Panegyricke, attributing to the gods both qualities, to save us from harm, and
to revenge us when we are harmed, and carrying a more reverent conceit of them,
then his fellow Tacitus seems to do in this place, and in some other places
beside. 14. Annal: Prodigia quoque crebra and irrita intercessere. Anguem enixa
mulier, and alia in concubitu mariti fulmine exanimata: tam sol repent
obscuratus, and tactae de coelo quatuordecim vrbis regiones. Quae adeo sine
cura deum eueniebant, vt multos post annos Nero imperium and scelera
continuauerit. page ^^6.
Annal. 16. Exutus omnibus fortunis, and in exilium actus (Cassius
Aselepiodocus) aequitate deum erga bona malaque documenta. And yet in some
other places he lets fall sometimes religious sentences, carrying himself as
it were in balance doubtfully between the carelessness of Polybius that way,
and the superstitiousnesse of Liuy, two principal writers of the Roman story.

18. The reasons and causes of things, not only etc.) The commendation of an
history consists not in reporting bare events, but in discovering the causes
of those events, without which the reader ca^ pick but small profit out of a
simple register book. (...), l^^. ^.7^.
says Polybius, That is, Neither are the writers of stories nor readers so
much to regard^ and insist upon the bate narration of the actions themselves,
as the precedents, the adjuncts and consequences of the actions, for take away
from story the causes whereupon, and the manner how, and the purpose wherefore
things were done, and whether the action had such success as in probability
was to be e^pecied, that which remains ^^tale i^^e^e but no instruction, for
the present desiring but afterward pro^^^^gnoti^ng at all.
(...). Scribere bellum, says Sempronius Asellio in lib 5 cap. 18.
Gellius quo initum consule, and quomodo confectum sit, and qui^ triumphans
introierit, and quae in eo bello gesta sint iterare; non predicari autem
interea quid senatus decreuerit, aut quae lex rogatione lata sit, neque quibus
consilijs ea gesta si^t; id fabulas pueris est narrare, non historias scribere.
Nobis non modo satis esse video quod factum esset id pronuntiare; sed etiam quo
consilio quaque ratione gesta essent demonstrare. And Dionysius (...). 5. page
238. That is, In reading of stories he principal profit consists not in
knowing only the end of things and events, but every man desires to
understand the causes of that which passed, the manner of doing, the drift and
devises of the doers, the occurrences of fortune, and to be ignor^nt of nothing
which belonged any way to the action.
(...). the like lib. 11. p. 505. For this virtue Theopo^pus is by the same In
fragmentis.
Dionysius extolled, and praised in most exquisite manner. That is, The last of
his virtues and most peculiar and proper, as being by no other history writer
old not new so exactly performed, is this, in every action not only to see
and declare what was apparent to the view of the world, but also to search out
the secret^ causes of actions, and to see into the affections of their minds
who were agen^s* things not easily seen of the common sort and finally to
discover all the mysteries both of pretended virtue and cloked vice* the
examination and trial by Theopompus writings being no less exact then the
arraigment of souls fabulously devised before the infernal judges.
(...), says he, (...). Now Tacitus in this place setting us down a theoreme
of history, wherein without controversy he excelled; that an historiographer
is to give knowledge of counsels and causes: another natural, wherein he had
no great grace, that euentus plerumque suat fortuiti, that is, either had no
causes, or no causes that could be discovered, may seem in In division of
notions.
(...) to have seen very nearely, but yet in In composition.
(...) to have looked not so well about him: joining somewhat strangely two
contrary notions together.

19. Citty-souldier) The soldiers that were resiant at Rome were of two sorts,
Praetoriani and Vrbani proprie dicti, both of them by Tacitus here, and
elsewhere comprehended by the name of Miles vrbanus. Miles vrbanus longo
Caesarum sacramento imbutus: and again ne vrbano quidem militi satis confisus,
meaning only or principally of the Praetorians. In his proper signification
and standing in opposition to Praetoriani, Tacit. page 58. addidit classi
Vrbanas cohortes, and plerosque e Praetorianis* again, quod raro alias
Praetorianus, Vrbanusque miles in aciem deducti: now when it does stand for
the one, or for both, only circumstance must help to discern.

20. That secret of state disclosed: Euulgato imperij arcano) Euulgare arcana
imperij may seem to be that which Dionysius in the place before alleged
calls (...), in affairs of estate to reveal the good openly pretended, and
the ill secretly intended. Notwithstanding arcana imperij, being in mine
opinion so sundry in nature, can hardly be bounded with one definition.
Tacitus. page 2^1.
Annal. 2. Censuit Gallus in quinquennium magistratuum comitia habenda. haud
dubium erat eam sententiam altius penetrare, and arcana imperij tentari: the
secret of state herein was, that whereas hope of honor or gain is the only
sovereign mean in court to retain suitors and servants in diligence and due
devotion, to speed so many at once were to make so many slack wayters; and
for so many years before hand to drive the rest to despair. In the same
page 283.
book. Augustus inter alia dominationis arcana, vetitis, nisi permissu,
ingredi senatoribus aut equitibus Romany illustribus, seposuit Aegyptum: ne
fame vrgeret Italiam, quisquis eam prouinciam, claustraque terrae ac maris
quamuis leui praesidio aduersus ingentes exercitus insedisset* the secret is,
into a country which rebelling might endanger the state, never to suffer men of
great houses, or great credit among the common people to have access. In this
place, as it may seem, are me^t the secret trueths of apparences in affairs
of estate* for the mass of the people is guided and governed more by
ceremonies and shows then matter in substance. The example is of an act done
in undue place, whereof there had been no precedent before. In co^gruity a
Prince of Rome were to be created at Rome, and an Emperor in the seate-towne
of the Empire, and so it had been always observed: but the truth was, and so
much the secret imported, that in substance it mattered not much where he were
made, that afterward could maintain it with arms, and with the good liking of
the subjects of the Empire. This secret of state Galba disclosed, and making
his profit thereof against Nero, gave occasion to other to practice the like
against him. The soldiers of Germany in the choice of Vitellius, as Plutarch
reports, That is, Go too now, by choosing Vitellius let us show to the
world that we are able to make an Emperor better the^ those of Spain and
Portugal.
(...). Vitellius likewise passed out the same way he came in. Nam posse ab
exercitu principem fieri, sibi ipsi Vitellius documento est, says Mutianus in
Tacitus lib. 2. page 95.
Hist. And generally after this secret was by Galba once disclosed, more
Emperors were made abroad, then at Rome. Beside these imperij, or dominationis
arcana, Ann. 1. page 218.
Tacitus makes mention of arcana domus Augustae: that is, secrets of court,
or of Palace* and 3 page 309.
Ann. of secreta imperatorum.

21. Making indeed very bold with their Prince as being new in state) Tacitus
2. Hist. Recens Galbae principatu censuerant patres vt accusatorum causae
noscerentur. and 4. Hist. in the oration of Curtius Montanus. Elanguimus P.C.
nec iam ille senatus sumus, qui occiso Nerone delatores, and ministros more
maiorum puniendos flagitabat. Optimus est post malum principem dies primus. Now
accusatores, promoters, or enformers, are reckened inter instrumenta imperij,
with as good reason as one Locusta in Claudius and Neroes time, nuper veneficij
damnata and diu inter instrumenta regnihabita, says Tacitus. 12. page 446.
Annal. For accusers certain it is that many good Princes, or not very bad,
have been content to mainetaine them. Mutianus the mouth of Vespasian censuit
prolixe pro accusatoribus: Tacitus 4. page 176.
Hist. Heluidius Priscus suing Eprius Marcellus upon the decree Dubia voluntate
Galbae became suddenly non-suite* ibidem.

22. His journey to Rome was slow) At what day Galba began his journey from
Spain to Rome, and when he entered the city, the stories being lost, it is
hard precisely to determine. Notwithstanding to give some light to this place,
and withal to yield a reason of the times set down by me In the end of Nero
and beginning of Galba.
elsewhere, I think good to note the reasons which moved me thereto. First
Galerio Trachalo, Silio Italico Coss. Neapoli de motu Galliaru^ cognouit (Nero)
die ipso, quo matre^ occiderat. Suet. cap. 40.
Neron. Now Agrippina was slain ipsis Quinquatruu^ diebus: Tac. 14. page 479.
Ann. and Suet. cap. 34.
Nerone; and Quinquatrus begin the nineteenth day of March: Ovid. Fast. 3. so
allowing some co^pete^t time from Vie^na, or Lio^s to Naples it will appear
that Vindex rebellion began about the tenth or twelfth of March. Again
Xiphilinus says that Galba reigned nine months and thirteen days, which is
to be understood from the time he took the Empire upon him in Spain, as
Xiphilinus himself notes in the last words of Vespasians time* so that Galba,
dying the fifteenth of Tac. 1. Hist.
January, began his reign about the first, or second of April. Nero began
the 13 of October: Tac. 12. page 447.
An. That is, And he reigned thirteen years and eight months, wanting two
days, and died in the month of July.
(...), says Zonaras tomo. 2, which two sayings cannot both be true* for if
Nero deceased in July, then reigned he more then thirteen year and eight
months: but if his reign was no longer, which Xiphilin also assures us of,
the^ died he not in July. Again the same Xiphilin writes; That is, That by
just computation from Neroes death till the beginning of Vespasians reign,
there was one whole year and two and twenty days. page 225.
(...). but the first day of Vespasia^s Empire was the first day of July: Tac.
2. Hist: so that Neroes death was upon the 8. of June. and so it should seem
by Tacitus in this very book, septe^ a Neronis fine menses sunt. Aurelius
Victor says, Menses septem diesque totidem (imperauit Galba) which
understood from Neroes death agrees justly with the former account. About the
very same time with Nero dyed Vindex in France. The word came first of his
death to Galba in Spain, and certain days after of Neroes in post. Plutar.
Galba. And certain it is that Nero never had any news of Vindex overthrow*
for it could not have been otherwise but that being heard must needs have
wrought some notable alteration at Rome. Philostratus l. 5. de vita Apollonij.
That is, It was reported (at Messana where Apollonius then was) that Nero was
fled, and Vindex dead.
(...), as though at Messana in Sicily the news of Neroes destruction had
first been reported. Of Neroes death Icelus brought Galba the news in seven
days from Rome. Plut. (...). So allowing some time for provision, it may seem
that Galba set forward about the beginning of July, and entered the city, as it
may be reasonably supposed, about September follovving; his journey says
Tacitus was slow, the way long, and his men heavy laden.

23. Galba brought in the Spanish Legion) That is, as I think, Septima
Galbiana, gathered (as it may seem by Tacitus 3. page 120.
Hist. Dio. page 384.
lib. 55. and Galba cap. 10.
Suetonius) by Galba in Spain, which notwithstanding seems to have been sent
away into Illyricum before his death under Antonius Primus Lieutenant, and
therefore without cause remembered here in the tumult of Otho I find no mention
of any Hispana legio, neither in Tacitus in this book, nor any writer beside,
unless percase they alone were a sleep, when all the world beside was in arms.

24. To the straits of the Caspian mountains) Suetonius cap. 1^.
Nerone. Parabat (Nero) and ad Caspias portas expeditionem, conscripta ex
Italicis senum pedum tyronibus noua legione, quam Magni Alexandri phalangem
appellabat. Xiphilinus adds further that he had purposed a viage into
Aethiopia.

25. Lieutenants of legions: Legati legionu^) Legatus in this very book has
3. significations. 1. Legatus for an Ambassador. p. 24. Censuera^t patres
mitte^dos ad Germanicu^ exercitu^ legatos. 2. Legatus, or Legatus consularis,
or consularis for a Lieutena^t, deputy, president, or governor of a whole
province, or army. p 21: Othonem in prouinciam Lusitaniam specie legationis
seposuit. p 42: Hordeonius Flaccus consularis legatus aderat. p. 19: inferioris
Germaniae legiones diutius sine consulari fuere. 3. Legatus legionis, or
legatus Praetorius, or legatus simply, but by circumsta^ce to be discerned, for
the Lieutena^t of a Legio^, whereof were in every army as many as Legions. p.
44: Coelius legatus vicesimae legionis. p. 586: in vita Agricolae speaking of
the same Legio^ and man; Quippe legatis co^sularibus nimia ac formidolosa erat.
Nec legatus Praetorius ad cohibe^du^ potens. p. 42: Nullo legatoru^,
tribunoru^ue pro Galba nite^te. p. 44: Foedis legatoru^ certaminibus, spoken
equiuocally, and to the va^tage of the word, for the one of the^ was legatus
consularis, and the other legatus legionis.

26. Provinces abroad: Eprouincijs) Scilicet Caesaris, only meant, as I take
it, here for Augustus after the war at Actiu^, enforced forsooth by the
Senate to undertake the Monarchy, divided the provinces into two sorts. The
quiet and peaceable cuntreyes he rendered into the Senate and peoples hand; the
provinces that limited and bordered the Empire, with the rest where any
rebellion, or war might be feared, he retained to himself, and his
successors, in show to sustain himself al danger alone, and leave to the
Senate the sweet at their ease, but in truth to keep himself always armed,
and them without arms. To the Senate and people, as lib. 17.
Strabo, and lib 53.
Dio write, belonged these provinces follovving, which 13. Ann p. 450.
Tacitus, if I be not deceived, calls publicas prouincias. Duae consulares,
Afric with Numidia, and Asia, so called because these two provinces were
properly assigned to those who had been Consuls, whereas for the rest it
suffized to have borne inferior office: and december praetoriae, Boetica,
Narbonensis, Sardinia with Corsica, Sicilia, Epirus, Macedonia, Achaia with
Thessalia etc. Creta with Cyrene, Cyprus, Pontus and Bithynia. To himself he
retained Hispania Tarraconensis, Lusitania, Gallia Lugdunensis, Belgica,
Aquitania, Syria etc. Cilicia, Egypt, Dalmatia, Moesia, Pannonia, and the tract
of Rhene upon the French side called by the name of In Marcellinus, li. 15. p.
1461. Germania prima (wherein were Magontiacus, Vangiones* Nemites, and
Argentoratus) and Germania s^cunda, Agrippina and Tungris munita.
superior and inferior Germania, as it is also at this day called Germany, but
by Caesar's description comprehended in Gallia, and a very part of Belgica,
who knevv no other Germania, but that which the later vvriters call for
difference sake Great Germany.
(...) beyond the Rhene: whereas Tacitus in this first book naming often
Germany, means always the other two provinces, so called because the Germans
continually passing the Rhene inhabited the country, and so by little and
little changed the name. Caesar lib. 2. com. Dio. lib. 53. Tac. lib. 1. page
242.
Ann. and in his book page 574.
de moribus Germanorum. Treueri and Neruij circa affectationem Germanicae
originis vltro ambitiosi sunt, tanquam per hanc gloriam sanguinis, a
similitudine and inertia Gallorum separentur. ipsam Rheni ripam haud dubie
Germanorum populi colunt Vangiones, Treboci, Nemetes etc, Of these two
Germanies, superior, says Dio, was From the head of the Rhene.
(...), and stretched to Mentz, or Cobolentz rather: inferior, downward To the
British O^ein.
(...). Beside these provinces whatsoever was afterward conquered, or became
subject to the Roman Empire, as England in Claudius time, Pontus Polemoniacus,
and Alps Cottiae in Neroes time, Dacia in Traianes etc, (...). Dio. page 341.
increased the Emperors portion. Now the governors that were sent into the
Senates cuntreyes, both Pretorian and Consular, were called Proconsules,
whether they had ever been Consuls or no. Those which the Emperors sent into
theirs were called Legati, or Legati Consulares, or Propraetores, except
peradventure they sent sometimes their Procuratours, as in small provinces
before we have noted. Dio. lib. 53. That is, Of both the public and Princes
provinces, Egypt only excepted, the governors were taken ^ut of the
Senators: for the public provinces annual, and chosen by lot (except they
were conferred on any upon some special privilege, as of marriage or multitude
of children) and sent out as it were from the body of the Senate, nor wearing
sword, nor spaludamentum, an indifferently called Proconsuls whether they ever
had been Consuls or not: having also as many sergeants attending as usually
they had in the city, and as soon as they were out of the Pomerium assuming
the ensigns of their office which they always retained until their return.
Now for the governors of the Princes provinces, he reserved them for his own
choice, and appointed that they should be termed Legati and ropraetores,
though they had peradventure borne the office of Consulshippe before.
(...). and paulo post, That is, The name of Propratores he gave to those of
his own choice, and continued their office more or less during pleasure;
appointing likewise that they should wear the Paludamentum and sword, as
having authority of life and death over the soldiers.
(...). Tacitus in this book speaking of ^allia Narbonensis a public
province; Vinius, says he, proconsulatu Galliam Na^onensem severe rexit, who
never had been Consul before: page 152.
Annalium. 1: I find Granius Marcellus called Praetor of Bithynia, which was
at the first division a public province, and so continued as appears out of
Plinies ep. 64. 65.
tenth book of epistles. And in the same place of Tacitus mention is made of a
Questor, an office not used in the Princes cuntreyes; and in Claudius time
damnatus lege repetundaru^ Cadius Rufus accusantibus Bithynis; which action I
think, lay not against the Princes legati, as executing their charge rather by
way of commission, the^ by virtue of office. But of Propraetor the case is
clear. 12. An. p. 430. in Brita^nia P. Ostorium propraetorem. and p. 434. of
the same man, Caesar cognita morte legati. etc. Vitellius in this book is
called legatus consularis inferioris Germaniae: and 4. page 367.
Ann. L. Apromus inferioris Germaniae propraetor. Suetonius cap. 40.
Nerone. Duce Iulio Vindice, qui tum eam prouin eiam propraetore obtinebat ad
est, Galliam Lugdunensem belonging to the Prince. In Afric Caius beside the
Proconsul, the office and name due to the place, superinduced a legatus as from
himself to take charge of the soldiers there. Tac. page 178.
Hist. 4. Legio in Africa auxiliaque tutandis imperij finibus, sub diuo Augusto
Tiberioque principibus, proconsuli parebant. Mox C. Caesar turbidus animi, ac
Or according to Dio, Lucium Pisonem.
M. Sullanum obtinentem Africam metuens, ablatam proconsuli legionem, misso in
eam rem legato tradidit, aequatus inter duos beneficiorum numerus, and mixtis
vtriusque mandatis discordia quasita, auctaque. Prauo certamine legatorum ius
adoleuit, diuturnitate officij, vel quia minoribus mayor aemulandi cura.
Proconsulum splendidissimus quisque securitati magis quam potentiae
consulebant. Dio. lib. 59. That is, After that Lucius Piso son of Cn. Piso
and Plancina was made Pr^consul of Afric, Caius the Emperor fearing that
upon hautinesse of stomach he might be induced to work innovation,
especially having under his charge great forces both legi^nary and auxiliary,
he divided the government into two parts and gave another the charge both of
the soldiers and of the Numidians bordering thereabouts which custo^e is
retained even to this day.
(...). Only of Egypt the governor was neither called Legatus, nor Propraetor,
but Praefectus Aegypti, or Praefectus Augustalis. Other names as praeses,
rector etc. I take to be common to both sorts. Again in prouincijs publicis
were Quaestores beside Procurators; in the Princes, Procurators only. Dio.
lib. 53. That is, Into the provinces which appertain to the Senate and people
there are sent Questors chosen by lot.
(...). page 342. and page 343. That is, The Emperor sends Procurators to
all provinces alike, both his own and those which belong to the people.
(...).

27. Of Spain etc. Hispaniae praerat Cluuius Rufus) Id est, Hispaniae
Tarraconensi, for that only of the three provinces, into which Spain is
divided, was furnished with soldiers, and of such especially in this place
Tacitus intends, not extending his speech to the naked and peaceable, which
afterward he calls inermes. Cluuius Rufus was a famous orator, and vvrote
a story of that time alleged by Tacitus. 13. and 14. Ann. who,
notvvithstanding his preferment was by Galba, Tac. 1. Hist. p. 51.
swore with the first to Otho, and in the beginning of Vitellius time
returned to Rome, non adempta Hispania quam rexit absens. Tacitus. 2. Hist.
page 90. In the nineth book and nineteenth epistle Pliny makes mention of a
speech that passed between Verginius, and Cluuius: his words be these; ita
secum aliquando Cluuium locutum: Scis Virgini quae historiae fides debeatur;
proinde si quid in historijs meis legis aliter ac velles, rego ignoscas. Ad hoc
sic illum, Cluui ne tu ignoras, ideo me fecisse quod feci, vt esset liberum
vobis scribere, quae libuisset?

28. Egypt and the garrisons there the gentlemen of Rome) That is, After the
victory at Actium Augustus made Egypt tributary, and committed the government
thereof to Cornelius Gallus. For considering the great store of people both in
the towns and the country, moreover their leuity and inconstancy, that it was
the Roman storehouse of corn, and very rich of money, not only he durst not
trust it into the hands of the Senators, but also expressly forbad any of them
to soiourne there, except by permission namely from him.
(...). says Dio. lib. 51 (...). Tacitus. 2. Ann. page 283. writes that not
only Senators but also equites Romani illustres (that is, as I think, those
whom. 16. Ann. page 551. he terms equites Romanos dignitate senatoria) were
forbidden to go thither, but upon permission; Ne fame vrgeret Italiam quisquis
eam prouinciam, claustraque terrae ac maris quamuis leui praesidio aduersus
ingentes exercitus insedisset, Arrianus. lib. 3. is of opinion, that the Romans
in ordering Egypt followed the example of Alexander the great, who, says he,
Is reported to have divided the government of Egypt amongst many, having in
admiration the natural site and strength of the country: wherefo^e he thought
is not safe to commit the entier regiment thereof to any one man, and the
Romans in my opinion learned this point of Alexander strictly to guard Egypt,
and for the same cause to make none of the Senators governor there, but only
of the ordo Equestris.
(...).

29. Who being privileged to wear gold rings: Quem annulis donatum) In
Spain when he brought the news of Neroes death. Annulis donare is al one
with equestri dignitate donare. Tac. 2. Hist. postulante exercitu vt libertum
suum Asiaticum equestri dignitate donaret, inhonestam adulationem compescuit,
(Vitellius). Dein mobilitate ingenij quod palam abnuerat, inter secreta
conuiuij largitur, honorauit que Asiaticum annulis, foedum mancipium, and malis
artibus ambitiosum. Suet. cap. 12.
Vitellio. primo imperij die aureu donauit annulis super coenam, quum mane
rogantibus pro eo cunctis detestatus esset seuerissime talem equestris ordinis
maculam; speaking of the same man with Tacitus. Dio. lib. 48. That is,
Augus^us honored Menas with golden rings, and entered him among the Equites.
(...) for in ancient time, though afterward wealth increasing every one
began to brave it in gold, yet That is, Among the ancient Romans it was not
lawful for any (I mean not of those only which sometimes had been slaves,
but of al others free borne and liberally brought up) to wear gold rings,
except he were either Senator or Eques. and therefore the Princes bestow this
upon the freedmen whom they favor as a great honor though otherwise they
wear rings of gold, as being thereby made better then common freedmen and
equal in degree with the Equites.
(...). This privilege the Prince conferred not only upon his own, but also
upon other men's liberti, (although inuitis or ignorantibus patronis it was not
lightly granted, or if it were, it was recalled) and it drevv with it ius
ingenuitatis, but not to exclude the patron ab hereditate liberti. lib. 40.
Digest.

30. In grace with Nero etc.) That is, Nero used Otho as his inward friend and
companion because of his riot, and being often noted by him of sparing and
nigardlines he took it in very good part, and it is reported that on a time
Nero, as he was anointing with a very costly ointmen^, having besprinkled Otho
with a little thereof, the day following Otho entertayning him again set in
diverse corners silver and golden pipes spouting out the ointment like water
and washing the place.
(...). Plutarchus Galba. That is, There was one M. Saluius Otho so familiar
with Nero both for likeness of their conditions, and fellowshippe in vices,
that when once in speech with Nero he let fall a word: So may you see me
Emperor as this, and this is a truth, he did him no harm, but only replied,
No I will not so much as see thee a Consul.
(...). Xiphilinus Nerone.

31. Poppoea Sabina) Concerning the matter how it passed between Nero, Poppaea
and Otho, read Suetonius Othone. c. 3. and Plutarch page 1503.
Galba differing from Tacitus in some little circumstances. But to this place
of Tacitus most contrary, and without question irreconciliable is Tacitus
himself in another. 13. Annal. p. 471.

32. Sulpician and Lutatian houses) Plutarch. p. 1490. speaking of Galbaes
petigree He was descended of the most honorable house of the Seruij.
(...), says he, (...). And Tacitus lib. 2. Hist. Post Iulios, Claudios,
Seruios; both somewhat strangely using the This forename of Seruius was so
general to the Sulpitij that the Sulpitij surnamed Rufi assumed another foren
me turning the foresaid after a sort in gentilicium, whereupon in the life of
Atticus we read, M. Seruius Sulpicius and in Julius obsequens P. Seruius
Sulpitius Rufus.
forename pro gentilicio, to note the house which was Sulpitia: of which you
may read more at large in Sueton. Galba. c. 2. and 3. But Galba, says
Plutarch, Gloried more in his affinity with Catulus,
(...), Qu. Lutatius Catulus being his great grandfather by the mother. That he
was of kin to Liuia Augusta, as Plutarch writes, I have not else red, although
it is true, that obseruauit ante omnes Liuiam Augustam, cuius and vinae gratia
plurimum valuit, and mortuae testamento pene ditatus est. Suet. c. 5. But of
kindred I find no word, neither do I greatly believe it* only a stepmother
he had named Liuia Ocellina, who adopted him, and therefore he was called
Lucius Liuius Ocellinus after her name vsque ad tempus imperij, if Suetonius in
cap. 4.
Galba do not deceive us.

33. Near me in blood: Propinquos aut socios belli) Augustus adopted Agrippa
and Tiberius as socios belli, the rest as propinquos. So Otho was to Galba
socius belli, and Dolabella, who as Plutarch affirms was also in speech about
the adoption, propinquus. Tac. p. 58. Cornelius Dolabella propinquitate Galbae
monstratus, if it be, as I think, the same man, of whom Plutarch speaks.

34. Of one family) C. Julius adopted Augustus; Augustus Liuia and Tiberius,
who adopted Germanicus, whose son Caius was, and Claudius his brother, and
lastly Claudius adopted Nero in whom failed the Julian line. Ausonius.

Aeneadum generis qui sextus and vltimus here is
Polluit, and clausit Iulia sacra Nero.
35. I Shall cease etc. Desina^ videri senex) i. Desina^ contemni quasi senex.
Non legiones, non classes perinde firma imperij munimenta, quam numerum
liberorum. Tac. page 180.
4. Hist. in the person of Titus. Literally to construe, it may seem somewhat
strange, that a man should cease to seem aged, because he had adopted one that
was one and thirty years old, as Piso Tac. 1. Hist. page 37.
was, to whom in common intendement he might have been father, and so was
reputed to all constructions, and purposes in law. But Adoption, as Generation,
does in a sort eternize, and eternity knows no agednes.

36. That being of ancient time observed as cause to break up assemblies) Cic.
in Vatinium. Augures omnes vsque ab Romulo decreuerunt, love fulgente cum
populo agi nesas esse. Philippica. 5. love tonante cum populo agi non esse fas
quis ignorant? 2. de diuinatione. In nostris commentarijs scriptum habemus: Jove
tonante fulgurante comitia populi habere nefas. A none after. Comitiorum solum
vitium est fulmen, quod idem omnibus rebus auspicium optimum habemus, si
sinistrum fuerit.

37. Where each man makes choice of his fellow) This manner of mustering was,
that the first man should choose out the second, who in the battle should
stand fast beside him, the second the third, and so forth, each his mate till
the last man. An army so gathered was in the opinion of those ancient times
thought in a manner invincible, and questionles it had very many singular
commodities. Liuy lib. 9. Ad Vadimonis lacum Hetrusci, lege sacrata coacto
exercitu, cum vir virum legisset, quantis nun quam alias ante simul copijs,
simul animis dimicarunt. Much after the same manner page ^4.
Xenoph. 1. (...). describes the Persian muster, either because it was so
indeed, or because in his judgment, being an excellent commander, so had been
the best. Cyrus the General makes choice of 200. trained gentlemen such as he
knew most fit for the service. Each of those 200. choose four more gentlemen:
and so rising up to a thousand gentlemen, every gentleman makes choice of
thirty common soldiers, namely 10. (...).
targets, 10. slings, and 10. bows.

38. Their donatiue which they had used of duty to receive) The Princes
liberalities to the soldiers were called Donatiua, to the people or otherwise
to his friends, Congiaria, doubtless because at the first certain measures
called congij of wine or oil were bestowed, and afterward other things being
given, yet the ancient name remained. p. 435.
Tac. 12. Ann: Additum nomine Neronis donatiuum militi, congiarium plebi. And
Sueton. cap. 7.
Nerone of the self same thing: Deductus (Nero) in forum tyro, populo
congiarium, militi donatinum proposuit. Which propriety of speech Tully, as it
may seem, not regarding, uses congiarium in steed of donatiuum, 16. ad
Attic. ep. 8. An iret ad tres legiones Macedonicas, quae iter secundum mare
superum faciunt, quas sperat suas esse. Eae congiarium ab Antonio accipere
noluerunt. Or rather, as I think, the word donatiuum came in with the Empire,
not known in the free state. Donatiues the Princes usually bestowed upon some
great victory, or other extraordinary occasion. Claudius was the first which at
his creation promised to the soldiers Donatiue, fifteen thousand sesterces a
man, that is, about six score pound sterling. Primus Caesarum fidem militis
etiam praemio pigneratus, says cap. 10.
Suetonius: and when Nero his adopted son did take togam virilem, he gave
them another. Nero at his entry promisit donatiuum ad exemplar paternae
largitionis. Tac. Ann. 12. and after the conspiracy of Piso was detected bina
nu^mum millia viritim manipularibus diuisit, that is, about sixteen pound, and
diverse times in the Grecian journey, inducing as it were by so many precedents
a kind of necessity to his successors. Nymphidius promised them in Galbaes
name thirty thousand sesterces, that is about twelve score pound, but Galba at
his coming paid nothing at all. And here in the adoption of Piso: nullu^
oratiom aut lenocinium additum, aut pretium. Adrian following a more agreeable
course to that time, in the adoption of Verus bestowed three hundredth millions
of sesterces upon the soldiers: and Antoninus at the marriage of his daughter
Faustina exceeded vsque ad donatiuum militum. Spartian. p. 818. and 828.

39. Two and twenty hundredth millions: ^is and vicies mill sesterium) Mill by
error for milies. Tacit. 2. page 105.
Hist: Nouies millies sestertium, not nouies mill; for so is the use of the
tongue. Now in these speeches pronounced aduerbi^lly is understood of course
ce^tena millia so that bis and vicies millies is as much as if he had said,
bis and vicies millies ce^tena millia sestertium. Plutarchus Antonio
interprets DECIES by (...) that is decies centena millia sestertium; counting
as he does four sestertij to a dram. Sesterius, quasi semis tertius, that
is two and an half; and according to the same analogy, in Greek (...) is
four talents and an half, and in Dutch drit halb batzen, two batz and an
half. Now sestertius signifying two and an half, as the vulgar note also
imports H S. or joined H. S. that is duo and semis, is meant always of so
many asses; and therefore four sestertij are precisely equivalent to a
denarius, so called of dena era. Now all the Greek stories without exception
writing of the Roman affairs, in steed of quatuor sestertij set down (...),
not only in small sums, but in huge great, where the difference must of
force appear, if in their opinion there were any between them. Seeing then
denarius and dram, according to the consent of the most old writers against
a few, are of equal value, both containing four sesterces, eight drachmaes
making an ounce, and the ounce in our time esteemed at five shillings sterling,
our present sum of bis and vicies millies centena millia sestertium, reduced
to English money now current, amounts to seventeen millions an hundredth
eighty seven thousand and five hundredth pound. Neither can this sum seem
strange for Nero in fourteen years, when Tac. 2. Hist p 105
Vitellius paucissimis mensibus nouies millies H.S. interuertisse creditur
about seven thousand thousand pound.

40. The Astrologers also: Mathematicis) This use of the word Mathematicus pro
Apotclesmatico is utterly G^ll^^s lib. 1 c 9. Geometria^, G^omonicam, Musi^^a^
c^terasque item disciplinas altiores (...) veteres Graeci appellabant, vulgu^
autem, quo^ gentilicio vocabi^o Chaldaeos dicere oportet, mathematicos dicit.
unknown to the ancient Groecians, and to the Romans also, for ought I
remember, till the Emperors time. Before, they were called Chaldaei, non ex
artis, sed ex gentis vocabulo, says Tully: then Mathematici (a name undue to
their occupation) or Planetarij, and Tac. 12. Ann. p. 427. qui obijceret
Chaldaeos, mago^ enterr^gatos super nuptijs imperatorus.
Chaldei also: in our time Astrologi, a word of the ancientest both Greek and
Latin applied to that part of the Mathematical sciences, both now, and then
also, known by the name of Astronomy. In Augustus time, That is, Agrippa
banished Astrologers (for so in Dioes time they began to call them) and
Magicians out of the city.
(...). Dio. lib. 49. p. 281. In Tiberius time, Facta and de Mathematicis,
Magisque Italia pellendis senatusconsulta, quorum e numero L. Pituanius saxo
deiectus est. In P. Martium Coss. extra portam Esquilinam, cum classicum canere
iussissent, more prisco aduertere. Tac. 2. Ann. p. 269. In Claudius time Tac.
Ann. 12. p. 4^0.
De Mathematicis Italia pellendis factum senatus consultum atrox and irritum.
And in Vitellius time 2. Histor.
pulsi Italia Mathematici. Vlpianus lib. 7. de officio Proconsulis. Praeterea
interdicta est Mathematicorum callida impostura: nec hodie primum interdici eis
placuit, sed vetus haec prohibitio est. denique extat senatusconsultum Pomponio
A V. C. 770. but Tacitus. 2. Ann. places it in the year before.
and Rufo Coss. factum, quo cauetur, vt Mathematicis, Chaldaeis, ariolis and
caeteris, qui similem artem fecerint, aqua and igni interdicatur, omniaque bona
eorum publicentur* and anon after, saepissime denique interdictum est fere ab
omnibus principibus, ne quis omnino huiusmodi ineptijs se immisceret* yea
before the Princes came in, M. Popillio Laenate, Cn. A. V. C. 615.
Calpurnio Coss. C. Cornelius Hispallus Praetor edicto Chaldaeos intra decimum
diem abire ex vrb^ atque Italia iussit: leuibus atque ineptis ingenijs, fallaci
siderum interpretatione quaestuosam mendacijs suis caliginem inijcientes:
says Valerius lib. 1. Tertullian in his book de habitu muliebri, and again
in lib. de Idololatria, is of opinion, that the angels which fell from their
first creation were autours of Astrology, and therefore exiled out of heaven,
as their creatures out of Italy. Expelluntur, says he, Mathematici, sicut
angeli eorum* vrbs and Italia interdicitur Mathematicis, sicut coelum angelis
eorum* eadem poena est exitij discipulis and magistris. All these laws
notwithstanding they remained at Rome, says Tacitus, and that in as good
credit as before, the better believed, the oftener they had perused the Gayles.
Iuuenalis Satyra. 6. Inde fides arti, sonuit si dextera ferro,
Laeuaque si longo castrorum in carcere mansit.
Nemo Mathematicus genium indemnatus habebit.
And of Ptolemaeus the same Iuuenal: Praecipuus tamen est horum, qui saepius
exul,
Cuius amicitia conducendaque tabella
Magnus ciuis obit and formidatus Othoni.


Suetonius cap. 4
Othone names him Seleucus, by error as it may seem; for Seleucus was
Vespasians man. Tacitus.
Nec erat intactus tali superstitione (Vespasianus) vt qui mox rerum dominus
Seleucum quendam Mathematicum rectorem and praescium palam habuerit.

41. The lakes of Campania, and towns of Achaia) The ancientest and best
historiographers, taking their pleasure in explicatione consiliorum, and
fayning orations, have left us sometimes rather an image of their own wits,
then of the times whereof they have written. The nature of which, in mine
opinion, were better learned ex Actis vrbis diurnis, Actis senatus and such
like, if any were extant, then by any story we have. Not that I think a simple
collection of memoires of the like use in other respects, as a story well
written* neither do I condemn that liberty of fayning speeches, which I see
granted them by In his book (...).
Dionysius Halicarnasseus and other good writers, so it be done with judgment
and pro decoro personarum, including no evident absurdity or contradiction.
Which inconvenience Tacitus, though otherwise sharp sighted enough, in this
place in mine opinion has scarsely avoided. Those which were wont Campaniae
lacus and Achaiae vrbes classibus adire were the Xiphilinus page 190 and
Suetonius Nerone. c. 19. praetoriano^ pro concione adinchoandum opus cohortatus
est.
Praetorian soldiers: those whom Otho had here to talk with were the
Legionaries of Spain as they passed the mountains, who surely could not in
possibility accompany Nero into Achaia. Hist. page 183.
4. in the oration of Vocula: Non adeo turbatam ciuilibus armis rem Romana^, vt
Treueris etiam and Lingonibus despectui sit. Melius Diuo Iulio, Diuoque Augusto
notos eorum animos. Galbam, and infracta tributa hostiles spiritus induisse.
Nunc hosts, quia molle seruitiu^, cum spoliati, exutique fuerint, amicos fore*
and yet it is plain by Tacitus himself, and all other histories of that time,
that Treueri, and Lingones, were of all the French the only men which Galba
atrocibus edictis, aut damno fi^iu^ perculerat, relieuing the rest of their
tribute, and making them citizens. Vulcatius Gallicanus in the life page 862.
of Auidius Cassius brings in M. Antoninus the philosopher profou^dly
disputing the causes of the fall of certain Emperors, among other of
Pertinax. M^^nioninus.
Enumerauit deinde omnes principes qui occisi essent habuisse causas quibus
mererentur occidi, nec quenquam facile bonum vel victum a tyranno, vel occisum;
dicens meruisse Neronem, debuisse Caligulam, Othone^ and Vitellium nec imperare
voluisse. Nam de Pertinace and Galba paria sentiebat, cum diceret, in
Imperatore auaritiam esse acerbissimum malu^, whereas Pertinax was living
thirteen years after Antoninus was dead, succeeding in state to Co^modus his
son. Appianus (...) placing in the Roman battle Domitius in dextro cornu,
Lucius Scipio in the middle battle, and Eumenes in laeuo: and of the enemies
Antiochus in dextro, Philippus in the middle, and Seleucus in laeuo, in joining
like a good and skillful captain matching the middles, opposes the left to
the left (a thing not possible in nature) Eumenes to Seleucus and his people,
which indeed was true, as it appears by lib 37 fol 305.
Liuy, but Appians ordering of the battle is false. For Eumenes by Liuy, and in
truth was placed in dextro. Appia^s words be p. 76. Tha^ i^ Domitiu (...) ^nded
the ^^ght wi^g in the midd e battle was the Consul himself, the left wing
was given to Eumenes.
(...) (^. Domitius) (...). of the enemies The right wing was led by Antioch is
himself, the left by Seleucus his son the maine battle by Philip master of
the Elephants.
(...). now in the ioining, Fumenes says he p. 77. Charged with his horsemen
against the Galatians and Cappadocians which were over against them.
(...). and lest we might doubt where these Cappadoces stood, he concludes
with these words And these things were done on the left hand of the Macedonia^
battle
(...). The like error is in Dionysius. lib. 6. Of the Roman army the left
wing was commanded by T. Aebutius General of the horse over against Sex^
Tarquinius p 255.
(...), says he, (...), whom before he had placed In the left wing of the
Latins
(...) in the battle ad lacum Regillum. And in Callisthenes story of Alexander
Polybius l. 12. notes many F^^^ours in n a^ shalling the men in battle.
(...).

42 The golden Milliarium) Milliarium aureum was a golden pillar set up by
Augustus, as Dio witnesses page 356.
lib. 54. in capite fort Romani, says Pliny, At which all the high ways of
italy do end.
(...). Plutarchus Galba. so called because from thence began the account of
miles. Beside Milliarium aureum there were Milliaria lapidea, that is, little
pillars of stone erected by order from C. Gracchus at the end of every mile.
Plutarchus Gracchis. That is, Moreover having measured out the whole way by
miles (a mile being l ttle less then eight stadia, he erected pillars of stone
as marks of the measure p. 1535.
(...). whereupon grew the usual phrase ad tertium, quartum, quintum ab vrbe
lapidem, for three, four or five miles from the city.

43. Not upon judgment, or any) Tacit. 3. page ^39.
Hist. Populi mobilem animum; and si se ducem Flauius Sabinus.
praebuisset, easdem illas adulationes pro Vespasiano fore, which now they used
to Vitellius. and in the page ^50.
same book. vulgus eadem prauitate insectabatur interfectum (Vitellium) qua
fouerat viuentem. Iuuenalis Satyra. 10. Sed quid Turba Remi? sequitur fortunam,
ut semper, and odit
Damnatos* idem populus, si Vulsinijs. n. ^yn. de Se^anus erat autore Tacito
An. 4. templum Nortiae diae. Liu l. 7.
Nortiae Tusco
Fauisset, si oppressa foret secura senectus
Principis, hac ipsa Scianum diceret hora
Augustum. --


44 Framing acclamations at pleasure) The formula of acclamations in Senate is
to be seen in the later Roman stories, in favor, as in page 977.
Lampridius, to Alexander Seuerus, Auguste innocens dij te serue^t. etc. In
page 864.
Vulcatius Gallicanus, to Antoninus, Antonine pie dij te seruent, Antonine
clemens dij te seruent. etc. to Diuus Claudius, in Trebellius page 1107.
Pollio. Augusto Claudi dij te nobis praestent (dictum sexagies) Claudi Auguste
etc. in Flauius page 1145.
Vopiscus, to Tacitus the Emperor, Tacit Auguste dij te seruent, te
diligimus, te principem facimus. etc. In disfauor, as in page 876.
Lampridius after Commodus death, Hosti patriae honores detrahantur, parricidae
honores detrahantur, parricida trahatur etc. Of popular acclamations we may
guess they were much after this form.

45. Easily believed: credula fama) Dionysius notes in Thucidides among many
other innouations in speech, that he commonly changed actiues into passiues,
and passiues into actiues, (...). In Tacitus here we have credula to signify
cui facile credatur, passiuely, whereas credulus in common Latin, and so it is
used pa. 20, signifies only qui facile credit. likewise p. 37. Ne vulgi
largitione centurionum animos auerteret. i. largitione que fiat vulgo, sieve
gregario militi. Again 15. Ann. p. 518. Iniuriae minorum. i. quae minoribus
inferuntur. But to give a taste once for all of Tacitus grammar, I will note
here three or four places worthy the noting. Hist. 3. p. 133. It omnes Mutiano
volentia scripsere, volentia, pleasing, p. 145: Turbae sacricolarum immixtus,
ignarusque delituit. i. ignotus. in another place gnarum id Caesari, for notum,
and p. 147. Qu^ gnara Vitellianis, incomperta hostibus. 1. Ann. p. 244: Fama
dediti Segestis vulgata, vt quibusque bellum inuitis, aut cupientibus erat,
(...). 15. An. p. 524. Hac atque talia plebi volenti fuere, (...). In vita
Agricolae. Vt quibus bellum vole^tibus erat. 5. Hist. p. 202. Caesar Titus vt
superior sui tam crederetur (...). Ann. 2. 280. Appelli^que Colophona, vt
Clarij Apollinis oraculo vteretur. Homer. (...). An. 3. 306. Adulteros earum
morte aut fuga puniuit. i. exilio, (...). To be short who so list seek and
look more nearely into Tacitus phrases shall doubtless find as many strange
points in his grammar, as Dionysius has done in Thucidides.

46. As if they had gone to pull Vologeses or Pacorus out) Dio. l. 40. That is,
The Parthians inhabit beyond the river of Tigris in castles and hold^, now of
late they have some cities also* among others Cresiphon where the kings place
of resiace as, they were a several nation among the ancient barbaria^s, and
this name had they even under the Persia^ Empire* notwithstanding at that time
their territory was small, neither had they any dominion abroad. But when the
Persian monarchy was dissolved by the Macedonian power, and Alexa^ders
successors waging war one against another began to wither and decay, then
attempted the Parthians first of all to come forward under the conduct of one
Ar^aces, of whom all the kings afterward were called Arsaci^ae. and so good was
their fortune that they conquered all the country adjoining, together with the
province of Mesopotamia. In sine they grew to such height both of glory and
strength that they opposed themselves in op n war against the Romans, and
till this day are accounted the only men to match and make head against the^.
p. 80.
(...) And soli^ and lunae fratres also, says Marcellinus lib. 23. quo^
Ars^ces astris ritus sui consecratione (vt ipsi existimant) ^erm^xtus est omn^^
pri^aus.
(...). Herod^^nus libro. 6. page 520. Alexanders successors being divided one
against another, and the Macedonian power greatly weakened with continual
wars, Arsaces by birth a Parthian is said first of all to have persuaded the
barbarians of those quarters to revolt from the Macedonians, and assuming the
di^d^me b^ consent both of the Parthians and other barbarians thereabout
himself was king, and after him the crown continued for a long time in his
posterity.
(...). The very precise time of the Parthian revolt was under Antiochus Tac.
5. Hist. p. 206. Antiochus Parthoru^ bello prohibitus est nam ea tempestate
Arsaces desciuerat. Appianus (...) specifieth which Antiochus, to wit Antiochus
surnamed Deus, grandechilde to Ammianus lib 23 p. 1651 affirms it was
Seleucus Nicator.
Seleucus sounder of the Syrian kingdom. p. 90. At that time began the
Parthians their revolt by reason the kingdom of the Sele^cida was in great
disorder.
(...). From this Arsaces the Parthian kingdom continued to Artabanus, who
reigning in Alexander Seuerus time, was then destroyed by Artaxerxes a Persian,
and so the Empire of those Eastern cuntreyes united again to the crown of
Persia. Herodianus lib. 6. Vologeses or Vologesus (for 4. Hist. p. 180. gratiae
Vologeso acta.
both ways we find it written the Grecians call him (...)) was at this time
king of Parthia, son to Vonones that died in Claudius time, Anno vrb. con.
802, and brother to Pacorus king of Media, and Tiridates by Nero crowned king
of Armenia.

47. The fees of vacations: Vacationes) Id est, pretia vacationu^. for so he
terms them. 1 An. p. 233. Mox indiscretis vocibus pretia vacationu^ incusat.
now vacationu^, of what? muneru^. for so Tacitus speaks in another place*
hinc vacationes muneru^ redimi. So that vacationes in this place, and again p.
43, is as much as pretia vacationu^ munerum. for the common soldier by the
strictness of ancient discipline was tied and bound to many servile mini^eries
in the camp, by 1. Annal.
Tacitus called munera, as is before said, and by lib. 2. cap. 19.
Vegetius mu^a, as to bring in wood, straw, hay, water etc. Being negligent, or
failing in execution ^herof, they were cudgelled and whipped by the Centurions.
Tac. 1. Ann. Fracta vite in ^rgo militis, alteram clara voce, ac rursus alia^
poscebat centurio Lucillius. whereupon in all mu^nees the Centurions were the
me^ principally shot at by the common soldier. In the Ger^an sedition at the
entering of Tiberius, they muttered first among themselves venisse tem^us quo
cuncti modum miseriaru^ exposcerent, saeuitiamque centurionum vlciscerentur:
and straight after put it in execution against the^. Repent lymphati
districtis gladijs in centuriones inuadu^t. ^a vetustissima militaribus odijs
materies, and saeuiendi principiu^* prostratos verberibus multant sex^genis
singulos, vt numeru^ centurionu^ adaequarent. Tum co^uulsos laniatosque and
partim exanimos, ^nte vallu^, aut in amnem Rhenum proticiunt. Now the welthy
soldier, and those which had means, redeemed and bought out for money this
service at the Centurions hands. So the ^oldiers in Pannony complain. page 225.
Denis in diem assibus anima^ and corpus aestimari; hinc ve^e^ arma, tentoria,
hinc saeuitia^ centurionu^, and vacationes muneru^ redimi. and the German. page
233.
mox ^ndiscretis vocibus pretia vacationu^, angustias stipendij, duritia^
operu^ ac propriis nominibus incu^ant vallum, fossas, pabuli, materiae lignoru^
adgestus, and siqua alia ex necessitate, aut aduersus otiu^ ^astrorum
quaeru^tur. That the^ which here they demanded was, that for purchasing
immunity from these munera, they should not be forced to pay any money to the
Centurions.

48. His own cofers: Ex Fisco suo) Fisci, spartea sunt vtensilia ad maioris
summae pecunias capiendas; Asconius. and so Tully uses the word, in Verre^.
Fiscos co^plures cu^ pecunia Siciliensi a quoda^ senatore ad equite^ Romanu^
esse translatos. And in the same sense we read it in Tac. ^. page 234.
An. cum fisci de imperatore rapti inter signa, interque Aquilas veherentur. in
Suet. cap. 18.
Claudio positis ante se cum pecunia fiscis etc. Whereupon quia mayor summa est
pecuniae publicaeque priuatae, vt pro censu priuato loculos, and arca^ and
facellos dicimus, sic pro publico thesauro aerarij dicitur fiscus, says
Asconius, applying the names of fiscus and aerariu^ both to one thing; as Tully
does, Verrina. 3. Quaternos H. S. quos mihi senatus decreuit and ex aerario
dedit, ego habebo, and in cistam transferam ex fisco. But after the division of
the Empire made by Augustus in publicas, and principis prouincias the words
were no more indifferently used, Fiscus being appropriated to signify the
Princes treasure, and Acrarium the public, a difference notwithstanding more
of names then of substance. That is, In name the public treasure was severed
from Augustus exchequer, but in truth that also was spent at his disposition.
(...). Dio. l. 53. p. 343.

49 Being a freedma^) Ingenui were commonly murdered privily; serui, or
libertini generis publicly executed. Such also was Asiaticus end, that carried
the credit with Vitellius, as soon as Vespasia^ came in. Tac. 4. Hist.
Asiaticus, vt libertus mala^ potentia^ seruili supplicio expiauit.

50. The Citty-Praetor calls the Senate) For both the Consuls were slain. In
which case or otherwise in their absence ius vocandi senatu^ belonged to the
Praetor vrbanus. Cic. lib. ad familiares. ep. 12.
10. Paulo post idem mihi Munatius eas literas legendas dedit, quas ipsi
miseras, and eas quas public. Placuit nobis vt statim ad Cornutum praetorem
vrb literas deferremus: quique Coss. aberant, consulare munus sustinebat more
maiorum. Senatus ^st continuo conuocatus.

51. With all other princely prerogatives) The principal titles usually annexed
to the Princes place were these. 1 Princeps, 2 Imperator, 3 Caesar, 4 Augustus,
5 Tribunitiae potestatis. 6 Pater patriae, 7 Pontifex maximus. Tac. 1. Ann.
Augustus cuncta descordijs ciuilibus fessa nomine 1 Principis sub imperiu^
accepit. which title of Princeps, as I think, was borrowed from princeps
senatus in the former state. That is, In that year Augustus took to himself
the name of Imperator. I mean no^ that name which in ancient time was given to
certain persons upon some notable victory, but this other signifying
sovereign power and majesty.
Imperator has a double signification both touched by Dio. l. 52.5 (...). And
not only this later which began first in Julius Caesar, A. v. c. 709. importing
sovereign majesty, but also the other was usual under the Emperors, both in
the Princes style, and conferred likewise upon private persons that had
deserved it. Tac. 3. page 330.
An. Tiberius id quoque Bloeso tribuit, vt imperator a legionibus salutaretur,
prisco erga duces honor, qui been gesta rep. gaudio and impetu victoris
exercitus conclamabantur, erantque plures simul imperatores, nec super
caeterorum aequalitatem* concessit quibusdam and Augustus id vocabulu^, ac tu^c
Tiberius Bloeso postremu^. In the princes style thus. Imp, Caesar Augustus,
Imp. decimu^ sextu^: Imperator in the first place signifying supreme authority,
in the second (...), obtained either by himself, or by his deputies. So Nero
remaining at Rome ob rem been gestam a Corbulone in Armenia (...) Hist. p. 171.
Nihil aeque exercitus nostros, quam egestas copiarum fatigabat. and so it is
taken in this book. p. 46. Priuatis and promiscuis copijs iuuere militem.

58. That in the Legions every tenth man was allotted to dye) In ancient time
if some great part of the army had lost their enseignes, thrown away their
weapons, and run cowardly out of the field, the manner was for the General to
put all the Standerd-bearers, Centurions etc. to death, and of the common sort
every tenth man. The example is in Liuy lib. 2. fol. 26, of Appius Claudius in
the Volscian war, in Dio, of Augustus and Antony; lib. 49. page 275. and 279.
in Tacitus of L. Apronius Proconsul of Afric, when ancient discipline was
welny expired. Annal. 3. page 305. The manner is in Polybius. lib. 6. page 186.
That is, If at any time it happen that whole enseignes pressed b^ the enemy do
forsake their standing and run away, the manner of the Romans is not
straightwaies to put the^ all to death without difference, but they follow a
mean course both profitable and terribl^. For the Tribune calling the army
together and producing those which failed in service, first he checketh them
sharply, and in conclusion out of the offenders he chooses by lot sometimes
five, sometimes eight, sometimes twenty (alwai^s having an ey^ to the numbe^,
and aiming as near as he can to take every tenth man) and those on whom the
lot fails are beaten to death with clubbes without remission. To the rest he
gives the^ their allowance in barley in steed of wheat, and so commandes them
to quarter without the Trench and places of surety.
(...). And not only upon the causes before rehearsed of Forsaking their
standing and casting away their armor.
(...), and (...) but upon Appianus 3. (...). p. 283. in oratione Ciceronis.
(...).
occasion of a mutinee Scipio in Spain in the second war Punicke, and in
later times also, when severity of discipline was much decayed Caesar at
Placentia renewed the custom, and Antony at Brundusium. Liuius. l. 28. f. 218.
Appianus. 2. (...). p. 224. 3. (...). p. 280. Dio. l. 41. 109.

59. The colony of Lions discontented) The Senate fearing that Lepidus and
Plancus, whom they had called into Italy, would betray the side, and go to
Antonius, willed them still to stay in France, and found the colony of (...).
Dio p. 216.
Lions, at the confluent of the Rhone, and Saone and there to place those which
before had been driven out of Vienna by the Allobroges. Dio. li. 46. Now Lions
in Neroes time being burnt, hanc cladem, says Tacitus, 16. page 549.
Annal. ^125^. li. English.
quadragies. H. S. solatus est princeps. and therefore they had cause to love
Nero, as of the other side to hate Galba, qui reditus ipsorum occasion irae in
fiscum verterat. Tac. page 46.

60 The cuntreyman: Paganos) Paganus a townesman, a cuntreyman, in opposition
to miles. Veget. lib. 2. c. 23. Nam si doctrina cesset armorum, nihil paganus
distat a milite, and that which Suetonius cap 19.
Galba utters in these words Dimota paganorum turba, the self same
circumstance Tacitus in this page 34.
book notes with these Disiecta plebe, conculcato senatu; and Tacitus
himself 4. Hist. p. 163. Tria millia legionariorum, and tumultuariae Belgarum
cohortes, simul paganorum, lixarumque ignaua, sed procax ante periculum manus.
and again 2. Hist. Multae and atroces inter se militum caedes, manente
legionum auxilioru^que discordia; vbi aduersas paganos certandum foret,
consensis. Antonius Primus pa 120
3. Hist disgracing the Praetorians (who were before discharged of their
service and disarmed by commission from Tac. 2. H. p. 105.
Vitellius) names them paganos. Vos, inquit, nisi vincitis, pagani, quis alius
imperator, quae castra alia excipient? like as Caesar at Rome in a mutinee, and
afterward Alexander Seuerus at Antioche, dismissing his soldiers in
displeasure, called them Quirites, Quirites discedite atque arma deponite.
Sueton. Caesare. c. 70. Lampridius Seuero. p. 1003.

61. The very first day of January) And before that day, as it may appear by
p. 1502.
Plutarch, the army of upper Germany had given shrewde signs of small good
liking of Galba. That is, For in a public play the Tribunes and Centurions
wishing good luck to Galba the emperor, according to the usual manner of the
Romans, many of the soldiers at the first murmured, and when as the captains
pe^sisted in their wishes, they answered and cried again, He does not deserve
it.
(...). Now to break down the images of the Prince was the usual beginning
in all rebellions. 3. Hist. page 114: Trierarchi magno tumultu Vitellij
imagines inuadunt, and paucis resistentium obtruncatis etc. in the same page:
simul Vitellij imagines dereptae.

62. Coleyn: Coloniam Agrippinensem) Founded by Agrippina Claudius wife.
Tacitus 12. Annal. page 429. Sed Agrippina quo vim suam socijs quoque
nationibus ostentaret, in oppidum Vbiorum in quo genita erat, veteranos,
coloniamque deduci imperat, cui nomen inditum ex vocabulo ipsius.

63. The principal men of the colonies) Principes coloniarum, be the
Decuriones, Principes castrorum, whom Vegetius cap. 9.
lib. 2. calls also milites principales, and Tacitus. 3. page 123.
Hist. primores castrorum, are the Aquiliferi, Signiferi, Optiones etc. qui
priuilegijs muniuntur. Where as the rest, the common soldiers are called
Munifices, quod munia facere coguntur.

64. Julius Ciuilis) The same men who afterward with the Batauians, and aid of
the French and Germans, maintained war so long with the Romans, as it
appears. 4. and 5. Hist. Of the event here noted Tacitus makes mention
again. 4. Hist. p. 158. Julius Paulus, and Claudius Ciuilis, regia stirpe,
multo caeteros (Batauos nobiles) anteiba^t. Paulum Fonteius Capito falso
rebellionis crimine interfecit. iniectae Civilly catenae, missusque ad Neronem,
and a Galba absolutus, sub Vitellio rursus discrimen adijt, flagitante
supplicium eius exercitu. Inde causae irarum, spesque ex malis nostris. Where
is to be marked, that he calls him there Claudius Ciuilis, whom here he
names Julius Ciuilis, forgetting himself in the one or the other, or else the
describers of books not forgetting their accustomed negligence.

65. Of Batauians eight cohorts, the Aids of the fourteenth Legion) The great
and notable rebellion of Britanny, by the virtue of Suetonius Paullinus, and
valiantness of the fourteenth Legio^, not without great loss of me^ being
suppressed, Nero sent out of Germany thither a fresh supply of 2000.
Legionaries, a thousand horse, and eight cohorts of Auxiliaries, which I take
to be the very eight cohorts of Batauians mentioned here. Howsoever, certain
it is that these cohorts of Batauians were assigned as Auxiliaries to the
fourteenth Legion: That Nero, for what occasions soever, upon special
confidence of their valor sent for into Italy the same Legion, with her
Auxiliaries: That in the troubles of Vindex the Auxiliaries upon some quarrel
departed from the Legio^, in prejudice, as it may seem of Neroes cause: That
Galba coming to state the Legion was sent into Illyricum, the Batauians into
Britanny again, and in the mean season, as they were in their way
thitherward, hearing the news of Vitellius commotion they joined themselves to
the side. For confirmation of the premises Tacitus alone may suffice. 14
Annal. page 496. Auxitque copias Caesar missis e Germania duobus legionariorum
millibus, octo auxiliariorum cohortibus, ac mill equitibus. 2. Hist. page 65.
Motae ad imperium Othonis, e Dalmatia, Pannoniaque legiones, praecipus fama
Quartadecimani rebellione Britanniae compressa. Addiderat gloriam Nero eligendo
vt potissimos. vnde longa illis erga Neronem fides. and in the same book. page
73. cohortes Batauorum, quas bello Neronis a Quartadecima legione digressas,
cum Britanniam peterent, audito Vitellij motu in ciuitate Lingonum Fabio
Valenti adiunctas retulimus, superbe agebant, vt cuiusque legionis tentoria
accessissent, coercitos a se quartadecimanos, ablatam Neroni Italiam, atque
omnem belli fortunam in ipsorum manu sitam iactantes.

66. Now that the British host was adjoined) If it be true that Trebellius
desertus (a militibus) ad Vitellium perfugerit; if it be true which Paullinus
alleges. 2. Hist. Britannicum militem host ac mari distineri: which
Tacitus himself vvriteth. page 19 In Britannico exercitu nihil irarum. Non
sane aliae legiones per omnes ciuilium beliorum motus innocentius egerunt, how
can it be true that here is said, Adiuncto Britannico exercitu, and in another
page 86.
place. Vitellius e Britannico dilectis octo millia sibi adiunxit?

67. With the name of Germanicus) The first of the Romans that bare the name of
the place he conquered was Cn. Martius of Corioli named Coriolanus; then P.
Scipio the elder of Afric subdued, Liuius lib. 30.
Africanus. Lucius his brother likewise of Asia, Asiaticus. Many of the
Metelli, more for distinction, then for any notable conquest obtained. The
former Emperors at pleasure sometime took some few names to themselves,
sometime bestowed them on others. In the later times, virtue decaying, ambition
in titles increased. Xiphilinus Commodo. p. 296. That is, So exceeding great
was the madness of that vile monster Commodus, and with this style he sent a
letter to the Senate; Jmp. Caesar L. Aelius Aurelius Commodus. Augustus Pius
Felix, Sarmaticus, Germanicus, Maximus. Britannicus, concordia orbis terrarum,
Inuictus, Romanus Hercules, Pontifex Maximus, Tribuniciae potestat-^v^ij.
Jmperit. v^^^. Consul vij. Pater patriae.
(...). And Iustinia^ accounted of as a sober Emperor has his style
notwithstanding not much shorter. Imp. Caesar Flauius Iustinianus Alemanicus,
Gothicus, Francicus, Germanicus, Anticus, Alanicus, Vandalicus, Africanus, Pius
Faelix Inclytus Victor ac Triumphator se^per Augustus. Now what right Vitellius
had to the name of Germanicus, where he had never seen enemy in face, since he
was Emperor, the fountain of justice, who ca^ do no wrong, we will not
dispute it.

68. A lucky sign) Many of the Latin stories (for to them and their disciples
this virtue is peculiar) account it, I think, a capital crime to set down
any notable mutation in state without many prodigious portenta, miraculous
omina etc, inducing the change, most of them being counterfeit, and coined to
drive (...).
the reader into an ecstasy, many happening commonly, and remembered only when
any notable eue^t did ensue. In the page 84.
second book, at Othoes death, we have another tale much of this making, or
somewhat worse, with a preface to give it some credit. As for our eagle here
she was surely either a notorious cosener, or else notoriously ignorant of what
would befall, thus to give ome^ haud dubiu^ of great prosperity, which in effect
dured but a moment.

69. Nothing else but strangers and enemies: contrariwise themselves a Roman
colony) And so was Vienna too. The Emperor Claudius in a speech in Senate
which yet is extant at Lions graven in brass: ORNATISSIMA ECCE COLONIA
VALENTISSIMAQVE VIENNENSIVM QVAM LONGO IAM TEMPORE HVIC CVRIAE SENATORES
CONFERT? And Tacitus himself almost in the next sentence, Tum vetustas
dignitasque coloniae valuit, speaking of Vienna, so that both being colonies,
and both external alike, this rhetoric of his was here out of season.

70. Sacred veles, and infules: Velamenta and infulas) Velamenta and infulae
signs of submission and humble demanding of mercy. 3. Hist. Antonius Primus
vehemently assaulting Cremona, primores velame^ta and infulas pro muris
ostenta^t. And Coriolanus wasting the Roman country, sacerdotes suis insignib.
velatos isse supplices ad castra hostium traditum est. says lib 2, fol. 22.
Liuy. and the same Liuy l. 30, fo. 241. Haud procul aberat (Carthaginis portu
Scipio) cum velata infulis ramisque oleae Carthaginiensium occurrit nauis. Now
(...) in Polyb. li. 16. p. 271. Liuy turns infalas lib. 31. f. 246.
infulae says Varro and Festus, were certain velamenta lanea, quibus
sacerdotes and hostiae, templaque velabantur. so that by their description
there should seem to be no great difference between velamenta and infulas.

71. Lucus, a free town: Municipium id Vocontiorum est) Municipium and Colonia
though used indifferently in many good autours, yet indeed, and in preciseness
of speech carry several senses. and so does Tacitus. 2. page 86.
Hist. put them as diverse. Dispersiper municipta and colonias Vitelliani. The
difference is that municipia in ciuitatem extrinsecus assumuntur, and coloniae
e ciuitate educuntur. Geliius, cap. 13.
lib. 16. ex oratione D. Hadriani ad Italicenses, distinguishes them in this
manner. Municipes sunt ciues Romani ex municipijs, suo iure and suis legibus
vtentes: muneris tantum cum P. R. honorarij participes, a quo munere capessendo
appellati videntur: nullis alijs necessitatibus, neque vlla P. R. lege
astricti, quum nunquam P. R. eorum fundus factus esset. Colomarum alia
necessitudo est; non enim veniunt extrinsecus in ciuitatem, nec suis radicibus
nituntur, sed ex ciuitate quasi propagatae sunt, and iura institutaque omnia P.
R. non sui arbitrij habent. Now that Lucus was indeed municipium, according
to the exquisite use of the word, may appear by Pliny lib. 3. cap. 4.
Vocontiorum ciuitatis foederatae duo capita, Vasio and Lucus Augusti.

72. Petrin wing) our printed books have in Alpe Graia, corruptly no question.
for Alps Graiae are the passage out of Sauoy into Italy, as I think, by mount
Senise, or S. Bernardo minor; the direct way from Lions to Milan. Out of
Suisserland, where Caecina was, be the Peninae by mount S. Bernardo mayor.
The Cottiae are out of Daulphiney into Italy by mount Gineura. In the Vatica^
copy of Tacitus it is, cum alpe tarma, which with less mutation of lettres,
and more possibility of circumstance, we may rather imagine should have been,
cum ala Petrina, then cum ala Taurina, which passed the other way with Valens.
and Tacitus himself. 4. Hist. page 178. makes mention of one Claudius Sagitta
which was e Vitellianis, and Praefectus alae Petrinae.

73. His heavy Legionary: Subsignanum militem and grave legionum agmen)
Subsignanus miles and grave legionum agmen (and yet there was here but one
whole Legion, the One and twentieth) may seem to signify both one thing, as
being contradiuided both to Auxiliaries. 2. Hist. page 91. Erupere legionarij
in perniciem auxiliorum. 4. Hist. Id solum, vt in tumultu, monuit, subsignano
milite media firmare. Auxilia passim circumfusa sunt. and yet in another place
we have; Quicquid sub signis sociorum.

74. Were not to mislike such examples: Exemplum vltro imputauit) Imputare in
Tacitus is a word of a middle signification, indifferent to the good part and
bad: yet (...) standing for beneficij loco numerare, or some such like thing.
Examples. p. 42. Neque enim erat adhuc, cui imputaretur. that is, for as yet
there was none whom they might account benefited by the revolt. In this place
exemplum vltro imputauit, he accounted this fact of his standing sure to his
old master beneficial to Otho also, and the example not to be disliked of any
prince whatsoever. Plutarch, I know, in the beginning of Otho seems to take
it otherwise. p. 1513. That is, Otho commanded Marius Celsus to be brought
before him, who^ he embraced and entreated very kindly, desiring him rather to
forget that ever he was in fault, then to remember that he was forgiven, to
who^ Celsus made answer both courageous and pertinent, saying that the
accu^ation it self gave sufficient proof of his honesty, for what else was he
charged withal but that he had been^ faithful to Galba to whom he was
nothing beholden? whereupon they that were present much admired them both, and
the soldiers did not dislike it.
(...). But we may give him good leave to err in construing one hard place of
Tacitus, that in so many easy in Caesar mistaketh. But to proceed in examples.
2. Hist. p. 87. Proditione^ vltro imputaba^t; spatiu^ longi ante praelium
itineris, fatigatione^ Othontanoru^ permixtu^ vehiculis agme^, ac pleraque
fortuita fraudi suae assignantes. 5. Hist. page 213. in the like sense.
Potuisse tunc opprimi legiones, and voluisse Germanos, sed dolo a se flexos
imputauit Ciuilis. in both places the meaning of Tacitus is, that in benefit
of their aduersarye they had preuaricated with their own side. page 99: Vnde
metus, and ex metu consilium, posse imputari Vespasiano, quae apud Vitellium
excusanda erant. that is, that they might reckon and score it up as a benefit
to Vespasian, which with Vitellius needed excuse. 4. Hist. page 159: Ambiguam
fortunam belli Vespasiano imputaturos; victoriae rationem non reddi: that is,
if the war fell out ill, or hard of their side, then forsooth they took
arms in Vespasians behalf: if well, they should never be brought to the
reckening. 3. Hist. page 151. Reip. haud dubie intererat Vitellium vinci. Sed
imputare perfidiam non possunt, qui Vitellium Vespasiano prodidere, cum a Galba
desciuissent. id est, qui Vitellium Vespasiano prodidere, perfidiam suam reip.
beneficij loco numerare non possunt, as though they had done it for the good of
their country, who before had revolted from Galba a good Emperor to cleave to
Vitellius or Otho. In the book de moribus Germanorum. page 571. Gaudent
muneribus, sed nec data imputant, nec acceptis obligantur, that is, neither in
bestowing do they account it, as though they had done you a benefit, nor in
receiving as though they were bound, or beholden. This strange use of the word
imputare, as Latin goes now a days, and therefore by me confirmed by many
examples, in Tacitus time was not so strange. Suetonius. Tiberio. cap. 53.
Imputauit etiam, quod non laqueo strangulatam in Gemonias abiecerit, proque
tali clementia interponi decretum passus est, quo sibi gratiae agerentur.
Plinius. lib. 8. ep. 21. Recitauibiduo, hoc assensus andientium exegit, and
tamen vt alij transeunt quaedam, imputantque quod transeant; sic ego nihil
praetereo, atque etiam non praeterire me testor. in both places imputare for
benesicij loco numerare. But further I say it stands also for maleficij loco
numerare, and vitio vertere. Tac. 2. Hist. Vitellio initium belli nemo
imputabat, that is, no body charged him with that fault. 3. Hist. Casum
Cremonae bello imputandum. In vita Agric. Approbate reip. nunquam exercitui
imputari potuisse aut moras belli, aut causas debellandi.

75. Sophonius Tigellinus) Of Tigellinus all the stories are full. After the
death of Burrhus, Nero, says 14. Annal.
Tacitus, duos Praeterijs cohortibus imposuerat, Fenium Rufum ex vulgi fauore:
Sophonium Tigellinum ex intimis libidinibus assumptum, That is, In luxuriousnes
and cruelty exceeding all the men of his time. Xiph. page 177.
(...). for those were indeed the two virtues, by which Tigellinus wanne
credit with Nero. Tacitus. 15. Ann. p. 351. Fenium vita famaque laudatum, per
saeuitia^ impudicitiamque Tigellinus in animo principis anteibat. page 537.
Poppaea and Tigellino coram, quod erat saeuienti principii ^timum consiliorum,
interrogat etc. 14. An. page 504. he is described as the only autour of all
the miseries of that time. Validior indies Tigellinus, and malas arts, quibus
solis pollebat, gratiores ratus, si principem societate sceleris obstringeret,
metus eius rimatur. etc. page 501: Tacitus bestows as favors upon him these
friendly terms: flagrantissima flagitia, adulteria, vetus impudicitia,
infamia. p. 536. Tigellino scilicet comitante eum pellicibus. page 526, he
notes him as autour, or privy at least to the burning of Rome. Plusque infamiae
id incendium habuit, quia praedijs Tigellini Aemylianis proruperat. A fit man
man in all respects for such a bad master, and unfit to have been by Galba
protected.

76. To famish the city of Rome) Tac. 3. Hist. p. 131. Africam eode^ latere
sitam, terra, marique inuadere parabat, clausis annonae subsidijs inopiam ac
discordiam hosti facturus. for so was it, that Egypt and Afric furnished the
city of Rome for corn. Egypt for four months the year, and Afric for
eight. Josephus (...). 2. cap. 28. That is, They of Africa beside eight months
provision of corn yearly for the people of Rome, pay all manner of tributes,
and willingly support all other charges of the Empire.
(...). and paulo post. That is, Egypt paies more tribute in one month the^
the Jews do in a whole year, and beside this great sum of money they
yield provision of corn for Rome for the space of four months.
(...).

77. Mighty in money and because she was childeles) Rich and childeles, two
good helps to get many friends, every man contending to please them, of whose
wealth he may hope to be heir. Siluanus being in Neroes time accused
repetundarum valuit says* 13. Anual.
Tacitus, pecuniosa orbitate and sancta: and yet in the end he deceived them
all, ouerliuing those quorum ambitu euaserat. Contrarily in Germany nulla
orbitatis pretia, sedquanto plus propinquorum, quo mayor affinium numerus,
tanto gratiosior senectus. De moribus Germanorum. p. 571.

78. Himself and Titianus his brother Consuls till the kalends of March) In
the free state the two Consuls entering the first of January remained in office
the whole year out, unless they chanced to die, or upon special and rare
occasions resign. Afterward cum belli ciuilis praemia festinari coeperunt, as
Tacitus speaks, when many mo for their good service to the side had deserved
to be pleasured then there were places to pleasure them in, a shift was found
to abridge the time, and so to speed many in one year. The author of this
disorder was C. Caesar, An. vrbis conditae. 709. whenas being Consul sine
collega he resigned to Fabius and Trebonius. Dio. lib. 43. page 155. That is,
Then first of all contrary to the ancient custom a precedent was given, that a
man should bear the office of Consulship neither for the term of a whole
year, nor for the remainder of the year, if happily upon another man's death
or resignation he was chosen to the place, but that one during his life time,
not compelled by law, in whose creation no error was committed in matter of
Auspicia should resign the place and cause another man to be chosen in his
room, and from this time forward very few enjoyed the Consulship a complete
year, but as it chanced some more some fewer either months or days.
(...). As the Princes oftentimes did.
(...). In the year ab vrbe condita. 715. it altered from a voluntary
resignation to a matter of necessity, and order. Dio. lib. 48. page 253. That
is, They chose not two Co^suls for the whole year according to the ancient
custom, but even at that time of election they nominated more, for six years
before this some had succeeded others in the same year* though the former
neither by death, nor misdemeanour, nor other causes were deprived. Howbeit
then they were made as it pleased them who were chosen for the whole year: but
now even at the first creation no man was nominated for the whole year, but
some for one part of the year, and some for another.
(...) (to wit from the 709 year) (...). In Augustus time, specially toward
the later end, as it may appear by the Capitolin tables, four Co^suls were
yearly created, two to bear office from the Kalends of January to the Kale^ds
of July, and two more, ex Kal. Iul. to the end of the year. After his days,
although I cannot precisely define when it began, the ordinary time was no
more but two months, and the ordinary number of Consuls twelve. In our present
year.

Ex Kal. Ianuar. Tac. page 15.
Seruius Galba. 2. Titus Vinus.
which two being slain in their office M. Otho, and L. Titianus supplied their
rooms in Kal. Mar.

Ex Kal. Martij. Tac. page 51. 52.
L. Verginius Rufus. Poppaeus Vopiscus.


Ex Kal. Maij. Coelius Sabinus. Flauius Sabinus.


Ex Kal. Iulij. Arius Antoninus. Marius Celsus.


Ex Kal. Septe^bris. Tac. 2. Hist. page 93.
Fabius Valens. Alienus Caecina, adjudged enemy of the state. in his place for
one day that remained Roscius Regulus. Tac. 3. Hist. p. 126.


Ex Kal. Nouembris. Tac. 3. Hist p 143* 144 X^ (...).
Cn. Coecilius Simplex. C. Quintius Atticus.


This number and this time continued even to Dioes age: That is, For in our
time no man be ^^eth the office for a whole year, noe most commodite for more
then two months.
(...) (says he) (...). li. 43. p. 155. Now of these Co^suls the two which
e^tred the first of January were (...), named the year, and were called
ordinarij: the rest minores, as being obscure and not heard of abroad, so that
with great reason a man might dema^d in whose Co^sulships they were Co^suls:
otherwise in authority etc. not differing any thing the one from the other. Dio.
l. 48. p. 253. That is, They which were first t^ enter had the name of Consu^s
(as even yet it is used during the whole year as for the rest they which lived
in Rome and other parts of Italy called them so during the ^ame of their
office. But all that lived abroad either know (...) or b^ (...) the^. when (...)
they were call ed. Cosul^s (...).
(...). and again. l. 43. p. 155. That is, In a^ (...) the name to the ear
(...) ( nos Consules, lest we might have been ignorant of his preferme^t)
(...). (...).
notwithstanding this minor Co^sulship served well enough to make up a number.
example in Vespasian who bearing the office of Co^sul in Claudius time Su^t.
Vespas c. 4.
per duos nouissimos anni me^ses, of ordinary never before. an. 823. is styled
Vespasianus iteru^. Tac. 4. Hist. p. 172.

79. For polling the provinces: Repetudaru^ criminibus) The actio^ of
Repetu^dae lay against the governors of provinces for money unduly extorted,
or cruelty exercised in their jurisdiction, so called of the more principal
part, because by that action, pecunias iniusse ablatas, vel si quid aliud
ablatu^, captu^, conciliatu^, auersumue siet, prouincialibus repetere ius
fasque esset: and not only the su^me extorted, but an arbitrary mulct was
imposed beside, double, or treble nomine poenae. This law was induced by L.
Calpurnius Piso, Anno primo tertij belli Punici: and afterward revived by other
with many new clauses and straight sanctio^s. Tac. 15. An. p. 518 Magistratuu^
auaritia Calpurnia scita peperit. And yet notwithstanding all the good laws in
that case enacted the Proconsuls and Propraetors, both before and under the
Emperors, ceased not to rack and pol the poor cu^treyes. Nay the more laws
there were and greater penalties established, the more they robbed and spoiled
the provinces, to make good great extortio^ abroad with great bribery at home,
according to the Greek senary, Vic that has sto^ne much with giving a small
matter shall escape well enough.
(...). and therefore Tully tells us (in jest, or in earnest) that the
provinces would surely prefer supplication to the Senate, that the law de
repetundis made in their behalf, at their request might be repealed. his words
be these, prooemio prioris actionis in verre^. Planum facere multis testibus
possum, C. Verre^ in Sicilia multis audientibus saepe dixisse, se habere
homine^ potente^ cuius fiducia prouincia^ spoliaret: neque sibi soli pecunia^
quaerere, sedita trienniu^ illud praeturae Siciliensis distributu^ habere, ut
secu^ pulchre agi diceret, si vnius anni quoestu^ in re^ sua^ co^uerteret:
alteru^ patronis and desesoribus suis traderet; tertiu^ illu^ vberrimu^
quoestuosissimu^que annu^ totu^ iudicibus reseruaret. Ex quo mihi venit
inmente^ illud dicere, quod apud M. Glabrione^ nuper cum in reijciendis
iudicibus commemorasse^, intellexi vehementer Populu^ Romanu^ commoueri, me
arbitrari fore, vti nationes exterae legatos ad Populum Romanum mitterent, vt
lex de pecunijs repetundis iudiciumque tolleretur, si enim iudicia nulla sint,
tantum vnumquemque ablaturum putant, quantum sibi, ac liberis suis satis esse
arbitrentur. nunc quod eiusmodi iudicia sint, tantum vnumquemque auferre,
quantum sibi, patronis, aduocatis, praetoribus, iudicibus satis futurum sit.
Hoc profecto infinitum esse. Se auarissimi hominis cupiditati satisfacere
posse, nocentissimae victoriae non posse. Under the Empire the law was
understood, as it may seem by Pliny. lib. 2. ep 11. against extortion only.

80. Crime of Majesty and treason) Lex maiestatis in the ancient free common
wealth comprehended only points of greatest importance in state: Tacitus. 1.
Anu. p 251.
si quis proditione exercitum, aut plebem seditionibus, denique male gesta
Republica maiestatem Populi Romani minuisset. Augustus put it in ure against
libellers, whereas before facta arguebantur, dicta impune erant, or at least
not punished with the penalties laesae maiestatis. In Tiberius, Caius,
Claudius and Neroes time it was vnicum crimen eorum, qui crimine vacabant, as
Pliny speaks. Falaniut. 1. Ann. page 251.
One was accused to Tiberius, and all was majesty, quod venditis hortis
statuam Augusti simul mancipasset: Rubrius. ibidem
another quod violasset periurio nomen Augusti. a Grauius Marcellas. ibidem.
third beside some undutiful speeches, that he had set up his own image
higher then those of the Princes, and that in another image he had cut of the
head of Augustus, and clapped in place one of Tiberius for saving of cost.
Lutorius Priscus 3. Ann page 318.
another for making an epitaph for the Princes son, before he was dead,
arraygned and condemned. L Ennius. Ann. 3. page 327.
another, quod effigiem principis promiscuu^ ad vsum argenti vertisset. C.
Silius 4. Ann. 340.
another, for that he had done greater service for the Prince, the^ that he was
able any other way to requite it. Cremutius Cordus Ann. 4. page 347.
another, for that in his story he had commended Cassius and Brutus enemies of
the monarchy, and dead above threescore years before. Pompeta Matrinacum
marito, socero patre, ac fratre. 6. Ann. 382
others because they were descended of those which in their time had been of
near acquai^tance with Pompey. Titius Sabinus 4. Ann 364. C. Silius 4. Ann.
340. etc.
another because he had been a follower of Germanicus, of whom Tiberius without
just cause had ever been ielous. Mamercus Scanru^ 6. Ann. p. 388.
another for making a tragedy wherein certain verses were of doubtful
understanding. In Claudius time Petra 11. Ann.
one was arraigned, and condemned of majesty for dreaming a dream, another for
C. Silanus Dio. page 463.
being dreamed of. In Neroes time one 10. Ann. p. 546.
Cassius, quod inter imagines matorum etiam C. Cassij effigiem coluisset ita
inscriptam DVCI PARTIVM. And infinite mo for such trifles as these. Seeing
therefore that lex maiestatis had been so late so odiously executed, it pleased
the pardoners to term that which indeed was extortion, crime of majesty, the
memory whereof was so hateful, that in respect of it even other good laws
were neglected.

81. To the Hispalienses and Emeritenses a new supply of families) In deducing
of colonies a certain number of families were assigned, which if tract of
time, or any mischa^ce had diminished, or adulterated, to have them supplied a
fresh, or increased, was esteemed of the rest, as a special great benefit.
Liuius. lib. 32. fol. 259. C. Acilius tribunus plebis tulit, vt quinque
coloniae in oram maritimam deducerentur. Tricanae familiae in singulas colonias
iubebantur mitti. eodem l^bro. f. 253. Narniensium legatis querentibus ad
numerum sibi colonos non esse, and immistos quosdam non sui generis pro colonis
se gerere, earum rerum causa triumuiros creare L. Cornelius consul iussus.
creati P. and Sex. Aelij (Poetis fuit ambobus cognomen) and C. Cornelius
Lentulus. Quod Narniensibus datum erat vt colonorum numerus augeretur, id
Cossani petentes non impetrauerunt. And in another place, postulantibus a
senatu Aquileiensiu^ legatis, vt numerum colonorum augeret, M. and D. familiae
ex S.C. scriptae. Tac. 13. Ann. p. 462. Caeterum coloniae Capua atque Nuceria,
additis veteranis firmatae sunt. Now that Hispalis was a Colony of the Romans,
Pliny affirms lib. 3. c. 2. A laeua Hispalis colonia, cognomine Romule^sis:
That Emerita Dio. l. 53. p. 348. (...). The reason of the name is apparent
Emerita, quod emeriti milites (...) deaucerentur. For militar colonies (to
leave the other kind which in the free state were derived abroad by the
Senates appointment, for so That is, This war being Ended Augustus di^^ssed
the soldiers which were past years of service and gave them license to build
a city in Portugal called Augusta Emerita. ^^b. 1 p. 749.
Velleius seems to divide them) they were devised for a recompense of old
soldiers, who having spent the flower of their age in the service of their
country, small reason it were to turn them a begging when they were aged.
Wherefore Sylla, Caesar and the Emperors following, at the end of their
service rewarded the old soldier with an honorable mayntenance of land of
inheritance. In this kind of colonies at the beginning Tac. 15. Ann. page 491.
vniuersae legiones ducebantur cum tribunis centurionibus, and siu cuiusque
ordinis militibus, vt consensu and caritate remp. efficerent. Mela. lib. 2,
cap. 5. names some special Legions, and where they were placed. Secundanorum
Arausio, Sextanorum Arelate, Septimanorum Blitera, Decumanorum colonia Marcius
Narbo. In process of time this good order decaying, Tacitus.
non vt olim vniuersae legiones, sed ignoti inter se ducebantur, diuersis
manipulis, sine rectore, sine affectibus mutuis, quasi ex alto genere mortalium
repent in vnum collecti, numerus magis quam colonia: and the proof thereof
was according, the soldiers slipping away in prouincias, in quibus stipendia
meruerant, and leaving the colonies desolate. Whether upon this or whatsoever
occasion apparent it is that Hispalis and Emerita were both decayed, and
therefore with new families here by grace from Otho stocked again.

82. Honored with a Triumphal image: Triumphali statua) Tac. 4. An. p. 342.
Iamque tres erant laureatae in vrbe statuae etc. and the sentence before of the
same matter. Priores duces impetra^do sibi triumphalium insigni sufficereres
suas crediderant. again. 15. Ann. p. 542. Triu^phale decus, and Triumphales in
foro imagines of the same. So that we may reasonably gather Triu^phale^
statua^ to be either the same with Triumphalia insignia, or else parcel of them,
and yet inducing the whole. This title of honor, (...), unknown in the free
common wealth, was first conferred, as some do suppose, by Augustus upon
Tiberius Anno. vrb. conditae. 742. Sueton. cap. 9.
Tiberio. Quas ob res and ouans and curru vrbem ingressus est (Tiberius) primus
(vt quidam putant) triumphalibus ornamentis honoratus, nouo, nec antea cuiquam
tributo genere honoris. 4 page 361.
But That is, Sacrifices were made to the gods in the name of Agrippa, yet was
there no triumph decreed unto him. For he did not at the first certify the
Senate concerning the success of his actions. Whereupon in succeding ages men
of his place following his example as a rule never wrote to the Senate, neither
accepted the grant of triumph but contented themselves with triumphall
ornaments alone.
Dio writes that it was to Agrippa two years before first granted: (...): and
so consequently to Dio page 369.
Tiberius. The cause as I judge of the innovation was, that to Augustus who of
the old state left nothing standing but names, and hardly that, the pomp
triumphall seemed a thing too full of majesty for any subject, and therefore
seeking every way to cut the sinews of liberty, and yet to retain a shadow of
ancienty, he cunningly converted the solemnity of a triumph into Triumphalia
insignia. only the Princes themselves, or their children, as Germanicus in
Tiberius time, solemnly triu^phed. Next to Triu^phalta in lower degree of
honor were Consularia insignia, or ornamenta, (...), and Praetoria likewise,
(...), under them, obtained by those, I suppose, whom Dio in sundry places
terms (...). and lastly Quaestoria ornamenta, to make the^ as Co^suls,
Praetors, Quaestors fellows. Tac. 4. Hist. p. 154. Multo cum honor verborum
Mutiano triumphalia de bello civilly data. sed in Sarmatas expeditio fingebatur.
adduntur Antonio Primo consularia, Cornelio Fusco, and Arrio Varo praetoria
insignia. Ann. 11. p. 418. Decreta Narcisso quaestoria insignia. etc.

83. The cause bred a crime: Causa in crimen eualuit) If these rymes have in
them any reason, the meaning may be, that which the Tribune did to the end to
execute the Princes commandment, that the soldiers drew to a sinistre sense,
as done not for the service of the Prince, but rather seruitioru^ in
imperatore^ armandoru^ gratia. Plutarch p. 1514. That is, The boldest of them
cried out with one voice that Crispinus had no good meaning that the Senate
intended innovation, and that those arms were carried out against the Prince,
not in his favor.
(...).

84. Casting away the marks: Abiectis militiae insignibus) Tribunatus insigne,
the badge or mark of his office was (...), a dagger. Martialis lib. 14. of a
Centurion vitis, a vinerod to correct the trewanting soldier. Iuuenal of
Marius. Satyra octaua. Arpinas alius Volscorum in monte solebat
Poscere mercedes alieno lassus aratro.
Nodosam post haec frangebat vertice vitem
Si lentus pigra muniret castra dolabra.
Hic tamen etc. --
Tac. 1. Annal. p. 227. Centurio Lucillius interficitur, eui militaribus
facetijs uocabulum, Cedo alteram, indiderant; quia fracta vite in tergo
militis, altera^ clara voce, ac rursus aliam poscebat. of the Captainship of
the Praetoriu^, (...), a sword. Xiph. p. 251. speaking of Licinius Sura made
captain of the Guard by Traian. That is, When as first he reached to him whom
he intended to make captain of the Guard the sword wherewith he was to be
girt, he drew it forth, and holding it up said; Take this sword, that if I
govern well thou may use it for me; if ill. against me.
(...). and Nymphydius in Plutarch depriving his fellow Tigellinus of his
office, Commanded him to put of his sword.
(...). To this privilege of wearing a sword was annexed perpetually power of
life and death over the soldiers. Dio. lib. 53. p. 342. That is, No man had
authority (were he Proco^sul, or Propr^tor, or Procurator) to carry a sword,
but only he that had power to pu^ a soldier to death. For to such it was
lawful whether he were Senator or Equei.
(...). Gladius (...) or pugio (for so they seem to be taken for one) was
also one of the marks of sovereign authority, as it is at this day. Vitellius
resigning the Empire, That is, Vitellius in open asse^bly reached his sword to
the Consuls, and the rest of the Senate, as thereby resigning all imperial
authority.
(...). and Tacitus of the same matter. 3. Hist. p. 141. Postremo fletu
praepediente assistenti consuli exsolutum a latere pugionem velut tus necis
vitaeque ciuium reddebat. Suet. Vitellio. c. 15. Solutum a latere pugionem
consuli primum, dein illo recusante magistratibus, ac mox senatoribus singulis
porrigens; nullo recipie^te, quasi in aede Co^cordiae positurus abscessit.

85. By the gods approbation: Auspicato) That is addicentibus auibus. For
although nei-Liuy nor Dionysius make any mention of any such ceremony observed
in the choice of the Senate, yet seeing we find that equitum centuriae were by
Romulus Liuy li 1 f 9.
augurato scriptae, that the city was founded and named captis ad inaugurandum
templis, the Auentin by Remus, the Palatin by Romulus (Liuius l. 1. f. 2.
although in his verses reported by Tully. 1. de diuinatione.
Ennius places them otherwise) seeing that Romulus Brought* up this custom
for all posterity that they should not take upon them neither the kingdom* nor
any other office, except first the gods per auspicia gave their approbation.
Dio. nys, Halicarn. lib. 2, page 61.
(...), (...), we may probably conjecture that it was not omitted in a case of
so great importance, as was the choice of a counsel of state. Surely after
that Attius Nauius had cut with a razor a whetstone in Tarquinius Priscus time,
fol. 9.
Liuy writes that the Augurall discipline grew daily in reputation.

86. Allurements of lust etc.) Iuuenal Satyra secunda writes, that Otho
himself inter instrumenta belli carried a certain looking glass.

Res memoranda nouis annalibus, atque recenti
Historia, speculum ciuilis sarcina belli.
Contrary to that testimony which Tacitus gives of him. 2. H. p. 65. Nec
Othoni segne, aut corruptu^ luxu iter; sed lorica ferrea vsus, and ante signa
pedester, horridus, inco^ptus, famaeque dissimilis

87. That the holy shieldes called Ancilia) Ancilia, clypei Although Liuy in
the oration of Camillus seems to attribute the^ to Romulus also for kindred
sake. Quid de Ancilib. vestris Mars Gradeu^, ^uque Quirine pater. lib. 5, fol
67.
Martis, arma ab ancisu sic dicta. Varro. lib. 6. de ling. Lat. Ouidius
Fastorum. 3.

Atque Ancile vocat, quod ab omni part recisum est,
Quemque notes oculis, angulus omnis abest.
Dionysius Halicarn. lib. 2. p. 96. expressing Ancile in Greek turns it That
is, A Thracian shield, resembling a losing figure target whose angles be
rebated.
(...), in figure much like, says he, (...) I think it should be) (...).
Liuy. lib. 1. fo. 5. and lib. 5. fol. 68. terms them caelestia arma, and
caelo demissa: whereof the story at large is in Ovid, in the place above
alleged: Dum loquitur totum etc. and in Dionysius. p. 97. although with some
little difference of circumsta^ce* That is, Among these shieldes which are very
many one they say there is which fell down from heaven, and that it was found
in Numaes Palace not brought thithes by any ma^s hand, no not so much as the
fashion being known in Italy before that time* upon which two reasons the
Romans were induced to think that the piece was sent from the Gods So when
Numa had determined to have it carried through the city, on high days, by some
of the most honorable young me^, and to institute yearly sacrifice in memory
thereof; fearing lest the enemy should privily steal it away, as the report
goes he took this course. He caused man other to be made like unto this
which fell from above (one Namurius undertaking the work) that whosoever sought
to steal it, for the nearenesse and likeness of the rest wrought by man's
hands might not be able to discern the form of that which came from the gods.
(...). La^pridius Heliogabalo. Matris typum, and Vestae ignem, and Palladium,
and Ancilia, and omnia Romany veneranda etc. Now as concerning the motus
Ancilium I find of it two several circumstances recorded. Seruius upon this
place of Virgil. 8. Aeneid. -- vtque impulit arma, writes thus. Is qui belli
susceperat curam (meaning, as I think, the Consul) sacrarium Martis ingressus
primo Ancilia commouebat; post hastam simulachri ipsius dei, dicens, Mars
vigila. After which ceremony performed by the Consul, the Salij, as I guess,
immediately they and their servants carried the Ancilia about in procession.
Which pomp and solemnity is described by Dionysius p. 96. That is, The Salij
celebrate a solemn feast about the time of the Athenian Panathenaea in the
month of March, continuing many days, in which they pass through the city
solemnly dancing into the Forum, the Capitol, and many other both public
and private places, wearing party colored coats girt to the^ with copper
girdles. Over these they cast their gowns guarded with gards of purple in their
own language called Trabea, which the^ faste^ with a button, lastly wearing on
their heads a certain attire which they call Apices. Beside this every man is
girt with a sword, and in his right hand holds a spear or rod, or some
such other things, and in his left a Thracian shield. They dance in certain
militar measures to the noise of the pipe, sometimes al at once, sometimes by
turns, and withal sing old songs delivered to the^ by tradition from their
fathers.
(...). Li^ius lib. 1. Salios item duodecim Marti Gradiuo legit, tunicaeque
pictae insigne dedit, and super tunicam aeneum pectori tegumen, coelestiaque
arma, quae Ancilia appellantur far ac per vrbem ire cauentes carmina cum
tripudijs, solennique saltatu iussit. This feast as Dionysius writes, was
celebrated (...), begun, as it may appear by Ovid, the very Cale^ds of March.
Carisius seems to place it in the Quinquatrus, which began the 19. of March.
Quinquatrus, says he, a quinquando. i, lustrando, quod eo die arma Ancilia
lustrari sint solita. which etymology no doubt is erroneous* for Quinquatrus
without question is derived of quinque. Ovidius.

Nominaque a iunctis quinque diebus habent. Then Quinquatrus were holy days to
Minerua, not Mars, to whom the Ancilia properly belonged. So taking his
beginning at the Calends of March, the feast Dionysius.
continued (...), and by this very place of Tacitus it is clear they were not
laid up again before the 14. of the same month, whenas Otho took his
solemn leave of the Senate and people. Polybius fragm. p. 39. extends the
whole solemnity To thirty days.
(...). but motus Anciliu^ began certain days after the beginning of the
feast, as it may appear by Polybius in that place, and Liuy l. 37. speaking of
the same matter: during which time no expedition was usually undertaken.
Suetonius Othone c. 8. agreeing with Tacitus, and expounding this place;
Expeditionem impigre atque etiam praepropere inchoauit (Otho) nulla ne
religionu^ quidem cura; sed and motis nec dum conditis Ancilibus, quod
antiquitus infaustum habebatur. Liu. lib. 37. Statiua ad Hellespontum
aliquandiu habuere: quia dies forte, quibus Ancilia monentur, religiosi ad iter
inciderant.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE SECOND BOOK.
BY the maine sea, Audentioribus spaciis) i. per altum, in opposition to litus
and oram legere, seu praeteruehi. So that the meaning of the place is, that
Titus from Corinth to Cypres went along by the coast, and from Cypres into
Syria by the maine sea.

2. The temple of Venus at Paphos) Strabo l. 14. That is, Next is old Paphos
situate about eleven sta^ia from the sea* there is an h^rborow for ships, and
an ancient temple of Venus, surnamed of the place Paphia.
(...). Homerus (...). (...)
(...).
Dionysius Afer calls the whole island (...).

3. The site of the temple) A point proposed, but forgotten to be handled,
unless we will take those words, quanqua^ in aperto, as a sufficient
discharge thereof: which were somewhat hard, being spoken particularly of the
altars, whereas Homer makes distinct and express mention, both of The temple
and altar
(...) and (...).

4. Prayers and pure fire) If it were an unbloody sacrifice, as by these words
it should seem, it may reasonably be doubted wherefore mention is made before
of the choice of beasts, of the fibers of kiddes, and anon Caesis compluribus
hostiis. But perhaps there might be bloody sacrifices before the Altar,
although upon it none but unbloody.

5. A figure rising continually round) The figure which Tacitus describes is a
Conus. Maximus Tyrius terms it (...), which is a somewhat different thing in
strictnes of terms* his words be these, That is. In his 38. discourse. The
Celta worship Jupiter: his image with them is nothing but an high oak, the
Arabians adore but whom I know not; the Image which I saw amongst them is a
square stone. In Paphos Venus has the chiefest honor howbeit her image you
can liken to nothing so well as to a white Pyramid, or rather a trya^gular
Pyramid.
(...). or peradventure it was written (...) that is (...).

6. Received the favors of Princes) He seems to have expressed the very
words of Josephus. 4. (...), c. 36. That is, The leaders and soldiers banded
themselves together, and openly sought to make a change, furiously crying;
These soldiers which live in Rome at their ease, which never could abide to
hear so much as the rumor of war, choose whom they list to the Empire, and
upon hope of gain pronounce Princes. Whereas they who had passed through so
many pains, and were now waxen old under their helme^s* must yield that
authority to others, and that having in their own camp a man fittest of al
other for government.
(...). and paulo post: That is, That not only they would employ their forces
to the establishing of such as should be agreed upon there, having presently
with them 3. Legions and Auxiliarie forces from the kings; but that the whole
East would conspire, and so much of Europe as stood out of fear of Vitellius.
(...).

7. The beginning of the war) In declaring of this great and important action
between Vitellius and Otho, I find Tacitus, at least in my conceyt, much
inferior to himself otherwhere; omitting many necessary circumstances,
confounding things together, affirming contrarieties in appearance, and
generally leaving his reader not so fully satisfied, as in a history is to be
looked for. As first in the circumstances of Otho the principal person, whose
paces and footesteps would have been numbered, Tacitus. p. 59. brings him out
of the city accompanied in a manner with all the Senate toward the later end
of March, and as we found by collection out of Suetonius and Marcellinus.
other writers, upon the seven and twe^tieth day. The^ here showing his soldier
like manner of marching before his soldiers on foot, in the end he bestows him
and his company no where: whereas indeed the Senate was left at Mutina, and
himself marched toward the enemy, as far as Brixellu^ a city upon the Po, and
there sen^^ng out his captains stayed behind, as it appears in page 1517.
Plutarch, and Tacitus p. 84. circumstances, in mine opinion, not so lightly to
have been passed over. From Brixellu^, says Plutarch, were dispatched away
Celsus, Paullinus, Gallus and Spurinna. Tacitus. p. 65. seems to say, that
Gallus and Spurinna were dispatched at Rome, and sent before hand ad Perchance
the meaning of these words ad occupandas Padi ripas is to put themselves in
possession of the towns upon the river.
occupandas Padi ripas. Which if it were meant to guard the south side of the
Po, and so to stay the Vitellianists at least from passing the river, since
they could not stop the^ in the mountains, a few being able to keep such a
passage against a great army, it has good reason, but Gallus did not so
observe it. If to put himself in possession of both sides of the Po, and so to
have the whole river at commandment, how could he with a few withstand
Caecinaes whole army, having no advantage of the place? Now to the leading of
Gallus and Spurinna sent before, from what place soever, ad occupandas Padi
ripas, Tacitus assigns five Praetoria^ Cohorts, equitum vexilla, legio prima
Adiutrix, and two thousand gladiatores: in the page 71. 76.
process of the work, assigning the gladiatores to the government only of
Marcius Macer a third man, and after him to Flauius Sabinus, page 77. and
setting the other two far enough asunder, page 68.
Spurinna at Placentia with three Praetoria^ cohorts, one thousand Vexillarij
not named before in the survey of their whole power, and a few horse, and page
70. 28.
Gallus with Prima Adiutrix, I cannot tell where, nor where, and upon what
occasion they divided themselves; but wheresoever he was, taking Bebriacum in
his way to Placentia, he was in all reason of the north side of the Po. Then
for his other three captains Paullinus, Celsus, and Proculus, whereof mention
is made p. 58. in the preparation of the war, here in the setting out p. 65.
they have no charge at all assigned them (and to say the truth, I cannot see
any great mass of men they could have, leaving Otho sufficiently guarded) nay
they are not so much as once named. By way of probable conjecture we way
suppose, that Proculus, as being Captain of the Guard, stayed at Brixellu^,
and attended upon Othoes person. But Celsus and Paullinus are not named before
the 71. page in the battle ad Castoris. where suddenly within twelve miles of
Cremona they appear, and not far from Bebriacum (where Gallus p. 70. was
left) never mentioned before, besides many other with prima legio under their
leading, being the peculiar charge of Gallus. So that to roue at that which it
was our autours fault not to set down plainly, we may imagine, that Paullinus
and Celsus were sent afterward from Brixellum to the camp at Bebriacum, either
to take ioynt-charge with Gallus, or else charge in his place, as it is more
likely, and that thereupon Gallus withdrew himself, percha^ce to recover his
fall mentioned p. 76, seeing there is no mention of him in the action ad
Castoris; and in an action which passed at Bebriacum, we shall find him by
and by away, where notwithstanding Tacitus last left him, p. 70. Now whereas
Tacitus p. 71. upon not prosecuting a little skirmish of the gladiatores
against the Vitellianists, makes Otho to send for his brother Titianus, whom
he had left at Rome, to make him Lieutenant general, page 1519.
Plutarch with greater reason and probability, says it was done after the
battle ad Castoris, upon dislike of Paullinus slow proceedings; and that
Proculus Captain of the Guard was sent withal; but when they came to
Bebriacum I cannot determine. Now if Otho were at Brixellum, Paullinus and
Celsus at Bebriacum, where shall we say the great consultation was holden,
where Otho, Titianus, Proculus, Paullinus and Celsus were present, and Gallus
absent? Here Tacitus fails us again, and page 1520.
Plutarch releeueth us, showing that Otho removed from Brixellum to Bebriacum
to consult with his captains of the manner of proceeding in the war. Thus
much of Otho, and his captains, it follows of their power, which was of two
sorts: brought from Rome, and sent for from abroad. From Rome of 6. sorts.
Quinque 1 Praetoriae cohortes: 2 Equitum vexilla: 3 legio prima Adiutrix: 4
Gladiatores: 5 Caeterae Praetoriae cohortes: and 6 Classici. with Gallus and
Spurinna 1 Quinque praetoriae cohortes: whereof three were page 68.
with Spurinna in Placentia, the other two belike with Gallus. 2 equitum
vexilla without number; 3 legio prima Adiutrix Classica ex reliquis caesorum a
Galba ad pontem Miluium: 4 two thousand gladiatores: in the siege of Placentia
we find mention of a thousand vexillarij: whether differing from all these,
or portion of any, I know not. The^ in Othoes train Spiculatorum lecta
corpora, as I think e Praetorianis.5 Caeterae praetoriae cohortes, beside the
five sent with Gallus: and yet many Praetorian soldiers were sent with the
navy into Narbonensis. p. 58. and 66. so that surely all the rest were not
here. Classici from whence soever they came, have ministered us, and will
minister many men* seven thousand were slain by Galba ad pontem Miluium, and
the rest decimated, e reliquis prima legio Adiutrix was composed. In the fleet
to Narbon there served also many as soldiers* here we have classicorum ingens
numerus: with Otho. page 68. ver. 10. a thousand Classici inter Placentia^ and
Ticinum intercepti, which by all circumstances were none of this company. And
page 70, 23: Turullius Cerealis had many Classici: but whence he had them, and
how he became their captain is not set down* and beside all these we have in
the third page 134.
book another whole Legion e Cl^ssicis differing from prima Adiutrix, which
then was in Spain. The power sent for by Otho from abroad was out of
Illyricum only, where at that present were seven Legions, to wit, two in
Dalmatia, Vndecima Claudiana and quartadecima Gemina; two in Pannonia, septima
Galbiana, and tertiadecima Gemina: in Moesia three, tertia Gallica, septima
Claudiana, and octaua Augusta, as it is declared elsewhere. Now all these being
sent for by Otho, there marched at Othoes commandment, says page 65.
Tacitus, the Legions of Dalmatia and Pannonia, which is manifestly defective*
for the Moesian Legions marched also, and came forward as far as Aquilera in
favor of Otho: the same Tacitus, p. 99. So that all the seven Legions upon
Othoes commandment marched, and came on: but who were come before the great
battle at Bebriacum, and who not, is in my opinion a question inexplicable,
Tacitus words receiving so many oppositions, and implying so many
contradictions, and no other story to purpose being extant of this matter. And
first to begin with the most certain, the three Legions of Moesia absolutely
were absent in all militar actions of this war. Tacitus lib. 3. p. 99. and p.
109. Maesici exercitus vires integrae* present absolutely were two thousand
soldiers sent before out of the four Legions of Dalmatia and Pannonia, as
Tacitus, p. 65, 2. says. But Suetonius cap. 6.
Vespasiano seems to say they came out of Moesia. Moesiaci exercitus bina e
tribus legionibus millia missa auxilia Othoni* and Tacitus himself page 82, 8.
Praemissi Moesia: either meaning the same that he makes here to come out of
Dalmatia and Pannonia, or talking there of men in the action, which we find
not here in his general view* and lib. 3. p. 109. Duae tunc Pannonicae ac
Moesicae alae perrupere hostem, talking of the skirmish of horsemen at the
beginning of the battle at Bebriacum. Now before the four Legions of
Dalmatia, and Pannonia, alae cohortesque praeueniebant: which words seem to
be meant only of these bina millia praemissa: although it may be that some
other page 71, 31. quatuor auxiliorum cohortes in prali^ ad Castoris.
Auxiliaries were sent after the bina millia, and before the Legions
themselves* of whose coming and presence is the greatest and most difficult
question. In the skirmish ad Castoris p. 71. 30. we have tertiaedecimae
legionis vexillum being one of the Pannonians* in the shocke at the great
battle at Bebriacu^ tertiadecima legio it self is expressly mentioned by
Tacitus, p. 80, 14, and Vedius Aquila Lieutenant of the same: p. 80, Vedium
Aquilam tertiaedecima legionis legatum.
25. Likewise in the very conflict at Bebriacum express mention is made p. 80.
15. of the Quartadecimani, one of the Dalmatian Legions, and l. 3. p. 115.
Quartadecimani campis Bebriacensibus fusi stratique. Now that Septima Galbiana,
and vndecima Claudiana were before the battle at Bebriacum united with their
fellows, albeit they are not in the battle expressly named, it may appear
p. 91. where they are counted inter victas legiones as well as quartadecima and
tertiadecima, and by Vitellius commandment suis hibernis redditae. and p. 100.
in Pannonia tertiadecima legio ac septima Galbiana dolorem iramque Bebriacensis
pugnae retinentes. Moreover the Praetorian soldiers at Bebriacum after the
field lost comfort themselves with no other page 81, 6. venire Moesicas legiones
supply, but only of the Moesian Legions: and at Brixellum, in comforting Otho
likewise mention is made only of them. p. 82. praemissi Moesia eandem
obstinationem aduentantis exercitus, legiones Aquileiam ingressas nuntiabant,
vt nemo dubitet potuisse renouari etc. So that by these places, and some other
like, we may probably conclude, that all the four Legions of Dalmatia and
Pannonia were come, and joined, but when they came, and how, where they joined,
and all other circumstances necessary in a point of that importance, we are
finally beholding to Tacitus diligence for omitting. Of the contrary side, to
prove first that quartadecima was not come, we have Tacitus words p. 75. in
the consultation at Bebriacum, which was not above two or three days before
the battle, paucis diebus quarta^decima^ legionem, magna ipsam fama, cu^
Moesiacis coptis affore, whereby it may reasonably be collected, that all the
other three were come, but not quartadecima. p. 90. e victis legionibus
quartadecima prima, tertiadecima, septima, vndecima, soli quartadecimani se
victos abnuebant. so that the rest be like were there. Now betwixt the time of
co^sultation and the battle there is no mention at all made of their coming:
a thing in reason if there had been any such, not to have been omitted, and
which p. 79. Ti^ianus ac Proculus vbi consilijs ven^erentur, ad ^us imperij
transibant.
Titianus and Proculus would, no doubt, have alleged, in justification of
their purpose, against Paullinus and Celsus. or if this be but coniecturall,
what can be said to the place of Tacitus p. 85. Coenus atroci mendacio
vniuersos per culit, affirmans superuentu quartaedecimae legionis versam
partium fortunam, as being a known matter, that quartadecima was not come at
the time of the battle at Bebriacum. and again p. 90. speaking of the
quartadecima legio, Bebriacensi acie vexillarijs tantum pulsis vires legionis
no^ affuisse, furthermore the Pannonian Legio^s, as it appears by page 1520.
Plutarch were absent at the time of the co^sultation at Bebriacum. That is,
That Othoes forces expected out of Moesia and Pannonia were no less then those
which he had then p^esent.
(...). and Tacitus lib. 3. p. 109. Pannonicae legiones deceptae magis quam
victae resurgere in vltionem properant. and generally Suetonius, c. 9, writes
that Otho slew himself residu^^ integrisque etiam nunc (...)* qua^ secum ad
secundos casus detinuerat, and superuenientibus alijs e Dalmatia Pannoniaque
and Moesia.
if the sour Legions of Pannonia and Dalmatia were in the action at Bebriacum,
why have we no mention set down of their manner of yielding to Vitellius: being
without all question the greater, and better part of Othoes army? and yet
certain it is, that immediately after the battle all the four Legions in
question at least were in Italy, and disposed of by Vitellius, as appears p.
90. and 91. but when they entered Italy, whether they ever joined with the
rest, and when; how and by what means they yielded themselves to Vitellius
disposing, Tacitus, to the eternal note of imperfection of this most excellent
story otherwise, has left us utterly ignorant. Of Vitellius side al is clear
out of question. In the Germanies, Kal. Ianuarijs Galba iterum and Vinio Coss,
at the Time of Vitellius revolt, were seven Legions, as is declared elsewhere;
namely in low Germany quinta, and quintadecima, whose standing camp was at
Vetera: prima, who lodged at Nouesium, and sextadecima at Bonna. In high
Germany quarta Macedonica, and decimaoctaua alias duoetuicesima encamped at
Magontiacum, and vnaetvicesima Rapax lodged, as I think, at Vindonissa*
whereof Caecina took away with him vnaetuicesima Rapax wholly, and pulled well
the other two at Magontiacum, to make up thirty thousand men: and in Italy
associated unto him Ala Syllana. Valens took with him aquilam quintae, with
cohorts and wings out of the other three to make up forty thousand, and by the
way associated to him legio Italica, and octo cohortes Batauorum. Tacitus. 1.
page 44.
Hist. Neither do we find in all this action, before Vitellius coming, any
Legion named but Rapax, and quintani. Now by Aquila quintae we are to
understand some good portion, not the whole Legion entierly, which portion
albeit it bears sometime the name of quinta, yet we are to understand, that
so many were left in Vetera thereof, as bare also the name of quinta at the
same time. Vitellius at his coming away brought with him, says lib. 2. p. 86.
Tacitus, the rest of the strength of Germany, leaving the same Legions in
number and names which were before (Rapax only excepted, which was wholly gone
away) but most slenderly As two Legions left at Vetera had but five thousand
men. Tacitus. lib. 4.
furnished of men, and of soldiers very few or none so that under Hordeonius
charge, in the fourth book of Tacitus, we find in Germany quinta and
quintadecima at Vetera, sextadecima at Nouesiu^, prima at Bonna, quarta and
octauadecima alias duoetvicesima at Magontiacu^. and the very same time with
Vitellius in Italy was another quinta, another quintadecima, another
sextadecima, and so of prima, quarta, octauadecima alias duoetuicesima, being
indeed not two Legions, but two members of one Legio^, Rapax only excepted, as
before I have said, which Caecina took wholly away, not leaving any in
Germany to carry the name of Rapax, till the selfsame Legion returned thither
afterward with Cerealis.

8. p. 59. A base supply) being bo^dslaues of the worst sort, and besides the
dishonorablenes of the thing Tacitus notes their unfitness to service p. 76.
neque ea consta^tia gladiatoribus ad praelia quae militibus etc. and yet we
find, that Spartacus with a few of his companions breaking out of their
school put Praetors and Consuls to flight, and troubled the whole Roman state
in the greatest height. and P. Rutilius being Co^sul, as Valerius Maximus
reports in his second book, sent for certain masters offense out of the
school of C. Aurelius Scaurus, and so setting the^ to teach his soldiers,
vita^di atque infere^di ictus subtiliore^ ratione^ legionibus engenerauit.
unless peradventure it be true, that such me^ have better cunning then valor.

9. pa. 61. The battle on both sides) In this conflict we have of Othoes side
mention distinctly of Classici, Pagani, Praetoriani, and the navy, for
Vitellius of twelve turmae of horsemen, a cohort of Ligurians, the choice of
the two Tungrian cohorts, five hundredth Pannonians, and a little afterward
Alpins beside: unless peradventure it should be read Alpini in both places,
and meant perchance of the Ligures: for what Pannonians should do here I cannot
imagine* or if it were true, yet being strange, at the least Tacitus should have
done well to have told us how they came thither.

10. page 63. Lying between the Po and the Alps) of Milan, Nouara, Eporedia
and Vercellae we have mention before l. 1. p. 48. of the rest being many, and
great towns, how they were at this time come to Vitellius side, nothing is set
down in Tacitus: matters in my opinion not to have been omitted, especially
concerning Cremona. page 1519.
Plutarch seems to make Cremona, being one of the towns between the Alps
and the Po, to have been kept and possessed a great while by the Othonians*
and Tacitus here writes, capta Pannoniorum cohors apud Cremonam by the
Vitellianists, which cohort of Pannonians, whatsoever they were, and from
whence soever they came thither (for Tacitus leaves us to our gesses) may
seem to have been put in the town by Otho for a garrison, and here taken by
the Vitellianists with the town, although the circumstances in Plutarch do
not fully agree with it by reason of the time there.

11. page 65. Plutei, crates and vineae) Pluteus, says Vegetius lib 4. cap.
15, is a certain moveable engine contexta ad similitudinem absidis, and
cilicijs vel corijs tecta, quam obsidentes applicant muris, eiusque munitione
protecti sagittis sieve fundis vel missilibus defensores de propugnaculis
exturbant, vt scalis ascendendi facilior prestetur occasio. Vinea according to
Vegetius in the same place, and Lucan, l. 3. was a frame of wood, or hurdles,
covered with earth, sub quo subsidentes tuti ad subruenda murorum penetrant
fundamenta. Crates the same with the one or the other of them, or at least to
the same purpose.

12. p. 66. Notorious and unfortunate) The two calamities here meant are the two
great battles, the first betvveene the Othonians and Vitellianists described
in this book: the other betvveene the Vitellianists and Flauianists set down
in the next, more commonly known by the name of praelium Cremonense, and with
greater reason, being fought under the wales of Cremona, and twenty miles
from Bebriacum, albeit then the first skirmish indeed began not above eight
miles from Bebriacum. 3. Hist. p. 126. and this former battle also was
fought a great way from Bebriacum, immensum id spatium, says Tacitus, and by
all probability, many miles, as shall be declared elsewhere.

13. pa 67. So he sent for Titianus) This change of captains Plutarch with
more reason puts after the battle ad Castoris; That is, The victory being
not fully prosecuted thorough the leaders fault Otho sent to the army Titianus,
and Proculus captain of the Guard.
(...) (speaking of the victory ad Castoris) (...). and indeed the alteration
is too great to be induced upon the slacknes of a petty companion, especially
seeing we find Macer, who committed the fault, still page 7^.
retained in his charge, and Paullinus and Celsus, two of the greatest men in
the state, in a manner disgraced for the fault of another, according to Tacitus.
Now upon this fault whensoever committed, to send from Brixellu^ for
Titianus at Rome so many miles distant, (for there we left him in the last
words of the first book) and bring him to Bebriacu^ to the co^sultatio^, may
percha^ce seem strange to him that co^sidereth how that from Othoes going out
of Rome with his army til his death were not above twenty four days in all,
and perchance not so much.

14. p. 67. Twelve miles from Cremona at a place called Castor.) This place ad
Castoris is twelve miles (says our autour) from Cremona, where the maine
camp, I think, of Caecina lay, and eight miles at the least from Bebriacum,
where Paullinus and Celsus were encamped, howsoever they are here met in the
middle way. Gallus, as it should seem, was retired to cure himself of his
fall, or at least, seeing here is no mention of him in the field, left to
guard the camp: as it seems also he was the time of the great maine battle
described in the sixteenth chapter.

15. p. 67. Three Praetorian cohorts) Five Praetorian cohorts were under the
charge of Gallus and Spurinna. Tacitus p. 65, 9. whereof three were at this
time in Placentia with Spurinna, p. 68, 18. and three more we have here now in
Gallus camp. one too many: but Otho, we must say, was not far of to supply
it out of the rest of the Praetorian cohorts.

16. page 70. Forbidding the Centurions) Vetitis vigilias obire centurionibus.
The Centurions (...) gods, without whose good favor no humane action could
in that place have any happy success. So Aeneas in Virgil. lib. 7. at his
entry into Italy -- geniumque loci primamque deorum
Tellurem, nymphasque, and adhuc ignota precatur
Plumina. -- and Orestes in Sophocles Electra.
(...)
(...).
In Xenophon 1. (...). Ca^byses and Cyrus passing out of Persia That is,
Besought the gods protectors of Persia, to send them forth favorably and with
good speed.
(...): and entering into Media, (...).

24. The Theater, where the manner of that town is to meet and consult) For so
all the Grecian cities used to do, as appears both by the Greek Orators
and Historiographers* To receive them favorably and with good speed.
a thing noted also by Ausonius Ludo septem sapientum, Prologo.

Quid erubescis tu togate Romule?
Scenam quod introibunt tam clari viri?
Nobis pudendum est hoc, non and Atticis
Quibus theatrum curiae praebet vicem?
Nostris negotijs sua loca sortito data.
Campus comitijs, vt conscriptis curia.
Forum atque rostra separatius ciuium.
Vna est Athenis, atque in omni Graecia
Ad consulendum publici seeds loci.
25. Cappadocia had no legions) Vespasian being settled in state Cappadociae,
says cap. ^.
Suetonius, propter assiduos barbaroru^ incursus legiones addidit,
consularemque rectorem imposuit pro equite Romano. yet by Tacitus. p. 63. it
may seem there was some power. Cappadocia Pontusque, and quicquid castrorum
Armenijs praetenditur.

26. Berytus) By the circumstances in the story of Josephus it may seem, that
here at Berytus was the first meeting of Vespasian and Mucianus, and that
before all was dealt between them by the mediation of Titus, whom we find in
Tacitus: p. 97, 1. absent with Mucianus in Syria, which had not needed if they
had met before and the matter been concluded upon. Surely in Tacitus of their
first meeting no place is set down, and it may seem strange how two
Lieutenants General could come personally together before the war was openly
undertaken. But they not coming together before their open declaration in
arms, there had been no place left for that good oration, which Tacitus meant
howsoever to bestow on Mucianus. although for the truth of the story, and the
circumstances of matters which passed in Iewry, and Syria, I am content to
believe Josephus better, who, as I have said, was an ey-witnesse of the whole
action.

27. Marched forward) Joseph. (...). 4, c. 40. That is, Mutianus fearing to
commit himself to the sea because it was the deep of winter* brought his army
by land through Cappadocia and Phrygia.
(...). How it could be (...) the deep of winter, whenas without question the
war was begun sometime in July, or at the furthest in the beginning of
August, I cannot imagine.

28. To leave Moesia and with his horsemen) It appears in the process of the
story, that he took the way of Moesia, of whose whole journey from Syria, till
we find him in the pa. 130.
third book fighting with the Dacia^s, we have not one word set down by
Tacitus; as likewise after that actio^, til his entry into Rome, in the fourth
book: points in my judgment very material in a good story, and greatly to
the satisfaction of the reader.

29. Illyria^ armies) Some learned me^ charge this narratio^ here, and
generally the story of the actions between Vitellius and Vespasia^, of great
insufficiencies, imperfections, and co^fusions, whereof I do in my judgment
most clearly acquit it. Illyricum was divided into three provinces; Moesia,
whereof at this time Aponius Saturninus was President or Lieutena^t general;
Pa^nonia, whereof T. Ampius Flauianus was President; and Dalmatia, whereof
Poppaeus Siluanus, or Po^peius Sullanus (for in both names we find difference
of writing) was President. In Moesia were three Legio^s, Tertia Gallica, Octaua
Augusta, and Septima Claudiana, led by three legati legionu^, Lieutena^ts of
Legio^s: Dillius Aponianus of the Third, Hist. 3. p. 112, 28. Numisius Lupus of
the Eightth. Hist. 3. p. 112, 29. and Tertius Iulianus of the Seventh; who
forsaking his place, as appears in this place, Vipsanius Messalla undertook
the charge. 3. Hist. p. 111. In Pa^nonia there were at this present two
legions, septima Galbiana whose Lieutenant was Antonius Primus; and
tertiadecima Gemina sent back out of Italy from building of Amphitheatres,
whose Lieutenant in this war was Vedius Aquila, the same man who was also
Lieutena^t in the last war. 3. Hist. 112, 14. and 2. Hist 80, 25. In Dalmatia
there was none but only one Legio^, namely vndecima Claudiana (the fourteenth
being transported into Britanny) whose Lieutenant was Annius Bassus. 3. Hist.
p. 131, 3. The premises considered, which are all expressed by Tacitus, I see
not what can be required more to the perfection of this narration here, it
seeming to me one of the best, and most sufficient in this book. and so
likewise in the whole story of Tacitus, of al great actions I take that
between Vitellius and Vespasia^ to be generally the most fully, and best set
down, as the other between Otho and Vitellius the worst. Now for the time
when Illyricu^ began to revolt from Vitellius, as in noting of times Tacitus is
always too scant, Suetonius cap. 15.
Vitellio somewhat releeueth us. Octauo imperij mense desciueru^t ab eo
exercitus Moesiaru^ atque Pannoniae: so that it seems to have been begun in
August, or perchance toward the later end of July.

30. Threescore thousand armed me^) Valens had out of Germany forty thousand
armed men, beside legio Italica, and eight cohorts of Batauians etc. Caecina
thirty thousand, beside Ala Syllana etc. Vitellius tota mole belli secuturus,
says Tac. 1. Hist. and in this book p 86. reliquas Germanici exercitus vires
trahebat, beside eight thousand e Britannico dilectu. of al which number we
find in Tacitus none sent away, page 92.
but the cohorts of Batauians* and yet here we have but threescore thousand
armed men.

31. Fe^cers diet, Gladiatoria sagina) Gladiatores and Athletae in old time
were most daintily dieted and stal fed, as it were: the known phrases of
Athleticus habitus, and Gladiatoria sagina importing no less. Cic. Cum
gladiatoria totius corporis firmitate. Cyprianus: Impletur in succum cibis
fortioribus corpus, and aruina assidui nidoris moles membrorum robusta
pinguescit, vt saginatus in poenam carius pereat.

32. The sta^derds of four legions) The eight Legio^s, which seem here, and
elsewhere, to be noted of Vitellius side, were Italica, and the seven Legions of
Germany, albeit none completely but Rapax, in all the rest part of the men being
left behind, and the whole names attributed alike to both parts.

33. Accounted unlucky) Liuius l. 6, f. 68, I. Tu^ de diebus religiosis agitari
coeptu^ die^que a.d. 15. Kal. Sextiles duplici clade insigne^, quo die ad
Cremera^ Fabij caesi, quo deinde ad Alia^ cu^ exitio vrbis foede pugnatu^, a
posteriore clade Alie^se^ appellaru^t, insigne^que nulli rei public
priuati^que agedae feceru^t. Dio. page 429.
l. 9. de clade Cremere^si. That is, The day in which this calamity befell them
the people of Rome accounts dismal and unlucky, neither will they on it
begin any serious matter, in respect of the ill fortune that happened that
day to the city.
(...).

34. In the election of Co^suls: Comitia Consulu^ cu^ candidatis ciuiliter
celebrans) What by comitia Co^sulu^ should be meant in this place, the people
being at this time excluded from al voice in electio^s, either I do not
conceive, or else comitia consulu^ ciuiliter celebrare is but as much, as munera
a candidatis co^sulatus edita (whether it were himself or any other) ciuiliter
celebrare. In the free state the suitors for offices to win the peoples favor
and goodwil dabant gladiatores, till it was by a law expressly by Tully to
that purpose enacted forbidden, and brought within the compass of ambitus.
Cicero in Vatinium: Ego legem de ambitu ex S. C. tul^, quae dilucide vetat
biennio quo quis petat petiturusue sit, gladiatores dare nisi ex testame^to.
But after they had attained their suit, it was the^ not lawful only, but
necessarily incide^t to most offices to exhibit to the people al sorts of games
and plays, and accordingly they performed it with all magnifice^ce and cost.
Under the Emperors, albeit no part of the election of any officer depe^ded
upon the peoples favor, yet both candidats, and designati, and actual officers
continued to minister to the people their accustomed pleasures of gladiatores,
circe^ses etc. co^te^ding therein by all possible means to win the goodwil of
the people. In the time of Alexander Ma^meae, Quaestores ca^didati munera
populo dederu^t: in Neroes, Quaestoribus designatis gladiatores edendi
necessitas erat, says Tacitus. Co^sul designatus est and munus edidit:
Marcellus Iureco^sultus l. 36. Now to be present at these shows was accounted
great popularity in the Prince. Xiphil. de page 204.
Othone. He used much the Theaters to win the hearts of the multitude.
(...). cap. 45.
Suetonius de Augusto. Ipse Circe^ses spectabat spectaculo plurimas horas,
aliqua^do totos dies aderat. Tac. 1. p. 242.
An. de eode^. Civil rebatur misceri voluptatibus vulgi. as co^trarily to come
seldo^e thither was disliked as a sign of a proud, mela^cholicke, and sour
nature; whereof Iulianus accuses himself in Misopogone: That is, I always
hate and shun the horse races, as they which are indebted do the places of
public assembly, therefore I go seldom to the^.
(...) etc. or to come thither and not to be atte^tiue, or aliud agere, as
Caesar, qui vulgo reprehensus est, says Suetonius quod inter specta du^
epistolis libellisque legendis ac rescribendis vacaret. But Vitellius here
seems not only to have frequented the shows, which ca^didati Co^sulatus, or
designati did exhibit, but also to have take part, for example, with the
Mirmyllones against the Thraces in theatro, or with the Veneti against the
Prasini in circo, and therein omne^ infima plebis rumore affectasse; in those
days accounted a point of most great popularity, Suet. cap. 8.
Tito: Quin and studiu^ armaturae Thracu^ (ne quid popularitatis
praetermitteret) prae se ferens, saepe cum populo and voce and gestu, vt fautor
cauillatus est Titus. verum maiestate salua.

35. P. Sabinus) Not Vespasia^s brother, as some learned me^ against al
circu^sta^ces of story have written. This Sabinus was cast in prison ob
amicitia^ Caecinae: 3. Hist. p. 125. Vespasia^s brother was Praefectus vrbis,
and at good liberty, til he was besieged and taken in the Capitol.

36. Right over their freedme^: Iura libertoru^) The Libertus was bound to
maintain his patron, if by any means he fell in decay: at his death by the
old co^stitutio^s to leave his patron heir of the half of his goods, which
if it were any ways embezeled, the law awarded the patron omniu^ bonoru^
possessione^ etia^ contra tabulas. and in these two points, beside some other
services and duties called in the law operae, consisted almost the whole ius
libertoru^, as appears li. 38. Digest. Now whereas Vitellius reuersis ab
exilio iura libertoru^ concessit by grace, it seems in later times to have
belonged to the^ by common right. Vlpian: Dig. 38. Tit. de bonis libertoru^. L.
3. Si deportatus patronus restitutus sit, liberti contratabulas bonoru^
possessione^ accipere potest. and again in the same title L. 4. Paullus. Si
deportatus patronus sit, filio eius competit bonoru^ possessio in bonis
liberti, nec impedimento est ei talis patronus, qui demortui loco habetur.

37. The Augustales) Tac. 1. Ann. p. 241. Ide^ annus nouas ceremonias accepit,
addito sodaliu^ Augustaliu^ sacerdotio, vt quo^da^ Titus Tatius retine^dis
Sabinoris sacris sodales Titios instituerat. sort ducti e primoribus ciuitatis
vnus and viginti. Tiberius, Drususque and Claudius, and Germanicus adijciu^tur.
Where we see Tacitus attribute that to Tatius himself, which here he
attributes to Romulus.

38. Vitellius had governed as Proconsul) In administra^da prouincia (Africa)
singulare^ inno centia^ praestitit (Vitellius) says Suetonius Vitellio. c. 5.
agreeing with Tacitus: but in Vespasia^ he disagreeth utterly. Tacitus says
here famosu^ inuisu^que proconsulatu^ in Africa Vespasianus egerat. Suetonius
Vespasiano. c. 4; Exin sortitus Africam (Vespasianus) integerrime nec sine
magna dignatione administrauit.

39. The Etesians) Etesiae according to Aristotle. 2. Meteor. and Theophrastus
de ventis, That is, Are northerly winds blowing after the summer Solstitium,
and rising of the dogstarre.
(...), according to Pliny. li. 2. c. 47, fell in that time upon the eighteenth
of July, and post biduum exortus, says the same Pliny, Etesiae diebus
quadraginta perflant, nec vlli ventoru^ magis stati sunt. so that Etesiae dured
ordinarily from the twentieth of July til the end of August. Olympiodorus
seems to have read the place of Aristotle thus: (...).
And the solstitium aestiuu^ being just twenty five days before (...),
according to Olympiodorus in. 2. Meteor. it must by due account light in that
time upon the four and twentieth of June, from which day the too great length
of the Iulia^ year has in our age drawn it back eleue^ or twelve days,
casting it upon the twelfth or thirteenth of June. Now that Etesiaru^ flatus
was good for sailing into Egypt and the For so the author of the book de
mundo ad Alexand. makes the Etesia to have some point of the west: (...).
East, and il from thence, beside the site of the country, that also may be an
argument, that Thales and certain other philosophers affirm (as Diodorus
Bibliothecae l. 1. reports) the cause of the rising of Nilus to be these
Etesia^ winds That is, Which blowing directly against the mouth of the riu^r
hinder the water from f lling into the sea.
(...)

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE THIRD BOOK.
AND lest the provinces) Al from these words in the Latin copy ac ne mermes
prouinci etc. to these si placeret Galbae principatus, inclusiue, should be
placed before, quaesitu^ in de quae seeds bello legeretur etc. and so the
words vt innocuu^ exercitu^ Moesicum celebrare cohere with and praesumpsere
parts. Which disorder, by reason the lines and letters almost between
quaesitum inde and Moesicu^ celebrare are equal to the lines between ac ne
inermes and Galbae principatus, may seem to have grown first by the mere
transposition of a leaf in the copy, from whence al ours were derived.

2. Antonius taking with him certain etc) The Legions, their captains and
marching, with all necessary circu^sta^ces in a manner, are in this war fully
and plainly set down by our autour, incomparably better then either in the
last between Vitellius and Otho, or in the next between Ciuilis and the
Romans in Germany. Here Antonius Lieutenant of septima Galbiana marches
first, about the later end of August, or beginning of September, with
vexillarij e cohortibus, and part of the horse, making up no doubt a convenient
power, albeit there was not any entier Legion. With him went Arrius Varus, of
no higher degree at that time, a^ I think, then a Primus pilus, of what Legion
I cannot tell: but li. 4. p. 173. Tertia Legio is called familiaris Arrio Varo
miles: afterward, as it appears Hist. 4, he obtained the page 152.
captainshippe of the Guard, and page 154.
Praetoria insigniae, and being put by Mutianus from the captainshippe of the
Guard, was page 190.
made Praefectus annonae. At Patauium or thereabout the two Legions of Pannonia
ouertooke Antonius. p. 112, 13. namely septima Galbiana, whose Lieutenant was
Antonius himself, and tertiadecima Gemina with Vedius Aquila Lieutenant
thereof, the Lieutenant general also T. Ampius Flauianus, as it may be
presumed, coming withal: for we find him anon in the mutinee. At Verona
Aponius Saturninus President of Moesia with septima Claudiana, Vipsanius
Messalla being Lieutenant thereof, ouertooke them. page 111. and anon
afterward at Verona or thereabout the other two Legions of Moesia, tertia
Gallica with Dillius Aponianus, and octaua Augusta with Numisius Lupus. And
this was all the power that was present of the Flauian side at the battle of
Cremona, certain bands of old Praetorian soldiers excepted, whereof we
find page 118, 27. 119, 19 120, 11.
mention both in that field and elsewhere: but when and where they came to the
side is no where, as it ought, expressly set down. Of Vitellius part there
were present in the action of Cremona two co^plete legions, vnaetvicesima Rapax
which came out of Germany with Caecina, and Italica taken away from Lions by
Valens; and six imperfect legions out of Germany: to wit quarta, and
octauadecima alias duoetuicesima out of high Germany; prima, quinta,
quintadecima, and sextadecima out of low Germany. whereof six be named 2.
Hist. Saving that lin. 31. for quintadecima, quartadecina is written by error
of copy, which Legio^ was quite sent away into Bryta^nie before, p. 90 30.
p. 106. and p. 119. A little before the joining all the eight are set down
particularly, and by name. And beside the eight legions there were of that side
vexillarij out of the three British legions, secunda Augusta, nona, and
vicesima Victrix, part of the eight thousand which Vitellius brought out of
Germany e Britannico dilectu. Tacit. 2. Hist. p. 80, 21. p. 107, 1. 3. Hist.
p. 119, 5. and all this power under the charge of Caecina. After the battle at
Cremona victae legiones per Illyricum dispersae. Tac. p. 125, 7. The five
conquering legions, being increased by vndecima Claudiana, and six thousand men
beside out of Dalmatia, under the leading of Poppaeus Siluanus Lieutenant
general of that country, and Annius Bassus Lieutenant of the eleventh legion,
were left at Verona. Antonius with the Auxiliaries and lecti e legionibus
marched to Fanum Fortunae. Tacit. p. 131. At Fanum they sent for all their
power from Verona, p. 132, which ouertooke them at Carsulae. p. 137. On the
other side after that overthrow at Cremona Vitellius sent to Fabius Valens
three Praetorian cohorts with the British wing, p. 127, which were taken by
Cornelius Fuscus at Ariminium. p. 128. Then, p. 134. he sent both the captains
of his Guard with And three taken before at Ariminium. sum xvii. besides
others perchance left with Vitellius at Rome, and yet te^ was the ordinary
number of all, and in Vitellius time, when they were most but xvi. Tac. 2.
Hist. p. 104.
fourteen Praetoria^ cohorts and certain wings of horsemen, and a legion e
classicis different from Adiutrix Classica (which then was in Spain) and
belike newly enrolled. And this in effect was the power of both sides employed
in this action.

3. Flauianus departed away) It had been well Tacitus had made us acquainted
with the contents of these letters, which met him so maruelously, Tanquam ex
machina.
(...); as if Vespasian in Jury two months before had foreseen, that his good
friend Flauianus should have been suspected and misused by his soldiers at
Verona, and thereupon directed letters in his favor. Then where the letters so
luckily met him, or at all whither he went is not specified: but surely whither
soever it was, being once out of the soldiers singers, he was as I presume out
of all danger, at least any such as Vespasians letters could exempt him from.

4. Bassus was conveyed) Why remained he not still in the charge? why was he
committed, albeit it were custodia honorata, by those which favored Vespasian?
why sent to Adria? why there put into straiter prison, if Mennius were a friend
to Vespasians cause? if an enemy, why loosed at Hornius commandment, who was
Vespasians man? and what then became of him? when, by whom, and wherefore was
Mennius Rufinus put there in garrison? These petty circumstances, or some good
part had in my opinion been necessary in this place for the full satisfaction
of the reader.

5. The moon rose) The very same effects fell out upon the like cause, in the
night battle between Pompey and Mithridates described by Plutarch. page
1162. and Dio, page 12. But the Epitome of Dio, p. 211. sets this here down
somewhat otherwise then Tacitus. That is, The moon being eclipsed that night
increased the astonishme^t, not so much because she was darkened (although in
such as are afrighted such things also strike a terror) but because she seemed
bloody and ^la^kish and streaming out some other ^ea^ fa l^volous.
(...).

6. Under the conduct of M. Antonius) Some three or four years above an
hundredth year before, so that no one man, that served then with Antonius,
could in possibility now be here in this service* but we are to understand of
a Legion, as the lawyer says of a ship, that being repaired by peecemeale,
albeit in process of time there be no one stick remaining the same, yet does
it continue still the same ship although the Philosophers, says Plutarch,
are not yet fully agreed of the point, (...) is some defending it to remain
the same ship ^e^^^l, some denying it. The^eo p. 19.
(...).

7. Target sense) Testudo. The manner of Testudo and the vtility is very well
declared by Liuie lib. Fol. 3: 71
44. in these words. Quadrato agmine facto scutis super capita densatis
stantibus primis, secundis summissioribus, tertijs magis and quartis, postremis
etiam genu nixis fastigiatam, sicut tecta aedificioru^ sunt, testudinem
faciebant: vt alij armati superstantes propug natoribus muri fastigio
altitudinis aequarentur. Soli tamen in front extrema, and ex lateribus non
habehant super capita elata scuta, ne nudarent corpora, sed praetenta
pugnantium more^ita nec ipsos tela ex muro missa subeunteis laeserunt, and
testudini intecta imbris in modum lubrico fastigio innoxia ad imum labebantur.
Plu. Antonio. p. 1715. That is, The ^arg t bearer, kneeling o^ their knees hold
before the^ their target^, those which nex follow e^uer the^ with theirs, and
others them again, the form is very like the covering of a house, somewhat
also resembling a theat^e (...) of all other defense, is most sure against
arrows sliding down upon it.
(...). Now in case one Testudo would not serve to set their armed me^ high
enough to match them on the trenches or walls, they made, as I think, a
double Testudo, one upon another. Tacit. in the words following super iteratam
testudine^ scande^tes, albeit those words may receive also another
co^struction. The strength of targets so compacted together is declared by
Arrianus (...). 1. Whenas Alexander had to ascend the mount Haemus, the top
whereof was occupied by the enemies, who turned down mighty great carres upon
his army, he willed such as could not open their ranckes, and so give passage
to their violence, That is, To couche and fall to the ground, that the caries
coming down upon them and carried over the^ amain as it was likely, with their
own force might pass away without doing harm and as Alexander gesled so it
came to pass.
(...).

8. Of a disdainful traitor) Xiphilinus, p. 213, seems to say that upon
hanging out of their velamenta and insulae obtaining not pardon, they loosed
Caecina, and sent him in his Consular robes That is, To entreat for them, and
by his means obtained mercy.
(...), and by his means (...). Josephus 4. (...). c. 41. says that Antonius
loosed Caecina after his entry into the town. By Tacitus here it should seem
he went not to Antonius till after the soldiers had yielded.

9. This end had Cremona) In this battle, faieth Josephus (...). 4. cap. 41.
were slain of Vitellius side thirty thousand and two hundredth: of Antonius
soldiers sower thousand and five hundredth. Xiphilinus says that in Cremona,
with those which were slain in the field, dyed fifty thousand persons. The
time was about the later end of October about which time also, as it appears
by Tacitus, the news were brought to Rome of Caecinaes revolt.

10. A middle course) It may seem that Valens for his part resolved upon the
first opinion, that was accitis ex vrbe cohortibus valida manu perrumpere, but
the fault was in Vitellius who sent no more.

11. Men greedy of danger) Apud auidos periculorum. So be the words in our
copies, the meaning I know not; and the narration following I find in my
conceit to be somewhat imperfect* as wherefore Valens did send the power
rather to Ariminium into the enemies mouth, then back to Vitellius, if he meant
not to follow them himself. upon what intent and purpose he went into Vmbria
and Etruria, and what he would have done, if he had not had advertisement of
the battle at Cremona, unless it were to take the secret way now, which
before he refused, toward Hostilia and Cremona. Which circumstance surely
would not have been omitted.

12. page 142. Barbarous people also of the country) Others as I think beside
those which associated themselves with Anicetus: namely the Achaei, Heniochi,
and Cercaei dwelling of the other side of Pontus Euxinus, and according to
Strabo lib. 11.
living, as they are here described, by pyracie.

13. page 147. New treaties: Foedera socijs, Latium externis) that is, to our
socij their foedera were renewed with a further increase of exemptions and
privileges; and to forrainers that privilege was granted, that those which
had borne annual office with the^ should by that means become ciues Romani:
for that is the maine point of ius Latij. App. 2. (...). p. 216. That is,
Caesar had fomented the ^o. l ^in of (...) Common in the Ape and (...) it with
his (...) had (...) annual office thereby e ta^ thereof (...) citizens of
^^me. f^r son (...) Iu^^tj in porteth.
(...).

14. page 148. No less ominous) The breaking away of the beast at sacrifice
was among the Romans an ominous matter. Titus a little before his death Sabinos
petit, says cap. 10.
Suetonius, aliquanto tristior, quod sacrifica^ti hostia aufugerat. Ide^ cap.
5^.
Iulio. Cu^ immolanti aufugisset hostia, tamen profectione^ non distulit. and
cap 18.
Galba. Taurus securis ictu consternatus rupto vinculo essedu^ eius inuasit.
Festus. Ptacularia vocabant, quod sacrificantibus tristia portendebant: cum aut
hostia ab ara profugisset, aut percussa mugitum dedisset, aut in aliam partem
corporis quam oporteret decidisset. Plin. li. cap 45.
8. Notatum est vitulos ad aras humeris hominum allatos non litare, sicut nec
claudicante, nec aliena hostia deos placari, nec trahente s^ ab arts.

15 p. 159. As a pledge of the Empire) Liuius. l. 1. fol. 12. secutu^ aliud
magnitudine^ imperij porte^dens prodigium est. caput humanu^ integra facie
aperientibus fundamenta templi dicitur apparuisse: quae visa species haud per
ambages arcem eam imperij caputque reru^ fore portendebatadque ita cecinere
vates quique in vrbe erant, quosque ad eam rem consultandao^ ex Hetruria
acciuerat. Dionysius l. 4. p. 191. reports the words of the answer made to
certain messengers sent from Rome purposely into Etruria. That is, Men of Rome
go tell your citizens that the Gods have decreed, t at where his (...) was
found that place (...) the head of all (...)
(...). Varro l. 4. de lin. Latina. Capitolium dictum, quod hic, cum fundamenta
foderentur aedis Iou^^, caput humanu^ inuentu^ dicitur. hic mons ante Tarpeius
dictus a virgin Vestali Tarpeta, quae ibtab Sabinis necata armis and
sepultateius nominis monumentum relictum, quod etiam nunc eius rupes, Tarpeium
appellatur saxum. And this head so sound I take to be that pignus imperij here
in Tacitus.

16. page 159. Porsenna when the city was yielded) It must be that either
Tacitus followed some other tradition in this story the^ we have, as indeed by
Liuy it appears there were other, or else had forgotten himself in reporting
it. Of hostages given to Porsenna Dionysius lib. 5. and Liuy lib. 2. make
mention of surrendering the city I find no word spoken by any other we have
extant save Tacitus, to my remembrance.

17. page 159. Who laid also) According to Dionysius l. 3 p. 149.
Halic. Tarquinius Priscus did but only leuel the ground: Tarquinius Superbus
laid the fou^datio^s and builded most of it up, but did not co^su^mate the
work, That is, But the Temple was finished under the annual magistrates, the
third year after the C^nsuls come in.
(...). read the same Dionysius. l. 4. p. 190. and l. 5. p. 224. But it may
seem that Tacitus took hold of these words in Liuy. l. 1. f. 9. Tarquinius
Priscus area^ ad aede^ in Capitolio Iouis occup it fundame^tis. which
notwithstanding is not otherwise ^ment, but of leuelling the ground, and making
it ready for the laying of the foundation. for Superbus as it appears by the
same Liuy s. 12. was the man that laid the foundation. Of Seruius Tullius in
this building I have not sound mention elsewhere to my remembrance.

18. pa. 167. Seven and fifty year old) Vitellius was borne, says Suetonius,
Vit cap. 3.
Druso Caesare and Norbano Flacco Coss. which was ab vrbe condita the 768
year, the 24. of September, or as some say the seventh of the same month. The
day in which he went out of the Palace with intention to resign the Empire
was, according to Tacitus, the 18. of December in anno 822. the day following
being the 19. of Dece^ber the Capitol was burned, the Beside the circumstances
in Tacitus Josephus 4 (...). c. 42 expres^ely says (...) (of the burning of
the Capitol) (...). 1. page 172.
twe^tieth of December Antonius entered into the town, and the death of
Vitellius ensued. Al which does appear plainly by the course of the story of
Tacitus. So that from his birth to his death we have no more by just account
but fifty four years, and as much as is between the seventh or four and
twentieth of September, and the 20. of December.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE FOVRTH BOOK.
WAS PRETENDED) Triumphs, and Triumphalia ornamenta, which succeed in their
place, were awarded upon great service done, and upon some notable conquest
obtained against a forrayne enemy: at least never any man in the Roman state
made profession of triumphing de ciuibus victis, L. Sylla, says Valerius,
lib. 3, qui plurima bella ciuilia confecit, cum consummata ac constructa
potentia sua triumphum duceret, vt Groeciae and Asiae multas vrbes, ita ciuium
Romanorum nullum oppidum vexit. Appian. 2. (...) 243. (...).
Caesar after he had ended the civil wars, albeit he spared in show to
truimph de victis ciuibus, and chose rather the name of King Iuba for the title
of his African triumph, then of Scipio, Cato, or Afranius, who were Generals in
the field, yet went he further then Sylla, carrying their images and pictures
in triumph, and Dio. lib. 43. p. 146. (...).
grieuing thereby the people of Rome. Augustus, having overcome at Actium
Antonius and Cleopatra, entitled likewise his triumph upon the woman, omitting
the man, (...). true it is, that oftentimes finding small cause of triumph over
an external enemy, and not daring to name the citizen, diverse colors, as
here, have been used.

2. Of Tarracina) Italy by Augustus was divided into eleven regions. Pliny.
lib. 3. cap. 15. Regio prima is from the river of Tiber to Surentum, or rather
to the river of Silarus thirty miles beyond (for the limit of that side is
doubtfullie set down in Pliny) containing Latium, Campania and Picentini.
Regio secunda, from Metapontum in sinu Tarentino, to the river of Tifernus in
mari Adriatico, comprehends Salentini, Calabria, Apulia etc. Regio tertia,
between Silarus and Metapontum, contains Lucani, Brutii and magna Groecia.
Regio quarta extends from Tifernus to the river Aternus likewise upon the
Adriaticum, and incloseth Ferentini, Peligni, Sanmium etc. Regio quinta is from
Aternus to Ancona, including Picenum. Regio sexta contains Vmbria, and the
coast between Ancona and Ariminium. Regio septima comprehends Hetruria
between the river of Macra and Tiber. Regio octaua is the country which lies
by west from the limits of the sixth region, between the Apennin and the Po,
comprehending Ariminium, Rauenna, Bononia, Brixellum, Mutina, Parma, Placentia
etc. Regio nona is from the river of Macra, to the river of Varus, containing
Liguria Regio decima contains Venetia: and Regio vndecima Gallia Transpadana.
Now for thi^ place, it was in the old copies of Tacitus regione Italiae
without any addition of number, and Tarracinae municipio doubtfully written,
sometimes Tarentium municip. sometimes Tarentinae municip. and sometimes
Tarentino* indeed it may seem strange, that he should so solemnly describe
and note out Tarracina, a town so famously known, and so near unto Rome* but
howsoever, this is more strange, that allowing it to be Tarracina, some have
inserted septima to fill up the sense, and some secunda, whereas Tarracina is
clearly and evidently in prima regione Italiae.

3. Counsel Heluidius) And Heluidius, for not obeying better this counsel of
Eprius Marcellus, lost his life even under Vespasian a good and moderate
Prince. Suetonius cap. 15.
Vespasiano. Heluidio Prisco, qui reuersum ex Syria solus priuato nomine
Vespasianum salutauerat, and in praetura omnibus edictis sine honor ac
mentione vlla transmiserat, non ante succensuit quam altercationibus
insolentissimis pene in ordinem redactus. Hunc relegatum prima, deinde
interfici iussum, missis qui percussores reuocarent, seruasset, nistiam
perijsse falso nuntutum esset. Probus. Eluidius Priscus post damnationem soceri
Poeti Thraseae, interdicta sibi Ita^s Apolloniam concessit, sed post
interfectum Neronem restitutus a Galba, non aliter quam libero ci^tatis statu
egit. See Arrian also libro primo, cap. secundo dissert. Epicteti.

4. P. Celer) Publius Egnatius Celer a chieffe witness produced against Barea
So^nus. Tac. 16. page 558.
Ann. Cliens hic (speaking of Egnatius) Sorani, and tunc emptus ad opprimend^
amicum auctoritatem Stoicae sectae praeferebat habitu and ore ad exprimendam
imaginem honesi^ exerciti, caeterum animo persidiosus and subdolus, auaritiam
ac libidinem occultans. quae post qu^ pecunia reclusa sunt, dedit exemplum
praecauendi, quomodo fraudibus inuolutos, aut flagitijs immaculatos, sic specie
bonarum artium falsos, and amicitiae fallaces. Iuuenalis.

Stoicus occidit Baream delator amicum,
Discipulumque senex --
The scholiast upon Iuuenal touches another particularity. Egnatius
philosophus filiam Bareae Sorani, cum ipsius ad magicam descendisset hortatu,
Neroni detulit.

5. At the naked and bare names of Legions) In Germany at this time were six
imperfect Legions, or rather names of Legions, as he terms them here: in
high Germany, at Magontiacu^, two, quarta Macedonica and octauadecima alias
duoetvicesima, beside eight Batauian cohortes. In lower Germany, at Bonna,
prima legio: beneath it, at Nouesium sextadecima; and lowest of all, at Vetera
quinta and quintadecima, both under Mummius Lupercus. The two last were in this
war utterly destroyed, and their camperazed. Tac. p. 185. and 186.
Sextadecima and prima, after Hordeonius death, yielded themselves to the enemy,
p. 185, and were by the enemies appointment removed to Triers, p. 186. and 187:
the^ of their own accord they went to the Mediomatrici, p. 192, and from
thence were sent for by Cerealis and received into grace. The two Legions also
at Magontiacum yielded themselves to the enemy at the same time, and were not
removed from their camp, who upon Cerealis coming returned again to the
Romans. Tac. p. 185, 18. 186, 23. 191, 27. The eight Batauian cohortes revolted
at the very first beginning of the war to Ciuilis. Now in supply of these so
reuolting, yielding themselves, and being slain, there were assigned under the
leading of Petilius Cerealis seven Legions, says Tacitus, p. 190. to wit
sexta Victrix, which came with Mutianus out of Syria, and octaua Augusta, one
of the Moesian Legions (for so it should be read, not octaua decima, there
being none of that name inter victrices) vnaetvicesima Rapax: secunda, surnamed
as I think Flauia, e recens conscriptis: quartadecima Gemina out of Britannie:
sexta Ferrata, and decima Gemina out of Spain* for whereas the common copies
of Tacitus p. 190. have tertia ac prima ex Hispania accitae, there was no
tertia then in Spain, and that the Spanish sexta was in this action, we find
expressly set down lib. 5. Hist. p. 210. True it is, that a prima surnamed
Adiutrix was in Spain: but seeing we find, li. 5. p. 211. twice mention of
decima, lin. 16. and 30, a Spanish Legion, we must say, that either all the
Legions of Spain were called away, against probability, or else that prima, p.
190, should be read decima. So that following these corrections, in the later
end of this war against the Germans and French, we have at one time eleven
Legions employed by the Romans.

Superioris Germaniae Quartae, as it seems, was without Lieuetenant, at least
in this story none is named, and peradventure V^tellius had taken him away, but
surely Didius Vocula although by office but only Legate of the xiix. alias the
xxii* executed no doubt both the charges.
Quarta Macedonica, Octauadecima alias Duoetvicesima: Didius Vocula legatus. p.
165, 2.
Inferioris Germaniae Prima: Herennius Gallus legatus. p. 162, 21. Sextadecima:
Numisius Rufus legatus, as I think, p. 185, 10.
Sexta Victrix, e Syriacis. Octaua Augusta, e Moesicis. Vnaetvicesima Rapax, e
Vitellianis. Secunda Flauia, e recens conscriptis. Quartadecima Gemina, e
Britannicis. Sexta Ferrata ex Hispanicis. Decima Gemina. ex Hispanicis.
6. Mummius Lupercus) Belike Vitellius left the Legions not only bare of men,
and as it were half Legions (for in these two Legions were not above five
thousand men) but disfurnished of captains also, leaving here but one
Lieutenant over two Legions. and yet page 163, lin. 27. as though he had
forgotten himself, we find another, tanquam ex machina, to wit Numisius
Legati legionu^ Mummius Lupercus and Numisius Rufus vallum murosque firmabant
Rufus. of whose coming into Vetera as we find no reason, so we find him in
another page 185. 10.
place out of Vetera with less reason, if he were there from the beginning,
why does Tacitus tell us here, that Lupercus alone duarum Legionum hibernis
praeerat? if not, how and when came he? and specially how, and when went he
out? But in the setting down of this German war there are in my opinion many
little imperfections and negligences, whereof part we will touch, as occasion
shall serve, but most of them we have supplied, and explaned in the contents
of the chapters, and by inserting sometimes a word or two into the text, as by
comparing the books it will appear.

7. The cohorts of the Batauians and Caninefates) These are the octo cohortes
Batauorum quartaedecimae legionis auxilia, so often mentioned in the first and
second of the History, and now remaining at Magontiacum, whither Ciuilis sent
secret messengers to solicit them to the party, as it appears in this page
159.
book and albeit in none of the places before remembered there is any mention
of Caninefates, yet by this place it is to be intended, (...) to foresee that
no prejudice should grow to the common wealth by that means. In the second
Punicke war, new religions being brought in by the means of certain lewd
books of prophesies, says lib, 25.
Liuie, Incusati grauiter ab senatu Aediles, Triumuirique capitales, quod non
prohiberent* and as in this place of Tacitus the Triumuiri had the charge, so
in another of the same Tacitus we read the Aediles. Tacit. 4. Ann.
Libros Cremutij Cordi per Aediles cremandos censuere patres. The usual and
solemn place of this execution was in Comitio, a part of Forum Romanum. Liu.
lib. 40. Libri Numae de iure Pontificio in Comitio, igne a victimarijs facto,
in conspectu populi cremati sunt.

5. The professors of wisdom) Suetonius cap. 10.
Domitiano. Aru^nus Rusti^us in Tacitus.
Iunium Rusticum (interemit Domitianus) quod Poeti Thraseae, and According to
Tacitus not of Heluidius Priscus but of Thrasea alone.
Heluidij Prisci lauds edidisset, appellaretque eos sanctissimos viros, cuius
criminis occasion philosophos omnes vrbe Italiaque su^mouit. Sulpicia a
poetesse of that time: Nunc igitur quires Romanas imperat inter
Et studia, and sapiens hominum nomenque, genusque,
Omnia abire for as, atque vrbe excedere iussit.


page 238.
Xiphilinus: That is, Nero put Arulenus Rusticus to death because he studied
philosophy, and because he termed Thrasea Verum sanctum* he put also Herennius
Senecio to death because he had written the life of ^eluidius Priscus* and many
other beside for this crime of ph^losophy lost their lives and all of the
profession were banished out of the City.
(...).

6. Forum Iulium) A town seated in litore Narbonensi, distant from Massilia 75
miles, as Strabo lib. 4.
reckeneth. Of the same name there were also in Italy, but none so famous as
this. The present estate whereof is described very well (as all other things)
by that excellent chancellor of France, Michael Epist. lib 5
Hospitalis.

Inde forum Iuliparuam nunc venimus vrbem:
Apparent veteris vestigia magna theatri,
Ingentes arcus, and thermae, and ductus aquarum;
Apparet moles antiqui diruta portus,
Atque vbi portus erat, siccum nunc litus and horti.
7. None of the judicial places) That is, he was neither Praetor vrbanus, nor
peregrinus, which were the two places of civil causes, properly called by the
name of Iurisdictio. To the rest belonged cognition of criminal causes, as de
Ambitu, Repetundis, Falso, veneficijs, etc. properly called by the name of
Quaestiones, and under the Emperors handled before the Praefectus vrbis,
rather then their own Praetor, which at those times carried not much more then a
bare name.

8. Plays) To give plays and pastimes to the people seems to have been at
the first the Aediles peculiar charge, and afterward common to all magistrates
in a manner, Quaestors, Praetors, Consuls etc. Of Praetors it is plain by these
words of Cassius to Brutus in Plutarch; That is, Of other Praetors men do
expect and re^^ite latgesses, stage-p ayes and Gladiatores* but at your hands
they expect a matter of more importan^e.
(...).

9. Patritians) One of the fundamental divisions in the Roman state was in
Patres, sieve Patritios and plebeios. The Patriti^ were all made by Romulus, as
Liuy reports, Senators and counselors of state: as Dionysius, out of the
Patritii the Senators were elected. Hostilius uniting Alba to Rome, Principes
Albanorum in Patres, vt ea quoque pars reip. cresceret, legit, Iulios,
Seruilios, Quinctios, Geganios, Curatios, Cloelios. After whom the elder
Tarquinius, non minus regni sui firmandi, quam augendae reip: memor, centum in
patres legit, qui deinde minorum gentium sunt appellati. Liu. lib. 1. And when
the kings were cast out, quo plus virium in senatu frequentia etiam ordinis
faceret, caedibus regis deminutum Patrum numerum, primoribus equestris gradus
lectis, ad trecentorum summam expleuit Brutus. and five years after, Appius
Claudius, fleeing with his faction from the Sabins to Rome, inter Patres Liu
lib 2.
lectus est; being the last, I remember, upon whom in the free state that
honor was conferred, to be made a Patritian. The emperors many years after
upon the like causes, or to pleasure their friends, renewed the custom. ^ue^
nec 41.
Julius senatum suppleuit, Patritios allegit. Then Augustus, That is, Augustus
by permi^^ion, is he would b^^e it seem, of the Senate, supplied the number of
the Patritian^, whereof the most part was decayed nothing in civil wars
going so much to the walls as the ancient nobility. ^^c. lib 52 page 334.
(...). And Claudius. Iisdem diebus in numerum Patritiorum asciuit Caesar
(Claudius) vetustissimum quemque e senatu, aut quibus clari parents fuerunt,
paucis tam reliquis familiarum, quas Romulus maiorum, and L. Brutus minorum
gentium appellauerat, exhaustis etiam quas dictator Caesar lege Cassia, and
princeps Augustus lege Se^ia sublegere. Tac. 11. Annal. And lastly, as it may
here appear, Vespasian, after whose time I find no mention of any such
subrogation* only I find that Constantine the great under the old name of
Patricii induced a new kind of office, and honor superior to the Prefecti
Praetorio. Zosimus. That is, Op^^^s had (...)
(...). and of Patritius in this sense we read often in the times of the later
emperors.

10. A pontifical dignity) Of all the colleges of Priests, in Rome being
many in number, that of the Pontifices was of the supremest authority,
consisting of four, afterward four more were added, and the number by Sylla
further augmented, eligible in the free state by chapter, sometime by the
people, afterward appointed by the Prince. The head of this college was called
Pontifex maximus, an honor resia^t in the Emperors person even from the time
of Julius, in whom the Empire, and Pontificatus first by chance were united,
and continued even in the Christian Emperors, till Gratian cast of both the
name, and the attire. Zosimus ^
lib. 4. (...) Ch^^ we^^ at atti^^
(...). and afterward Theodosius, as the same (...) 77.
Zosimus and Symmachus report, dissolved the college of the Pontifices, and
all the rest of the Priests, and confiscated the revenues. The name of
Pontisex, says Varro, lib. 4. de lingua Lat. is deduced a ponte, named is
Sublicius est factus primum, and restitutus saepe. Zosimus deriueth the name
from an ancient custom among the Thessalia^s, where before the use of temples,
the images of the gods being placed upon the bridge of the river Peneus, the
priests thereof were named (...).

11. To a long dish, or two edged axe) Scutula, used by Tacitus here, and
Martial. lib. 11. Epigr. 32. and scutella by Tully, signifies a dish usually
served at table, and to Sortella is A^^rg^^ ^^te.
(...) by Censorinus cap. 18. resembled, whose definition by Euclide is this
(for in Censorinus the place is corrupted) That is, A figure ^^^led with some
sides having g^^^ the angles right, but not all the sides equal
(...). like to the figure. A. although by this place of Tacitus it may seem,
that not all Scutulae were (...), but some of some other fashion for he adds
oblongae, A Scutula Cuneus.


The figure of whole Brita^nie occording to Tacitus.


limiting as it were the generality of the word. Bipennis, says Quintilian,
institut. orator. lb. 1, securis vtrinque habens aciem, a pinna quod est
acutum. Now how well the part of Br tanny here described resembles the axe, or
the dish, or one of them the other (although twolike to a third ought in good
Geometry to be like together) because I see not my self, I am content to
leave it to others. One thing I see, that many good writers have had but ill
luck in such kind of rese^blances. Strabo Aristotle 2. Meteor: likeneth the
know part of the world Tympano
likeneth the known part of the world to a (...).
cloak, and Dionysius Afer to a (...)
sling (being much like the one to the other) and both of them Spain to an
oxehyde, Rutilius Numatianus Italy to an oken leaf; and the same Dionysius
Versu 277.
Africa and Europe to a Conusisosceles; (...).
Pelopennese That is, To the mouse-tayle-li^el^ ate of Playnti^e.
(...).

12. The extreme and plain parts) A place in mine opinion very hard to be well
understood, or at least, made good. For he seems to say, that the extreme
parts of the world being plain, the night therefore is nothing, or short,
which imports as much, as if the night were nothing else, but when the sun
hides it self behind some mountain or other* or else, that albeit the earth
toward the midst was globose and bossed, yet was it toward the poles flattish
and plain. Very vulgar conceits in so great a man, and yet in the text infra
coelum and sidera nox cadit, by nox is meant, I suppose, vmbraterrae, as out of
the bowels of art; and the lowness of the shadow proiected is the cause of the
shortness of the nights* but the lowness proceeds not neither of mountain,
nor plain, but because the sun in the summer season runs his course
almost all above ground in those countries toward the poles, and when it does
set, by reason of the inclination of his circle to the Horizon, descends not
directly, but passes obliquely razing as it were under their Horizon* yet one
of the page* 23^.
Panegyrists, as though Tacitus had delivered us here matter worthy of
imitation, has taken the pains to assume this hye point of learning ad verbum
into his oration.

13. Pearls) Marcellinus page ^64.
lib. 23. Apud Indos and Persas margaritae reperiuntur in testis marinis
robustis and candi^is, permixtione roris anni tempore praestituto conceptae.
Cupientes enim velut co^tum quendam humoris, ex lunari aspergine capiunt
deusius oscitando. Exind^que grauidae edunt minutas binas aut ternas, vel
unions sic appellatas quod eius terrae conchulae singulas aliquoties, pariunt,
sed maiores. Idque indicium est aetherea potius deriuatione quam saginis pelagi
hos oriri foetus and vesci quod guttae matutini roris usde^ infusae claros
essiciunt lapillos and teretes: vespertine vero, fluxuosos co^tra and rutilos,
and maculosos interdu^. M^mma aute^ vel magna pro qualitate haustuu^ figurantur
casibus variatis. Concussae vero saepissime met u fulguru^ manescu^t, aut
debilia pariunt, aut certe vitijs desluunt abortiuis. Capturas aut e^
difficiles and periculosas, and amplitudines pretioru^ illa efficit ratio, quod
frequentari sueta littora propter piscantiu^ insidias declinantes, vt quidam
conuciunt, circa deuios scopulos, and marinorum canum receptacula delitescunt.
Quod genus gemmae etiam in Britannici secessibus maris gigni legique, licet
dignitate dispari, no^ ignoramus. And to the like purpose speaks Pliny also
l. 9. cap. 35.
In Britannia paruos atque decolores unions nasci certu^ est: whereas the
commendation of pearl consists in ca^dore, magnitudine, or be, leuore,
po^dere. But in hope of the British, such as they were, Julius Caesar, says
cap. 47.
Suetonius, first went into Britanny, and ex it is contextum thoracem Veneri
genitrici consecrauit. Pliny.

14. p. 245. Policy) Co^siliu^. As in a natural body too little is imperfect;
too great vnwealdy; so in a politic, both the extremities are weak, and not
defe^sible, although peradventure as well in the one body as in the other,
Fullness.
(...) induces less danger generally, the^ ^m^tinesse.
(...) does. This inconvenience Augustus wisely foreseeing in his time, whe^as
the Roman empire was growe^ to that greatness, vt ia^ mole laboraret sua, says
Liuy, restrained first of all that infinite desire of enlarging. of which act as
a thing most advisedly done Iulianus Caesaribus brings Augustus himself
discoursing in these words. That ^, The assures of the (...) I settled s^ that
^t was ^ecome as strong and as hard to make a breach in^o at a dia ^at. (...) I
yielded not to: s ^nmeasurable desires of conquering (...) more and more. b
^^ontented my se^fe with th^^ two limits, ^i^ were appointed b^ natu e, of
Danubius and ^u phrite^. afterwardeth Gods sparing me longer life I vnd^rtooke
^ome nec ssary matters, and those dispatche^ sought not occasion to make still
war upon war.
(...), etc. After the death of Augustus a book was produced written with his
own hand, in the which, says Tac. 1. Ann. opes publicae co^tineba^tur,
qua^tu^ ciuiu^ socio^u^que in armis, quo^ classes, regna, prouinciae, tributa,
aut vectigalia, et necessitates, aclargitiones, addider atque in super
Co^siliu^, says he, using the sa^e word in both places speaking of the sa^e
matter, coerte^di intra terminos imperij, incertu^ metu, an per inuidia^, Dio.
l. 56. He gau^ the^ adu se to content themselves w th ^^eir present estate and
in no case to seek to enlarge the ^^^tes of the Empire. for it wou^d be both
hard to be kept, and ^^danger, he sa^d even that which they had. and thi^
precept he always observed him self not only in word but in deed and
effect (...) using, ^h na^ with great facility he might, to conquer any more
of the barbarous nat^^^s.
(...).

15. p. 250. To buy corn) The Romans, beside tribute, imposed upon the
cu^treies subdued, such at least as yielded commodity thereof, a proportion in
corn, commonly the tenth part and beside for the provision of the Lieutena^t,
and soldiers maintained there, and other like purposes, at a reasonable price.
In gathering whereof the purueiours and takers, and sometime the head officers
used many co^cussions and unlawful exactio^s, as appears at large in Tullies
fifth oration against Verres. In Britanny it seemed the Romans had engrossed
all the corn of the country and instituting a monopoly thereof compelled the
poor Britans to buy at their hands and their price, and by and by laying a
new charge upon the^, as to vittaile the army, or such like, to sell it again
under foot. Moreover the carttakers for carriage of provision from Canterbury,
for example, to London, would take up carts at C^erlil, or make them pay well
to be spared, whereas the same thing might have been done without any
molestation at all of the subject, but not with like gain to the officers.
These abuses, or other of this kind, are meant in this place, as I understand
it, submitting my judgment herein to men of better experience that way.

16. p. 263. The most capital kind of enemies, co^me^ders) To hurt or
disgrace by way of co^mendatio^. albeit it seems a strange positio^ at the
first sight, yet may be, and daily is, both easily and diversely performed. For
example: To commend a man to his Prince for those qualities, wherein the
Prince himself either by his place ought to excel, or otherwise upon some
special fancy affects to excel, and principally if he find any weakness
that way in himself, is one of the most subtle, ready, and pernicios means to
work a great man in disgrace with his Prince. Whether that humor were with the
rest infused into us at our beginning, I know not; but I surely believe, that
no man lives so utterly void of good parts, but that he supposes he has
some special gift above most me^ some way or other the nature and motions of
which humor who so can mark and observe in his Prince, to take where advantage
is offered, and work as the matter does yield, shall seldom want means to do
harm: to note wherein they delight and please themselves, being as ready a
means to do hurt, eue^ with the good Princes, as to Metus principis rim^r, as
Tig Ilinus d d with Nero. s^e ^acitus 14. An p. 504.
feel and search out, what they feared, has been with the bad. For if all
kind of riuality breed in private men causes of grudge and dislike, what may
the subject attend from his Prince (whose mind, as his body. is more tender,
and more apt to receive offensive impressions) in so great means to offend, but
assured destruction, be the concurrency founded upon never so small, and
trifling a point? Diodorus li. 15 p. 461. (...).
Dionysius the elder, upon some gentle phrenesy, having a desire to become in
his old days a writer of Tragedies, hated, imprisoned, and tortured
Philoxenus the poet, who seemed to stand in his light. Obiiciebant etia^
eloquentiae laude^ vni sibi asciscere, and carmina crebrius fictitare, postquam
Neroni amor eorum venisset. Tacit.
The first disgrace of Seneca with Nero was grounded upon a suppose, that
Seneca sought to excel him in eloquence, and making of verses; unto which
studies the Prince in those days had wholly betaken himself. and in his later
times settling his fancy and love upon singing and playing in stages, qualities
unseemly for his estate, Sueton. Nerone. cap 54.
he cast out of favor, and then made away Paris the stageplaier, as his
concurrent in that profession. Now by way of commendation Poppaea Sabina
commending the gentlemanly qualities of Otho, albeit she did it to another
intent, yet wrought she unawares his Tac. 13. Ann. p. 471. deticitur
familiaritate sueta, post congressu and comitatis Otho: and postremo ne in vrbe
aemulatus ageret. prouinciae Lusitaniae praeficitur.
discredit with the same Nero. And for my part I am not resolved, how an
excellent poet of our time observed co^gruity, which before a Prince, that
esteemed it more then his crown to be accounted the most beautiful personage
in the world, makes one extol his own brother so highly, yea and prefer
him also before the king himself in that point, being a point so prone to
engender emulation, and emulatio^ in that kind, dangerous effects. But above
all other kinds of co^mendations, that touches most nearly, and works most
danger, where the quality commended breeds not only love, but admiration
also generally among the mean people; as militar renown, magnanimity,
patronage of justice against al oppressio^s and wrongs, magnifice^ce and other
Heroical virtues properly belonging, or chiefly beseeming the Princes person.
And this being general to al in some measure, no Prince in the world having his
mind so well armed against this cunning but that some breach may be made at
some seasons into it, yet there it works both most speedily, and dangerously,
where the Prince, as before I have said, is a witness to himself of his own
weakness. For as it is true, that Alienae virtuti nemo inuidet, qui confidit
suae, so is it true also, that insufficiency is most apprehensiue and envious.
Suetonius Vespasiano. c. 14. vt suspicione aliqua vel metis ad perniciem
cuiusquam compelleretur, ta^tum absuit vt monentibus amicis cauendum esse
Metium Pompesianu^, quod vulco crederetur genesim habere imperatoria^, insuper
Cos. lecerit. spondens qua^doque beneficij memorem futurum.
Vespasian and other great Princes, standing upon their own might, and the
strength of their virtues, could easily digest, that one should be said, for
example, to have imperatoriam genesim, yea and preferred him also to place of
credit, adding in jest, that he would perhaps remember it one day, whereas with
Domitia^ a Prince vmbrageous and fearful, because of himself he was nothing,
no way was found more fit to bring Agricola in disfavor, then by commending
his excellent virtues. In like manner certain of Co^stantius court, whereas
they could not justly speak ill, by the same strategeme of praising in
audience of their master, a ielous and suspicious Prince because he was weak
and unable, brought Iulia^ in hatred, as Mamertinus declares at large in his
Panegyricke p. 163. Cum (Iuliani) sancti principis mores atque instituta,
falsaru^ vituperationum licentiam submouerent, callido nocendi artisicio
accusatoria^ diritate^ laudu^ titulis peragebant, in omnibus conue^ticulis
quasi per beneuolentia^ illa iactantes, Iulianus Alamaniam domuit: Iulianus
vrbes Galliae ex fauillis and cineribus excitauit. Aestates omnes in castris,
hyemes in tribunalibus degit: ita illi anni spatia diuisa sunt, vt aut barbaros
domitet, aut ciuibus iura restituat, perpetuum professus aut contra hostem, aut
contra vitia certamen. Hae voces fuerunt ad infla^manda odia probris omnibus
potentiores. St. n. comminisci aliqua flagitia tentassent, facile ipso
splendore laudis and gloriae refutarentur: inuenerunt accusandi genus quod
nullus refelleret. Another kind of hurting by way of co^mendatio^ is touched
by Polybius, whereof he gives us in the fourth book of his story an example
in the person of Apelles a cou^sailour, and one in chief credit with Philippe
of Macedonie father of Perseus: who being desirous to remove Taurion, governor
of Peloponese, from his charge, and place some creature of his in his room,
told Philippe his master, that Taurion was a most singular man, and fit in
all respects to serve nearer, counsailing him thereupon to send for him home,
and place him about his own person, craftily calling him by that means from
an honorable, and almost absolute government thither, where he should live in
equality with others, and be subject to check as one of the meany: great men
in this point somewhat resembling the moon, which although she fetch her
light from the sun, and eftsoons resorteth thither again to receive new
influence and virtue, yet in her prime turns her dark face toward the world,
and shines then brightest, when she is furthest removed. Albeit in later
times the contrary example has been more usual in courts, by way of
commendation to remove one from about the Prince and send him out of the way,
under pretense that he is the only fit man for such and such a service
abroad. Many other kinds might be reckened of this sort of sophistry, as to
commend a man publickely, where it can do no good (beside that it makes the
party secure of all danger from thence) and secretly dispraise him, where it
should do much harm. Manlius Valens, says Tacitus, 1. Hist; quanquam been
de partibus meritus, nullo apud Vitellium honor fuit. secretis eum
criminationibus infamauerat Fabius ignarum, and, quo incautior deciperetur,
palam laudatum. Or else to commend in generalities, and so having wunne the
opinion of a friend in the Princes ears, consequently to disable to this or
that particular, which shall be in question; with such like deceites, which the
malice of courtiers heretofore has invented, and daily inuenteth plentifully.
For in court, says (...). p. 136.
Polybius, this malice was found, and in court it remains.

17. A good man you would easily think him: etc Bonum virum facile crederes,
magnum libenter.) Et te Corneli Tacit bonum historicum facile credimus, bonum
oratorem crederemus libenter, were it not for this and some other sayings of
the like making. Fuit illi viro, says 13. Annal.
Tacitus judging of Seneca, as we may of him, ingenium amoenum, and temporis
illius auribus accommodatum. How that age was eared, long or round, I cannot
define: but sure I am it yielded a kind of Sophisticate eloquence, and riming
harmony of words, wherevnder was small matter in sense, when there seemed to
be most in appearance. This kind of Rhetoric was induced into Groecia by the
teachers of Oratory in school, whose judgments use and experience had not
refined: first by Gorgias, as it may well appear by that little of his which is
left; then by Isocrates and his disciples, and being refused by that judicious
nation found favor in some corners of Asia, til at length the use of eloquence
decaying in common wealth, and the study thereof remaining in schools, that
bastard Rhetoric returned again, yielding us in steed of the soundly
contrived sentences of Demosthenes, AEschines, Hyperides, the paintings of
Aristides, Philostratus, Dio Chrysostomus, and others, though not without
opposition of many, as Dionysius, Lucian and such like. The ancient Romans
sucking the best from the Greeks, when they were at their best failed not much
that way, unless peradventure we may reckon Hortensius as one of the number:
for so Tully in Bruto seems to describe him. But of the later, whom have we
almost not infected with that heresy of style begun by Seneca, Quintilian, the
Plinies, and Tacitus, continued in their successors the Panegyrists, and
lastly conveyed to Christian religion by Cyprian, Ambrose, Augustine, Bernard
etc? For a taste of this affectation in Tacitus, 1. Hist. p. 15: Rara te^porum
foelicitate vbi sentire quae velis, and quae sentias dicere licet. p. 20:
Inchoauere annum sibi vltimum, reip. prope supremum. p. 22: Secundae res
acrioribus stimulis animum explorant, quia miseriae tolera^tur, foelicitate
corrumpimur. p. 37: Quatriduo Caesar properata adoptione, ad hoc tantum matori
fratri praelatus vt prior occideretur. p. 46: Et vno amne discretis connexum
odium. p. 54: Redieruntque in castra inuiti neque innocents. p. 34: Nec illos
priores and futuri principes terruere, quo minus facerent scelus cuius vltor
est quisquis successit. p. 45: Quaeque alia placamenta hostilis irae non quidem
in bello sed pro pace tendebantur. 2. Hist. p. 88: Et Vitellius credidit de
perfidia and fidem absoluit. 3. Hist. p. 143: Arserat and ante Capitolium sed
fraud priuata: nunc palam obsessum, palam incensum. with many more of the same
mark.

FINIS.
A VIEW OF CERTAIN MILITAR matters, for the better understanding of the
ancient Roman stories.
SERVICE in war is by land, or by water. The Roman service by land was
either at home in the City, or external abroad. The external consisted
principally in Legiones and Auxilia; a known division in the Roman stories.
Liuius lib. 8. fol. 91. Pro exercitu, legionibus, auxilijs P. R. legiones
auxiliaque hostium mecum dijs manibus deuoueo. most frequent in Tacitus. 1.
Hist. p. 27. infecit ea tabes legionum quoque and auxiliorum motas iam mentes.
13. Ann. p. 451. Copiae orientis ita diuiduntur, vt pars auxiliarium cum duabus
Legionibus apud Quadratum remaneret, par ciuium, sociorumque numerus Corbuloni
esset. Where also we see he varieth the words legiones and auxilia by two
equivalent in the later member ciues and socij. And Liuius lib. 7. fol. 84. F.
ciuilis exercitus and socialis coetus, meaning the Roman Legions and Latin
Auxilia. Legio, says Varro, lib. 4. de lingua Latina, quod To this etymology
of the word Galba no doubt alluding answered the soldiers, which demanded ^o
native; legi a se militem non emi.
leguntur milites in delectu, dicta est. The Grecians translate it diuersely:
some (...); some others (...), or (...) in respect of their standing camps,
which were fortified and vvalled, and gave occasion in the later times to the
founding of many great cities in the Empire.

LEGIO was divided into Pedites and Equites: although peradventure sometimes by
Legions and also by Auxilia the footmen alone are intended, as being the more
principal part. The other two kinds of service in field, by charets and
Elephants, either were never in the Roman state, or were not ordinary, and
even so were quickly laid down. The manner of fighting out of charets, a
matter so often recorded not only by poets in those fabulous times, but also
by the vvriters of the sacred story, may seem to have been in a sort proper
to those Heroica tempora, and by general consent of the world (some few
barbarous nations excepted, who are always best keepers of customs) laid
aside, beside the vnwealdines, peradventure because to furnish out one fighting
man in that case The man that sighteth, the cochman, and two horses at the
least.
four mouths were to be fed, and four bodies armed, of which any one
failing the service of all four was at an end. The other by Elephants was
ancient, and continued long among the Eastern and Southerlie nations, the
cuntreyes yielding good store of those beasts: by the Romans seldom used, not
for that they lacked the breed (for what would they lack, that either could
serve for use or delight? and of those creatures they would kill for their
pleasure hundreths at once in their Theaters) but because they utterly disliked
the service, as ambiguous, turning as often to the hurt of the owner as of the
enemy. Whereof they saw good proof in the army of Pyrrhus, who first brought
them into Italy: in which, as L. ^lorus lib. 1. cap. 18.
one says, eaedem ferae, quae primam victoriam Romany abstulerant, secundam
parem fecerant, tertiam sine controuersia tradiderunt. The Eastern nations
also found them at the length unserviceable (...). Diodor. Sic. l. 19. pa. 717.
for the tenderness of their hoofes, and diverse other respects: and so they
remain generally laid aside. Now for the number of Pedites and Equites in a
Legion, Romulus at the foundation of Rome, after the misfortune of Remus
wherein many perished, had only three thousand footmen, and three hundredth
horsemen remaining. Dionys. page 56. 59. 67.
lib. 1. and 2. of which number he composed his Legion at the very first
beginning of Rome according to Plutarch. That is Whe^as the city was built,
first of all he sorted the people such as were within years of service into
Legions, eue^ Legion consisted of t^^^ footmen and 300 horse. Romulo. p. 74.
(...), one Horseman for ten Foot. Varro lib. 4. de lingua Lat. Milites,
says he, a mile, quod trium milium primo (...) was called primus Hastatus,
the second secundus Hastatus: and so forth vsque ad decimum ordinem Hastatum.
Likewise the Principes into ten Enseignes, primum, secundum, tertium Principem,
etc, every Enseigne containing as before. And lastly the Triarii were also
divided into ten Enseignes, each one containing sixty persons. The first
Enseigne whereof was called primus Pilus, the second Or secu^dus Triarius
according to some learned men although Liuy seems to call all the Enseignes
of the Triarij Primos Pilos in that intricate place in the eightth book, where
he has rather obscured then expounded the Roman soldiery.
secundus Pilus, and so forth to the tenth. The Velites were proportionably
dispersed among all the Enseignes. Of these thirty Enseignes called in Latin
Manipuli, according to Gellius, lib. 6. cap. 4, and Seruius in 11 Aeneid.
(although Plutarch, in Romulo. page 39, interprets Manipulus, (...),
confounding it with Centuria, and Vegetius lib. 2. cap. 13, most absurdly
makes it equivalent with Contubernium, a company of ten or eleven persons)
each one was divided again in duas Centurias, Centuriam priorem and Centuriam
posteriorem, although in truth they contained not the full number of an
hundredth, but only in an ordinary Legion sixty persons beside the Velites,
and of the Triarii but thirty. Liuy in describing these Centuries seems to
use an inuersed kind of speech, lib. f. 356. K.
42. Hic me imperator dignum iudicauit, cui primum hastatum prioris centuriae
assignaret, in place, as it may seem, of cui priorem centuriam primi hastati
assignaret. and in the leaf following lest it might be supposed as done by
chance or negligence: A. M. Acillio mihi primus princeps prioris centuriae est
assignatus, for prior centuria primi principis. Beside these divisions of the
footmen in a Legion, we find another in later times more usual into ten
Cohorts of equal number. Julius Frontinus, Strategem, lib. cap. 6.
1, dissolueth one Legion into ten Cohorts: Fuluius Nobilior legionis, de qua
supra dictum est, quinque cohortes in dextram partem viae direxit, quinque ad
sinistram. and Caesar, lib. cap. 2.
6. de Bello Gall, three Legions into thirty Cohorts. Tacitus, 1. Annal. page
242, dissolueth four Legions in quadraginta cohortes Romanas. The Veget. lib.
2. c. 8. Cic. lib. 5. ep. ad Attic. 20 Caesar. 3 de bell. civilly, c. 13.
first Cohort resulted of the three first Enseignes, or Manipuli, to wit, ex
primo ordine Hastato, primo Principe, and primo Pilo joined in one; the second
of the three second, and so forth to the tenth. Cohors, says Varro. lib. 4.
de Lin. Lat, quod vt in Which is also called Cohors, quod circa eum locum pecus
coer^eretur, lays Varro.
villa ex pluribus tectis coniungitur, ac quiddam fit vnum, sic haec ex
manipulis copulatur cohors. The Grecians call it (...). This division of a
Legion into ten Cohorts, is not mentioned in Polybius, and therefore, as I
think, was not usual before his age. For although the words be not unknown
to ancient times, as to Liuy oftentimes in his former books, unless he spoke
by a figure, and to Polybius likewise page 240, 243.
twice in the eleventh book, expresselie and by name (...), in the war of
Scipio in Spain, yet then peradventure it was rather certain Manipuli united
and assigned extraordinarily, then any member of a Legion; but of that I
cannot greatly affirm. Now although in former times it is out of question,
that the Legionary Cohorts were equal of five hundredth a piece where the
Legion was five thousand, and more where more, yet in Vegetius time, or at
least in his Legion, the first Cohort contained a thousand, and the rest but
only five hundredth. for in his rebus, as com in. 11. A^meidos.
Seruius says, accessu temporis ducum varietas semper mutauit militiae
disciplinam. The horse, being in the Royal and Popular Legion most commonly
three hundredth, were divided in Turmas december: Polyb: lib. 6. page 182. That is,
In like manner the horsemen also were divided into te^ Turm^.
(...): every Turma containing thirty horse, even from the beginning of Rome;
as generally few things we find after in use, whereof the grounds were not
laid at the first. Varro lib. 4. de ling. Lat. Turma Terma est (E in V abijt)
quod ter them equites ex tribus tribubus Tatiensium, Ramnium, and Lucerum
fiebant. In Vegetius Legion, being six hundredth and sixty beside the officers,
they are divided into two and twenty Turmaes, every Turma likewise containing
thirty persons, whereof he attributes four Turmaes to the first Cohort of
the Legion, and to the other nine two a piece. Lastly Turma was divided in
treis Decurias each consisting of ten Horse, as the name also imports.

IN the Legion of Romulus over the footmen ( page 62.
says Dionysius.) three Tribunes, (...), were appointed to govern under the
King, each over his own tribe: and over every Centurie or Curia a Centurion,
or Curion. Tribuni ^^litum, (...), Tatiensium ^ in ad exercitum (...) tebantur.
Three Tribunes and thirty Centurions in a Legion, the Tribunes selected out of
the greatest men for nobility or reputation, (...); the Centurions of the most
valiant, (...). Under the Consul or Praetor in the time of liberty, and Prince
in the Empire, captains in chieffe and soueraintie, the next and immediate
officer in both was named Legatus consularis, as it were vicegerent deputed by
the Consul or Prince: by the Consul As Africanus to his brother in Asia.
one, or As to P. m^^y in bello P^^tico twenty five. Appian Mit^ridatico. p.
150.
many as his Lieutenants in the army; by the Prince one only as Lieutenant
general over an army or country. Under the Legatus consularis in the Empire
were subordinate Legati Pratorii, or Legati legionum, one or more according to
the number of the Legions in the army; which name I find not in the free
state, nor any office answerable to it. Now for the Legion in both states the
ordinary officers were, as before in the Legion of Romulus, Tribuni and
Centuriones. Decani and the rest were of smaller name. The popular Legion
being quadrata had also at the first four Liu l 9 f. 106. K.
Tribunes elected by the people, or sometime at the Consuls discretion:
afterward in Polybius time six, Polyb. l. 6. p. 185 (...).
executing their charge alternatiuelie, two at one time for two months; so
that in one summer every one had served his course. In the Empire, as it may
be coniectured by some-places in Vegetius, there were in every Legion ten
Tribunes, not with charge over the whole by turns, but with several and
continual each over his Cohort. Now out of every Enseigne, says Polybius,
were chosen (...) two Centurions ((...)) having charge each of his several
Centurie, in absence, or sickness, or other mischance the one of both. To
every Enseigne beside the Centurions belonged two Enseigne-bearers at the
Centurions appointment. The Centurions were distinguished in names according to
the Enseignes or Centuries which they led. Liuius. lib. 42, f. 356. K. Mih: T.
Quintius decimum ordinem hastatum assignauit. Cicero. ep. 8. ad Brutum: C.
Nascenius Metello imperatore octauum principem duxit. Liuius. lib. 7. fo. 81,
G. Septimum primum pilum iam Tullius ducebat. Likewise of the Enseigne-bearers.
Cicero: 1. de diuinatione. Signifer primi hastati signum loco mouere non
potuit. Sometime for breuity sake the Centurion is called by the name of his
Enseigne. Liuius. lib. 25, f. 176, l. T. Pedanius princeps primus centurio cum
signifero etc. Caesar lib. 1. de bell. ciu. cap. 10. In his Quin. Fuluius
primus hastatus legionis decimaequartae. lib. 2. de bell. Gall. cap. ^.
Omnibus fere centurionibus aut vulneratis aut occisis, in his primipilo P.
Sextio Bibaculo, multis vulneribus confecto, the same man whom lib. 3. cap. 1.
he calls at large primi pili centurionem. But whereas there were in every
Enseigne two Centurions, whether only the Centurion of the former Centurie was
(...), for example called Primipilus, primus Princeps, primus Hastatus, and so
in the rest, or both the one and the other equiuocally, I dare not, without
better ground of authority then hitherto I have seen, peremptorily determine.
only by centurio primi Pili I take to be meant the Centurion alone of the
former Centurie, of the first enseigne of the Triarii; a Centurion of
principal Cuius imperio, says Dionysius lib. 9. page 418, (...). by Liuy in
the l^ter end of the seventh book, f. 88, K. it may seem that place was of
equ^ll dignity, or rather (...) then the ^ribures: ^^^wi^hsta^d^ng the
Ce^^ur^^n were otherwise subordinate to the^.
credit and endowed with special privileges, as to be of the Generals
counsel, to have the custody of the Eagle or Standerd of the Legion, to sound
the watches etc. Polyb. Veget. This number of sixty Centurions in a Legion we
find also retained under the Empire. Tacitus. 1. Annal. page 231. Prostratos
verberibus multant sexagenis singulos, vt numerum centurionum adaequarent:
although Vegetius, by I cannot tell what mischance, l 2 cap 6.
makes but fifty, and in another place by error of the copy, or oversight of
the autour, Quinquaginta quinque: for Quinquaginta is much more suitable even to
his own grounds. Under the Centurion, were the Decani Diziniers, one over
every ten, as the word also imports. Veget. lib. 2. cap. 13. Rursus ipsae
Centuriae in contuhernia diuisae sunt, vt december militibus sub vna papilione
degentibus vnus quasi praesset decanus, qui caput concubernij vocatur. The
horsemen in the Legion of Romulus were governed by (...), says page 66.
Dionysius not expressing the number: but the horse in the Royal and Popular
Legion being of one number had in all likelihood the same officers, that is
Decuriones, three chosen out of every Turma, whereof the first and principal
is called also (...).
Praefectus Turmae, Polybius. lib. 6. page 182. But Vegetius lib. 2. cap. 14,
writing that turma habet 32 equites, huic qui praeest decurio nominatur,
reckeneth two of his officers as common soldiers, and the third names amiss.
for Decurio is of december, not of triginta or triginta duo. Wherefore if he will
needs have two of Polybius Decurions reckened among the common horsemen, the
third he might more justly have named with Polybius Praefectus Turmae, then
Decurio. So have we in Polybius Legion triginta Decuriones, whereof ten were
called (...): in Vegetius twenty two Decuriones, or in more reasonable
speech, and more according to his own principles, sixty six. Of any higher
office ordinary over the Legionarie horsemen then Praefectus Turmae, I find
no mention in the Popular or Imperial Legion, the horse in general being, I
suppose, under the direction of the great officers of the field, Legatus
consularis, and Legatus legionis: extraordinarily I grant under the Dictatour,
Magister equitum was, as it were, the General of the horse. Of the Centurion
and Decurion the under officer, and as it were vicegerent or adiutour, was
named Optio, the same which is in Polybius called, as I suppose, (...). Paulus
ex Festo. In re militari Optio appellatur is quem decurio, aut centurio optat
sibi, rerum According to Vegetius lib. 2. c. 7. it was to supply his place in
sickness.
priuatarum ministrum, quo facilius obeat publica officia. Festus omitting his
charge among horsemen; Optio is, says he, qui adiutor dabatur centurioni a
trib: militum, so called quia centurionibus permissum est optare quem velint.

Thus much of the Legionarie soldiers, among whom none were enrolled but ciues
Romani, ingenui, artis ludicrae expertes. As touching the first point it is
clear in story, that many hundredth years together all the delectus were ex
plebe Romana alone, which in later times seldom was mustered, in the Empire
scarce ever, nor almost any Italian borne, but ciues Romani e prouincijs.
Herodianus lib. 2. (...).
p. 437. Caesar sometime in the French war seems to have enrolled of the
Transpadani into Legions, being then not citizens of Rome. Concerning the
second point they which were libertini generis, though ciues Romani, were
never enrolled, much less serui, but once, or twice in extremities. For the
third, according to Dionysius lib. 2, not only Histrionica disabled to
Legionary service, but all (...). p 73.
sedentatarie, mechanical, and voluptary arts. Agriculture was only allowed
of, as the only nurse of fit men for service in war: not as in the practice
of Sparta, and precepts of Plato one man to till at home, and another to fight
abroad, but one and the same man in peace a good husbandman, and in war a
good soldier; no person by the opinion of many being more dangerous in a
state, then he which makes souldierie his occupation and trade. Furthermore
it was requisite, that the Legionary soldier should be within the years of
service, (...), and assessed at least in the fifth classis. The militar age was
Tuber^ apud Gellium lib. 10 c. 28. ex Seruii regis formula Plut. Gracch.
from seventeen to forty five, as page 164.
Dionysius says, or forty six, as lib. 6. page 180. (...). for so that place
of Polybius is to be rectified.
Polybius, and in dangerous times to fifty. In which time the footeman might
be compelled to serve sixteen or twenty years, if need so required, the
horseman ten. In Augustus time, Dionysius lib. 54. page 366, appoints twelve
years of service for the Praetorian soldier, and sixteen for the Legionarie:
and in the book page 384.
following, as having forgotten himself, sixteen to the Praetorian, and
twenty to the other. In Tiberius time to the soldiers in Germany missio data
est, says Tacitus 1. Annal. page 233, vicena stipendia meritis: exauctorati,
qui sena dena fecissent, ac retenti sub vexillo, caeterorum immunes nisi
propulsandi hostis. which words peradventure may reconcile in some part the
repugnant places of Dionysius. Now for the classes, the manner of mustering,
which in Romulus time went meerelie tributim, every tribe conferring his
thousand, Seruius Tullius reduced to a matter of cense or tax: according to
which not only the muster was taken, but all officers of importance in the
state Comitiis centuri^^^^.
elected, laws established, and tributes imposed. The whole number of Citizens
being digested into six classes, in the first were all those, which in the tax
or subsidy book were assessed at an 31 a^. li. 10. s. English.
hundredth thousand asses and vpvvard. The second from an hundredth thousand
downward to seue^ty five thousand. The third from seventy five thousand to
fifty thousand. The fourth from fifty thousand to twenty five thousand. The
fifth from twenty five thousand to twelve thousand and five hundredth. And the
sixth of all such as were under the last rate. Now whereas the first c^assis
conferred eighteen horse, and eighty footmen, the second conferred twenty
footmen and two artificers beside, as smithes, carpenters. etc. The third
classis twenty footmen. The fourth twenty, and two beside to sound the
trumpet, and strike the drum. etc. The fifth thirty. The sixth classis Liu^.
l. 1. f. 10. P
immunis militia, That i^ Free from al service in war and al pa^^ent of
Tribute. Dionysius lib 4 p. 165. although the same Dionys. in the same page
all^t^eth it by oversight one soldier in 193. true it is that the sixth cl^ssis
had one voice in 193. in comit^^s centuriatis, but it yielded no man to the
muster at al.
(...). So that one course by this manner of mustering yielded a hundredth
ninety two men to the war, whereof eighteen were horsemen, four
artificers and fifers, a hundredth and seventy footmen: and so about again,
as the case required a greater or less army, in the same proportion.
Dionysius. libro. 4. page 164. and 165. With whom Liuy libro. 1 agreeing in the
rest differs only in the cense of the fifth classis, which by him is but
eleven thousand asses, and furthermore the artificers Liuy ioineth to the first
classis, and the fifers to the fifth, whereas Dionysius puts them to the
second and fourth. The reason why this last and poorest sort was excluded from
service is well set down by Julius Exuperantius. Populus Romanus, says he,
per classes diuisus erat, and pro patrimonij facultate censebatur. ex ijs omnes
quibus res erat, ad militiam ducebantur. diligenter enim pro victoria
laborabant, qui praeter libertatem, bona defendebant, illi autem quibus nullae
opes erant, caput suum quod solum possidebant censebantur, and belli tempore in
moenibus residebant, facile enim poterant existere proditores: quia egestas
haud facile habetur fine damno. This kind of mustering per classes instituted
by Seruius, was in later times, as it may be gathered by the Tribus ad
sacramentum vocatae. Liuy, Tacit. and others.
practice in the Roman stories and plain words of lib. 6. p. 180. (...) etc.
Polybius, altered in part and reduced somewhat nearer to a matter of tribe,
as being a more popular order, and more agreeable to the present government,
yet so, that to Legionary service none could be mustered but such as were
sessed at (...).
four thousand asses at the least, says Polybius, which is indeed somewhat
less then the cense of the fifth classis limited by Dionysius and Liuy;
whether it were that Polybius had forgotten the sum, or that the cense of
the classis was abated. for that both then and afterward regard was had of the
classes in taking the muster it is clear by the words of Salust. in
Iugurthino. Marius interea milites scribere non more maiorum, neque ex
classibus, sed vti cuiusque lubido erat, capite censos plerosque, such as for
lack of wealth were censed only by poll. After which time the classes
were, as I take it, in little consideration in the muster of Legions,
especially in the civil wars, and in the Empire utterly neglected, the cense
also being abolished.

Now the Legion and Legionary being such as we have described, remains to
speak of the Auxiliary soldiers. Auxilia, (...), were soldiers which being not
citizens of Rome served in the Roman camp. The first Aids to purpose which
the Romans used were of the Albans in Tullus Hostilius time. Dionys. l. 3. p.
119. And anon Alba the head and mother city of the Latins being razed they
challenged as conquerors that superiority over the Latin nation, which the
Albans before had enjoyed. In the time of Tarquinius Priscus the Latins served
in the Roman Army as Aides Dionys. p. 143. 147.
against the Hetrusci, and against the Dionys. p. 143. 147.
Sabins the Hetrusci and the Latins. In the free state many hundredth years,
the Latins only and Hernici ministered Auxilia grauium armatorum. for archers
and funditores and leuia auxilia of other nations they did Hiero apud Liuiu^
li. 22. f. 145. A.
not refuse sometime to admit. After the third Punicke war they admitted also
S. lust. Ju^urtia.
Auxilia ex socijs Italicis a populis regibusque. And after that time we find
sometimes As in ^ul^es epistles, Appian. etc. perchance ^^t^er ex veteri
formula, and by an ordinary phrase of speech then otherwise,
mention but no great reckening made in the free state of Auxiliaries. the
reason, as I take it, was that the city being communicated to the Latins and
Italian allies in bello Marsico they served no longer in quality of Auxilia
being now invested with the right of Legionarie service. Augustus and the
Emperors fortifying the limits of the Empire with armies, and furnishing the
Legions only in a manner of provincial Citizens, established Auxilia again,
supplied out of their allies and subjects abroad, and generally out of all
nations indifferently, making acquainted the barbarous people, and ancient
enemies of the Roman Empire with their manner of service, not without notable
Vide Tac 4 Hist in bello cum German^^.
prejudice to the state. In Tacitus under the first Emperors we have in the
Roman camp Auxiliaries e Transrhenanis, Gallis, Britannis, Numidis, Lusitanis,
Batauis, Thracibus etc. and under the later Emperors no militar matter in the
whole Empire passed through other then barbarous hands; till at length the
Romans, as great reason was, were forced to deliver the Empire to them, to
whom they had delivered their arms. Theodosius, says Zosimus That is, Made
leg^onaries the barbaria^s b^rne beyond the Damnius l. 4. p. 755
(...). and page 756. That is, There wa^ no ord^r b^rued in the armies ^or
difference made of Roman and Barbarian.
(...). and of Gratian page 760. That is, He received certain fugitives of the
Ala^i and bestowed, them in his armies
(...). (...). p. 17. and 18.
Synesius likewise a more indifferent person to the Christian Princes
reprehendeth the too great facility of Theodosius in receiving to mercy, into
his country, kingdom and armies the barbarous nations, reaping no other fruit
of his clemency but scorn at their hands, and thereupon he takes occasion to
exhort Arcadius his son (...). etc.
to increase his Legions, and with the Legions his courage, making supply of
his own people and sending back the Barbarians thither from whence they first
came. But to return to our Auxiliary soldier, Vegetius lib. 2. cap. 2.
describing them under the Empire has these words. Auxiliares conducuntur ad
praelium ex diuersis locis, ex diuersis muneribus venientes. Nec disciplina
inter se, nec notitia, nec affectione consentiunt. Necesse est autem tardius ad
victoriam peruenire qui discrepant antequam dimicent. Denique cum in
expeditionibus plurimum prosit omnes milites vnius praecepti significatione
conuerti, non possunt aequaliter iussa complere qui ante pariter non fuerunt.
Tamen haec ipsa auxilia si solennibus diuersisque exercitijs prope quotidie
roborentur, non mediocriter iuuant. Nam legionibus semper auxilia tanquam leuis
armatura in ac^e tungebantur, vt in his praeliandi magis adminiculum esset,
quam principale subsidium. Of Auxilia we find two principal kinds,
external and sociall. External sent from kings and foreign states, of which,
as depending in most points upon the voluntary disposition of the sender, I
have not to say. Soci^l were Tacit 1 Hist. Octo Bat^uorum cohore^^. 14 legionis
auxilia.
either annexed to some Legion, or severally assigned to the guard of some 2.
Hist p. 6^. Liguru^^ cohor^ vetu^ loc^ auxilium,
place or country, where it seemed not necessary to maintain a Legionary
power. Concerning the Auxilia legionum in the free state, before bellum
Marsicum, as often as the Romans armed their allies armed also ex foedere,
footmen Pol. b. l. p. 1^1. lib. 6. p 182.
ordinarily as many, horse double. Ordinarily I say, because that rate was not
perpetually observed, as it appears by infinite places in Liuy, Appian and
others, but more or less according to circumstances. Under the Empire illa
ratio seruata est, says Vegetius, ne vnquam amplior multitudo sociorum
auxiliarium esset in castris, quam ciuium Romanorum. In the free state the
Legionary Auxilia were governed in steed of Tribuni by Praefecti, though
different in name, yet of like Poly^ius l. 6. p. 185. having spoken before of
the Tribun^, adds, (...).
authority, and, as it may seem, in Polybius time equal in number. For page
182 he assigns twelve Praefecti to one Consul, to whom belonged two Legions,
and therefore twelve Tribunes. Now the Extraordinary ba^de being chosen out, at
the discretion of the Praefecti, of the best men and fittest for service, of
the footmen about the So that the Extraordinary band, (...), co^sisted of 8^0
footmen, and 200 horse.
fifth part, the third of their horsemen, the rest of the Auxilia were divided
into two companies, the one called the Right (...).
horn, and the other the Left. And this is all that Polybius has written
touching their partitions and officers. In lib. ^ fol. 90. 91.
Liuy the Latins making head against the Romans have the very same divisions
and officers with the Roman Legions: but whether at other times also, and as
in the nature of assistants they had them likewise, I cannot positiuely
determine; it seems rather otherwise. The most known division both in the
free state, and under the Empire of Auxilia as well local as legionary, is in
cohortes of footmen, and Alas of horsemen. And so does Tacitus often resolve
the word 4. page 8^.
Hist. Cohortium, alarm, legionum hiberna. i. Auxiliorum and legionum. 1. page
41.
Hist. Asciscitur auxiliorum miles primo suspectus tanquam circumdatis
cohortibus alisque impetus in legiones pararetur. The Auxiliary Cohorts are
sometime to distinguish them from the Legionary called Caesar, Liuiu^. Tacitus.
sociae cohortes, leaves cohortes, and alariae cohortes: like as the Alae are
also called Alarij equites. Now of these Cohorts and Wings how many belonged to
a Legion usually I cannot preciselie define. Vitellius at his entry into Rome
with eight battered Legions had only 2. Hist. page 102.
thirty four Cohorts. The Auxilia of the fourteenth Legion were 1. Histo. pa.
43.
eight Cohorts: which if it were ordinary, seeing the use of that age bears
at least six hundredth footmen for a Cohort, the Auxiliary footmen belonging
to a Legion are four thousand eight hundredth. And yet Tacitus. page 601
Agricola had for three Legions in his army in Britanny no more but eight
thousand, the rest peradventure being dispersed in garrisons. Alae dictae
exercitui equitum ordines, quodcircum legiones dextrasinistraque tanquam alae
in auium corpor^b. locabantur. Cine. apud Gell. li. 16. c. 4.
Equitumalae, says Lib. 2. cap. 1.
Vegetius, ab eo dicuntur quod ad similitudinem alarm protegant aciem. Ala
contained, as I suppose, about three hundredth horsemen. By Tacitus, 2. page 66.
Hist, it is plain, that ex quatuor equitum turmis and vniuersa Treuerorum
ala, some part being retained in colonia Foroiuliensi praesidij causa, duodecim
turmae aduersus hostem iere. So that Ala was more then eight Turmae, that is,
two hundredth and forty horse. The ala equitum which follovved Scipio into
Afric consisted of Liuius lib. 29. fol. 223, H.
three hundredth. And that Ala in these later days was a number of importance
it appears by the circumstances of ala Syllana touched by Tacitus 1. page 48.
Hist. Now to every Legion belonged two Alae of Auxiliaries at the least.
Josephus 3. (...). c. 5.
sets down six Alae as the Auxiliaryes of three Legions. and 3. Hist. p.
109.
Tacitus writes of sixteen Alae in Illyricum, where at that present were but
six or seven Legions. Contrarily Vitellius to his eight broken Legions had but
twelve Alae. Agricola in Britannie to three Legions had three thousand
Auxiliarie horsemen. Of these Cohorts of Auxiliary footmen the governors in
later times also were called Praefecti; and the Wings of horsemen likewise in
later times had their Praefecti several from the foot, of which in Polybius
we find no mention. In Wings the vndercaptaynes, as in the Legionarie, were
named Decuriones. Of the number I cannot affirm: only it seems probable,
that the Praefecti then were according to the number of the Cohorts and Wings,
and the Decuriones, as in the Legio^ three in a Turma consisting of thirty
horsemen. To conclude this point, although the Imperial Auxilia seem not to
observe alvvaies one stint, as by the examples alleged may be auerred, yet
taking two Wings and eight Cohorts for the Auxilia of a Legion, those things
presupposed which we have set down, the Legion Imperial with her Auxilia
arriueth to twelve thousand persons. Six thousand Legionary footmen, six
hundredth horsemen: four thousand eight hundredth Auxiliarie footmen, and six
hundredth Auxiliarie horse. Sum twelve thousand. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Vegetius out of other particulars collecteth the same total. Vna legio,
says he, mixtis auxilijs, hoc est december One horseman to five foot.
millia peditum and duo millia equitum. Whereof six thousand one hundredth
footmen, and seven hundredth twenty six horse according to his principles
being Legionary, there remaynes three thousand nine hundredth foot, and twelve
hundredth seventy four horse for the Auxiliarie; or in round numbers 4000
foot, and 1200 horse, approaching near to the ancient proportion in Polybius
of double the Legionarie horse. At the enrolment the names were imposed to the
Legions Prima, Secunda, Tertia, as they were in Dio. lib. 48. p. 55. (...).
order of mustering first, second, or third. Which custom, as I suppose,
continued in his first institution so long as the Romans armed and disarmed
every year: but afterward retayning sub signis some of their Legions with
their old names, and with perpetual supply as it were eternizing them many
ages, the rest decaying or being dissolved, the name was no longer a note of
his place, but rather became a proper name simply. In the later Of Augustus.
Dio. page 384.
times we read of three Tertiae, and two Sextae distinguished by surnames,
Tertia Italica, Tertia Cyrenaica, Tertia Augusta: Sexta Victrix, and Sexta
Ferrata. Of which devise of surnaming the Legions we have no example before
Caesar's time, and after no end: a nouelty induced upon ambition, or country,
or accident, or for distinction sake, or lastly upon pleasure and voluntarily.
The Auxiliarie Cohorts and Wings, specially locals, had also their several
names, as cohors Decimaseptima, Decimaoctaua of numbers, cohortes Tungrorum,
Rhoetorum, ala Treuerum, (...) and the rest in order toward the gate K. These
lodgings lie in The length of the camp I call according to P^lybius from the
top of the page to the bottom, and from the left hand to the right the
breadth: albeit the later he calls as often (...), as (...).
length and open upon the street c. c. c. c. each side being an hundredth foot:
so that to one horseman they allowed a standing equal to a square somewhat
more then eighteen foot every way.

December ordines Triariorum) Ten lodgings for the ten ordines, or manipuli
Triariorum primae legionis with their The Centurions according to Po y^ius
quartering in the two corners toward the street: (...).
Centurions and under officers, ioining back to back with the lodgings of the
Equites, and opening into the street e. e. e. e. of fifty foot broad: primus
Pilus being quartered next to the PRAETORIVM, and so in consequence toward the
gate K. where all the Decimi Ordines do lodge. Every one of these lodgings, in
length an hundredth foot in breadth fifty, lodges sixty Triarij, and a (...).
ratable part of the Velites, which, considering the proportion that one of the
Ordines Triariorum bears to one of the Ordines Principum and Hastatorum, and
the number of Velites in Polybius Legion, falls out to be twenty four
persons. according to which reckening to one footeman they allowed a standing
equal to a square somewhat more then eight foot every way.

Of the other side of the street e. e. e. e. the lodgings of the December ordines
Principum primae Legionis, and at their backs the lodging of the December ordines
Hastatorum opening the one into the street e. e. e. e. the other into the
street f. f. f. f. being also fifty foot broad, each of these twenty
lodgings is square, every side containing an hundredth foot, and lodges an
hundredth and twenty sui ordinis, and forty eight Velites beside:
proportionably as in tabernaculis Triariorum we had for half so many men half
so much ground.

Of the other side of the street f. f. f. f. are the lodgings of the
Auxiliares equites in dextro cornu, and at their backs the lodgings of the
Auxiliares pedites in dextro cornu, the Horse opening into the street f. f. f.
f. the Foot into the void place between the lodgings and the trenches, of
which we shall have occasion to speak anon. Now the Equites auxiliares of a
Legion (the extraordinary Band being deducted) amounting according to Polybius
to four hundredth horse, and allowing to three hundredth Legionary horse ten
lodgings of a hundredth foot every way, we are to allow to these, following
the same proportion, ten lodgings each a hundredth foot in length (for that way
we may not increase them) and a Mathematically 133. but Polybius uses not to
mince it so nicely. neither were the Romans so great Masters in that kind of
learning, if we may believe their own poet excudent al^j ^pirantia mollius
era etc.
hundredth fifty in breadth, to make the one as conveniently lodged as the other.
And so Polybius expresselie signifies in these words; That is, In framing
their camp, the lodgings of the Auxiliarie horse they make equal to the
Legionary in length, increasing the breadth proportionably to the number.
(...). Likewise the footmen after the deduction of the extraordinary Band
being three thousand three hundredth sixty, that is three hundredth thirty six
persons for every lodging, seeing as the lodgings in length are but a hundredth
foot, we must make them in breadth two hundredth, twice as broad as the
lodgings of the Principes or Hastati, seeing they contain twice as many men.
For so Polybius warranteth us here also To increase the breadth proportionably.
(...).

Upon the left hand of the street c. c. c. c. are the lodgings of the second
Legion with her Auxilia in the same proportion and order in all points with the
first. And so have we the breadth of the camp from the utmost Auxiliary
footmen of the one Legion to the like of the other a thousand six hundredth
fifty foot, or three hundredth thirty pace, accounting five foot for a pace.

VIA QVINTANA: is a street fifty foot broad, passing from side to side
through the whole breadth of the lodgings, so named a Quintis ordinibus which
quarter all upon it. In this street, as being in the middle of the soldiers
quarter, and therefore fittest for such a purpose, was holden a market, forum
rerum vtensilium, says Festus.

Now of the hundredth fifty foot, which as we noted were between the
soldiers quarter and the PRAETORIVM, a hundredth foot was the breadth of VIA
PRINCIPALIS, of which street, says Polybius, special care was had, that it
should be sweet and handsome, because it was the usual place of resort for the
soldiers in the day time. In the other fifty foot toward the PRAETORIVM was
a row of lodgings opening upon VIA PRINCIPALIS, each lodging bearing every way
fifty foot, for the twelve Tribuni and twelve Praefecti socioru^, their
train, horses and cariadge. a. a. a. a. a. a. are the lodgings of the six
Tribunes of the first Legion, the first lodging answering directly to the
Legionarie horsemens quarter, and the last to the street. f. f. f. f. with
passages between of thirty foot. b. b. b. b. b. b. are the lodgings of the
Praefecti, (whom as it seems Polybius had forgotten to lodge) answering
precisely to the breadth of the Auxiliary quarter, with a void space of fifty
foot between the third and fourth tent. and so of the other side for those of
the other Legion, a void space of fifty foot being left at. o. to answer the
street c. c. c. c.

g. g. g. g. a cross street before the PRAETORIVM being a hundredth foot
broad, where I suppose was settled the watch mentioned by Polybius p. 185. That
is, Every day one enseigne by course keeps watch and ward at the Gen^^als
pauilion both for the safety of his person, and majesty of his place.
(...).

Extraordinarij Equites. and Extraordinarij Pedites.) a plot of a hundredth
fifty foot in length (for so it will fall out if we make the whole ground for
the lodgings, as we must, perfectly (...).
square) and four hundredth and fifty in breadth, answering to the QVAESTORIVM
and part of the PRAETORIVM for the Extraordinary band of the Auxilia primae
Legionis, consisting of two hundredth horse, and eight hundredth forty foot
(some (...).
selected out of them only excepted, which are lodged else where) the footmen
quartering toward the trenches, and the horse toward the camp. And so of the
other side for the other Legion.

Auxilia externa) a plot of the same length and in breadth three hundredth and
fifty foot for the foreign Aids such as by occasion come in.

Selecti ac voluntarij Equites, and Selecti ac voluntarij pedites.) a plot of
two hundredth foot in length, and three hundredth fifty in breadth, where the
selected out of the Extraordinary band of the Auxilia primae Legionis are
placed, the foot quartering toward the trenches, and the Horse toward the
PRAETORIVM: and so of the other side for the other Legion, reserving in both
place for voluntary men, which upon kindred or friendship, or other respects
follow the General. These Selecti and Voluntarij do not only says Polybius
quarter near the General, but also in marching, and at all other times of any
service are continually attendant upon the General and the Quaestor, in the
nature peradventure of a Cohors Praetoriae.

QVAESTORIVM) a plot of two hundredth foot in length and three hundredth seventy
five in breadth, for the Quaestor and his train with their treasure and
provision, for the pioners, carpenters, smithes, armorours etc. with their
tools and officers. There was also the Auguraculum, (...), and peradventure
the public prison.

FORVM.) a plot equal in both dime^sio^s to the QVAESTORIVM. Here was the
place of public assemblies, and the Tribunal with the Sedescurulis.
seat of estate, here also in likelihood were those Seats.
(...) whereof 3. (...), cap. 6.
Josephus makes mention, on which the Tribuns and Centurions sat in judgment
to decide the controversies happening between the soldiers. In the FORVM also
the Eagles and Enseignes of the Legions with their bearers Aquiliferi and
Signiferi, certain images of the gods, in later times of the Prince and his
children, and sometimes of his Colique per theatra and fora effigies Sciani,
tute^que princi. a legionum sinere^. Tac. 4. An. quaeda^ m^nera Syri^cis
legionibus largtius est qu^d solae nullam Setani imaginem inter signa
coluissent. Su^t. Tiberio. cap. 48.
great fauorits also, were quartered. Tacitus 15. page 322.
Ann. describing a solemn assembly in that place Inde, says he, eques, hinc
agmina legionum stetere fulgentibus aequilis signisque and simulacris deum, in
modum templ^. Medio Tribunal sedem curulem, and seeds effigiem Neronis
sustinebat. The Eagles, except peradventure in time of assemblies, stood in
little chapels. Dio: That is, In all the Roman armies there is a little chapel,
and in it a golden eagle does stand. lib. 40 p. 82.
(...). The Enseignes were placed subdio, as indeed, being certain long
spears covered with silver with the Princes image hanging upon them under the
Empire, they could hardly be planted under a tent. and yet Herodian seems to
place them all in one chapel. That is, he sat down in the chapel where the
en^eignes and images are adored. lib. 4 page 481.
(...) says he, for as well the Aquilae and signa as the Simulacra deum, and
imagines principu^ were by the Roman soldiers adored as gods, and therefore
the place of their ^^nding accounted sacred. for by Principia so often
remembered in 1. Hist. In ipsi^ princi^^ slup^um ausa 3 Hist. Nox prodition^
electa vt caeteris ignaris soli desectores in principia co^rent. ibidem.
secreta castrorum affectanum principia vocat. Paulo post. sed vbi tot^ca.
str^^n fama proditio recurre^s in principia miles.
Tacitus and others I take the FORVM to be principally meant, although in some
places of the sto^es Principia may seem particularly to be intended of that
row of lodgings where the Tribuni and Praefecti are quartered, specially in
that place of Tacitus. Principia, (...), the leaders lodgings.
1. Ann. Prima Vari castra lato ambitu, and dimensis Principijs trium legionu^
manus ostentabant. and in some other places of the same 2. Hist. primani
stratis vnaetuice simano^um principus Aquilam abstulere. 4. Ann effigies Sc^ant
inter principia legionum.
Tacitus this word Principia seems to be taken pro ipsa Aquila signisque.

N. N. N. N. etc.) a void room of two hundredth foot broad, round about
between the lodgings and the Trench. The use of this void room is for the
commodious entering and issuing of the Legions, for the safe custody of the
cattle in the night season which are provided for the use of the camp, or
otherwise catched from the enemy. But the principal commodity is that the
enemy upon sudden approches by night to the tre^ches cannot throw any fire
work, or dart to do any great hurt in so great a distance.

P. Q. R. S.) Agger or Vallum, (...), the trench which compassed the whole
camp. Agger signifying generally cuiuslibet rei coaceruationem, as Seruius in
10. A^n cid.
one of the Grammarians says, is here appropriated to that mounde of earth,
which is raised for defense about the camp: in which certain stakes called
Valli were pitched with two, three, of foure-forked heads to close and wreath
one within another, and were for that purpose prepared and carried by the
soldier, each man carrying three, four and sometime vsque ad septenos vallos,
says Liuy. Of these valli the whole fortification of the Camp is called
Vallum. Vallum, says Seruius in 9. Al^ne^^, ipsa munitio valli, fustes quibus
vallum munitur.
In the Vallum in convenient distances were raised and cast out certain
platformes like turrets, and on the (...). Joseph. 3. (...) c. 6.
curtain between the turrets were placed Balistae, catapultae, balistae, and
al engines or shot ready bent.
(...), such artillery as that age did aforde. And about the Vallum they cast a
ditch of six foot deep and as much in breadth.

In the Vallum of the camp were four gates. Liuius lib. 40, fol. 339, B.
Aemilius ad quatuor portas exercitum instruxit, vt signo dato simul ex omnibus
partibus eruptionem facerent. and Joseph. 3. (...). That is, In every side of
the camp a gate is built.
(...). So that the sides of the camp being four, the gates must also be
four.

H. Porta Praetoria, so called a PRAETORIO which stands near it: the
foregate of the camp, and in times of danger, next to the enemy.

K. Porta Decumana, so called a Decimis ordinibus ibi tendentibus (as appears
by the former description) the backegate of the camp, and in times of danger
furthest from the enemy. Otherwise in places of safety, as appears by
Polybius, opportunity of water and forage was rather respected in the placing
of that gate, because all the common soldiers in a manner were quartered upon
that side.

M. The third gate of the camp called Sinistra Principalis: and L. the fourth
called Dextra Principalis, so denominated, because they open into Via
Principalis. Liuy in the place ^^. 40.
above alleged names them thus: 1 Extraordinaria, 2 Dextra Principalis, 3
Sinistra Principalis and 4 Quaestoria: whereof Extraordinaria is without all
question the same with Praetoria, so named of the Extraordinary band who
quarter there: so that Quaestoria in that place must be all one with Decumana,
belike because in his conceyt the QVAESTORIVM was not far from Decumana. And
so it may seem he conceived of it by another place lib. 10, Fol. 119, F. Ab
tergo castrorum Decumana porta impetus factus: itaque captum Quaestorium. But
that placing of QVAESTORIVM cannot stand with Polybius description, whom in
this case we are rather to believe. Now that Praetoria was nearest to the
enemy, and Decumana furthest of, it is evident by Caesar lib. 3. de belliciu.
Pompeius, says he, acre excessit, protinusque se in castra equo contulit,
and iis centurionibus quos in statione ad Praetoriam portam posuerat, clare,
tutamini, inquit, castra. and immediately after, Pompeius cum intra vallum
nostri versarentur, equum nactus Decumana poru se ex castris eiecit. That
Praetoria was the foregate, and Decumana the backegate it appears by the place
of Liuy above alleged lib. 10. ab tergo castrorum Decumana por^ impetus
factus: and yet Polybius calls the side where K. stands perpetually The
foreside of the camp.
(...), The backeside of the camp.
and that other wherein H. stands (...), as I think, only by way of
supposition and docendi causa, because in his description of the lodgings he
begins at the PRAETORIVM and proceeds on forward toward Porta Decumana.

Thus have we a description for two of Polybius ordinary Legions with their
Auxilia, which was the ordinary army of one Consul: a camp perfitly square,
not as the Grecians (although according to Frontinus the Romans took this
whole learning of Pyrrhus a Grecian) who framed their camp according to the
ground, whereas the (...). Josephus.
Romans framed the ground to their camp, and distinguished it with streets
and passages in so good an order, that a man might as readily find his place
there, as his own house in the town where he was borne. The whole perimetre
within the trenches amounted to eight thousand two hundredth foot, or one
thousand six hundredth fifty paces: every side, according to the positions
already laid, containing two thousand fifty foot. Now when the Legions were
much fuller then ordinary, in lodging both horse and foot the Polyb. (...).
partitions were made proportionably bigger as well in length as in breadth, and
so the square figure still retained. But if the Auxilia do exceed, first they
contriue the QVAESTORIVM and FORVM into one, and lodge them in the other: or if
that do not suffice, they make more rows of lodgings upon the right and left
hand of the Auxiliary quarter, enlarging the figure in breadth by that means,
and retayning the former length. And likewise if more then two Legions under
one General were to be encamped together, the figure was, I suppose, (...).
a long square, enlarged only in breadth with more rows of lodgings on both
sides the street c. c. c. c. For Tacitus in a place above alleged signifies
that by measuring the Principia we might find out the number of the Legions,
which presupposing, the enlargement in length could not by that means be so
well discerned. But when four Legions under two Polyb. p. 184. (...). for so
it must be read, not (...). and in the next line for (...) we are contrarily
to read (...).
Consuls were to be joined in one camp, if it pleased the Generals to keep
their standings a part it was likewise a long square, but doubled in length, in all other respects agreeing with this description: and the Camp so doubled
contained twice as much ground, perimetre half as much more with six gates,
two Decumanae, two Sinistrae Principales, and two Dextrae without any Praetoria
at all. But when it pleased the^ to pitch together they placed the FORVM,
QVAESTORIVM and PRAETORIVM in the middle between the two armies; the
Extraordinarij and Auxilia externa quartering, as it may seem, in this case,
between the Tribunes and soldiers lodgings in the same quantity of ground as
before, and with convenient streets on both sides.

The General officer over the Camp was called Praefectus Castrorum: Veget. l.
2. c. 10.
to whose charge appertayned to stake out the Camp and see it kept sweet, to
appoint and order the trenches and ditch, to quarter the soldiers with their
carriage in their lodging, to provide diet and physic for the sick and pay
the physician etc. Veget la. c. 11.
Particularly over the smiths, carpenters and other artificers with the
enginers and such like the officer was called Praefectus fabrum. Both of them,
as I think, lodged in QVAESTORIO, where it is likely the Legati legionum also
were quartered, and in the free state the Legati consulares.

(...) Polyb. lib. 6. and lib. 10. (...).
As Soon as ever the tents were pitched, and camp settled, al which followed
the camp both bond and free received an oath called sacramentum castrense,
which according to Polybius was, That is, That he should steal nothing out of
the camp, but if any happened to find ought he should carry it to the
Tribunes. lib. 6. p. 184.
(...). and in another place he touches a matter of greater importance,
concerning the just representatio^ of the spoil in the sacking of cities, a
point most profitably induced, whether the spoil were to be reserved to
public uses, or else divided among the soldiers, whereof the worst sort are
commonly most nimble that way. But chiefly it stayed the minds of those, who
by the Generals commandment remained in arms in the Market place against all
sudden mischances of war, being assured thereby of equal part with the rest
in the pray which should be taken by others. A. Lib. 16. c. 4.
Gellius sets the very form of the oath down in more particular terms out
of Cincius de re militari; In exercitu decemque millia passuum prope furtum non
facies dolo malo solus, neque cum pluribus pluris numi argentei in dies
fingulos. extraque bastam, hastile, ligna, pabulum, vtrem, follem, faculam, si
quid ibi inueneris quod pluris numi argentei erit, vti tu ad Coss. sieve ad quem
eorum alter iusseret perferas, aut prositebere in triduo proximo quicquid
inueneris sustulerisue dolo malo, aut domino suo cuium id censebis esse reddes,
vti quod recte factum esse voles.

In service the Legionary soldier had allowance of pay, corn and apparel:
and at the end of his service a consideration in money, or land of
inheritance, and sometimes both. For the pay Liuy Lib. 4. fol. 55.
writes thus. Anno vrbis condita 349. decreuit Senatus vt stipendium The
footeman alone: for three years after Equiti primum certus numerus aeris est
assignatus. Liuius.
miles de publico acciperet, cum anteid tempus de suo quisque functus co munere
esset. The quantity Polybius limiteth in the sixth book, at least as it was in
his time, assigning to a footeman the third part of a Dram is the eight part
of an ounce, about 7d. ob English.
dram, or two oboli by the day, which Polybius in another place resolves
into four asses, to a Centurion twice so much, to a horseman a dram, or
Roman denarius then current for twelve asses. This pay continued, as I
suppose, in this form till Caesar's time, qui legionibus stipendium in
perpetuum duplicauit. Suetonius Iulio. cap. 26. So that the footeman had by the
day eight asses, the Centurion sixteen, the horse twenty four. Augustus
increased the footemans pay to Tacit. 1. Ann. p. 225. lin. 5, 11. p. 228, lin.
25.
ten asses a day, and as it seems shortly after it rose to a full denarius.
Beside wages the soldiers received in later times vestem de publico, as it
were some liuerie garment, not all his apparel, as I suppose. Plutarchus
Gracchis, among the laws which were established by C. Gracchus one was, says
he, That is, Militar, comma^ding a garment to be given the soldier by the
officer without any deduction of wages therefore.
(...). for before, as it appears by Polybius, they received apparel, and
other necessaries of the Quaestor, but the price was set up in their wages.
Vegetius lib. 2. cap. 19. Imperatoris miles, qui vest and annona publica
pascitur. Thirdly they received frumentum. Vegetius in the place above
alleged, Imperatoris miles qui annona publica pascitur. And in the free
state. Salust. Iugurth. Miles frumentum public datum vendere, panes in diem
mercari. In Polybius time the price was deducted out of their wages, and so it
continued long afterward: for Nero was the first, which unto the Praetorians
(who were in all preferments the foremost) dedit sine pretio frumentum, which
before they had at some under price. Tacit. 15. Annal. p. 542. The measure was
to a footeman for a month two thirds of an Athenian medimnus of wheat: to a
horseman two Medimni of wheat, and seven of oats or barley: as having, as it
may be supposed, a spare horse, and an attendant or two allowed. Polyb. lib.
6. page 187. Donat upon Terence limiteth dimensum serui to be four modij the
month, precisely agreeing with the rate of Polybius footeman in this place.
For a medimnus contains justly six modij, according to Tully Frumentaria in
Verrem, Suidas, and others. Notwithstanding the dimensum serui grew afterward,
as it may appear by the words of Marcius in Salust, and by Ep. 81.
Seneca, to five modij a month. Herodotus Polymnia vittaileth Xerxes people at
a choenix (that is the forty eightth part of a medimnus) a day, and that was
indeed That is, A days allowance. Suidas and alij.
(...) among the Grecians, somewhat less then Polybius rate, who allows
thirty two choenices the month. For the quantity of medimnus and modius thus
we may gather it. Quadrantal is the measure of a cubicall The Roman foot
less then ours by half our inch.
Roman foot. Festus and others. Now quadrantal contains tres modios
according to Volusius Moetianus, which is half a medimnus. So that a measure
of a square Roman foot in the bottom, and the third part of a foot high, is
the Roman modius: and of two foot high with the same bottom, an Atticall
medimnus. Of our vulgar measures medimnus being less then a bushel and an
half, and modius, which our common learning construeth for a bushel about a
pint less then a pecke. For consideration at the end of their service the
old soldier had oftentimes an assignement in land of inheritance, as after
the second Punicke war the Senate Lin. lib. 31, fol. 244. C.
awarded to them which had served in Afric quod agri Samnitis and Appuli
publicum populi Romani esset, and at other times upon like occasions. Sylla to
the Appia. 1. (...). p. 199. Which were, says he, thirty two. Liuim in
epitoma 89. forty seven, as I think, by corruption of copy.
Legions which had served vnd^ him in the civil wars That is, Distributed
much land in Italy; some which had lain in common before; and some taking it
by force from the owners.
(...), not only as in recompense of the former service, but much more to
have so many good soldiers at hand, whose fortune could not be severed from
his, and whom he might raise in a moment the case so requiring. The like upon
like respects did Caesar Julius placing his veteranas legiones in colonies
about him. Antonius and Augustus conspiring against the state named before hand
eighteen of the fairest and richest cities in Italy as Capua,, Rhegium,
Venusia, Nuceria, Beneuentum, Ariminium etc. which they promised to distribute
and part among the soldiers after the war Both land: and houses.
(...), voyding all the old inhabitants, and accordingly for the most part
performed it. under the Empire all provinces were replenished with such
militar colonies. For consideration in money at the end of their service
before Augustus time I find no stint set down. At the triumph after some
great war the soldier had some little remembrance: at the triumph of Liu.
li. 30 f 213.
Africanus forty asses a piece, two shillings six pence English. At the
triumph of Liu. i 45 f 387.
Paulus forty five asses, double the Centurion, triple the horse. At the
triumph of Appian. Mithr. page 159.
Pompey out of Asia 46. li. 3. s 9. d.
fifteen hundredth drachmaes a common soldier, and the rest in proportion. so
much was either wealth or ambition grown in so few years. At the Triumph of
App. 2. (...). p. 244.
Caesar after the civil wars the soldier 156. li. 5. s.
five thousand drachmaes, the Centurion ten thousand, the Tribune twenty
thousand. Augustus reducing it to a certainty upon the Garde-souldier at the
end of sixteen years service Dio. li. 55. p. 384.
bestowed five thousand drachmaes, upon the Legionarie at the end of twenty,
three thousand. For the pay of the Auxilia, the allies in the free state had
their pay and Polyb l 6. p. 187.
paymaster from home, as living in some equality of alliance, and yet
recognizing a superiority. Some allowance in corn they had even in Polybius
days from the Romans. In Augustus time first and so in the Empire the Sociall
Auxilia carrying arms more for the maintenance of the Princes estate, then for
the interest of their own liberty, received their pay and other commodities
of the Prince as well as the Legions.

It remains now to consider the number of the Legions and men which the
Romans commonly armed, or armed at the highest, or possibly could arm. Rome in
her infancy had only one Legion, according to Dionysius and Liuy in Romulus
time. fol. 3. F. ad hos Romana legio ducta, says he, in the singular number:
and fo. 6, F. in the beginning of Tullus Hostilius, Romanas legiones ium spes
deserve. rat in the plural.
Varro, consisting of three thousand footmen, and three hundredth horse, as
before it is showed: notwithstanding the words before alleged of Romulo.
(...), etc.
Plutarch, a man of a baser alloy, seem to import a multitude. After the
Ceninenses, and Antennates were incorporated, the Romans had then, says
Dionysius. lib. 2. page 77, six thousand (...).
Legionarie footmen, that is according to the usage of that time, two complete
Legions. In his army against the Sabins, Romulus armed of his own people, and
from his grandfather twenty thousand footmen, and eight hundredth horse.
Dionysius. page 78. Afterward the Sabins being received into the City, and
the Camerini with others, at his death Romulus Dionys. l. 2. p. 67.
left the City furnished of forty six thousand footmen, and little less
then According to Liuy lib. 1. fol. 4, B. and 9. E. 900. horse in tribus
centurijs.
a thousand horse; a great and almost incredible increase in one man's reign.
In the time of Tullus Hostilius third king of the Romans by the ruins of Alba
the Roman forces were (...).
doubled. Dionysius. lib. 3. page 130. Which if it be true in grammatical
understanding, the state of Rome at that time was able to make welny an
hundredth thousand men to the field: an excessive number of soldiers, seeing
the whole cense, which contained all men above seventeen years, not Dionys. l
9. page 430.
bond nor mechanical, in Seruius time amounted but to eighty thousand, or
eighty four thousand seven hundredth, as Liuie, and the same Dionysius page
167 do witness; although Fabius Pictor indeed makes it the number of men
able for service, something approaching to our number collected by consequence
out of Dionysius words. In the free state, from the beginning in a manner
without interruption, they commonly armed every year four Legions with their
Auxilia, as lib 1. page 6. 3. page 101. 6. page 180.
Polybius an ey-witnesse, and lib. 8, fol. 91, E.
Liuy do testify. which according to the lowest reckening of those times with
the Auxilia make thirty two thousand footmen, and four and twenty hundredth
horse. And this was their ordinary yearly stint, observed even in peaceable
times, and as it were to keep their hands in: a point of great consideration
and necessary use in a warlike common wealth. But how many they armed upon
occasions, or possibly could arm is another consideration. In the battle ad
lacum Regillum, Anno Vrbis conditae 257, the Romans Dionys. l. 6. p. 225
put in the field twenty four thousand, that is six complete Legions, as the
Legion was then, and three thousand horse, five hundredth as it seems to a
Legion, which exceeds greatly the use of (...) only twenty, lacking (beside
the same nine which are wanting in Dio) septima Galbiana, and the Vicesima
which we have placed in Syria. Now thirty one Legions Imperial, which in
Galbaes time we do find, according to our suppositions contain an hundredth
eighty six thousand footmen, and eighteen thousand six hundredth horse. The
Auxilia of the one kind and of the other in number not much otherwise. So we
have in these times usually mayntained by the Empire, footmen three hundredth
seventy two thousand, and horse thirty seven thousand two hundredth at the
smallest reckening. Whose ordinary pay, beside corn and some apparel, at one
denarius or dram a day for the footeman, and three for the horse, beside the
increase of wages given to the officers, amounts by the year to an hundredth
seventy seven millions five hundredth fourteen thousand denarij, in our money
five millions five hundredth sixteen thousand sixty two pounds and ten
shillings: which is more then the great Turk at this day receives in two
years toward all charges. And yet they maintained beside a guard of many
thousands for the Prince with double pay, another for the Provost of the city,
with many Cohorts of Nightwatchers; and many armadaes with proper soldiers
annexed, as shall be declared. Neither can we find throughout all the Roman
story for lack of pay any disorder or mutinee to have grown among the
soldiers though otherwise very mutinously disposed.

The service at home in the City was performed by three sorts of soldiers
principally; Praetoriani, Vrbani and Vigiles. Praetorium, (...), the Generals
pauilion, be he Consul or Praetor, or else whatsoever: and Praetoria cohors a
band of chosen men to the guard of his person, so named by Scipio Africanus,
but induced before in Romulus time by the name of Celeres, selected ex
fortissimis and nobilissimis, That is, Whom always he had about him being 300.
in number, for the guard of his person and dispatch of urgent affairs.
(...) ( Liuius.
non in bello solum sed etiam in pace) (...). Dionys. lib. 2. p. 65. in the
free common wealth not used, but As in the battle ad Reg^llum the Dictator had
cohortem delectam circa le praesidij c^^sa. Liu l. 2. f^. 18. D.
abroad in the war, till Sylla and Caesar usurping the state retained also at
home as among enemies their usual guard. But Sylla Appian. 1. and 2 (...). p.
200. 240. Salust, and other.
resigning the state and his guard both at once, howsoever he is charged by
Caesar nescire literas, may seem to have followed a better grammar then Caesar
himself; who dismissing his guard and not his government, committed a
notable and dangerous solecisme in matter of state, and opened the way to his
own destruction. After the death of Caesar the state being troubled, Antonius
by permission of the Senate That is, Put a guard about his person.
(...) of six thousand chosen men. 3. (...). p. 265. And Octauius pretending
enmity against Antonius returned out of Campania That is, Bringing with him
10000. men under one ensign for the guard of his person only.
(...) p. 279. and in the page following Antonius marching from Brundusium to
Rome That is, Selected out of his whole army a Praetorian cohort of the best
and choicest men.
(...). In bello Philippensia Praetorian cohort of two thousand going toward
Octauius was intercepted at sea by those of the contrary part. 3. (...). p.
337. and after the war Antonius and Octauius That is, Received into service
8000. soldiers which desired to continue in pay, and distributed them into
Praetorian cohortes.
(...). 5. (...). p. 347. and after the battle at Actium Augustus eschewing
his fathers fault, and thincking it expedient for the safety of his person,
maintenance of his state, and dispatch of affairs to have in a readiness a
convenient company of soldiers in arms, established under the name of
Praetoriani a guard often thousand men divided into ten cohorts: says Dio.
page 384.
lib. 53. Tacitus 4. page 333.
Annal mentions but nine in Tiberius time. In Vitellius time prauitate vel
ambitu confusus ordo militiae, sedecim praetoriae, quatuor vrbanae cohortes
scribebantur, quibus singula millia messent. 2. Hist. p. 104. This guard of
Praetorians consisted e militibus Etruria ferme Vmbriaque delectis, aut vetere
Latio, and colonijs antiquitus Romany, differing in that point only from the
guard of Tyrannes in ancient times, which commonly consisted of mercenary
strangers, and so the Emperors had also another guard of Germans, Tacitus. 1,
Annal. robora Germanorum qui tum custodes imperatori aderant. 13. Annal.
Germanos super eundem honorem custodes additos. Sueton: cap. 34.
Nerone. abductaque militum and Germanorum statione. which guard Galba
dissolved. Suet. cap. 12. Germanorum cohortem a Caesaribus olim ad custodiam
corporis institutam multisque experimentis fidelissimam dissoluit, ac sine vllo
commodo remisit in patriam. Dio, lib. 55. makes mention also of certain
horsemen of Batauia attending upon the Prince. That is, Certain choice
horsemen stranger, whom they call Bataui of Batauia an ^le in the Rhene; but
the number of them I cannot precisely set down.
(...). Of the Praetoriani some were horsemen: Tac. 1. Annal, Additur magna
pars praetoriani equitis. Suet: Claudio. c. 21. Africanus exhibuit Claudius
conficiente turma equitum praetorianorum, ducibus tribunis ipsoque praefecto.
most footmen, as Spiculatores, and other. Their proper office was (...) (and
so they are called of the Greek writers (...), and (...)) to watch and ward at
the Palace every Cohort in their turn, or to accompany the Prince abroad in
Forum, in Curiam, in conuiuium etc. Tac. 1. Hist: Consultantibus placuit
tentari animum cohortis, quae in palatio stationem agebat. and again, Annal:
12. Egreditur Nero ad cohortem quae more militae excubijs adest. Suet, cap. 6.
Othone: Obstitit respectus cohortis quae tunc excubabat. Tac. Annal. 1: Miles
in forum, miles in curiam comitabatur. Dio. li. 60. That is, At banquets
Claudius had always some soldiers attending upon him. which custom begun by
him is continued even to this day. p. 457.
(...). And not only the Prince himself, but his wife, mother and children
had likewise some of these Praetoriani attending upon them. Tac. 13. Annal.
Excubias militares, quae vt coniugi imperatoris olim, tum and vt matri
seruabantur, digredi iubet. With Germanicus in Germany were duae praetoriae
cohortes, 2. Ann. whether of the body of the Roman Guard, or after the ancient
use of the word, I can not determine. And 1. Annal. Tiberius sends with his
son Drusus into Pa^nonia duas praetorias cohortes. At the plays I find that
a cohort assisted to keep good order. Tac. 13. Ann. Statio cohortis assidere
ludis solita demouetur. Moreover in accompanying Ambassadors sent from the
Prince, in doing executions and murders, and many other serviceable points they
were by the Princes employed. In the war but seldom upon urgent occasions.
Tac. 1. Hist. Quod raro alias praetorianus, vrbanusque miles in aciem deducti.
Of the Praetorian soldiers the principal officers were called Praefecti
praetorio, Captains of the guard we may term them, chosen at the first out of
militar men till upon the danger discovered that way, how unsafe it was to put
such strength into men's hands of that quality though of mean birth, wisdom
in later times and skill in law was in that choice rather respected, as it
appears by Papinian, Vlpian and other famous Lawyers preferred to that room:
by means of whom peradventure the place became in the end more Cui princeps
rerum iudiciorumque summam commisitiqui and vice sacra iudicat and cu^ctarum
prouinciarum maximam posestatem habet: praeier qu^m vel vicarium eius nullus
magistratus hab^t plenissimum imperium merum.
judicial then militar; but at all times the greatest office in the state.
Zos. lib. 2. That is, the office of the Praefictus Praetorio is esteemed the
next degree to the Prince. p. 687
(...). The number of them at the first institution was two. Maecenas apud
Dionem lib. 52. in his advise to Augustuo, That is, I counsel you to appoint
two of the most choice persons of the Equites for captains of your guard. ^o
commit it to one may bre^^^e danger, and to more confusion. wherefore let there
be two Prafecti Praetorio, that if one besicke, you may not want one to
perform so necessary a charge. p. 325.
(...). Some other Grecians call the (...).
(...). Agrippina persuaded Claudius to reduce the whole government to one.
Tacit. 12. Annal. Distrahi cohortes ambitu duorum, and si ab vno regerentur
intensiorem fore disciplinam asseuerante vxore, transfertur regimen cohortium
ad Burrhum Afranium egregiae militaris famae. After whose death Nero again
duos praetorijs cohortibus imposuit. Ann. 14. In Galbaes time ^aco was only
without any fellow. Otho made two, Plotius Firmus, and Licinius Proculus, as
appears by Tacitus. 1. Hist. and so consequently afterward, sometime one,
sometime two, as it pleased the Prince. Now that which Maecenas counsaileth
Augustus to choose them ex equitibus Romany and no higher (least their high
birth should give them courage perchance to attempt against their sovereigns)
was observed in a manner continually till the time of Alexander Mammaeae, qui
Praefectis Praetorij suis, says Lampridius, senatoria^ addidit dignitatem, vt
viri clarissimi and essent, and dicerentur: quod ante a vel raro fuerat, vel
omnino non fuerat: cousque vt si quis imperatorum successorem Praef. Praet.
dare vellet, laticlauium eidem per libertum submitteret. Notwithstanding in
Vespasians time Titus praefecturam quoque praetorij suscepit, nunquam adid
tempus nisi ab equite Romano administratam. Suet. cap. 6.
Festus.
Tito, which opinion of Suetonius I find checked by Tacitus. 4. page 190.
Hist. where Aretinus Clemens before that time, quanquam senatorij ordinis,
was made Praefectus Praetorio. Beside the two Captains there was one
Praefectus castrorum, Tribuni as many as Cohorts: and under the Tribunes
Centuriones, and other petty officers, as in the armies abroad. Their pay was
in the free state f sesquiplex, (...), in the Empire double to that of the
Legionary soldiers. The Senators, says Dio. li. 53, That is, Immediately
established a law that those which should be of Augustus Guard should receive
double pay to the rest of the soldiers, to the end they might be more
dilligent and watchful in their charge.
(...). Tacitus 1. Annal. limiteth the sum, An Praetorias cohortes, quae
binos denarios acceperint, etc. that is in our money fifteen pence, which no
doubt is meant of the simple footeman only, for a Legionary horseman had more.
These Praetorian bands in Augustus and part of Tiberius time, lying dispersed
in the City and colonies about, were by Seianus united and placed together
in castris prope viuarium constructis, (...), or (...) they called it in
Greek. Seianus, says Tacicitus. 4. Annal, vim praefecturae modicam antea
intendit, dispersas Su^t. Augusto. ^.49. neque vnquam plures quam tres cohortes
in vrbe esse passus est. Augustus, easque sine castris, reliquas in hiberna and
aestiua circa finitimae oppida dimittere assueuerat.
per vrbem cohortes vna in castra conducendo, vt simul imperia acciperent
numeroque and robore and visu inter se, fidueia ipsis, in caeteros metus
crearetur. praetendebat lasciuire militem diductum. si quid subitum ingruat,
maiori auxilio pariter subueniri, and seuerius acturos si vallum statuatur
procul vrbis illecebris. Suetonius cap. 37.
Tiberio. Romae castra constituit, quibus praetorianae cohortes vagae ante id
tempus and per hospitia dispersae continerentur. The ruins are under the
wales of Rome, as it is now not far from Saint Laurence gate. For
afterward Constantine the great, perceiving the order to have more of the bad
in it then of the good, That is, Ca^sed the Praetorian soldiers, and destroyed
their camp. lib. 2 p. 677.
(...), says Zosimus, retayning the name of Praefectus Praetorij still, but
matring the office ^ (says the same lib. 2. page 688.
Zosimus who seldom says well of that Prince) by dividing it into
Praefectus Praetoris orientis. Praefectus Praet. Illyric. P. P Jtaliae. P, P.
Galliae.
four, and vveakening their authority. Milites vrbani in Augustus time (if Dio
be not deceived, as I think he For in another place he writes (...). and
Tacitus 3. Hist. makes 1000. an excessive and disorderly number for the
Vrbani. pa. 104.
is) were in number six thousand, distributed into four Cohorts, or
companies. Dio page 384.
lib. 55. (...), in Tiberius and Cains time into three only. 4. page 333.
Annahum. Tres vrbanae cohortes. and Josephus (...) cap. 18.
lib. 2. (...), which, as it appears by Suetonius cap. 10.
Claudio, were the cohortes vrbanae. in Vitellius time quatuor vrbanae
cohortes quibus singula millia inessent. Tacitus. 2. Hist. page 104. Their
governor was called Praefectus vrbis, (...) taken ex senatorio ordine. whose
office Dio describes lib. 52 in Maecenas oration; That is, Let there be a
Praefectus vrbis one of the greatest countenance and such as before has passed
al degrees of honor with commendation, not to govern in absence of other
officers, but to undertake the government of the city both in other matters,
and namely to judge in cases of appeal from other magistrates, and in criminal
not only within the city but within 650 stadia round about.
(...) ( leg. (...). veletiam (...)) (...) 1. Dig. quic quid intra vrbem ad.
vuttuur, ad praefectum vrbi vide tur pertinere. sed and si quid intra
centesimum millia^tum admissum sit. ad praefectu^ vrbi pertines. so that Dio in
this place seems to make six stadia and an half answereable to a Roman mile.
(...). His office dured for life, unless it pleased the Prince otherwise upon
desert or displeasure to deprive him. Dio. lib. 52. (...). Tac. 6. An shows
the occasion of the foundation of the office in the old commonwealth, and the
use of it in the new. L. Piso praefectus vrbis recens contiuuam potestatem, and
insolentia parendi grauiorem mire temperauit. Namque antea profectis domo
regibus, ac mox magistratibus, ne vrbs sine imperio foret, in tempus
deligebatur quitus redderet, ac subitis mederetur. Caeterum Augustus bellis
ciuilibus Ciluium Maecenatem equestris ordinis cunctis apud Romam atque Italiam
praeposuit. Mox rerum potitus, ob magnitudinem populi, ac tarda legum auxilia,
sumpsit e consularibus, qui coerceret seruitia, and quod audacia turbidum, nisi
vim metuat. Notwithstanding this new office, the name and shadow of the old
remained still, when the Consuls going forth ad instaurandum sacrum in Albano
monte one or two of the young nobility were left for fashion sake, with title
of Praefectus vrbis, and authority of the Consuls. Tac. 6. Annal. Duratque
adhuc simulacrum, quoties ob ferias Latinas praeficitur qui consulare munus
vsurpet. read Suetonius Claudio. cap. 4. Nerone. cap. 7. Aulus Gellius lib.
14. cap. vltimo. but principally 1. Digest. tit. 12. and 1. cod. tit. 38.
where the points of this office are set down particularly. Vigiles were night
vvalking soldiers appointed by Augustus ad restinguenda incendia, prohibenda
Cassiodorus de praefecto vigilum qui surta in suribus facis, dum illos noctu
circumuents.
furta nocturna etc. ex libertinis and afterward of others too, severed into
seven companies, with one Praefectus Vigilum, a Deo officio praefecti vigilum
vide Dig. 1. tit. 15. cod. 1. tit. 43.
Gentleman of Rome, Tribunes and other officers. Strabo. lib. 5, That is,
Against the inconvenience of fire by n ght Augustus appointed bands of
soldiers taken i libertius generis hominibus.
(...). Dio lib. 55. That is, Because about that season many parts of the ci^ty
-- were wasted by fi^e, ^gustus to me^^e with such mi^chances chose ^a^^
l^bertinis seven companies appointing an Eque^ for their governor, meaning it
only for a time. Howbeit by experience finding the use and necessity of that
institution he retained it still. and so they remain even to our days,
collected not only e libertin. 1. but of other, also and have their ca^pes in
the cit^^ and pa^ ^f the state.
(...) (...). p. 385.

The city of Rome though opportunely seated for sea matters, as being distant
only fifteen miles from mare Tyrrhenum, and having the river of Tiber passing
through the city of convenient breadth, and for depth able to carry small
vessels, nevertheless many hundredth years neglected the service. Which thing
peradventure among others was not the least cause which mayntained the state
in integrity, and preserved it so long without corruptions, of which the
traffic, and service by sea, as these Politickes make us believe, is the
principal mother and nurse. Notwithstanding a conquering state, and they
which will live That i^, by their a^ Lands of others or in liberty
themselves, must necessarily have a competent power that was also Arist 7.
Politico^um.
(...), must necessarily have (...). And generally no state may look to stand
without notable molestation, and danger of ruin, much less to enlarge, which
in any kind of service, on foot, or one horseback, or by sea is quite
defective and utterly disfurnished, although perhaps it cannot in all attain
to that degree of perfection, which some of their neighbors have attained
unto. Wherefore the Romans in the first Punicke war having to deal with the
Carthaginians, undoubted lords of the sea Of a long time even from their
ancestors.
(...), and perceiving the error, in the year ab vrbe condita 490 determined
to apply themselves, and diligently to attend to that part of service: having
before, as Polybius reports, not only no naues tectae, but no naues longae
at all, no not so much as any lembus or passage boat, but only upon
borrowing. As for the Quinquereme a principal ship of war, their
shipwrights knew not any way what it meant, till such time as one of the
Carthaginians by great good chance was in the strayte at Rhegium run upon
ground, and so being taken by the Romans, the shipwrightes used it for a
pattern. Again the men which were mustered, having never served at sea,
were set upon benches in the same order, and taught by practice upon the dry
land to keep their time and measure in strokes. And this was indeed the
first time the (...). Polyb. li. 1. page 9.
Romans attended to service by water; although some Roman Apud Liuium lib. 4
50. D.
vvriters upon a vanity and ambition have reported, anno vrbis conditae 329
class ad Fidenas pugnatum fuisse cum Verentibus. which perhaps was some
bravvle betvveene bargemen; as indeed the river is so strayte at that place,
that scarce two barges can pass one by another. And lib. 9, f. 106, K. 109, A
etc. and Florus lib. 1, c. 11 about the time of the waire with the Latins:
extant and partae de Anno spolia, capta hostium class; si tamen illa clas^is.
nam sex fuere rostratae sed hic numerus illu ini^^s nauale bellum fait.
Liuy not altogether free of the humor, in his former books makes solemn
mention of the navy, of Praefectus orae maritimae, Duumutri nauales, socij
nauales and so forth, which either were not at all, or not to any purpose of
war. For as concerning matter of merchandise, many years before, Ancus
Marcius perceiving that Tiber at the mouth yielded commodity of haven, builded
Ostia to lade and unlade vvares there, That is, So that Rome was not only
served of whatsoever the cu^trey about did afforde but by that means provided
also of sea commodities.
(...). Dionysius. page 136.
lib. 3. And yet to say true, I see not how that opinion of Polybius can in
rigor stand with the causes of the Tarentin war some years before that
time, alleged by the common consent of all the Roman stories, but specified
most particularly by Appian page 443. in his fragment (...), and the Epitome of
Liuy. lib. 12. first that there was an ancient league with the Tarentines,
That is, That the Romans with their ship^e should not pass the point called
Lacintum.
(...), which shows that the Romans haunted the sea. Then that the Roman
Duumuir went with ten naues (...).
tectae to survey the coasts of Magna Graecia, whereof four were suncke, one
taken, and the Duumuir slain. But whether now first or otherwise, the Romans
upon the occasion before mentioned entering the sea brought thither from their
service by land, says Polybius, a kind of violent proceeding, as though
wind and weather notwithstanding, what once they had determined to do, that
they must necessarily go through withal. Which manner of contending and striving
or rather enforcing of Fortune, as it is by land commendable, and to the Romans
has been cause of infinite good, so by sea against that wild element it did
them more harm, then their enemies the Carthaginians did; who although through
their long experience by sea they excelled the Romans in skill and agility
(...), yet That is, At handy strokes in grapling, and valor of soldiers.
(...) being inferior, they were at the length inferior in the whole.

Ships, as far as concerns our purpose, were of three sorts: of war, of
burden, and of passage: the first rowed with oar, the second governed with
sail, and the last often towed with cords. Ships of passage by sea, were
either for transportation of men, (...) called also (...): or of horses, (...),
hippagines. over a river, or some short cut peradventure by sea, (...),
feriboates, if the number were few; and to pass whole armies with their
carriage (...), rates, plankes or fagots tied together. Ships of burden,
onerariae, (...), and Hulkes.
(...), which word our vulgar language also retains, were for carriage of
vittaile and other provision, sometime for Caesar. 4. com. appoints 80.
onerarias ad duas legione^ transpor^andas.
transportation of soldiers also. Of ships of war the most principal and
of greatest service were naues longae, (...), so named of their form most apt
both to be weelded and to make way, whereas ships of burden were commonly
built big in the belly, and more round for capacity. Now Longae were sorted
again into their several kinds, according to the number of (...), says one.
banks and oars placed one above another, as I take it, though peradventure
not directly. some I know have concluded otherwise, that in the Trireme for
example, three men with three oars sat upon one bank, and some other that
three men pulled at one oar, directly against both the authority of ancient
writers produced by themselves, and contrary to the ancient portraytures of
triremes remaining yet to be seen: so incredible a thing it seemed to believe
that which in our gallyes now adays they never saw: where as in truth Zosimus
tells us, that very many years before his time they had disco^tinued to make
any triremes at all: as indeed from the battle at Actiu^, til the battle
between Constantin the great and Licinius at Hellespont, I do not remember by
sea any action of moment. His words be li. 5. p. 797. That is, These ships
(speaking of the Liburnicae) are as swift at sea as the Galley of fifty cares,
but nothing of the like service to the Triteme, which kind of ship this many
years has not been built, although Polybius describes the measures and
proportions of the Hexeres an usual ship in the wars between the
Carthaginians and Romans.
(...). But howsoever, some different circumstance in the manner of rowing
produced the different kinds of Naues longae. For generally the ships of
war, as before we have said, although in the flight, and otherwise for
speed both oar and sail were used, in the Dio. li. 50. p. 297. (...).
combat were directed only by oar, as being a thing very serviceable in those
calm seas, and more at commandment. The most usual kinds of Naues longae in
the Roman wars, especially ancient, were these three, Triremis, Quadriremis,
and Quinqueremis: (...) exceeding one another by one rank of oars, and
consequently rowed with more strength, and builded more hye. In the nienth
year of the first Punicke war the two Admirals were Hexeres. (...).
Polyb. l. 1. And in the writers of Roman stories we have mention also above
this number, though seldom used in the Roman wars, as of Hepteres, Octeres,
(...). Philippe of Macedonie father to Perseus had an (...). Polyb. in fragm.
p. 17. which place lib. 33 fol 264.
Liuy translateth thus: Regiam vnan inhabilis prope magnitudinis, quam sexdecim
(...).
versus remorum agebant. And yet the Egyptian Kings exceeded vsque ad viginti,
and triginta versus remorum, (...): and Philopator, as Demetrio. page 1666.
Plutarch and lib. 5.
Athenaeus testify, built one of forty rank (...), more like to a castle or
palace, then a ship, being in length fore hundredth and twenty foot, and in
height seventy two, containing four thousand rowers, other mariners four
hundredth, and almost three thousand soldiers. On the other side under Triremis
there were two perfect kinds, Biremis and Moneres, and two imperfect, (...)
and (...). Biremis, in Greek (...), and more usually (...) consisted of two
ranckes of oars; of which the fittest for ser-seruice both for lightness and
swiftness were called Liburnicae, as (...). p. 62.
Appian says, of the Liburni a people in Dalmatia who were the inuentours of
that fashion and building: albeit in later times, as it may seem by Vegetius
and others, all ships, though of more or fewer ranks then two, built after
that manner were generally called Liburnicae. Tacitus 1. Hist. page 213. comple^
quod bitemium, quaeque simplies ordine agebantur, interpreting Moneres into
Latin.
Moneres mentioned by Liuy lib. 38. was a galley consisting of one simple
rank, whereof I remember five kinds specially named: (...), or Actuaria
viginti remorum, of twenty oars, (...). incertus author adfinem Atliani.
(...) which had thirty (named also by page 71.
Polybius in fragmentis, as it seems to me (...) which had forty, (...),
which had fifty, as the galleyes now a days commonly have, and (...) which had
an hundredth. The Grecians use (...), and more usually (...), which lib 10 c 25.
Gellius translateth celox as equivalent to Moneres: and so that gradation in
the sixth of Polybius seems to induce; (...). Of the imperfect kinds, (...)
and (...) seems to have been a ship furnished with one rank and a half
only, as it were between a Moneres and a Biremis: and (...), between a
Biremis and a Triremis, with two rows and an half. These four kinds under
the Trireme, although being built as I suppose, ad forman longarum nauium, yet
are not so generally comprehended by the name, but in the writings of approved
authors stand oftentimes in opposition to longae, and some of the kinds to
(...) also. Liuius libro. 21, seuereth celoces, and lib. 38. (...), from
longae. (...).
Thucydides in his proeme seems not to allow the name of (...) to (...), and
yet to some other under the Trireme, whereas Herodotus, Cho, expressly names
it inter (...), the same which in Polymnia.
another place sets both (...) and (...) in opposition to ships of war:
and so does (...).
Plutarch, Catone, by oversight Liburnicae. and that some of the Moneres also
were (...) it is clear by Liuy libro. 38: Neue monerem habeto ex belli causa,
which else were a vain and needelesse addition. Beside these sorts
diuersified, as we see, by the number of rows, we have in the stories
particular mention of others, as Myoparones, Pristes, Phaseli, Cercuri, etc
differing peradventure from those we have reckened in the fashion and manner of
building, as being in some part built like to the Longae, and in part to the
Hulkes, as Appian, 5. (...), witnesses namely (...).
Phaseli trieritici. And these kinds of shipping we find also to have been
employed in service by sea, sometime principally, and sometime (...), and as
accessaries to others. And thus much of the different fashions of ships of
war, which again were divided in tectus and aportas: rostratas, turritas,
and such as were otherwise. Tectae, or constratae, (...), so called because
they had (...), hatches: apertae, (...), having none: although Aphractum in the
neuter gender in some places of Tully, Diodore, Plutarch etc seems to stand
for some special kind of ship, and (...) in Polybius for a Quinquereme. The
greater ships, as Quaariremis and upward, had always, as far as I
remember, hatches: the Triremes and Liburnica constrata. Plutarch. Antonio. and
contrarily the (...) in opposition to (...). Appianus Mithridat.
Biremes sometimes otherwise: the rest that were under in a manner always
apertae. (...) were induced to the end that the ship might be more capable
of soldiers for her defense, nam antea, says Pliny. libro. 7, ex prora
tantum and puppi pugnabatur. Rostratae, aeratae, (...), were such as had rostra
ex aere, (...). Rostra were common to all ships of war, greater or smaller,
covered or open, to all such at the least, which were to encounter with the
enemy: in Speculatorijs, and such like that were merely (...), being not
greatly material. For whereas in their manner of fight by sea there were three
ordinary ways to offend, either to break the enemies ship by running
against it, to wipe away her oars, or to kill the soldiers which stood at
defense upon the hatches and so board her, for perfourming the first it was
meet that their own should be surely and strongly headed for that
encountre. Turritae, (...), which had ad proram and puppim turrium
propugnacula, vt in mari quoque, says lib. 32.
Pliny, pugnaretur velut e muris. Pollux makes mention of The right and left
turret.
(...), which were on the sides.

The officers in the navy were Praefectus classis, Admiral of the whole
Armada; Duumuiri in the ancient story, when as two were joined in the
commission. Trierarchus governor of a particular ship, then Gubernator the
Master, (...), and other under officers: the rest socij nauales or milites,
(...). again socij nauales of two sorts, (...), remiges to handle the oar,
or (...), whom Caesar calls nautas, for the other services in the ship.
Socij nauales in the free state were collected ex vltimae classis hominibus, or
(...), as lib. 6. p 180.
Polybius speaks; in later times ex 3. Hist. 132. etc.
Dalmatis, Pannonijs etc. The soldiers, (...), most commonly Legionary,
accommodated both to fight at sea, and upon occasion to make their descent into
the land: and in later times to every Armada was Veget. l. 4. c. 31.
annexed his proper Legion with the Legionary officers appertaining. In the
first Punicke war we have example in lib. 1. page 11.
Polybius of three hundredth remiges, and an hundredth and twenty (...) in each
of the ships of war: and likewise a division of the Armada into four
ranks: the first called (...).
prima legio, and prima classis: and in consequence the second, and third; the
fourth triarij: but I find little mention of this division in the practice of
later times. In the fourth year of the first Punicke war, and first of their
service by sea against the Carthaginians, the Romans manned out an Polyb. lib.
1. p. 9
hundredth Quinqueremes, and twenty Triremes. Florus. cap 2.
libro. 2. increases the number, 160. nauium classis intra sexagesimum diem
quam caesa silua fuerat, in ancoris stetit: of so wonderful a dispatch must
they be, which will be lords of the world: and yet that of the elder Scipio
was more marvelous, who Liuy lib. 28 extremo.
die quadragesimo quinto quam ex siluis detracta materia erat, naues instructas
armatasque in aquam deduxit and that being not assisted by the public purse.
In the eightth year of the said Punicke war, three hundredth, as it may be
collected by page 11.
Polybius were manned. Regulus sailed into Afric with three hundredth and
fifty. Appian page 14.
(...). Aemilius and Fuluius had Polyb. li. 1. p. 16.
three hundredth sixty four ships of service in the same war, which number
can hardly be matched again in the Roman state in many years after. In the
second Punicke an hundredth and sixty, and two hundredth, or not much above.
Against Antiochus they manned but eighty, and at other times the like in their
more flourishing state. Which doubt Polybius also notes in lib. 1. page 26.
(...).
his stone, but leaves the solution to another place. For although the number
of three hundredth sixty four seem not so excessive, yet such and so great was
the fleet, by reason of the quality of the ships, that not only the
Grecian, and Macedonian, but even the Persian power, which covered the sea with
twelve hundredth sail, could not by Polybius judgment stand in comparison.
After Polybius time Pompey in bello Appian Mithridat. p. 150.
Piratico had not above two hundredth and seventy. But in the civil war he
had as (...). 1. p. 225.
Appian witnesses six hundredth naues longas (...). And Augustus after he had
driven Sex Pompeius out of Italy (...). 5. p. 387.
six hundredth longas naues of his own, beside seventeen which fled with
Pompey, and the navy of Antony; who shortly after at the battle of Actium
furnished five hundredth ships of war ((...)) where Augustus had two
hundredth and fifty. Plutarch page 1: 78.
Antonio. And this was, as I take it, the greatest reckening in the Roman
state. For whereas we read of Appian (...). page 190.
sixteen hundredth with Sylla out of Asia; Tacit. Ann. 2. page 258.
a thousand with Germanicus in Germany, and such like; they are not to be
otherwise intended but as vessels to transport, not for the war.

After the civil wars ended Augustus having as it were walled the state with
Legions and Aides by land, as before we have showed, established also, to
guard the Empir^ by sea, two ordinary Armadaes in Italy, the one at Misenum in
mari infero to protect^ keep in obedience France, Spain, Mauretania, Afric,
Egypt, Sardinia and Sici^ another at Rauenna in mari supero to defend and
bridle Epirus, Macedonia, Achai, Asia, Creta, Cyprus etc. and out of Italy one
in Tac. 2.3. Hist. pa. 90. 130. Arria^. (...). point Euxiui.
Ponto Euxino for defense of those cuntreies consisting of forty ships at the
beginning of Vespasians time. Egesippus lib. 2. Beside these Armadaes which
remained ordinary for defense of the Empire, proximum Gallae littus, says 4
Ann. p. 333.
Tacitus, rostratae naues praesidebant, quas Actiaca victoria captas Augustus
inepidu^ Foroiuliense miserat valido cum remige: and beside apud idonea
prouinciarum sociae triremes. Claudius adjoining Brita^ny to the Empire
adjoined also the British Armada. And not only by sea, but also upon the
rivers, which bordered the Empire, several nauies were maintained, as
Germanica classis upon the Rhene, Danubiana classis, and Euphratensis. Tacitus
and others.

THE EXPLICATION OF A PLACE IN POLYBIVS WITH A DEFENSE OF THE COMMON copy
against the opinion of certain great learned men, wherein also the reason of
the militar stipend is declared.
POLYBIVS lib. 2. discoursing of the excellent and miraculous fertility of
Lombardie, makes report that a man in his inn might there be well and
plentifully entreated for half an assis a meal, which is, says he, the
fourth part of an obolus. His words in our common printed books be these. p.
41. That is, They which travel that country, are entertained in their innes
not bargaining by parcel, but demanding how much in gross they must pay for a
man. and for the most part the hosts give entertainment with allowance of all
necessary things for half an assis, that is, the fourth part of an obolus,
seldom exceeding that rate.
(...). For the better declaration whereof we are to understand, that Dram
was a Grecian silver coin weighing precisely the eightth part of an ounce, and
usually divided into six Oboli: That Dram and Denarius, according to the
most testimonies in number and most pregnant in proof against the fewer and
more doubtful, of the ancient stories are interchangeably used, and to
construed in the one and the other tongue, as precisely equivalent: That
Denarius contained precisely and in all ages four Sestertij: and at the first
was current for ten Asses only, as the Denarius, quasi dena era.
name also imports: but afterward went at a hyer reckening, sometime for
sixteen. So that of our silver, whereof five shillings sterling makes the
ounce, Dram or Denarius weighed seven pence halfpenny: and Obolus was in
value penny farthing: Sestertius, penny halfpenny farthing A kue I call the
eightth part of our penny; a ^ee, the sixteenth; a prick the two and thirtieth.
kue. Assis at the first institution, halfpenny farthing: and when the Denarius
went at sixteen Asses, of our money but farthing kue cee prick. And if at any
time Denarius was current for twelve Asses, as Polybius seems to make it in
this For if half an Assis be the quarter of an Obolus, one obolus is equal to
two asses, and consequently six oboli, that is the Dram or Denarius to
twelve asses.
place, then one Assis was worth halfpenny kue of English money; and an half
Assis, farthing cee, the price of a man's dinner in his inn in Lombardie. This
saying of Polybius seems to Budaee an impossibility, and to D. Hottoman,
page 20. of his book de re nummaria, a miracle. Which if Hottoman had said,
and said no more, it had been well said: for as a miracle Polybius put it
down, and so it may seem much more unto us, considering the prices of things
in our age. But Hottoman not contenting himself to accept it as a miracle, not
with that most true and justifiable consideration, as anon shall appear, that
money has his value by position and not by nature, by the help of that
blessed art of correcting old copies proceeds to Mihi tamen, says
Hottoma^ p. 23. tantuli nummi pretium cogitinu venit in mentem suspicari
duofoedissima in illo Polyb^j loco menda subasse etc.
amend the place, in steed of (...), an Half-assis, reading (...), that is
two Asses and an half: and in steed of (...), the fourth part of an Obolus,
(...), the fourth part of a Dram: the word (...), as he gesseth, being
written not at large, but by note. ^. which the next copyer not understanding
left out: and the note.. signifying a Dram easily slipping into, which
signifies an Obolus. And to strengthen his correction he adds further, that
it is a thing never heard of, vt

(...) Translations of the marginall Greek.
In the margin of Tacitus.

Page 2.* (...), destroyed. ^ For virtue, wealth or nobility was with him a
public crime against al men. 4. a Galba lost opinion of orderly proceeding
and popularity, in putting to death certain noblemen without form of law,
though peradventure they had justly deserved to die. 5. (...), to be slain by
treason. 7. a He that is sent governor into Egypt sustaineth the person and
place of the King. * In extorsions and murders upon cruelty and avarice. 12. a
He gave to the judges of the Ludi Olympici a million of sesterces, which
afterward Galba demanded of them back again. b Galba sought out those who
had bought or received in gift any thing of Neroes favorites, and of them he
exacted it. 20. Intending to make sacrifice to Jupiter, and be seen of the
citizens. 21. He kissed his fingers and cast toward every one of them. 22.
They rauened, robbed, and spoiled all things they could lay their hands on.
23. *Getting up on the porches and high places about the Place of asse^bly, as
it were to behold a play. 24. With which the Centurions scourge them that
deserve punishment. 25. Otho fearing to contradict the^, answered that he would
make the man away, but not so suddenly; for that he had matter of importance
which he must first learn out of him. 27. Galbaes body Heluidius Priscus took
up by Othoes permission, and Argius his freedman buried it by night. 28. This
year Sulpicius Galba conquered the Chatti. 29. (...), universally one and
other. 31. Missing of their desire in Verginius, they sought to fulfill it in
some other. 41. Otho dispatched toward Tigellinus lying at Sinuessa. for there
he soiourned, having ships atte^ding in the road as though he would have fled
further. and first he attempted to corrupt him who was sent, offering him store
of gold to let him escape: then not obtaining his purpose he gave him
notwithstanding the gold, praying him that he would yet have patience a little
til his beard might be shaven, and himself taking the razour cut his own
throat. 45. a Least being in wine you fall to quarrelling amongst your selves,
and wound one another, and so dishonor the banquet. for the sight of arms
draws men often to handling of them. Telemachus excuse why he removed his
fathers armor and weapons out of the place where the wooers used to eat. b 2.
Centurions. d 80 Senators. e Sending the^ out by a back gate. 49. a And the
common people accounted the rising of Tiber as an evil sign. b The river did
most harm in the corn market, whereupon followed a great dearth for many
days. 53. To do his reverence to the Prince, and receive co^missio^ from him
concerning the affairs of Iewry. 54. c Some say that the Island was called
Cyprus, of Cyprus the son of Cinyrus. e The said altar was placed in the open
air without any covert, as others also in Homer seem to have been, on which
those that travailed by the way did offer. f It is reported and believed
amongst the Bargylietae that the image of Diana named Kindyas though lying open
to all weather is yet neither touched with snow, nor rain at all. 78. Slaying
all those of the vantgard. 81. One of the common soldiers stretching out his
sword and crying, We are thus resolved for thee all o Caesar, slew himself.
84. Supposing it madness to receive the Empire at the conquered hands, having
refused it before at the conquerours. and fearing to go in Embassy to those
of Germany whom he had forced to many things against their own will. 100.
Nothing amazed at the change determined to go on his journey to Rome. 142.
Small vessels strait and light of some 25 men a piece; seldom and at the
uttermost not above 30. the Grecians call them Camarae. 159. a The temple of
Jupiter, and Juno and Minerua. b At what time also the Capitol was burnt. which
foul act some imputed to Carbo, some to the Consuls, others said it was done
by Syllaes co^ma^dement. The certainty was not known. neither can I conjecture
the cause why it was done. f Appian. for his felicity against his enemies his
flaterers named him the Happy, which name proceeding first of flattery was
afterward confirmed to him by common consent. Plut. Lastly upon these accidents
he commanded himself to be called The happy: for so much does the word
Felix signify. 165. And fighting in 3. several places in the city, they were
al made an end of. 171. To have 12. fasces always and in every place borne
before him, and to sit between the present Consuls in a chair of estate. 185.
An escape of memory. 200. a Being brethren, and in a manner of the same years,
and never doing any thing the one without the other, but being always united,
and communicating as in blood, so in their counsels and wealth, they governed a
great while the 2. Germanies together, afterward being sent for by Nero into
Greece as though he had stood in need of their sufficie^cy, they were
according to the nature of those times accused, and both of them let themselves
blood to death. 207. (...), archiers on horseback. 220. a He hid himself in a
cave under ground, and there lay secret the space of 9. years with his wife,
on whom he begat 2. sons. b As it were by divine providence. 234. Dionysius
in his periegesis speaking of Alexandria, where is, says he, the temple of
the great god Jupiter Sinopita beautified with much gold, then the which there
is no one temple in the world more goodly and glorious. 235. For he brought not
with him that name from Sinope, but after his coming to Alexandria the name of
Sarapis was given him, which in the Egyptian language signifies Pluto. 239. In
these times the nobleme^ of Rome, such as be desirous of good learning, in
steed of travailing to Athens go to Massilia. and in another place he
attributes to the^ the commendation of wariness in dispense, and modesty.
243. Xiph. Agricola the first Roman that we have memory of discovered Britanny
to be an Ila^d. Dio. In process of time first under Agricola Propraetor, and
now under Seuerus the Emperor it was evidently known to be an Island. 250. For
as the proverb says venture must be made in the Carian (that is the common
mercenary soldier) not in the Generals person. 262. Making an expedition into
Germany he returned not having so much as once seen the enemy. now it is
needless to report what great honors therefore were then bestowed upon him,
and always after upon other Emperors his matches, least that suspecting by
the smalnesse of the honors their actions to be checked they should wreake
their anger upon the Senators. (...), worthy to be led in triumph, or
triumphed over.
FINIS.
In the margin of the Annotations.

Page 2.f. Dio. Wherefore it becomes us not to mourn for him, but to magnify
always his spirit, as a god. h Afterward the Centurions with torches put fire
to the pile, which was soon consumed, and out of it an eagle let loose flew
up, as carrying forsooth his soul into heaven. p. 16. Appian. To be sacred and
not to be touched himself, and whosoever else should fly unto him. Dio. The
prerogatives granted to the Tribunes were conferred upon him, so that if any
man should injury him in word or deed, he was to be reputed as a
sacrilegious and detestable person. p. 18 a Antony allotted soldiers to death,
not those who had stirred mutinees, forsaken their place in watch, or standing
in battle, upon which crimes only the law of arms has laid so rigorous and
terrible a punishment, but etc. b Called then Lugudunum, now Lugdunum. p. 36. a
Northerly winds blowing yearly after the summer solstitiu^ some xx. days,
about the rising of the Dogstarre. b Being mixed of the northerly and western
winds. p. 39. h One day after Antonius entered the city, being the third of the
month Apellaeus. p. 40. a Of the Roman wars he spared to triumph, as being
civil, and neither much beseeming himself, and much misliked and abhorred of
the people, yet did he notwithstanding carry in triumph all the accidents of
those wars in diverse pictures, and the images of the captains and
principal men, saving of Pompey. who^ only he eschewed to show as being yet
in all men's hearts greatly desired, and wished for. b The show in his triumph
of the citizens slain in Afric did much grieve the people. p. 47. Dionysius
gloried much more in his poemes, then in the happy success of his wars. and
amongst other poets that lived in the Tyrants court Philoxenus a maker of
Dithyrambi, a man of great reputation and renown in that kind of poem, the
Tyrannes verses being read in banquet which indeed were naught, was aske'd his
opinion of them. Who speaking somewhat freely his mind the Tyranne was
offended with his answer: and crying out that upon envy he had spoken ill of
his poemes, commanded those that attended to carry him forthwith away into the
quarrie-pittes p. 48. This kind of knavery and enuyous iugling and deceit, not
by dispraising but by commending to ruin your neighbors, was first and
principally found out by such as remain in Princes courts, upon gelousie and
ambition they have one to out-growe another. p. 50. d Every one of the Legions
is of 4000 a piece. c Ten Legions were enrolled of 4000 a piece. p. 51. d There
followed him the horse belonging to the Legion. for every Legion has annexed
to it an hundredth and twenty horse. p. 53. c For dividing themselves into
payres, of the 6. months they keep the field each pair commands two
months. g The law commands all the 60. centuries to obey and do what is
commanded by him. p. 54. c After that Augustus was settled in the monarchy, he
quit the Italians of the pains of service, and utterly disarmed them. g The
gentlemen on horseback must of necessity serve ten years, the footmen 16.
before they be 46. years of age. p. 55. e When they will take up any soldiers,
they call the tribes one by one, as the lot falls. p. 56. g The same form of
government the Praefecti also use with the allies. p. 58. f The first day of
the year they both swear themselves, and caused others to swear, that they
would accept for good all Caesar's acts. which thing is used even at this day
for the acts of the present Emperors, and for those of all their predecessors
whose memory is not disgraced. p. 61. a The whole figure of the castrametation
is a square of equal sides. p. 63. a If the place chance to be uneven, they
make it plain and even. g When they are first gathered together into the
camp, and ready to enter the enemies country. p. 65. k Romulus divided his
people into Legions, and every Legion co^sisted of 300 persons. o He resolved
to make war against the Sabins arming all the Roman forces, which were double
to that they were before the taking of Alba. p. 70. e The Provost of the city
having but few soldiers under his government. p. 71. ^ Having never so much
as imagined of sea service, the^ first they entered into conceyt thereof. p 72.
c For being without sails, and prepared only for the fight, they did not
follow in chase those which fled. i Liburni a people of Illyrium, who with
light and swift ships moved about the Mare Ionium, and islands there.
Whereupon at this day the Romans call the lightest and swiftest of the Biremes
Liburnicae. p. 73. b Triacontoros and Tessaracontoros and Pentecontoros have
their names of the number of their oars. Moneres and Biremis and so in
consequence have their names according to the number of ranckes of oars one
above another. e Using but few Triremes but furnished with Pentecontori, and
long ships. g Ships of service there were some five hundredth, and of
Liburnicae an infinite number. p. 74. m A man may well doubt what the reason
should be why the Romans being now lords of all, and in a far greater height
then before, can neither man out so many ships, nor sail with so great
nauies.
The rest which are not here translated are but either some few words, or else
Greek of that, the substance whereof is in the text.

FINIS.
A NOTE OF THE EDITIONS USED IN SVCH AVthors as are cited by page.
Appianus. in folio. Lutetiae apud Carolum Stephanum anno. 1551. Arrianus. in
folio. apud H. Stephanum anno. 1575. Cicero. in 8o. Lutetiae apud Iacobum du
Puys anno. 1573. Dio. in folio. Lutetiae apud Robertum Stephanum anno. 1548.
Dionysius Halicarnasseus. in folio. apud Rob. Stephanum anno. 1546. Diodorus
Siculus. in folio. apud Henr. Stephanum anno. 1559. Herodotus. in folio. apud
Henr. Stephanum anno. 1570. Iuvenalis cum Scholiaste. in 8o. Lutetiae apud
Mamertum Patissonium. 1585. Liuius. in fol. Venet. apud Paulum Manutium. 1566.
and-72. Maximus Tyrius. in 8o. apud Henr. Stephanum. 1557. Olympiodorus. in
folio. apud Aldum anno. 1550. Philostratus de vita Appollonii. in folio. apud
Aldum. Plutarchus. in 8o. apud H. Stephanum anno. 1572. Polybius. in folio.
apud Heruagium anno. 1549. Polybius. (...) in 4o. apud Plantinum. 1582. Plinij
epistolae cum Panegyricis. in 16o. apud H. Step. 1576. Romanae Historiae
scriptores. Velleius Paterculus. Suetonius. Ammianus. Vopiscus. Trebellius
Pollio. Lampridius. Vulcatius Gallicanus Spartianus. Xiphilinus. Herodianus.
8o. Apud Henricum Step. 1568. Synesius. in folio. apud Hadria. Turnebum. 1553.
Strabo. in folio. ex editione Casauboni anno. 1587. Sophocles. in quarto. apud
Henr. Stephanum. 1568. Tacitus. in 8o. apud Plantinum. 1574. Varro. in 8o. apud
H. Stephanum. 1573. Xenophon. in folio. apud H. Stephanum. 1561. Zonaras. in
folio. Basileae apud Oporinum. 1557. Zosimus. in folio. apud Wecheli haeredes.
1590.
Errors of the printe, or changes.
In the end of Nero and beginning of Galba. page 2. direst. direct. 11. tiles.
titles. 14. without. with. 16. Septinius. Septimius.

In the translation of Tacitus. page 1. to found. to be found. in some copies
only. 5. The cuntreyes of Gallia. Those of Gallia. p. 20. puts on a
brestplate. or rather a privy coat. 22. when they shall see my enseigne. or
when they shall have my watch. word given them. 23. The standing in temples and
churches, or thus, The standings upon the common halles and temples on every
etc. 32. In higher army. In the higher army. p. 44. was honored with a
triumphal. honored with a 82 triumphal. for reference to the annotatio^s. 49.
(...). 53. which put up in diverse regions and according. or which diversely
according. 59. five Paetorian. Praetorian. 60. XI. VI. 77. Po and Olium. Olius,
or Oglio. 78. and the sides knowing. and the parties knowing. 116. Septinius.
Septimius. 243. (...). In the translation for bilmen read always spearemen.

In the annotations. p. 2. the last Charles. late Charles. p. 5. praedicari.
praedicare. 7. (...). 23. during the name of the time of. 25. (...). nei- Liuy.
neither Liuy. in the margin. never wrote to the Senate. neither wrote. 26.
losing figure. lozing-figure. 27. (...) 30 (...) 30. succeed. succeeded. 52.
A. M. Acilio. a M' Acilio. 54. Dionysius lib. 54. repugnant places of
Dionysius. read Dio in both places. 58. (...). 62. two, three, of
foure-forked. or foure-forked. 69. Africanus exhibuit. Africanas. 74. point
Euxini. ponti Eux. Some other small escapes; as in the Greek mistaking of an
accent or spirit, an o for o, an e for an e or contrary; in the Latin an u for
an e, the multitude or want of comm^es, the dark printing and sometime leaving
out of a letter, as evident to every one we have not regarded.

PRINTED AT OXFORDE BY JOSEPH BARNES FOR RICHARD WRIGHT.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.


