OF The marks of the children of God, and of their comforts in afflictions. To
the faithful of the Low Country.

By John Taffin.

Ouerseene again and augmented by the Author, and translated out of French by
Anne Prowse.

Rom 8.16. The spirit bears witness to our spirit that we are the sons of
God. If we be sons, then are we also heirs, the heirs of God and joint
heirs with Christ: so that we suffer together that we also may be glorified
together.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Orwin, for Thomas Man. 1590.

To the right Honorable and virtuous Lady, The Countess of War wicke.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased almighty God of his infinite goodness, to give
unto the glorious Gospel of his eternal son, so long and prosperous
success in this our Country; it is now time (right Honorable and my very
good Lady) for every one that is a true professor of the same, all carnal
persuasions of humane reason deluding the soul being set aside, to prepare our
selves to the day of trial. For although it pleases God sometimes, for the
gathering of his Church, to give unto it as it were Halcyon days: yet common
it is not, that it should any long time continue in rest and pleasure. Nay, by
the word of GOD we know, and by experience sometimes of our selves (her
Majesty's royal person not excepted) and now of our neighbors round about us
we see, that the Church of God in this world, as it ever has bin, so must it
ever be under the cross. And therefore if we will be compted of the Church
indeed, and glory in that excellent name of a Christian, let us know
assuredly, that unto us, even unto us (that have so long lived in rest and
pleasure, if we be the children of God) in some sort and measure a trial must
come. For, if God chastise every son whom he receives, and every member of
Christ's body must be fashioned like unto the head, if the afflictions of this
world are manifest tokens to the children of God, of his favor and love
toward them, and sure pledges of their adoption: how can we look, or how can
we desire to be exempted from this common condition of God his own children
and household? To this end therefore (right Honorable Lady) I have translated
this little book, first to admonish some (who for lack of experience, never
feeling other days than these full of peace and quietness) that they learn to
apply unto themselves whatsoever they hear or read of the trial of GOD his
children, least falselie imagining it to appertain either to the times that
are past, or to other Nations, it fall suddenly upon them as a thief in the
night, and they be destitute of all hope and comfort. Secondly, to awake
others abounding both in knowledge and other graces, whom notwithstanding,
satan (by the deceaueable lusts and vain pleasures of this wicked world) has
so rockt a sleep, that they seem almost, as they that are diseased with the
Lethargy, to have forgotten both themselves, their holy calling and
profession. Last of all, to comfort an other sort, whom it has pleased GOD so
to press down with sorrows, and to exercise with the continual afflictions
and calamities of this mortal life, as no times seeming favorable unto the^,
they can scarce receive the words of any comfort. And because your Honor has
been of long time, not only a professor, but also a lover of the truth, whom
the Lord (exalting to an higher place of dignity than many other) has set up,
as it were a light upon an high candlestick, to give light unto many, I have
especially dedicated unto your Honor this my poor travail, humbly
beseeching the Lord to make it no less comfortable to your Honor, and to
those that shall read it, than it has been unto me who have translated it.
Every one in his calling is bound to do somewhat to the furtherance of the
holy building; but because great things by reason of my sex, I may not do,
and that which I may, I ought to do, I have according to my duty, brought my
poor basket of stones to the strengthening of the walls of that Jerusalem,
whereof (by grace) we are all both Citizens and members. And now to return to
those who^ experience has not yet taught, and whom prosperity will not suffer
to awake: I earnestly beseech them both in the Lord, no longer to deceive
themselves with vain imaginations, neither to suffer their hearts so to be
tied to earthly vanities, that they should despise or neglect those things
that ca^ truly make them happy indeed. When it shall please GOD to open their
eyes to discern between heavenly and earthly, between things transitory,
and things everlasting, I know they will of themselves be ashamed of this
their negligence. For what are all the pleasant things of this world, which
most bewitch the minds of men, if they be compared with heavenly and eternal
things? If stately and sumptuous buildings do delight; what building is so
stately and glorious as new Jerusalem? If riches; what so rich as that, whose
paueme^t is of pure gold, whose foundations and walls of precious stones, and
gates of orient pearls? If friends, kinsfolk and neighbors; what City so
replenished as this, where God himself in his Majesty, Jesus Christ the head
of the Church in his glory, and all the holy Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles and Martirs do dwell together in happiness for ever? If honor; what
honor comparable to this, to be the servant and child of so mighty a King, and
heir of so glorious a kingdom; where neither time does consume, nor envy
deprive of honor, nor power of adversary spoil of glory, that is endless and
inco^prehensible? If then there be no comparison between things heavenly and
things that are earthly, and no man can attain to the things that are
heavenly, but by the same way that Christ himself attained unto them; which
was by the cross: why (casting off all impediments that presses down) do we
not run on our course with cherefulnes and hope, having Christ so mighty a
King, for our Captain and guide, who (as the Apostle says) for the glory
that was set before him, endured the cross, and despising the shame, sits
now at the right hand of the throne of God? How slow and dull of heart are
we, if as Esau, (who for a mess of pottage sold his birthright) we are
contented for a small and short pleasure in this wicked world, to leese that
incomparable and everlasting glory, which Christ the son of GOD with so
great a price has purchased for us. The Lord give us wisdom to understand,
and grace to hear his voice while it is said to day, that when days and
nights and times shall cease, we may (without time) enter into his joy and
rest which never shall have end. The Lord ever preserve your Honor; and add
unto a multitude of happy years spent in his fear, a continual increase of
al spiritual graces to his glory, and your endless comfort.

Your Honors in the Lord most humble A.P.

To the faithful of the Low Country.
IT is not without reason (right dear and worshipful brethren) that the
Church of Christ is called militant upon earth: and compared as well to a woman
in travail of child from the beginning of the world, as to a ship upon the sea
tossed with tempests, and to a field tilled, upon which the plowe is drawn to
cut it. The present estate of the Church exercised by so many dissipations,
assailed so mightelie by continual wars (the mother and nurse of all
calamities) and afflicted by reuolts, by Libertines, by people profane, and by
so many heretics, is to us a lively mirror, a manifest seal, and an
example good to be marked. Now, as the infirmity of the flesh which dies not
in the very children of God, but at their death, takes from thence, and from
other matter, occasion of temptations most dangerous, and many assaults: so the
bounden duty and affection which I bear toward you, drives me to testify
unto you the fervent desire which I feel continually in my heart, of your
comfort, constancy and perseverance in the way of salvation. For this cause it
is that in my voyage from Germany I made this little treatise Of the marks of
the children of God, and of their consolations in their afflictions: the which
(being GOD be thanked returned) J was willing, with the advice of my brethren
and fellows in the holy Ministry, to put to light and dedicate unto you, to
the end that reading it you might know and feel more and more the
incomprehensible grace of GOD toward you, by the testimonies of your adoption,
and the full assurance of the certainty of it: and that in the midst of your
so long and heavy afflictions, you might be partakers of the unspeakable
comforts which GOD sets forth to his children in his word: whereby also you
feeling your selves truly happy, you may constantly persevere in his holy
truth and obedience of his will, aspiring with conte^tment and joy of the
holy Ghost to the inioying of that kingdom of glory, the right and
possession whereof is purchased for you, and kept in your head Jesus Christ.
Finally, J pray God with all my heart to show me this favor, that this my
little labor may be acceptable unto you, and that it will please him to
bless it, by the efficacy of his holy spirit, to your comfort and salvation,
and to the advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ: Harlem 15.
September 1586.

Your humble brother and servant in Christ: John Taffin Minister of the holy
Gospel in the French Church at Harlem.

The matters that are handled in this Treatise.
1 OF the great and incomprehensible happiness of the life everlasting promised
to the children of God. 2 How we know that we are the children of God. 3 How
every member of the Church ought to apply to himself the marks of it, to
assure himself of his adoption and salvation. 4 How we ought and may assure
our selves that we are the children of GOD, although the marks of our
adoption be in us but small and weak. 5 That the Apostacy and revolt of some
who have made profession of the true religion, ought not to cause us to call in
doubt either the doctrine, or our adoption. 6 That afflictions ought not to
make us doubt of our adoption, but rather to confirm us. 7 That the
afflictions which come unto us were foretold, and therefore they ought to
confirm us in the assurance of our adoption. 8 That the children of GOD have
at all times been afflicted, and yet beloved of God. 9 That the common
afflictions of the children of Adam, are to the faithful, because of the
excellent fruits of them, testimonies of their adoption, and of the love of
GOD toward them. 10 Of the afflictions for Christ's sake, and of the fruits
of them. 11 Other fruits of the afflictions for the name of Christ. 12 An
exhortation to persevere constantly in the truth of the Gospel, in the time
of persecution: not to fear death: for man to keep himself from Apostacy
and dissimulation: To use the holy Ministry: To walk in the fear of God,
and to pray unto him. 13 Holy meditations and prayers.
Of the marks of the children of God, and of their consolations in their
afflictions.
To the faithful of the Low Country.
Of the great and incomprehensible felicity of the everlasting life promised
to the children of God.

CAP. 1.
SAint Paul has very aptly set forth unto us the incomprehensible
excellency of the felicity of the children of GOD, saying, That the eye has
not seen, 1. Cor. 2.9.
the ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, what
things God has prepared for those that love him. According to this sentence,
Saint Augustine, tending to the same butt, says of the goodness of grace: Aug.
Enarrat. 2. Psalm. 26. Tom. 8.
Let your hearts go beyond all that you are able to comprehend, and stay not
your selves at the greatness and excellency of it which you imagine: but say,
yet this is not it; for if it were it, it could not enter into thy thought and
heart. This happiness then cannot be comprehended by us according to the
greatness and excellency of it, so long as we dwell in these earthly
mansions, 2. Cor. 5.1. 1. Cor. 13.9
where we know God but in part and darkly. Notwithstanding, seeing the same
Apostle adds, that the holy Ghost who searches the most deep things of God,
1. Cor. 13.12.
has given us some revelation: 1. Cor 2.10.
Seeing also he prayed to God for the Ephesians; That he would open the eyes of
their understanding, Ephe. 1.18.
that they might know, what is the hope of their vocation, and what are the
riches of the glory of his inheritance among the Saints: we should be too
unthankful to God, and enemies of our own comfort, if we should make courtesy
or refuse to understand that, which it pleases him to reveal unto us by his
word. Now, in it this felicity is oftentimes signified by the promise of life
everlasting, and not without reason. For in our felicity, Life everlasting
comprehends the felicity of the children of God.
two points may and ought specially to be considered: first, the greatness and
excellency of the good thing: secondly, the long continuance and surenes of
it. Now, both the one and the other is noted by these words, life everlasting:
For by life is signified the greatness of the felicity, and by everlasting, the
infinite length of it. As touching life, we may consider three degrees as well
in the body, Three degrees of life to the body and to the soul.
as specially in the soul. The first degree of life as touching the soul,
The first degree of life.
is meant by this peace of conscience, and joy of the holy Ghost which we
receive and feel, being reconciled to God in Jesus Christ. Romans 5.1.
And this peace and beginning of life, surmounteth al understanding, Philip.
4.7.
as Saint Paul does witness, and God his children do feel. And indeed it is a
thing rauishing our souls with joy unspeakable, when GOD makes the brightness
of his face to shine upon us: As also David shows, Psalm. 80.
when he asks so often of God this grace, for a full measure of all felicity.
As touching the body, the first degree of life lies in this, that the
afflictions of it be not only mitigated, and made light by this life of the
soul reconciled to God, and feeling joy through the brightness of his
countenance, Romans 8.27. Heb. 12.6.
but also are converted (being the fruits of the love of God toward us) into
salvation and glory. The second degree of life may be considered in the
separation of the soul and the body, The second degree of life.
the which improperlie (as touching the faithful) is called death. For even as
touching our bodies, although they go to rot in the earth, yet being then
delivered, and free from all sickness, from hunger, thirst, heat, cold, and
from a thousand other torments, which of their nature are a kind of death, they
go to rest in their beds, Esaias. 57.1.
as Esai says; and being delivered from their labors and travails, Apoca.
14.13.
they are blessed, as Saint John says. And this rest proceeding from the
favor of God, cannot properly be called death, but is to them a kind of life.
But specially the soul the^ enters into the possession of the second degree
of life. For being delivered from the body, she is carried up by the Angels
into the bosom of Abraham, Luke 16.22 Luke 23.43
and into Paradise with Jesus Christ, exempted then from ignorance, from
incredulity, from mistrust, from covetousness, ambition, envy, hatred, fear,
terror, lusts, and from all other passions, vices and corruptions which are
deadly in the^, which also bring forth the fruits of death. And contrariwise,
is then fully sanctified, victorious, and assured against Satan, Hell, sin
and all other enemies: waiting after that, with great joy, for the
accomplishment of her glory in the resurrection of her body. The third degree,
The third degree of life.
shall be at the glorious coming of Jesus Christ, when our bodies being
awaked out of their sleep, they shall rise again all renewed, bodies
incorruptible, 1. Cor. 15.42.
spiritual and immortal, Philip. 3.21
yea fashioned like to the image of the glorious body of Jesus Christ: And so
being joined together again to their souls, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
they shall be together caught up into the clouds before our Lord Jesus Christ
in the air, Ephe. 4.10. Ioh. 14.2. Ioh. 17.24.
and exalted above all the heavens, into the house of God our father. 1 Thessalonians.
4.17.
Then also shall be the accomplishme^t of the life of our souls reunited to
their bodies, being together where Jesus Christ is, and with him, as members of
his body, his brethren, and his spouse, united to him, and by him, to God the
fountain of life. And by this union inioying a community in all his goods,
and of this incorruptible inheritance, 1. Pet. 1.4.
which can neither fail nor fade away, referued for us in heaven. Then shall
God wipe all tears from our eyes, Reave. 21.4.
and death shall be no more, neither shall there be any sorrow, cry or travail
any more. All these old things shall be gone away: God shall make all things
new. Then shall we be before the throne of God, Reave. 7.14.
and shall serve him night and day in his Temple, and shall be led by the Lamb
to the living fountains of waters. Reave. 19.7.
Then shall be the day of our marriage with the Lamb, when being clothed with
pure and bright raiments, we shall sit at his marriage banquet. Then shall we be
like unto the Angels. If our bodies shall shine then as the Sun, Matthew. 22.30.
what shall the brightness of our souls be? Matthew. 13.43.
Then our pilgrimage being finished, we shall be indeed the citizens of this
heavenly and holy Jerusalem, Bern. meditation. 9.
which shall be all of pure gold like unto the clear glass: Reave 21.18.
having the foundations of the wall garnished with precious stones: whereof
also the twelve gates, are twelve pearls: which has no need of the Sun, nor
of the Moon to shine in it, because the brightness of God shall be the light of
it, and the Lamb him self shall be the candle of it. O how happy shall the
citizens be, that shall live in such a City? See then what good things are
signified by life everlasting, and the three degrees of it. But Saint Paul
lifts us up yet higher into the contemplation of this life which we shall
enjoy after the resurrection. Then, 1. Cor. 15.24.
says Saint Paul, Jesus Christ shall give up his kingdom unto God his
father, as if he should say: Father, behold those whom thou have given to me
before the foundation of the world: they were lost, and thou did send me to
save them: I have redeemed them with my blood; thou have appointed me King over
them: they are my kingdom which I have gotten, and which I have so guided and
governed, that having sanctified and delivered them from all their enemies, I
have brought, given and presented the^ unto thee, that having as touching my
self, accomplished the work and charge which thou had enjoined me, from
this time forth, thou may be king reigning immediately in them, and filling
them with all happiness and glory. Then shall there be no creature either in
heaven or in earth, that shall have any domination or Lordship. There shall be
neither King nor Prince, 1. Cor. 15.28.
neither Master nor Lord. There shall be neither father, mother, husband nor
wife. There shall be neither Prophet, Doctor, Minister nor Pastor. There shall
be neither riches, nor estates. All the enemies also of Jesus Christ shall be
destroyed for evermore, death being swallowed up into victory, and Satan with
his angels, and all the reprobate being cast into the bottomless pit.
Contrariwise, the Elect being fully sanctified, shall be lifted up both in
body and soul above all the heavens. The work of Christ shall be finished.
And all being done. Reave. 21.6.
The very same offices which Christ has received, and shall exercise for the
accomplishment of our salvation, to be a King, a Priest, and a Prophet, and to
sit at the right hand of God, shall cease, but so, as the fruits and the
incomprehensible benefits gotten by the^ unto the church, shall ever abide to
his everlasting glory. But what shall that be then? God the Father, the Son,
and the Holy ghost, one only God shall be immediately all things, both in
this man Christ, and in all us the members of his body. The Godhead (I say)
shall be in the man Jesus Christ and in us, King, Prince, father, riches, life
and glory. To be short, all things, and such a heap of happiness and
felicity, that as sundry vessels cast into the sea are full of water, so as
they can neither want, nor have more: So this sea of Divinity being all things
in us al, we shall be filled and satisfied with life and glory, so as we can
neither want, nor receive more. Then shall we not only taste how sweet our God
shall be, Psalm. 34.9.
but we shall be filled and thoroughly satisfied with his sweetness most
wonderful. Cipri. de asce^. Christi 1. Cor. 15.18.
Then shall the son himself be subject to the father, to wit, as touching
his humanity: but that shall be for the increase of his glory, and our
felicity. For the son of man abiding still united to the son of God,
August. lib. 80. quaest. 69. and lib. de trinit. 1. cap. 8.
and then ceasing the government which he shall have until the resurrection,
God shall in such sort be in this son of man, and in us, that the majesty
and brightness of the divinity then reigning immediately, shall cause the
difference between the divinity of Christ, Ihe. 17.22.
and his humane nature subject unto it to appear. But as the principal glory
of the son of man, Phil. 2.7.
is to be united unto the son of God in one person, and that this his
divinity shall be for the most part as it were, hid until that day, and that
then it shall be fully revealed: how much more the divine majesty of the
son of God, shall cause the subjection of the son of man to appear, so
much the greater shall appear the glory of this son of man united in one
person to the Godhead then reigning in his full majesty and glory. As (if a
man may find any thing never so little to represent this high mystery) we may
consider, that the felicity and glory of the brethren of Joseph was so much
the greater, Genesis 47.
that by the greatness of Joseph, exalted to the government of Egypt, they were
subject unto him, and there appeared a great difference between Joseph and his
brethren, not by the diminishing of them, but by the increasing of Joseph, his
brethren having this happiness and honor, to be the brethren of Joseph, so much
more great and honorable, by how much, the greatness of the majesty and glory
of Joseph, made their subjection more to appear. And this is it that may in
some sort be noted in the church. For although that now, her subjection and the
difference appear between her, gathered and composed of sinful men, having
their sanctification and their life of their head Jesus Christ: and between
him very GOD, and perfect man sitting at the right hand of God the father
almighty: yet as then, the more great the glory of Christ shall appear,
showing himself immediately with his divine majesty in his brightness: so much
the more clearelie shall the subjection and difference of the Church appear,
not by diminishing the happiness and glory of it, but by the increase of the
glory of her head, brother and bridegroom: The Church having this happiness and
honor, to be, and still to abide united unto Christ, making with her this new
man, whereof Saint Paul speaks, Ephe. 2.15.
yea so much the more happy and glorious, by how much the excellency of the
majesty and glory of Christ, the son of man with us, shall exceed in
greatness, being united to the son of God, shining then with the Father and
the Holy ghost, one only GOD in his divine majesty. Hereof also it
follows, that our chief felicity shall be to behold this glory of Christ.
And indeed this is that benefit and happiness which he asked for us of God his
father, saying: Father, Ioh. 17.24.
my desire for those whom thou have given me, is, that they be where I am,
and that they may see my glory. And what glory? That we should see him, 1.
Ioh. 3.2.
as he shall be in majesty incomprehensible as touching his Godhead, and
consequently in sovereign glory as touching his humanity united to this
divine majesty. Behold also how this shall be accomplished which is written,
1. Cor. 13.12.
that we shall see God face to face for the accomplishme^t of our felicity.
Which that we may the better comprehend, Ioh. 15.11. Ioh. 16.24. Matthew. 25.21.
we must finally conclude, that the fruit thereof, shall be this, joy full
and perfect, which Christ has promised us, promising further, to make us enter
into the joy of our Lord. Aug. in manuel. cap. 35.
Saint Augustine in a certain meditation (which is inded both holy and
heavenly) shows very excellently, how great this our joy shall be, and
that joy of our Lord which we shall enter into. Having discoursed of the
everlasting felicity of the children of God, thus he says. O heart humane,
poor and needy, O heart exercised with miseries, and almost consumed of the^,
what should thy joy be, if thou had the full inioying of the abou^da^ce of
these good things? Ask of thy soul if thou were capable of the joy, which
thou should feel of one such felicity. But if besides, any other who^ thou
love as thy self, should inioye the same happiness with thee, surely this
superabounding joy which thou should feel of thine own happiness, should it
not be twice doubled, for the glory and the joy of him who^ thou love as thy
self, and for whose happiness, thou should be as joyful as for thine own
happiness? Now, if there were two, three, yea a great number inioying the same
happiness with thee, whom also thou louedst as thy self, thou should feel
as much joy for the happiness of each of them, as for thine own happiness. What
then shall be in this perfect charity, when we shall love all the blessed
angels, and all the elect, loving every each one of them even as our selves,
and being no less joyful of the felicity of each of them, than of our own?
Surely if never a one of the elect shall be capable of his own joy for the
greatness of it, how shall he be capable of so many joys for the happiness of
so many of the elect, for whom he shall feel as much joy, as for his own?
Lo what it is Saint Augustine says. But yet how much shall this joy be
augmented for the happiness, felicity and glory of this elect of God, in whom
we our selves have been elected, who having died for the elect, shall
sanctify, preserve and lift them up into heaven to the inioying of this
felicity? who is not only man holy and just, but also true God, especially
beholding him in his glory, to be united in one person to the Godhead then
shining in his Majesty. Surely if we, loving other elect as our selves,
should have as much joy of the happiness of each of them, as of our own, what
shall be the joy that we shall receive of the happiness and glory of this
sovereign Elect Jesus Christ, whom by good right we should love more than our
selves? See then more than a sea of joy proceeding from the happiness of the
servants of God. Let us now understand the great deapth of joy which we shall
feel, entering into the joy of our Lord. The cause why we should love God
(says Saint Bernard) is God him self. Bernard in tract. de diligendo deo.
And the measure which we ought to keep in this love, is to love him without
measure, and so, infinitlie. But according to that we know him, 1. Cor. 13.12.
we love him. But now we know him, but in part, and as it were in darkness;
even so very little and obscure is the love which we bear him. But when we
shall know him as he is, we shall love him according as he is. What shall our
love be toward him then, 1. Cor. 15.24.
when Jesus Christ having given over his kingdom to God his Father, God the
Father, the Son, and the Holy ghost one only God, 1. Cor. 15.28.
shall be all things, in this man Jesus Christ, and in us? and when we shall
know him as he is, beholding the brightness of his face, and his Godhead then
reigning immediately in us, and filling us with all happiness? Without doubt this
contemplation of the glory of the divine majesty shall bring forth in us an
infinite love toward God. Now (to return to the meditation of Saint
Augustine) if according to that we love each one, we should rejoice of his
happiness. Then as in this blessed felicity each one of us shall love God
without comparison, more than himself, and more than all the Angels and elect
with us: so shall we feel more joy without comparison of the blessedness and
glory of God, than of our own, or of all the Angels and the elect with us. And
if then we shall love God with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our
understanding: yet so as al our heart, al our understanding, and all our soul
shall not be capable of the excellency of this love: Surely we shall so
feel joy with all our heart, with all our understanding, and with all our
soul, as yet all our heart, al our understanding and all our soul shall not
be able to comprehend the fulness of this joy. Howsoever it be then, that
this full joy, yea more than full, through the greatness of it (whereof all our
heart, all our understanding, and all our soul shall not be capable) cannot
enter into us: It shall remain that we, (filled with the sea of joy of the
felicity of the Angels, and of all the elect) shall enter into this great
deapth of joy proceeding from the contemplation of the glory of our God. And
this shall be the joy of the Lord, Matthew. 25.21.
into which all his faithful servants shall enter. Now, when this felicity so
great, and joy incomprehensible, shall endure so many years as there be
drops of water in the sea, Of the eternity of the life to come
or grains of sand in the whole earth, yet should not this be a perfect
happiness. For howsoever the continuance shall seem to us infinite, yet the end
will once come. And indeed the drops of water, and the grains of the sand are
numbered before God. But this our felicity and joy shall last without end. Such
shall be the life everlasting: As also Saint John says, Apoc. 22.5. 1. Tim.
1.17.
we shall reign in heaven world without end. We shall be the kingdom of that
immortal king whom Esai calls the father of eternity, Esai. 9.6.
who has promised life and immortality to those that shall believe the
Gospel. 2. Tim. 1.10.
Also death shall then be swallowed up into victory. The author and prince of
life, 1. Cor. 15.45.
having vanquished the devil, Act. 3.15.
who had the rule over death, shall make us partakers of the life that is
everlasting. And as we shall be united to the fountain of life, Heb. 2.14.
Apoc. 21.6
so shall it run in us eternally. For as the fountain of this life which we
shall enjoy, has no beginning, so the life that proceeds from it, shall have
no end. The mercy of GOD (says S. Bernard) is from eternity to eternity
upon those that fear him; from eternity, because of the predestination; to
eternity, because of the glorification: The one has no beginning, the other
has no ending. This therefore shall be a happiness incomprehensible for the
greatness, and infinite for the eternity of it. Behold also how we shall then
enjoy a full and perfectioy, Ioh. 16.22.
which shall never be taken away from us. Now, this life is promised and assured
to all the children of God, in as much as they are heirs of God the fountain
of life, Romans 8.17. Psalm. 36.10. Ioh. 14.6. Ioh. 3.15.
and coheires and members of Jesus Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the
life: who also has so often protested, that whosoever believes in him, he
has life everlasting. Ioh. 6.
Let us conclude then, that the children of God are truly and only blessed,
being assured to inioye this great and incomprehe^sible happiness of life
everlasting, which is purchased, promised, and kept for them in Jesus Christ
our Lord.

How we shall know that we are the children of God.

CAP. 2.
OF this conclusion it follows, that there is no greater joy or contentme^t
in this present life, or any thing more sure or more necessary for the happy
ouercomming the difficulties of it, tha^ to know and feel that we are the
children of God. For this foundation being laid, we ought to be assured that
whatsoever shall happen unto us, can be none other than the blessing of a
father, and so consequently a mean, aid, and way disposed by his providence,
either to lead us unto life everlasting, or to increase our glory in it. True
it is, that GOD only knows his own, 2. Tim. 2.19.
whom he has chosen before the foundation of the world to be his children.
2. marks of our adoption.
Yet there are two principal means by which he gives us to understand who
are his children: the one is outward, by marks visible unto men: the other is
inward by testimonies, which he that is the child of GOD feels in himself.
The outward mark lies in this, Of the outward mark
that we be members of the church of Christ. Now, we call that the church of
Christ, in which the word of God is truly preached, the Sacraments are purelie
ministered, and one only God is called upon in the name of his only son
Jesus Christ. Matthew. 13.
First, this Church is often called the kingdom of heaven, because that by it,
we enter in thither; so that it is (as it were) the suburbs or the gate of it.
Whereof it follows, that being the true members of the Church, we are in the
way and forwardnes to enter, and make our abode in heaven. Mat. 21.13.
It is also called the house of God, to give us to understand, Ephe. 2.19.
that those that abide there, are by good right accounted the children and
household of God. Furthermore, when after we have protested in our Creed,
that we believe the holy Church universal, we add the communion of Saints,
the forgiveness of sins, the rising again of the body, and the life
everlasting: is not this to assure us that those that are the members of the
Church, have a community in all these treasures and goods of it, and
consequently that they are the children of God, and inheritours of everlasting
life? According unto this S. Luke also says resolutlie, Act. 2.47.
that God joined unto the Church those that should be saved. The which is
confirmed by the Prophet Joel saying, Joel. 2.32.
that there shall be salvation in Sion. And S. Paul himself sticks not at
all, 1. These. 1.4
to call those that are the members of the Church, the elect of God. But yet so
much the more to resolve us, let us consider the marks of the true church
touched here before. The first is, the pure preaching of the word of God. Now,
Jesus Christ says, my sheep hear my voice, and they follow me: Ioh. 10.27.
showing thereby very manifestly, that this is one mark to be the child of
God, Ioh. 8.47.
to hear the voice of his son Jesus Christ: As also he says in another
place, 2. Cor. 5.18 Ephe. 6.15. Act. 14.3. Act. 20.32. Act. 13.26. Act 5.20.
Phil. 2.15.
that is of God, hears the voice of God. And indeed, seeing that the
preaching of the Gospel is called the ministry of reconciliation, the
Gospel of peace, the word of grace, of salvation and of life, (as without
doubt, God by the ministry of his word, presents Reconciliation, peace,
grace, salvation and life): So they that are the members of the Church, hear
and receive the word, show therein, that they are partakers of all these
benefits, and consequently, the children of God. The second mark of the
Church consists in the Sacraments of Baptism and of the Lords supper. As
touching Baptism, it is a seal and sure warrant that the sins of those that
receive it are washed away by the blood of Christ: Act. 22.5. Romans 6.4. Tit.
3.5. Gal. 3.27.
that they are ingrafted and incorporate into his death and resurrection: that
they are regenerate, and that they have put on Jesus Christ. Whereof it
follows, as S. Paul affirms, Gal. 3.26.
that they are the children of God. The like assurance of our adoption is given
us in the Lords supper. For if the bread and the cup, 1. Cor. 10.16.
which are given to the members of the Church, are the communion of the body
and of the blood of Jesus Christ: it follows that in this communion of
Christ, they have the food and life of their souls. And that consequently,
as the children of GOD, they shall obtain life everlasting, according to the
protestation of Christ. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, Ioh.
6.54.
he has everlasting life. The third mark of the Church of God, is the
invocation of the name of God, in the name of that only one lesus Christ. Now,
Psalm. 14 4. Genesis 12.7. Act. 2.21. Act. 9.14.
as all the service of God is oftentimes signified by this invocation: So Saint
Luke notes the faithful and children of God by this description, that they
call upon the name of the Lord. As on the contrary side, Psalm. 14.4.
it is said of the reprobate, that they do not call upon the name of God. And
indeed when the members of the Church join together and lift up their prayers
unto God, Matthew. 6.9.
saying: Our Father which art in heaven: and so calling him father, by the
commandment of Christ, they may well assure themselves that God does
acknowledge them for his children, and that he will make them feel the fruit of
their prayers, according to the promise of Christ, Mat. 18.19.
that whatsoever they shall with one consent ask of GOD, it shall be given
them. By this that is above said, it manifestly appears, how every member
of the Church may and ought to assure him self to be the child of God, and to
acknowledge all other members of the Church with him in like manner to be the
children of God. If any allege that we may thus account such a one for the
child of God, who possibly is an hypocrite, and may after show himself a
reprobate, we answer, that such discourses are contrary to charity, so much
recommended unto us by Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 13.
noting amongst other properties of charity, that she thinks not evil, or
is not suspicious, but that she believes all things, and hops all things.
We ought then to hold the members of the Church, for the children of GOD.
until that departing from it, or discovering their hypocrisy, they show
themselves reprobates. Furthermore, as GOD would that al those to who^ he
vouchsafes to be father, should acknowledge the Church for their mother: so
let us not doubt, but being borne again, and nourished in the Church our
mother, we may call God our father, and abiding united to the family of the
mother, let us not doubt but that we be the heirs of the father. Thus much
for the outward marks.

Now let us come to the inward marks. As to the blind and deaffe the opening
of their eyes and ears is needful, clearelie to see and hear the voice of
him that speaks: Of the inward marks of our adoption.
So being of our own nature both blind and deaffe as touching understanding,
the holy spirit is he, that opens our eyes and ears, to comprehend
thereuelation of our adoption, and to feel in our hearts the assurance of it,
ingendring in us faith, which is as it were the hand, by which we apprehend
this great benefit: whereof also the fruits and effects as well of the holy
ghost dwelling in us, as of the faith that is in us, are the principal and
most assured marks, to give us knowledge of our adoption. A ccording
whereunto, Romans 8.16.
Saint Paul says, that the Holy ghost gives testimony to our spirits that
we are the children of God, so as having received this spirit of adoption, we
cry with all assurance, Abba father. 1. Ioh. 3.24
This is it also which S. John teaches us, saying: we know that he abides in
us, by the spirit which he has given us. 1. Ioh. 4.13
Also, By this we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has
given of his spirit unto us. In like manner the Apostle S. Paul affirms,
Romans 5.1.
that by the peace and quietness which we feel in our consciences before GOD in
the free forgiveness of our sins by the blood of Jesus Christ, we show and
prove that we are justified by faith, and so the children of God. Wherein to
confirm us, he says in another place, that after we have believed, we are
sealed by the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest penie of our
inheritance, Ephe. 1.13.
until the redemption of the possession purchased to the praise of his glory.
First he shows there, that faith is as it were the seal whereby the Holy
ghost imprinteth in our hearts for our assurance, that we are the children of
God. Furthermore, as in a thing that is bought there is sometimes given an
earnest penie, to wit, some part of the money agreed on, as well for the
beginning of the paime^t, as by consequent, for the assurance that the bargain
shall be held firm: so the holy ghost, who by faith inge^dreth peace and joy
in the hearts of the faithful, is the earnest penie, assuring us, by this
beginning, of the spiritual blessings which God promises to his children,
that he holds us for his possession, purchased to the praise of his glory,
and that at the length he will gather us into the full inioying of the
inheritance of heaven. Hereunto it is also, that goodly gradatio^ leads us,
which is proposed of the same Apostle, Romans 8.28.
saying: Those who^ God has before known, those he has also predestinate to
be made like unto the image of Jesus Christ: and those who^ he has
predestinate, he has also called, and those whom he has called, he has also
justified: and those who^ he has justified, those he has also glorified. For
all will confess, that those that are elected and predestined to be made
like unto the image of Jesus Christ, are the children of God, as also they, who
in his eternal counsel and decree are glorified. Now they, who being lightened
with the knowledge of the Gospel, believe that their sins are washed away by
the blood of Jesus Christ through his satisfaction, and so are called and
justified, are elected and glorified before God, as S. Paul teaches here: it
follows then, that they are the children of God. And this is so certain,
that the Apostle, opposing the will and power of GOD, against all impediments,
adds: If GOD be on our side, who shall be against us? Rom 8.30. Bern. ser.
5. in dedica. templi.
S Bernard teaches the self same thing very aptly, saying: we are certain
of the power of God to save us: but what shall we say of his will? who is he
that knows whether he be worthy of hate or of love? who is he that has
known the will of the Lord? or who has bin his counselor? It behooves that
herein faith help us, and that truth succor us. That that, which is hid
concerning us in the heart of the father, may be revealed unto us by the
spirit, and his spirit testifying unto us, may persuade us that we are the
children of God; that he persuade it us, I say, in calling and justifying us
freely by faith, which is as it were a mean or passage from the
predestination of GOD to the glory of the life everlasting. The same thing is
it which S Augustine means, saying: Aug Hom. in Joan. 35.
We are come into the way of faith, let us hold it constantly, it shall lead
us from degree to degree even unto the chamber of the heavenly King, where all
the treasures of knowledge and wisdom being hid, we may learn and behold
the revelation of our election. From hence proceeds yet another fruit
serving us for a mark to assure us more and more that we are the children of
God, when we love God, and our neighbors for his sake: whereof also follows
the hatred of evil, and an earnest desite to render obedience to God. For if
it be so as Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 4.19
that our love to God comes of this, that he has first loved us: The love
that we bear unto him, is a testimony that he loves us. As also Jesus Christ
maintains and shows, that by the signs of love, Luke 7.47.
which the sinful woman gave him, God loved her greatly, and had forgiven her
many sins. So the brightness of the Moon is a certain argument that the
Sun ministers wholly to her, for otherwise she has no brightness at all.
And in summer, the heat that is felt in the stones set against the Sun, is a
sign that the Sun shines upon them. Of our own nature and first
generation we are unprofitable to all goodness, and inclined to al evil, Romans
3.10.
as Saint Paul very largely sets forth unto us writing to the Romans. If
then on the contrary we walk in the fear God, giving our selves to his
service, and occupying our selves in all good works: is not such a change a
testimony of our regeneration, and consequently of our adoption? The tree is
known by his fruit, says Jesus Christ: Matt 7.17.
If then we bear the fruit of justice, holiness and of charity, we are trees
planted in the garden of God by his holy spirit, and so consequently the
childen of God. Charity, says Saint John, 1. Ioh. 4.7.
is of God, and he that loves, is borne of God, and knows God. As then the
heat and light of a coal is a sign that it has fire: and as the moving and
actions of the body are certain signs, that it lives, and that the soul is
within it: so the testimony of the holy ghost in our hearts, the peace and
quietness of our consciences before GOD, feeling our selves justified by faith;
this love toward God and our neighbor, this change of our life, and desire
to walk in the fear and obedience of God, are assured tokens of our adoption:
as also this, that we are members of the Church of Christ hearing his word,
participating with the holy Sacraments, and calling upon God in the name of
Jesus Christ, are testimonies that we are the children and household servants
of God, and heirs of eternal life.

How every member of the Church ought to apply unto himself the tokens of
it, to assure himself of his adoption and salvation.

CAP. 3.
NOw, although the tokens before mentioned are certain to assure us that we
are the children of God: yet there are two sorts of temptations, which above
all other tend to shake us. The one proceeds of our selves, either for lack
of applying to our selves the testimonies, which God gives to the members of
his Church to assure them of their salvation: or through the feeling of a want
(as we think) but rather, of the smalnes or weakness of those tokens of
adoption here above alleged. The other temptation comes unto us from some
other where, and consists specially in two points. To wit, in the revolt of
some having made profession of the true religion: and in the grievous and long
afflictions which are ordinary to those that follow the doctrine of the
Gospel. Now, as there is nothing of greater importance than the salvation of
the soul: so there is nothing that does more grieuouslie afflict and trouble
the tender consciences desirous of eternal life, than the doubts and fears
not to be the child of God, getting to themselves hereby such sorrows and
anguishes, as none are able to comprehend, but those that have themselves felt
and tried them. To help then, to the consolation of the souls so
dangerously, and so mightelie afflicted: first it is to be noted, that this
disease comes to many of this, that they pretend to resolve themselves of
their salvation, examining themselves whether they be worthy to be the
children of God or no. And as there is none that is, or can be worthy, so
this is at the last to turn doubts into despair. Other discourse, whether
they be of the number of the elect, and whether their names be written in the
book of life, to wit, if God love them, and hold them for his children. But it
is not so high, that we must mount, but in the doctrine of the Gospel it is,
where we should search the revelation hereof, and resolve our selves if God
has loved us, if he do love us, and will hold us for his children in Jesus
Christ. For as a man if he be of credit, makes the hid thoughts of his heart
to be known by speaking: even so God, who is the truth it self, reuealeth
unto us, by the preaching of the Gospel, his counsel, and his will touching
our adoption and salvation: and confirms this revelation by the use of the
holy Sacraments. But we must note, that this revelation of the will of God in
the Gospel comprehe^deth first two points: to wit, that there is perfect and
entire salvation in one only Jesus Christ, and that the mean to obtain it, is
to believe in him. Moreover, when this Gospel is preached unto us, GOD
reuealeth unto us yet two points more: first, that he will make us partakers of
this salvation in Christ. Secondly, that he will have us to believe the
testimony that he has given us of this his will, to the end that we might be
saved. Now, the difficulty of believing lies in the persuasion of these two
last points, which notwithstanding are certain and true. Behold, says S.
John, 1. Ioh. 5.11
the testimony of God, which he has given us of everlasting life, and this
life is in his son, he says not only that the life is in his son, but
says further, that he gives us this life, and that the Gospel is the witness.
And having protested a little before, that he which believes not this
testimony of God, 1. Ioh. 5.10
makes him a lier: he shows sufficiently that he will that we should
believe it. The Apostle to the Hebrews passes further, and says; that God,
Heb. 6.17.
willing to show the immutable stablenes of his counsel to the heirs of the
promise, interposeth himself by an oath, that by two things immutable in which
it is impossible that God should lie, we might have firm consolation, we, I
say, who have our refuge to the hope that is set before us, the which we hold
as the ancker of the soul sure and stable, pearcing even into the sanctuary
of heaven, where Jesus Christ our forerunner is entered for us. By this he
teaches us first, that when we hear the Gospel, we ought to hold for
certain, that the counsel of God which was hid in his heart, touching his
will to save us, and to take us for his children, is there made manifest unto
us. Secondly, that he will that we believe it, seeing he confirms it by two
things immutable, in which he cannot lie, to wit, his word and his oath, to the
end that we might have firm consolation, which cannot be in us, if we
believe not. Moreover, he calls the revelation of his counsel, the hope set
before us. Speaking then to us, he would that we should have hope: yea and he
will that this revealing of his counsel should be unto us a sure anchor of the
soul, to show, that as a ship is held fast by the anchor, that it might not
be carried away of the wind: so God would that this revealing of his counsel
by the doctrine of the Gospel should hold us fast, and assure us against all
doubts of our adoption, yea and to pearce even into the very heavens with
assurance, whereof our forerunner Jesus Christ has taken possession both for
himself, and for us. See then one place showing very expreslie, that when thou
hear the Gospel, God declares and reuealeth unto thee, that it is his will
to save thee by his son Jesus Christ. And to this end he will further, that
thou believe it. And indeed when S. Paul says, To. 10.17.
that faith comes by hearing the Gospel, he shows that thou can not
believe, except that thou hear. Now, faith is a knowledge and certainty, that
it is the will of God to save thee, and to take thee for his well-beloved child
in Jesus Christ. Then it follows, that the Gospel which is preached unto
thee, and which thou hear, contains the revealing and testimony: first,
that it is the will of God to save thee by Christ: secondly, that thou
should believe this testimony which he gives thee, that thou may have
everlasting life. Who now is he, that ought or can doubt? Seeing also he is not
content to say in general, Ioh. 3.36.
he that believes has everlasting life: but he commands thee to believe.
Believe (says he) the Gospel. Mar. 1.15.
Also, This is his commandment, says S. John, 1. Ioh. 3.23
that we believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ. Now, to believe the
Gospel, or in the name of Jesus Christ, is not only to believe that there is
salvation in Christ, and that he that believes in him has life everlasting.
For the devil himself believes that, and yet he believes not the Gospel,
neither in the name of Jesus Christ. But this is to believe, that he has
salvation in Christ for thee, as Esai says: A child is borne to us, a son is
given to us. Esaias. 9.5.
And so speaks the Angel to the shepherds. This day is borne unto you a
savior. Also, Luke 2.11.
that it is the will of God that thou should be his child, and thou
should believe it so. The which thing the devil cannot believe for
himself: neither is the Gospel offered unto him. Now, when GOD reuealeth unto
thee his good will and love toward thee, wherefore doubtest thou? He is true,
he neither will, nor can either lie or deceive. And when he commands thee to
believe it, must thou examine thy self whether thou be worthy or no? Thou
art bound to obey, and so to believe, that he does love thee, and that thou art
his child by Christ. Call to mind that which is written, Ioh. 3.16.
whosoever believes (what manner a one, or whosoever it be) he has life
everlasting. Neither is it presumption so to believe, and that constantly, but
it is to him obedience most acceptable. And indeed it is an honor that he
requires of thee to believe his word, and so to put to thy seal that he is
true. It is very true that in preaching the Gospel, he says, Ioh. 3.39.
not, I am come to save Simon Peter, Cornelius the Centurion, Marie Magdalen,
and so of others. He names no man by his name that was given him by men,
either at their circumcision, or at their baptism, or otherwise: for so might
we yet doubt of our salvation, thinking that it might be spoken not of us, but
of some other that should have the same name. But when thou hear that Jesus
Christ is come to save sinners: either renounce the name of a sinner, Matt.
9.13. 1. Timo. 1.15.
or confess that he speaks to thee, and that he is come to save thee. Make
then boldly this conclusion: Jesus Christ is come to save sinners, I
acknowledge my own name, for I am a sinner: therefore he is come to save me.
And also when he says: Come unto men all ye that travail and are heavily
laden, Math. 11.28.
and I will refresh you: Thou must mark well these words, all ye; for seeing
he says, all ye, he speaks to all those that travail and feel the heavy
burden of their sins. Wherefore should thou doubt then, whether he speak
to thee? Conclude rather on this manner, seeing he says, all ye, he speaks
then also to me, promising to comfort me. And to this purpose says S. Paul,
that there is no difference of men before GOD, Romans 10.12.
but the same who is Lord over all, is rich toward all those that call upon
him: Have thou then recourse unto him, and believe in him, and thou art assured
that he will also be rich in mercy even unto thee. If there were two or three
hundred inhabitants of some town banished for some offense, and after a
general pardon should be published, that all the banished of such a town
should have free liberty to return thither, with all assurance to enter
again upon all their goods and honors: suppose that thou were one of those
banished, and that he that has given the pardon were a faithful and true
Prince: would not thou believe, that thou were comprehended in the pardon,
although thy name were no more expressed, than the names of the other banished,
and that returning to the town thou should again be placed in thy goods?
Now, Genesis 3.24.
we have bin banished from the kingdom of heaven by the transgression of Adam.
Jesus Christ dying for these banished persons, causes a general pardon to be
published by the preaching of the Gospel, with permission, yea with
commandment to return into heaven. He is a true King, yea the truth it
self: and the abolishing of this banishment, and the reentrie into heaven has
cost him very dear, 1. Pet. 1.19.
even the shedding of his most precious blood. What occasion then have thou to
doubt of thy pardon, and return into heaven? For, although thy Christian name
be not expressed; yet if thou be of the number of the banished, he speaks to
thee, behold thy name, thou art there comprehended. Believe that he speaks in
truth, and that his will is such toward thee, as he declares to thee by his
word. But let us pass further to the Sacraments, which serve greatly to
resolve us to believe that we are the children of God. The Sacraments are (as
it were) a visible word, August. in Joan. hom. 19.
representing the grace of the Gospel. But more then that, they are
communicated to thee, and thou receiuest the^. Is not this to put thee, as it
were, into real possession of thine adoption, and to give thee assurance of
everlasting life? The Pastor preaches unto all, the grace of the Gospel in
the name of Christ. But in thy Baptism he directs his speech to thee by
name, to assure thee of the forgiveness of thy sins, and of thine adoption, as
S. Paul says, that those that are baptized have put on Christ, and that so
they are the children of God. Gal. 3.27.26.
And it is as if a Prince having called back again all the banished, amongst
who^ thou should be one, calling unto thee by name, amongst the other
banished, by a letter sealed of thy pardon, and of reestablishing thee in thy
goods. Should not this be to assure thee? As touching the holy supper, Jesus
Christ, having published by his Minister, that his flesh is meat indeed and
his blood drink, adds, that whosoever eats his flesh and drinks his
blood, Ioh. 6.55.56.
he has life everlasting: He calls thee among others to his table, and
gives thee of the bread and wine, namely, to assure thy person, that he died
for thee, and that he gives thee his body and his blood, yea himself all
whole, and all his benefits, that thou should be with him, the child of
God, and an inheritour of life everlasting. If the devil or thy conscience
trouble thee, to doubt of thine adoption, assure thy soul against such a
temptation, by the communication of the holy supper. Say boldly, Satan, can
thou deny that I have been at the holy supper, and that I have received bread
and wine? I have seen, touched and tasted it, thou can not deny it. Further,
can thou deny that this bread and wine were given me for seals and sure
pledges of my communicating with the body and blood of Christ? 1. Cor. 10.16.
Saint Paul says plainly, that the bread which I have received, is the
communion of the body of lesus Christ. Seeing then thou can not deny, but
that I have received the bread and wine: and that the bread and wine are the
communion of the body and of the blood of Christ, I have then communion with
the body and blood of Jesus Christ, and thou can not deny it. True it is
that there are some, who being outward members of the church, baptized in it,
hearing the word, and communicating at the holy supper, show themselves after
hypocrites, declaring that they were never indeed the children of God. But we
cannot say therefore, that the revelation and testimony of the will of God
contained in his word, and sealed by the Sacraments, are doubtful or
uncertain. For GOD, who offers his grace in his word, and has sealed it by
the Sacraments, is faithful and speaks truly, revealing unto us and
assuring us that he will take us for his well-beloved children in Jesus Christ.
And he can neither lie nor deceive, as is already said. But these are
unfaithful men, who rejecting the testimonies of the will of GOD toward them,
deprive themselves by their incredulity of the grace which was offered unto
the^, doing this dishonor to Christ, to co^pt him a lier. 1. Ioh. 5.10
As the Sun then cease not to give light and brightness, although some man
shuts his eyes that he may not see it, nor be lightened: and as meat
cease not to be good and nourishing, although it be received without profit
of a stomach evil disposed: So, if many unwilling to believe that the will of
GOD is such, as he has declared by his word, rejecting (by their incredulity)
the grace which GOD offers them; should their incredulity make thee call in
doubt the truth of God, and the testimony of his good will toward thee? If
some few among these banished, not trusting the pardon published by a true and
faithful Prince, do him this dishonor to count him as a deceiuer or lier:
acknowledge thou that justly and by good right they remain banished. But
thou, seeing that faithful Prince Jesus Christ has sent to pronounce unto
thee a general pardon, and namely, has given thee his letters sealed by the
Sacraments, commanding thee to believe, and promising thee, that it shall be
unto thee according to thy faith: Assure thy self, Matt. 9.29.
that his will is that thou should be his child, and heir of everlasting
life. See how every one should assure himself, by the preaching of the
Gospel, and the use of the Sacraments, the true marks of the Church: that
(being a member of it) he is the child of God: and consequently, an inheritour
of his everlasting kingdom. True it is, that faith is the gift of GOD, yea
proceeding from the operation of the mighty power of his strength, Phili.
1.29. Ephe. 1.19.
as S. Paul speaks. And this is it which he makes us to feel in this
difficulty of apprehe^ding (by an assured faith) so many, so clear and so
certain testimonies of his good will toward us, touching our adoption. It is
therefore needful that he work farther with us by his holy spirit, which
(without ceasing) asking of him in the name of Jesus Christ, we are assured by
his promise, that he will give us, and that, so joining with the power and
efficacy of his spirit, the preaching of his Gospel, and the use of the
Sacraments, he will give us grace to apply unto our selves (by a true and
lively faith) the testimonies which he has given us of our adoption, to our
salvation and everlasting life.

How although the marks of our adoption be in us but small and feeble, yet
we ought, and may assure our selves that we are the children of God.

CAP. 4.
I See well (will some say) that I have just matter to believe it: and
therefore am I the more sorry that I feel not faith in my self, to assure me
without doubt that I am the child of GOD, which thing troubles me greatly, so
as I fear least by this mine incredulity, I reject the grace of God. But
understand I pray thee for thy comfort, that there is great difference between
unfaithfulness and weakness of faith. The unfaithful man or infidel cares not
for his salvation: or, The first temptation proceeding of the small feeling of
our faith.
rejecting the salvation which is in Jesus Christ alone, seeks salvation
other where. Contrariwise, the faithful desire salvation: he knows that his
salvation is in Jesus Christ alone: he seeks it in him, and feels a desire
to increase in assurance, that he has salvation in Jesus Christ, though he do
not yet feel this peace and joy in the holy Ghost so manifestly as faith
brings it forth at the last. Also it is not written, he that feels, but he
that believes has everlasting life. Iho. 3.36. Heb. 11.1. Romans 8.23.
And indeed, as faith is of things that are not seen, so the understanding of
it consists more in certainty, than in apprehensio^. In this complaint of
David, yea and of Christ himself: My God my God, why have thou forsaken me.
Psalm. 22.1. Mat. 27.46.
We hear the testimony of faith by these words: my God my God, but without
apprehe^sion or feeling of favor or joy, as this complaint, why have thou
forsaken me, shows. Also our faith may be so small and weak, as it does not
yet bring forth fruits that may be lively felt of us. But if such as feel
themselves in such estate, desire to have these feelings: if they ask them of
God by prayer. This desire and prayer are testimonies that the spirit of God is
in them, and that they have faith already. For, is such a desire a fruit of
the flesh, or of the spirit? It is of the holy spirit, who brings it forth
only in such, as he dwells in. He dwells then in them. In like manner, is
not this prayer the work of the holy ghost in the^? For it is the holy ghost
(says S. Paul) which prays for us, Romans 8.25.
and in us, with groans that cannot be expressed. Again, none can come to God
by prayers, if he have no trust in him. Then these holy desires and prayers,
being the motions of the holy ghost in us, are testimonies of our faith,
although they seem to us small and weak. As the woman that feels the
mooning of a child in her womb, though very weak, believes and assures her
self that she is with child, and that she goes with a live child: so if we
have these motions, these holy affections and desires before mentioned, let us
not doubt, but that we have the holy ghost (who is the author of them)
dwelling in us, and consequently that we have also faith. And we must
understand, that the faith of the children of God cease not to be a true
faith, although they feel doubts, fears, and mistrusts. For if they delight
not in such infirmities, Romans 7.
to nourish them; but are sorrowful and resist them, with desire to feel
their salvation in Jesus Christ, behold a battle in them: and between whom?
Between the spirit and the flesh: between faith and mistrust. There is then
in them faith assailed with doubts, and the spirit fighting against mistrust,
and laboring to overcome it. These doubts, mistrustings, and incredulities are
the fiery darts which Satan throws against our faith, the which bearing the
blows, as a buckler, as S. Paul says: thrusts them back and quenches
them, so as they pearce not to the heart. Ephesians. 6.16.
What devises or assaults soever the devil make against us, faith S. Augustine,
so he occupy not the place of the heart where faith dwells, he is driven
back. Incredulity then assaulteth us without, but wounds us not deadly: It
troubles only, or so wounds, as the stroke is yet curable. And such
temptations and assaults are common to the most faithful and excellent
servants of God. If we consider the continual course of the life of David,
there is no mirror of faith better to be noted than in him. And yet was not
he assaulted with great fears and doubts? What complaint makes he in the 77.
Psalm? Has the Lord forsaken for ever? Psalm. 77.8, 9 10, 11, verse.
will he no more show me favor? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Is his
promise come to an end for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious? Has
he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure? And to conclude, he holds such
a course, as a man desperate, saying: This is my death. Where was then in
David, the feeling of his faith? For all this he had not lost it. And indeed all
these words were but representations of fear and despair assailing the faith
that was in him, and fighting against it: As he shows in other places very
plainly, saying: My soul, why art thou cast down, Psalm 42.12. Psalm. 43.5.
why art thou so heavy within me? Put thy trust in God, for I will yet give
him thanks, for as much as he is my manifest deliverance (as it were before my
face) and my God. If these testimonies of faith before mentioned seem small:
how small and dark was the faith of the Apostles before the resurrection of
Jesus Christ? They believe that Christ is the son of God, Mat 16.16 John
6.69. Mat. 17.23 Luke 9.45. Luk 24.11 Act. 1.6.
the savior of the world: but yet they understand not that he must die, and
rise again: wherein notwithstanding lies the principal rest of our faith.
Yea, and after his resurrection they (acknowledge him for a King) imagined
rather a carnal, than a spiritual kingdom. If their faith was dark in their
understanding: it was also small in their hearts, when they were offended at
Christ, and all forsook him: and Peter himself renounced him. Mat. 26 31 Mar.
14.27. Mar. 14.50. Mat. 26.70 Mar. 14.68
And yet we cannot say, that they were without faith, though it were then very
weak and small. And also when the ship being covered with floods they cried to
Jesus Christ: Luke 22.32 Matt. 8.25.
saying, save us, we perish: he calls them not infidels, but men of little
faith, and fearful: showing that they had some faith in them, though very
small, and assailed with fear, wherein notwithstanding having recourse unto
him, they were heard, and delivered out of danger. For he came not to break
the bruised reed, nor to quench the smoking flax: As Esaias foretold, Esa. 42 3.
Matt. 12.18
showing thereby, that there are some of the children of God, weak as a bruised
reed, and having as little strength of faith, as in steed of flaming, it
smoaketh only. This smalnes and beginning of faith is very aptly noted by S.
Paul, saying: Romans 1.17.
that the righteousness of GOD is revealed by the Gospel from faith to faith.
He shows that there are degrees in faith, and that it happens to us in the
revealing of the righteousness of GOD, by which we are justified, as when we see
one so far off, as with much a do we know him: but the nearer we approach,
the more cleerelie we discern him. Many of the children of God are like to
that blind man, whose eyes Christ opened, Mar. 8.29.
but so at the beginning, as he saw men like trees, forthwith he recovered his
sight, but yet troubled at the beginning, but afterward cleared. To be short,
he who in the person of his Apostles has taught us to pray unto God to
increase our faith, shows that he has children in whom it is weak, Luke
17.5.
and has need of increase. Also the chief wisdom of the most perfect is to
profit. And to this purpose we must remember, that in all spiritual graces,
there is nothing but beginnings and imperfections, in the most perfect, and
most highly exalted in this life. But that the perfection (to the which
notwithstanding we must always tend) and the accomplishment shall be in
heaven. To conclude, there are two effects or fruits of faith, to wete, the
rest and peace of the conscience before God: and sanctification, which
consists in the mortification of the works of the flesh, and newnes of life.
Now, as the rest and peace of conscience proceeding from faith, is a testimony
that it is in us, so is also sanctification, and the desire to walk in the
fear and obedience of God. And indeed, faith is the fountain of good works.
If then, one of these fruits be languishing, the other suffices to assure us
that we have faith. As it is known that there is true and natural fire, by
the flame and the heat, which are two effects and operations of fire: but if
the flame shall become weak, the heat shall suffice to assure us, that it is
natural, and not a painted fire. In like manner, if this fruit of thy faith be
weak, to feel peace and rest in thy conscience, and yet thou feel the
other effect of faith, to wete, a desire to the works of the spirit, love
toward God, and desire to walk in his obedience: This fruit of thy faith is
to thee a sure testimony that it is in thee, though but small and weak. But
thou will say: what comfort or assurance of salvation can a faith so weak and
little give me: I answer; It can assure thee of thine adoption. For so thou
have but one spark of true faith, thou art the child of God. Faith is of such a
force, Mat. 17.20
that (following the promise of God) one only grain of it, though never so
little, lays hold on Jesus Christ to salvation. Again, it is properly Jesus
Christ which saves us, and not our faith: saving in so much as it is the
instrument, and as it were the hand by which we take hold on Jesus Christ.
Now, faith how little soever it be takes hold on Christ and receives him,
not by halfes, but all whole: as an infant takes and holds with his little
hand a whole apple, though he does it not so strongly or surely as a man. By
the apple of our eye, though merueilous little, we see very great mountains,
and the very body of the Sun, much greater than the whole earth: so our
faith, though very little, takes and receives all whole Jesus Christ the
sun of righteousness. He who (being in a dark tower) sees not the light of
the Sun, but by a very little hole, may notwithstanding assure himself,
that the Sun shines upon the tower, as well as he that sees it by an open
window, knows that it shines upon his house. Even so although we are
hindered by the clouds of mistrust, that we cannot see the Sun of
righteousness to shine upon our souls in his brightness: yet so that we see but
a little beam, we know that the sun of life shines upon us, which
assures us that we are the children of God. Also whosoever in this life shall
have the least faith among all the elect, shall yet inioye Jesus Christ all
whole, and not a little or half salvation, but the full accomplished salvation
of eternal life. For whosoever believes in Jesus Christ, says Saint John,
shall not perish, Iho. 3.16
but have life everlasting. Now, as this ought greatly to comfort us in the
weakness of our faith, so ought it to be a sharp spur to enforce us to
grow in faith, that feeling so much the more clearelie and lively the peace
and joy of our consciences, by the assurance that we are the children of God,
we may the more strongly resist all temptations, and glorify our God. There
are others, who call their faith and adoption in doubt, 2. Temptation through
the smalnes of our sanctification. Ia. 2.17.20.
saying: That true faith cannot be without good works. Now, I feel my self so
miserable a sinner, that it makes me to doubt of mine adoption. Indeed this is
a thing greatly to be lamented, that we render no better obedience unto God,
that there is in us no greater zeal of his glory, nor more fervent charity
toward our neighbors: and to be short, no better amendment of life. But if
thou have begun to hate and flee sin, if thou feel that thou art
displeased at thy infirmities and corruptions: If having offended God, thou
feel a sorrow and grief for it: if thou desire to abstain: if thou auoidest
the occasions: if thou trauailest to do thine endeavor: if thou praiest to God
to give thee grace: All these holy affections proceeding from no other than
from the Holy ghost, ought to be unto thee so many pledges and testimonies,
that he is in thee: Romans 8.5
As also Saint Paul teaches us, saying: that as those that delight in the
works of the flesh, are of the flesh. So on the other side, those that delight
in the works of the spirit, are of the spirit. These holy desires then to the
works of the spirit, are testimonies of the spirit dwelling in thee. So as
being thus led by the spirit of God, thou art the child of God, says Saint
Paul: Romans 3.14 Romans 3.10
And indeed seeing the children of Adam are naturally inclined to all vices
and corruptions, it is a mark of regeneration, and so of being the child of
God, when contrary to nature we are displeased with our infirmities, and
fighting against them, we desire and endeavor to fashion our selves according
to the will of our GOD. Mat. 22.37.
God has commanded us to love him with all our heart, with all our
understanding, and with all our soul. Now, as we cannot know God in this life,
but in part, and darkly, so we can not love him but in part, 1. Cor. 13.9.12.
Aug. ad Bonif. lib. 3. ca. 7.
yea very little. The perfection is reserved for heaven as also S. Augustine
says: All the faithful ought earnestly to aspire to this, that they may once
appear before God pure and without spot. But for as much as the best and most
perfect estate that we can attain unto in this present life, is no other
thing, than to profit from day to day: then shall we come to this mark, when,
after putting off this sinful flesh, we shall cleave fully to our God.
Therefore also, as the same author says, when men speak of the perfection of
the children of God in this life: to this perfection is required the
acknowledging of their imperfection. It is as well in truth, as in humility
that the Saints acknowledge how imperfect they are. God deferreth the
accomplishment of our holiness and charity until the life to come, to the end
that this pride (which takes force through the increase of virtue) should not
overthrow us, but that walking in humility, God might accomplish his mercy
in pardoning us, 2. Cor. 12.9
his power in sustaining us, and his truth in saving us. And in deed there is
nothing more weak, says S. Augustine, than the proud, nor more strong than
the humble: For as the proud, trusting in himself, who is nothing but
vanity, has God his adversary, who resists the proud; 1. Pet. 5.5. Iam.
4.6.
so the humble mistrusting himself, has God for his strength and salvation.
God indeed in his law requires a perfect obedience. But that which he
looks for of us his children in this life, consists more in the desire to
obey, than in the obedience it self. Romans 8.5
According whereunto he says by his Prophet Malachi, I will spare them, Mal.
3 17.
as a father does his own son that serves him. If a child take pain to
write well, or to do as he should do any other service that his father has
commanded him, although there be great want both in the writing, and in the
other service; yet in bearing with him he praises him, and says that he
has written well, he had done his duty. Godliness, the love toward God,
and the obedience that we owe unto him, is often signified by the fear of God,
the which also David calls the beginning of Wisdom. Psa. 111.10
And those that have this fear of God, are acknowledged and called the
children of God. Then if thou feel such love and reverence toward God, that
thou fear to offend him, thou art the child of God. Psa. 112.1
But then thou fear to offend God, when thou shunnest the occasions and
inticements to sin, and when having offended, thorough ignorance, oversight,
or other infirmity, thou feel sorrow and displeasure, to raise thee up
again, being resolved to sin no more, and praying to God that he will conduct
thee by his holy spirit, that thou may walk constantly according to his
word. 1. John 3.9
S. Ihon says, that the children of God sin not: not that they offend not
God every day, or that they commit not sometimes most grievous offenses, as
David and Saint Peter: 2. Sam. 11 Mat. 26.74
And as daily experience does too much convict every one of us. But he
says, that they sin not, because they love God, and are afraideto offend
him, and do not willingly give themselves to do evil: but have sin in such
detestation, that they feel in themselves that conflict, which Saint Paul
sets forth unto us in his own person, Romans 7
in as much as they would do the good which they cannot do, and do
unwillingly the evil which displeases them: whereof it follows, as the
Apostle concludes, that if they do that which they would not do, it is no
more they which do it, but sin which dwells in them: which on the one side
ought to give the^ occasion to mourn and to cry with the Apostle, Alas wretch
that I am, who snall deliver me from the body of this death? But on the other
side they ought to feel the comfort which he adds, saying, I thank my God
through Jesus Christ. And wherefore? Romans 8.1
Because there is no condemnation to those, who thus fighting against the
flesh, walk after the spirit, and consequently are in Jesus Christ. For
therest, when thou feel a doubt of thine adoption through the want of
rendering to God such obedience as thou oughtst, know, that Satan is at hand
with thee falsifying the gospel in persuading thee, that thou should be
saved by thy works; or willing to make thee blaspheme Jesus Christ, in making
thee believe, that thou may and ought to be (at the least) in some part,
a Savior of thy self, and so a companion of Jesus Christ. Answer to this
temptation, that thou art a poor sinner, 1. Tim. 1.15 Matt. 9.13. Romans 8.5.
Romans 8.1. Romans 7.22
but that Christ came to save sinners, and that there is salvation in none but
in him. Furthermore, if thou feel a desire to the works of the Spirit, thou art
of the Spirit, and there is no comdemnation to thee, as is said. If thou
delight, as touching the inward man, in the obedience of the commandments of
GOD, he accepts thee for holy and just, receiving this desire to obey him,
for an obedience acceptable unto him. He accepts his own work in thee, and
pardons thee thine. Continue in this holy desire, fighting against the flesh
and the world, strengthening thy self by fervent prayer to the Lord. And behold
the certain testimonies of thine adoption.

But thou will say, 3. Temptation, because the seeling of the fruit of our
prayers is so long deferred, and because of the weakness of them.
I have of long time asked of God, and do daily ask his holy Spirit, the
increase of faith and grace to be obedient unto him; yet I feel no manner of
fruit of my prayers. If GOD loved me, and accounted me for his child, would
he not hear me? It is the same complaint, that in old time past David made,
saying: I am weary of crying, my throat is hoarse, mine eyes are failed, Psa
6^.4.
while I wait on my God. And in another place, My God, I cry by day, Psa, 22 2
and thou answerest not, and by night, and I have no rest. Now in saying he had
no rest, he shows that he did continue in prayer. Also Jesus Christ exhorts
us to this diligence, by the example or similitude of the importunate widow,
Luke. 18.1
crying still upon the wicked Judge to do her right, and at the last obtaining
by her importunacie. And besides that, he waketh us up, saying: Hear what the
wicked Judge says: Because she troubles me, I will do her justice. And
God which is your Father and Savior, who is just and loves righteousness,
Psalm. 11.7
shall not he hear the cry of his children crying unto him night and day?
Verily I say unto you, Luke 11.5.
that he will do it, and that quickly. He that went by night to his
neighbor to borow bread, continuing still his request, though the other
alleged many excuses, yet at the length he obtained what he would. Continue
then in praying to GOD, without discouragement. This perseverance in prayer, is
an evident and vehement testimony of thy faith. For that is not found but in
the children of God, guided by his Spirit: especially seeing thou ask the
holy Ghost, Luke 11.13
whom Jesus Christ promised thee, thou ask that, which by his promise is due
unto thee, without doubt he will give it thee. And seeing thou ask the
increase of faith, and grace to obey him, thou ask that which he commands
thee to have, and so that which he likes and is pleased withal, Be then
assured that thou shall be heard. Behold, says Saint John, John 5.14.
the confidence that we have with GOD, that if we ask any thing according
unto his will, he hears us. And if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we
ask, we know we shall obtain the requests that we have asked. His promises
can not fail nor deceive. Yea, be thou certain, that before thou have ended
thy prayer, he has heard thee, as Esaias says, Esa, 65.24
For our God is a God that hears prayers, says David. But thou owe him
this honor to submit thy self to his wisdom as touching the time of feeling
or receiving the fruit of thy prayers. If Jesus Christ had healed the daughter
of the Cananite at the first petition, Mat. 15.22.
her Faith had not been so kindled in her, nor so commended in the Church unto
the end of the world. The fruits of all trees are not ripe in one day. In
some they do ripen sooner, and men wait patiently for the other, which ripen
in the latter season: Luke 1.13
Zachary and Elizabeth thought that they had prayed in vain, asking of GOD
posterity in their youth. And when they were old, and without all hope for to
obtain it, the Angel of the Lord said unto Zachary, Thy prayer is heard:
not that prayer which he made then, for he thought not now to have issue, but
the prayer which he made long time before. That which is more, do we not
ask of GOD many graces, the which we know well that we obtain, either in
part, or in hope only? the enjoying or full accompliss meant whereof is
deferred either until death, or even until the day of the resurrection. In
the Prayer of all Prayers taught by Jesus Christ, we do ask of GOD that his
name may be sanctified, Matthew. 6.9
his Kingdom may come, his will may be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
And when shall we see the full accomplished effect of this prayer, but in
Heaven, when Christ having gruen up his kingdom to GOD his father, we shall
love him perfectly, and praise him everlastingly? Furthermore, he oftentimes
hears us, so as Saint Augustine says: not according unto our will, but as is
most for our profit, giving us better things than those that we expresselie
ask. The Jews desired the coming of the Messiah, and asked it of God. He
deferred it of long time: at the last he sent him, but not such a one, as al
(as it were) and the Apostles themselves looked for: Act. 4.6.
to wete, victorious in battle as David, to deliver them from the yoke of
the Romans, triumphing in riches and worldly glory, as Solomon; but such a
Messiah, as obtaining victory against the devil, death, and sin, has
established a spiritual kingdom in everlasting life and glory. Jesus Christ
feeling and apprehending the terrible gulphes of the fearful wrath of God upon
him for our sins, Mat. 26.39
prayed with strong cries and tears to God his Father that he might not enter
into the deep pit of death. The Apostle to the Hebrews says, Heb. 5 7.
that he was heard: and yet notwithstanding he entered, and drank the Cup of
the wrath, and of death which the Father had given him. But he was heard, says
the same Apostle, as touching that which (in making his prayer) he fered: to
wit, from being swallowed of death. In like manner, S. Paul prays to God
oftentimes that he 2. Cor. 12.
would deliver him from the Angel of Satan that buffeted him, but GOD much
better (as he himself confesses) gave him to understand, that the power of
God was made perfect in his infirmity: so as he protests, as it were enjoying
the fruit of his prayers, though otherwise than he thought, that from that time
forth he would rejoice in his infirmities, and would take delight in them,
forasmuch as being weak in himself, he was strong in God. So we will demand
many times commodities concerning this life, as health, goods, parents,
friends, or our country: and God depriving us of them, gives us spiritual
graces, patience, faith, contentment in God, and other like: yea, and our
prayer tending only unto the preservation, and enjoying such commodities
appertaining unto this life alone: GOD contrariwise depriueth us of them, to
keep them for us in heaven, and to give us everlasting enjoying of them, as
when we are deprived of them, being persecuted for his name. And that which
more is, when we feel weakness in faith, negligence to hear the word of
GOD, coldness in charity, impatience in our afflictions, and we having asked
of God graces contrary unto these, feel no amendment: his will is to make us
feel that these graces are the gifts of God, seeing we have them not when we
will, and that he will keep us in humility by the feeling of our infirmities,
and try our patience and faith, in waighting patiently until he make us
feel the fruit of our prayers. I think well (will thou say) that those that
pray unto God fervently and continue constantly in such prayers, have therein
testimonies that they are the children of God, and are assured to be heard. But
what comfort may I take therein, seeing my prayers are so cold, and with so
little feeling of zeal and faith required in them? But is it not in the name of
Jesus Christ that thou prayest? And it is for the love of his well-beloved Son,
Ioh. 16.23.
our advocate and mediator, that God hears us, and not for the excellency
of our prayers. It is, as it were, Exo. 28.38.
by the mouth of Jesus Christ that we present our prayers to God, to be
sanctified by him, and acceptable to God for his sake, in whom he has delight.
Mat. 17.5.
Satan, the enemy of our prayers, by the feeling of this infirmity, would
make thee leave praying to thy God. Resist the^ this temptation. Think that it
is not a thing indifferent, or left in thy liberty, to pray to God or not. Mat.
6.9.
God has comanded thee to pray; 1. Th. 5.17.
thou owe him obedience; it is an honor he requires of thee; thou can not
deny it him. Mat. 22.37
God commands thee to love him with all thy heart. Will thou say, I will not
love God at all, because I love him so coldly: I will help the poor no more,
because I cannot do it with a fervent charity. To conclude, what infirmity
or coldness soever thou feel, thou art bound to pray, and to continue in thy
duty. To. 12.12.
In the mean time, acknowledge thy infirmity, and in thy prayers ask double
pardon, first of thy sins which thou have committed before, secondly for this
sin, that thou prayest to God so negligently. See how GOD (supporting the
infirmity of thy prayers) will smell a sweet savor of them, as incense
offered by our high Priest Jesus Christ, Psalm. 141.2.
and shall make thee at last feel the fruit of thy prayers. Many complain
of another infirmity, that hardly they begin their prayers, but in stead of
thinking of God, and of that which they ask of him, their mind is wandering
other where. And for this they are vexed and troubled: and in truth it is a
great infirmity, for the which we ought greatly to be displeased with our
selves. Notwithstanding it is common to all the children of God in general.
Chrysostom reproouing those of his time for this infirmity, shows quickly
the first original, and after the remedy. Chrisost. Homil. of the Canaanit.
Mat. 13
Whence comes this (says he) that if we talk of war, of merchandise, or
of other things of the world, we can discourse a great while without thinking
of any other thing, and so soon as we set our selves to pray unto God, our
minds wander? It is because the Devil knows well, that in speaking of things
of this world, thou deost him no hurt, and therefore he suffers thee to talk
at thy pleasure: but when he sees, that thou set thy self upon thy knees
to pray to God, he knows that thou go to procure that, which is against
his heart, and to the ruin of his kingdom. Therefore he thrusts himself in by
and by, trobling and drawing thy thoughts hither and thither, to hinder the
fruit of thy prayers. Say then to satan, who is hard by thee, and fights
against thee; go behind me satan, for I must pray to my God. And if he be
importunate, yet must thou pray to god to drive him away from thee. So thinking
to whom thou speak, to wete, to the Majesty of God; and how great things
thou ask of him: be displeased with thy infirmity, fight against it, and
lifting up thy hands to heaven continue in prayer; and do it so much the more
courageously and constantly, for that satan fears nothing more tha^ the
prayers of the children of God; and shows sufficiently in going about to
troble and turn away their minds to other things, that he feels himself
hindered by their prayers, and that he fears the fruit of them. On the other
side, if it happen that by affliction either of body or of spirit, thou art so
cast down, that thou cast not make a framed prayer unto God; be not
discouraged for that, for at the least thou can desire thine own health and
salvation. There is neither sickness nor yet tyrant that can let thee to desire:
now, desire is prayer before God, says Saint Augustine; according whereunto
David says, that God hears the desire of the humble. Psalm. 10.17.
Say thou then with David; Lord all my desire is before thee, Psa. 38, 10.
and the sighs of my thoughts are not hid from thee. Ezechias King o Judah in
his affliction, Esai. 38.14.
could not distinctly pray unto God, but chattered as a Crane or a Swallowe,
and mourned as the Dove; yet so lifting up his eyes on high, he was heard.
What prayer makes the little Infant to his mother? He weepeth and cries, not
being able to express what he lacks. The Mother offers him the breast,
or gives him some other thing, such as she thinks his necessity requires.
Much more then the heavenly father heedeth the sighs, the groans, the desires
and tears of his children: and doing the office of a Father, he hears them,
and provides for them. The 4. temtation, because of the little increas of
grace by the exercises of religion. Mat. 13.19.
There are some also that doubt of their adoption and salvation, because they
feel not any comfort or increase of the graces of GOD, neither by reading or
hearing the word, neither by communicating at the holy Supper of the Lord.
Now, if thou feel thy self afflicted and troubled in this respect;
understand, that when thou go to employ thy self in these spiritual
excrcises, satan follows thee, to make it unsavory to thee, yea and to take
out of thy mind the word of GOD that thou have heard. Pray then to GOD, that
he drive him away from thee. Secondly this comes, forasmuch as thou art not
yet much accustomed to the language of the holy Ghost, so as it is to thee as
if thou did hear an excellent sermon, but of one whose language thou did
scarce understand, whereby thou can neither feel taste nor pleasure, and so
thou can receive but small pro sit. Then thou must continue, and also
accustom thy self to read and hear the word of God, thinking always that
God speaks to thee for the salvation of thy soul, praying him that he will
give thee grace by his holy spirit to profit to his glory and thy salvation.
And thou shall feel at the last that which is said to sick men that have lost
their taste, that thy appetite will come to thee by eating: And that the word of
God, and the participating of the bread and wine in the holy supper shall be
to thee more sweet, Psalm. 119.103.
than honey to the mouth, Psalm. 19.11.
as David says. Many sick persons having neither taste nor appetite, eat
notwithstanding and receive noriture. So, though in reading and hearing the
word of God, and communicating at the Lords supper, thou feel not any taste
or appetite: yet in continuing, thou shall receive some noriture for thy soul.
And if it seems to thee that thou forgettest by and by, that which thou have
read or heard, practice for thy soul that which thou dooest for thy body:
because the meats digest and abide not in the body, thou returnest to eat
meat again every day: So be thou so much more diligent to hear and read the
word, and to communicate at the holy supper without leesing any one meal for
thy soul, when GOD offers it thee. And as the corporal meat though it
pass away: yet there remains always some noriture for the body: so shall
this spiritual meat be to thy soul. Yea it may be that at one sermon thou
shall hear and remember one sentence, which shall serve thee, as it were, for
a passeport, a ladder or wings at thy need to conduct thee by, and by
comforting and strengthening thee, to lift thee up into heaven. If then, when
thou go to read or hear the word of God, or to communicate at the Lords
supper, thou praiest to God (as thou ought daily to do) that he will give
thee his spirit, that thou may profit: and so do continue co^stantlie in
these spiritual exercises. This disposition, this holy affection and obedience
shall serve thee for sure testimonies of thine adoption, and thou shall without
doubt, feel increase of the graces of God.

Finally, there are some, who having had lively feelings of their faith with
comfort and joy in their consciences, The fifth temptation by the interruption
of the graces of God.
walking besides in the fear of God, are afterward greatly troubled, when
these graces seem to be dead in them, falling into doubt and mistrust of their
salvation, or into crimes and sins too unworthy the children of God. For
satan hereby indeuoureth to persuade them, either that they never had the true
faith, or that God has cast them off, taking from them the gifts and graces of
his holy spirit: but both the one and the other conclusion is as false, as the
author of them is a great lier. And indeed, if the trees which have flourished
and borne their fruit in summer, are in winter without fruit, without leaves,
yea and without appearance of life: does it follow therefore either that they
had not life in summer, or that they are dead in the winter. When men go to
bed, they rake up the fire which did burn: if thou mark it very near, there
is no appearance either of heat, nor of brightness: does it follow therefore,
that there had been no fire, or that it is then quenched or dead. Contrariwise,
having been covered over night, men kindle again in the morning the same fire
that was hid and covered: and the trees that seemed to be dead in the winter,
flourish and bear fruit a while after. If thou see a drunken man, not
having for a time the use of reason, nor any feeling of it, will thou say
therefore, that he never had a reasonable soul, or that having had it, it is
now dead? A bide a few hours and thou shall be convict of the contrary. And
so of that, that thou have not presently the feeling or effects and fruits of
faith, can it follow that thou never have had them, or that having had them,
thou have lost them? Matt. 26.74
When S. Peter renounced Jesus Christ three times, cursing himself, was his
faith quenched? On the contrary, Jesus Christ having prayed to God that his
faith should not fail, Luke 22.31
and being without doubt heard, faith remained in him, but very weak and sore
beaten, but not destroyed nor quenched. David having committed adultery and
murder, Psalm. 51.
acknowledged his sins and offenses, praying to God that he would not take
his holy spirit from him. Then he had not lost it, rather it abode in him but
as a fire covered with ashes so as it is said; without having any feeling of
it to keep him from such a headlong fall. Faith then may be in a man without
kindling: and being kindled, it is not out, although it be not perceived for a
time. Yea, but (will thou say) the Apostle to the Hebrews shows that there be
some, Heb. 6 4, 5, 6.
who having been lightened, having tasted the heavenly gift, having been
partakers of the holy ghost, and tasted the good word of God, and the power of
the world to come, fall back and leese these graces, yea without hope ever to
recover them again. What assurance then can I have that faith abides in me,
and that GOD will yet make me to feel it hereafter? For as he has showed
mercy unto David, and to Saint Peter; so does he exercise his just
judgments upon other, as upon those of whom the Apostle spoke before. We
deny not but that there be reprobates that are greatly lightened in the
knowledge of the mysteries of salvation (which the Apostle terms here to be
partakers of the holy ghost) and yet that such apprehensions, tastings and
feelings as he proposes follow not thereof. For, reading or hearing the
testimonies and representatio^s of the mercies of God toward his Church, of the
love of Jesus Christ toward his elect, and of the excellency and felicity of
eternal life, they conceive these things in their understanding, and for the
greatness of them, they are after a sort moved: and when they talk of them,
they seem to be partakers of them. But the difference that there is between
them and the children of God, lies chiefly in this, that the apprehensions
and feelings of the reprobat are such, as a man may have in the reading or
telling of an history, which touches us nothing at all: but the feelings of
the children of God are as of a matter that touches themselves.

Let us consider for example the history of Joseph. Who is he that reading
attentively, how Joseph was sold of his brethren, Genesis 37.
carried into Egypt, put in prison: and the sorrow that Jacob had, Genesis 39.
understanding that he was devoured of a wild beast, that would not be moved
with compassion toward Joseph and Jacob? Who is he that reading how Joseph
being able to contain himself no longer, Genesis 45.
made himself known to his brethren, and how weeping and crying out he said
unto them: I am Joseph, is my father yet alive, and causing the^ to come near
unto him, said, I am Joseph your brother who^ ye sold, but be not sorry. Show
to my father al my glory: Then throwing himself upon the neck of Benjamin his
brother, he wept, and in like manner Benjamin wept upon his neck: after
kissing all his brethren he wept upon them. Who is he, I say, which is not
touched and weepeth not with them? But because this is a history of the fact
of an other, these motions and feelings soon pass away, so as having turned
the lease or talked of another matter, all these feelings are vanished and
gone. So is the feeling of the reprobate, hearing or reading the testimonies of
so great a mercy of God toward men, and of the greatness of the happiness of
the kingdom of heaven: The understanding and apprehension of these things,
causes some motions or feelings in them, as the Apostle says. But for as much
as these good things appertain not unto them, neither do the feelings that
they have, take any seat or root in their hearts, but are easily quenched
and vanish away. On the contrary, the feeling that the children of God have,
is, as of the good things that appertain unto them, and therefore it may well
be cold and drowsy, but not die. As also the feelings that Joseph and his
brethren had were such, as although they had the^ not when they slept, yet when
they awaked they returned again. And although that by the death of their
father, they were (as it were) interrupted: yet the benefit and the comfort
abode by them still. Following this that is above said, we say boldly, that
what feelings, what illuminations or apprehensions so ever the reprobate have:
so it is that they never feel the holy ghost in them, giving the^ testimony
that they are the children of God. For according to this testimony, they
should be, and should abide the children of God: seeing the holy ghost can
neither deceive nor lie. As also after that God has made us once feel by the
testimony of his holy spirit that we are his children, we are certain that
we cannot perish, but that we are indeed, and shall continue the children of
God. For it is the testimony and revelation of the spirit of truth. Also he
that gives faith, Mal. 3.6.
does not change: and therefore his gifts are without repentance. To. 11.29.
The second difference may be taken from this word, Heb. 6.4.
taste, which the Apostle uses: To wete, that the reprobate are like to him who
having tasted a good piece of wine, making show as if he would buy it,
understanding the price, and not willing to give so much, leaves it there,
without buying or drinking of it any more. So the reprobate having tasted the
heavenly good things, finding them good, and praising them exceedingly, after
they understand the price, that is, that they must renounce themselves, and
bear the cross of Christ, to go to take possession of the kingdom of
heaven, which he has purchased for the^ with his precious blood. They will
none of it at this price, and so renounce these good things without drinking or
imoying them. But the children of God on the other side, having never so little
a taste of these heavenly treasures, desire in such sort to have the enjoying
of them, that they make resolution to forsake all, to inioye it. We will add
this third reason: That as those that have their stomachs charged with evil
humors, cease not to eat sometimes for all that, yea and to find taste in some
good meats, but are constrained after (through the evil disposition of their
stomach) to cast it up again and to vomit: So some reprobates having within
them an evil conscience, may well taste the good heavenly gifts, but this
evil conscience, not being able to agree with the true and sure faith of the
heart, stops, that these gifts take no root to fructify to salvation, so
that finally they cast it off, or let it wither and come to nothing. And this
reason with those before, are the principal causes, for the which many, that
seemed to be the children of God, do revolt, as we will show hereafter more at
large. On the contrary, those who have faith, are assured, that though the
graces of the holy ghost are often weak in the^, and like fire covered with
ashes, and trees in the winter, yet it ca^ never come to naught or die: rather
they recover strength at the last, whereby they are certain to be, and to
continue the children of GOD, and heirs of everlasting life. Furthermore, let
us remember that these foul and gross faults of David and of S. Peter, and of
others are set before us, first that they should be to us as a mirror of the
fragilitie of man, to acknowledge, that if we be exempted, it is by the grace
of our God. Secondly, that we should so much the more stand upon our guard.
As if in walking thou should see him fall that goes before thee, thou go
not to fall with him, but thou art to be so much the more circumspect that thou
fall not, as he did. Thirdly, that understanding that faith abides in them
(although very weak and feeble) thou may take courage, believing certainly
that faith which was once given thee, cannot be quenched nor die. And
therefore continue in assurance that thou art the child of God, raising up thy
self by their example, and resolving with thy self to walk constantly as
the child of God in true holiness and righteousness before him all the days of
thy life. Luke 1.75.
See how we ought to be resolved, that although the marks, feelings and
testimonies of our adoption set forth here above, be in us but small and weak,
and accompanied with great infirmities and conflicts: yet we may and ought to
assure our selves that these marks are truly in us, and that therefore we
are certainly the children of God, and inheritours of everlasting life.

That the Apostacy and revolt of some having made profession of the true
religion, ought not to make us call in doubt neither our religion nor our
adoption.

CAP. 5.
WE have understood here before how we may and ought to resist the doubts of
our adoption, proceeding from our selves. Now, we must show how we may
overcome the temptations which come from others. There are two things
principally, which trouble the consciences of many, to make them doubt whether
they be the children of God, and in the way of salvation and of eternal life,
or no. First, the horrible offense or stumbling block of those which abandon
this church, renouncing the doctrine of it, and returning to the puddle of
idolatry: and specially when any persons having sometimes held any honorable
place in the Church do revolt, and become persecutors of the doctrine which
they have before taught and maintained. For thereof the devil gathers two
consequences, no less dangerous than false: either that our Church is not the
true Church, and so that we are not the children of God: or that there is no
assurance of perseverance in the faith, and consequently no certainty of being
the children of God, which have had and borne in aparance the marks of
adoption. The other offense consists in the grievous and long afflictions
which we endure: for the prosperity of the wicked, deriding our miseries, and
the apprehension of our own troubles, give occasion to doubt whether God care
for us, or whither he love us or no. And this ordinary condition to those that
make profession of our religion, causes many to condemn it, and have it in
detestatio^, as the mother and nurse of al calamities. As touching the 1.
point, concerning those that revolt, Of the certainty of the doctrine
notwithstanding the reuolts.
it is a small stu^bling block to trouble us: for this was foretold us, and it
is a disease wherewith the church has always bin afflicted. Many shall be
called, says Jesus Christ, but few chosen. And the parable of the seed falling
in diverse sorts of earth shows, Matt. 20.16
that with much a do the 4. part of those that shall hear and profess the
Gospel, Matthew. 13.
shall continue to the end. S. Paul has foretold expreslie, 1. Tim. 4.1.
that in the latter times many shall fall from the faith. Act. 20.30.
And he aduertiseth the Ephe. that even from among themselves there should rise
up me^ that should teach perverse things. And the Cor. that there shall be in
the church not only diuisio^s, 1. Cor. 11.19.
but also heresies. 2. Pet. 2.1.
Saint Peter speaks yet more largely: As there has been (says he) false
prophets among the people of Israel, so shall there be false teachers amongst
you, which shall secretly bring in damnable errors, and many shall follow
their damnable ways, by whom the way of truth shall be blasphemed. Now, we
must think the accomplishing of such prophecies so much the less strange,
because such has bin the condition of the church of God at all times. Genesis 6.
What revolt was there in the house of God before the flood, eight persons
only being found saved in the Arc, and yet amongst them one hypocrite, who
after was cast off and accursed. Genesis 9.25.
Now, the church of God being enlarged in the posterity of Sem, again there
was seen such a revolt, Genesis 12.
that the church of God was only found in the family of Abraham, himself
being pulled out of idolatry. In the time of Elias the revolt was so great in
Israel, 1. Reg. 19.10.
that he thought he had bin left alone. At the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Apostacy was so general, that almost all the Church, at the least
the principal members of it, lift up themselves against the Son of GOD, and
crucified him. When Jesus Christ had gathered many Disciples, he was forsaken
of the most part of them: yea, John. 6.66
Judas also the Apostle fellfrom him, sold him, and betrayed him. Mat. 26.14
Mat. 26.65 Mat. 26.69 2. Tim. 1.15
Jesus Christ being taken prisoner by his enemies, all his A postles fled away
and forsook him. Saint Peter himself denied him thrice. Saint Paul
complains, that all they of Asia had revolted, 2. Tim. 4.16
And says in an other place, that all had forsaken him. He notes Alexander
the Copper Smith, Hymenaeus and others, 2. Tim 4.14
who having beenethe chief members of the Church, were become heretics, and
enemies of the truth, Now it is the same Church, and we must no more be
astonished at such reuolts, than at a man having rheums all his life (whereby
he casts out of his body abundance of humors) that should continue in
the same disease still even in his old age: Herein rather we ought to
acknowledge the holiness of God, wherewith also he would his Church should be
adorned. For he purges his Church, not being able to endure that hipocrits
should any l^og time keep the place and title of his children aproching to his
Majesty. And hereunto we may aplie that which Moses says, Leuit. 10.3
when he saw the fire had devoured Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron, for
offering before the Lord strange fire: This is it which the Lord has spoken,
saying; I will be sanctified in those that approach unto me, and will be
glorified in the presence of all the people: showing thereby, that the nearer
me^ approach unto him by honorable offices in his church, and profession of his
word, so much the less will he suffer their corruptions, but punishes them
more sharply, to the end, that as the nearer the piece of wax approaches to the
fire, so much the more the heat of it appears in melting it. In like manner
the holiness of God may better be known in the revolt of hypocrites approaching
unto him, and so he may be the more glo rified of the people in such
judgments. This is also the cause why many, who before they had the knowledge
of the gospel, seemed in outward appearance very good people. Asterward being
joined to the church, become wicked and dissolute in their lives, and very
persecutors. It is the vengeance of god that pursues the^, punishing their
ingratitude, their love of the world and of the flesh, which they brought and
nourished in the church, and the contempt of the honor that God did them, when
he made the^ aproch unto him, receiving the^ into his house, speaking to them
by the preaching of his word, and presenting unto the^ upon his holy Table, his
own Son Jesus Christ for the food of their souls. So far off is it then,
that we should be troubled for such reuolts, that on the contrary, seeing that
they are the vengeances of GOD, we ought so much the more to fear, and to
continue the more constantly and holily in the church of GOD. Psalm. 101.
And indeed if we did at this day see David execute that protestation which
he did make of purging his house from vicious and wicked persons, would we
(think you) depart from it, doubting of the holiness of it? Shall we not
rather be confirmed to tarry there still, desiring to live holilie? But more,
what damage receives the Church in such reuolts? The glory of it before God
consists not properly in the greatness of the number, but in the holiness
of them. The health of a man consistethnot in the abundance of humors, which
will cause some deadly disease at the last: for even they that areladen with
them, take medicines to purge them, that they might be the more whole. Esaias.
1.22
This is it which God, having spoken of his Church of Israel, that her silver
was turned into dross, and her wine mingled with water, added for a great
benefit, that he would take clean away al her scomme, and remove al her lead
from her: and that having restored the Judges and Counselors, so as they had
been at the beginning, it should be called the righteous and faithful City.
Experience shows, that in the prosperity and peace of the church many thrust
in themselves, sul of avarice, ambition, pride, and of other corruptions and
vanities; to be short it happens even as in a sweet and rainie season, that
many weeds come up amongst the good herbs, which should be choked of them,
if the Gardeiner pulled the^ not out. The^, when such people depart from the
Church, returning to their vomit, it is as if God gave a purgatio^ to it, to
make it more holy, and more acceptable to her bridegroom. Let us further
consider the causes of reuoltes. If this happened then when the Church was in
peace and prosperity, it should seem there were more occasion to call into
dout our doctrine: But it is in the time of persecution, that these reuolts are
seen; and so, it is fear to leese their goods, their dignities, their parents,
their country, their lives, that causes them to revolt. It is then the flesh,
it is the world, it is the mistrust of God, and not the allowing of the
Papisticall doctrine, that makes them to change their religion. 2. Tim. 4.10
As also S. Paul says, that Demas had forsaken him, having loved this present
world. And indeed did this miserable John Haren revolt during the prosperous
estate of the town of Bruges, wherein he was minister? By no means. But
perceiving the danger, although he might yet have exercised his ministry, he
began to seek the means as a hireling, to forsake his flock. He knows what
letters I writ unto him, reproving his slothfulnes, his crafts and evil
conscience in the reasons which he put forth, to have some color to withdraw
himself. He knows also what reproves he had received by the letters of
others, that he should not defile his ministry in intermedling so ernestly in
the matters of war and of policy. After the Town of Bruges was re^dred to the
enemy, he withdrew him selfinto Zeland and Holand. Where perceiving that he
began (as good reason was) for many considerations to be suspected in our
churches, and in no reputation, he got him out of the country. So feeling in
his conscience small appearance to be established in his Ministry again,
having no hope of preferment in any other vocation, and being pursued by the
just judgment of God falling upon evil consciences; he revolted, thinking
happily that he should receive some recompense for the offense that he had
offered against the holy Ministry, and at the least to enter again into the
possession of his goods. This then is not the changing of doctrine, which
moved him, but (as we have said) it is the flesh, and the world: it is envy
that makes the Monk. It is ambition the mother of heresy, as saint Augustine
says: It is an evil conscience, the rock that makes the shippewracke of
Faith, as Saint Paul says, 1. Tim. 1.19
which has made him to change his profession. To be short, GOD could no
longer suffer such an hypocrite in his church, nor such a filth in his holy
temple: he would be sanctified in taking vengeance upon him, who so
inordinately approached unto him. He has set him forth for an example of his
judgments, that those that make profession of Religion, and chiefly the
Ministers of the word, may study more and more to walk with a good conscience
to keep themselves in their vocation, to renounce the passions of the flesh,
and the illusions of the world, and so with fervent prayers to continue
constantly in the grace of the Lord. Furthermore, let him make as many shows
as he will, let him swear, let him lift up his hands, and his eyes to heaven,
let him wear a great pair of beads, let him go often and devoutly to the
mass; yet shall he not easily make the Jesuits (who are cunninger than he)
to believe, that he does it indeed and from his heart. For those who among
them have any little more wit than the common sort, understand well enough if
they would confess it, that the change of the holy Supper into the Mass, the
worshipping of bread in it, the fiery purgatory after death, the opinion of
meriting paradise by works, specially those of supererogation; the setting
forth of God the father, who is an invisible and eternal spirit, under the
figure of an old man: the worshipping of images, the invocation of Saints
departed, candles lighted at noone days, and borne in procession, the great
beads hanging at their necks, and other such idolatries and superstitions, are
either so abominable or so manifestly contrary to the word of God, yea, or so
absurd, that he that has once known them by the light of the gospel can
never allow the^ in his heart. But be it, that by the enchantment of satan, and
judgment of God, he were indeed become a Papist, and that S. Paul himself
should revolt, preaching another gospel; we ought, as he himself protests,
to hold him accursed, Gal. 1.
and not to be moved to doubt of our faith. For our religion and says is not
founded upon the constancy or steadfastness of men, but upon the truth o our
God, and upon the testimony of the holy Ghost in our hearts. If men be
unfaithful, says S. Paul, 2. Ti. 2.13.
he remains notwithstanding faithful, and can not deny himself. When Jesus
Christ forsaken of his Disciples, should ask us, if we also would leave him:
we are taught to answer with the Apostles; Lord, Ioh. 6.67.
whether shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life. The faithful
Pastormust (without being astonished at the revolt of many) say with Esai,
Esai. 8.18.
Behold I and my children which god has given me, are for signs and wonders.
The horrible and fearful vengeance, which waighteth on, and follows these
cursed apostates at the very heels, should make us to tremble, and to resolve
to renounce all that is upon the earth, that we may get and hold fast all that
is in heaven: and so leaving these poor reuolters to the judgment of God, to
cast our eyes upon those, who even in our time have endured so constantly the
loss of their goods, reproaches, prisons: to be short, who cheerfully have
entered into the flaming fire, and by eruell death mounted into the kingdom of
heaven; to the end that such autentique seals of the heavenly doctrine, may
confirm our hearts to continue constantly, and cheerfully to follow their
steps, and so be their companions in glory. Of the assu ra^ce of our adoption,
notwithstanding the reuolts.
We ought not to be troubled at these reuoltes, as if we were not assured to
continue in the faith, whereby also it shall come to pass, that we shall be
in doubt whether we are, or shall continue the Children of GOD. For as the
marks of our adoption set forth here before are of two sorts: the one inward
before God, and the other outward before men: they which have the inward
marks, which consist in the testimony of the holy Ghost in our hearts, in the
peace of our consciences, and in the holy desire of our souls, feel these
graces, which assures them that they are the children of GOD, chosen to
eternal life: yea more certainly than we are assured by the light of the Sun
that we see, and by the heat that we feel, that the Sun shines. And in deed
they have the white stone, whereof mention is made in the revelation, Reave.
2.17.
and in that stone a new name of the child of god written, which none can know
but he that receives it. The world, says Christ, cannot receive the spirit of
truth, because it has not seen him, neither has known him: Ioh. 14.17.
but ye know him, says he to his Apostles, for he abides with you, and
shall be in you. As touching the outward mark of being a member of the
visible Church, it is also very certain in respect of God, inasmuch as
speaking to us, and sealing his words by the sacraments, he neither will, nor
can deceive or lie. But if me^ hearing his word, and communicating at the
Sacraments, reject in their hearts the spiritual graces which are offered unto
them, and so abide unfaithful, and wicked within (when notwithstanding they
are held for faithful and the children of god, because of the outward
profession:) it is no marvel if God at the last do discover them, and cast
them off: showing therein, that they were never his. And this is it that S. John
says of such; 1. Ioh. 2.19
They went out from amongst us, but they were not of us; for if they had bin of
us, they would have tarried with us. But this is, that it might appear that
all are not of us. They that are once grafted in Christ, can not perish: for
the gifts of God are without repentance. To. 11.29.
But every plant, Matt. 15.13
says Jesus Christ, which my father has not planted, shall be pulled up.
Matt. 13.
The parable of the seed falling into diverse sorts of earth, teaches us two
points to this purpose. First, that many shall hear the gospel, but without
fruit. Secondly, that it shall be their own falt. For if entering into the
Church, they bring their cares and love to the world, without having will to
forsake them, so as it like thorns, choke the good seed of the word. 2. Tim.
2.19.
And so having no moisture of the grace of God, they wither at the first sun
of persecution; a man may see the cause of their reuolte, to wete, because they
were not the children of God. Saint Paul having said, that God knows who are
his, adds: and whosoever calls upon the name of Christ, let him depart from
all iniquity: showing thereby, that if there be any which join themselves
to the Church, calling upon the name of Christ, and do not depart from
iniquity; they discover thereby that God never took them for his. Which thing
is good to be noted. For many think, that to be of our Church needs nothing,
but to change the mass to the preaching, and to the communicating at the Lords
supper. And when they understand, that to be the child of God, is required to
renounce themselves to leave covetousness, ambition, drunkenness, the world,
and all pompes: to be short, that they must put off the old man, and be a new
creature: not being disposed to do this, they leave the preaching, and return
to the Mass. Now be these the children of God that revolt, that they should
make those that are in deed and continue to doubt? Nay, rather they are the
children of the world, who having brought the world in with them, have also
carried the world away with them. They therefore that have once believed, who
also believing, feel a desire to live according unto god, are assured that
they cannot perish. He that begins this good work in them, Phil. 1.6.
will accomplish it, even unto the day of christ. And to this purpose says S.
Augustine very well, Aug. de cor rect. and gra. ca. 12. to. 7.
He which made us good, makes us also to persevere in goodness: but they that
fall and perish, were not of the number of the predestinate. It remains, that
considering in the fall of hipocrites, the double mercy of god toward us.
First, that he has received us into the number of his children. Secondly, that
he will continue this grace toward us even to the end: there remains, I
say, that we feel our selves double bound to practice the exhortation of S.
Paul, beseeching us by the mercies of God, to offer our selves a living
sacrifice, holy and pleasing to God, Romans 12.1.
and not to be fashioned like this wicked world: but rather endeavoring to
this, that being tranfformed by the renewing of our understanding, we may
approve and follow, the good and perfect will of God. And let us remember that
which S. John says, 1. John 3.3.
That they that have hope to live with Jesus Christ, and to see him as he is,
do purify themselves as he is pure.

That afflictions ought not to make us to doubt of our adoption, but rather
confirm us.

CHAP. 6.
LET us now come to that stu^bling block and trouble, that proceeds from our
afflictions. What apparaunce is there (says the flesh) that we are the
Children of GOD? Our goods are violently taken from us, our possessions are
confiscate, and our Offices and Estates are taken away. We are driven out of
our Country, yea from Country to Country like vagabonds: we are hated of
father and mother, and of our other kinsfolk and friends: we are drawn and kept
in prison: we are derided and brought into extreme calamities and miscries:
we are as sheep of the shambles, appointed to the sword, to the gallows and to
the fire: To be short, we see nothing but the signs of the wrath and the
curse of God upon us. And that which more is, the Church which we have said
was the kingdom of Christ, and the house of God, how is it assailed by the
mighty men of this world? whom also we see to come to the end of their
enterprises, to oppress, tread under foot, rent and scatter this Church,
exercising al cruelty against it, as hu^grie wolves upon a flock of sheep,
forsaken of their shepherd. They triumph in their victories, and we hang down
the head and weep, bowing down our necks under the yoke of afflictions. They
increase in riches, and we consume in poverty: they are advanced to honors
and dignities, and we are despised as rebels, and wicked and seditious people.
See what the flesh says: and yet these are but discourses and complaints of
great ignorance or infirmity. For what is that which troubles and offends
us in this condition and estate. Even that whereby we ought rather to be
confirmed, in the assurance that we are the children of GOD, and indeed
happy. First, if GOD had promised to entreat his Children in this world
delicatelie, and to set them up in riches and high estate, we might have some
occasion to doubt whether we were the Children of GOD, all calamities and
afflictions quite contrary falling upon us. But seeing it is so, that the
Holy Ghost has foretold us both often and manifestly, that the children of
GOD should be afflicted, and that those that would live faithfully in the
fear of GOD in Christ, shall suffer persecution; 2. Tim. 3 12
this persecution and affliction ought rather to serve us for a sign that we
are the children of GOD.

Moreover, if the most excellent servants and children of GOD have always
been most afflicted. Afflictions ought not to make us doubt of our adoption
and salvation, except we will call in doubt the salvation and felicity of
those, whom we confess to be the very blessed children of GOD: Especially,
if afflictions do serve greatly to pull our hearts from the Earth, and to lift
them up into Heaven, to purify our faith as gold in the fire, and to fashion
us into a true obedience of God. Then the vtility and profit which comes
unto us thereby, ought to serve us for a sufficient proof, that in afflictions
GOD shows himself to be our father, having care of our welfare and
salvation. And yet more, seeing the taking away of our goods temporal, shall
bring us forth an eternal treasure in Heaven, the mockeries and reproaches
shall be turned unto glory before GOD, the tears into joy, our sufferings
into comfortes: Who is he that will not confess, that such afflictions
proceed from the very love of GOD toward us? To be short, seeing that GOD,
strengthening us in the midst of the fires of tribulations, shows in our
infirmity his might and bounty, and seeing (when we suffer for his name) he
makes us witnesses of his truth: our afflictions are (as it were) stages from
whence he makes his own glory to shine, and gives increase unto ours. So
far off is it then, that being afflicted, we should be troubled or
offended, that contrariwise those troubles ought to serve us for an assurance,
that we are the children of GOD: whereof that we may be the better resolved,
we will treat of these points more at large.

That the afflictions that happen unto us, have been foretold, and therefore
they ought to confirm us in the assurance of our adoption.

CAP. 7.
THE holy Ghost has at all times foretold and testified by sundry and
manifest sentences, that the children of God should be persecuted and
afflicted in this life, yea, in such sort, as the first afflictions should be
but the beginnings of greater; and that passing one evil, they should prepare
themselves to endure others that should follow as the waves in the Sea. Genesis
3.15 Prophecies of the old testament.
GOD from the beginning of the world, having pronounced, that he would put
enmity between the seed of the woman and the seed of the Serpent, has
advertised us, that as long as there shall be devils in the world, and children
of God, they must understand, that such enemies will employ all their strength
and means to persecute the^: As this also is represented in the Revelation in
that which is said by S. John, Reave. 12
that the old serpent not being able to devour the Son of GOD, nor the body
of the church, was very angry, and went to make war with the rest of her seed
which kept the commandments of God, and which had the testimony of Jesus
Christ. Likewise God having promised seed unto Abraham, and added, that it
should be as the Stars of the Heaven. Genesis 15.13
He told him by and by, that it should be afflicted, saying: Know thou for
a certain, that thy seed shall dwell and serve in a Land that is not their
own, and shall be afflicted four hundred years. And that which is more, he
confirms this advertisement by a vision or notable sign, commanding him to
divide in pieces an heifar, a ram, a he goat, a turtle, and a pigeon; and
sending a flight of Birds upon the dead carcases cut in pieces: he showed him,
that his seed (by the greatness of afflictions) should be like unto dead
carcases cut in pieces, and exposed for a pray unto the Birds. David in a few
words shows this condition to be common to all the children of GOD, saying,
Psalm. 34.20
that the afflictions of the righteous are many. And in how many sorts, and
in how many places have the Prophets foretold of the afflictions that came
upon the ten tribes of Israel carried after captives into Assyria? In like
manner of the kingdom of Judah, the destruction of the Temple, the sacking of
the City, the massacre of a great part of the people, and the captivity of
the rest, Prophecies of the new testament. Mat. 10.16
by the space of seauentie years in Babylon. Above all, Jesus Christ, who is
the wisdom of GOD, how often has he foretold the afflictions of his
faithful servants and members of his body? Behold (says he) to his A
postles, I send you as Sheep amongst Wolves. Ye shall be delivered unto the
Consistories, and whipped in the Synagogues. Ye shall be hated of all men for
my names sake. If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much
more his servants. I am not come to bring peace upon the Earth, but a Sword.
Mat. 16.24
If anse will follow me, let him renounce him self, and take up his Cross
and follow me. They shall deliver you to be punished, and shall slay you.
Mat. 24.9
If they have Persecuted me, they will also persecute you. Again, Ihon 16.2
Verelie, verelie I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, and the
world shall rejoice. Yea, he compares the faithful unto a Woman which
trauaileth of child. Iho. 16.21
True it is, that the wicked are also tormented in their course. But Judgment
says Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 4.17
must begin at the house of GOD. And of this judgment it is that Saint Paul
does speak, 2. These. 3.7
saying: That we are ordained to be afflicted, which he does confirm by a
Sentence full of comfort, Act. 14 22
faying: That by many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Again, 2. Tim. 3.12
all they that will live godly in Christ, must suffer persecution. But above
al, that is to be noted that he said in an other place: Col. 1.24.
I rejoice, and fill up in my self that which wanted of the sufferings of
Christ: meaning by Christ, all the faithful, with their head, and showing,
that GOD has ordained a certain measure of passions for this Christ, and
consequently to every one of his members his portion, which he must suffer, to
accomplish the passions of Christ. Now this is not without great reason, that
the Holy Ghost has so carefully, and in so many sorts and manners foretold,
that the children of GOD should be afflicted. It is to this end, as Jesus
Christ him self teaches his Apostles, Ihon 16.1.
that we should not be troubled or offended, when we see the faithful to be
spoiled, chased away, imprisoned, mocked, and murdered, that then we should
remember that it was told us before. And that it comes not to pass by
fortune or chance, nor by the absolute will of me^ that we are afflicted. But
by the appointment of God the father, and that this is the entertainment which
he has ordained for his servants and children. But our flesh does Iudaize too
much in this behalf. For as the Jews in old time, looking for a Messiah
triumphing in the world, were offended at his humility and base estate, and so
at the cross of Jesus Christ, and therefore rejected both him and his
doctrine: even so our flesh at this day does still imagine a gospel of velvet
agreeable to their desires, and a kingdom of Christ that were of this world.
See now why it is troubled and offended, deriding a Christ crowned with
thorns, bearing his cross upon his shoulders, and laying it upon all those
that will be the children of God with him. But if the Jews had well weied that
which Esai foretold of the Messiah, Esai. 53.
That he should grow up as a root out of a dry ground, That he should have in
him neither fashion nor beauty to be desired, That he should be despised and
rejected of men; a man so afflicted and accustomed to sorrows, that men should
hide their faces from him, so much should he be contemned; That he should be
oppressed with injury, afflicted, and led to the slaughter as a Lamb. To be
short, that he should be numbered among the transgressors. Also that which
Zachary says; Behold thy king comes to thee humble, Zach. 9.9
riding upon an Ass. And that which Daniel says, That the Christ should be
cut off, Dan. 9.26
and should not be. If, I say, the Jews had well weighed these Prophecies, and
many other like these, touching the abasement and afflictions of Christ: so
far off is it, that they would have rejected him, that on the contrary, they
would have known by the accomplishment of those things that were foretold of
him, that he was in deed the Messiah promised. In like manner, if we would
carefully meditate on that which the holy Ghost has fore spoken of our
condition, and that we must be conformable unto the image of Christ, Romans 8.17
suffer and die with him: the tribulations which accompany the profession of
the Gospel, should be unto us signs and testimonies,, that we are
Christians, and the Children of God. Luk 2


When the Angel showed unto the Shepards the nativity of Jesus Christ,
saying, I show unto you greatioy, that this day is borne to you a Savior in
the City of David, which is Christ the Lord: He addetth, you shall have these
signs, ye shall find the child wrapped in swaddeling clothes, and laid in
a maunger. Now, if these shepherds (being come to Bethlehem,) had found the
holy Virgin in an honorable pallaice, and the Child in a magnificall and
royal cradle, had they not had just occasion to doubt of the tidings of the
Angel, this estate not agreeing with the sign that he had given? But having
found the Child in poor estate in a maunger, as the Angel had foretold,
they were confirmed to believe, that it was the Messiah.

Even so, GOD having revealed unto us by his Word, that he has chosen us to
be his Children, having sealed it in us by the testimony and effects of the
unction of the holy Ghost: and having also given us the marks in this, that
he has made us the members of his Church: he has foretold, and has also
given one sign more of our adoption, that we shall be reproached and
persecuted. If then the world did make much of us, loved and honored us, we
might after some sort dout of the word of God, and of our election and
adoption. But seeing the accomplishment of that, that was foretold us, we
ought to be so much the more confirmed in this assurance, that we are not of
the world, but appertain to our God. And this is it that Jesus Christ told
his Apostles, saying; Ioh. 15.19.
If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but now because I
have chosen you out of the world, the world hates you. If we ask the way to
go to any place, and that one tell us (for a sign of the right way) that it
is at the beginning durty and afterward full of hills, we will leave the other
ways which seem straight, dry, fair and easy: and finding in that way
which we take, durte and hills foretold and given us for a sign, we will be
so much the more confirmed, that we are in the right way. So the holy Ghost
having foretold, Act. 14.^^.
that thorough many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of heaven,
Matt. 7.13.
and that the way leading to eternal life is narrow and difficult: If we
find the way of the Gospel narrow and full of troubles, let us acknowledge
that we are in the right way to the kingdom of heaven, and that we ought
therefore to be so much the more confirmed in assurance that we are the
Children of God.

That the Children of God have always been afflicted, and yet still beloved of
God.

CHAP. 8.
THis that the Holy Ghost has fore spoken, that the condition of the Children
of GOD is to be afflicted, has by experience been found to be true in all
ages, whether we consider the people and Church of GOD in the whole body, or
speak of it particularly in the members of it. Examples of the afflictions of
the Church during the time of the old testament.
How long and grievously was the people of Israel afflicted in Aegipt? Moses
recites, that their life was vexed bitterly, thorough grievous servitude, and
that all the service wherein they served was tyrannous, Pharaoh intending to
destroy them, Exo. 1.14.
and to root them out by travail and excessive labor. And not so being able
to come to his purpose, neither yet by the commandment made to the midwiues,
Exo. 1.18
to slay secretly all the male children which should be borne: at the last he
appointed certain of the Aegiptians his subjects to be their hangmen openly.
Exo. 1.22.
Whereby also when Moses was borne, his parents having hid him some time with
great fear, they were at the last constrained (for the avoiding of the fury
of these hangmen) to put him out into the brinke of the river, as abandoning
him unto death. Could there be any more barbarous cruelty used to any
people? And yet, did they still continue to be grieuouslie afflicted four
score years after the birth of Moses. So that it is not without a cause that
the Lord called Aegipt the house of bondage, Exo. 20.2. Deuteronomy. 4.20.
and an iron furnace. The which also he confirms, appearing to Moses in the
midst of a burning bush, saying, Exo. 3.2.
I have seen the affliction of my people. They were not so soon in the way to
depart out of Aegipt, but they were pursued by the Army of Pharaoh, Exodus 14.9.
having the sea before them, and the mountains on their sides, and so seeing
present death before their eyes. Did they escape the hands of Pharaoh in
passing over the sea on dry foot? Then they entered into the horrible and
fearful Deferts, and going three days through the Deserts, they found no
water, the first that they found was so bitter, Exo. 15.22.
that they could not drink it; They were assailed of enemies, vexed with
fiery Serpents, and inflammations unaccustomed, and wandered up and down
forty years in those Deserts, living by Manna and water. Number. 21.6.


In the time of the Judges, how often was the people of god brought under the
cruel tyranie of diverse enemies? Under the reign of Manasses King of Judah,
there was such persecution against the faithful, 2. King. 21.16.
that Jerusalem was filled with blood from the one end to the other. But above
all, it was unkindly handled both before and during the Captivity of Babylon.
2. King. 25 Ier. 39. and 52.
The City of Jerusalem was taken and sacked, the Temple of God spoiled, burnt
and destroyed. He that escaped the pestilence, famine, and the sword, was
transported into Babylon among the Idolatours their Enemies, and plunged into
all miseries and calamities, and that by the space of threescore and ten
years, Ier. 25.12.
as it was foretold. The Prophet Esai does sufficiently set before us their
miserable estate, calling the Jews persons despised, Esa. 46.7.
an abominable people, servant to Lords, worms of Jacob, the dead men of
Israel, Esa. 41.14.
people afflicted, overwhelmed with tempests, Esa. 54.11.
without any comfort. Are they returned out of this captivity into Judea?
There they were vexed of their enemies: and above al, how many horrible
cruelties did they endure by Antiochus, Herod, and other tyrants.

Let us also see what complaints the people of God make of the calamities that
befell them by the Assirians, or (as other think) by this Antiochus, saying: O
God the heathen have entered into thine inheritance, Psalm. 79.
they have polluted thy holy temple, and have brought Jerusalem to a heap of
stones. They have given the dead bodies of thy servants for meat to the fowls
of the air, and the flesh of thy Saints to the beasts of the earth: they have
shed their blood like water on every side of Jerusalem, and there was none to
bury them. We have been a reproach to our neighbors, and a mockery, and a
derision to those that are about us. Again, Psalm. 44.
Thou have put us (O Lord) far from thee as sheep to be eaten, and thou have
scattered us among the heathen. Thou have sold thy people without gain, and
do not increase their price. Thou have smitte^ us down into the place of
dragons, and have covered us with the shadow of death. Also comparing the
church to a vine: Psalm. 80.
wherefore (says he) have thou broken down her hedges, that all they that go
by pluck of her grapes? The boar out of the wood has destroyed it, and the
wild beasts of the field have eaten it up. It is burnt with fire and cut down.
To be short, we may behold the estate of the Church in these words: Let Israel
now say, Psalm. 129.
They have often times afflicted me from my youth, they have often times vexed
me. The plowers have plowed upon my back, and made long furrows. In like
manner, after the ascension of Jesus Christ into heaven, Examples of the
afflictions of the Church since the time of the new testament.
has not the Church been, and that continually, persecuted, and extremely
afflicted: as may appear by the book of the Acts of the Apostles, and by the
Ecclesiastical histories, in the very which, a man may note ten general
persecutions, which were kindled in all the quarters of the earth, by the
public decrees of the Emperors, besides those that were particular, which
were made in diverse places by the Governors, or seditious of the people. It is
a horrible thing to think, and almost incredible, of the blood which was then
shed, and of the desolations of Cities, yea and of some whole Provinces. For as
the Church was then spread over all the world, so in all the kingdoms of the
earth this fury of persecution was kindled. It was enough for any to confess
that they were Christians, and they should be slain by thousands. Among other
persecutions made by Hadrian Emperor of Rome in the 9. year of his Empire, he
caused ten thousand Christians to be crucified in Armenia. Henry of Erford.
Dioclesian and Maximinian having enterprised to constrain the Christians, by all manner of torments and cruelties, Oros lib. 7. chap. 25. Vrsperg.
to renounce their religion, and to sacrifice to the Idols, they forced them
after a fashion so furious, that in the space of 17. days there were 30000.
put to death, and as many or more chained and carried to the mettalls, a
torment resembling after a sort, the punishment of the galleys at this day.
Vincent in his mirror lib. 12. chap.
In those days such cruelty was exercised at Trenios upon the river Mosel,
that the river was red with the blood of the Christians being slain. The
book entitled Fasciculus temporum, witnesses that the Christians that were
in England, were all put to death. Euse. lib. 8. chap. 11.
To be short, whole towns were burned with their inhabitants, for the hatred
of Christian religion. As touching the variety of the sorts of tormens and
cruelties, the devil surmounted himself in devising them: Some were cut in
pieces: Some were tormented with stripes of rods even to the bones: Some were
cast to the Lions, to the Bears, and to the Tigers to be devoured: Some were
covered with beasts skins to be torn in pieces of wolves and dogs: Some were
burned quick: Some were broyled upon gridirons: Some were crucified: Some had
their bodies dropped on with burning pitch and boiling lead: Some were drawn
upon the pauement of the streets: Some were dashed against the stones: Some
were tumbled down headlong from high places, and into rivers: Some they
smothered with smoke proceeding from a small fire: Some had their intrailes
pierced with sharp stakes: Some were thrown into the Lime kills: Some were
slain with the stripes of staves and lead: Some had sharp reeds thrust
between their nails and their flesh: Some had red burning plates put under
their armepits: Some were scorched quick, and then sprinkled with vinegar, or
powdered with salt: Some were set up quick upon forks, and suffered to die of
hunger or thirst. And those that could escape into the deserts and mountains,
either they died of hunger, or of thirst or of cold: or they were devoured of
wild beasts, or slain of thieves, or carried away slaves to the Barbarians.
Now, although these examples ought to suffice to make us understand what the
condition of the Church has always been, and so consequently of the children
of God: we will yet notwithstanding, set forth some particular examples of
those that have been the most excellent servants and children of God. Abel
having offered unto GOD a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, Examples of
particular members of the Church afflicted in the time of the old testament.
Genesis 4. Mal. 1.2. Genesis 28.
and so receiving the testimony that he was just, was mischievously and
traiterouslie murdered by his brother. Among the Patriarchs, let us consider
the afflictions of Jacob beloved of GOD: After he had been long time in fear
of the threatenings of his brother Esau, at the last he was constrained to
forsake his fathers house: Being with Laban his uncle, Genesis 31.
he served him the space of 20. years, feeding his flocks, enduring the cold
of the night, and the heat of the day: In the mean time he received so many
injuries at the hands of his uncle, that he resolved with his wives the
daughters of Laban, to steal away from him, and to depart without bidding him
farewell. He being thus (as it were) fled, he was pursued of Laban provoked to
anger, and determining to use him violently, if God (as himself confesses)
had not forbidden him. Having escaped his hand, he fell into a new and
horrible fear, Genesis 32.
for the coming and meeting of his brother Esau, fearing (as he shows by the
prayer which he made to GOD) least he would slay both him, with his wives and
children. Genesis 35.22.
His eldest son committed adultery, and that not with a strange woman, but
with his fathers own concubine. His daughter is ravished and defiled. Genesis 34.
His children profane circumcision the sacred seal of the covenant of God,
making it to serve to murder, as they did, all the inhabitants of Sichem, Genesis
35.
who asked nothing of the^ but friendship. By this cruelty more than
barbarous, they exposed their father, themselves, and all their house, to
manifest danger of utter rooting out by their neighbors, if GOD had not held
them back. His own children having sold their brother Joseph, they made their
father believe that he was devoured of wild beasts. Genesis 37.
Being pressed with famine, he sent his sons into Egypt to get corn: Genesis
42.
whereby Simeon being kept prisoner, he understood that there was no hope of
his delivery, but in sending his youngest son Benjamin: which was, as it
were, to take away his soul. What manner of life then is this of the good
Patriarch, but continual anguishes and afflictions, as himself confesses,
saying unto Pharao, Genesis 47.9.
that the days of his pilgrimage were few and evil? Among the Prophets let
us take Moses, to whom GOD showed himself more familiarlie. When he was yet a
little infant, he was put forth and abandoned unto death: Exodus 2.
being after come to the age of forty years, and feeling that God had
ordained him to deliver his people Israel, Act. 7.25. Exodus 2.
he began to exercise his vocation in slaying the Egyptian: whereupon he was
constrained to forsake the Court of Pharao, and to fly. And withdrawing him
self into the land of Madian, he served Iethro, feeding his sheep the space
of forty years: He, I say, that was taken for the son of Pharaos daughter,
that might have enjoyed the riches and pleasures of Egypt. Being after
returned into Egypt by the commandment of GOD, to deliver the people of
Jsrael, incontinently so soon as he began to exercise his charge in speaking to
Pharao, the Jsraelites being more afflicted than before, took occasion to
murmur against him. Having conducted the people to the red sea, Exodus 14.1
again they rose against him with dangerous complaints. And sinallie, having
retired themselves into the desert, he was in continual trouble, anguish and
torment, for the plaints and murmuring of the people, for the envy of his own
brother and sister: but above all, Number. 12.1.
for the vengeances that God executed upon his people, and specially for their
sins, as when they made the golden Calfe: Exo. 32 19.
And this having continued the space of 40. years, Deuteronomy. 34.
at the last he died in the desert without entering into the land of promise.
We may to this purpose set down many other notable examples, as of Job,
David, and others. But as every one may note their great and sundry
afflictions by the reading of the sacred Histories, so it shall suffice to set
forth this which the Apostle writes to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.35.
speaking of diverse of the faithful, and servants of GOD: Some (says he) were
racked, and would not be delivered, to the end that they might obtain a better
resurrection. Other were tried with mockings and stripes: yea and by bands and
imprisonment. They were stoned, they were hewn asunder, they were tempted,
they were slain with the sword, they wandered up and down in sheep skins
and in goats skins, being destitute, afflicted and tormented, of whom the
world was not worthy, wandering in deserts and in mountains, and in deep
pits and caves of the earth. As touching the examples of the children and
servants of God, Examples of the children and servants of God afflicted under
the new Testament.
which have been since the coming of Christ in the flesh, he alone may and
ought to suffice, for as much as we must be fashioned like to his image, and
follow his steps. Now, this Prince of glory making his entrance into this
world, created and maintained by him, found no place in the Inn, it pleased
him to be borne in a stable, and to be laid in a manger in stead of a cradle.
Luke 2.
By and by after Herod sought to slay him: Matthew. 2.
for the which cause he was carried into Egypt by Joseph and Marie. And what
poverty (trow ye) endured he there? Is he returned into Judea? Mark. 6.3.
there he passed his life until he was 30. years old, in the abject and base
estate of a Carpenter: Did he begin his charge? Matthew. 4.
after he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was hungry, and had
not whereof to eat in the desert. During these forty days and forty nights,
he was assailed of Satan and tempted, and sinallie endured those three mighty
assaults recited of the Evangelists. He suffered poverty, Luke 9.58.
not having one pillowe to rest his head on, and lived by alms.

He was violently pressed with injuries, Luke 8.3.
being called glutton, drunkard, deceiuer, and one possessed with devils. Mat.
11.19
He was carried violently to the top of a mountain to throw him down
headlong. Mat. 27.63.
He was betrayed of one of his own Apostles: He was taken prisoner, Ioh.
7.20. Luke 4.29. Matthew. 26. and. 27.
spet on, buffeted, beaten, mocked, scourged, crowned with thorns. He was
condemned to die, and hanged upon a cross between two thieves. And besides
these persecutions and outward torments, what anguishes did he feel, when he
swet blood and water for distress and fear? When he cast his face upon the
earth, and when he cried on the cross, My God, my God why have thou forsaken
me? let us add to this example, Act. 9.16.
that of S. Paul, that vessel of election. When he was converted, Jesus
Christ said unto him, that he would show him what he should suffer for his
name. And so it came to pass, as he himself does briefly recite, making
comparison of his own person, with some of the false Apostles: 2 Cor. 11.23.
Are they the ministers of Christ? I am above them, in travails more
abundant, in stripes more than they, in prisons more, in deaths often. Of the
Jews I have received (says he) five times forty stripes saving one. I have
been three times beaten with rods, once I was stoned, three times I suffered
shipwreck: night and day have I bin in the deep sea, in iornies often, in
perils of floods, in perils of thieves, in perils of mine own nation, in
perils of the Gentiles, in perils in the City, in perils in the deserts, in
perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren, in labor and travail, in
watching often, in hunger and in thirst, in fasting often, in cold and in
nakedness: besides the things that happen to me without, there is that which
combereth me every day, even the care that I have of all the Churches. Now,
The use of the afflictions of the church, and of the members thereof.
let us apply these examples to our purpose. When the Church is persecuted,
and the members thereof afflicted, the flesh calls in doubt, whether we be
the true Church and children of God, or no. But what afflictions endure we,
that the most excellent servants and children of God have not suffered before
us, as it appears by the examples here before alleged. And where is it that
we find, that troubles and the cross are marks of the false Church, and of
the children of the world, and not rather the contrary, as it has been showed
above? The people of Israel being so grieuouslie afflicted in the captivity
of Babylon, and that for their sins, God by Esaias calls them, his well-beloved
one, Esaias. 41.8. and 4^.^3.
and his elect: and protests that he can less forget them, than the mother
her child. And that he had them graven in his hands, having them always before
his eyes. And speaking of them to Ezechiel, he says: Ezec. 11.15
Thy brethren, thy brethren, the men of thy kindred. He contenteth not himself
to call them once his brethren, but doubleth the word, saying: Thy brethren,
thy brethren, and adds, men of thy kindred, that he should not think,
because they were in this miserable condition, that they were cast off of GOD,
but that he should acknowledge them for his brethren. In like manner, the Holy
ghost speaking of those that were murdered and cast to wild beasts, Psalm.
79.2
calls them the servants of God and his faithful ones. The Apostle to the
Hebrews speaking of the faithful which were tormented and afflicted after
sundry manners, and cruelly put to death, says: Heb. 11.3^.
That the world was not worthy of them. It is as if he should say, that they
being the well-beloved children of God, and brethren of Jesus Christ, the world
full of abominable people, was not worthy that they should be conversant and
be any more among them. And so far off was it that S. Paul entered into doubt
of himself for his troubles, that contrariwise he alleged them to prove that
he was a more excellent servant of Christ tha^ the others, 2. Cor. 11.23.
having endured more than they al. And if this sentence pronounced by the
father touching Jesus Christ: Mat. 17.5.
This is my well-beloved son in whom I am well pleased, be true, even then
when he swet blood and water for distress, and then when he thought he was
forsaken of GOD, Luke 9.31.
so as being in this hell, he continued still the dearly beloved son of
GOD: what occasion have we then, when we are afflicted with our head, to doubt
of our adoption? Let us set before us the great number of faithful which were
before the throne and in the presence of the Lamb, clothed with long white
robes, holding palms of victory in their hands: and let us understand by the
testimony of the holy Ghost, Reave. 7.9.
who they be. These are they (says he) which are come from great tribulation,
and have washed their long robes, and have made them white in the blood of the
Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night
in his temple. And he which sits upon the throne will over shadow them:
they shall neither have thirst nor hunger, and the Sun shall beat upon the^
no more, neither any heat: for the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne
shall govern them, and lead them to the fountains of living waters, and God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. When S. Peter exhorted his
disciples to constancy, saying: 1. Pet. 5.9.
That they knew well, that the same afflictions were accomplished in the
company of their brethren which were in the world. And when Jesus Christ said
to his Apostles: Mat. 5.12
ye are happy when you suffer injuries and reproaches, for so have they
persecuted the Prophets which were before you. The intention neither of Christ
nor of Saint Peter was to set before them the comfort of miserable persons, as
it is said, to have companions in their miseries, but rather to show them,
that the afflictions which they endured were proper to the servants and
children of GOD, and that therefore they ought to comfort themselves, being
honored with the liuerie of their other brethren and members of Christ, yea,
the most excellent servant of God, as the Prophets were. Romans 8.28
And indeed seeing those whom God had foreknowne, those he has predestinate
to be fashioned like unto the Image of Christ. Let us not doubt (for so Saint
Paul says) that it is a true saying, that if we die with him, 2. Tim. 2. 11
we shall live also with him, and if we suffer with him, we shall also reign
with him. Let us remember the saying of Christ to his Apostles: Iho. 15.20
The servant is not above his Master, If they have persecuted me, they will
also persecute you, if the world hate you, know that they have hated me before
you. And this should be a thing monstrous to see, Iho. 15.18
under a head crowned with thorns, members handied delicatelie. Shall we
doubt then of our adoption, being called unto the same condition which the
well-beloved Son of GOD took upon him going to the inioying of his glory?
Will we refuse to follow him, ascending up by the cross into his Kingdom?
He has suffered (says Saint Peter). 1. Pet. 2.21.
Leaving us an example that we should follow his steps. Let us not then
think it strange, as he faith in an other place, 1. Pet. 4.12.
when we are as in a furnace, for our trial, as if an unwonted thing had come
unto us. Butrather in as much as we communicate with the afflictions of
Christ; Let us rejoice, that when his glory shall appear we also may rejoice
wath gladness. Now let us understand how he adds, that suffering injury for
Christ's sake, we are happy, forasmuch as the spirit of God, which is the
spirit of glory rests in us, and the feeling which we have, causes us to
glorify him, though of the blind world he is evil spoken of. Seeing then
the heavenly father has vouchsafed us such love, 1. Ihon. 3.1
that we are called the sons of God, although the world persecute us, because
it knows neither the Father, nor us: Let us say boldly with S. Ihon, We are
now the children of God: And although it does not yet appear what we shall be,
yet we know (as he also adds) that when Christ shall appear we shall be
like unto him, for we shall see him as he is. Col. 3.3.
Let us be contented to be dead in this world, and to have our life hid with
Christ in God, being assured, that when Christ our life shall appear, we
shall also appear in glory. If the Devil will gather of our afflictions,
that we are not the children of GOD; let us say boldly that he is a liar, or
let him first pluck out of the rank of God his children, the Martyrs, the
Apostles, the Prophets, and other of the best and most approved children and
servants of GOD, which have been afflicted as well as we, and more than we:
Even the holy Virgin and Christ himself. But rather seeing that we bear
their liuerie, let us acknowledge our selves the children of GOD with them, and
let us say (with a holy resolution) with Saint Paul, Romans 8.38.
that there is neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature which can separate us from the love of GOD, which he
bears us in Jesus Christ our Lord.

That the faithful have the common afflictions of the children of Adam,
because of the excellent fruits of them, testimonies of their adoption, and of
the love of God toward them.

CAP. 9.
TO be yet better confirmed in this truth, let us now consider how the
afflictions themselves, even those that are common to the children of Adam
serve for our profit and salvation. First, 1. Fruit to awake us out of our
sins.
for as much as the relics of sin abide still, even in the most perfect in
this life, which makes them hardened in their faults, and inclined to offend
God: We have need of helps, to be waked, to be humbled, and drawn from our
sins, to keep us in the time to come, and so to dispose us to a perfect
obedience, holy, and acceptable unto God. And to this end tend the
afflictions of the children of God, which for this cause are called
chastisements, corrections, and medicines of our souls. The children of Jacob
having committed a detestable crime in selling then brother Joseph, Genesis 42.21
but they never thought of it, until that being in Egypt pressed with
reproaches and imprisonment, they called to mind their sin, saying one to the
other, surely we have sinued against our brother: for we saw the anguish of his
soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear him, and therefore is
this trouble happened unto us. Manasses. King of Judah having set up Idolatry
again, persecuted those that would purelie serve the Lord, 2. Chro. 33
so as Jerusalem was full of blood, and having shut his ears to the
admonitions of the Lord, at the last was taken by the army of the king of the
Assyrians bound with manacles, fettered in chains, and carried prisoner into
Babylon. Then, being in affliction, he was exceedingly humbled before God, he
prayed to the Lord, and was heard; and carried back unto Jerusalem. Then he
pulled down all Idolatry, reformed the service of God, and commanded Judah to
serve the Lord the God of Israel. Yea, the poor pagane mariners, of whom
the history of Jonas makes mention, seeing the continuance of the tempest,
concluded to cast lots to know who was the cause of that affliction; and God
making it to appear that it was the sin of Jonas; Ion. 1.7
thereof is come a common Proverb in a dangerous tempest; that there is some
fonas in the ship. And this proceeds of a feeling and apprehension of the
providence and justice of GOD: this little spark yet still remaining in man of
the image of God, whereby we think, that it is he that afflicts, that he is
just, and does nothing but justly, and so, that afflictions are corrections of
our sins. Therefore Jeremie justly reproves the blockishnesse of the people
of Israel in this, that being afflicted, Ierem. 8.6
no man said what have I done? See now why God, to make us more lively feel
his judgments, and to the intent to wake us up, and to convert us unto him,
sends us oftentimes afflictions, which after a sort answer, and have some
conformity to our sins. As for example, EZechias king of Judah sinned by
ambition or vain confidence, in showing all his treasures to the Ambassadors of
the king of Babel: and GOD told him by the Prophet Esaias, that all his
treasures should be transported into Babel. Esa. 39
David offended God in committing adultery, 2. Sam. 11
and in putting to death Vriah, and GOD chastised him in this, 2. Sam. 13
that Amnon his son defiled his sister Thamar; and that Amnon was slain by
his brother Absalom, that Absalom lay publicly with his fathers Concubines,
2. Sam. 16. 22
according to that which God had said unto him: 2. Sam. 12 11
Thou have done it in secret, and I will do it in the sight of all the
people. The child borne in adultry died, 2. Sam. 12 10
and he was threatened, that the Sword should not depart from his house. Now as
the afflictions bring us to the feeling of our sins, 2. Fruit, amendment of
life, and first in works.
to wake us up, and to humble us; so thereof rises the resolutions and
protestations to fall into them no more, but to amend them. And this is it that
is seen in those that by tempest of sea, or some grievous disease, are in
manifest danger of death. They examine their conscience, their sins and
infirmities then come before them: they ask pardon, and make protestations to
live better in time to come. The same also we see in children that are beaten
of their fathers. This is it which the Apostle to the Hebrews teaches us
saying, That no chastisement for the time seems pleasant, Heb. 12.11.
but grievous: but after it brings the peaceable fruits of righteousness. And
before he had said, That God chastises us for our profit, that we might be
partakers of his holiness. Prosper in son. ex. Aug. ^.
The goodness of God (says S. Augustine) is angry with his children in this
world, that he may not be angry with them in the life to come: and by his
mercy he uses some temporal severity, to exempt the^ from everlasting
vengeance. According unto this, S. Bernard made this prayer unto God; Lord
burn and cut in this temporal life, that thou may be merciful to me in the
life that is everlasting. And it is the same that S. Paul teaches saying;
When we are judged and afflicted, 1. Cor. 12.32.
we are nurtured of the Lord, that we might not be condemned with the world.
And to this purpose David protests, that before he was afflicted be went
wrong: Psa. 119.67
but now (says he) I keep thy commandments. A game, It was good for me that
I was afflicted, Psa. 119 71
that I might keep thy statutes. Medicines are given either to heal diseases,
or to prevent the^, and therefore are very requisite for the health and life
of man. Now what be these afflictions, but medicines of our souls? as also
S. Augustine says, This which thou so lamentest, is thy medicine, and not thy
punishment, As in a house where there are many children, the rod is
necessary: and as in a City subject to diverse diseases, and where there is an
evil air, Physicians are needful: so in the house of god, where there are
many children inclined to evil, the rod is many times more necessary than
bread: and in such an hospital full of diseases and sores, as the Church is
(for out of it they are dead) it is a great fault if there be not Physicians
and Surgeons to heal the corruptions of our souls, and to keep us from
offending God, and from falling into death. Many accustomd to delicate meats,
have their mouths out of taste, and after falling sick, they take bitter drinks
to recover again the health of their bodies: let us cheerfully do the same
for the health of our souls. And indeed, behold the difference between a
madd man, and one that is sick of a corporal disease; The mad man is angry
with the Physician, chaseth him away, and throws away the medicine: but the
other sends for a Physician, takes drink at his hand, thanketh him, yea and
gives him a reward: So when God the sovereign Physician of our souls,
visits us and gives us wholesome medicines, let us not be like mad men
rejecting the hand of God, but receiving the medicine, let us give him thanks
and bless him, after the example of Job; 2. In words and affliction of heart.
Furthermore, howsoever the goods and other commodities of this life ought to
be helps to lift up our hearts to the spring from whence they come, that is
to the goodness and power of God, to praise him: our corruption and affection
to the world does turn them quite contrary to thorns and hindrances, so as
God oftentimes cutteth them off, or takes them away, or mingleth the^ with
afflictions, to turn us from evil, to draw us unto him, and the better to
dispose us to his service. Experience shows, that in bankets and feasts men
talk of the world: but where sickness, death and burials are, they talk of
everlasting life. It is also seen that riches lift us up in pride and
insolency, and that poverty brings us down and humbles us: that in
prosperity we triumph, and feel not the force of the spiritual instructions
and teachings: but being afflicted with sickness or any other way, the^ we
are godly people, we confess that all flesh is but grass, and that we have
here no abiding City. To be short, our infirmities tending unto death, make us
to lift up our understanding and affections to a better life. Then God, who is
good, and doing well unto men, who takes not pleasure in our evils,
afflicts us not, but to wake us the better, and to sanctify us in his
obedience, purifying our affections, and by the sorrows of troubles makes us
to abhor our corruptions, the very cause of them. He does as the good keeper
of a vine, John 2.
who cutteth his vine, that it may bear more and better fruit, not suffering
it to grow wild, in leaving too mame boughs on it. And as we cut the wings
of hens and other birds, that they should not fly away and be lost: so God
cutteth off from us the commodities of the flesh to keep us down, that we
lift not up and destroy our selves with vain confidence and pride. We see also
that the corn shut within the chafe comes not forth, if the ear be not
beaten: and that it tarieth still in the chafe if it be not fanned. The like
happens to the children of god if they be not beaten and fanned by
tribulations, to be separated from the chafe of the world, and the pleasures
and impediments that be in it. The Prophet Oseas when he would show how God
would turn away his people from following idolatry. Hose. 2.6.
I will hedge (says he) thy way with thorns: wherein he gives us to
understand, that as the beasts that go by the way, and see on the side of them
fair flelds, assaying to go to the^, and running upon the hedges of thorns,
if they feel the sharp pricks, they go back and return into the way: So,
when the children of God go out of the right way to heaven, to go to the
fields of this world and o^ the flesh, God makes the^ to come upon the
thorns of afflictions, to the end that by their prickings they may turn
back again. When a Mother willing to weane her child shall say unto him night
and day, My child, it is time to weane thee, thou art grown great enough, and
I am with child, my milk is corrupt, it will make thee sick; yet he is so
fond of the breast that he cannot forsake it: but if the Mother put worm wood
or mustard upon the breast, the child sucking it and feeling the bitterness,
he quite forsakes it without sucking any more. Even so, though the preachers
preachvnto us, and exhort us to forsake the corrupt milk of the world and of
the flesh, yet we seem dease still and are always backward, until God put
upon these cursed teates the mustard and wormwood of afflictions to weane us.

We have also of our own nature too much considence in our selves, 3. In
confidence.
and in humane means, so as we know not what it is to hope in God against
hope, and to trust to him without gage in the hand. So the riches estates,
traffiques, the leaning upon men, on the husband to the wife, on the father to
the children, on the good Prince to the Subjects, are unto us as vayles, that
keep down our sight upon the earth, and as staves for us to lean upon. Now,
our God taking away these vayles and carnal leaning stocks, makes us to
feel the weakneise of our faith to humble us, and to constrain us to look
unto him with a pure eye, to cleave unto him alone, and wholly to depend upon
him. According to that Saint Paul says, That he had received the sentence of
death in himself, 2. Cor. 1.9.
that he might have no confidence in the sleth, but in him that raises up
again the dead.

This is it also which Saint Peter teaches by the similitude which he
proposes in the first chapters of his first Epistle and the seventh verse,
comparing the afflictions to fire, and faith to the gold, for as gold is put
into the fining pot and furnace, not to consume it, but to try and purify it:
so our faith is tried and purified in the fire of tribulations. For as it
happens to him that is quiet and at his ease, that he falls soon asleep,
and having an apple or any other thing in his hand, it falls, or is easily
taken from him: so the ease of the flesh brings us a sleep in the world, and
causes us to leese the spiritual good things and to suffer them to fall to the
ground. On the contrary side, the more one forces to take away a staff which
I hold in my hand while I am awake: so much the faster I shut it in, and hold
it the harder, that it may not be taken away from me. Even so the more the
devil indeuoureth to take faith from us by tribulations, so much the more do
we meditate on the promises of God to hold it fast: and the more he thrusts
at us to ouerturn us, so much the more strongly we lean upon the staff of
faith, to overcome his assaults. 4. In Invocation and prayers.
From hence also proceeds this excellent fruit of invocation of the name of
God. And surely in the time of prosperity, when we are at our ease we pray
not ordinarily, but of custom and for fashion, but being pressed with
necessity, being assailed on all sides, finding no comfort in the earth, and
feeling that we perish if God do not strengthen, aid and deliver us: Then it
is, that with all our hearts, we cry unto the Lord, that we protest that he
is our father and savior, and that our trust is in him: as the feeling of our
diseases is it that makes us run to the Physician. The history of the book
of Judges shows by many examples that the people of Israel being in peace
grew corrupt, but after being afflicted they had recourse to GOD, asking of
him deliverance. When God slew them (says David) then they sought him, and
Psalm. 78.34.
turned them selves, and rose early in the morning to seek after God, and
then they remembered that God was their rock, and that the high and mighty GOD
was their redeemer. Ose. 5.15. and 7.1.
I will go (says the Lord by his Prophet Osee) and return to my place,
until they confess their fault, and seek my face: They shall seek me
diligently in their trouble, saying: Come, let us return unto the Lord, for
it is he that has spoiled us, and he will heal us, he has stricken us, and he
will cure us. So long as the prodigal son had means, Iuk. 15.11.
he continued in his disorders: but being brought to extreme poverty, he
remembered his fathers house, and returned unto him. Furthermore, our patience
is proved and augmented by troubles, 5. In patience and hope. Romans 5.3.
as S. Paul teaches: and by the experience of GOD his assistance, our hope
grows, in so much as making us (in the time of need) to feel his goodness,
his power, and his truth, in strengthening and sustaining us in assaults and
conflicts, and in delivering us out of our afflictions: he seals in us the
assurance of this his promise, Joel. 2.32.
that whosoever calls upon him shall be saved. And he that shall put his
trust in him, shall never be confounded. To. 10.13.
For this cause S. Paul teaches us to rejoice in our tribulatio^s: adding,
that tribulation brings patience, To. 10.11. Romans 5.3.
and patience experience, and experience hope. And S. James exhorts us to
count temptations for matter of great joy, Iam. 1.2.
forasmuch as the trial of our faith ingendreth patience. By the same means
he tries our obedience and fashioneth us. For when God intertaineth us in
prosperity according to the flesh, 6. In obedience, because he that afflicts
us, is first our creator.
it is easy to submit our selves to so sweet handling, and to frame our
selves according to his will, with acknowledging of his goodness and love
toward us. But when he afflicts us with sickness, poverty, reproach and
other calamities. Then to feel that he loves us, to like this handling, to
subject our selves to this his will: herein consists true obedience. Then,
Romans 12.1.
he afflicts us to try us and to fashion us in this obedience, in as much as
working in us his children by his spirit, he makes us to commit our selves to
his government, to depend upon him, and to suffer our selves to be guided by
his hand, offering our selves as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto
God, considering that it is reasonable, that we being his, by right of
creation and redemption, he may dispose of us as it pleases him. And herein
there are two things to be considered. First, in as much as he is our
creator, we ought to practice that which David says: Psalm. 39.10.
Lord I have held my peace, and have not opened my mouth, because it is thou
that have done it: showing thereby, that whether he tie us to our bed by
sickness, or bring us to poverty, or driving us from place to place, he bring
us to many discommodities, or even make us to languish in prison, or pass
through the sword or fire, we must think and say, Lord I hold my peace and
will not murmr against thee: but render thee obedience, because it is thou
that have done it: for thou have all authority over me, in as much as I am thy
creature. And indeed if after the similitude of a potter, who is able to make
of the self same lump of earth, some vessels of honor, and others of
dishonor, Saint Paul shows, that God has authority to choose some to
salvation, Romans 9.20.
and to reject others, so as they that are rejected to be damned eternally,
have no cause to reply or murmur: how much more ought we to hold our peace
and obey, when he disposes that we shall be afflicted but for a little time,
and that in the body only? But that in this obedience we may feel indeed
that we are happy, 2. Because he is our father and redeemer.
we must mark an other point: that he which does afflict us, is not only our
creator, but also our redeemer: not only God, but also our GOD and father. And
that same assures us, that according to the love that he bears us, and
according to his infinite wisdom, he will dispose nothing of us, which shall
not be to his glory, and to our benefit and salvation. It is well known that
fathers and mothers take no pleasure to afflict their children, and to make
them to weep. And although they have power to beat them, to appoint them
their diet, and to put them abroad, either to school, or to serve some other,
yet when they do this, men do not only confess that they have authority so
to do: but also every one believes, that it is for the benefit of the
children, whose duty also it is to like well of it, and to render unto them
willing obedience. Now, properly God only is our father, Mat. 23.9.
as Jesus Christ says: Call ye no man father upon the earth: ye have but one
father, which is in heaven. What injury then do we to this only true father,
that we being afflicted by his hand, after what manner soever, do not
sanctify his name, conforming our selves to his will, thinking and confessing,
that all proceeds from his goodness and love, to his glory, and our benefit
and salvation? See how, in the school of affliction, we learn what it is
properly to obey God: and that is very necessary for us. Heb. 5.8.
For, if Jesus Christ being the son, notwithstanding learned obedience, by
the things which he suffered: how much more had we need to learn to submit
our hearts and our necks by afflictions, to the guiding of our God, as
children yielding themselves peaceably to the government of their father,
saying with Job: The Lord has given, the Lord has taken, his name be blessed:
Job. 1.21.
And with David persecuted of Absalom: If God say to me, 2. Sam. 15.16.
thou please me not, behold I am here, let him do unto me whatsoever pleases
him. And being ready to sacrifice our own children with our own hands unto
God, when he shall command us, as Abraham did in old time. Genesis 22.
To be short in following GOD, as the old proverb is, in what condition or
estate soever it shall please him to call us. If then afflictions serve, Sen.
de Gita beata. cap. 15.
to awake us out of sin, to humble us, to correct the infinite corruptions
that are in us, to pull us from the world, to cleave unto God, and to draw our
hearts from the earth, to lift them up to heaven, to fashion us in the obedience
of GOD, to give us increase in patience and faith. To be short, to make us so
much the more fervently to pray unto God; it rests that we conclude, that
indeed they proceed from the love of God toward us, and of the care that he
has of our salvation, and so, that in afflicting us, he shows himself
indeed our father: as the Apostle to the Hebrews does also teach us, saying:
Heb. 12.6.
That God chastises those whom he loves, and corrects every child whom he
receives: If you endure (says he) chastisement, God offers himself unto
you, as unto his children. For what child is it whom the father does not
chastise? Then, if ye be not under chastisement, whereof all are partakers, ye
are bastards and not sons. Rods then are testimonies, that he acco^pteth us
his lawful children, and not bastards. And nature it self teaches it us.
For, if we see two children strive together, and a man coming by, takes the
one of them and beats him, leaving the other, we will judge by and by that
this man is the father of him that he did beat, and that the other appertained
not unto him. And this is it that S. Peter means, saying: that judgment
begins at the house of God: 1. Pet. 4.17.
showing that they are his children and household servants, which are afflicted
in this life. The which thing a good ancient father did think and well
express, calling his afflictions, Grego. Nazian.
bitter arrows shot from a sweet and amiable hand. Therefore as, when we see
the Carpenters strike with their hatchets upon pieces of wood to pare it, or
plane it: and Masons to polish stones with the strokes of an hammer; we gather
that these are stones and timber, which the master would employ to some
building: Even so let us conclude of our selves, that if God lift up upon us
the hatchets and hammers of afflictions to polish us: It is a manifest and sure
testimony, that he has chosen us to put in the building of his temple. And
that so, we are his children both well-beloved and happy. But let us pass to
another consideration of singular comfort.

Of the afflictions for the name of Christ. and of their fruits.

CHAP. 10.
TRue it is that God being just, does never afflict us unjustly, which thing
we ought alwais to think and confess, to humble our selves, and to give glory
unto God. Nevertheless, GOD does not always take occasion of our sins to
punish us, but often times he shows this favor to his children to dispose
that the cause and title of their afflictions should be honorable, calling
them persecutions and sufferings for righteousness sake, Matt. 5.10. Mar. 10.29.
Col. 1.24. Matthew. 5.11 Romans 8.35. What are the afflictions for Christ.
for the Gospel, for the Church, for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
for the love of GOD. And this comes when we are persecuted of men, because
we will not approve iniquity, or false doctrine, nor defile our selves with
idolatries and superstitions, but serve God purelie and holilie according to
his word. To be short, when we will live in the fear of God in Jesus Christ,
as Saint Paul speaks, 2. Tim. 3.12.
who speaking of these afflictions says: Phil. 1.29.
To you it is given of God not only to believe, but also to suffer for his
name: They that suffer for Christ are happy.
wherein he shows, that such afflictions are the gifts of GOD proceeding from
good will and love toward us: And see why Jesus Christ said, Blessed are they
which are persecuted for righteousness sake: 1 By the testimony of the word of
the God. Mat. 5.10.
Also, Blessed are you when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and speak
all manner of evil against you, lying of you for my sake: rejoice ye, and be
glad. Whereunto Saint Peter agrees, 1. Pet. 4.14.
saying: If ye suffer wrong for the name of Jesus Christ, ye are happy.

Now, if we have no other foundation than the only testimony of Jesus Christ
to assure us, that being persecuted for his name, God loves us, and will make
us blessed, were it not an intolerable impudency for the devil, and an
incredulity inexcusable for us, to call that in doubt, which he, who is the
truth it self, does affirm? Notwithstanding, to the end that we may the more
lively feel this felicity than when we are persecuted for his name: let us
consider the reasons which the holy ghost gives us. First, when Jesus Christ
had said: blessed are they which suffer for righteousness sake, he adds as a
reason: 2. For the promises. 1. Of the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 5.10.
For theirs is the kingdom of heaven. They that through zeal and charity
imploye themselves to maintain the innocence and right of an other, and above
all the truth of God, incur ordinarily the hatred of the world, lifting up
it self against them, to bring them to ruin. But let them comfort themselves:
for what can they leese, seeing the kingdom of heaven is theirs, and cannot
be taken from them? Yea farther, seeing these persecutions assure them, and
prepare them to come thither, Jesus Christ adds that we are blessed, Mat.
5.12.
and that we ought to skip for joy when any injury is offered us, either in
word or deed, 2. For the reward:
lying on us for his names sake. For your reward (says he) is great in heaven.
Note that he says in heaven: for it shall be specially in the life to come,
that we shall receive it. Yet notwithstanding, in an other place he promises
recompense in this present life. 1. In this life.
For mark what he speaks to his Apostles: Mar. 10.29.
Verelie I say unto you, that there is none that shall forsake house, or
brethren, or sisters, fathers, mothers, or wife, or children, or lands, for the
love of me, and of the Gospel, which shall not now in this world receive an
hundred fold as much, houses, brethren, sisters, fathers, mothers, children
and lands with persecution, and in the world to come life everlasting. Now, the
purpose of Jesus Christ is to teach us, that when by persecution it shall
happen that we shall be constrained to forsake father, mother, brothers,
sisters, and lands, he will give unto us, in that poor, vile and base estate
cansed through persecution, more joy, contentment and happiness, than if we
had recovered an hundred fathers for one, and an hundred times as much lands
and possessions, as was taken from us. And experience makes the faithful to
feel the truth of this promise. And we should feel it much more
abundantly, if the mouth of our faith were greater. But yet in this weakness
of faith, do not we know, that the wicked in their abundance are poor, and
we in our poverty are rich. Their covetousness is insatiable, and like unto
fire, which, the more wood you put on, the greater it is. As for us, we find
contentment and rest in the providence of GOD, which never forsook those that
put their trust in him. In the time of Eliah, 1. King. 17.
many had greater store of food than the widdowe of Sarepta, unto whom he was
sent: but she having this blessing of the Lord, that the oil failed not in the
cruse, nor the flower in the barrel, she had more than the richest in the
country: As he that has a spring of running water in his house, may say, that
he is more assured, and has more plenty of water, than he that has it in a
cesterne, and that all broken. Besides, this great happiness that we feel our
selves to be the children of God, that being pilgrims in this world, the end
of our voyage is to come to heaven, which also we see open, and Jesus Christ
reaching out his hands unto us to gather us into his glory, gives us more
contentment without comparison, in eating of bread, and drinking of water, than
the unfaithful have in all delicates, having nothing in their hearts but the
world and the earth; and living, or rather languishing in continual fear to
be suddenly deprived of all that, wherein they set their whole felicity.

This is it which David notes, Psalm. 37.10.
saying: A little that the righteous has is more worth, than the great
abundance of the wicked. Yea, the very ordinary experience teaches us, that
GOD provides for our necessities both more abundantly than ever we looked
for, and also by such means as we never thought, accomplishing in his children
persecuted, that which Saint Paul says: 1. Tim. 4.8.
That godliness has the promise of this present life, and of the life to come.
If then (as it is said) the contented be rich, and that it is not the
abundance which gives this contentment, but the feeling that we are the
children of a father that is almighty, which loves us with a love
incomprehensible, in his beloved son, who has taken upon him to make us
happy. It must needs follow, that even in this life we recover an hundred
times as much, as we have lost through persecution. And who is he that can
doubt if he carefully meditate this sentence of Saint Paul? Romans 8.31.
He that has loved us so much, as he gave his own and only son unto the
death for us, much more shall he give us all other things with him. And
indeed, seeing we are the members and brethren of him, whom God has
appointed the universal heir of all things: let us not doubt but that all
things are ours. As also the goods of the house appertains to the pupils,
although the Tutor govern it, and gives it them by portion: and that which is
more, he shall sometimes appoint to every one his diet, according to that
which by the counsel of the Physician shall be thought fit. Mat. 6.33
And indeed if we seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, Let us
not doubt, following the promise of Jesus Christ, but that all other things
shall be added. In the mean time we must especially lift up our understanding
to the reward promised in the life everlasting. For true it is, that besides
this contentment whereof we have spoken: God (to show that it happens not for
lack of power to enrich his children, that poverty and other afflictions do
often follow and accompany the profession of the Gospel) does oftentimes
dispose, that they which have forsaken father, mother, and their worldly goods
for the name of Jesus Christ, find afterward many, which serve them for
fathers and mothers, and obtain after greater possessions in following the
Gospel, than they had before. Always this is not the purpose of Christ to
have us to rest upon so bare recompense, as to give us goods which are common
to the wicked and the infidels. Saint Paul proposes to the bondslaues of men,
for recompense of their faithful service, Col. 3.24
the inheritance of Heaven. The children then of the house of God, should do
themselves great wrong, to look for at the hands of a Father, so mighty, so
rich, and so liberal, earthly and transitory riches, and other commodities
of the flesh. He esteems it not agreeable to his greatness, nor to the
anguishes and travails of those which have forsaken father, mother, their
goods and their life for his service, to give them things so vain: to the
end, that they should not set their minds thereon, thinking that their
felicity lay in them. The Master of a house, who keeps his inheritance for
his Son, does not think that he does any thing for him, to clothe him with
the liuerie of his servants: as also when any one shall be received for a
Prince into any country, he may well cast some pieces of gold or silver,
amongst the people, to show his liberality, but the honors and dignities are
distributed among his fauourits. GOD will not feast our bodies with the service
of our souls. He is liberal and just, and therefore will recompense
Spiritual conflicts with Spiritual Crowns, and accept our labors, not
according to the vileness of our hearts, but according to the dignity of his
greatness: seeing also, that he crowns not in us, our works, August.
but properly his own. Of one and the self same service, there is one
recompense of a King, and an other of a Merchant; so as when we would content
our selves with earthly goods, God might answer with better reason than (in
old time) Alexander the great, that it were enough in regard of us that
should receive it, but not in regard of him that should give it us. They that
know the vanity of worldly things, have no contentation but in heavenly
things, yea, Manuel. Aug. cha. 3
and will say with Saint Augustine; Lord, if thou should give me all that
thou have created in the world, that should not suffice thy servant, except
thou gave me thy self. As also he says in another place, All abundance,
which is not my God, is to me scarcity. 2. In the life to come
We must then set before us the reward promised in the eternal life, wherewith
(without al doubt) Moses was lively touched in his heart, when he refused to be
called the son of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather to be afflicted with the
people of GOD, than to enjoy for a small season, the pleasures of sin,
esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than all the treasures of Egypt.
For (says the apostle) he had respect to the reward, which also he received,
not in this present life, wherein he was afflicted until his death; but in
heaven, whither he lifting up his eyes, feared not the fury of the King, but
held fast, as if he saw him, that is invisible. The same Apostle writing to
the Hebrews that believed, shows very well, that they also did understand
this reward. For he bears them witness, Heb. 10.34
that they had taken joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing, that they
had a better riches inheauen, which abides for ever. Wherein also he
confirms them, adding this exhortation: Then cast not off your confidence,
which has great reward. The fruit in the life to come incomprehensible:
first, for the greatness. Romans 8.18
Now although, as touching our selves, we can not comprehend what this reward
shall be, yet ought we certainly to believe it, that it is most certain,
because Jesus Christ has promised it; and most excellent: seeing that Saint
Paul affirms, that the sufferings of this present life are not worthy of
the glory to come, which shall be revealed in us. As also he says in an other
place: 2. Cor. 4.17
That our transitory afflictions which endure but a small time, and are gone
in a moment, shall bring forth in us an eternal weight of glory marvelous
excellent. And to give some taste in waighting for the full revelation, and
inioying of it, let us note in this last sentence of Saint Paul, the
comparison that he makes of our afflictions that are swift, and passing in a
moment, and the eternal weight of glory marvelous excellent, which they
bring forth. For true it is, that our outward man decays, as he said,
meaning thereby the loss of health, of riches, honors, friendships, aliances,
and other such aides and commodities of this life, and the life it self: but
in the mean time the inward man is renewed every day, by an happy and excellent
change, in goods and honors that are spiritual, heavenly, and eternal. And
indeed what is all that which we suffer and lose here for Jesus Christ, in
respect of the infinite and incomprehensible good things, which we shall
recover in heaven, whereof also we have a feeling in this present life? Are we
constrained to forsake a fleshly father? Behold the heavenly father which
offers himself at hand, who alone properly is our Father, as is said
before. John 9.
What lost the man borne blind being cast out of the Synagogue, and refused
of the Scribes and Pharisees, when Jesus Christ met him and received him? If
any spoil our worldly goods, God offers us the Kingdom of heaven. If the
earth will not bear us, the heavens open to receive us. If the people of the
world drive us away, the Angels offer their presence, acknowledging us their
companions in glory: If men curse us, those words are but wind; and God in
the mean time does bless us, and turns even the curses of our enemies into
blessings as David speaks. 2. Sam. 16 12
If we be thrust out of our offices or dignities, Jesus Christ gives us things
more excellent, making us kings and priests to God his father: Rene. 1.6
If our parents disdain us, and will not know us, Christ is not ashamed to auow
us, and call us his brethren. Heb. 2.12
If we be deprived of the succession and inheritance of our parents, Christ
acknowledges us the heirs of God his father, and fellow heirs with him. Do
any make us weep for sorrow? Christ presents him self to wipe away our tears,
and to turn our sorows into perfect joy. Are we not received into any town to
be an inhabitant there? God gives us freedom in heaven, to dwell in that
heavenly Jerusalem, the streets whereof are paued with sine gold, the walls are
made of precious stones, the gates are pearls, whereof the son of god is the
temple and the sun. Are we put to death? it is to enter into a better life, full
of joy and glory. And indeed let us consider here the wo^dersul goodness of
God. A she knows that we are too much tied to goods, dignities, and other
commodities of the flesh, that instead of willingly laying up our tresure in
heaven, we lay it up in earth: he so disposes that we shall be persecuted for
his name, and does therein, as a good and faithful Tutor, who taking the money of
his pupil, puts it out to profit, or buieth for him good rents with it. And
hereunto tends that which David says: Psalm. 56.9
Thou have nu^bred my fleetings, do the^ put my tears in thy bottle, are they
not noted in thy register? This being true, how much more will he put the drops
of blood which we shed for his name into his barell, and in his Register the
reproaches, the flittings, the losses of father, mother, lands and other goods,
the imprisonments, the other afflictions; and above all, the deaths which we
endure for his service and glory? As also it is written, Psa. 116.15
Right dear in the sight of God is the death of his Saints. And to what end
serve these registers? They shall be laid before, not only the persecutours, to
make the^ feel so much the more horrible judgment and vengeance: but
especially before us, to make us feel an incomprehensible increase of glory
and of joy, in showing us what we have suffered for his name, and in accepting
us before his Angels. But let us now consider how our afflictions are of small
continuance, 2. Because of the eternity.
and passing away as in a moment, in respect of the weight of the eternal
glory which they bring. And first let us say boldly, that our troubles are
short, because our days are short; and that the glory is of long
continuance, because there shall be no end of it. But for the better
understanding of the shortness of our afflictions, we must consider according to
the instruction of S. Paul, 2. Co. 4.18.
the things invisible, that are eternal. For in respect of them, we shall
find, that the visible things which concern this life, are temporal, that is
to say, during a little time. The Patriarch Jacob being demanded of Pharao of
his age, he answered, that the years of his pilgrimage had been few and evil.
Genesis 47.9.
And how were they few, seeing he had lived 130. years? surely in comparison or
8. or 900. years which his forefathers had lived, as also he adds, that his
years had not attained to the years of his fathers. How then are not our days
short, not coming at the most but to 70. or 80. years, and that in those that
have the stro^gest or mightiest bodies, Psa. 90.10.
as the song of Moses imports. God speaking of the captivity of Babylon
which continued 70. years, says thus: Esai. 54.8.
I have for a little while as in a moment of mine indignation hid my face from
thee. How? 70. years, are they a little time, is that but a moment of
indignation? yea, in respect of the comforts and everlasting happiness, which
he would communicate to his people: as he adds, That he would have compassion
on them with everlasting mercy. This also is the cause why S. John calls the
time following Christ's coming in the flesh, 1. Ioh. 2.18
the last hour: as if he would divide the co^tinua^ce of the world into 3. or
4. hours, whereof the last should be after this coming of Jesus Christ until the
end of the world: so this last hour should now have continued 1587. years, and
these 1587. years should not be yet a whole hour finished. This seems
strange to us. But let us set before us 2. eternities of times: that which was
before the foundation of the world, and that is an infinite time (if a man may
call that time) and a swalowing up of the understanding of man: and the
eternity of time which shall be after the end of the world, and behold again
an incompreheusible infinitenes of time. Now let us consider the continuance of
the world between these two eternities. When it shall continue 7.8. or 9000.
years, this should not be, in respect of these 2. eternities, 2. or 3. hours
no not one hour: it should be yet less than one grain in respect of all the
sand in the world: for, as touching the sand the number is finite, but in
eternity there is no end. And here unto tends that which S. Peter says, 1.
Pet. 3.8.
That before God, 1000. years are but as one day, and a day as 1000. years,
forasmuch as before the eternity of GOD, there is no numbering of time; for
there is no time at all. According unto this, Moses says, Psalm. 90.4.
that 1000. years before god are as a day that is past. If then 1000. years are
but as a day past, or an hour, 60. or 80. years are but as one minute of time:
so the longest continuance of our afflictions should be but one minute; and yet
there are some that accomplish not that. And when do we begin this minute of
tribulations? seeing that a great part of our life passes before we suffer
any thing for the name of Christ; and yet there is some intermission in them,
if it were but in sleeping. Then, we do now see how true it is, that S. Paul
says, that our afflictions pass in a moment. And what is that which this
moment of afflictions brings us? An eternal weight (says he) of glory, as
we have largely showed here before. In the first chapter.
And in deed there shall be no end says the Angel, of the kingdom of
Christ. And we are the house of Jacob, Luke 1.33.
over whom he shall reign for evermore. 1. The 4.17
And S. Paul says, that being risen again, and ascended into heaven, we
shall be with Jesus Christ everlastingly. Ioh. 3. and 6.
For whosoever believes in him has everlasting life. If God for the full
measure of our felicity shall be all in all, when we have him in us, 1. Co. 13.25
who is eternal and immortal, we shall enjoy a glorious immortality: as also
S. Paul says. That he has brought to light, life and immortality by the
gospel. To be short, S. Matthew having set forth unto us the last judgment,
says, Mat. 25.46.
That the sheep that shall be at the right hand of Jesus Christ, shall go
into everlasting life. Even so, when he promises us a perfect joy, headdeth,
Ioh. 16.22.
that it shall never be taken from us. Now, what comparison is there between
one moment of affliction, and a glory, a life, and a joy, that shall last
eternally and without end? Then when we think that our cross is long and
heavy to bear, let us set before us the excellency and the eternity of the
incomprehensible glory, whereunto we ascend by it, whereof also we feel the
earnest penny and beginnings in our hearts, waiting for the full feeling, and
through enjoying of this felicity, when we shall be lifed up, and put in
possession of the kingdom of heaven. Now this reward is certain and assured
to al those which shall suffer for the name of Jesus Christ. Such afflictions
then are seals of the love of God toward us, and testimonies that he takes
us into the number of his best beloved children, and that he will make us
indeed and everlastingly happy.

Other fruits of the afflictions for the name of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. 11.
BEsides these, 1. Fruit, honor to be a Martyr of Christ.
both excelent and eternal good things, which the sufferings for the name of
Jesus Christ does bring us, there is yet the honor that he does us, to bring us
forth to be witnesses of his truth. In regard whereof, although all they that
preach the Gospel are called witnesses of Jesus Christ, yet this title of
Martyr or witness, is after a more particular manner, and by excellency
attributed unto such, as to maintain the truth of the doctrine of the Gospel,
suffer constantly persecution, and especially unto death. So we read that S.
Paul gave to S. Stephen this title of honor, Act. 22.20
calling him the Martyr of Jesus Christ. And S. John makes mention of Antipas,
Reu. 2.13.
whom he calls a faithful Martyr of Christ. And in the same book of the
Revelation, he says, that he saw the great whore drunk with the blood of the
Saints, Reu. 17.6.
and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. In like manner the apostle to the
Hebrews, having recited how many faithful had bin mocked, scourged, cut in
pieces, stoned, Heb. 11. and 12.
and otherwise persecuted, he adds, that in them we have as it were a cloud
of martyrs or witnesses co^passing us round about, and exhorting us to follow
constantly their example. The Apostles did well understand and confess this
honor, who after they had been publikelie whipped for the name of Jesus Christ,
Act. 5.40.
they went before the council, rejoicing that they had this honor to suffer
reproach for his name. And indeed when when we endure persecution, to maintain
the glory, the authority, and the truth of Christ, against Antichrist and his
supposts, it is as if Jesus Christ should borrowe our goods, our renown, our
blood, our life, to serve for autenticall seals, and most sure witnesses that
cannot fail, of the right and the glory that appertains unto him. And what
are we poor worms of the earth, that the eternal Son of GOD, the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, shall do us this honor, to put his glory (as it
were) into our hands, to be the keepers and defenders of it, against those
that would spoil him of it? And here let us consider the incomprehensible
wisdom and goodness of God toward us. The most perfect offend God daily, and
one only sin, be it never so little to our judgment, deserves death, and
everlasting condemnation, then it is yet more than the loss of our goods, and
the corporal life. Now in stead of exercising his just judgments upon us, he
does us this honor, that it which we endure (which is not the thousand part
of that we have deserved) changes the nature, and instead of being the
punishment of sin, God imputes it, as a most excelent service for the
maintenance of his glory. But yet there is more. 2. Fruit, the glory of God,
declaclaring and accomplishing his power in our infirmity, and showing his
goodness, and the truth of his promises: first toward every faithful.
For what are we to suffer willingly? The love of riches, ambition, the
pleasure of fleshly commodities, the affection toward father, mother, wife,
children, and above al to this life, is so strong and vehement in us, that in
stead of renouncing them for Christ, we renounce Christ, and his Kingdom to
entertain us. And experience shows this too much. We are also so very
impatient and dainty when there is any question of suffering, that if we
should but only snuff a candle with our fingers, we wet them with our
spittle, that we might not feel the fire of that small snuff, which yet we
throw from our fingers in all haste: and how then should we abandon our bodies
to the death, entering quick into the fire to be there consumed, if God did not
strengthen us supernaturally? How should we maintain his truth against the
supposts of Antichrist, if the spirit of his father, the which he promised us,
Mat. 10.19 20
did not work mightily in us? Then when we see these vessels so frail and
weak, to surmount the threatenings of kings, the apprehension of fire, the
assaults of Antichrists supposts, and the temptations proceeding from father,
mother, wife, and children; are not these so many testimonies of a wonderful
and mighty grace and power of God, which fortifieth them, and makes them
victorious against Satan, the world and the flesh? I can do all things
(says Saint Paul) through Christ who strengthens me. Phil. 4.13 2. Cor. 12
10
And in an other place, I rejoice (says he) in infirmities, in injuries, in
necessities, in persecutions, in anguishes for christ. For when I am weak,
then am I strong, even thorough the might and power of Christ, which showed it
self, and was made perfect thorough his weakness, as he had said before. So
then this constancy, this faith, this zeal, and other virtues which God
communicates (by his free goodness) to his elect, are manifest by persecutions,
which otherwise should be hid. As in running the course, the agility or
swiftnes of the horse is known, the strength of a man in the combat, the savor
of many drugges, in rubbing, or brusing of them, or casting them into the fire,
as we see in the incense. The Stars (says Saint Bernard) which appear not
by day, shine in the night, Bernar. in Can.
so the virtue that is hid in prosperity, shows it self in adversity. Now,
2. Toward the body of the church.
this which we have said of the power of GOD, showing it self in the
infirmity of his children to his glory, is seen also in the body of the
Church, which ordinarily is so poor, so weak, so little helped, at the hands
of men, that if GOD did not sustain it, it should quickly be swallowed up.
Then when we see it so mightelie assailed, by the potentates of this world,
conspiring her ruin, by so many forces and slights, and by so many heretics,
does not God in the guiding, delivering and preserving of it, show that it is
he himself, and he alone, which maintains and defends it? And that his
power and wisdom is wonderful, in preserving it against so many enemies,
and that his truth is certain, in acco^plishing that, which he has promised
us, of being with his Church until the end of the world? And that it is he
which is the stone cut out without hand, which has broken, Mat. 28.29 Dan. 2.34
and does still break the great image representing the empires, and kingdoms
of the world: Which to show unto us more lively, oftentimes he so disposes,
that leaning upon the strength of men, she has been thrown down, and being
thrown down, God has lift her up again without means, and beyond all hope
of man, that all men may know, that the preservation of the Church is not the
work of Man, but indeed the very work of God. Judge. 7.2
As also the Lord declares to Gedeon this his intent, commanding him to abate
his army. There is too many people with thee (says the Lord) that I should
give Madian into their hands, least peradventure Israel would glory in
themselves against me, saying: 3. Fruit, the advance meant of the church.
My hand has delivered me. See also how it comes to pass, that when the
Devil thinks quite to overthrow the Church by persecution, God quite
contrary, has advanced and increased it: Saint Luke having recited that the
high Priests and the chief rulers of the Temple, Act. 4
and the Sadduces laying hands upon the Apostles, put them into prison, he
adds by and by, that many of those that heard the word, believed, and the
number was about five thousand persons. When Saint Stephan was put to death,
Act. 8. and 11 19
the Church at Jerusalem was quite dispersed: but by the faithful dispersed,
there were as many more new Churches set up. And it is as if GOD took, at the
hands of his enemies, corn into his Garner to sow, whereof should follow a
goodly and plentiful harvest. It is a fruit that Saint Paul notes in his
afflictions, Phil. 1.12
saying, Brethren, I would have you to understand, that the things which
happened to me, came to the advancement of the Gospel: so as my bands were
made famous in Christ, through all the Judgment hall, and in all other places:
And many of the brethren (made bold by my bands) durst speak of the word
more freely. Iustine in his communication with Triphon writes that the same
thing happened in his time. It may appear (says he) every day, that we which
believe in Christ, cannot be astonished nor daunted of any, if they cut off our
heads, if they crucify us, if they cast us unto wild beasts, or into fires,
or unto any other torment; the more they torment us, so much the more
increases the number of the christians, neither more nor less, than as men
cut their Vines, to make them the more fruitful. So the Devil is greatly
beguiled. For in persecuting those which profess the Gospel, he thinks to
stop men from believing in Jesus Christ, to be saved. But it falls out
quite contrary. For the poor ignorant men seeing the constancy of the
Martyrs: gather two points, first, that there is no hypocrisy in them, nor
any fleshly passion which makes them to follow this doctrine, which to
maintain they utterly abandon all the commodities of the flesh, the honors of
the world, and life it self. Next, they are induced to think, that the
doctrine for which they suffer, is of GOD, seeing it is by no humane, but by
very divine power, that they suffer constantly and willingly so many reproaches,
discommodities and cruelties. And so is this Sentence so famous verified: That
the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church. In like manner those that
have already the knowledge of the doctrine, are confirmed as well to persevere
in it, as to take courage and strength to suffer in like manner for the
maintenance of it. For, seeing that GOD forsakes not his servants in the
conflict, but is with them, and in them, making them victorious: we take
thereof assurance, that GOD will also overcome in us all temptations,
threatenings and torments: And beholding them, thorough death to enter into
life, and by the Cross to ascend into the Kingdom of Heaven, we feel our
selves inflamed with desire to be their companions both in the troubles, and in
the triumph of glory. The which thing makes us to persevere constantly in the
truth of the doctrine, which sets (as it were) before our eyes this
sovereign felicity, even the heavens open, and Jesus Christ stretching out
his hand, to draw us up into the fellowshippe of his joy, and glory
incomprehensible and eternal.

The people of the world cannot understand these so excellent fruits of the
afflictions for the name of Christ, which we have set down here above, being
therein like to the Philistines the companions of Sampson, which could not
comprehend this proposition that he made them; Out of the eater came meat,
Judge. 14.14
and out of the fierce came sweetness: But we, that are taught in the School
of Christ by his Spirit, we understand and believe that as Sampson having
vanquished the Lion, found in the body of it honnie, so we having constantly
overcome all the persecutions and troubles of this life, which are like unto
fierce and cruel Lions, ready to devour us, we shall find this honnie so
excellent of the fruits of the cross of Christ, which shall make us blessed
for evermore. Seeing then, that the persecutions and afflictions that we
suffer, serve so abundantly and so many ways and manners to the glory of
god, and the edification of our neighbors, and do also turn to so great good
and honor unto us: let us conclude boldly, that we being so afflicted for
the name of Jesus Christ, ought to be confirmed in the assurance that we are
the members of the true Church, and that God compteth us for his well-beloved
Children.

An exhortation to persevere constantly in the truth of the Gospel in the time
of persecution, not to fear death, to keep us from apostacy and
dissimulation, to use the holy Ministry, to walk in the fear of God, and to
pray to him.

CHAP. 12.
BY this that is said above, it appears that it is so far off, that we have
any matter to complain or to be offended at our afflictions, that rather we
have just argument to rejoice, and to comfort our selves. 1. Cor. 9. To
persevere consta^tly in the doctrine of the truth, with constancy and hope
under the cross, for the assurance of of the felicity and honor of it. 1.
Tim. 6.12 1. Cor. 9.
And indeed, behold the counsel of God, who has ordained that such should be
the way which leads us to glory. When any run in a race, all run, but
he only bears away the prize, which shall run best. They then run
uncertainly, but we run with assurance to obtain the prize, although other
run better than we: only let us run constantly unto the end. Likewise we
strive, not in doubt as those that beat the air, but it is with the good
fight of faith, assured of the victory, and by the victory of a crown, not of
leaves that fade in three days, but incorruptible for ever. And we be not as
they that are mad or superstitious, suffering at all adventure without knowing
wherefore. We know that it is for the truth, we know that this truth
appertains unto us, we know that God has created and lightened us, to
maintain this truth and grace of God to his glory. How many Martyrs has
there been in old times past, that had not so much knowledge as we. If we
go back, they shall be our Judges: their zeal and constancy shall condemn
our careless knowledge, and unthankfulness unto God. God has not called us to
fight and to suffer, leaving us wandering without a captain: Jesus Christ
himself is our head, Captain and guide, bearing his cross before us and
crying, He that loves me, let him follow me. Himself has not refused this
condition, but has beaten and made the way, to draw and lift up his own into
his kingdom. All the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and blessed servant and
children of GOD are gone thither before us. The work it self of our salvation
calls us thither, and the glory of God requires it. Ought we to dispute,
whether we ought to obey? Should we doubt whether we will be fashioned like his
Image, and wear the liuerie of the children of God? Let us boldly enter into
this straight way, at the end whereof we shall find the gate of heaven. Let
us give our necks to Jesus Christ to receive his yoke, and the honor of his
order.

How many great Lords of the world travail all their life to come to this
honor, to be Knights of the Order of any Prince? And having attained to it,
they account themselves happy men. And what be the ensigns or such Orders?
The one shall have a Fleece, the other a Garter: and the ensign of the Order
of Christ, is prison, bannishment, loss of goods, reproaches, beatings, death.
This is the Order that Saint Paul received, and whereof he gloried, saying, I
bear in my body the marks of Jesus Christ. Gal. 6.17.
Now although that a Fleece and a Garter, are in themselfes vile or base
things, yet are they honorable and to be desired in the world, because princes
take them for the ensign of their Order, acknowledging and calling them
brethren that wear the^. The ensign then that Christ the King of kings has
taken for his order, shall not it be honorable? Shall we not account our selves
happy to attain unto it. Let us follow cheerfully this glorious troop marching
before us with triumph; honored with this Order of the Prince of Glory, JESUS
Christ.

Let us suffer our selves to be guided by him, who is infinitely wiser than we,
and loves us better than we love our selves. And let us receive this favor
of GOD, that so serving his glory, our glory may also be advanced. Let us
not be troubled nor shaken with fear, when we see the persecutors come to the
end of their enterprises, and the children of GOD afflicted. That is to them
(says Saint Paul) a manifest token of destruction, Philip. 1.28
and to us of salvation. There is no greater curse (says Saint Augustine) than
the prosperity and felicity of the wicked, because it is as a strong wine to
make them drunk in their iniquities, and to make a heap and tresure (as it
were) of the wrath of GOD upon them. It seems to us that the world goes to
confusion and disorder, when the wicked triumph, and the children of God weep.
But on the contrary, that is to us a manifest token of the just judgment of
GOD, as Saint Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5
That we are also made worthy of the kingdom of GOD, for which also we
suffer. For it is a just thing (says he) with God, to render affliction to
those that afflict us, and to us that are afflicted, deliverance; then, when
the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with the Angels of his power,
and with the flame of fire to do vengeance upon those that did not know God,
and obeyed not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, the which shall be punished
with an everlasting punishment from the face of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made
wonderful among all the faithful. We are so impatient, so hot, or so
foolish, that we consider nothing but the beginning of the works of our God:
but we must join them together, and consider the accomplishment of the^, as
S. James teaches us, Ye have heard the patience of Job, Ia. 5.11.
and have feene the end which the Lord made, and that the Lord is very
merciful and full of pity. He that shall set himself to consider in his mind
how poor Joseph was handled, and sold of his brethren, and how (refusing to
consent to the shameful and detestable request of his Mistres) he was cast
into prison, Genesis 37.39.
and kept there 2. years, surely a man would take pity on him, as on a
miserable person: but let us see the accomplishment of the work of God: let us
consider him (by this means) exalted to the government of all the Kingdom of
Aegipt, and then we shall count him happy. Above all, if we behold Jesus
Christ, mocked, scourged, crowned with thorns, crucified between 2. thieves,
who would not be offended, that the Prince of glory and Savior of the world
should so be handled? But let us behold him risen again, ascended into heaven,
and sitting at the right hand of God, above al principalities and power,
inioying a glory incomprehensible, and we will admire and praise the work of
God. So if we behold his members persecuted, banished, mocked, spoiled,
imprisoned, entering into the fire: what (will we say) is this a father, which
handles his children in this sort? But if we join to the cross the glory,
and the resurrection to the death: to be short, if we behold them in that
estate, wherein we shall be, when Jesus Christ meeting us in his majesty and
glory shall lift us up above all the heavens, into the house of GOD his father,
to live with him everlastingly, and that the Cross shall be to us as a ladder
to go up upon, to the inioying of such a glory. Who is he then among us that
would not shout out for joy, seeing this wonderful work of God? Who is he that
would not count himself happy? Who is he that would have bin more daintily
ha^died? Who is he that would not be ravished with the bounty, wisdom and
love of God toward his children? He that never saw a harvest, seeing the
plowman taking so much pain to till the earth, to spread it with dung, and
after to cast fair wheat into the field so tilled, he would think that this
man were mad, and that a child were to be whipped that should do such a thing:
but seeing after the harvest that should come of it, he would change his
mind, and acknowledge, that the husbandman had done an excellent work. Now,
this is the time to til, to dung and to sow, the harvest shall follow. Let not
us change the course of the seasons: neither yet let us separate them the one
from the other, but let us join the time of the death with the day of the
resurrection: and let us assure our selves, Psalm. 126 6
as it is written in the Psalms, that having sowed with tears, we shall
reap with joy. He that in old time had seen poor Lazarus full of sores at
the gate of the rich man, Luke 16.19
and the rich man at the table in all delights and pleasure, he would not have
chosen to be Lazarus, but the rich man. But if tarrying a while, he saw the
soul of Lazarus carried straight, by the Angels, into heaven, and the rich
man's soul go to the fire of hell, he would change his mind and would desire
to be Lazarus. Let us then detest the glistering state of cursed riches, and
let us count, the poor and afflicted condition of the Lazarusses of our time,
waighting to be carried up into everlasting glory, happy. The wicked have
nothing in heaven, nor we in the world. Psalm. 94.12.
Blessed is the man (says David) whom the Lord instructs by the power of his
spirit, and by the doctrine of his law, to have contentment and rest in the
time of adversity, while the grave is dug for the ungodly, for an end of
his felicity. Yea, if we were called to suffer death for the name of Jesus
Christ. 2. Not to fear death.
What other thing is this death, but (after a long conflict) the day of
victory, the birth of a blessed soul after a great travail, the haven
desired after so furious tempests, the end of a dangerous and troublesome
voyage, the healing of all wounds and sickness, the deliverance from all fear
and terror, the accomplishment of our sanctification, the gate of heaven, the
entrance into paradise, the taking possession of the inheritance of the father,
the day of our marriage with the Lamb, the inioying of our desires? Who is it
then among us, who feeling with S. Paul the bondage of sin, would not cry
out with him: Alas wretched man that I am, Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from this body of death? And feeling the good that death
brings unto us, will not also say with him, I desire to be dissolved, Phil.
1.23.
and to be with Christ. If death wherewith God threatened our first parents is a
feeling of the wrath of God in the soul, and in the body because of sin.
Genesis 2.17.
We may well say that death and life are two twins united and knit together,
until the separation of the soul and the body: and this separation, which is
co^monlie called death, is rather the deadly stroke of death, the body being
then exempt from pain, and the soul from vice and corruption, waighting
until the rest of death be swallowed up in victory at the day of the
resurrection. It is then an abuse to call life a continual death, and to call
that, death, which is the end of a thousand deaths, and the beginning of the
true life. It is then also against reason, that we have horror of that which
we ought to desire, and desire the continuance of that, the only end whereof
brings us to eternal felicity And to this end Saint Chrysostom says very
well, that it, which is called life and death, have deceaueable visours. Life
deformed, and accompanied with many miseries and calamities, has a fair
pleasant visour which makes it to be desired: and Death, so fair, happy,
and to be desired, has one deformed and fearful. Let us put off then, says
he, these visours, and we will change our minds, when we shall find under the
fair visour of life, nothing but matter of heaviness and displeasure, and under
the soul and hideous visour of death, such a beauty and felicity, as we
shall incontinently be taken with her love. So long as we live we have cruel
enemies, which never cease making war with us, whom we can never vanquish,
but by death. And indeed we cannot make the world to die in us except we die
our selves. Sin which is in us, lives in us, and fights against us, until
we, dying, it also die with us. And by death alone, the deadly assaults of
Satan our chief enemy, die forthwith. But yet why should we fear it, which
cannot come unto us, but by the will of him who is our heavenly father, yea
and at such a time as he appoynteth? As David said: Lord my times, that is to
say, Psalm. 31.16
all the minutes of my life are in thy hands. There is no creature more enemy
to man, nor more able to hurt, than the devil. And indeed he is called, the
enemy, the murderer, Mat. 13.39 Iho. 8.44. 1. Pet. 5.8. Job 1. and 2.
and the roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. But the history of Job
shows plainly, that GOD holds him brideled, so as he can attempt nothing,
nor go either forward or backward, more than GOD will permit him. And this
which is more, he has not power to enter so much as into the swine, Luke 8.32
without the leave of Christ. What is this then that we should fear men? Are
not they also under the providence, power and government of our GOD? It is GOD,
says Hannah the mother of Samuel, 1. Sam. 2.^
who weighs their enterprises, so as they cannot pass one ounce of the
weight ordained of GOD. It is he that slaieth and makes alive again: 1. Sam.
2.6.
which brings down to the pit, and lifts up again: he makes poor, and
makes rich: he abaseth and exalts. To be short, It is he alone, as David
says, Psalm. 115.3.
which does whatsoever he will. Now, we doubt not, but he will do that which
he has promised us, and we know that he has promised us, yea and that he
has taken upon him to make us happy. If then, the doctrine of the providence
of God imports, that he has not only ordained in his eternal counsel the
end and issue of his work (which is his glory, and the salvation of his
elect) but also the fit means, according to his infinite wisdom, and
requisite for the execution and accomplishment of it: let us be assured that
there is no creature that can let or alter his will, as Saint Paul says: If
God be for us, who shall be against us. Let us also be assured, Romans 8.30.
that whatsoever happen unto us, is the way whereby he has ordained to lead
us to life and everlasting glory. Saint Paul, speaking of Jesus Christ,
says, Col. 1.16.
that all creatures are of him, stand by him, and are for him. As also he says
in an other place, that of him, and by him, and for him all things are.
Wherefore then do we fear our enemies, To. 12.36.
seeing even this, that they are, is by the power and will of him, who is our
head and savior; for as much as they can neither enterprise, nor consult,
neither yet be alive one moment without the will of Christ? And besides this,
seeing their life and being, is for him, and for his service, that they might
be to his members, as fire to purify them, a rod to correct the^, medicines to
heal them, a bridge for them to pass upon over the desert of this world, into
the land of promise, ladders to help them to ascend into heaven, instruments
to glorify them, and as a knife that cutteth the cords by which we are held in
the earth, and hindered to go unto God, and to be where Jesus Christ our head
is? Also, what threatening can the most mighty of the world threaten us with
more horrible, to make us turn from the service of God, than those wherewith
God threatens all those that turn away from him? Mat. 10.28 Luke 12.24
Fear not, says Jesus Christ, those that can kill the body (and yet so, and
when GOD will, and the body, which within a very little after must needs
die) and can do nothing more: but fear him, who after he has killed the
body, has power to throw both soul and body into everlasting hell fire:
him I say unto you, fear indeed. In like manner, what promises can the world
make us greater, or more certain, to draw us unto it, than those which our God
has made us, to keep us in his service, and in his house, promising us
everlasting life? Now, the Church is his house, and this good GOD has called
you (my brethren) thither, and has received you. He has nourished you in it
sometime. He has there given you the seal of your adoption. He has begun to
clothe you with the liuerie of his children, and has fashioned you like to the
image of Jesus Christ. A great part of your way is past. In this your travail
of childhood you have passed many torments. If the greatest torments come, the
happy deliverance approaches. He that shall continue unto the end, Mat. 14.13
shall be saved. They that are revolted, and do revolt, make you to feel in
their unhappiness, how happy you are, to be the children of God elected to
eternal life. 3. To keep our selves from apostacy and dissimulation.
For it is upon this election, and so, upon the good pleasure of God, that
your perseverance does depend. Acknowledge in it both his infinite mercy,
supporting you, and pardoning you daily so many faults and sins, and also
his incomprehensible goodness leading you, as it were by the hand, to the
inioying of eternal life. Abhor you and detest that miserable, yea cursed
and unhappy state of these Apostates, that ye may also hate and detest the
ambition and the pride, the evil conscience, the despising and abuse of the
gifts of GOD, the love of the world and those other vices, which threw them
headlong into ruin. And on the contrary, love, search and follow all that
which God has ordained to nourish godliness, faith, charity, humility in us,
and other gifts and graces which proceed from the election, and are means
ordained by the providence of GOD, to guide us to the happiness promised to
those which shall continue unto the end. Keep your selves hereafter from these
false Nicodemites, who to avoid the cross, will abandon (by a sacrilege
intolerable) their bodies to idolatry, and so consequently to the devil, in
reserving, as they say, their hearts unto God. Will the most careless husband
among them, content himself, if his wife, giving over her body to whoredom,
should say unto him, that she keeps nevertheless her heart unto him? 1. Cor.
6.19
Ye are not your own, says S. Paul, ye are bought with a price: Then
glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which both appertain unto God
Again, 2. Cor. 7.1
Cleanse your selves from all filthiness both of body and spirit, finishing your
sanctification in the fear of God. Persevere constantly in the Church, which
is your mother, 4. To use the holy ministry.
that you may be the heirs of the father. It suffices not to keep your
souls from poison, ye must nourish them, that they may live. Rather than we
will suffer our bodies to die of hunger, we will sell all to get bread: and
we would run through the fire in such a case to save it. At the least, let
us follow those that in the time of famine, forsake their Countries to find
food. The soul is more precious than the body. Ioh. 6.27.
And therefore must we labor more to have the bread abiding unto eternal
life, than for it that perishes. Always think with your selves our souls
must live, and it is to tempt GOD to desire to live without food. Therefore
we must seek food, that we may live.

Now, true it is, that to read and meditate the word of GOD in the house, and
to keep there the family, is a holy exercise, and very profitable for the
noriture of the soul. Col. 3.16 Psa. 1.2. Act. 17.11 Deuteronomy. 6 Psa. 119 Act. 2.42
It is commanded of GOD, and such as are negligent in this duty, show that
they have no care of the life of their souls: yet this does not suffice. We
must confess the name of God, and call upon him in the assembly: We must
hear the sermons, 1. Tim. 3.15
and communicate at the holy Sacraments: we must join and keep our selves
united with the Church, which is the pillar and sure ground of truth, and the
mother of the children of God. This only title of mother given to the Church,
Gal. 4.26
teaches us, that there is no entrance into the life that Iasteth ever, except
we be conceived in the womb of this mother, that she bear us, and bring us
forth, and give us suck of her breasts: finally, except she hold and keep
us under her conduct and government, until (being unclothed of this mortal
flesh) we be made like unto the Angels. Act. 11.26
In ancient time the faithful were called disciples. For the Church is also
called the school of Christians, wherein (according to the infirmity that is
in us) we must be the disciples of Christ all the days of our life. This
Church is also often signified by a Temple: and the holy ministry is
ordained of GOD to build it. Therefore whosoever despises it, 2. Cor. 3.6
cannot be builded in this Temple to be there a living stone. 1. Tim. 3 15 Heb.
3.6 Ephe. 2.19 2. Cor. 3.8
This Church is the house of God: the faithful, his household servants and
children. Therefore whosoever does not enter, and abide in the Church, cannot
call himself the child or household servant of God. The preaching of the
Gospel is the ministry of the holy ghost, of life and of glory: whosoever
refuses to hear it, has not the spirit of Christ, and consequently
pertains not unto him, Romans 8.9
and so abides in death and everlasting shame. See how ye must think in your
selves of the benefit, utility, yea and the necessity of the holy
ministry, to say with David: Psalm. 84.2
O Lord of hosts how amiable are thy tabernacles? My soul desires greatly,
yea and longs after the courts of the Lord. My heart and my flesh rejoice in
the living God. Blessed are they which dwell in thy house, and praise thee
continually. Let the taste and need of this spiritual food cause those that
are now deprived of it, to say with David: Like as the Heart desires the water
brooks, so longs my soul after thee O God: My soul is a thirst for God,
Psalm. 42.1.
yea even for the living God, saying: Alas when shall I come to appear before
the presence of God? When we shall be deprived of our country, wife, husband,
traffic, goods, dignities, and other things pleasant to the flesh: let all
these be nothing to us: but let us say with David, I have asked one thing of
the Lord, which I will still require, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord
all the days of my life, Psalm. 27.
to behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and carefully to visit his temple.
If David, a man excellent in faith and all virtue, a prophet, and as an Angel
amongst men, confesses so roundly, and so often, the need that himself had
to be in the Temple of the Lord, feeling himself as it were ravished with a
most fervent desire of this benefit, what ought we to feel in our selves,
who are yet so ignorant, so weak, so corrupt, in the midst of so many
dangers? Say then from the heart with the same David: Psalm. 26.8.
O Lord I love the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor
dwells: And that good God and almighty father, who has care to nourish our
bodies, yea and provides for the nourishment of the little birds, will without
doubt hear your desire, and will provide for the nourishment of your souls.

Moreover, (accomplishing his promise made by Esaias, Esaias. 44.
of pouring out of waters upon the dry ground) he will make you to grow as
the grass, and as the willowes by the river sides, for the joy and comfort
whereof, one shall say, I am the Lords, another shall call himself by the name
of Jacob, an other shall subscribe with his hand, I am the Lords, and shall
call himself by the name of Israel. 5. To walk in the fear of God.
But understand farther, that the Gospel whereof ye make profession, is a
doctrine not to fly about in the understanding, but to take seat in the heart;
not in the tongue to talk only, but in the life and holy works. Then be ye
doers of the word, and not only hearers deceauing your selves. God has
adopted you for his children, Iam. 1.22
but on this condition, that the image of Christ may shine in you. God has
chosen and called you to be his Temples, and to dwell in you by his holy
spirit: 1. Cor. 6.19 1. Cor. 3.16
Remember ye that the temple of God is holy, and that it is not lawful to
defile it, nor to put holy things to profane uses. God has created you for
his glory, and Christ has redeemed you, that ye might be his: Remember then
that you must be consecrated and dedicated unto God, neither to think, say
nor do any thing but to his glory. Ye are dead to sin, Romans 6.
but living to GOD by Jesus Christ: Apply not then your members to be
instruments of of iniquity to sin, but apply you unto God, as being of
dead, made alive, and your members to be instruments of righteousness to God.
Romans 6.18
Ye are made free from sin by Christ, but it is to be servants to
righteousness. Remember that which S. Paul says, that if ye live according to
the flesh ye shall die: Romans 8.13.
but if by the spirit ye mortefie the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live: they
that are of christ, Gal. 5.24
have crucified the flesh with the concupisce^ces of it. If ye live in the
spirit, walk also in the spirit. Gal. 5.25
As out of fire proceeds inseperablie heat and brightness: in like manner if
ye have received Christ for justification, ye must have him also for
sanctification If ye have hope to see Christ as he is, 1. Cor. 1.30 1. Iho.
3.2 3 Heb. 12.14
purify your selves as he is pure, following peace with all men, and holiness,
without which none shall see God. Remember what the faithful soul says, I
have washed my feet, Can. 5.3
how shall I file them again.

The band between GOD and us is holiness, inasmuch as it appertains to his
glory, that he which is holy, have no acquaintance with iniquity and
uncleanness. 1. Pet. 1.15 2. Cor. 6
Be ye then holy, for I am holy says the Lord. What participation is there,
says Saint Paul, of righteousness with unrighteousness? what fellowship has
light with darkness? what agreement has Christ with Belial, or what part
has the believing with the infidel? or what agreement has the Temple of GOD
with Idols? For ye are the Temple of the living God; wherefore depart from
amongst them, and separate your selves, says the Lord, and touch not any
unclean thing. The end of our regeneration is, that there may appear in our
life, an holy melody and consent between the righteousness of GOD and our
obedience. Ye have understood here before, that the desire of the heart to
consecrate your selves to God, is a mark of your election and adoption. But
see ye that this desire may show it self by the works of godliness and
charity. If you make profession that ye know Christ: Ephe. 4.20
know ye according to the doctrine of S. Paul, that ye have not known him as
ye ought, if ye mortify not the old man, Col. 2.13
and put on the new, walking in righteousness and true holiness. God has
drawn you out of the power of darkness, and has transported you into the
kingdom of his beloved Son. Walk ye then, as the children of light: Renounce
this cursed boudage of Satan: Show that ye are faithful and not traitors to
Jesus Christ: Be ye without reproach and single hearted. The children, I say,
Phil. 2.15
of God unreprovable in the midst of this crooked and perverse nation. Among
whom ye shine as lights in the world, which bear before you the word of
life. Tit. 2.11
Show your selves to feel the wholesome grace of God, which teaches you to
renounce all infidelity and worldly lusts, to live soberly, justly, and
godly. Think in your selves, that the friendship of the world is enmity to
God. And that ye cannot be friends to the world, Iam. 4.4
but that ye must needs be enemies to God. Ephesians. 5.11
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove
them, so as your holy conversation may serve for a reproof and check to such
as walk disorderly. Job. 28.28.
Remember what God said to man, The fear of the Lord is true wisdom, Esaias. 33.6
and to depart from evil is understanding. Let the favor of God be our
treasure: walk, as it were, before him, Genesis 17.1
as he commanded Abraham. Think that ye are not your own, to live for your
selves according to your own wisdom and pleasure, but that ye appertain unto
God, that ye might live unto him, and according to his wisdom and will
revealed unto us in his word. That man has much profited, who knowing that he
is not his own, has taken away from himself, and his own reason all
lordship and dominion, to resign it to God, and to suffer himself quietly to
be guided according to his pleasure. There is no vice more common, more
pernicious, or more hard to cure than the love of our selves: and therefore
there is no lesson more necessary than it, which Jesus Christ taught his
apostles: That to be of the number of his disciples, Mat. 16.14
we must renounce our selves. Renouncing then your selves, hate ye that which
is evil, and cleave unto that which is good, inclined by brotherly charity to
love one another. Procure things that are good, Col. 3.12
not only before God, but also before men. If it be possible, so much as in
you lies, have peace with all men. Be ye as the elect of God, holy and
beloved, clad with the bowels of compassion, of kindness, of humility, of
meeknes, of longsuffering, forbearing one another: and forgiving one another,
if any man have a quarrel with another, eue^ as Christ has forgiven you Love
one another, 1. Ihon 10
as God has loved you. For herein is the difference between the children of
God, and the children of the devil, and wherein ye may be known to be the true
disciples of Christ. Ye are al members of one body, Iho. 13.35.
let there be no division or parts-taking among you, 1. Cor. 12 25
but feel the afflictions of those that weep, to weep with them, and to
comfort them, and rejoice with those that rejoice, to praise God with them. If
ye be the Citizens of the City Jerusalem, and will have a sure dwelling in it,
walk in integrity, Psalm. 15
labor to deal justly, speak the truth from your hearts, keep you from
slandering, covetousness, and all other corruption. Acknowledge in all men the
image of God, whereunto you owe honor and love: and in your brethren
acknowledge the renewing of this image, Gala. 6.10
and the brotherly conjunction in Christ, in doing good to al men, 1. Pet. 4.10
love, honor, and help especially, those that are of the household of faith. Ye
are debtors to your neighbors of all that ye have, 1. Pet. 4.8
or are able to do, to be disposers of it with condition, that ye render to God
an account. Iam. 1.19
Honor the graces of God in your brethren, and cover their infirmities by
charity, be quick to hear, but slow to speak, and slow to wrath. For the
wrath of man works not that which is righteous in the sight of God. Do not
desire, hope, or imagine any other means to prosper by, tha^ by the blessing of
God. And do not look, that he stould advance by the aid of his blessing,
that which he has accursed by his mouth. So go forward in the amendment of
your lives, that this day may pass yesterday. Seal to the purity of the
doctrine, with the holiness of your life, that the ignorant seeing your blameles
conversation, 1. Pet. 2.12
and esteming you by your good works, may glorify God, and embrace the gospel
with you, Luke 7.1.
when it shall please GOD to call them. Have mind of that great curse
pronounced by the high Judge, 2. Cor. 13 11
against such as offend any of the very least. Furthermore, rejoice in the
Lord, endeavor to be perfect, be comforted, be of one consent, live in peace,
Phil. 2.13
and the God of love and peace shall be with you. But as it is God which
works in us both to will, and in work to accomplish according to his good
pleasure. 6. To pray to God.
So above all things employ your selves to pray fervently and continually.
Prayer (says Chrysostom) is the soul of our souls. For it also is the soul
which quickneth all the actions of the children of God. It was the lifting up of
Moses hands to heaven, Exo. 17.11
which strengthened Iosuah and his army, and gave him victory over the
Amalckites. And in deed, without the grace of God, the which we obtain by
prayer, all that we do is but vanity. Faith is the key that opens the
coffers of the treasures of our God. Prayer is the hand to draw it out to
enrich our selves. Prayer lifts up our hearts from earth to heaven; it
renueth the memory of the promises of God to confirm us; it assures us
against all that we can fear, it obtains all that we can desire. It gives
rest and contentment to our souls. It keeps and strengthens the fear to
offend God. It increases the desire to go unto him, whom in praying we feel
to be the spring and heap of all good things. It ingendreth in us a steadfast
despising of the world, and renouncing of the flesh: it represents unto us
the heavenly and everlasting felicity, that we may aspire to the inioying of
them. There is nothing to be more desired, than to be conversant with him,
without whom we can not be happy. But he that will always be with GOD, he must
always either pray or read. For when we pray we talk with God: and when we
read, Aug. in Psalm. 85.
God talks with us. The more we are exercised in prayer to God, the more we
increase in godliness. Therefore also we may not be weary or faint-hearted in
prayer, although the Lord defer to make us feel the fruit of our prayers,
For we have a promise of him that can not lie, that whatsoever we ask of GOD
in the name of Jesus Christ, it shall be given us. If he defer, for some time,
to make us feel the fruit of our prayers, it is for our greater benefit. Let
us continue still and weight, knowing assuredly, that he, who according to his
fatherly love and bounty, desires our good, can (according to his infinite
power) give that which we ask of him, and according to his truth will hear us:
he also according to his wisdo^e knows the fittest time, as is before said,
and the means most apt to make us feel the fruit of our prayers. When we
ask of God (says S. Bernard) even those things that concern this present
life: our prayers are not so soon gone out of our mouth, but they are written
in his book: and we ought (says he) to be assured, that he will either give
the thing it self which we have asked, or other things which he knows to
be more profitable for us. To conclude, Prayer is the most mighty and
fruitful work of charity, seeing by it we help our neighbors present and
absent, known and unknown, great and little, and that both with spiritual
and corporal good things, drawing by our prayers the blessing of God upon
them. And in this confidence my very dear and worshipful Brethren, I will
continue in this duty and office of charity, earnestly to pray to God for
you, and particularly I will water with my prayers to God this Exhortation,
which I have directed unto you, beseeching him with all my heart, that being
comforted and strengthened thereby, in the doctrine of the truth, which ye
have received, ye may continue constantly in it, sealing it by the works of
godliness and charity, comforting your selves in the Lord, in that ye are
his well-beloved Children in Jesus Christ: and surmounting al temptations and
assaults, to the end, that by the power of the holy Ghost departing Conquerors
out of all conflicts, ye may attain at the last, to the crown of glory,
which God has prepared to all his children, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Now the GOD of peace sanctify you throughout,
and preserve your whole spirit, and soul, and body blameless, until the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. He that has called you is faithful, who
also will do it. I also beseech you (my brethren) to employ your seiues more
and more in fervent and continual prayers, for the preservation, prosperity
and advancement of his Church, so mightelie assailed on all sides; and
particularly to be mindful of me in your prayers, that it may please the
Father of light, from whence all good gifts do come, to continue his mercies
toward me, and to guide me always with his holy spirit, with the increase
of his gifts and graces to accomplish the rest of my life, serving faithful
and holilie to his glory, and the advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Amen.

Holy meditations and prayers.

CHAP. 13.
O Lord God almighty, al good and all wise, we are confounded before thy holy
majesty, not (o Lord) for the troubles and extreme calamities wherewith we
are oppressed in these days full of tribulations, anguishes and tears: but
forasmuch as we have offended thee, and for as much as our sins, our
ingratitude, and rebellio^s have kindled thy wrath against us: and chiefly
forasmuch as the wicked and infidels, take occasion by thy just judgments and
corrections to blaspheme thy holy name. Alas Lord, we yield our selves guilty
before thee, confessing that we are inexcusable, and unworthy to be named thy
children: yea, we are worthy to be rejected of thee, we are worthy of hell,
and to be creatures accursed for ever. For (o our good God) when we were the
children of wrath, thine enemies, aba^doned to all evil, thou had pity upon
us poor and abominable sinners. Thou have cast the eyes of thy favor upon
us. Thou have given thy well-beloved Son Jesus Christ to the shameful and
cursed death of the cross for us. Thou have given us thy holy gospel, that
blessed and joyful tidings of our salvation: Thou have accompanied it with thy
spirit to lighten us, to draw us unto thee, to make us partakers of the
treasures of thy Kingdom and of eternal life. Thou have stretched out thy
hand from heaven to the depth of hell, to pull us back, and to make us thy
happy children. Thou have done according to the good pleasure of thy will,
inasmuch as thou show mercy on whom thou will show mercy. Alas Lord,
ought not we to acknowledge the day of thy visitation, and the time of
salvation? Ought not we to feel the abundant riches of thy incomprehe^sible
grace toward us, to love, serve, praise, and adore thee? to renounce our
selves, the world and the flesh, and all that which is contrary to thy glory:
yea to abhor all that does displease thee? to walk as the children of light,
and to consecrate our selves unto thee, to bring forth fruits worthy of thy
Gospel, and becoming the Children of such a Father: to be as bright lights in
this dark world, to give light to the poor ignorant ones, to draw the^ with
us into the way of salvation. But alas, o Lord our God, we (quite contrary)
having brought into thy Church the world and the flesh, have kept in our selves
these enemies of thy glory, these plagues of our souls, and have served them.
Our infidelity and our flesh have made us love the earth more than the heaven,
the world more than thy kingdom, the filthiness and dust of vain riches, more
than the treasures of heavenly and eternal good things, the smoke of humane
honors, more tha^ the glorious estate to be thy children, and brethren of thy
son Jesus Christ. Covetousness the root of all evil, has hardened our hearts
to despise thy poor ones, even Jesus Christ in his members. We have
slaundered thy holy Gospel by frauds, deceipts, and robbings: occupying our
traffic and doing our affairs, as people having no knowledge of thee. The
air in the Cities where thy word has bin preached, has bin stinking and
infected, with the whoredoms, adulteries, and other infamous acts that there
have bin committed. Gluttony and dru^kennes have made brutish those, that for
thy blessings and bounty ought to have praised thee. Every man thinking only
how to profit and advance himself in this world, to the despising of thy holy
service, and the building of thy Church. The profession of thy holy religion
has served many, but for the cloak of their iniquities. We have put out trust
in the arm of flesh, and in broken reeds, seeking comfort for thy Church of
the enemies of it, in forsaking the fountain of living waters, and the
almighty. Crimes, trespasses, blasphemies and iniquities have bin winked at
and supported, in defiling the seat of thy justice, without punishment: thy
threatenings and promises rejected as vanities, the holy Ministry of thy Word
despised, the chastisements which thou have exercised on our brethren
neglected, without thinking what our selves have deserved. We have not felt
sorrow for the afflictions of thy children, to mourn with them, and to fear
thy judgments. And what shall we say more, o Lord? Our iniquities are as
mountains, our ingratitude and rebellions, as the great deep, our whole life,
before thee, being nothing else but a continual sin and despising of thy
holy Majesty. If they who never heard speak of thy son Jesus Christ, and
that have not known thy will, are justly punished in thy wrath; what
judgment, what condemnation, what hells and cursses have we deserved, having
so villainously, so long, so obstinately, despised thy holy instructions, thy
promises, thy threatenings, and the examples of thy judgments, which thou have
exercised before our eyes. Also the voice of our ingratitude is ascended before
thee: our iniquities have, and do cry vengeance against us. These are the
procurers and advocates of thy justice, soliciting these judgments against us.
Our sins have strengthened our enemies, and have made them conquerours over
us. We have sown iniquity, and we have reaped afflictions: as thou see, o
Lord our God, that thy children are banished, spoiled, and impourished, that
they are cruelly dealt withal, trodden under foot, and exposed to the
laughter of thine enemies. Our persecuters make a scorn of those, over who^
thy name is called on, and they make their boast of the evil that they do:
They scatter thy flocks: They throw down the scepter of thy son Jesus
Christ: They deprive thy children of the pasture of thy word. Those temples (O
Lord) those temples where not long since, thy praises did sound, in which thy
holy Gospel was preached, the Sacraments purelie ministered, thy name
religiously called on: These temples, O Lord, are now defiled with Idols and
idolatry, the abominable Mass is established again, false tales and lies are
preached. These temples where thy people assembled in so great number to praise
thee, and to behold thy loving countenance, are now filled with people
blaspheming thy holy name, and treading under their feet the blood and glory
of thy son Jesus Christ. This youth of orphans, fondlings, and others that
went to school, being brought up in the knowledge of thee, and nourished in
thy fear, is now given up to the enemies of thy truth, to be instructed in
the damnable doctrine and service of Antichrist. O good God, our sun is
turned into darkness, the Moon into blood, our health into sickness, our life
into death: And yet, if thou should punish us yet more rigorously, than
hitherto thou have done, and that for one stripe we should receive an hundred.
If thou should transport the kingdom of thy son from us, to the Turks,
and the Jews: If thou should send such a famine of thy word, as running
through the forests to have some refreshing, and finding none, our souls
should faint: Yea Lord, if thou should throw us down into hell: we confess
that it were very right, and yield our selves guilty, acknowledging that we
have well deserved it. Notwithstanding, O good God and father, there is mercy
with thee, yea thy mercies are infinite to swallowe up the multitude and
grieuousnes of our sins. Thou art a God gracious and pitiful, slow unto
wrath, abounding in mercy and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, pardoning
iniquity, transgression and sin. Thou have said that thou will not the death
of a sinner, but rather that he turn and live. Convert us then, O Lord, that
we may be converted, and that we may live before thee. We are poor sinners, we
confess it: but yet thy son Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners. Behold us then, O Lord, not in our selves (for we are unworthy of thy
grace) but behold us in the face of thy son Jesus Christ, and for his sake,
be at tone with us, and be merciful and favorable unto us: that in the
multitude of our sins the greatness of thy grace may shine: if thou regard our
iniquities, who is he that is able to stand before thee? We have been
unfaithful, but thou remainest still faithful. Thou can not renounce thy
mercy and goodness: we haueforsaken thee, but thou have promised not to forsake
us. We have forgotten thee, but thou have said, that though a mother should
forget her child, yet would not thou forget us. Thou have made a covenant
with us, wherein thou have promised to pardon our sins, and to remember our
iniquities no more. Thou have promised, that though our sins were as red as
scarlet, thou would make them as white as wool: if they were as red as
crimson, that they should be made as white as snow. We are heavy laden, and
labor with our iniquities. But Jesus Christ has called us to him, and has
promised to refresh us. Have pity the^ on us, O Lord, have pity upon us. Let
our miseries move the bowels of thy mercy. Forgive us (O our GOD) forgive us
for thine own sake, for the glory of thy name, and for thy son Jesus
Christ's sake: Impute unto us the goodness that is in him, that the evil that is
in us may not be imputed. Thou have pumshed the just, that thou might pardon
the wicked: Accept thou the merits of his death and passion, for satissaction
of all that is in us, worthy of thy wrath and indignation: and make us to
feel the fruits of our reconciliation with thee. If thou will afflict our
bodies, have yet pity of our souls. If thou will impourish us on the earth,
deprive us not yet of the riches of heaven. If thou will take away the bread of
our bodies, yet leave us the spiritual bread of our souls. Though we be in
reproach among our enemies, yet let not thy name be blasphemed. Though we be
accursed of the world, yet let us be blessed of thee. Though the world hate
us, yet let thy love abide upon us. O Lord we are thine, forsake us not. Thou
have said, I am the Eternal, this is my name, I will not give my glory unto
Images, nor my praise unto another. For thine own sake then, even for thine
own sake have mercy upon us. For why shall thy name be blasphemed for our
sakes? Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory and honor,
in showing forth the riches of thy graces, of thy truth, and of thy might.
Thou art the God of glory, sanctify thy name, in drawing light out of our
darkness, and lift out of death, making perfect thy power in our infirmity, and
thy great grace in our unworthiness, to thy praise and glory. Hear the
blasphemies of thine enemies, boasting them selves in their counsels and their
forces, triumphing and rejoicing in our confusion: as if we were not thy
people, thy children, thy Church: as if we were cast off of thee: as if thou
were not able to help or keep us. Nevertheless, thou art our creator, and
we are the work of thy hands: Thou art our shepherd, we are thy flock:
Thou art our father, we are thy children: Thou art our God, we are thine
inheritance: Thou art our redeemer, we are the people whom thou have bought.
It is thou also (O our God) who by thy word alone, have created the heaven and
the earth, the sea and all that is in them: it is by thee that all things live,
be, and have their moving: it is of thee, by thee and for thee, that all things
are. It is thou which dooest whatsoever thou will. And there is neither
counsel, wisdom, nor strength against thee. Repress then, O Lord, the rage
and fury of thine enemies, break their forces, dissipate their counsels,
confound them in the bold enterprises which they have taken in hand against
thee, and thy son lesus Christ. Maintain the rest of thy flock, which thou
have kept until this day. Establish again the Churches that are ruined and
dispersed. Suffer not the memory of thy name to be abolished from the earth:
rather let thy word sound, and thy Gospel be preached, where it has not yet
been heard, to gather thine elect unto thee, and to magnify thy name: And that
so we may see it flourish more and more, and the kingdom of thy son Jesus
Christ our Lord to be advanced for ever more. Amen.

The necessity and benefit of affliction.
GReat trouble and vexation
the righteous shall sustains
By Gods determination,
whilst here they do remain:
Which grievous is and irksome both
for flesh and blood to bear.
Because by nature we are loath
to want our pleasure here;
And eke because our enemy
that auncieat deadly foe
Satan, with cruel tyranny
the worker of our woe,
Does still provoke the wicked sort
in sin which do delight,
To please themselves and make great sport,
to vex us with despite.
Yet do the righteous by the cross
more blessed things obtain,
Than any way can be the loss,
the dolor, or the pain.
The loss is that, which in few days
would pass, fade and decay
Even of it self: the gain always
can no man take away.
All earthly estimation
the cross may clean deface,
But heavenly consolation
the soul does then embrace.
Afflictions worldly pleasures will
abandon out of mind:
Then is the soul more earnest still
the joys of heaven to find.
These worldly riches, goods and wealth,
by troubles may depart:
Then inward joys and saving health
may wholly rule the heart.
In trouble friends do start aside,
as clouds do with the wind:
But Gods assistance does abide
to cheer the troubled mind.
Jfwe should feel these losses all,
at once, by sudden change:
We may not be dismayed withal,
though it seem very strange.
Job lost his friends, he lost his wealth,
and comfort of his wife:
He lost his children and his health,
yea, all but wretched life.
When all was gone, the Lord above
did still with him remain,
With mercy, kindness and with love
asswaging all his pain:
Teaching him by experience,
that all things fickle be
(Which subject are to humane sense)
and yield all misery.
But godliness within the heart
remains ever sure.
In wealth and woe, it is her part,
true comfort to procure.
Affliction turn'th these worldly joys
to greater pain and woe,
Because the love was linck'd with toys:
religion is not so.
For when man's heart does most delight
in pleasure, wealth, and pride:
Religion then will take her flight,
she may not there abide.
Where by our souls in woeful plight
continually remain:
Yet have not we the grace or might
from such lusts to refrain.
In which estate mest willingly
(though tending right to hell)
We count our chief felicity,
and love therein to dwell.
Therefore the Lord which is above,
regarding us below
With mercy, pity, grace and love,
that alwases from him flow,
Does mix with grief these earthly things
wherein we do delight:
Which to our souls all sorrow brings,
or else remoou'th them quite.
Then does the holy word of God
most comfortable seem:
Which we (before we felt the rod)
mere folly did esteem.
The world which erst most pleasant was
now loathsome seem'th to be:
It does appear (as in a glass)
all fraught with misery.
Then fear we hell, then fly we sin,
then seek we heaven the more:
To use good means we then begin,
which we despisde before.
Then can we pray, then can we call
to God for strength and grace:
Which things before might not at all
with us have any place.
Then hear we with attentiuenes,
then read we with all care:
Then pray we with great feruentnes,
no travail then we spare.
Then shall we see, feel and confess
the state wherein we dwelt,
To be nothing but wretchedness:
though worldly joys we felt.
Because the soul by godliness
more comfort does receive
In one day, than by worldliness,
for ever it can have.
Then we with David shall confess,
that God from heaven above
(By humbling us) does well express
his mercy and his love.
For ere we felt the scourging rod,
we er'de and went astray:
But now we keep the law of God,
and wait thereon always.
Then forreligion love the cross,
though it do bring some pain:
The joy is great, small is the loss,
but infinite the gain.
FINIS.

