(...) ^^ne gloves devised for Newyeres gifts to teache young peop^^ (...)
know good from evil whereby they may learn the.x. commandments at their
fyngers ends.x. other good lessons be written within the fyngers, the tree of
Virtues with her branches in the right palm and the Route of vices in the
left, with a declaration of the other pyctures folowinge in meter.
These be handys and glovys to (...) for the p^^y of an lastyng joy and blys
depiction of tree the ^ear: tree leaves faul, (...) to the ground.

The word of god fallyth down and is forgotyn



depiction of plow Frosyn ground

The hard heart of man to ^^^^yve faith



dpeiction of rain Reyne and tempests of malice and falshyd.



depiction of left hand Detestacyon of sin
2 thou shalt not ask to thy self any graue^ Image nor the likeness, for I
the lord thy god am a jealous god and visit the sin^ of the fathers upon the
children etc. 4 Remember that thou keep holy the ^abbath day S^xe days shall
thou labor but the ^eue^th day ^s the saboth of ^he lord etc. 6 Thou shalt do
no murder. Thou shall not steal. 1^ Thou shall not covet the n^yghbours
(...), thou shalt not couette thy neybours wife, nor his servant his maid his
Oie, his ass etc.
Pride is the rote of (...) evil and mischief, and subject to all the vices
in this Palm. Lechery and her fruits. Unstableness, love of the world,
blind thought, love of him self p^esignation, hatred of god, vnconsideration,
wantonness and incontine^ce. Slouthe, idelnesse, vagacion, pusyllanimitie,
erte in the faith, (...)inesse, and omission. Gluttony, folishe rejoicing,
immundicitie, over much speaking, eati^g by leisure, obtuse witty, lickernesse,
and drunkenness. Vaineglory, singularity, discord, inobedience, presumption,
bosting, obstination, and ipocrisye. Ire, wodnes, indignation, clamor,
blasfeming, great courage, noise, and hate Covetousness, theft, disceauing,
forsweri^g, usury, rapine, treason, simony. Envy, detraction, joy of aduersite,
^orow of prosperity, homicide, wickedness, and ill maginacion.
Feyth and beleve in god and the chirch

depiction of the shield of faith Bokeler of feyth:
purpose to amend and no mor to offend and hearty co^trycyon hool co^fessyon^
and du satisfaccyon^.

To change carnal and worlkly love: i^ to spiritual and goostly love To (...)
here to godly honor* and to the (...)cyon^ of sin. To (...)e nothy^g upon
(...)


depiction of needle and thread As th^s nedle and threde does signify, causes
al people to virtue and science them apply.

depiction of right hand desire to do good
The.x. co^mandme^ts. Exo. xx. chap. God ^ayd, I am the lord thy god, which
brought the out (...) the land of Egypt* etc. 3 Thou shall not take the name
of the lord thy god in vain. For the lord will not hold him gyltles that
(...)h his name in vain. 5 Honor thy father and thy mother. That thy days
may be long in the la^d, which the lord thy god gives thee. 7 Thou shall not
commyt adultry 9 Thou sha^t (...) b(...) ag^i^st etc.
Humility and Ient^lnes is the rote of al vertu^s and has all th^se ver^ues
in this Palm attendant upon her Charytie and her fruits. Grace, p^tie, peace,
swetenes, mercy, forgiveness compassion, benignirie, and concord. Faith,
religion, clennesse, obedience, chastity, continence, a(...)tion, and
virginity. Hope, contemplacion, joy, honesty, confession, patience,
compunction, and longa(...)tie Prudence, dread of god, co(...)e, memor^,
intelligence, prou^d^nce, deliberatio^, and reason. Temperance, discretion,
moderalitie, taciturnitie, fasting, soberness, affliction, and dispraising.
Justice, law, strayghtnesse, equiete, correction, obseruaunce, judgment, and
verity. Force, felicit^e, confidence, tolleraunce, rest, stablenesse,
perseueraunce, and magnificence.
Justice doing no harm to owr self or to owr neybur to do all thing oonly for
the love of god and for no vaynglory not to fere i^ger done no^ to leve the
truth. (...) pleasur. willynf to dye gladly for justice in crystys cause. To
(...) (...)ly and to do (...) discretly




WHo loves and would virtues increase
and vices eke to over throw,
Lo hear be gloves that will the teach
all evil in time to lay full low,
Draw nere therefore and bye apace
For newyeres gifts you may them give
To old and young in every place
There is no man will the repreue.
Now this matter to make thee understand,
As man's heart is hard gods truth to receue:
So to frosen ground it is compared
Which in no wise the plowe can reave.
As the sear tree leaves that falls to ground,
The word of god calls us to grace,
If we forgetful be not found
Our wealth shall grow in every place.
But where malice and falsehode still does reign
With us in this clear gospelles light,
There look for storm, temepst, and rain,
As plagues from heaven both day and night.
Fear god therefore and love him eke.
With labor true the Penny win,
And to everlasting joy and bliss,
As before is said, it will the bring.
The.x. Commandments of the lord,
At thy fyngers ends here may thou lere,
Divided from one hand to the other,
As title tells in mind to bear.
The fingers ten yet more does teach,
Ten virtues for to bear in heart,
The which if you keep well in mind,
From all evil ways thou shall reuarte.
More by these gloves thou may well see,
The seame is broke by impacient breath,
That vice to restrain I advise thee,
Each time and hour remember death.
Within the Palms thou may well learn
Virtues to know in thy right hand
And vices in the left to over turn,
If with shield of faith, thou stoutly stand.
Detestation of senne, and desire to do good
As braselettes fine I advise thee hold,
With d^uoute prayer for mercy and grace,
Then hope well thou may be bold.
Throu^he Christ our savior safe to be,
And his just judgment to embrace,
This is the trus;te I have trwely
Within the sterres to have a place.
And ride alofte above the skies
In Quintessence I hope to dwell,
Where joy and solace shall never cease
All world^ly pleasures they do* cell.
God save the Queen. quod. T. T.

Finis.
Imprinted at London by Wylliam Powell


