A Pleasant Conceited History, called The Taming of a Shrew. As it has been
sundry times acted by the right Honorable the Earl of Pembrooke his Servants.

G. STEEVENS.



Printed at London by V. S. for Nicholas Ling, and are to be sold at his shop
in Saint Dunstons Church yard in Fleetstreet. 1607.

G. STEEVENS A pleasant conceited History, called, The Taming of a Shrew.
Enter a Tapster, beating out of his doors Sly drunken. Tapster. YOu whoreson
drunken slave you had best be gone,
And empty your drunken panch somewhere else,
For in this house thou shall not rest to night.

Exit Tapster. Sly Tilly valley, by crisee Tapster I Will fese you anon,
Fills the the other pot, and all is paid for: look you,
I do drink it of mine own instigation,
Omne been. Here I Will lie awhile: why Tapster I say,
Fills a fresh cushen here,
Heigh ho, here is good warm lying.

He falls asleep. Enter a noble man and his men from hunting. Lord Now that
the gloomy shadow of the night,
Longing to view Orions drisling looks,
Leapes from th'antarticke world unto the sky,
And dims the welkin with her pitchie breath,
And darkesome night oreshades the cristall heavens,
Here break we off our hunting for to night.
Couple up the hounds and let us (...)
And bid the huntsman lee them (...)
For they have all deserved it well to day.
But soft, what sleepie fellow is this ^res here?
Or is he dead, see one what he (...)

Serving man. My Lord, it is nothing but a drunken sleep
His head is too heavy for his body,
And he has drunk so much that he can go no further.

Lord. Fie, how the slavish villain stinkes of drink.
Ho, sirrah arise. What so found asleep?
Go take him up, and bear him to my house,
And bear him easily for fear he wake,
And in my fairest chamber make a fire,
And set a sumptuous banquet on the board,
And put my richest garments on his back,
Then set him at the Table in a chair:
When tha^ (...) done, against he shall awake,
Let heaue^^y music play about him still,
Go two of you away, and bear him hence,
And then I Will tell you what I have deuisde,
But see in any case you wake him not.
Exeunt two with Sly. Now take my cloak, and give me one of yours,
All fellows now, and see you take me so:
For we will wait upon this drunken man,
To see his countenance when he does awake,
And find himself clothed in such attire,
With heavenly music sounding in his ears,
And such a banquet set before his eyes,
The fellow sure will think he is in heaven,
But we will about him when he wakes,
And see you call him Lord at every word,
And offer thou him his horse to ride abroad,
And thou his hawks and hounds to hunt the dear*
And I will ask what suits he means to wear,
And what so ere he says see you do not laugh,
But still persuade him that he is a Lord.

Enter one. Mes. And it please your honor your plaiers be come
And do attend your honors pleasure here.

Lord. The fittest time they could have chosen out,
Bid one or two of them come hither straight,
Now will I fit my self accordingly,
For they shall play to him when he awakes.
Enter two of the plaiers with packs at their backs, and a boy. Now sirs, what
store of plays have you?

San. Mary my lord you may have a Tragical,
Or acommoditie, or what you will.

The others A Comedy thou should say, souns thou wilt shame us all. Lord. And
what is the name of your Comedy?

San. Marry my lord it is calde The taming of a Shrew.
It Is a good lesson for us my L. for us that are married men

Lord. The taming of a shrew, that's excellent sure,
Go see that you make you ready straight,
For you must play before a lord to night,
Say you are his men and I your fellow,
He Is something foolish, but what so ere he says,
See that you be not dashed out of countenance.
And sirrah, go you make you ready straight,
And dress your self like some lovely lady,
And when I call, see that you come to me,
For I will say to him thou art his wife,
Dally with him and hug him in thine arms,
And if he desire to got to bed with thee,
Then feign some scuse and say thou will anon.
Be gone I say, and see thou do it well.

Boy. Fear not my Lord, I Will handle him well enough
And make him think I love him mightily.

Ex. boy Lord. Now sirs, go you and make you ready too,
For you must play as soon as he does wake.

San. O brave, sirrah Tom, we must play before
A foolish Lord, come lets go make us ready*
Go get a dishclout to make clean your shoes,
And I Will speak for the properties, My Lord, we must
Have a shoulder of mutton for a property,
And a little vinegre to make our Devil rore.

Lord Very well sirrah, see that they want nothing.

Exeunt Omnes. Enter two with a table and a banquet on it, and two other, with
Sly, asleep in a chair, richly apparelled and the music plaieng. One. So
sirrah, now go call my Lord,
And tell him that all things are ready as he willd it.

Another Set thou some wine upon the board,
And then I Will go fetch my Lord presently.

Exit. Enter the Lord, and his men. Lord How now, what is all things ready?

One Yea my Lord.

Lord Then sound the music and I Will wake him strait,
And see you do as erst I gave in charge.
My Lord, my Lord, he sleeps soundly, my Lord.

Sly Tapster, gives alittle small ale: Heigh ho.

Lord Here Is wine, my Lord, the purest of the grape.

Sly For which Lord?

Lord For your honor, my Lord.

Sly. Who I, am I a Lord? Jesus what fine apparel have I got.

Lord. More richer far your honor has to wear,
And if it please you I will fetch them straight.

Will. And if your honor please to ride abroad,
I Will fetch your lusty steedes more swift of pace
Then winged Pegasus in all his pride,
That ran so swiftly over Persian plains.

Tom. And if your honor please to hunt the dear,
Your hounds stands ready cuppled at the door,
Who in running will oretake the Row,
And make the long breathde Tygre broken winded.

Sly. By the mass I think I am a Lord indeed,
What Is thy name?

Lord. Simon and if it please your honor.

Sly. Sim, that's as much to say Simion or Simon
Put forth thy hand and fill the pot.
Give me thy hand, Sim am I a lord indeed?

Lord. I my gracious Lord, and your lovely lady
Long time has mourned for your absence here.
And now with joy behold where she does come
To gratulate your honors safe return.

Enter the boy in Woman's attire. Sly. Sim. Is this she?

Lord. I my Lord.

Sly. Mass it is a pretty wench, what is her name?

Boy. Oh that my lovely Lord would once vouchsafe
To look on me, and leave these frantike fits,
Or were I now but half so eloquent,
To paint in words what I Will perform in deeds,
I know your honor then would pity me.

Sly. Hark you mistress, will you eat a piece of bread?
Come sit down on my knee, Sim drink to her Sim,
For she and I will go to bed anon.

Lord. May it please you, your honors plaiers be come
To offer your honor a play.

Sly. A play Sim, O brave, be they my plaiers?

Lord. I my Lord.

Sly. Is there not a fool in the play?

Lord. Yes my Lord.

Sly. When will they play Sim?

Lord. Even when it please your honor, they be ready.

Boy My Lord, I Will go bid them begin their play.

Sly. Do, but look that you come again.

Boy. I warrant you my lord, I will not leave you thus.

Exit boy. Sly Come Sim, where be the plaiers? Sim stand by me,
And we will flowt the plaiers out of their coats.

Lord. I Will call them my lord. Ho where are you there?
Sound Trumpets.

Enter two young Gentlemen, and a man, and a boy. Pol. Welcome to Athens my
beloved friend,
To Platoes school and Aristotle's walks,
Welcome from Cestus famous for the love
Of good Leander and his Tragedy,
For whom the Helespont weeps brinish tears,
The greatest grief is I cannot as I would
Give entertainment to my dearest friend.

Aurel. Thanks noble Polidor my second self,
The faithful love which I have found in thee
Has made me leave my fathers princely court,
The Duke of Cestus thrice renowned seat,
To come to Athens thus to find thee out,
Which, since I have so happily attaind,
My fortune now I do account as great
As erst did Caesar when he conquered most,
But tell me noble friend, where shall we lodge,
For I am unacquainted in this place.

Poli. My Lord, if you vouchsafe of scholars fare,
My house, my self, and al is yours to use,
You and your men shall stay and lodge with me.

Aurel. With all my heart, I will requite thy love.
Enter Simon, Alphonsus, and his three daughters. But stay; what dames are
these so bright of hew
Whose eyes are brighter than the lamps of heaven?
Fairer then rocks of pearl and precious stone,
More lovely far then is the morning sun,
When first she opes her oriental gates.

Alfon. Daughters, be gone, and hie you to the church,
And I will hie me down unto the key
To see what merchandise is come ashore.

Ex. Omn^s. Pol. Why how now my Lord, what, in adumpe,
To see these damsels pass away so soon?

Aurel. Trust me my friend I must confess to thee,
I took so much delight in these fair dames
As I do wish they had not gone so soon:
But if thou can, resolve me what they be,
And what old man it was that went with them,
For I do long to see them once again.

Pol. I cannot blame your honor, good my Lord,
For they are both lovely, wise, fair, and young,
And one of them, the youngest of the three
I long have loved (sweet frind) and she loved me,
But never yet we could not find a means
How we might compass our desired joys.

Aurel. Why, is not her father willing to the match?

Pol. Yes trust me, but he has solemnly sworn,
His eldest daughter first shall be espowsde,
Before he grants his youngest leave to love:
And therefore he that means to get their loves*
Must first provide for her, if he will speed,
And he that has her shall be fretted so,
As good be wedded to the devil himself,
For such a skould as she did never live,
And til that she be sped, none else can speed:
Which makes me think, that all my labors lost,
And who soere can get her firm good will,
A large dowry he shall be sure to have,
For her father is a man of mighty wealth,
And an ancient Citizen of the town,
And that was he that went along with them.

Aurel. But he shall keep her still by my advise,
And yet I needs must love his second daughter
The image of honor and nobility,
In whose sweet person is comprisde the sum
Of Natures skill and heavenly majesty.

Pol. I like your choice, and glad you chose not mine,
Then if you like to follow on your love,
We must devise a means to find some one
That will attempt to wed this deuilish skould,
And I do know the man. Come hither boy,
Go your ways sirrah, to Ferandoes house,
Desire him to take the pains to come to me,
For I must speak with him immediately.

Boy. I will sir, and fetch him presently.

Pol. A man I think will fit her humor right,
As blunt in speech as she is sharp in tongue,
And he I think will match her every way,
And yet he is a man of wealth sufficient,
And for his person worth as good as she:
And if he compass her to be his wife,
Then may we freely visit both our loves.

Aurel. O might I see the censer of my loule
Whose sacred beauty has enchanted me,
More fair then was the Grecian Helena
For whose sweet sake so many princes did;
That came with thousand ships to Tenedos.
But when we come unto her fathers house,
Tell him I am a Merchants son of Cestus,
That comes for traffic unto Athens here,
And here sirrah, I will change with you for once,
And now be thou the Duke of Cestus son,
Revel and spend as if thou were my felfe,
For I will court thy love in this disguise.

Val. My Lord, how if the Duke your father should
By some means come to Athens for to see
How you do profit in these public schools,
And find me clothed thus in your attire,
How would he take it then think you my Lord?

Aurel. Tush fear not Valeria, let me alone,
But stay, here comes some other company.

Enter Ferando and his man Sander with a blew coat. Pol. Here comes them an
that I did tell you of.

Feran. Good morrow gentleman to al at once.
How now Polidor, what man still in love?
Ever wooing and can thou never speed?
God send me better luck when I shall woo.

San. I warrant you master and you take my council.

Feran. Why sirrah, are you so cunning?

San Who I twere better for you by sieve ma^e
And you could tell how to do it as well os I.

Pol. I would thy ^^ster once were in the vain,
To try himself how he could woo a wench.

Feran. Faith I am even now a going.

San. I faith sir, my master's going to this geere now

Pol. Whither in faith Ferando? tell me true.

Fera. To bonie Kate, the patientst wench alive,
The Devil himself dares scarce venture to woo her,
Seignior Alfonsos eldest daughter,
And he has promisde me six thousand crowns
If I can win her once to be my wife,
And she and I must woo with skoulding sure,
And I will hold her to it til she be weary,
Or else i will make her yield to grant me love.

Pol. How like you this Aurelius, I think he knew
Our minds before we sent to him,
But tell me, when do ye mean to speak with her?

Feran. Faith presently, do you but stand aside,
And I will make her father bring her hither:
And she, and I, and he, will talk alone.

Pol. With all my heart, come Aurelius,
Let us be gone and leave him here alone.

Feran. Ho Seignior Alfonso, who is within there?

Alfon. Seignior Ferando you are welcome heartily,
You are a stranger sir unto my house,
Hark you sir, look what I did promise you
I Will perform, if you get my daughters love.

Feran. Then when I have talk a word or two with her,
Do you step in and give her hand to me,
And tell her when the marriage day shall be,
For I do know she would be married feign,
And When our nuptial rites be once performde
Let me alone to tame her well enough,
Now ^^ll her forth that I may speak with her.

Enter Kate. Alfon. Ha Kate, Come hither wench and list to me,
Use this gentleman friendly as thou can.

Feran. Twenty good morrows to my lovely Kate.

Kate. You jest I am sure, is she yours already?

Feran. I tell thee Kate I know thou love me well.

Kate. The Devil you do, who told you so?

Feran. My mind sweet Kate does say I am the man,
Must wed, and bed, and marry bonnie Kate.

Kate. Was ever seen so gross an ass as this.

Feran. I, to stand so long and never get a kiss.

Kate. Hands off I say, and get you from this place;
Or I will set my ten commandments in your face.

Feran. I prithy do Kate, they say thou art a shrew.
And I like thee the better, for I would have thee so.

Kate. Let go my hand, for fear it reach your ear.

Feran. No Kate, this hand is mine, and I thy love.

Kate. Y faith sir no, the woodcoke wants his tail.

Feran. But yet his bil will serve, if the other fail,

Alfon. How now Feranda, what, my daughter?

Feran. She Is willing sir, and loves me as her life.

Kate. It Is for your skin then, but not to be your wife.

Alfon. Come hither Kate, and let me give thy hand
To him that I have chosen for thy love,
And thou to morrow shall be wed to him.

Kate. Why father, what do you mean to do with me,
To give me thus unto this brainsicke man,
That in his mood cares not to murder me?
she turns aside and speaks. But yet I will consent and marry him,
(For I me thinks have liu'de too long a maid,)
And match him too, or else his manhood a good.

Alfon. Give me thy hand, Ferando loves thee well,
And will with wealth and ease maintain thy state.
Here Ferando, take her for thy wise.
And sunday next shall be our wedding day.

Feran. Why so, did I not tell thee I should be the man?
Father, I leave my lovely Kate with you,
Provide your selves against our marriage day,
For I must hie me to my country house
In haste, to see provision may be made,
To entertain my Kate when she does come.

Alfon. Do so, come Kate, why do thou look
So sad? be merry wench, thy wedding daie's at hand,
Son, fare you well, and see you keep your promise

Exit Alfonso and Kate. Feran. So, al thus far goes well. Ho Sander.

Enter Sander laughing San. Sander, I faith you are a beast, I cry God heartily
mercy, my hearts ready to run out of my belly with
laughing, I stood behind the door all this while,
And heard what you said to her.

Feran. Why, do thou think that I did not speak well to her?

San. You spoke like an ass to her, i will tell you what,
And I had been there to have wooed her, and had this
Cloak that you have, chud have had her before she
Had gone a foot further, and you talk of Woodcoks for all this.
With her, and I cannot tell you what.

Feran. Well sirrah, and yet thou see I have got her

San. I mary, it was more by hap then any good cunning,
I hope she will make you one of the head men of the parish shortly.

Feran. Well sirrah, leave your ieasting and go to Polidors house,
The young gentleman that was here with me,
And tell him the circumstance of al thou know,
Tell him on sunday next we must be married,
And if he ask thee whither I am gone,
Tell him into the country to my house,
And upon Sunday i will be here again.

Ex. Ferando. San. I warrant you master, fear not me*
For doing of my business.
Now hang him that has not a livery cote
To slash it out and swash it out amongst the prowdest
On them. Why look you now, i will scarce put up
Plain Sander now at any of their hands, for and any
Body have any thing to do with my master, straight
They come crouching upon me, I beseech you good M.
Sander speak a good word for me, and then I am so
Stowt and take it upon me, and stand upon my pantofles
To them out of all cry, why I have a life like a giant
Now, but that my master has such a pestilent mind
To a woman now of late, and I have a pretty wench
To my sister, and I had thought to have preferred my
Master to her, and that would have bin a good
Deal in my way, but that he is sped already.

Enter Polidors boy. Boy. Friend, well met.

San. Souns friend, well met. I hold my life he ^ee^
not my masters livery coat,
Plain friend hop of my thum, know you who we are?

Boy. Trust me sir it is the use where I was borne,
To salute men after this manner, yet notwithstanding
If you be angry with me for calling of you friend,
I am the more sorry for it, hoping the style
Of a Fool will make you amends for all.

San. The slave is sorry for his fault, now we cannot be
angry, well what is the matter that you would do with us?

Boy. Marry sir, I hear you pertain to seignior Ferando.

San. I and thou be not blind thou may ^ee,
Ecce signum, here.

Boy. Shall I entreat you to do me a message to your Master?

San. I, it may be, and you tell us from whence you come.

Boy. Marry sir I serve young Polidor your masters friend

San. Do you serve him, and what is your name?

Boy. My name sirrah? I tell the sirrah is called Catapie.

San. Cake and pie, O my teeth waters to have a piece of thee.

Boy. Why slave, would thou eat me?
San Eat thee, who would not eat Cake and pie?

Boy. Why villain my name is Catapie,
But will thou tell me where thy master is.

San. Nay thou must first tell me where thy master is.
For I have good news for him, I can tell thee.

Boy. Why see where he comes.

Enter Polidor, Aurelius, and Valeria. Pol. Come sweet Aurelius my faithful
friend,
Now will we go to see those lovely dames,
Richer in beauty then the orient pearl,
Whiter than is the Alpine Crystal mould,
And far more lovely than the terrene plant,
That blushing in the air turns to a stone.
What Sander, what news with you?

San. Marry sir my master sends you word
That you must come to his wedding to morrow.

Pol. What, shall he be married then?

San. Faith I, you think he stands as long about it as you do.

Pol. Whither is thy master gone now?

San. Marry he is gone to our house in the Country
To make al things in a readiness against my new
Mistrisse comes thither, but heel come again to morrow.

Pol. This is suddenly dispatched belike:
Well, sirrah boy, take Sander in with you,
And have him to the buttrey presently.

Boy. I will sir: come Saunder.

Exit Sander and the Boy. Aurel. Valeria, as erst we did devise,
Take thou thy lute and go to Alfonsos house,
And say that Polidor sent thee thither.

Pol. I Valeria, for he spoke to me,
To help him to some cunning Musition,
To teach his eldest daughter on the lute,
And thou I know wilt fit his turn so well,
As thou shall get great favor at his hands,
Be gone Valeria, and say I sent thee to him.

Valor. I will sir, and stay your coming at Alfonsos house.

Exit Valeria. Pol. Now sweet Aurelius, by this devise
Shall we have leisure for to court our loves,
For whilst that she is learning on the lute,
Her sisters may take time to steal abroad,
For otherwise she will keep them both within.
And make them work whilst she herself does play.
But come, lets go unto Alfonsos house,
And see how Valeria and Kate agrees
I doubt his music scarce will please his skoller,
But stay, here comes Alfonso.

Enter Alfonso. Alfon. What M. Polidor! you are well met,
I thank you for the man you sent to me,
A good Musition I think he is;
I have set my daughter and him together,
But is this gentleman a friend of yours?

Pol. He is, I pray you sir bid him welcome,
He Is a wealthy Merchants son of Cestus.

Alfon. You Are welcome sir, and if my house afforde
You any thing that may content your mind,
I pray you sir make bold with me.

Aurel. I thank you sir, and if what I have got
By merchandise or travel on the seas,
Sattins, or lawnes, or azure colored silk,
Or precious fiery pointed stones of Indy,
You shall command, both them, my self, and all.

Alfon. Thanks gentle sir, Polidor take him in,
And bid him welcome unto my house,
For thou I think must be my second son;
Ferando, Polidor do thou not know
Must marry Kate, and to morrow is the day.

Pol. Such news I heard, and I came now to know.

Alfon. Polidor it is true, go let me alone,
For I must see against the bridegroom come,
That al things be according to his mind,
And so i will leave you for an hour or two.

Exit. Pol. Come then Aurelius, come in with me,
And we will go sit a while and chat with them,
And after bring them forth to take the air.

Exit. Then Sly speaks. Sli. Sim, when will the fool come again?

Lord. Heel come again my Lord anon.

Sil. Gis some more drink here, souns where is
The Tapster, here Sim, eat some of these things.

Lord. So I do my Lord.

Sly. Here Sim, I drink to thee.

Lord. My Lord here comes the Plaiers again.

Sly. O brave, heers two fine gentlewomen.

Enter Valeria with a Lute and Kate with him. Vale. The senseless trees by
music have bin moved,
And at the sound of pleasant tuned strings,
Have savage beasts hung down their listening heads,
As though they had been cast into a trance.
Then it may be, that she to whom naught can please,
With Musickes sound, in time may be surprisde.
Come lovely Mistress, will you take your lute,
And play the lesson that I taught you last?

Kate It is no matter whether I do, or no,
For trust me, I take no great delight in it.

Val. I would, sweet Mistress, that it lay in me,
To help you to that thing that is your delight.

Kate In you with a pestlence, are you so kind?
Then make a nightcap of your fiddles case,
To warm your head, and hide your filthy face.

Val. If that (sweet Mistress) were your hearts content,
You should command a greater thing than that,
Although it were ten times to my disgrace.

Kate You Are so kind it were pity you should be hanged,
And yet me thinks the fool does look asquint.

Val. Why Mistress, do you mock me?

Kate No, but I mean to move thee.

Val. Well, will you play alittle?

Kate Yea, give me the Lute.

She plays. Val. That stop was false, play it again.

Kate Then mend it thou, thou filthy ass.

Val. What, do you bid me kiss your arse?

Kate How now jacke sauce? you are a jolly mate,
You Are best be still lest I cross your pate,
And make your music fly about your cares*
I Will make it and your coxcombe meet.

She offers to strike him with the Lute. Val. Hold Mistress, sowns will you
break my Lute?

Kate Yea on thy head and if thou speak to me,

There, take it up, and fi^dle somewhere else,
She throws it down. And see you come no more into this place,
Lest that I clap your fiddle on your face.

Exit Kate Val. Sowns, teach her to play on the Lute?
The devil shall teach her first, I am glad she is gone,
For I was never so fraid in all my life,
But that my Lute should fly about mine ears:
My master shall teach her himself for me,
For I Will keep me far enough without her reach,
For he and Polidor sent me before,
To be with her, and teach her on the Lute,
Whilst they did court the other gentle women,
And here me thinks they come together.

Enter Aurelius, Polidor, Emelia, and Philena. Pol: How now Valeria, where is
your Mistress?

Val: At the vengeance, I think, and no where else.

Aurel. Why Valeria, will she not learn apace?

Val: Yes berladie, she haz learned too much already,
And that I had felt, had I not spoke her fair,
But she ^^all never be learnt for me again.

Aurel: Well Valeria go to my chamber,
And bear him company that came to day
From Cestus, where our aged father dwelles.

Exit Valeria. Pol: Come fair Emelia, my lovely love,
Brighter than the burnisht palace of the Sun,
The eie-^ight of the glorious firmament,
In whose bright looks sparkles the radiant fire.
Wily Prometheus slily stole from Jove,
Infusing breath, life, motion, soul^,
To every object stricken by thine eyes.
Oh fair Emelia, I pine for thee,
And, either must enjoy thy love, or die.

Emel: Fie man, I know you will not die for love,
Ah Polider, thou need'st not to complain,
Eternal heaven sooner be dissolved,
And all that pierces Phoebus silver eye,
Before such hap befall to Polidor.

Pol: Thanks fair Emelia for these sweet words:
But what says Philena to her friend?

Phil: Why I am buying merchandise of him.

Aurel: Mistress, you shall not need to buy of me:
For when I crossed the bubbling Canibey,
And sailde along the cristall Hellispont,
I filled my coffers of the wealthy mines,
Where I did cause millions of laboring Moors
To undermine the cauerns of the earth,
To seek for strange and new found precious stones,
And diue into the Sea to gather pearl,
As fair as Juno offered Priams son,
And you shall take your liberal choice of all.

Phil: I thank you sir, and would Philena might
In any courtesy requite you so,
As she with willing heart could well bestow.

Enter Alfonso. Alfon: How now daughters, is Ferando come?

Eme: Not yet father, I wonder he stays so long.

Alfon: And where is your sister that she is not here?

Phil: She is making of her ready, father,
To go to church, and if that he were come.

Pol* I warrant you he will not be long away.

Alfon: Go daughters, get you in, and bid your
Sister provide her self against that we do come,
And see you go to church along with us.
Exit Philena and Emelia. I marvel that Ferando comes not away.

Pol. His Tailor, it may be, has bin too slack
In his apparel which he means to wear:
For no question but some fantastike suits
He is determined to wear to day,
And richly powdered with precious stones,
Spotted with liquide gold, thick set with pearl,
And such he means shall be his wedding suits.

Alfon. I cared not I, what cost he did bestow,
In gold, or silk, so he himself were here,
For I had rather lose a thousand crowns,
Than that he should deceive us here to day:
But soft, I think I see him come.

Enter Ferando basely attired, and a red Cap on his head. Feran. Good morrow
father: Polidor well met,
You wonder, I know, that I have staide so long.

Alfon. Yea mary son, we were almost persuaded,
That we should scarce have had our Bridegroom here:
But say, why art thou thus basely attired?

Feran. Thus richly father you should have said,
For when my wife and I are married once,
She Is such a shrew, if we should once fall out,
She Will pull my costly suits over mine ears,
And therefore am I thus attired a while:
For many things I tell you's in my head,
And none must know thereof, but Kate and I:
For we shall live like Lambs and Lions sure,
Nor Lambs to Lions never were so tame,
If once they be within the Lions paws,
As Kate to me, if we were married once,
And therefore, come, le^^ to church presently.

Pol. Fie Ferando, not thus attired for shame,
Come to my Chamber, and there (...) thy self,
Of twenty suits that I did never wear.

Feran. Tush Polidor, I have as many suits
Fantastike made to fit my humor so,
As any in Athens, and as richly wrought
As was the Massy Robe that late adorned
The stately legate of the Persian King,
And this from them have I made choice to wear.

Alfon. I prithee Ferando let me entreat
Before thou go unto the church with us,
To put some other suit upon thy back.

Feran. Not for the world, if I might gain it so,
And therefore take me thus, or not at al.
Enter Kate. But soft, see where my Kate does come,
I must salute her: how fares my lovely Kate,
What, art thou ready? shall we go to church?

Kate Not I with one so mad, so basely tired,
To marry such a filthy slavish groom,
That as it seems sometimes is from hi^ wits,
Or el^e he would not thus have come to us.

Feran. Tush Kate these words add greater love in me,
And makes me think thee fairer then before:
Sweet Kate, thou louelier then Dianas purple to be,
Whiter then are the snowie Apenis,
Or icie hair that grows on Boreas chin.
Father, I swear by Ibis golden beale,
More fair and Radiant is my bony Kate,
Then silver Zanthus when he does embrace
The ruddie Simies at Id^s feet,
And care not thou, sweet Kate, how I be clad,
Thou shall have garments wrought of Median (...),
Enchac'd with precious jewels fetched from far,
By Italian merchants that with Russian stemes,
Plowes up huge furrows in the (...) Mai^e,
And better far my lovely Kate shall wear:
Then come sweet love, and let us to the church,
For this I swear shall be my wedding suit.

Exeunt omnes Alfon. Come gentlemen go along with us,
For thus, do what we can, he will be wed.

Exit. Enter Polidors Boy and Sander. Boy. Come hither sirrah, boy.

San. Boy, oh disgrace to my person! sounes, boy
Of your face, you have many boys with such
Pickadenaunts I am sure, souns would you
Not have a bloody nose for this?

Boy. Come, come, I did but jest, where is that
Same piece of pie that I gave thee to keep?

San. The pie? I, you have more mind of your belly
Then to go see what your master dooes.

Boy Tush, it is no matter man, I prithee give it me,
I am very hungry I promise thee.

San. Why you may take it, and the devil burst
You with it, one cannot save a bit after supper,
But you are always ready to munch it up.

Boy. Why come man, we shall have good cheer
Anon at the bridehouse, for your maister's gone to
Church to be married already, and there is
Such cheer as passes.

San. O brave, I would I had eat no meat this week,
For I have never a corner left in my belly
To put a venson pastie in, I think I shall burst my self
With eating, for i will so cram me down the tarts
And the marchpanes out of all cry.

Boy. I, but how will thou do now thy maister's
Married, thy mistres is such a devil, as she will make
Thee forget thy eating quickly, she will beat thee so.

San. Let my master alone with her for that, for
Heel make her tame well inongh ere long I warrant thee,
For he is such a churl waxen now of late, that and he be
Never so little angry he thums me out of all cry,
But in my mind sirrah, the youngest is a very
Pretty wench, and if I thought thy master would
Not have her, I Would have a fling at her
My self, i will see soon whether twill be a match
Or no: and it will not, i will set the matter
Hard for my self I warrant thee.

Boy Souns you slave, will you be a Rival with
My master in his love? speak but such
Another word and i will cut off one of thy legs.

San. Oh cruel judgment, nay then sirrah,
My tongue shall talk no more to you, marry my
Timber shall tell the trusty message of his master
Even on the very forehead on thee, thou abusious
Villain, therefore prepare thy self.

Boy. Come hither thou imperfectious slave, in
Regard of thy beggary, hold thee, there is
Two shillings for thee, to pay for the
Healing of thy left leg which I mean
Furiously to invade, or to maime at the least.

San. O supernodical fool! well, i will take your
Two shillings, but i will bar striking at legs.

Boy. Not I, for i will strike any where.

San. Here take your two shillings again,
I Will see thee hanged ere i will fight with thee,
I gat a broken shin the other day,
It Is not whole yet, and therefore i will not fight.
Come, come, why should we fall out?

Boy, Well sirrah, your fair words have something
Alaid my choler: I am content for this once
To put it up, and be friends with thee,
But soft, see where they come al from church,
Belike they be married already.

Enter Ferando and Kate, and Alfonso, and Polidor, and Emilia, and Aurelius,
and Phylema Feran. Father farewell, my Kate and I must home,
Sirrah, go make ready my horse presently.

Alfon. Your horse! what son, I hope you do but jest,
I am sure you will ^o^ go so suddenly.

Kate Let him go or tarry, I am resolved to stay.
And not to travel on my wedding day.

Feran. Tut Kate I tell thee we must needs go home,
Vilaine, have thou sadled my horse?

San. Which horse, your c^^all?

Feran. Souns you flaue, stand you prating here?
Saddle the bay gelding for your mistress.

Kate. Not for me, for I will not go.

San. The Ostler will not let me have him, you owe ten pence
For his meat and 6 pence for stuffing my mistress saddle.

Feran. Here villain, go pay him strait.

San. Shall I give them another pecke of lauender?

Fera. Out slave, and bring them presently to the door.

Alfon. Why son, I hope at least you will dine with us.

San. I pray you master lets stay til dinner be done.

Fera. Souns vilaine, art thou here yet?
Exit Sander Come Kate, our dinner is provided at home.

Kate. But not for me, for here I mean to dine:
I Will have my will in this as well as you,
Though you in madding mood would leave your frinds,
Despite of you i will tarry with them still.

Fera. I Kate so thou shall, but at some other time,
Whenas thy sisters here shall be espousd,
Then thou and I will keep our wedding day,
In better sort then now we can provide,
For here I promise thee before them all,
We will ere long return to them again:
Come Kate, stand not on terms, we will away,
This is my day, to morrow thou shall rule,
And I will do what ever thou commandes.
Gentlemen, farewell, we will take our leaves,
It will be late before that we come home.

Exeunt Ferando and Kate. Pol. Farewell Ferando, since you will be gone.

Alfon. So mad a couple did I never see.

Emel. Thei're even as well matched as I would wish.

Phile: And yet I hardly think that he can tame her:
For when he haz done, she will do what she list.

Aurel: Her manhood then is good I do believe.

Pol: Aurelius, or else I miss my mark:
Her tongue will walk, if she do hold her hands.
I am in doubt ere half a month be past
He Will curse the Priest that married him so soon,
And yet it may be she will be reclaimde,
For she is very patient grown of late.

Alfon. God hold it, that it may continue still,
I would be loath that they should disagree,
But he (I hope) will hold her in a while.

Pol: Within these two days I will ride to him,
And see how lovingly they do agree.

Alfon: Now Aurelius, what say you to this?
What, have you sent to Cestus as you said?
To certify your father of your love,
For I would gladly he would like of it,
And if he be the man you tell to me,
I guess he is a Merchant of great wealth:
And I have seen him often at Athens here,
And for his sake assure thee thou art welcome.

Pol: And so to me whilst Polidor does live.

Aurel: I find it so, right worthy gentlemen,
And of that worth your friendship I esteem,
I leave censure of your several thoughts,
But for requital of your favors past
Rests yet behind, which when occasion serves,
I vow shall be remembered to the full,
And for my fathers coming to this place,
I do exspect within this week at most.

Alfon. Enough Aurelius: but we forget
Our marriage dinner now the Bride is gone,
Come, let us see what there they left behind.

Exeunt omnes Enter Sander with two or three Serving men. San. Come sirs,
provide all things as fast as you can,
For my maister's hard at hand, and my new mistress
And all, and he sent me before to see all things ready.

Tom. Welcome home Sander: sirrah how looks our new mistress, they say she is a
plaguey shrew?


San. Yea and that thou shall find, I can tell thee and if thou do not please
her well: why my master haz such ado with her, as it passes, and he is even
like a mad man.


Will. Why Sander, what does he say?

San. Why I Will tell you what: when they should
Go to church to be married, he puts on an old
Ierkin, and a pair of canuasse breeches down to the
Small of his leg, and a red cap on his head, and he
Looks as thou would burst thy self with laughing
When thou see him: he is even as good as a
Fool for me: and then when they should go to dinner,
He made me saddle the horse, and away he came,
And never tarried for dinner, and therefore you had best
Get supper ready against they come, for
They be hard at hand I am sure by this time.

Tom. Sowns, see where they be already.

Enter Ferando and Kate. Feran. Now welcome Kate. Where Is these villains
Here? what, not supper yet upon the board?
Nor table spread, nor nothing done at all,
Where Is that villain that I sent before?

San. Now, adsum, sir.

Feran. Come hither you villain, I Will cut your nose,
You rogue, help me off with my boots: will it please
You to lay the cloth? Sowns the villain
Hurts my foot: pull easily I say, yet again?
He beats them all. They cover the board, and fetch in the meat. Sowns, burnt
and scorch't, who dressed this meat?

Will. Forsooth John Cook.

He throws down the table and meat, and all, and beats them all. Feran. Go
you villains, bring me such meat?
Out of my sight I say, and bear it hence:
Come Kate, we will have other meat provided,
Is there a fire in my chamber sir?

San. I forsooth.

exeunt Ferando and Kate Manent Seruingmen and eat up all the meat.

Tom. Sownes, I think of my conscience my maister's mad since he was married.

Will. I laft what a box he gave Sander
For pulling off his boots.

Enter Ferando again. San. I hurt his foot for the nonce man.

Feran. Did you so, you damned villain?
He beats them all out again. This humor must I hold me to a while,
To bridle and hold back my head strong wife,
With curbes of hunger, ease, and want of sleep:
Nor sleep, nor meat shall she enjoy to night,
I Will mew her up as men do mew their Hawks,
And make her gently come unto the Lewre,
Were she as stubborn, or as full of strength,
As was the Thracian Horse Alcides tamde,
That king Egeus fed with flesh of men,
Yet would I pull her down, and make her come,
As hungry Hawks do fly unto their Lewre.

exit. Enter Aurelius and Valeria. Aurel: Valeria attend, I have a lovely love,
As bright as is the heaven cristalline,
As fair as is the milk white way of Jove,
As chaste as Phoebe, in her summer sports,
As soft and tender as the azure dowlne,
That circles Cithereas silver Doves.
Her do I mean to make my lovely Bride,
And in her bed to breathe the sweet content,
That I, thou know, long time have aimed at.
Now Valeria, it rests in thee to help
To compass this, that I might gain my love,
Which easily thou may perform at will,
If that the merchant which thou told'st me of,
Will (as he said) go to Alfonsoes house,
And say he is my father, and therewithal
Pass over certain deeds of land to me,
That I thereby may gain my hearts desire,
And he is promised reward of me.

Val: Fear not my Lord, I Will fetch him strait to you,
For he will do any thing that you command,
But tell me, my Lord, is Ferando married then?

Aurel: He is, and Polidor shortly shall be wed,
And he means to tame his wife ere long.

Val. He says so.

Aurel. Faith he is gone unto the taming school.

Val. The taming school! why is there such a place?

Aurel. I: and Ferando is the master of the school.

Val. That Is rare: but what decorum does he use?

Aurel. Faith I know not: but by some odd devise
Or other, but come Valeria I long to see the man,
By whom we must comprise our plotted drift,
That I may tell him what we have to do.

Val. Then come my Lord and I will bring you to him straight.

Aurel. Agreede then, lets go.

Exeunt Enter Sand^r and his mistress. San. Come mistress.

Kate. Sander I prithee help me to some meat,
I am so faint that I can scarcely stand.

San. I marry mistress, but you know my master
Has given me a charge that you must eat nothing,
But that which he himself gives you.

Kate. Why man, thy master needs never know it.

San. You say true indeed. Why look you mistress,
What say you to a piece of bieffe and mustard now?

Kate. Why I say it is excellent meat, can thou help me to some?

San. I, I could help you to some, but that
I doubt the mustard is too chollerick for you.
But what say you to a sheep head and garlic?

Kate. Why any thing, I care not what it be

San. I but the garlic I doubt will make your breath
Stincke, and then my master will course me for letting
You eat it But what say you to a fat Capon?

Kate. That Is meat for a king, sweet Sander help me to some of it.

San. Nay berlady then it is too dear for us, we must
Not meddle with the Kings meat.

Kate. Our villain, do thou mock me,
Take that for thy sawsinesse.

she beats him. San. Sounes are you so light fingred with a murrin,
I Will keep you fasting for it these two days.

Kate. I tell thee villain, i will tear the flesh off
Thy face and eat it, and thou prate to me thus.

San. Here comes my master now, heel course you.
Enter Ferando with a piece of meat upon his. dagger point and Polidor with
him.

Feran. See here Kate, I have provided meat for thee,
Here take it: what, is it not worthy thanks?
Go sirrah, take it away again, you shall be
Thankful for the next you have.

Kate Why I thank you for it.

Feran. Nay now it is not worth a pin, go sirrah and take it hence I say.

San. Yes sir i will carry it hence: Master let her
Have none, for she can fight as Hungry as she is.

Pol. I pray you sir let it stand, for i will eat
Some with her my self.

Feran. Well sirrah, set it down again.

Kate. Nay nay I pray you let him take it hence,
And keep it for your own diet, for i will none,
I Will never be beholding to you for your meat,
I tell thee flatly here unto thy teeth,
Thou shall not keep me nor feed me as thou list,
For I will home again unto my fathers house.

Feran. I, when ya're meek and gentle, but not
Before, I know your stomach is not yet come down.
Therefore, no marvel thou can not eat,
And I will go unto your Fathers house,
Come Polidor let us go in again,
And Kate come in with us, I know ere long,
That thou and I shall lovingly agree.

Exit Omnes. Enter Aurelius, Valeria and Phylotus the Merchant. Aurel. Now
Seignior Phylotus, we will go
Unto Alfonsos house, and be sure you say
As I did tell you, concerning the man
That dwells at Cestus, whose son I said I was,
For you do very much resemble him,
And fear not: you may be bold to speak your mind.

Phylo. I warrant you sir, take you no care,
I Will use my self so cunning in the cause,
As you shall soon enjoy your hearts delight.

Aurel. Thanks sweet Phylotus, then stay you here,
And I will go and fetch him hither strait.
Ho, Seignior Alfonso: a word with you.

Enter Alfonso. Alfonso. Who Is there? what Aurelius what is the matter
That you stand so like a stranger at the door?

Aurel. My father sir is newly come to town,
And I have brought him here to speak with you,
Concerning these matters that I told you of,
And he can certify you of the truth.

Alfon. is this your father? you are welcome sir.

Phylo. Thanks Alfonso, for that's your name I guess,
I understand my son has set his mind
And bent his liking to your daughters love,
And for because he is my only son,
And I would gladly that he should do well,
I tell you sir, I not mislike his choice,
If you agree to give him your consent,
He shall have living to maintain his estate,
Three hundred pounds a year, I will assure
To him and to his heirs, and if they do join,
And knit themselves in holy wedlock band,
A thousand massy ingots of pure gold,
And twice as many bars of silver plate,
I freely give him, and in writing straight
I will confirm what I have said in words.

Alfon. Trust me, I must commend your liberal mind,
And loving care you bear unto your son,
And here I give him freely my consent.
As for my daughter, I think he knows her mind,
And I will enlarge her dowry for your sake,
And solemnise with joy your nuptial rites.
But is this gentleman of Cestus too?

Aurel. He is the Duke of Cestus thrice renowned son,
Who for the love his honor bears to me,
Has thus accompanied me to this place.

Alfon. You were too blame you told me not before,
Pardon me my Lord, for if I had known
Your honor had bin here in place with me,
I would have don my duty to your honor.

Val. Thanks good Alfonso. but I did come to see
When these marriage rites should be performed.
And if in these nuptials you vouchsafe,
To honor thus the prince of Cestus friend,
In celebration of his spousal rites,
He shall remain a lasting friend to you,
What says Aurelius father?

Phylo. I humbly thank your honor, good my Lord,
And ere we part, before your honor here,
Shall articles of such content be drawn,
As twixt our houses and posterities,
Eternally this league of peace shall last
Inuiolate and pure on either part.

Alfonso. With all my heart, and if your honor please
To walk along with us unto my house,
We will confirm these leagues of lasting love.

Val. Come then Aurelius I will go with you.

Ex. Omnes. Enter Ferando and Kate, and Sander. San. Master, the Haberdasher
has brought my
Mistress home her cap here.

Feran Come hither sirrah: what have you there?

Haber. A velvet cap sir, and it please you.

Feran. Who spoke for it? did thou Kate?

Kate What if I did? come hither sirrah, give me
The cap, i will see if it will fit me.

She sets it on her head. Feran. O monstrous: why it becomes thee not,
Let me see it Kate: here sirrah take it hence,
This cap is out of fashion quite.

Kate. The fashion is good enough: belike you
Mean to make a fool of me.

Feran. Why true, he means to make a fool of thee,
To have thee put on such a curtald cap:
Sirrah, be gone with it.

Enter the Tailor with a gown. San. Here is the Tailor too with my mistress
gown.

Feran. Let me see it Tailor: what, with cuts and jags?
Sounes thou vilaine, thou have spoiled the gown.

Tailor Why sir, I made it as your man gave me direction,
You may read the note here

Feran. Come hither sirrah: Tailor read the note.

Tailor. Item a fair round compassd cape.

San. I that's true.

Tailor. And a large truncke sleeue.

San. That Is a lie master, I said two truncke sleeves.

Feran. Well sir, go forward.

Tailor. Item a loose bodied gown,

San. Master if ever I said loose bodies gown,
Sew me in a seame, and beat me to death
With a bottom of brown thread.

Tailor. I made it as the note bade me.

San. I say the note lies in his throat and thou too,
And thou say it.

Tailor Nay, nay, never be so hot sirrah, for I fear you not.

San. Do thou hear Tailor, thou have braued
Many men: brave not me.
Thou Have faced many men.

Tailor. Well sir.

San. Face not me, i will neither be faced nor braued
At thy hands I can tell thee.

Kate Come, come, I like the fashion of it well enough,
Here Is more ado than needs, I Will have it, I,
And if you do not like it, hide your eyes,
I think I shall have nothing by your will.

Feran. Go I say, and take it up for your masters use.

San. Souns villain, not for thy life, touch it not:
Souns, take up my mistress gown to his
Masters use!

Feran: Well sir, what is your conceit of it?

San: I have a deeper conceit in it than you
Think for, take up my mistress gown
To his masters use.

Feran: Tailer, come hither, for this time make it:
Hence again, and I Will content thee for thy pains.

Tailor I thank you sir.

exit Tailer Feran: Come Kate, we now will go see thy fathers house,
Even in these honest mean abiliments,
Our purses shall be rich, our garments plain,
To shroud our bodies from the winter rage,
And that is enough, what should we care for more?
Thy sisters, Kate, to morrow must be wed.
And I have promised them thou should be there,
The morning is well, up, lets haste away,
It will be nine aclocke ere we come there.

Kate Nine aclocke, why it is already past two
In the afternoon by all the clockes in the town.

Feran: I say it is but nine aclocke in the morning.

Kate I say it is two aclocke in the afternoon.

Fera: It shall be nine then ere you go to your fathers:
Come back again, we will not go to day:
Nothing but crossing me still?
I Will have you say as I do ere I go.

exeunt omnes. Enter Polidor, Emelia, Aurelius, and Philema. Pol: Fair Emelia,
summers bright sun Queen,
Brighter of hew than is the burning clime,
Where Phoebus in his bright Equator sits,
Creating gold and precious mineralls,
What would Emelia do if I were forced
To leave fair Athens, and to range the world?

Emel: Should thou assay to scale the fear of Jove,
Mounting the subtle airie regions,
Or be snatched up as erst was Ganimede,
Love should give wings unto my swift desires,
And prune my thoughts that I would follow thee,
Or fall and perish as did Icarus.

Aurel: Sweetly resolved, fair Em^lia,
But would Philema say as much to me,
If I should ask a question now of thee?
What if the Duke of Cestus only son,
Which came with me unto your fathers house,
Should seek to get Philemas love from me,
And make thee Duchess of that stately town,
Would thou not then forsake me for his love?

Phil: Not for great Neptune, no not Jove himself,
Will Philema leave Aurelius love,
Could he enstall me Empress of the world,
Or make me Queen and guidresse of the heaven,
Yet would I not exchange my love for his,
Thy company is poor Phylemaes heaven,
And without thee, heaven were hell to me.

Emel: And should my love, as erst did Hercules,
Attempt the burning vaults of hell,
I would with pitteous looks, and pleasing words,
As once did Orpheus with his harmony,
And rauishing sound of his mellodious Harp,
Entreat grimme Pluto, and of him obtain
That thou might go, and safe return again.

Phil: And should my love as erst Leander did,
Attempt to swim the boiling H^llispont
For Heroes love: no Towers of brass should hold,
But I would follow thee through those raging floods,
With locks dis-sheuered, and my breast all bare,
With bended knees upon Abidaes shore,
I would with smokie sighs and brinish tears,
Importune Neptune and the warry gods,
To send a guard of silver scaled Dolphins,
With sounding Tritons to be our conuoy,
And to transport us safe unto the shore,
Whilst I would hang about thy lovely neck,
Redoubling kiss on kiss upon thy cheeks,
And with our pastime still the swelling waves.

Emel: Should Polidor as Aehilles did,
Only employ himself to follow Arms,
Like to the warlike Amazonian Queen,
Pentheselea Hectors paramour,
Who foild the bloody Pirrhus murderous Greek,
I Will thrust my self amongst the thickest throngs,
And with my utmost force assist my love.

Phyle. Let Eole storm: be mild and quiet thou,
Let Neptune swel, be Aurelius calm and pleased,
I care not, I, betide what may betide,
Let fates and fortune do the worst they can,
I recke them not: they not discord with me,
Whilst that my love and I do well agree.

Aurel. Sweet Phylema bewties mineral,
From whence the sun exhales his glorious shine,
And clad the heaven in thy reflected rays,
And now my liefest love, the time draws nie,
That Himen mounted in his saffron robe,
Must with his torches wait upon thy train,
As Hellens brothers on the horned moon.
Now Juno to thy number shall I add,
The fairest bride that ever merchant had.

Pol. Come fair Emelia, the priest is gone,
And at the church your father and the rest
Do stay to see our marriage rites performed,
And knit in sight of heaven this Gordian knot,
That teeth of fretting Time may never untwist,
Then come fair love and gratulate with me
This days content and sweet solemnity.

Exeunt omnes Sly. Sim, must they be married now?

Lord. I my Lord.

Enter Ferando and Kate and Sander. Sly. Look Sim, the fool is come again
now.

Feran. Sirrah, go fetch our horses forth, and bring
Them to the back gate presently.

San. I will sir I warrant you.

exit Sander. Feran. Come Kate, the moon shines clear to night, me thinks.

Kate. The moon? why husband you are deceived,
It is the sun.

Feran. Yet again, come back again, it shall be
The moon ere we come at your fathers.

Kate. Why i will say as you say, it is the moon.

Feran. Jesus, saves glorious moon.

Kate. Jesus, save the glorious moon.

Feran. I am glad Kate your stomach is come down,
I know it well thou know it is the sun,
But I did try to see if thou would speak,
And cross me now as thou have done before,
And trust me Kate had thou not namde the moon,
We had gone back again as sure as death.
But soft, who is this that's coming here?

Enter the Duke of Cestus alone Duke. Thus al alone from Cestus am I come,
And left my princely court and nobl^ train,
To come to Athens, and in this disguise,
To see what course my son Aurelius takes.
But stay, here is some it may be travels thither,
Good sir can you direct me the way to Athens?
Ferando speaks to the old man, Fair lovely maid, young and affable,
More clear of hew and far more beautiful
Then precious Sardonix or purple rocks,
Of Amithests or glistering Hiasinth,
More amiable far then is the plain,
Where glistering Cepherus in silver boures,
Gaseth upon the Giant Andromede,
Sweet Kate entertain this lovely woman.

Duke I think the man is mad he calls me a woman.

Kate. Fair lovely lady, bright and Christaline,
Bewteous and stately as the eie-traind bird,
As glorious as the morning washed with dew,
Within whose eyes she takes her dawning beams,
And golden summer sleeps upon thy cheeks,
Wrapped up thy radiations in some cloud,
Lest that thy bewty make this stately town
Inhabitable like the burning Zone,
With sweet reflections of thy lovely face.

Duke What is she mad too? or is my shape transformd
That both of them persuade me I am a woman,
But they are mad sure, and therefore i will be gone,
And leave their companies for fear of harm,
And unto Athens haste to seek my son.

Exit Duke. Feran. Why so, Kate, this was friendly done of thee,
And kindly too* why thus must we two live,
One mind, one heart, and one content for both,
This good old man dos think that we are mad,
And glad is he I am sure, that he is gone,
But come sweet Kate, for we will after him,
And now persuade him to his shape again.

Ex. Omnes. Enter Alfonso and Phylotus and Valeria, Polidor, Emelia, Aurdius
and Phylema. Alfon. Come lovely sons, your marriage rites
Performed,
Lets hie us home to see what cheer we have,
I wonder that Ferando and his wife
Come not to see this great solemnity.

Pol. No marvel of Ferando be away,
His wife I think has troubled so his wits,
That he remains at home to keep them warm,
For forward wedlock as the proverb says,
Has brought him to his nightcap long ago.

Phylo. But Polidor, let my son and you take heed,
That Ferando say not ere long as much to you.
And now Alfonso, more to show my love,
If unto Cestus you do send your ships,
My self will fraught them with Arabian silks,
Rich Affricke spices, Arras counter points,
Musk, Cassia, sweet smelling Ambergreece,
Pearl, curtol, Crystal, jet, and iuory,
To gratulate the favors of my son,
And friendly love that you have shown to him.

Vale. And for to honor him and his fair bride.
Enter the Duke of Cestus. I Will yearly send you from your fathers court,
Chests of refind sugar severally,
Ten tun of tunis wine, sucket, sweet drugs,
To celebrate and solemnize this day,
And custom-free, your merchants shall commerce
And interchange the profits of your land,
Sending you gold for brass, silver for lead,
Casses of silk for packes of wol and cloth,
To bind this friendship and confirm this league.

Duke. I am glad sir that you would be so frank
Are you become the Duke of Cestus son,
And revels with my treasure in the town,
Base villain that thus dishonerest me?

Val. Sounes it is the Duke, what shall I do?
Dishonor thee? why know thou what thou say?

Duke. Here Is no villain: he will not know me now,
But what say you? have you forgot me too?

Phylo. Why sir, are you acquainted with my son?

Duke With thy son? no trust me, if he be thine,
I pray you sir, who am I?

Aurel. Pardon me father, humbly on my knees
I do entreat your grace to hear me speak.

Duke. Peace villain, lay hands on th^^,
And send them to prison straight.

Phylotus and Valeria runs away Then Sly speaks. Sly. I say we will have no
^^nding to prison.

Lord My Lord this is but the play, the'yre but in jest.

Sly. I tell thee Sim we will have no sending,
To prison that's flat: why Sim, am not I Don Christo Vari?
Therefore I say, they shall not go to prison.

Lord. No more they shall not, my Lord,
They be run away.

Sly. Are they run away Sim? that's well,
Then gis some more drink, and let them play again.

Lord. Here my Lord.

Sly. drinks and then falls asleep.

Duke. Ah treacherous boy that durst presume,
To wed thy self without thy fathers leave,
I swear by fair Cintheas burning rays,
By Merops head, and by seven mouthed Nile,
Had I but known ere thou had wedded her,
Were in thy breast the worlds immortal soul,
This Angry sword should rip thy hateful chest,
And hewd thee smaller then the Libian sands,
Turn hence thy face, oh cruel impious boy.

Alfon. I did not think you would presume,
To match your daughter with my princely house,
And never make me acquainted with the cause.

Alfo. My Lord, by heavens I swear unto your grace,
I knew none other but Valeria your man,
Had bin the Duke of Cestus noble son,
Nor did my daughter I dare swear for her.

Duke. That damned villain that has deluded me,
Whom I did send for guide unto my son,
Oh that my furious force could cleave the earth,
That I might muster bands of hellish feends,
To rack his heart and tear his impious soul.
The ceaselesse turning of celestial orbs,
Kindles not greater flames in flitting air,
Then passionate anguish of my raging breast.

Aurel. Then let my death sweet father end your grief,
For I it is that thus have wrought your woes,
Then be reuengd on me, for here I swear
That they are innocent of what I did,
Oh had I charge to cut off Hydraes head,
To make the to please Alps a champaine field,
To kill untamed monsters with my sword,
To travel daily in the hottest sun,
And watch in winter when the nights be cold.
I would with gladness undertake them all,
And think the pain but pleasure that I felt,
So that my noble father at my return,
Would but forget and pardon me my offense.

Phyle. Let me entreat your grace upon my knees,
To pardon him and let my death discharge
The heavy wrath your grace has vowed against him.

Pol. And good my Lord, let us entreat your grace
To purge your stomach of this Melancoly,
Taint not your princely mind with grief my Lord,
But pardon and forgive these lovers faults,
That kneeling crave your gracious favor here.

Emel. Great prince of Cestus, let a woman's words
Entreat a pardon in your Lordly breast,
Both for your princely son, and us my Lord.

Duke Aurelius stand up, I pardon thee,
I see that virtue will have enemies,
And fortune will be thwarting honor still.
And you fair virgin too, I am content
To accept you for my daughter since it is don,
And see you princely used in Cestus court.

Phyle. Thanks good my Lord, and I no longer live,
Then I obey and honor you in all.

Alfon Let me give thanks unto your royal grace,
For this great honor done to me and mine,
And if your grace will walk unto my house,
I will in humblest manner I can, show
The eternal service I do owe your grace.

Duke. Thanks good Alfonso: but I came alone,
And not as did beseem the Cestian Duke,
Nor would I have it known within the town,
That I was here, and thus, without my train:
But as I came alone, so will I go,
And leave my son to solemnise his feast,
And ere't be long I Will come again to you,
And do him honor as beseemes the son
Of mighty Ierobel the Cestian Duke,
Til when i will leave you, farewell Aurelius.

Aurel. Not yet my Lord, i will bring you to your ship.

Exeunt Omnes. Sly sleeps. Lord. Who Is within there? come hither sirs, my
Lords
Asleep again, go take him easily up,
And put him in his own apparel again,
And lay him in the place where we did find him,
Just underneath the alehouse side below,
But see you wake him not in any case.

Boy. It shall be done my Lord, come help to bear him hence.

Exit Enter Ferando Aurelius and Polidor and his boy, and Valeria and Sander.
Feran. Come Gentlemen, now that supper's done,
How shall we spend the time til we go to bed?

Aurel. Faith if you will, in trial of our wives
Who will come soonest at their husbands call.

Pol. Nay then Ferando he must needs sit out,
For he may call I think til he be weary,
Before his wife will come before she list.

Feran. It Is well for you that have such gentle wives,
Yet in this trial will I not sit out,
It may be Kate will come as soon as I do send.

Aurel. My wife comes soonest for a hundred pound.

Pol. I take it. I Will lay as much to yours,
That my wife comes as soon as I do send.

Aurel. How now Ferando, you dare not lay belike.

Feran. Why true, I dare not lay indeed:
But how, so little money on so sure a thing,
A hundred pound: why I have laid as much
Upon my Dog, in running at a Dear,
She shall not come so far for such a trifle,
But will you lay five hundred marks with me,
And whose wife soonest comes when he does call,
And shows her self most loving unto him,
Let him enjoy the wager I have laid,
Now what say you? dare you adventure thus?

Pol. I, were it a thousand pounds I durst presume
On my wives love: and I will lay with thee.

Enter Alfonso. Alfon. How now sons, what in conference so hard,
May I without offense, know where about?

Aurel. Faith father a weighty cause, about our wives,
Five hundred marks already we have laid,
And he whose wife does show most love to him,
He must enjoy the wager to himself.

Alfon. Why then Ferando he is sure to lose it,
I promise thee son, thy wife will hardly come,
And therefore I would not wish thee lay so much.

Feran. Tush father, were it ten times more
I durst adventure on my lovely Kate,
But if I lose i will pay, and so shall you.

Aur. Upon mine honor, if I lose I Will pay.

Pol. And so will I upon my faith I vow.

Feran. Then sit we down and let us send for them:

Alf. I promise thee Ferando I am afraid thou will lose.

Aurel. I Will send for my wife first, Valeria,
Go bid your mistress come to me.

Val. I will my Lord.

Exit Valeria. Aurel. Now for my hundred pound,
Would any lay ten hundred more with me
I know I should obtain it by her love.

Fera. I pray God you have not laid too much already.

Aurel. Trust me Ferando I am sure you have,
For you I dare presume have lost it al.
Enter Valeria again. Now sir ha, what says your mistress?

Val. She is something busy but she will come anon.

Feran. Why so, did not I tell you this before,
She was busy and cannot come.

Aur. I pray God your wife send you so good an answer
She may be busy, yet she says she will come.

Fera. Well, well: Polidor, send you for your wife.

Poli. Agreed, Boy desire your mistress to come hither.

Boy. I will sir.

exit Boy Feran. I, so, so, he desires her to come.

Alfon. Polidor, I dare presume for thee,
I think thy wife will not deny to come,
And I do marvel much Aurelius,
That your wife came not when you sent for her.

Enter the Boy again. Pol. Now, where is your mistress?

Boy. She bade me tell you that she will not come,
And you have any business, you must come to her.

Feran. O monstrous intolerable presumption,
Worse then a blasing star, or snow at Midsummer,
Earthquakes, or any thing unseasonable,
She will not come: but he must come to her.

Pol. Well sir, I pray you lets hear what
Answer your wife will make.

Feran. sirrah, command your mistress to come
To me presently.

Exit Sander Aurel. I think my wife for all she did not come,
Will prove most kind, for now I have no fear,
For I am sure Ferandos wife, she will not come.

Feran. The more's the pity, then I must lose.
Enter Kate and Sander But I have won, for see where Kate does come.

Kate Sweet husband did you send for me.

Feran. I did my love, I sent for thee to come,
Come hither Kate, what is that upon thy head?

Kate. Nothing husband but my cap I think.

Feran. Pull it off and tread it under thy feet,
It Is foolish, I will not have thee wear it.
She takes off her cap and treads on it.

Pol. Oh wonderful metamorphosis.

Aurel. This is a wonder, almost past belief.

Feran. This is a token of her true love to (...)
And yet I Will try her further you shall see,
Come hither Kate, where are thy sisters?

Kate. They be sitting in the bridal chamber.

Feran. Fetch them hither, and if they will not come,
Bring them perforce and make them come with thee.

Kate. I will.

Alson. I promise thee Ferando I would have sworn,
Thy wife would never have done so much for thee.

Feran. But you shall see she will do more then this,
For see where she brings her sisters forth by force.

Enter Kate thrusting Phylema and Emelia before her, and makes them come unto
their husbands call. Kate. See husband, I have brought them both.

Feran. It Is well done Kate.

Eme. I sure, and like a loving piece, your worthy
To have great praise for this attempt.

Phyle. I for making a fool of her self and us,

Aurel. Beshrew thee Phylema thou have
Lost me a hundred pound to night,
For I did lay that thou would first have come.

Pol. But thou Emelia have lost me a great deal more.

Eme. You might have kept it better then,
Who bade you lay?

Feran. Now lovely Kate, before their husbands here,
I prithee tell unto these headstrong women,
What dewty wives do owe unto their Husbands.

Kate. Then you that live thus by your pampered wills,
Now list to me, and mark what I shall say,
The Eternal power that with his only breath,
Shall cause this end, and this beginning frame,
Not in time, nor before time, but with time confused,
For all the course of years, of ages, months,
Of seasons temperate, of days and hours,
Are tuned and stopped by measure of his hand,
The first world was, a form without a form,
A heap confused, a mixture al deformed,
A gulf of gulfes, a body bodilesse.
Where all the elements were orderlesse,
Before the great Commander of the world.
The King of kings, the glorious God of heaven,
Who in six days did frame his heavenly work,
And made al things to stand in perfect course,
Then to his image he did make a man
Old Adam, and from his side asleep
A rib was (...), of which the Lord did make
The woe of man so termd by Adam then,
Woman, for that by her (...) sin to us,
And for her sin was Adam doom^ to die.
As Sara to her husband so should we,
Obey them, love them, keep and nourish them,
If they by any means do want our helps,
Laying our hands under their feet to tread,
If that by that we might procure their ease,
And for a president I Will first begin;
And lay my hand under my husbands feet.
She lays her hand under her husbands feet.

Feran. Enough sweet, the wager thou have won,
And they I am sure cannot deny the same.

Alfo. I Ferando, the wager thou have won,
And for to show thee how I am pleased in this,
A hundred pounds I freely give thee more.
Another dowry for another daughter,
For she is not the same she was before.

Feran. Thanks, sweet father, gentlemen, good night,
For Kate and I will leave you for to night,
It Is Kate and I am wed, and you are sped:
And so farewell, for we will to our beds.

Exit Ferando, Kate, and Sander. Alfon. Now Aurelius, what say you to this?

Aurel. Believe me father, I rejoice to see
Ferando and his wife so lovingly agree.

Exeunt Aurelius, and Philema, and Alfonso, and Valeria. Emel. How now Polidor?
in a dumpe? what say thou man?

Phi. I say thou art a shrew.

Emel: That Is better than a sheep.

Pol. Well, since it is done, come, lets go.

Exeunt Polidor and Emelia* Then enter two bearing of She in his own apparel
again, and leaves him where they found him, and then goes out: then enters the
Tapster. Tapster Now that the darkesome night is ouerpast,
And dawning day appears in cristall sky,
Now must I haste abroad: but soft, who is this?
What Sly, O wondrous! has he lain here all night?
I Will wake him, I think he is starued by this,
But that his belly was so stufft with ale:
What now Sly, awake for shame.

Sly Sim, gives some more wine, what all the Players gone? am not I a Lord?


Tapster A Lord with a murrin: come, art thou drunken still?


Sly Who Is this? Tapster, O Lord sirrah, I have had the brauest dream to
night, that ever thou heardest in all thy life.


Tapster Yea mary, but you had best get you home, For your wife will course you
for dreaming here to night.


Sly. Will she? I know now how to tame a shrew,
I dreamt upon it all this night till now,
And thou have wakt me out of the best dream
That ever I had in my life: but I Will to my wife presently, and tame her too if
she anger me.

Tapster Nay tarry Sly, for I Will go home with thee,
And hear the rest that thou have dreamt to night.

Exeunt omnes. G. STEEVENS.

FINIS.

