A very necessary and profitable Book concerning Navigations, compiled in
Latin by Ioannes Taisnierus, a public professor in Rome, Ferraria, and other
Universities in Italy of the Mathematicalles, named a treatise of continual
Motions.

Translated into English, by Richard Eden.

The contents of this book you shall find on the next page following.

Imprinted at London by Richard Judge.

Cum priuilegio.

publisher's device (?) OMNIA DESVPER R. I.


The Table.
1 OF the marvelous nature and virtue of the Lode stone, called in Latin
Magnes, where they be found, and how to know the best. 2 Of continual motion
by the said stone, Magnes. 3 Of the due proportion of whatsoever Ship, and the
disclosyng of certain Mathematical secrets. 4 Of ebbyng and flowyng, with
their diversities, and the causes thereof. 5 Demonstrations of proportion of
motions local, confutyng the opinion of Aristotle therein.
To the right woorshipfull Sir Wylliam Winter, Knight, Master of the
Ordinance of the Queens Majesty's Ships, and Surueyor of the said Ships.
Richard Eden wysheth health and prosperity.
IT is now about twelve years paste (gentle Master Winter) since the
courtesy and favor which long before I found at your hand, moved me no
less for the good will that I have ever borne you and your virtues, to
excogitate or devise somethyng, within the compass of my poor ability, that
might be a witness, and as it were a seal, to testify both that I have not
forgotten your gentleness, and also how desirous I am to pay the debtes of
freendshyp which then I promised you, and also attempted to perform: But
being at that time prevented, by means of my sudden departing out of
England, with my good Lord the Vidame, with whom I remained for the space of
ten years, until the calamities of that miserable country, with loss of
goods, and danger of life, has driven me home again into my native country:
Where fyndyng my self at some leisure, and desirous to pass forth part of
my time in some honest exercise, which might be profitable to many, domagable
to none, and a means to geat me new friends, the old in my so long absence,
in manner utterly wasted: I chanced in the mean time, to meet with my old
acquayntance and friend, Richard Judge, Printer to the Queens Majesty, who
had many years before, printed the Book of Matten Curtes, of the Art of
Navigations, by me translated out of the Spanyshe tongue. Whereof, having with
him some conference, he declared that he would prynt that book again, if I
would take the pains to devise some addition touching the same matter, that
might be joined thereto. At which time, having with me in the Latin tongue,
these books here following printed, which I brought with me out of France, I
soon agreed to his honest request, to translate them into English: Which
being accomplyshed, this only remained, according to the common custom, to
consecrate and dedicate the same to some worthy personage, whose fame,
auchoritie, and dignity, might defend them from the evil tongues of such as
are more ready rather to reprove other men's doings, then to do any good
them selves. And therefore (gentle Master Winter) knowing your authority and
fame in well deseruyng, and honorable service unto your Prince and Country, to
be such as all men think so well of, and so greatly esteem, to whom (rather
then unto you) may I dedicate this book of Navigations? In consyderation
whereof, and the hope that I have in your approved courtesy, favorably to
accept this dedication, as proceeyng from one that desires nothing more then
to do you service, and remain in your grace, I shall think my travail well
bestowed, and sufficiently recompensed, if it shall please you to accept the
same as thankfully, as I wyllyngly offer it unto you. For if there be any thing
in me, wherein I may by good reason please my self, it is cheefely this, that
I have ever loved and honored men of singular virtue or quality, in what so
ever laudable Art or Science, even of those whereof I me self have little
knowledge, as are Geometry, Astronomy, Architecture, Music, Payntyng,
feats of Arms, inventions of Ingens, and such like: Of the which, this our
age may seem not only to contend with the Auncientes, but also in many
goodly inventions of Art and wit, far to exceed them. For (not to speak
against all the marvelous inventions of our time) what of theirs is to be
compared to the Arts of Printyng, making of Gunnes, Fire works, of sundry
kinds of artificial Fyres, of such marvelous force, that mountains of most
hard rocks and stones, are not able to resyst their violence, but art by them
broken in pieces, and thrown into the air with such violence, that neither
the spirit of Demogorgon, or the thunderboltes of infernal Pluto can do the
like. What should I here speak of the wonderful inventions of Fartalio, in
his book De Art maiori? or of many other, whereof Vannucius Beringocius
writes in his book, entitled Pytotechnia. As touching which terrible
inventions, and the like, although some men be of opinion that they were
invented by the instigation of the devil, for the destruction of mankind: yet
other weyghyng the matter more indifferently, think that the invention of
Gunnes has been the saving of many men's lives, because before the use of them,
men were not wont so long time to lie batteryng in the besiegyng of Towns or
Fortresses, but in short space to come to hand strokes, and to soughten
feeldes, to the great slaughter of great multitudes. And seeing that now our
enemies the Turks, and other Infidels, have the use of these deuylyshe
inventions (as they name them) it may be thought requisite for us, against
such deuylles to use also the like deuylyshe inventions, lest refusyng the
same, and geuyng place to evil, we should wyllyngly suffer the kingdom of the
devil to triumph over us, not otherwise able to resyst, and much less to
overcome so puissant and horrible enemies (except beside al hope) might arise
in our defense some new Moses, or Elias, or the Priests of Jericho, which
only with the noise and sound of Horns or Trumpettes ouerthrewe the walls
of the town. Neither will the example of David and Goliath, or of Samson and
the Philistines, serve our turn at this time, although I believe that the arm
of the Lord is not weakened, if there lacked not a Moses with his rod, and
worthy Assystentes, which might help to hold up his weerye arm. But to
return to speak of ingens, and ingenious inventions, which invented and used
to the glory of God, and defense of his people, against the fury and tyranny
of Infidelles, they may as woorthyly be called the gifts of God, as were the
inventions and Art of them that builded either the Temple of Jerusalem, or the
Ark of God: And yet is it there written of those Artificers, that God gave
them the spirit of knowledge and cunnyng in such Arts. And therefore I
think it may also be said without offense, Exodus xxxv. Bezaleel and Ahaliab.
that the knowledge of Archimedes, and other men in such commendable
inventions, are the gifts of God, for as much as the gifts of God are free,
and not bound to any nation or person. And if it may be granted that the
spirits of men, or the spirit of God in men, may be divided (as was the
spirit of Moses to twelve other) or otherwise that the spirits of dead men
may revive in other (after the opinion and transanimation of Pythagoras) we may
think that the soul of Archimedes was revived in Besson, that excellent
Geometer of our time, whom I knew in France the Master of the engines to the
French king, Charles the nienth, under whom that lamentable slaughter at Paris
was committed, in the which were slain so many noble men. Which cruelty the
said Besson abhorryng, fled hither into England, and here dyed, in the year.
1573. and left in witness of his excellency in that Art, a book in prynt,
conteynyng the fourmes and portractes of syxtie engines of marvelous strange
and profitable device, for diverse commodious and necessary uses. Of the which,
for as much as three of them, that is to mean, the.54. 57. and 60. be engines
cheefely parteynyng unto Ships, it shall not be from my purpose here to make
a brief rehearsal of them. The.54. therefore (as he writes) is an engine not
unlike unto that which in ancient time Archimedes invented for the
Syracusians, wherewith a man with the strength of only one hand, by help of
the instrument called Trispaston (which in our tongue some call an endless
Serve, brought a Ship of marvelous greatness from the land into the sea, in
the sight of king Hieron, and an infinite multitude, which with all their
force could not do the same. etc. Of the which also, our country man, Roger
Bacon, Of this instrument, read the Cosmolabe of Besson.
a great Philosopher (and no Nicromancer, as that ignorant age slaundered him)
seemed to have had some knowledge: For in his book of the marvelous power of
Art and Nature, he makes mention of an Instrument (as far as I remember) no
bygger than a man's hand, wherewith one man might draw to him the strength of
three hundred men. And I well remember, that at my being in France, I heard
credible report, that the Earl of Rocum^^^fe, an Almaine, made an engine,
wherewith the said king Charles when he was but.xvi. years of age, lyfted
from the ground a weight, which the strongest man in the court was not able
to remove. Almost the like device we see in the bendyng of a Crossebowe. Also
at my being in Germany in the city of Strosburge, a worthy and learned
Gentleman, Monsieur de Saleno, told me that in that city one had invented an
engine of iron, no bygger then a man's hand, whereunto fastenyng a rope, with a
hook of iron, and castyng the hook upon a wall, tree, or other place, where it
might take hold, he could with that engine lift him self up to the wall, or
other place. But to return to the other two engines of Besson, parteynyng to
our purpose. Therefore the.60. figure (as he there writes) is the invention of
an engine, scarsely credible, wherewith by balance and easy motion, beyond the
order of nature, a Ship may be so framed and governed, that in the calm sea it
shall move forewarde, and in little wind hasten the course, and in too much
wind temper and moderate the same: A thing worth the knowledge to a king, as
he says. Of the third engine, which is the.57. figure of his book, he writes
thus, An Artifice not yet diuulgate or set forth, which placed in the pomp of
a Ship, whyther the water has recourse, and moved by the motion of the Ship,
with wheels and weyghtes, does exactly show what space the Ship has gone.
etc. By which description, some do understand that the knowledge of the
longitude might so be found, a thing doubtless greatly to be desired, and
hitherto not certaynely known, although Sebastian Cabot on his death bed told
me that he has the knowledge thereof by divine revelation, yet so, that he
might not teach any man. But I think that the good old man, in that extreme
age, somewhat doted, and had not yet even in the article of death, utterly
shaken of all worldly vain glory. As touching which knowledge of the
longitude, to speak a little more b^ occasion now given, it shall not be from
the purpose, to rehearse the saying of that excellent learned man, Johannes
Feruclius, in his incomparable book De ab^^s rerum causis, where in the
Preface to king Henry of France, he writes in this manner. We have put our
helpyng hand to the Art of Navigations and Geographie: forby observation of the
hours of the Equinoctialles, we have invented how, in what so ever region or
place of the world a man shall be, he may know in what longitude it is: which
certainly we have not taken of the fountaynes of the ancientes, but first, of
all other (as I think) have drawn it of ou^ ryuers, as our own invention.
etc. So that (says be) which way so ever you turn your eyes, you may see
that the posterity has not ryotously wasted the inheritance of Arts and
sciences, left them by their predecessors, but have greatly increased the same,
and invented other: For certaynely, the multitude of things incomprehensible,
is infinite, and so therefore inventions must needs also be infinite, and
without end. And therefore, as touching this thing (says he) to speak freely
what I think, they seem to me to offend as much, which contend that the
auncientes have invented and comprehended al things, as do they which
attribute not unto them the first inventions, so depryuyng them of their right
possession. For whereas now by the benefit of almyghtie God (who has given
us his Christ, and with him all good things) the light of truth shyneth in
our understanding by godly inspiration, there is no just cause why we should
in such things think us inferior to the auncientes. Of which Argument, who
lysteth may read more in the said Epistle of Pernelius. An instrument in
motion agreeyng with the motion of heaven. Anno Dom. 1584.
And for as much as I have made mention of such inventions, it shall not be from
the purpose, to describe the goodly instrument whereof Angelus Policianus in the
fourth book of Epistles to Franciscus Casa, writes in this manner, I have
received your Epistle, wherein you signify unto me, that you have heard of
the strange engine or instrument Antomaton invented, and made of late by one
Laurence a Florentine: in the which is expressed the course and motions of the
Planettes, comformable and agreeyng with the motions of heaven: And that (for
as much as the report thereof is hardly believed) you greatly desire that I
should write unto you, what certain knowledge I have of that thing, wherein I
am ready to obey your request. And although now it be long since I saw it,
yet as far as I bear in memory, I will breefely declare the form, reason,
and use thereof. And if the description of it shall seem unto you somewha^
obscure, you shall not ascribe it altogether to my declaration, but partly to
the subtlety and nouiltie of the thing. It is in form of a square pyller,
sharp toward the top, in manner of a P^rami^, of the height of almost three
cubits: over or above it, in manner of a cover, is a flat or plain round
plate of gylted copper, garnyshed with sundry colors, on whose other part is
expressed the whole course of the Planets, and whose dimention or measure is
somewhat shorter then a cubite, and is within turned or moved with certain
little denticle wheels, an immouable circle comprehendyng the highest border or
margent, and divided with the spaces of xxiiii. hours within it, in the
highest turnyng rundel, the twelve signs are discerned by three degrees.
Further, within are seen eight runde is, in manner all of one greatness. Of
these, two obtain the myddle point, the one fastened in the other, so that the
lowest being somewhat bygger, represents the Sun, and the higher the Moon.
From the Sun a beam coming to the circle, shows in it the hours: and in
the Zodiac, the months, days, and number of degrees, and also the true and
half motion of the Sun. From the Moon also proceeds a p^^ne, or wyre,
which beneathe or downwarde in the border or margent of the greatest rundell,
shows the hours: and passing by the center of the Epicicle of the Moon, and
extendyng to the Zodiac, shows the half motion of his Planet. Another also
rysyng from thence, and cuttyng the border of the center of the Moon (that is
of the Epicicle) shows her true place, whereby art seen the slownesse,
swyftnesse, al motions and courses, conjunctions also, and full Moons. About
these are six other rundels: of the which, one, whom they call the head and
tail of the Dragon, shows the Eclipses both of the Sun and Moon. The
other are attributed to the Planets: from every of which, proceed two
pay^^es, assigning the motions (as we have said) of the Moon: but they also
go backwarde, which chances not in the Moon, whose Eclipse is moved
contrarywyse. And thus the reason of conjunctions, departynges, and latitudes,
is manifest in all. There is also an other border like unto a Zodiac, cutting
or diuidyng upward or above, those syx little rundels (whereof we have spoken)
being the rundels of the Planettes: whereby appears the degrees of the East
signs, and the spaces of the days (that is to say) at what hour the Sun
rises, by the which, every of the Planettes are carried in their rundels or
circles by course, in the day time to the East, and in the night to the West.
Again contrarywyse, the greatest rundel of al, draws with it all the
Planettes, in the night to the East, and in the day to the West, in the space
of.24. hours. At which, to agree with the motions of heaven, both reason and
experience do confyrme: And therefore ought ye not to marueyle, if these
things seem incredible to many. For (as says the wise Prouerve) faith is
slowlye given to great things, for even we scarsely believe our own eyes,
when we see such things. And therefore, whereas in time past I read, that
such a like instrument was made by Archimedes, my faith yet failed me to give
credit to so great an Aucthour, which thing nevertheless this our Florentine
has performed. The work doubtless being of such excellence, that all praise
is inferior to it, and can not therefore for the wo^^thyn^sse thereof be
otherwise praised, then to say that it passes all praise. The Artificer him
self also being a man of such integrity of manners, that the sun is nothing
inferior to the excellency of his wit: in so much that he may seem a man sent
from heaven, where be learned the making of this heaven, by the example of the
other. Hitherto Policianus. Of the like instrument, Roger Bacon also makes
mention in his said book, of the marvelous power of Art and nature,
affyrmynge the same to be worth a kingdom to a wise man. But for as much as
the subject which I have now in hand, is cheefely touching inventions
parteinyng to Ships, and the Art of Navigations, I think good to speak
somewhat of the invention of a certain Italian writer, named Leonardo
F^o^ananti, who in his book, entitled, Lib. 3. Ca. 18
Specchio discientia universal, does greatly glory in the invention of
Ships, which can not peryshe either on the sea, or the land, The invention
of a Ship which can not be drowned.
affyrmyng that the like was never invented since the creation of the world.
But I fear me, lest vain glory of discoursyng in the Italian tongue, has
caused him more then needs, to commend his own invention, as for the most
part is the manner of the Italian writers. Therefore committing the judgment
hereof to men of greater experience and knowledge in these things, I will only
translate his words, whereby in the book before named, he describes the
said Ship in this manner. Take beams of Fyrre, or Pyne tree, which of their
own nature can never go down, or syncke, or abide under the water, and with
these beams frame an e^^^ne ( Machina, if I may so call it) of the length of
three score four, and of the breadth of twenty foot, and of the heyght of
six foot, laying the first rank in length, and the other trauerse, or
ouerthwarte, and the third again in length, fas^^onyng the sore part like
unto other Ships, and in like manner, bryngyng the poupe or hinder part to
good form: then with such irons as ^pparteyne, bind it, and strengthen it
in such manner that it can not break. And upon this frame or fundation build
your Ship, of such fashion as you think best. etc. It were here too long to
rehearse with what proud words and ostentation he magnifieth this invention.
But whether this frame or engine should be bylden upon the keele or bottom of
the Ship, or otherwise, I commit it to them of better judgment, as I have
said. But whereas it may for this time suffice to have written thus much of
these things, I will make an end with only a br^^te rehearsal of the
invention and increase of the Art of Navigations.

After that the Art of Navigations was found, every man began to challenge unto
him the dominion of the sea, and there to dwell and keep war even as on the
land.

Minos (as writes Strabo) was the first that ruled on the sea, which
nevertheless, other ascribe to Neptunus, who first found the Art of
Navigations, and was therefore (as writes Diodorus) appointed by Saturnus to be
Admiral of the first Navy: and thereby the posterity afterward ascribed to
him the governance of the sea, and named him the God thereof. After whom the
Cretenses ever were esteemed most expert in the Art of Navigations. But (as
writes Pliuie) boats were first invented, and with them was the first
saylyng in the Islands of the red sea, under king Erythra, as also witnesses
Quintilian, saying, If none had proceeded further then the inventions of our
predecessors, we had had nothing in the Poets above Andronicus, and nothing in
histories above the Annals or Cronicles of Bishops, and had yet have sailed
in troughes or in boats. Other have ascribed this invention to diverse other
nations and persons, as to the Trojans and Mysians in Hellesponto, and also
that the ancient Britanes made boats of leather or hydes, and sailed with them
in the Ocean sea. Pliny writes, that Danaus was the first that brought a
Ship out of Greece into Egypt. Some also give the same to Minerua. But most
ryghtfully, the invention both of the Ship, and Art of Navigations, is ascribed
to Noe, who (as writes Eusebius) was long before Neptune or Danaus. For
doubtelesse (says he) the Ark of Noah was none other then a Ship, and the
first and only exemplar of the buyldyng of all other Ships or vessels of
saylyng. Also the most ancient writer Berosus the Chaldean (as writes
Josephus) calls the Ark of Noah, a Ship. The same Josephus also says, that
the Nephues of Noe, departing to inhabit diverse parts of the world, used
many Ships. etc. Long after Noe, the Tyrians were counted most expert in the
Art of Navigations: and after them, diverse other nations. For whereas no Art is
so perfect, but may receive increase, hereof does it follow, that this Art also
has been greatly augmented, and brought to further perfection by witty
inventions of the posterity, even unto our age: whereof, who so lysteth to
know further more particulerly who invented all other parts and instruments
parteynyng to al sorts of Ships, and Art of Navigations, may read ye third
book of Polidor Virgil, Cap. xv, De Inuentorib. Rer. and Bayfius, de re nauali.

Thus gentle Master Winter, beseechyng your woorshyp to take in good part this
testimony of my thankful heart (such as it is) I beseech the immortal God
to prosper all your dooinges to his honor, and the benefit of your Country.

To the right Reverend father in Christ, and honorable Prince, Lord John
Gebhard, of the Earls of Mansfelt. etc. Archbishop of Colen, Prince elector,
duke of Angaria and Westphalia, high Chaunceler of the Romayne Empire. etc.
THE thing which to this day in manner from the beginning of the world, great
Philosophers with perpetual study and great labor, have endeavored to bring
to effect, and desired end (most gracious Prince) has nevertheless hitherto
remained either unknown, or hid, not without great damage and hynderance of
most expert Mathematicians and Architecteurs, and al other men of like
practical faculties: And if any there have been which have attained to the
experience of this continual motion, I suppose the same to have been vexed and
noted, A perpetual or continual motion.
with the va^ne glory of the incomparable paynter and grauer, Michael Angelo,
Michael Angelo.
who even at the extreme rendryng of the spirit of life, did not vouchsafe to
disclose unto his own son the secrets of his art, esteeming it greatly to
the reputation of his fame and glory, by this ingrate hydyng of his science,
falsely to obtain a perpetual memory with such as should succeed him: Or
else truly he doubted (as is commonly seen in all manner of doctrine and
science) that there should still rise up certain malicious and envious
quarrelers, and troublous wits, instigate by an evil spirit, to deface and
suppress truth with slanderous tongues, especially against arts
Mathematikes (of which kind, are Grauyng, Payntyng, and such like) which in all ages have ever been subject to this inconvenience of ignorant detractours,
except they be defended by the protection and title of favorable princes. And
whereas such sciences unto the ignorant seem ridiculus and suspicious,
nevertheless in the frame and experience of this continual motion, ought no
suspicion to be bad. And forasmuch as the same is very necessary and
profitable for the common wealth, I was the bolder through confidence in your
hyghnes clemency under the grace and title of the same, to put forth this
little book of continual motion. The which how great profit and exercise it
may bring to excellent men of what so ever faculty, experience it self shall
easily declare. Most humbly desiring your highness, graciously to accept this
ray travail with such as are consecrate to the Muses, and employ their labors
to the profit of mankind.

Your highness most humble servant and Orator, John Taisnier Hannonius*

Of the nature and effects of the Lode stone, called in Latin Magues.
IT is a common proverb that in stones, woods, and herbs, consysteth great
virtue: which saying is doubtless most manifest by the daily experience of
this stone, being found in sundry places of India, it is said also that it
was found in Spain by one named Heracleon (as witnesses Nicander) while in
keepyng of cattle, Five kinds of Lode stones.
the iron nails of his shows and pyke of his staff, cleft fast to the stone.
Of the which Magnes, are five kinds as Sotacus writes. That is to wit: one of
Ethiopia. An other of Macedonia. The third is found in Echio of Beotia. The
fourth about Troades of Alexandria. Lode stone male and female.
The fyfth of Magnesia Asiae. The difference of the stone is, whether it be
male or female. The next difference, is in color: for that which is found in
Macedonia and Magnesia, is ruddishe and black. That of Beotia, is more ruddish
the^ black. That of Troades is black, and of female kind, and therefore
without virtue. The best Lodestone of Hew color.

Lode stone s^^d for the weight of si^uer.


The worst of Magnesia Asiae, is white, and draws not iron, and is like unto
a punice stone. They are proved the best which are most of blewe or heavenly
color. That of Ethiope is most praised, and (as Pliny says) is sold for the
weight of silver. This is found in Zimri, a sandy region of Ethiope, where is
also found Haematites Magnes, of blooddy color, appearyng like blood if it be
ground, and also like saffron, which in drawyng of iron, One lodestone
draws another.
is not of like virtue to the Hematites Magnes of Ethiopia, which draws unto
it another Magnes. All these be profitable for medicines of the eyes, each of
them according to their portion, and do specially stay Epiphoras (that is)
droppyng of the eyes. Lode stones m^d^cin^^ (...) for the (...).
And also being brunt or made in powder, they heal burninges. And not far
from the same place of Ethiopia, is a mountain which brings forth the stone
called Theamedes, The stone Theamedes puts iron from it.
which puts from it, and refuses iron. I have often proved the virtue and
power of the stone Magnes, by the needle which is in some Dialles, by the
attraction thereof, moouyng it self from side to side, and round about.
Although the stone were under a table, yet does the needle, being above the
table, naturally follow the moouyng of the stone. It is therefore no marueyle if
there be great virtue in stones, Iron nails drawn out of Ships by the stone.
woods, and herbs. It has also been proved, that Ships compact with iron
nails, saylyng by the sea of Ethiope, and by tempest driven to land, to
certain capes or lands ends, have by these stones been either drawn to the
bottom of the sea, or else the nails being drawn out by the virtue of the
stone, the Ship has fallen in a thousand pieces. And therefore the discreet
and ware Cantabrians, most expert Mariners, saylyng by the sea of Ethiope,
frame their Ships with pynnes and hoopes of wood, to avoid the danger that
might chance of like occasion.

Again, of the naure, knowledge, virtue, equality, quality, and effects of
the stone Magnes, or the Lode stone.
FOR as much as every thing that is good, is so much the better as it is more
common: therefore do I intend to communicate unto our posterity, this little
work of the nature, effects and miracles of the stone Magnes. The which,
although they may seem to the ignorant common people, to exceed the limittes
of nature, yet to expert men, and Mathematitians, they seem not so strange,
notwithstanding that it is almost impossible to manifest all the secrets and
miracles thereof: Art in many things passes and amendeth nature.
For whereas Art inuenteth, and brings to perfection many things which are
impossible to nature, it is necessary that he who desires to do great
effects in these things, and the like, be very expert in woorkyng with the
hand: neither is it sufficient for him to be a perfect Naturalist,
Mathematitian, or Astronomer, for as much as furthermore is required great
dexterity of handie work: And for defaulte hereof, it comes to pass, that
in this our age these natural arts lie hid and unknown. This stone is known
by color, virtue, weight, and equality. The stone Magnes is known by color,
virtue, weight, and equality. Color. Virtue. Equality.
The best color, is like pure iron, shynyng, mixed with Indian or heavenly
color, and is in manner like iron poolished. This stone is also oftentimes
found in certain regions of the North, and is brought from thence into
certain parts of Normandy and Flaunders. The experience of the virtue of
this stone, is easy. For if it draw unto it a great weight of iron, it is
judged to be strong: and the heavier also the better. By equality, it is
judged if it be al alyke of one substance and color: but if it be unequal
with chappes, and holow places indented, having red spots here and there, it
is unapt to the art of navigations or of continual motion. It represents the
simititude of heaven. For like as in heaven are two points immovable, ending
the axiltre of the sphere, upon the which the whole frame of heaven is turned
(as may be found by the art whereby Cristall and other stones are poolished:)
even so the stone Magnes, reduced into a globous or round form, laying
thereon a needle or any other like iron, How to find the poles by the stone.
then which way so ever the needle turns and rests, thereby is showed the
place of the poles. And that this may be done more certaynely, it must be
oftentimes attempted, and the line showed by the needle, must be observed: for
such lines shall cut the one the other in two points, as the Meridian circles
join together in the poles of the world.

The same is geathered an other way.
This is done more certaynely, if in the round stone (as is said) lodestone be
found the place which oftentimes draws iron, which being found, if then the
point do exactly appear, part of the broken needle, must be laid upon the
stone, and be so often by little and little transposed, until the style or pyn
by perpendicle or plommet do directly fall upon ye stone. For there on the
contrary part, by like manner shall be found the other pole. A. shall be the true
point, and B. the false,

The manner to know the one pole from the other.
Which of the two points aforesaid may aunsweare to the pole Artike or the
North pole, is found in this manner. Cause a large vessel to be filled with
water, in the which cause the stone Magnes to be laid upon a light boorde,
not deep, much like the coueryng of a box, so nevertheless that the two
points found in the stone may lie equally eleuate in floating lodestone the
said box: and so by virtue of ye stone, the box shall be moved to ye place
where the meridionall pole shall exte^de toward the South, and the other
opposite to the North, and shall rest there. And thus shall it be easy to
discern, which of the points answers to the pole Articke, and to the pole
Antartike, so that the places of heaven be first known by any means.

That one stone draws another.
HOw one stone draws another, we will declare hereafter. Lay ye one (as is
said) upon a boorde or box in the water, that it may freely flote, and hold an
other in your hand. If then the North part of the stone, which you hold in
your hand, you turn to the South part of that which floteth in the box, or
otherwise the South part to the North, the floting stone shall turn toward
your hand: and if contrarywyse, you turn the like part to his like, that is to
say, the South part to the South etc. the flotyng stone shall fly from you. A
question of attraction of humors etc. Scammonea, and chole^. A vire or a
needle.
By this experience is destroyed the reason of certain Physicians, which
dispute on this manner. If Scammonea draw unto it choler by similitude or
likeness of nature, ergo much more should one Magnes draw another, rather
then iron: for that which they assume falsely, we have now taught to be true.
The like judgment is of a long slender iron that is rubbed with this stone:
for if in the water it be laid on a light piece of wood, or a straw, or such
like, so that it may freely flote upon the water, the one end of it shall
turn to the North, and the other to the South. And if holdyng the stone in
your hand, you turn his North point to the South extremity or end, or
contrariwise, the stone shall then draw iron. But contrarily, How the stone
draws ^ron or ariueth it away.

Agent and patient.


if you turn the like part to the like (as is aforesaid) two lodestones with
poles marked A. The North part. D. The South part.


it shall fly from the iron, or drive it away. The reason whereof seems to
be, that the agent does not only endeavor to make the patient like unto it
self, but also in such sort to unite it with himself, yt of them two be made
one, as may appear by this reason. Take the stone Magnes A D. of the which A
signifies the North point, and D. the South. The stone divided in the mydde^t.
Divide the stone in two parts AB. and C D. put A B. to the water as is said,
and by this means you shall see A. turn to the North, and B. to the South.
For the breakyng or diuidyng of the stone, diminish not the virtue thereof, so
that it be Homogenie, yt is, in all parts alike. Take therefore A B. for the
patient, and CD. for the agent. Then whereas the agent, in the best manner it
may, woorketh to conserve the order of nature, it is manifest that D. can not
draw C. the South: For although they could by that means be joined, yet
should there not so be made one of them two, the parts remaynyng in their
virtue: for if A. should remain North, then D. should be South, which is
certain to have the power of the North.

depictions of lodestones with incompatible poles Impossible.

Impossible.



lodestones with proper poles Natural.

Neither contrariwyse shall C. draw A. for both are Northly, and so should B be
the North which first was South, and D. in like manner: for so should the
order of nature be inuerted. It remains therefore that A shall naturally draw
D. and B. shall draw C. For so every way shall remain equal strength of al.
From whence the stone has his virtue.
Some ignorant men were of opinion that the virtue of the stone Magnes, comes
not of heaven, but rather of the nature of the place where it is engendered,
saying that the mines thereof are found in the North, and that therefore ever
one part of the stone extends toward North. But these are ignorant that
this stone is also found in other places. Whereof it should follow that it
should then extend it self as well to other and diverse parts, as to the
North. Which thing is false, as is well known by common experience, for it ever
moves to the North in what so ever place it be. Neither is it to be believed,
The North star is not the Pole.
that the North star of the Mariners is the Pole: for as much as that star
is without the Meridian line, and but twyse within one revolution of the
fyrmament. But whereas the marvelous virtue of hollow globe this stone
depends of heaven, Every part of this stone respect (...) some part of heau^^^
who would believe that only two points thereof should so have them selves,
and not rather that every part of it should not enclyne to some like part in
heaven, as may thus be proved. Let the stone be brought into a Sphericall or
round form, as is said, and the Poles being found in manner before
declared, let it be turned upon two pynnes, or Turners instruments, and there
be pullyshed, until it be on every part of equal heaviness, which you may
well find by often proouyng: for that part that falls down is heauiest,
which done, fra^^e it a Meridian circle with a Horizon, wherein fasten two
other pynnes, The greatest miracle in natural things.
upon the which it may easyly move, and direct the Poles most exactly to the
Poles of the world, the which if it come well to pass, rejoice that then you
have found almost one of the greatest miracles of natural things. For you shall
by this means see the Ascendent, the place of the Sun, and the like. etc. at
every moment. But if it fall not out according to your desire, you ought not to
impute that to the art, but to your own ignorance and negligence. For if you
execute al things duly, according to the art, you need not to doubt the
success.

The composition of Instruments by the stone Magnes.
How by this stone instruments may be framed, by the which may be found
the Azimuthes of the Sun and Stars (that is to say, Vertical circles) it
shall not be necessary to show, for as much as the same is easily done by the
Mariners Compass, or by the box with the Magnes or Lodestone enclosed, and
flotyng above the water with a pynne erected, and in the vppermoste part
divided into 360 parts, after the manner of Astronomy.

depiction of magnetic compass

Of continual motion.
FRom the beginning of the world, in manner all natural Philosophers and
Mathematitians, with great expenses and labor, have attempted to find out a
continual motion or moouyng: yet unto this day have few or none atteyned to
the true end of their desire. They have attempted to do this with diverse
instruments and wheels, and with quicksyluer, not knowing the virtue of this
stone. Neither can continual motion be found by any other means, then by the
stone Magnes, in this manner. Make a holowe case of silver, after the fashion of
a concaue glass, outwardly labored with curious art of grauyng, not only for
ornament, but also for lyghtnesse, for the lyghter that it is, so much the more
easlyer shall it be moved, neither must it be so pierced through, that such as
are ignorant of the hyd secret, may easyly perceive it.

The form of the stone.
lodestone with two poles The Pole

The Pole



It must have on the inner side certain little nails and denticles or small
teeth of iron of one equal weight, to be fastened on ye border or margent, so
that the one be no further distant from the other, then is the thycknesse of a
bean or thick pease. The said wheese also must be in all parts of equal
weight, then fasten the Exiltree in the myddest; upon the which the wheel may
turn, the Exiltree remaynyng utterly unmooueable. To the which Exiltree
again shall be joined a pynne of silver, fastened to the same, and placed
between the two cases in the highest part, whereon place the stone Magnes.
Being thus prepared, let it be first brought to a round form, then (as is
said) let the Poles be found: then the Poles untouched, the two contrary
lodestone device sides lying between the Poles, must be fyled and pullyshed,
Denticles (...) little (...) that it (...) the (...).
and the stone brought in manner to the form of an egg, and somewhat narower
in those two sides, lest the lower part thereof should occupy the inferior
place, that it may touch the walls of the case like a little wheel. This
done, place the stone upon the pynne, as a stone is fastened in a ryng, with
such art, th^^ the North Pole may a little enclyne toward the denticles, to the
end that the virtue thereof work not directly his impression, but with a
certain inclination give his influence upon the denticles of iron. Every
denticle therefore shall come to the North Pole, and when by force of the wheel
it shall somewhat pass that Pole, it shall come to the South part, which
shall drive it back again: whom then again the Pole Artike shall draw as
appears. Calculus, a little round stone or small weight like a pellet or
plomm^^.
And that the wheel may the sooner do his office within the cases, enclose
therein a little Calculus (that is) a little lodestone device A. The stone. B.
The silver plane. E. Calculus.


round stone or pesset of copper or silver, of such quantity, that it may
commodiously be received within any of the denticles: then when the wheels
shall be raised up, the pesset or round weight shall fall on the contrary part.
And whereas the motion of the wheel downewarde to the lowest part, is
perpetual, and the fall of the pellet, opposite or contrary, ever received
within any two of the denticles, the motion shall be perpetual, because the
weight of the wheel and pellet ever enclyneth to the center of the earth, and
lowest place. Therefore when it shall permit the denticles to rest about the
stone, then shall it well serve to the purpose. The myddle places within the
denticles ought so artificially to be made holowe, that they may aptly receive
the falling pellet or plommet, as the figure above declares. And briefly to
have written thus much of continual motion, may suffice.

Of most swift Motion by art of Navigations.
WE intend now to speak of most swyft motion, which to the common sort of
men seemeeth incredible, for that the same may be done by saylyng in a ship
or other vessel, against what so ever most outrageous course of any fludde or
river, and against most furious wyndes what so ever they be, even also in
deepest winter and greatest sourges of waters. Neither is it marueyle if this
be incredible to the inexpert. For the common people counts that for a
miracle, which the expert Mathematitians know to be natural and easy: A
strange experiment practiced.
for if it should be propounded to the ignorant people, that any man might
in the myddest of the waters and fluddes, descend to the bottom of the river
of Rene, his apparel remaynyng dry, and no part of his body went, and also to
bring with him burning fire from the bottom of the water, it should seem to
them a laughing stock, a mockery, The ryuers of Tagus and Danubius.
and impossible. Which nevertheless in the year 1538. in Toleto a city of
Spain, in the most swyft river Tagus (in the which gold is found) runnyng
against the course of the Sun none otherwise then Danubius, and three other
in the world, making their course from the west to the East, I, with twelve
thousand other persons, saw in the presence of Charles the Emperor the fyfth
of that name. Of such other marvelous natural experimentes, I need not here
to speak much. Other there be that dare affirm, M^rueylous swiftness of a
ship.
that a certain ship was in such sort driven with violent wyndes and furious
seas with so swyfte a course, that the Pilote standing in the keele of the
ship, near unto the mast, shootyng an arrowe out of a cross bow, the arrowe
fell down before his feet, and came not so far as to the forepart or
forecastle of the ship. I have heard also of credible men, that a certain
Pilote Cantabrian, lying at anchor at Antwerpe, on a certain Sunday after
morning prayer, Swyfte spe^^^ after m^^nyng prayer.
departed with full sails and prosperous wyndes, until he came to the coast
of Saint James in Compostella. And immediately returnyng with like prosperous
wyndes, came again to Antwerpe in the same ship the Sunday next following. The
which I deny not, but may be done, yet not without great danger of
shipwreck, especially in the return, the wind being at the South. Also in
the year.1551. I had experience of a most swyft motion. For, from Drepan of
Sicilia and Trinacria, Another experience of swift sayly^^.
the port of the galls of Maltha (now being in place of the Rhodes,
otherwise called of Saint John in Jerusalem) a certain ship without ever
strykyng sail, in.37. hours arrived at Naples. And yet are these places
distant in latitude almost five degrees, beside some part of longitude: which
on the earth correspondeth or amounts to four hundred and five miles. These
motions, are caused by violent fluddes and outrageous wyndes. The like also may
be done against the fury of wyndes and violence of fluddes, when need shall be
for expedite carriage of vitayles by sea, and even in places where it is hard
to come to land, and this with small labor, as hereafter I will plainly
declare by Demonstration: but oftentimes, The difference of sh^ppe^ in sa^^^ng.
most expert Pilotes and sea men, do marueyle that saylyng in ships of the
self same making, weight, content, or capacity, framed also of the seife same
shypwryght, furnished with equal sails, and all other things apparteining,
yet to be of such diverse swiftness, that the one can not keep equal course
with the other. The prop^^^^^^ in ^^aming of ships.
Which marueiling douhtlesse proceeds of ignorance and lack of knowledge of
the due proportion of the frame of al sorts of ships: that is to mean, the
deapth, breadth, heyght, and length (named by the masters, latitude,
longitude, altitude, and profunditie.) The which if they be unknown to the
master Carpenter or Shypwryght, two ships can never be so directed by equal
course, but that one shall be swyfter then another, as I plainly observed in the
expeditions of Arsenaria, or Thunes, or Agolette: ^^nes and (...).
in which amongst in manner innumerable ships, and especially Galleys, and
foystes, were scarsely two or one of the same quantity, heaviness,
greatness, and capacity, driven all with one wind and equal sails, that
kept equal course one with another: And this doubtless only by reason of the
different proportion of the framyng, making, or architecture.

Of the right and due proportion of what so ever Ship.
IN the framyng of any manner of ship, the proportion of length, breadth,
heyght, and deapth, ought most cheefely to be exactly observed, lest the
ignorance and negligence of these consyderations, should hinder the swyfte
course, and cause danger of shypwracke. The due proportion therefore of
ships is, that first the longitude or length of the ship or vessel what
so ever it be, more or less, ought to be divided into.300. equal parts, as
appears in the figure following.

depiction of ship

Of the which parts.30. must be assigned to the heyght or depth, for the
tenth part of ye whole requisite longitude or length: and to the latitude or
breadth shall corresponde the parts of the said longitude.50. or the syxth
part of the longitude. The matter also or timber of the Ship must be light,
lest too much heaviness of the matter should hinder the swyfte course. And
this proportion of Ships or other saylyng vessels, of whatsoever shape or
frame, is most convenient, and no less necessary: As for Scafes, Ships of
burden, Galleis, double, triple, or quadruple (that is to say) of two, three,
or four men to an Ore. Also for Foystes, Pinaces, Brigantines, Espions, and
such like.

Of the framyng and Architecture of the aforesaid Ship.
I HAVE often times attempted by Mathematical reason, how and in what manner a
commodious fashion of Ships, or other like vessels may be invented with
small labor and little cost, which may in short time strive against ye course of
whatsoever strong fluddes or ryuers, as Rhene, Danubie, Mosella, Scalda, and
almost infinite such other, boylyng and ouerflowyng, through the abundance of
great showers, molten snowes, and furious wyndes, and this especially for the
commodity of transportyng victualles, and such other necessaries: In
consyderation whereof, the proportion first observed, and the said Ship or
vessel almost finished, then must be made three holes from the Kele, toward
the forecastle or foremoste part of the Ship, as appears in the figure by the
letters ABC. In which holes, in time of the course, certain engines of strange
and marvelous inventions may be fastened. In the poupe or hinder part of the
Ship, may be prepared (after the manner of Germany) a little Stoue or whotte
house, where the Passengers may commodiously rest. Now the Ship being thus
prepared, the bottom thereof must be dressed with tallowe, and not with tar,
that it may move the swyftlyer.

Thus having absolved the frame and proportion of the said Ship, the rest of
Mechanical or handicrafte work, we leave to the Carpenters and Shypwryghtes.

To what use such kind of Ships or vessels may be applied.
IT chances often times, and especially in winter, that certain floods and
rivers overflowed with to much abundance of waters, do with their violence
refuse all nauigations that may be made against their course, to the great
damage and hurt of the Inhabitants of many Towns and Cities, to the which
they should carry victualles, and other provisions, against the course of the
ryuers: And therefore in favor of the common wealth, I have invented these
kind of Ships, that I may hereby, as by my seal, confyrme the good will I
bear to our posterity. Now therefore it may suffice to have said thus much
of this swyfte motion which I have proved with mine own strength, and have
sufficiently declared the framyng and use thereof: It is easier to add to
inventions, then to invent.
whereunto it shall be easy for all men to add more, according to the
excellency of their wits and experience. For in all sciences it is easyer to
add to inventions, then to invent. Consider now what commodity this may
bring to the Brabantines, saylyng from Antwerpe to Bruxels in the new river:
For that which they attempt dangerously with great vexation and shoggyng in
wagons by foul and tedious journey, The new river from Antwerpe to Bruxels.
often wette to the skyn for the space of one whole day, may by water be done
more conveniently, in the space of four or five hours, even against the river
and wind.

And lest the reader should seem to refute our sayings, while he thinks
those things which he esteems for miracles, to exceed the limittes of
nature, A no^^^le experiment.
I will show manifestly by one Demonstration, how a man may descend into the
bottom of any water or river, his body remaynyng dry, as here before I have
affirmed, that I saw in the famous Town and kingdom of Toleto, before the
Emperor Charles the fyfth, and infinite other. The water intends to ^^^bus
form^.
But here must first be considered, that naturally the water or sea (as other
Elements) intends to Sphericall form, and with his globosite or rising,
ouerpasseth most high mountains. But again here shall rise an other doubt to
the inexpert. That is: If the sea be higher then the land, Why the water (...)
about ouerflowe the land.
how is it then that it does not drown and cover the earth? Whereunto I
aunsweare, that the dryenesse of the earth may so long resyste the moystenesse
of the water, until it receive or imbibe to much moystenesse, which may thus
be naturally proved. Fill a cup or other vessel with water or wine to the
brymme, An experime^t.
so that the fullness thereof may seem to swell as though it would ouerflowe
the brymme of the cup. Then may you yet put therein many pieces of gold,
without sheddyng of one drop of water. But if the extremity of the brymme be
once wette, immediately the water ouerfloweth, because the dryenesse of the
vessel does participate the moystenesse of the water: which is yet better
proved in manner as follows. Take a certain quantity of water, and sprynckle
it by drops upon a dry (or dustie, cable: so shall the drops partly show
a Sphericall and swellyng form remaynyng. But if the table before be never so
little wette with water, the drops sprynckled thereon, shall flote abroad,
and keep no Spherical or round form, by reason of the moystnesse which the
table had before received of the water. It has also oftentimes chanced, The
dr^wning of certain ^^gio^.
that certain Towns and lands have been drowned by ouerflowyng of ryuers
near unto them. Nevertheless, how much so ever such waters increase and
rise, there is no danger, until great showers falling from heaven, do
thoroughly wette the banckes, rampertes, or calseys of such rivers. For when
they (as we have said) be thoroughly imbibed with moystenesse, they cause the
ouerflowyng and breach, whereof follows the ouerflowyng and drownyng of the
region: and this may suffice for advertisement. Now therefore I come to the
experience aforesaid, showed at Toleto by two Greeks: who taking a chaulderon
of great capasitie, This experiment may be proved with a great bell.
and the mouth turned downewarde, and so hangyng it in the air by ropes, they
fasten certain posts and boordes or shelues in the myddest of the chaldron
where they place them selves with the fire. The^ to make it hang steadfastly and
equally, they compass the circumference, brymme, or border thereof with leaden
plommetes on every side equally, and made of equal weight, least any part of
the circumference of the mouth of the chaldron when it is equally and softly
let down into the water, should sooner touch the water then the whole
circumference. For so should the water easyly overcome the air enclosed in
the chaldron, and resolve it into moisture. But if by due proportion the
chaldron thus prepared, be fair and softely let down into the water, the air
enclosed in the chaldron (by resistance of the water) shall violently make him
self place, not admittyng the water to enter. So the men there enclosed, shall
so long remain dry in the myddest of the water, until success of time do
by respiration debilitate and consume the enclosed air, turnyng it into gross
humiditie engrossed by the coldness and moystnesse of the water: but if in due
time the chaldron be softly and equally drawn out of the water, the men shall
remain dry, An other example of the foresaid experiment.
and the fire not extinct, which also may thus be proved: Take a cup of
glass of a certain quantity: the circumference of the mouth whereof, shall be
brother then the circumference of the bottom. In the mouth let be fastened a
little stick, tying thereto a threede: On the stycke, fasten a little candle
of wax, whose light may come only to the myddest of the cup, least to much
nearenesse of the water might suffocate the candle. Then proportionally (as in
the former experiment) put the cup with the burning candle into a vessel full of
water, and in due time draw it out softly and equally, so that no part of the
mouth of the circumference thereof be drawn out before the whole, or sydelye:
so shall the candle remain alive, as it was before. Then be natural and
Mathematical Demonstrations. Let not therefore the ignorant condemn our
wrytynges, before they know what may be done by experience. A secret
known, is no more a miracle.
It is now then no more a miracle, when it is known to be natural: And thus
is it in all other Sciences and experimentes, which the common people think
to be impossible. As the like in growyng of certain fruits, trees, Ignorance
causes admiration
and herbs, by art so helpyng nature, that they may spring and grow before
their natural time, even in the heart of Winter. It seems also a miracle to
the common people, that in the time of most temperate season, and great
calmness on the sea, Whirlepooles deuouryng Ships.
Ships beheld fast immovable in the myddest of the sea, and sodaynely
swalowed into the bowelles of the earth: which nevertheless is done
naturally in manner of an earthquake, and by like natural cause. The reason
whereof, is, The like of earthquakes, ^^^me, and vndermin^ng.
that the air as a most light Element, enclosed in the bowelles of the earth,
striuyng ever naturally to the circumference of the earth, as unto his own
region. But the pores of the earth being stronglye stopped, and the air
thereby against his nature forcibly enclosed, stryueth by violence to brust
forth, and so cleauyng the earth in the bottom of the sea, and great
abundance of water falling into the breach, The spirit of De^^gorgon.
even from the highest part of the sea in that place, with swalowyng
attraction of the fall, draws down with it suddenly the Ship or Ships,
which at that time approaches near unto the place of that whyrelepoole.
Furthermore, any ignorant man would hardly beleeeue that the salt water of
the sea may be made fresh, and potable to be drunk, which nevertheless
may be done naturallye, as has been often proved diverse ways. To make said
water fres^e.
Some do this (as is written in Gemma Philosophica) puttyng the salt water in
a vessel playstered or crusted over with clean Wax, which distyllyng
through the strayte and narowe pores thereof, leaves the salt, There is a
better way.
which for his grosnesse can not pass thereby. The same may be done better by a
Canon or Pype, filled with gravel or little stones, and that the salt water
powered thereon, may diverse times pass through that Pype into an other vessel.

Of the Flowing, and Reflowing, (that is) increase and decrease of the Sea,
with the causes thereof, more exactly then hitherto has been declared by any.
Whereas heretofore mention has been made of the sea and flowyng of waters, and
diverse other motions, it may be convenient to add hereunto the sayings and
wrytynges of the most expert and learned man, Fredericus Delphinus, Doctor of
arts and physic, and public professor of Mathematical sciences in the
famous university of Padua, touching the flowyng and reflowyng, or increase
and decrease, (otherwise also named access and recesse, that is, coming and
going, or ebbyng and flowing) of the water of the sea. Which flowyng and
reflowing, some do also name, the false rest or quietness, or inordinate
motion of the water of the sea. And albeit diverse learned men have entreated of
this matter, yet forasmuch as some of their wrytynges are somewhat dark, and
not easy of all men to be understood, I have thought it necessary, partly
out of their wrytinges, and partly by mine own industry, more clearly and
largely to entreat hereof, that the same may be the better understood of all
men.

Therefore, for the more easy understanding of these two manners of motions of
the water of the sea, following the moouyng of the Sun and Moon, to the
moving of (primum mobile) the first moveable, is first to be known, Division
of ^^^uen and the H^^i^^^. (...) ^u^n into two parts.
that whersoeuer a man is on the earth, his Horizon (as I have said before in
my treatise of the sphere) ever cutteth or divides to him the heaven into two
halfes, and the one half of heaven is ever above his Horizon, and the other
half beneath. And whereas in the half of a sphericall or round body, are
contained two quarters, two quarters shall A figure showing the beginning of
the day increase at the Sun rising, and the beginning of the day decrease in
the midday, and the beginning of the night increase at the Sun setting, and
the beginning of the night decrease at midnight.
ever be above his Horizon, and two beneath. Those that are above the Horizon,
are called diurnall or day quarters: and they that are under the Horizon, are
called nocturnall or night quarters. Of these four quarters of heaven, are two
in the which is made the flowyng or increase of the water of the sea: and other
two in the which is made the reflowing or decrease of the sea. The quarters in
the which is made the flowing, is the quarter which is from the East to the
South above the Horizon, which is the quarter of the day access, or increase
of the day: and the quarter opposite or contrary, which is from the West to
midnight under the Horizon, is the quarter of the night access. The quarters
in which is made the reflowyng or decrease, is the quarter which is from the
South to the West above the Horizon, which is the quarter of the recesse of the
day: and the quarter opposite, which is from mydnyght to the East under the
Horizon, is the quarter of the recesse of the night. etc.

Secondaryly, is also to be known, Eight p^in^^^s of ^^u^n for (...) and
res^^^yng.
that there be in heaven eight points for the flowyng and reflowyng, or
increase and decrease of the sea: of the which, four are strong, and four
weak. Of the weak, two are weak for the flowyng, and two for the reflowyng.
Weak for flowyng, are the point of the East, and point of the West, which are
the beginning of the two quarters of flowyng. Weak for reflowyng, are the
point of the South or mydday, and the point of mydnyght, which are the
begynnynges of the two quarters of reflowyng: and these four points are
distant the one from the other, by a quarter of heaven. Of the strong points,
two are strong for flowyng, and two for reflowyng. Strong for the flowyng, are
the middle point between the East and the South in the day quarter of
flowyng, being distant from the East.45. degrees, and from the South likewise:
And the middle point between the West and mydnyght, in the night quarter of
flowyng, ^^yng distant from the West 45. degrees, and from mydnyght likewise.
Points strong for the reflowyng, is the myddle point, between South and West,
in the day quarter of the reflowyng, being distant from the South.45. degrees,
and from the West likewise: And the myddle point between midnight and the
East, A right Horizon is when both the poles lie in the Horizon, and that is to
them only which dwell under the Equinoctial. Points of equal virtue in
moouyng the water of the sea.
in the quarter of the night reflowyng, being distant from mydnyght.45.
degrees, and from the East likewise. And as the weak points are distant one
from the other by a quarter of heaven, so are also the strong points distant
the one from the other by a quarter of heaven, to them that have a right
Horizon.

It is thyrdly to be known, that beside the aforesaid eight points, to such
as have a right Horizon, there be many other points equipollent or of equal
virtue. And such be all the points of heaven equally distant from the four
principal points of heaven, which four principal points are, the point of
the East, point of the West, point of the South, and point of mydnyght, or from
the four strong points of heaven, which is all one, yet in quarters of
contrary operation. For all such points are equipollent or of equal virtue
in moouyng the water of the sea: but in a right Horizon it is otherwise, as
shall appear hereafter.

It is fourthly to be known, that the Sun and Moon every month, are
together in one sign, degree, and minute. And this so being, The aspectes
which the Moon makes with the Sun every month.
is called the Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun. From thence for the
space of eight days, or there about, the Moon is departed from the Sun by
her proper motion by a fourth part of heaven: and this departing is called the
first quarter of the Moon with the Sun. From thence in fourteen days, or
thereabout, she is departed from the sun by an other fourth part of heaven,
and so by the half of heaven: and this distance is called the opposition of
the Moon with the Sun, or the full Moon. From thence to.21. days or
thereabout, she is departed from her opposition with the sun or full Moon by
an other fourth part of the heaven, coming toward the Sun: and this
distance is called the second qu^^^ature of the Moon with the Sun, and then
the Moon is distant from the Sun by a fourth part of heaven, as it was
distant in the first quarter, and so comes near to Conjunction with the
Sun. From thence at thyrtie days, or thereabout, the Moon is again with
the Sun in conjunction, as it was first.

Fyftly and lastly, is to be known that the Sun and Moon, both together
every natural day (which is the time of.24. ^
hours, to the mouyng of the first moveable) are the causes of flowyng and
reflowyng, or increase and decrease of the water of the sea twyse. These
declarations premised, and well kept in memory, let us declare how the Sun
and Moon both together every natural day; to the moouyng of the first
moveable, are the causes of the flowyng and reflowyng of the sea. For if these
declarations be well held in memory, and especially the quarters of heaven in
which is the flowyng, and the quarters of heaven in which is the reflowyng,
and which are the strong points for the flowyng, and strong points for the
reflowyng, and which be the weak points for the flowyng, and the we^ke
points for the reflowyng: these (I say) being kept in memory, all the
narration of the mouyng, and false quietness of the sea, shall be clear and
manifest.

First of all (as touching the flowyng and reflowyng of the sea to the moving
of the first moveable) it is to be known, The Sun and Moon being in
con^^^ction, what effect^^s they ha^^ in mo^^^^ the w^^^^ the sea.
that when the Sun and Moon are joined together, which conjunction is
called Nouiluniun (that is) the new Moon, when they be moved to the moouyng of
the first moveable (called Primum mobile) from the East to the South, because
the virtues both of the Sun and Moon be unite together, and both these
Luminaries are moved continually to the moouyng of the first moveable by the
quarter of the day flowyng, which is from the East to the West, the day
flowyng or increase of the sea is continual. And while they are moved from the
South to the West, because they are moved continual by the day quarter of the
reflowyng, the reflowyng still continues. And while they are moved from the
West to mydnyght, because they are then moved by the quarter of the night
flowyng, the night flowyng is again continual. ^.
And while they are moved from mydnyght to the East, because they are then
moved by the night quarter of reflowyng, the night reflowyng is again
continual. And thus twyse in the natural day is the flowyng or increase, and
twyse the reflowyng or decrease of the water of the sea.

It is again secondarylye to be known, that when the Moon after her
conjunction with the Sun, by her proper motion is departed from the Sun
toward the East, according to the order of the signs, goeyng toward her
first quadrature with the Sun (which the Venetian Pilottes call, il
Quartirune) ever before the Moon by her proper motion, come to that first
quarter, which is the distaunce of the Moon from the Sun toward the East,
A quarter of heaven is three signs.
according to the order of the signs, by a quarter or fourth part of heaven,
when the Sun is so much above the Horizon of the East part in quarter of
the day flowyng, how much the Moon is under the Horizon of the same part of
the East in the quarter of the night reflowyng, because then the Sun is so
much distant from the strong point of the flowyng above the Horizon, as the
Moon is distant from the strong point of the reflowyng under the Horizon, A
time wherein is neither ebbyng nor flowyng.
they are equipollent and of equal virtue, therefore then is neither flowyng
nor reflowyng of the water of the sea, but the water seems to stand: And
then the Venetians say, L'aqua e stanca. But when the Sun by the motion of
the first moveable, comes near to the strong point of flowyng, which is
above the Horizon in the day quarter of the flowyng, the Moon by the same
motion of the first moveable, departs so much from the strong point of the
reflowyng, which is under the Horizon in the night quarter of reflowyng,
coming toward the weak point of the East flowyng: And then because the Sun
is nearer to the strong point of flowyng, which is above the Horizon in the
day quarter of flowyng, then is the Moon in the strong point of reflowyng,
which is under the Horizon in the night quarter of the reflowyng, the
reflowyng is weakened, and the flowyng is fortifyed: and then the water of the
sea begins to flow. And how much more the Sun approaches to the strong
point of the flowing, which is above the Horizon in the day quarter of the
flowyng, so much more the Moon is departed from the strong point of the
reflowyng, which is under the Horizon in the night quarter of the reflowyng,
approchyng to the weak point of the East flowyng, and therefore the flowyng
continues. But when the Sun by motion of the first moveable, comes to the
strong point of the flowyng, which is above the Horizon in the day quarter of
the flowyng, then the Moon is departed from the strong point of the reflowyng,
which is under the Horizon in the night quarter of reflowyng, and is made
near to the weak point of the East flowyng, and therefore the flowyng yet
continues: But when the Moon shall come to the weak point of the East
flowyng, she then to the mouyng of the first moveable, is moved by the day
quarter of flowyng, approchyng to the strong point of flowyng, which is above
the Horizon: And the Sun, because it is distant from the Moon less then a
quarter, shall likewise be moved by the same day quarter of flowyng, approchyng
to the weak point of the South reflowyng: And therefore because both are
moved by the day quarter of the flowyng, the flowyng shall continue. And when
the Sun by the moving of the first mooueable, comes to the weak point of
the South reflowyng, because then the Moon is nearer to the strong point of
the flowyng, which is above the Horizon, then the Sun to the strong point of
the reflowyng, which is above the Horizon in the day quarter of the reflowyng,
the flowyng shall continue. And when the Moon shall come to the strong point
of the flowyng in the day quarter of flowyng, the Sun shall not yet be in
the strong point of the reflowyng in the day quarter of the reflowing, because
that the Sun is distant from the Moon less then a quarter, but will come to
it: and then the Moon shall depart from the strong point of the flowyng, and
shall be less distant from it then the sun from the strong point of reflowyng:
and therefore the flowyng shall yet continue, until the sun be so much
beyond the South toward the West in the day quarter of reflowyng, how much
the moon on this side the South toward the East in the day quarter of the
flowyng: And then the sun shall be so much distant from the strong point of
the reflowyng which is above the Horizon, beyond the South in the day quarter
of the reflowyng, how much the moon from the strong point of the flowyng,
which is above the Horizon, before the South in the day quarter of flowyng:
And incontinent, the Sun and the moon shall be equipollent or of equal
strength, and therefore shall be no flowing nor rest^wing, as we have said before.
And when he sun by the motion of the first moveable, shall come to the strong
point of reflowing in ye day quarter of reflowyng, the moon by the same motion
of the first moveable, shall be departed so much from the strong point of
flowyng in the day quarter of flowyng, coming toward the weak point of the
South reflowing: and then the moon shall be more distant from the strong point
of flowyng, then the sun from the strong point of reflowyng: And so the sun
shall be stronger then the moon, and therefore then shall begin the reflowyng,
and shall continue according that the sun shall approach to the strong point
of the reflowyng, in the day quarter of reflowyng: and the moon shall be
departed from the strong point of the flowyng in the quarter of the day
flowyng. And when the son shall come to the strong point of the reflowing, the
moon shall be departed from the strong point of the flowyng, and therefore the
reflowyng shall yet continue. And when the moon shall come to the weak point
of the South reflowyng, the sun shall be departed from the strong point of the
reflowyng, in the day quarter of the reflowyng, coming toward the weak point
of the West flowyng: Yet shall the sun be less distant from the strong point
of the reflowyng, then the moon from the strong point of the flowyng, and
therefore the reflowyng shall yet continue. And when the sun shall come to
the weak point of the West flowyng, the moon shall be near to the strong point
of reflowyng, which is above the Horizon in the day quarter of reflowyng, and
shall be less distant from it, then the sun from the strong point of the
flowyng, which is under the Horizon in the night quarter of flowyng, because
she is distant from the sun less then a quarter or fourth part of heaven:
therefore the reflowyng shall yet continue, until the sun shall be so much
under the Horizon on the West part in the quarter of the night flowyng, how
much the moon is above the Horizon on the same part of the West in the day
quarter of reflowyng. And because then the Sun shall be so much distaunt from
the strong point of the flowyng, which is under the Horizon on the Weast
part, in the night quarter of flowyng, as the Moon from the strong point of
reflowyng, which is above the Horizon, on that part of the Weast in the day
quarter of reflowyng: then the Sun and the Moon shall be equipollent (that is)
of equal strength and virtue, and so shall there be neither flowyng nor
reflowyng. But when the Sun, by the moouyng of the first mooueable, shall
come to the strong point of the flowyng, which is under the Horizon in the
night quarter of the flowyng, the Moon by the same moouyng of the first
mooueable, shall be departed as much from the strong point of reflowyng, which
is above the Horizon in the day quarter of reflowyng: And then the Sun shall be
less distaunt from the strong point of flowyng, in the night quarter of the
flowyng, then the Moon from the strong point of reflowyng, in the day quarter
of reflowyng, and therefore the Sun shall be stronger then the Moon: and then
again shall begin the flowyng, and shall continue (as is said before)
until the Sun be so much beyond mydnyght toward the East, in the night
quarter of reflowyng, how much the Moon on this side mydnyght, toward the
Weast, in the night quarter of flowyng, and then the Sun shall be so much
distaunt from the strong point of the reflowyng, as the Moon from the strong
point of the flowyng: and then incontinent the Sun and the Moon shall be of
equal strength, and there shall be another flowyng nor reflowyng. But when the
Sun, by the moouyng of the first mooueable, comes to the strong point of
the reflowyng, in the night quarter of reflowyng, the Moon by the same moouyng
of the first mooueable, goes back, and is departed as much from the strong
point of the flowyng, (...) night quarter of the flowyng, coming to ye weak
point of midnight reflowyng: And then the Sun shall be less distaunt from the
strong point of the reflowyng, in the night quarter of the flowyng, then the
Moon from the strong point of flow^ng in the night quarter of flowyng and then
shall the flowyng be weakened, and the reflowyng strengthened and the water of
the sea shall then again begin to reflowe, which reflowyng shall continue (as
is said before) until the Sun be so much above the Horizon on the East
part, how much the Moon under the Horizon on the same part of the East:
And then the Sun shall be so much distaunt from the strong point of the
flowyng, which is above the Horizon, in the day quarter of the flowyng, how
much the Moon from the strong point of the reflowing, which is under the
Horizon in the night quarter of the reflowyng: and then the Sun and Moon
again shall be of equal strength, and there shall be another flowyng nor
reflowyng. Then daily (that is to say, in every natural day) shall return
the like change to this aforesaid, until the Moon by her proper motion, shall
come to her first quadrature with the Sun, which the Pilottes or Mariners
Venetians, call il Quartirone, as I have said before. The Moon being in
^^artile aspect, or at the first with the ^^arter, some what effects it
causes in ebbyng and flowyng.
And when the Moon shall come to her first quadrature with the Sun, then
when the Sun shall be in the weak point of the East for the flowyng, the Moon
shall be in the weak point of mydnyght, for the reflowyng: and then the Sun
shall be so much distaunt from the strong point of the flowyng, which is above
the Horizon, on the East part, in the day quarter of the flowyng, how much
the Moon from the strong point of reflowyng, which is under the Horizon of the
same part of the East, in the night quarter of the reflowyng: and so the Sun
and the Moon again shall be of equal force and power, A very little ebbyng or
flowyng.
and there shall be another flowyng nor reflowyng notable, but only small,
encreasyng and diminishyng. And when the Sun by the motion of the first
mooueable, shall come to the strong point of the flowyng, which is above the
Horizon, on the East part, in the day quarter of the flowing, the Moon by the
same motion of the first mooueable, shall come likewise so much to the strong
point of the reflowyng, which is under the Horizon on the same part of the
East, in the night quarter of the reflowyng: and continually to the diurnall or
day motion, the Sun shall be distaunt so much from the strong point of
flowyng, which is above the Horizon, in the day quarter of the flowyng, how
much the Moon from the strong point of reflowyng, which is under the
Horizon, in the night quarter of the reflowyng, and continentlye the Sun and
Moon shall be again of equal power, until the Sun by the moouyng of the
first mooueable, shall come to the strong point of flowyng, which is above the
Horizon: And then likewise the Moon shall come to the strong point of
reflowyng, which is under the Horizon, because these points are distaunt one
from the other by a quarter of heaven, as the Sun and Moon are distaunt from
them selves by a quarter of he. And when the Sun by the motion of the first
mooueable, shall depart from the strong point of the flowyng, which is above
the Horizon in the day quarter of the flowyng, coming toward the weak point
of the South, reflowyng, the Moon by the same motion of the first mooueable,
shall likewise depart as much from the strong point of the reflowyng, which
is under the Horizon, coming toward the weak point of the East flowyng, and
the Sun shall be contynually distaunt so much from the strong point of
flowyng, which is above the Horizon, how much the Moon from the strong point
of reflowyng, which is under the Horizon, until the same come to the weak
point of the South reflowyng: and then the Moon likewise shall come to the
weak point of the East flowyng. And the Sun and the Moon in all this time
shall be of equal strength, and incontinently shall be another flowyng nor
reflowyng notable, and shall be after the same manner while the Sun to the
motion of the first mooueable, shall be moved from the South to the Weast,
because then the Moon by the same motion of the first mooueable, shall be
moved from the East to the South: And likewise, while the Sun shall be moved
from the Weast, to mydnyght, because then the Moon shall be moved from the
South, to the Weast: And likewise, while the Sun shall be moved from mydnyght
to the East, Eight days ^^ter (...).
because the Moon shall be moved from the Weast to mydnyght. And so in all the
time of one revolution of heaven, which is one day natural of four and
twenty hours, the sea shall neither flow nor reflowe sensiblye, but shall
seem to stand, because the Sun and the Moon in all the time of that
revolution of heaven, shall be ever of equal power, without any notable
difference. And this chances about the eight day after the conjunction of the
Moon with the Sun. And this false quietness of the water of the sea, the
Venetians call Acquae de feel, and use this manner of saying, Da gliotto, a
inoue, Lacqua non si move. From the eight day to the nienth, the water moves
not.

When the Moon shall be departed from the Sun, beyond the first quadrature,
going toward her opposition with the Sun, then ever until the Moon shall
come unto her opposition with the Sun, when the Sun shall be so much above
the Horizon on the East part, in the day quarter of the flowyng, how much the
Moon is under the Horizon on the same part of the East, in the night quarter
of the reflowyng, the Sun shall be so much distaunt from the strong point of
the flowyng, which is above the Horizon, in the day quarter of flowyng,
departing from it by the motion of the first mooueable, and coming to the
weak point of the reflowyng, how much the Moon from the strong point of the
reflowyng, which is under the Horizon, in the night quarter of the reflowyng,
coming to it by the same motion of the first mooueable: And then the Sun
and Moon shall be again of equal power, and there shall be neither flowyng nor
reflowyng. And when the Sun by motion of the first moouable, shall come to the
weak point of the South reflowyng, the Moon by the same motion of the first
mooueable, shall approach or come near as much to the strong point of the
reflowyng, which is under the Horizon, in the night quarter of the reflowyng:
and then the Moon shall be nearer to the strong point of the reflowyng, which
is under the Horizon, in the night quarter of the reflowyng, then the Sun to
the strong point of the flowyng, which is above the Horizon, in the day
quarter of flowyng, because the Moon shall be stronger then the Sun: And
according that the Sun by the motion of the first mooueable, shall approach to
the weak point of the South reflowyng, the Moon by the same motion of the
first moouable, shall approach as much to the strong point of the reflowyng,
which is under the Horizon. And so the reflowyng shall continue until the
Sun come to the weak point of the South reflowyng. And when the Sun by the
motion of the first mooueable, shall depart from the weak point of the South
reflowyng, and shall be moved by the day quarter of the reflowyng, approchyng to
the strong point of the reflowyng, the Moon by the same motion of the first
mooueable, shall depart as much from the strong point of the reflowyng,
which is under the Horizon, in the night quarter of the reflowyng, and she
shall be also moved by the quarter of reflowyng, as the Sun coming to the
weak point of the East flowyng, because the Sun and the Moon are distaunt
between them selves more then by a quarter of heaven: And so both shall be
moved by the quarters of reflowyng, and therefore the reflowyng shall
continue, until the Sun shall be so much beyond the South, toward the
Weast, in the day quarter of the reflowyng, how much the Moon on this side
the South, toward the East, in the day quarter of the flowyng. And then the
Sun shall be so much distaunt in the strong point of reflowyng, in the day
quarter of reflowyng, departing from it by the motion of the first mooueable,
toward the Weast, how much the Moon from the strong point of flowyng,
which is above the Horizon, in the day quarter of the flowyng, coming to it:
And so the Sun and the Moon shall be of equal force, and then shall be neither
flowyng nor reflowyng. And when the Sun by the motion of the first
mooueable, shall be departed from the strong point of the reflowyng, which is
above the Horizon, in the day quarter of the flowyng, coming to the weak
point of the Weast flowyng, the Moon by the same moving of the first
moouable, shall approach as much to the strong point of the flowyng, which is
above the Horizon, in the day quarter of the flowyng, and then the Moon shall be
nearer to the strong point of the flowyng, in the day quarter of the flowyng,
then the Sun to the strong point of the reflowyng, in the day quarter of the
reflowyng: and so the Moon shall be stronger then the Sun, and then shall
begin the flowyng. And as the Sun shall continually be departed from the
strong point of reflowyng, in the day quarter of the reflowyng, so the Moon
continually shall approach to the strong point of flowyng, in the day quarter of
the flowyng, and so the flowyng shall continue. And when the Sun shall come to
the weak point of the Weast flowing, the Moon shall yet move by the day
quarter of the flowyng, because the Sun and the Moon are distaunt one from
the other more then by a quarter of heaven: and then the Moon shall be nearer to
the strong point of flowyng, in the quarter of the day flowing, then the Sun
to the strong point of flowing, which is under the Horizon, in the night
quarter of the flowyng, and therefore the flowyng shall continue. And when the
Moon shall come to the weak point of the South reflowyng, the Sun shall
pass the weak point of the Weast flowyng, approchyng to the strong point of
the flowyng, which is under the Horizon, in the night quarter of the flowyng,
and then the Sun shall be nearer the strong point of the flowyng, which is
under the Horizon, in the night quarter of the flowyng, then the Moon to the
strong point of the reflowyng, which is above the Horizon, in the day quarter
of the reflowyng, and so the Sun shall be stronger then the Moon, and
therefore the flowyng shall continue. A long time of flowyng.
And when the Sun shall come to the strong point of flowyng, which is under
the Horizon, in the night quarter of the flowyng, the Moon shall not yet be in
the strong point of the reflowyng, which is above the Horizon, in the day
quarter of the reflowyng, because the Moon is distaunt from the Sun more
then by a quarter of heaven, and therefore the flowyng shall yet continue,
until the Sun be so much under the Horizon on the Weast part, in the night
quarter of the flowyng, how much the Moon above the Horizon on the same
part of the Weast, in the day quarter of the reflowyng and then the Sun
shall be so much distaunt from the strong point of the flowyng, which is under
the Horizon in the night quarter of the flowyng, coming to the weak point of
midnight reflowyng, how much the Moon from the strong point of reflowyng,
which is above the Horizon, in the day quarter of the reflowyng coming to it:
and therefore the Sun and the Moon shall be of equal strength, and then shall be
neither flowyng nor reflowyng. Afterward, when the Sun by the motion of the
first mooueable, shall be distaunt from the strong point of the flowyng, which
is under the Horizon on the Weast part, in the night quarter of the flowyng,
coming toward the weak point of mydnyght reflowyng, the Moon by the same
motion of the first mooueable, shall approach as much to the strong point of
reflowyng, which is above the Horizon, in the day quarter of the reflowyng
coming to it. And so the Moon shall be nearer to the strong point of reflowyng,
then the Sun to the strong point of flowyng, and therefore the flowyng shall
begin, and shall continue in manner (as is said) until the Sun be so much
beyond mydnyght, toward the East, in the night quarter of reflowyng, how much
the Moon before mydnyght toward the Weast, in the night quarter of flowyng:
and then the Sun shall be so much distaunt from the strong point of reflowyng,
in the night quarter of reflowyng, going backwarde from it toward the
foresaid weak point of the East flowyng, how much the Moon from the point
of the strong flowyng, in the night quarter of the flowyng coming to it: and
then the Sun and the Moon shall be of equal force, and there shall be neither
flowyng nor reflowyng. And when the Sun by the motion of the first mooueable,
shall be departed from the strong point of reflowyng, under the Horizon, which is
in the night quarter of reflowyng, coming toward the weak point of the East
flowyng, the Moon by the same motion of the first moouable, shall approach as
much to the strong point of flowyng, which also is under the Horizon, in the
night quarter of the flowyng coming to it. And because then the Moon is
nearer to the strong point of flowyng, which is in the night quarter of
flowyng, then the Sun to the strong point of reflowyng, which is in the
night quarter of reflowyng: then shall the flowyng begin and continue in
manner aforesaid, until the Sun be so much above the Horizon on the East
part, in the day quarter of flowyng, how much the Moon under the Horizon,
on the same part of the East, in the night quarter of reflowyng. And because
the Sun shall be so much distaunt from the strong point of flowyng, which is
above the Horizon, in the day quarter of flowyng, coming by the motion of the
first mooueable, toward the weak point of the South reflowyng, how much the
Moon from the strong point of reflowyng, which is under the Horizon, in the
night quarter of reflowyng, coming by the same motion of the first mooueable
toward it, they shall be of equal force, and so shall be neither flowyng nor
reflowyng. And in this manner, the flowyng and reflowyng shall continue in every
natural day, until the Moon shall come to her opposition with the Sun.

The Moon being in opposition with the Sun, what effects they have in
moouyng the water of the sea.
And when the Moon shall come to her opposition with the Sun, then when the
Sun shall be in the weak point of the East flowyng, the Moon shall likewise be
in the weak point of the Weast flowyng: and then shall the flowyng begin, and
shall continue as long as the Sun shall be moved to the moouyng of the first
mooueable, from the weak point of the East flowyng, by the day quarter of the
flowyng, to the weak point of the South reflowyng. And the Moon then in all
this time, shall be moved likewise to the moouyng of the first mooueable, from
the weak point of the Weast flowyng, by the night quarter of flowyng, to the
weak point of mydnyght reflowyng: and then the flowyng shall cease, and the
reflowyng begin, and continue as long as the Sun at the moouyng of the
first mooueable, shall be moved from the weak point of the South reflowyng, by
the day quarter of reflowyng, unto the weak point of the Weast flowyng, and
the Moon in all that time shall be moved likewise to the moouyng of the first
mooueable, from the weak point of mydnyght reflowyng, by the night quarter of
reflowyng, unto the weak point of the East flowyng: and then the reflowyng
shall cease, and the flowyng shall begin again, and shall continue as long
as the Sun shall be moved to the motion of the first mooueable, from the
weak point of the Weast flowyng, by the night quarter of the flowyng, unto the
weak point of mydnyght reflowyng. And then the Moon in all that time, by the
same moouyng of the first mooueable, shall likewise be moved from the weak
point of the East flowyng, by the day quarter of the flowyng, unto the weak
point of reflowyng: and then the flowyng shall cease, and the reflowyng begin,
and shall continue as long as the Sun, by the mouyng of the first moveable,
shall be moved from the weak point of mydnyght reflowyng, by the night quarter
of the reflowyng unto the weak point of the East flowyng. And then the Moon
in all this time by the same motion of the first moveable, shall be moved
likewise from the weak point of the South reflowyng, by the day quarter of the
reflowyng, unto the weak point of the West flowyng: and then the reflowyng
shall cease.

And when the Moon shall pass her opposition with the Sun by her proper
motion, The Moon (...).
going to her second quadrature with the Sun, then when the Moon shall be so
much above the Horizon on the East part in the day quarter of flowyng, how
much the Sun under the Horizon on the same part of the East in the night
quarter of the reflowyng, because then the Moon shall be so much distant from
the strong point of flowing wh che is above the Horizon in the day quarter of
flowyng, how much the Sun from the strong point of reflowyng, which is
under the Horizon on the same part of the East in the night quarter of
reflowyng, then the Sun and the Moon shall be of equal power, and therefore
shall be neither flowyng nor reflowyng. And when the Moon by motion of the
first moveable, shall be departed from the strong point of flowyng, which is
above the Horizon in the day quarter of flowyng, coming toward the weak
point of the South reflowyng, the Sun by the same motion of the first
moveable, shall approach as much to the strong point of reflowyng, which is
under the Horizon of the night quarter of reflowyng, coming to it: and then
because the Sun shall be less distant from the strong point of reflowyng,
which is under the Horizon on the East part in the night quarter of
reflowyng, then the Moon from the strong point of flowyng, which is above the
Horizon on the same part of the East in the day quarter of flowyng, the
reflowyng shall begin and continue. And when the Moon by the motion of the
first moveable, shall come to the weak point of the South reflowyng, the
Sun shall yet be under the Horizon in the night quarter of reflowyng, because
the Sun and the Moon are distant from them selves more then by a quarter of
heaven, and then the Moon to the mouyng of the first moveable, shall be moved
by the day quarter of reflowyng, as also the Sun in like manner by the night
quarter of reflowyng, coming to the strong point of reflowyng in the day
quarter of reflowyng, and so the reflowyng shall continue. And when the Moon
shall approach to the strong point of reflowyng in the day quarter of
reflowyng, the Sun shall approach to the weak point of the East flowyng, in
the night quarter of reflowyng, and shall be further distant from the strong
point of flowyng, which is above the Horizon, in the day quarter of flowyng,
then the Moon from the strong point of the reflowyng, which is likewise above
the Horizon in the day quarter of reflowyng: and so the reflowyng shall
continue, until the Moon be so much beyond the South toward the West in
the day quarter of the reflowyng, as the Sun before the South toward the
East in the day quarter of flowyng: and then the Moon shall be so far distant
from the strong point of reflowyng in the day quarter of reflowyng, how much
the Sun from the strong point of flowyng in the day quarter of flowyng: and
so the Sun and the Moon shall be of equal force, and there shall be neither
flowyng nor reflowyng. And when the Moon by the motion of the first moveable,
shall depart from the strong point of reflowyng, coming toward the weak
point of the West reflowyng, the Sun by the same motion of the first
moveable, shall approach as much to the strong point of flowyng, in the day
quarter of flowyng: And then because the Sun shall be nearer to the strong
point of flowyng, which is in the day quarter of flowyng, then the Moon in
the strong point of reflowyng, which is in the day quarter of reflowyng, the
flowyng shall begin and continue according that the Moon, to the mouyng of
the first moveable, shall be departed from the strong point of reflowyng, in the
day quarter of reflowyng, coming toward the weak point of the West flowyng:
and the Sun shall approach to the strong point of the flowyng, in the day
quarter of the flowyng coming to it.

And when the Moon to the mouyng of the first moveable, shall come to the
weak point of the West flowyng, the Sun yet by the same motion of the first
moveable, shall move by the day quarter of the flowyng, because the Sun and
Moon are distant the one from the other more then by a quarter of heaven: and
the Sun shall be more near to the strong point of the flowyng, in the day
quarter of flowyng, then the Moon to the strong point of reflowyng, in the day
quarter of reflowyng, and therefore the flowyng shall continue. And when the
Sun shall come to the weak point of the South reflowyng, ye Moon shall be
under the Horizon on the West part in the night quarter of the flowyng, and
shall be nearer to the strong point of the flowyng, which is under the Horizon
in the night quarter of the flowyng, then the Sun to the strong point of
reflowyng, which is above the Horizon in the day quarter of reflowyng: And
therefore the flowyng shall yet continue, until the Moon be so much under
the Horizon on the West part, in the night quarter of the flowyng, how much
the Sun above the Horizon on the same part of the West in the day quarter of
the reflowyng. And then the Moon shall be so much distant from the strong point
of flowyng, under the Horizon in the night quarter of flowyng, coming toward
the weak point of mydnyght reflowyng, how much the Sun from the strong
point of reflowyng above the Horizon, in the day quarter of reflowyng coming
to it: and so the Sun and Moon shall be of equal strength, and then shall be
neither flowyng nor reflowyng. And when the Moon by the motion of the first
moveable, shall depart from the strong point of flowyng under the Horizon, in
the night qu^^ter of flowyng, coming toward the weak point of mydnyght
reflowyng, the Sun by the same motion of the first moveable, shall approach
as much to the strong point of reflowyng, which is above the Horizon, in the
day quarter of reflowyng coming to it: And then the Sun shall be nearer to the
strong point of reflowyng, which is above the Horizon, in the day quarter of
reflowyng, then the Moon to the strong point of flowyng, which is under the
Horizon, in the night quarter of flowyng And therefore then shall begin the
reflowyng, and shall continue according that the Moon shall depart from the
strong point of flowyng, which is under the Horizon in the night quarter of
flowyng, approchyng unto the weak point of mydnyght reflowyng, and the Sun
shall approach to the strong point of reflowing, which is above the Horizon in
the day quarter of reflowyng. And when the Moon by the motion of the first
moveable, shall come to the weak point of mydnyght reflowyng, the Sun shall
yet be above the Horizon on the West part in the day quarter of reflowyng,
coming by the motion of the first moveable, to the weak point of the West
flowyng, because the Sun and the Moon are distant one from the other more
then by a quarter: And then the Sun shall be more distant from the strong point
of flowyng, which is under the Horizon on the West part in the quarter of the
night flowyng, then the Moon from the strong point of reflowyng, which also is
under the Horizon on the part of the East in the night quarter of reflowyng.
And therefore the reflowyng shall continue until the Moon be so much beyond
mydnyght toward the East, how much the Sun before mydnyght toward the West:
and then the Moon shall be so far distant from the strong point of reflowyng
in the night quarter of reflowyng, going from it by the motion of the first
moveable, and coming to the weak point of the East flowyng, how much the
Sun from the point of flowyng in the night quarter of flowyng, coming to it
by the same motion of the first moveable: and so the Sun and the Moon
shall be of equal force, and then shall be neither flowyng nor reflowyng. And when
the Moon by the motion of the first moveable, shall be departed from the strong
point of reflowyng, which is under the Horizon, on the East part of the night
quarter of reflowing toward the weak point of the East flowyng, the Sun by
the same mouyng of the first moveable, shall approach as much to the strong
point of flowyng, which is under the Horizon on the West part in the night
quarter of flowyng coming to it: And then because the Moon shall be more
distant from the strong point of reflowyng, then the Sun from the strong
point of flowyng, then shall begin the flowyng, because the Sun shall be
stronger then the Moon. And how much more the Moon shall be distant from the
strong point of reflowyng, in the night quarter of reflowyng, so much more the
Sun shall approach to the strong point of flowing, in the night quarter of
flowyng, and so the flowyng shall continue: and when the Moon shall come to
the weak point of the East flowyng, the Sun shall yet be in the night
quarter of flowyng, because the Sun is distant from the Moon more then by a
quarter of heaven, and the Sun shall be nearer to the strong point of flowing
in the night quarter of flowing, then the Moon to the strong point of
reflowyng, which is in the night quarter of reflowing: and so the flowing shall
yet continue until the Moon be so much above the Horizon on the East part,
how much the Sun under the Horizon on the same part of the East: And then
the Moon shall so much be distant from the strong point of flowing, which is
above the Horizon in the day quarter of flowyng, departing from it by the
motion of the first moveable toward the weak point of the South reflowyng,
how much the Sun from the strong point of reflowyng, which is under the
Horizon in the night quarter of reflowyng, coming to it by the same motion of
the first moveable. And then the Sun and the Moon shall be of equal force,
and there shall be neither flowyng nor reflowyng, and the first disposition shall
return again, and such flowyng and reflowyng, shall continue every natural
day in this manner, until the Moon shall come to her quadrature with the Sun.

And when the Moon shall be in the second quadrature, The Moon being in the
last quarter, causes the same effects as in the first.
then the water of the sea, shall neither flow nor reflowe, but shall seem to
be at rest as it was in the first quadrature, in the which, in the whole
revolution of heaven, the Sun and the Moon were ever of equal strength for
the causes there declared: for the same are the causes of the second
quadrature, which are also of the first, and is about.21. days. And this
quietness or stay of the water of the sea (as is said before) the Venetians
call Acqua de feel, and use this saying: Da vent' uno a venti due, l'acqua non
va ne su, ne giu From the.21. to.22. the water goes neither up nor down.

And when the Moon by her proper motion shall pass this second quadrature,
proceedyng to her conjunction with the Sun, then the Moon shall be distant
from the Sun, less then the fourth part of heaven. And then when she shall be
so much above the Horizon on the East part, in the day quarter of flowyng, as
the Sun under the Horizon on the same part of the East, in the night quarter
of reflowyng, then the Moon shall be so much distant from the strong point of
flowyng, which is above the Horizon, in ye day quarter of flowyng, coming to
it by the motion of the first moveable, how much the Sun from the strong
point of reflowyng, which is under the Horizon in the night quarter of
reflowing, going from it by the same motion of the first moveable toward the
weak point of the East flowyng: and then the Sun and the Moon shall be of
equal power, and there shall be neither flowyng nor reflowyng. And when the
Moon by the motion of the first moveable, shall come to the strong point of
flowyng, which is above the Horizon in the day quarter of flowyng, the Sun
by the same motion of the first moveable, shall depart as much from the strong
point of reflowyng, which is under the Horizon in the night quarter of
reflowyng, toward the weak point of the East flowyng. And then because the
Moon shall be less distant from the strong point of flowyng, which is above
the Horizon, in the day quarter of flowyng, then the Sun from the strong
point of reflowyng, the Moon shall be stronger then the Sun, and therefore
then shall begin the flowyng: and how much more the Moon shall approach to
the strong point of flowyng, so much more the Sun shall be distant from the
strong point of reflowyng, approaching to the weak point of the East flowing,
and therefore the flowyng shall continue. And when the Sun by the mouyng of
the first moveable, shall come to the weak point of the East flowyng, because
the Moon shall yet be in the day quarter of flowyng, for that she is distant
from the Sun less then a fourth part of heaven, she shall be less distant
from the strong point of flowyng, which is above the Horizon, in the day
quarter of flowyng, then the Sun from the strong point of reflowyng, which
is under the Horizon, in the night quarter of reflowyng, therefore the flowyng
shall yet continue. And when the Moon shall come to the weak point of the
South reflowyng, the Sun shall be above the Horizon, in the day quarter of
flowyng, and shall be nearer to the strong point of flowyng, then the Moon to
the strong point of reflowyng, which is after mydday (or the South) in the day
quarter of reflowyng, because the Sun is distant from the Moon less then
the fourth part of heaven, and therefore the flowyng shall continue until the
Moon be so much beyond the South toward the West, in the day quarter of
reflowyng, how much the Sun before the South toward the East, in the day
quarter of flowyng: And then the Moon shall be so much distant from the strong
point of reflowyng, in the day quarter of reflowyng, coming to it by the
motion of the first moveable, how much the Sun from the strong point of
flowyng, in the day quarter of flowyng, departing from it by the same motion of
the first moveable: and so the Sun and the Moon shall be of equal force, and
there shall be neither flowyng nor reflowyng. And when the Moon by the motion of
the first moveable, shall approach to the strong point of reflowyng, in the day
quarter of reflowyng, the Sun by the same motion of the first moveable, shall
go back and depart as much from the strong point of flowyng, in the day
quarter of flowyng: and then the Moon shall be nearer to the strong point of
reflowyng, in the day quarter of reflowyng, then the Sun to the strong point
of flowyng, in the day quarter of flowyng: and so the Moon shall be stronger
then the Sun, and therefore shall begin the reflowyng: and the flowyng and
reflowyng, shall continue in the same manner as is said.

When the Moon departs from her conjunction with the Sun, and is not come
to her first quadrature with the Sun, and is between the conjunction and
first quadrature, and when the Moon shall come to her conjunction with the
Sun, then again all the disposition before declared, shall return in all
points in like manner as is said. A brief collection of all the premises.
Therefore this motion of the water of the sea whereof we have spoken, is a
motion following the motion of the Sun and Moon to the motion of the first
moveable. For if you shall well consider that we have said of the flowyng and
reflowyng (that is) increase and decrease, or access and recesse of the water
of the sea, you shall understand that the begynnynges of such flowyng and
reflowyng, and likewise the rest and quietness, chance diversely in the hours
of the day and the night: For they come not ever in the same hours of the day,
as is manifestly known to such as observe such flowyng and reflowyng, or
false rest or quietness of the water of the sea. And therefore by the
aforesaid does appear that the water of the sea has motion of flowyng, once
in the day, and once in the night: and likewise of reflowyng once in the day,
and once in the night.

Ebhyng and flowyng begin not always at one hour.
It is manifest also that the flowyng does not begin ever the same hour of the
day or night, but at diverse hours: and likewise the reflowyng.

Also the time of flowyng or reflowyng, proceeds inordinately when the Moon
is in her quadratures with the Sun, that is, in the first or second.

There chances sometimes great increase of waters, sometime less, sometimes
mean, when the Moon shall be in any other place from the sun beside these
four: That is to mean, in the conjunction, or opposition, or her first
quadrature, or second with the Sun.

And as are sometimes increases of waters, greater, less, and mean, even so
are the decreases in like manner.

Great motio is of the water in the conjunction of the Sun and Moon.
The greatest concourses and motions of waters, are when the Moon is in
conjunction with the Sun, and also the greatest flowynges and reflowynges.
Likewise in opposition of the Moon with the Sun, and greater then in the
time of the conjunction of the Moon with the sun. For the superior bodies,
by their motion and light, give their influence into these inferior bodies. And
so much more as they have of light, so much more and stronglyer they work:
Greatest motions in opposition of the Sun and Moon.
and because in oppositio^ of the Moon with the Sun, the Moon is full of
light, and her light is toward us, therefore is it reasonable yt then should be
caused greater flowynges and reflowyngs, then in her conjunction with the
Sun. Nevertheless, because that in her conjunction with the Sun, the Sun
and Moon are both unite together, and their virtues, therefore also are great
encreasynges and decreasyngs of waters, because both their virtues are unite,
as I have said, but yet greater in the opposition then in the conjunction, for
causes before rehearsed.

The Moon being in her quadratures with the Sun, Small motions of the water
without determinate time always in the quadratures of the Sun and Moon.
the water of the sea has no determinate time of flowyng or reflowing, and
then are the less concourses of waters, and least flowing and reflowyng. And
such motion of the sea, the Venetians call De feel: and then the water of the
sea has no determinate beginning of flowyng or reflowyng, but is moved
inordinately in diverse manner, sometime coming, and sometime going. The cause
of this diversity is, because the Sun and the Moon, where so ever they
shall be in moouyng to the water equally, or as it were equally, have
contrariety in what so ever point they shall be. For in what so ever point the
Sun shall be, the Moon shall be in the point of opposite virtue, contrary to the
place of the Sun, or near.

And when the Moon shall be without the said four places, then the water of
the sea shall begin to come or go. And when the Sun and Moon shall be in
equal points of virtue of the quarters of contrary operation, the concourses
of waters shall be so much the greater, Note.
in how much the Moon shall be nearer to her conjunction with the Sun, or to
the opposition: and so much the less, in how much the Moon shall be nearer to
the quadratures, likewise also the flowynges and reflowynges shall be so much
the greater. The Moon follows the Sun in rising.
For if the Moon shall be between her conjunction with the Sun and the first
quadrature, then the Moon to the mouyng of the first moveable, does follow
the Sun in his rysyng: and then shall be the beginning of the day flowyng, of
the day after the rysyng of the Sun, about three of the clock, or before:
that is to mean, When flowyng s al e (...) ^^ares after Sun rising.
when the Sun shall be so much above the Horizon on the part of the East, in
the day quarter of flowyng, how much the Moon under the Horizon on the same
part of the East, in the night quarter of reflowyng, because then the Sun
and Moon shall be of equal force, because they shall be in the points of equal
virtue in the quarters of contrary operation, and the beginning of the night
flowyng shall be in the night, after the fall of the Sun (that is) when the
Sun shall be so much under the Horizon, on the same part of the Weast, in the
day quarter of flowyng, how much the Moon under the Horizon on the same
part of the Weast, in the day quarter of reflowyng: Ebbyng after noone.
And the beginning of the day reflowyng shall be in the day after noone, when the
Sun shall be so much after noone, in the day quarter of reflowyng, how much
the Moon before noone, in the day quarter of flowyng: And the beginning of the
reflowyng of the night, shall be in the day after mydnyght (that is) when the
Sun shall be so much after the point of mydnyght, in the night quarter of
reflowyng, how much the Moon before him in the night quarter of flowyng. And
if the Moon be between the first quadrature and the opposition, the Moon
yet in her rysyng follows the Sun, and then shall be the beginning of the day
flowyng, in the day after noone, about euenyng (that is) a little before or
after, that when the Sun shall be so much above the Horizon on the part of
the Weast, in the day quarter of reflowyng, how much the Moon above the
Horizon on the part of the East, in the day quarter of flowyng, and the
beginning of the night flowyng, shall be in the day before day (that is) about
morning, before or after (that is) when the Sun shall be so much under the
Horizon on the part of the East, in the night quarter of reflowyng, how much
the Moon under the Horizon on the part of the Weast, in the night quarter of
flowyng: and the beginning of the day reflowyng, shall be in the day before
noone, when the Sun shall be so much before the point of noone, how much the
Moon after the point of mydnyght. And the beginning of the night reflowyng,
shall be in the night, before mydnyght, when the Sun shall be so much before the
point of mydnyght, in the quarter of the night flowyng, how much the Moon
after the point of noone, or mydday, in the day quarter of reflowyng. And if
the Moon shall be between the opposition of the Sun, and her second
quadrature with the Sun, then the Moon in her rysyng, goes before the
Sun, The Moon rising before the Sun.
and then the begynnynges both of flowyng and reflowyng, be in like manner as
they were when the Moon was between the conjunction and first quadrature. For
the beginning of the day flowyng, shall be in the day about three of the clock,
before or after (that is) when the Sun shall be so much above the Horizon on
the East part, in the day quarter of flowyng, how much the Moon above the
Horizon on the Weast part, in the day quarter of reflowyng. And the beginning
of the night flowyng shall be in the night, when the Sun shall be so much under
the Horizon on the part of the Weast, in the night quarter of flowyng, how
much the Moon under the Horizon on the part of the East, in the night
quarter of reflowyng: But the beginning of the day reflowyng, shall be in the day
after noone, when the Sun shall be so much after the point of the South, in
the day quarter of reflowyng, as the Moon before the point of mydnyght, in the
night quarter of flowyng. And the beginning of the night reflowyng, shall be in
the day, when the Sun shall be so much after the point of mydnyght, in the
night quarter of reflowyng, how much the Moon before the point of noone, in
the day quarter of flowyng. And if the Moon shall be between the second
quadrature, and her conjunction with the Sun, then the Moon also in her
rysyng shall go before the Sun: and then shall be the begynnynges of flowyng
and reflowyng in the same hours, Note.
as they be when the Moon is between the first quadrature and opposition:
because the beginning of the day flowyng, in the day after noone about euenyng,
before or after, when the Sun shall be so much above the Horizon on the part
of the Weast, in the day quarter of reflowing, how much the Moon under the
Horizon on the same part of the Weast, in the night quarter of flowyng: and the
beginning of the night flowing shall be in the night, about morning, before or
after, when the Sun shall be so much under the Horizon on the part of the
East, in the night quarter of reflowyng, how much the Moon above the Horizon
on the same part of the East, in the day quarter of flowyng. But the beginning
of the day reflowyng, shall be in the day before noone, when the Moon shall be so
much after the point of mydday, or the South, in the day quarter of reflowyng,
how much the Sun before it in the day quarter of flowyng, and the beginning
of the night reflowyng shall be in the night before mydnyght (that is) when the
Moon shall be so much after the point of mydnyght, in the night quarter of
reflowyng, how much the Sun before the point of mydnyght, in the night
quarter of flowyng. And hereby it appears, that as well the flowyng as
reflowyng of the water of the sea, begin not ever in the same hours of the day
or night: for the beginning of flowyng is either in the beginning of the day,
or beginning of the night, which chances, the Moon being in conjunction or
opposition to the Sun: or is before day from the mornings toward the day,
or from the day, until four of the clock, A general observation for the
beginning of ebbyng and flowyng.
or thereabout, or is before Euenyng, toward Even tide, and from thence to the
Cock crowyng, or thereabout: which chances when the Moon is between her
conjunction or opposition with the Sun, or any of the quadratures. The
beginning of reflowyng is either at noone, or at mydnyght, as when the Moon is
in conjunction or opposition with the Sun, or is before noone, or after, or
before mydnyght, or after, as when the Moon is between her conjunction or
opposition with the Sun, and any of the quadratures. It is apparent also,
that sometimes the water of the sea has no determinate or certain beginning,
neither order of flowyng or reflowyng, which chances, the Moon being in her
quadratures with the Sun. It is manifest also, that al flowyng of the water
of the sea, is caused by respect to the Horizon, Note.
on the part of the East or Weast. And every reflowyng by respect to the
Meridian, or to the point of mydday, or mydnyght.

In what Horizon this discourse takes place.
Here is also to be considered, that all that is said, are most certaynely
true in a right Horizon, but in an oblique or side Horizon, they sometimes
fail, as shall be said hereafter following.

It chances (as I have said) that the water of the sea does sometime wander
or decline from the order above prescribed, yet commonly, and for the most
part keeps that due order. Such manner of declynyng is after two sorts: For
there is either disorder, or error, in the hour of the beginning of the
motion of the flowyng or reflowyng, or in the myddest of the motion: that is to
mean, that they have greater or lesser courses then at other times, or
otherwise greater or lesser increases and decreases. The error coming in the
hour of motion, may come of three causes: As, by reason of the situation of
the region, or by reason of the bodies supercelestiall, or by change of the
air. By reason of situation of regions, chances diversity only in the
hour of the beginning of the flowyng, The beginning (...) of (...).
because the beginning thereof has respect to the Horizon, or is by respect
to the Horizon: for in the beginning of reflowyng is no diversity nor error,
because the beginning of the reflowyng, is by respect to the Meridian circle.
Again, I he beginning of eb^^^ (...) by re^^ (...) the (...) ch^^^.
by reason of the situation of the region, diversity chances thus, that is,
that either the region is under the Equinoctial circle, or without it. And if
it be under the circle, because they have a right Horizon, and the days be
there ever equal with the nyghtes there, at all times of the year. That we
have said of diverse hours of the beginning of flowyng, is certaynely true:
But regions distaunt from the Equinoctial, because they have a wyndyng or
slope Horizon in them, the begynnynges of flowyng are as in regions under the
Equinoctial, only in two times of the year: That is to say, in the Spryng
time, or Equinoctial Vernal, and in the time of Autumn, or Equinoctial
Autumna^l, that is to say, About the myddest of the Month of March, and about
the myddest of the Month of September: But in other times of the year, or
from the Vernal Equinoctial, by the whole Summer, until the equinoctial
Autumnal, it is otherwise, because the beginning of the day flowyng, if the
flowyng be before noone, that is, about the morning, it shall be later then it
ought to be: That is to say, more of the day then is in regions under the
Equinoctial, and that because, that in such regions the day begins sooner,
or the Sun ryseth sooner, then in regions which are under the Equinoctial:
for the declynyng of the oblique or side Horizon (although these regions be
under one and the same Meridian.) But and if the beginning of the day flowyng
be after noone, that is, about euenyng, then such beginning shall be sooner then
it is in regions under the Equinoctial, (that is to say) in fewer hours of the
day: because that then the Sun falls latelyer then in regions which be
under the Equinoctial. But the beginning of the night flowyng, if it be before
mydnyght, it is sooner in the said places or regions (that is to say) in less
time of the night, or in less time after the fall of the Sun, then in regions
under the Equinoctial: because that then the night begins to them
afterward. And if the beginning of the night flowyng be after mydnyght (that
is) toward the day, it shall be later (that is) of more hours, or more near
the day, then is in regions under the Equinoctial: because the Sun ryseth
sooner to them, Two flowyngs in one day, and none in the night.
then to those that be under the Equinoctial. And this diversity grows so
much, that sometime it chances to see two flowings in one day, and none in
the night: which chances for the inequality of the days, with their
nyghtes. For in how much the artificial day shall be longer then his night, so
much such diversity and error grows more evidently. Therefore in the
longest days of the year, such diversity shall appear manyfestly. But from
the Equinoctial Autumnal, by all Winter, until the Equinoctial Vernall, it is
contrary: because the begynn^ng of the day flowyng, if it be before noone, that
is, about the morning, then shall it be sooner then it should be (that is to
say) in fewer hours of the day, then it should be in a right Horizon: for
then the day begins latelyer, or the Sun ryseth latelyer to them that have
a wyndyng or crooked Horizon. And if such flowyng shall be after noone (that is)
about euenyng, then the beginning of such flowyng shall be later (that is) more
toward the euenyng, or nearer to the falling of the Sun, then in regions
which are under the Horizon: For in said or crooked Horizon, the night is
sooner, and the Sun falls sooner then in a right Horizon. Also, the
beginning of the night flowyng, if it shall be before mydnyght, it shall be later
and more in the night, then in regions under the Equinoctial: because then the
night shall sooner begin in the crooked Horizon, then in the right, because
the Sun first falls in the crooked Horizon, then in the right. And if the
beginning of the night flowyng shall be after mydnyght, that is, toward the day,
then such beginning of flowyng in the crooked Horizon, shall be sooner (that is)
in fewer hours of the night (that is) more before the day, or before the
rysyng of the Sun, then shall be in regions which be under the Equinoctial:
because the Sun ryseth latelyer then in regions under the Equinoctial. And
such diversity grows so much, that sometime shall be two flowynges in the
night, and none in the day: And this chances for the inequality and increase
of the night above his day. For in how much the night shall be longer then his
day, so much the more grows such diversity: and therefore such diversity
shall appear greatest in the longest night of the year. Wherefore, by the
aforesaid, Note.
it is manifest, that how much the nearer we shall be to the Equinoctial, so
much the less shall appear the diversity in the hour of the beginning of
flowyng of the water: And how much the Sun shall be nearer unto the standings
or stayinges of the Sun (called Solstitium) or the longest days, and longest
nights, so much greater and more certain shall be the diversity, and shall
appear more manyfestly. Furthermore, diversity chances by reason of the
heavenly bodies, and error, not only in the begynnings of flowyng, but also
of reflowyng.

For when any of the great and luminous Stars (as are Venus and Jupiter)
shall be about the Sun or Moon, The ^^^^^enes ^f other (...), ^^^e cause (...)
in ^^l by (...) and (...). And lyk^ (...).
they help them in moouyng the water of the sea: and therefore by this means
also, they have their due order. Likewise (as we have said) by reason of the
change of the air, often times chances diversity and error in the
begynnynges of flowyng and reflowyng: For the violent disposition of wyndes,
vehemently blowyng, as well near, as far of, remooueth the courses of waters
from their due order, sometime hastenyng the flowyng, and sometime the
reflowyng, and sometime staying or stackyng them likewise.

There chances also error in the mydst of motion of waters, for as well
courses of waters, as also flowynges and reflowyngs, sometime keep not the due
motion: For (as is said) the disposition of wyndes may either increase or
diminishe their courses. Furthermore also, Narownesse of places may cause
disorder.
the straytenesse or narownesse of places, by reason of Islands or mountains,
cause great concourses and diversities in many places. For where the sea is
strayter or narower, there is the stronger course, as about the Island Fuboea,
Nigropontis, and between Sicilia and Calabria is greatly observed. Such
straytes hinder the increase of waters, because less quantity passes
thereby, and therefore there the flowynges and reflowynges are less. And
hereupon it chances, that in the Ocean sea, are greatest flowynges and
reflowynges, because there are no straytes which may hinder or stay the courses
of waters, and by that means they have their full and free course, and in more
certain order. But in our sea, Mare Mediterraneum, it is otherwise. For what
so ever water of the Ocean enters therein, or comes forth, passes from the
Weast by one only narowe strayte: and therefore it can not in the flowyng be
greatly filled, neither in the reflowyng be greatly emptied. And so
consequently, the motion of the water of ye sea proceeds not in certain
order. And to have said thus much of the diverse motions of the water of ye
sea, may suffice.

Demonstration of Proportions of Motions Local, printed rather for the learned
Philosopher, then the Mariner, yet the Mariner may learn many proper
conclusions necessary to be known. To the godly and not envious reader, John
Taisnier Hannonius, wishes health. etc.
WHereas a few years past, at Rome, Ferraria, and in other Universities of
Italy (when Paul the third possessed the Papal dignity) I took in hand to
read public lectures of sciences Mathematike, I may testify without scruple
of arrogancy, that my lectures were honorably accompanied with the presence
of more then three hundred auditors, because that arts Mathematike are there
greatly esteemed. And therefore after the lecture was finished (as is the manner
of auditors) oftentimes many resorted unto me, departing from the schools, to
demand further of such doubts, whereof they had not full understanding In the
mean while, certain which envied my reputation and assertions, ceased not
with injuries, to hinder our proceedinges, and sometimes to make an end of our
disputations with quarrels and strokes. It chanced in the mean time that
mention was made of the lecture of Aristotel. And whereas, from the purpose,
one envious person moved the question of the Proportions of Local Motions, I
refused to dispute with him, affirming that he evil understood the intention
of Aristotel, whom he so esteemed as a heavenly God, that it seemed to him
sacrilege, if any should dissent from his doctrine. But he, maliciously and
furiously, affirmed that I did rashly condemn Aristotel. I was therefore
enforced by the request of my reverend Cardinal of Adulphis Florentine, openly
to repeat the same, especially for that the report of these contentions, was
now come to the Popes ears, whose request also, I took for commandment.
And thereupon (which I had not done before) I declared the errors of
Aristotle, in the presence of the reverend Cardinal Crescentius, and the
Bishop of Ponset, men most expert in all kind of learning, and in manner
infinite other Auditors, before whom (in manner as follows) I showed the
errors of Aristotle by words and demonstrations. You therefore gentle and
indifferent readers, accept this our Demonstration with favorable minds. I
repute Aristotle for the chief of all Philosophers. Yet forasmuch as it is
humane to err, he also might sometimes fail.

Demonstration of the Proportions of Motions Local, against Aristotle and all
Philosophers.
FIrst of al, and before we shall touch the point of the Demonstration of
Proportions of Motions local, is to be noted, that of bodies being of one and
the same kind, the like and self same is the proportion between quantities,
which is also between heaviness or lyghtnesse, either simply, or in respect
to other, it makes no matter. It is yenough, that among them whose proportion
we shall consider by quantity, among the same likewise, we shall understand
by heaviness and lyghtnesse. etc. Let be for example two bodies of lead, and
unequal, as A. and E. of the which the body A. shall be triple in quantity to
the body E. for of the multiplication of the body, let no man be deceived: for
many have thought the sphere to be duplicate, when his Diameter is duplicate,
which is a great error, as appears by.15. of the twelfth of Euclide. For
there is showed that the proportion of two spheres the one to the other, to be
as it were the triplicate proportion of the Diameter of the greater sphere, to
the Diameter of the less. Likewise also is showed in.37. of the twel^^, of
solid bodies like, and equidistant superficies. Further (...) Albertus Durerus,
speaks sufficiently of this in his.4. Albertus Durerus. Cubus is a square
^^^^re like a ^^ye.
book of Geometry, teaching the duplication of Cubus, etc. For then the same
body A. should exceed the body E. in heaviness in triple proportion. Note
therefore the weight A. and the letter B, and E be signed F. and conceive in
mind the body A. to be divided into three equal parts, that is to say, C D G.
of the which parts, H I K. now is it manifest for the presupposition, that
every part of, C D G. in equallitie shall correspond to ye body E. and shall
waygh by common science, equally F. which if it were depiction of weights not,
every part of A. should not be reputed Homogenie, or all of one like substance
with the body E. and so should it repugne with the presupposed. Therefore,
forasmuch as H I K. together is equivalent to B. only by common science,
shall be also (by the 7. of the fyfth) B. to F. the same that is H I K. to the
same F. but the weight of H I K. is triple to F. by which reason the
proposition is manifest.

I will now make Demonstration how bodies of the self same, or one kind and
figure, equal or unequal one to the other, in the same midst or mean, by
equal space, be moved in one or self same time: the which is against
Aristotel and all other philosophers that have not yet seen this proposition.
Aristotel first in the.4. of his phisickes. Cap. De Vacuo, where he intends
to show, that if Vacuum, or void, be granted, mouyng or motion is taken
away, etc. he there says thus, We see those bodies which have more heaviness
or lyghtnesse, so that they be of one figure, to be more swyftly moved by equal
space, and by such proportion as they have the one to the other. And therefore
they are so moved, per Vacuum etc. which is proved to be false. Furthermore
what S. Thomas says touching this, Thomas de Aquino.
any man that will, may read: for no man ever better understood ye mind of
Aristotle. But for the examples which Simplicius and Auerroes give to the
understanding of this (by two sphericall bodies of equal quantity, but of
diverse kinds, as one of gold, and the other of silver) we must not therefore
say that they understood this proposition as I will demonstrate. For they
should have said somewhat of the equality of the quantity of those bodies,
forasmuch as the motion of bodies equal or unequal, Motion of the bodies
(...) and silver.
is all one, so that they be all of one figure: as for example, if there be
three spherical bodies, of the which two be of gold, and the third of silver,
and they of gold be unequal, and the other of silver equal to one of the
golden bodies: then in the same proportion of time, shall be moved the golden
body equal to that of silver, with the silver body, in the which proportion
the silver body with the go^den unequal, as shall be declared hereafter.

Furthermore 6. Phisicorum. Cap. 1. in the end, and in manner through all the.2.
Chapter of the same book, he confirms the same: but in the fourth he says
thus, Whereas every thing that moves, moves in some other, and in some time,
and that moveable is motion of the whole, the same or all one shall be the
divisions of the time and the mouyng, and of to be moved, and of that which is
moved, and also of that in the which is mouyng. Afterward he gives
demonstration after his manner: but cap. 7. he wylleth the same, where he
intends, that in finite time, nothing may pass into infinite greatness.
etc. Furthermore Aristotle in his first book, De Coelo, confirms the same,
saying simply that the reason or consyderation of times, is contrary to the
reason of weyghtes: as if half a weight be moved in this time, the double is
moved in the half of this. etc. And this cap. 6. Furthermore cap. 8. of the
same book he says, The (...) of fire.
The fire in as much as it is greater then the earth, so much the sooner and
swyftlyer it comes to his restyng place. etc.

Also in his second book, De Coelo. Cap. 8. he says thus: As in other
things, the greater body, is more swyftly moved by his proper course or motion,
even so also in the heavenly circles, etc. Again Cap. 13. he affirms the
same in two places, Motion of heaven (...).
saying that the greater earth, is ever swyftlyer moved.

Item, lib. De Coelo. cap. 2. he says thus, If according to the proportion
which has the space C D. the body of B. shalb divided, all B. in the same
time shall be moved by C E. in th which time part of B. by C D. of necessity:
wherefore it follows that B. be moved with swyfter motion then part of B.
Afterward he makes like Demonstration, saying thus, The swyftnesse of the
less, The greater body the quicker motion.
to the swyftnesse of the greater, has such proportion as the greater body
to the less, etc. Again in the third, De Coelo. Cap. 5. in the end he says
likewise, that so much the more every thing is moved, as it is the greater, as
also the fire the greater it is, is so much of swyfter motion, etc. He
confirms the same also, The greater fire the swyfter motion.
Cap. 2. and 4. of the same book, where yet speaking more clearly, he says
that the greater fire ryseth upward swyfter then a less: and a greater piece
of gold or lead, does swyfter move downewarde, and the like of other heavy
bodies: and more clearly can no man geather the meaning of Aristotle.

Perspectiue and error of Vitellio.
Vitel io, in his second book of Perspectiue in the second proposition, has
fallen into the same error. I pretermit his ignorance in that proposition
where he thinks that there is no quantity insensible: but let this pass
with other errors, the which at any other time shall be showed in their place.
He that will read all other Philosophers, shall see that they all accord with
the mind and sentence of Aristotle, who also in diverse other places confirms
the same: but to have rehearsed these principal places, may suffice, and
therefore we will now come to the Demonstration.

This propounded Demonstration, I will show apparently, that it may the better
be understood. And forasmuch, as Archimedes in his work, Archimedes.
De insidentibus aquae, has spoken nothing of the proportion of motion of
Elements, it is manifest that he had not yet searched this proposition: for
there was the proper place of this matter. But it is not granted to any one
man to know all things: and therefore it was very difficult to many to
imagine the supposition, which I openly expounded in Rome, whereas Archimedes
makes none other Demonstration, but that natural motion is not caused of any
other then of the excess or proceedyng of a body in an Element, above or upon
the said Element, or contrarywyse. etc.

Demonstration.
LET be for example two bodies, G. and O. both alyke, that is to mean,
spherical and Homogenic (that is) altogether of like substance: of the which
O. shall exceed G. in quadruple proportion (for if it shall exceed it in
quantity, it shall also exceed in heaviness as it is said before) and that
the mean or myddle be uniform, as B D F M V. For example: let the termining
lines be equidistant, and the same also circular upon the center S. Then by the
terminyng line, from whence, let pass, A quo Ad (...).
or be drawn the line. P I Q. and by the termynyng line to whom, let pass the
line R M V T. Thus I conclude, the bodies G. and O. to be moved in unequal
time by the said space, by the motion of nature in the aforesaid mean: but
if the body O. were equal to the body G. there were no doubt, but that those
bodies should be moved in equal time by the same space. etc. I will therefore
by imagination divide the body O. into four equal parts, like unto their
whole. Let be therefore those parts signified by the letters, H K L N. whose
centers (for example) I will put in the line P Q. so that the distance between
H. and K. be the same that is between L. and N. I will also divide the line K
L. by equality, by the 29. of the third of Euclides in the point I. which
shall be the center of the heaviness of the bodies H K. and L N. by common
science mainteyned, by the third proposition of the book of Archimedes, De
centris grauium. Furthermore it is manifest, that every one of the bodies, H K
L N. shall be moved in equal time from the terminyng line or space of P I Q. to
the terminyng line R V M T. to that in the which is G. By the first conception
therefore of Euclides, all bodies, that is to mean H K L N. and G. passing
together from and at the same instant, shall be moved equally, that is to say,
in equal time: and ever the line passing by their centres, shall be equally
distant to the line R M V T. Finally if the line be understood by the center
I. and the body O. divided by equality or equal distance, then that point of
division, shall be the center of the weight H K L N. and O. by the aforesaid.
But now if that line be understood to be moved by force of the foresaid
bodies, and demissed from the line P Q. or equidistant to it (for the^ also
should M V R T. be equidistant) by common sense, MVR T. and the body O. in
equal time by the motion of nature shall be moved by the granted space, to that
in the which the bodies H K L N. shall be moved: For resistaunce of the mean to
the bodies H K L N. is the same which is to the body O. But that this may
appear more manifest, Proportion and motion of waterie bodies.
let it be thus understood. Let us imagine (for example) two bodies of water:
Of the which, the one shall be equal in quantity to the body O and the other
to the body G. or to one of the bodies N L K H. which shall be all one: then.16.
of the fyfth, the proportion of O. to G. or to one of the aforesaid bodies, is
the same which is of the waterie equal O. to the waterie equal G. by the
proposition declared before. The proportion of heaviness of the watrie body
equal O. to the heaviness of the watrie body equal G. is the same which is
between the quantities of the self same bodies: But we must understand them
to be sustained or weighed in a rarer or thynner Element. The proportion
therefore shall be the same which is between the heaviness of bodies O. and G.
by the.11. of the fyfth, the aforesaid proposition helpyng thereto.
Furthermore, let us imagine the heaviness of watrie bodies, to be substrace
from the heaviness of the bodies, O. and G. So the other grauities or
heaviness, shall be those which shall be moved without impediment, as appears
by the 7. of Archimedes, De nisidentibus aquae.

And whereas by the 15. of the fyfth of Euclides, the proportion of these
heavy bodies, is the same which is between O. and G. by the.19. of the fyfth
aforesaid: the resystaunce of the mean or myddle to O. shall be quadruple to the
resystance to G. The same also do I say of every of the bodies N L K H. It
appears by common science, that resystance of the mean to the bodies N L K
H. is equal to that which is to the body O. but is the same in the which G. by
the first conception of Euclides.

Furthermore, if there shall be two bodies of al one figure, but of diverse
homogeneite or substance, and of unequal corporalitie, and (for example) either
of them heavier then the mean or middle, in the which they are moved, and
that also the less of them be heavier then the bigger, yet that the greater
weygh more then the less, then I say, that the less shall be swyfter in motion:
and the same shall be the proportion of time to the less, which is to the
greater, which is also the greater kind of heaviness to the kind of ye
less, taking away so much heaviness from both, as is of the half in every of
them. Let be for example, two bodies M. and N. of the same form, and diverse
homogeneite or substance, and the same also to be unequal (for of equals there
is no doubt) of the which, the greater shall be M. but the kind of the body N.
to be heavier then the kind of the body M. Puttyng the case also, that the
body M. be heavier then the body N. and each of them also heavier then the
mean or myddle body, by the which they move: then will I show the
proposition. Understand first A V I. to be of equal and like figure to the
body M. but of the kind of the body N. Let us imagine also that the body M. in
heaviness, to exceed the myddle or mean in double proportion A V I. or in
the eight proportion: so then the moouyng of the body A V I. shall in the
seventh proportion be swyfter then the motion of the body M. because the
resystance of the half to the body M. is subdupla, and to the body A V I.
suboctupla, by ye seventh of Archimedes, De insidentibus aquae. But by the
aforesaid Demonstration, the body N. shall be moved in the same time in which
the body A V I. Wherefore, by the first conception of the mind added upon
Euclide by Campanus, the proposition is clear.

The like reason is also of violent motions, taking the proportion of the
moouyng strengthes, and taking away the proportion of the resystaunce of the
half or myddle. Motions violent and natural.
Also, whereas are two equal angles above the Horizon, or under, but in
contrary order to the motion of nature, because violent motion is swyfter in
the beginning then in the end: and the contrary chances in the motion of
nature: For with violent motion, the motion of nature is ever somewhat myxt, if
horizontally or angulerly it shall be above or beneathe the Horizon: and nature
woorketh so much, until it bring violent motion unto some end. But if
perpendiculerlye violence shall be made above the Horizon, and toward the place
which that body naturally moves unto, then nature can not strive against or
withstand, but that violence does ever go with it, in respect of the end
from whence. Furthermore, by the aforesaid, it is manifest that to be false
which Aristotle says 7. Physic. in the last chapter, where he says, If A. be
that which moves B. and B. that which is moved, and C. the longitude
whereby, and D. the time in which the motion is, that is to say, in equal
time and power equal. A. the half of B. shall move by the double of C. and by
C. in the half of D. for so shall be the similitude of the reason. etc. That it
is false I will thus demonstrate. Let us first imagine two bodies as before, in
any mean or myddle homogenie. etc. As let be for example. M. and N. and that
M. be double in quantity to the body N and that the weight of N. be al one
with the weight of M. And also that the body A V I. be equal to the body M. in
quantity, and in likeness or kind of the body N. Then by common science, the
body A V I. shall be double in heaviness to the body M. And grauntyng that the
body M. be double in heaviness above the half, then shall the body A V I. be
quadruple in heaviness above the said half. Wherefore the resystance taken
away, let be left the time in the which the body A V I. to the time in the
which M. is in proportion subtriple, or in the which the body A V I. in the
same time shall be moved the body N. by the aforesaid. Or if in the same time
the body N. shall be moved with the body M. yet the space by the which N
shall be triple to that by which M. For the reason is all one of violent
motions. The same shall precisely come to pass, if in the stead of the
excess of weight above the half, we shall take the virtue or power moouyng
etc, as before.

Aristotle likewise erreth in 4. Physic. Cap. 8. where he entreats De vacuo,
saying that the same, or al one, shall be the proportion of motions of any body
by diverse Elements, which is between the same Elements. As if the air be in
subtilitie double to the water, in double time B. the mean shall pass to that
time, in which by the mean D. and C. the time shall be double of the time E.
etc. Now I show the error of Aristotle. Let us first understand, a body to
pass through water by natural motion, as (for example) by a granted space,
let us also imagine that body in double to exceed the water in weight, The
proportion of motion of Elements.
and that the water in heaviness exceed the air in double proportion, then
the granted body shall be quadruple to the air. Wherefore in the heaviness, the
resystences of time taken away, in the which the motion of that body in the
air, by equal space to that, by the which in water to the time wherein by
water in the granted space is moved, the proportion shall be subtriple, and not
subduple, as Aristotle affyrmeth. Aristotle also erreth in the same Chapter,
supposyng that if motion should be granted in void, the same or all one,
should be the reason of time to time, as is between moouyng bodies: which is
impossible by the aforesaid. For those bodies should be moved in equal
time, although they should be of diverse kinds, fourmes, and bygnesse. By
which place also is easy to gather, that the mind of Aristot^^ was, that the
proportion of motion to motion, is the same which greatnesses have between
them, according to heaviness and lyghtnesse simply. But that this also may be
more clearly understood, imagine the bodies M. and N in void, and that the
body N. be of the same weight which. A V I. but of diverse kinds, and
consequently, of diverse bygnesse: then whereas those bodies have no resystence,
there is no doubt but they shall be moved in equal time, by equal space. I will
take therefore the body A V I. of the kind of the body N. but of the quantity
of the body M. now then by the mean of true method of the demonstration
before showed A V I. and N. shall be moved in equal time with the body N. by
equal space. Wherefore, by the first conception in the same in the which M:
wherefore it follows. etc. Furthermore, also where Aristotle. 7. Physic.
speaks of the comparison of motions, saying that a right line is not
comparable to a crooked line, because there should be found some right line
equal of circuler line, either greater or less. For whereas by reason of the
definition given by him in 6. Physic. to the swyftnesse and flownesse of
motion, it seems to him that it can not be, that circuler motion should be
comparable to right motion. In the which he is manyfestly deceived, and
cheefely, thynkyng that a right line can not be found equal, greater or
lesser to the circuler line: whereas Archimedes in the first proposition of his
Geometry, shows the contrary, and that by Mathematical demonstration, and
not by the opinion of Aristotle. For Archimedes shows there, by what means
we may find a right line greater or less then any circuler line, constitutyng
fygures of right lines without or within the circle. etc. But some man may say,
that although a right line may be granted greater or less then any circuler
line, yet that the same can not be found equal, whereas in.15. of the third
of Euclide, is showed that a greater Angle may be found, then is the angle of
Contingence, and that by the motion of the right line of the greater angle,
passage is made unto the right line contingent or touching the circle: Yet that
it can not be, that with the contingent line it should make an angle equal to
the angle of contingence. To this I answer, that although a greater angle be
granted, yet not a less: For if the less should be granted as well as the
greater, we should likewise have an equal. For example, consider the circle A
C. with the line A B. does touch in the point A. the angle of contingence
shall be A B C. then let be the circle inwardlye described A E. touching the
circle A C. in the point A. for to one only point it shall touch the circle A
C. by 12. of the third. And so the line A B. shall touch the circle A E by
common science, by the which the angle B A E. should be greater then the angle
B A C. Likewise also, if the circle A D. shall be described outwardlye, the angle
B A D. should be less then the angle B A C. And consequently by the same
order whereby we make the greater or the less, we shall also constitute equal,
which is the intent.

Wherefore it follows, that it may be done contrary to that which Aristotle
says, and for the same sentence of Aristotle, some have thought that it is
impossible that any of the fygures of crooked lines, should be found equal
to any figure of right line, or the contrary. The which to be possible, I will
now demonstrate. For example, let be given a trigon or triangle A B C. for
that I say of the trigon, I mean also of all fygures of right lines, for as
much as they be diuisible into triangles, as appears by the 32 of the first.
And if of those triangles we shall constitute a superficial line of equidistant
sides, by 44. of the first, taken as often as need shall be, which duplicate
by the help of 36. of the first, and afterward a Diameter in it, then the
half of that superficies, shall have an equal triangle of the taken
superficies by the 41. of the first, or by the taken right line by the first
conception, I will constitute a superficial of two crooked lines contained
equal unto it. I will divide the first Basis or ground A C. by equal spaces
into points H. by 10 of the first, and I draw B H. which also I draw
forth until H K. be double to B H. by 3. of the first twyse assumpted. Then
to the half of H K. that is I. I direct C I. and A I. I join thereto also A
K. and C K. by right lines: then (by the first of the syxth) these triangles
shall be all equal to them selves. After this, I will constitute a superficial
of equidistant sides, and of right angles upon what so ever line, which
superficies shall be equal to the Poligonic A B C K. by 44. of the first
assumpted, as often as shall be needful, that superficies is made G D. But in
the which I draw the Diameter F E. so that by 41. of the first trigon F G E.
shall be the half of the whole superficies, and by common science equal to the
trigon B K C. and triplus to the trigon B H C. now I divide F G. by equal in
the point M. by 10. of the first, and I protracte or draw forth
equidistantly G E. by 31. of the first. So do I also of the line M L.
dividing it by equal in the point N. by the aforesaid 10. of the first.
Afterward by 44 of the first twyse assumpted of equidistaunt sides, I make a
superficies of right angles upon the line M N. equal to the quadrature of the
line F M. which may consyst of M N. and N O. Furthermore, of M N. transuerse or
ouerthwarte, and N O. right, I constitute a parabol of a right angle, that it
may be of less labor: For this example may suffice by 52. of the first of
Apolonius Pergeus, Apollonius Pergeus.
the terminyng line of which paraboll, shall pass by the points F N. and G.
by the same, and by 33. of the same F E. shall touch the parabol at the point F.
And afterward when the trigon F E G. shall be triplus, to the trigon B H C. as
we have showed before, but also the portion F N G. triplus by the 17. of
Archimedes, De quadratura Parabolae. Wherefore the portion F N G. shall be equal
to the trigon H B C. by the first conception in Euclide, added by Campanus.
Furthermore, I draw E G. until by the third of the first G R. equal G R. I
draw forth also F R. and L M Q: Then by the fourth of the first, the
triangle F G E. shall be of equal sides, and also of equal angles to the
triangle F G R. Furthermore, Q M is equidistant G R. by common science, and by
R G. of the first, the angle F Q M. equal to the angle F R G. and the angle F R
G. equal to the angle F M Q. and whereas the angle F R G. is common to either of
them, then by the 4. of the syxt, the same, or al one, shall be the proportion R
G. to Q M. as is of G F. to M F. But as is G F. to M F. so is G F. to M L.
Wherefore by N. of the fifth, G F. so has it self to M L. as G R. to Q M. But
by the 16. of the same M L. to Q M. has it self, as G F. to G R. Wherefore M
L. equal. M Q. which M Q. I divide by equal in the point X by 10. of the
first, and will do as before. Then by the reasons aforesaid of the same, the
portion F X G. shall be equal to the trigon A B H. and the whole Superficies F
G. N X. shall be equal to the whole trigon, A B C. which is proposed.



The contrary appears thus. Let be granted a Superficies, contained of two
paraboll lines, as F N G. and F X G. proposing (for example) to find a
superficial of right lynts trianguler equal to the granted superficies. I
draw first F G. Then after by 44. of the second of Apollonius Pergeus, I find
the Diameter of the parabol F N G. which is M N. which I draw to N L. to be
equal M N. Then I draw F L. which shall touch the parabol F N G. in the point
F. by 33. of the first of the same. Then from the point G. I draw a line G E.
equidistant from the Diameter M N L. by 31. of the first of Euclide: which I
draw until it join together with F L. the which doubtless shall be done by
the second of the first of V^tellio.

The point of the concourse or joining together, is E. then I divide F E. into
three equal portions by the 11. of the syxth of Euclide, in the points S. and
T. which points I join with the point G. by the lines F G. and G R. Now
shall there be three angles all equal to them selves by 38. of Euclide. After
this, I constitute a Trigon, B H C. equal to the Trigon, F S G. by this means
I draw forth H C. to the equality G S. by the 4. of the first of Euclide.
Then at the point H. I design an angle B H C. equal to the angle F S G. by
23. of the first of Euclide: and by 3. of the first of the same, I draw H B.
until it be equal F S. Afterward I join B C. by a line. Then by 4. of the
first, the tryangle B H C. shall be equal to the triangle F S G. and shall be
equal to the portion F N G. by 17. Archimedes, De Quadratura parabolae, by the
help of the first conception of Euclide. I do the like of the portion F G X to
whom by an equal triangle O P R. Then I draw P Q equally distant O R. and R
V. equally distant O P. by 31. of the first of Euclide. Then by 41. of the
same O P R. shall be half of the superficies O V. Now then I somewhat protract C
H. then upon B H. I constitute a superficial of equidistant sides, having an
angle B H A. by 44. of the first of Euclide, twyse assumpted: the Diameter of
the which superficies, be A P B. Then by 41. of the same with the first
conception of the Trigon A B C. shall be equal of the superficies F G N X.
granted, which is the intent.

Aristotle (to say the truth) was an excellent searcher of things: Aristotle.
Yet I will not say as some say (which have never read ye works of Aristotle,
or understand the^ not) that every word of Aristotle, is almost a sentence:
and that Aristotle was the god of Philosophers, and never erred in one word,
but was divine in all things. Such miserable men, if they knew what it were to
speak with Demonstration, The sense judges not truly of all things sensible.
and what by experience to the sense, would never have said such things. For
by sense simply, in those things that are not properly sensible, we are
oftentimes deceived. And whereas we can not perceive the deception, by the mean
of that simple sense, then it seems to us that the thing can not be, and that
it is not in very deed as it appears to the sense, as for example: Who is he
that thinkyng not a reflexed form on the superficial of water immovable, to
be seen of the same greatness, as it is by a right longitude, by the mean of
a Diaphane, geathered of a radiall line incident and reflecte: whereas this is
false by G Q of the sixth of Vitellio. For the superficies of the water is
spherical, as shows Aristotle. 2. De Coelo. Cap. 4. But better Archimedes in
the 2. proposition, De subsidentibus aquae. And therefore when any star
appears unto us above the Horizon, yet is it not in deed as it appears:
but is rather under the Horizon, as appears by this Demonstration. Let the
star be I. the Horizon R A T. the earth E A M. whose center is A. and the
sight E. the vapors O E. Then whereas the radi^^ line passing from any rare,
thynne, or transparent in any transparent of more thycknesse, makes a
perpendiculer, by the 45. of the second of Vitellio, it is manifest therefore
the star I. to be seen by the line I O E. which line shall be crooked, The
thynnesse and thycknesse of Elements.
because that simple air is thynner then vapors, and fire thynner then air.
Also the matter or substance of heaven is thynner then fire, by 50. of the 10.
of Vitellio. Furthermore, the higher part of the air is thynner then the
lower part. The same I say also of water and fire (if we may call fire the
highest part of the body, near unto the concauitie of the Moon) and of every
superior part of Elements. And so the star by the line O E. seems to be
above the Horizon, in the point V. But Vitellio also in the tenth book, in the
proposition 49. teaches perspetiuely, and how it may be instrumentally
proved, how the stars may be seen in the Horizon, without their proper
places, by reason of incuruation or crookyng of the beams. Whereof it follows,
The true and false (...) the Horizon.
that they do not Mathematically define the Horizon, which say that it is the
terminer or ender of the sight, and of the greatest circles of the Sphere,
whereas by the demonstrations before, the circle endyng the sight, is cuttyng
the Sphere in two unequal portions, and that the higher portion be greater
then the lower. For if the Horizon be the ender of the sight, and one of the
greatest circles, then the earth is not equally about the center or middle of
the world, or else the myddle of the world is without the earth. But if the
earth does equally compass about the myddle, ergo the ender of the sight is
not of the greatest circles in the Sphere, or contraryly. Therefore if we shall
see any star above the ender of the sight, we should not therefore think it
to be in the twelfth station of heaven (this is to be understood by reasonable
manner) for the virtue of the star appears cheeslly in the great circle
(whose Pole is Zenith) passing by the 90. degree of the Equinoctial, from the
intersection or diuidyng of the same with the Meridian toward the East.
Furthermore, the difference between the ender of the sight and the greater
circle, is not of only one Diameter of the star, but of degrees, which if
it were not, we could by no means use the proposition 49. of Vitellio: And
therefore it was no small error of them that said that the Horizon is the
ender of the sight, and one of the greatest circles in the Sphere, and that
ever the myddle of heaven appears unto us, for evermore the^ half appears
unto us: for the incuruation or crookyng of the beams. But he that will see
more examples of these things, let him read the fourth book of Vitellio, and
the tenth, and somewhere the second and fyfth of the same. In every of them he
shall see somewhat how easyly we may be deceived by this sense: and the like
of other senses is not to be doubted. Therefore not without weak and slender
judgment, they call Aristotle so divine a Prince of Philsophie, as though he
could not err. Proportion in commendation.
And therefore that excellent Philosopher, and Divine, Peter Arches, did very
wisely give commendation and honor to Aristotle proportionally, and no
further, but only to God: To whom be all honor and glory. So be it.

FINIS.

