THREE BOOKS OF COLLOQVIES CONCERNING THE ART OF SHOOTING (...) GREAT AND
SMALL PIECES OF ARTILLERY, VARIABLE randges, measure, and weight of leaden,
iron, and marble stone pellets, mineral saltepeeter, gunpowder of diverse
sorts, and the cause why some sorts of gunpowder are corned, and some sorts
of gunpowder are not corned: Written in Italian, and dedicated by Nicholas
Tartaglia unto the Royal Prince of most famous memory HENRY the eight, late
King of England, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith etc. And now
translated into English by CYPRIAN LVCAR Gent. who has also augmented the
volume of the said Colloquies with the contents of every Colloquie, and with
all the Corollaries and Tables, that are in the same volume.

Also the said CYPRIAN LVCAR has annexed unto the same three books of
Colloquies a Treatise named LVCAR APPENDIX collected by him out of diverse
Authors in diverse languages, to show unto the Reader the properties, office,
and duty of a Gunner, and to teach him to make and refine artificial
saltpeeter, to sublime brimstone for gunpowder, to make coals for gunpowder, to
make gunpowder of diverse sorts and of diverse colors, to make gunmatches,
touchwood, and fire stones, to know the weight and measure of any pellet, to
make carriages, ladles, rammers, scourers, and cartredges for any great piece
of artillery, to know the proportioned length, due thickness, and weight of
every great piece of artillery, to know what number of men, horses, or Oxen
will draw any great piece of artillery, to make platformes for great
ordinance, to make gabbions of earth for the defense of gunners in time of
service, to charge every great piece of artillery with his due charge in
serpentine gunpowder, and also in corn gunpowder, to shoot well at any mark
within point blanke, to shoot well at any mark upon a hill, or in a valley
without point blanke, to shoot well at a mark in any dark night, to mount
mortar pieces to strike any appointed mark, to tell whether a thing seen
far of does stand still, come toward him, or go from him, to make and use
diverse Trunkes, and many sorts of fire works, to make mines, to measure
altitudes, longitudes, latitudes, and profundities, to draw the true plat of
any place, and to do other commendable things which not only in time of
war, but also in time of peace may to a good end be practiced.

La possessione delle ricchezze non e sicura,
se la non si salua con la difensione della (...).
depiction of a piece of artillery

^NTED AT LONDON FOR ^ohn Harrison. 1588.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DROIT ET LOYAL

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT EARL OF LEICESTER, BARON OF DENBIGH, LORD
STEWARD OF HER MAJESTY'S HOVSHOLD, CHIEF JUSTICE, in Oyer, of all her
Majesty's Forests, Parkes, Chases, and Warrens, by South Trent, and Knight of
the most honorable orders of the Garter, and Saint Michael in France, and one
of the Lords of her Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
Diverse men (Right noble and most renowned Earl) according to the diversity
of their natures do diversely seek to excel others: as in the ancient Roman
state, Crassus the rich by wealth, Pompei the great by honor, Caesar the meek
by friends, Cicero the eloquent by learning, Cato the wise by counsel,
Fabritius the temperate by integrity, Brutus the stout by fortitude, and
Scipio Affricanus by bounty, and liberality: In all commonweals are like
dispositions: And verily riches well used are ornaments of peace and sinews of
war: honors well gotten and true nobility are of peerless price, especially
in a comely personage, and manly countenance: friends unfeigned a treasure tha^
the which nothing more trusty: what is more sweet than learning? highlier to
be prised than wisdom? rather to be used than temperance? more valued than
magnanimity? and neerlier resembling the bou^ties of God than true
liberality? As each of these though desired for private praise, and singled
from others is a singular ornament, so being joined with more of the rest, and
employed to the public good, cannot but make a man to be admired. But if al
these together were inspired into one as though all the planets had agreed by
their gracious aspects, and sweet influences to furnish a man at all assaies,
would not the eyes of all men's minds be as it were dazeled at the bright beams
of the right peerless nobility of such a man? especially if they shall see
it wholly dedicated to the glory of God, the good of the Church and common
wealth. I dare not apply this directly to your Honor, least it may seem to
savor of flattery. But if it may please your wisdom to suruay the excellent
gifts, wherewith God has singularly graced your honorable estate, if it
appear that you have employed your wealth to the good of Gods Church, in this
are you like the wise rulers of Israel, who freely offered precious stones, and
costly perfumes to the work of the tabernacle: so far as you have used your
honorable estate to countenance the Gospel, and the professors thereof, therein
have you resembled the provident Joseph, whom God exalted above all Pharaohs
house, that so he might relieve his old father Israel, and the families of all
his brethren: wherein your Lordship has used her Majesty's favor to the
building up of the walls of Gods Church, therein have you lively represented
the right noble Courtier Nehemiah, whose countenance was sad bebefore Darius
his king, until he had obtained letters, leave, and furniture, to repair the
walls of the holy City: So often as your godly policies, grave counsels, and
wise speeches, have directed for the peace of England, have confounded the
counsels of our Romish Achitophels, have disapointed the treasons of our
Absoloms, so often has your Honor bin found faithful to your Prince, to your
Counrie, to the Church, as Hushai the Archite David's friend. If by prayer and
fasting you have called for the help of God, as Ezra: if your hand have bin as
the hand of Ioab against the enemies of your Prince, and for the people of God
in the lo countries: if you have enlarged your heart and hand in gifts to
many, who have travailed to benefit their country and profit the Church, as
Salomo^ rewarded Hiram, and those who wrought al skilful works for the Temple.
If in all these things God have inhabled your Lordship in some measure, or in
most of them in great measure, to his glory, the peace of the Church, the
wealth of the land, and honor of the Prince, then both have you wherein to
rejoice, and the eyes of all men whom to behold, as a common Patron of all
those, who in any zealous desire employ their pains to profit their country
and the Church of God. Wherefore licensed to dispose (as I will) of this English
work made by Master Cyprian Lucar with a dutiful zeal to benefit his native
soil, I thought it my duty to offer it to your noble patronage, as a present
most fit for your Honor, and most profitable for these times.

Your L. her Majesty's liefetenant in the lo countries has endured great
travails in the cause of God, and your Prince, and can any thing be more
acceptable to your Honor than that which may be both for chief defense of the
friends, and greatest anoyance of the enemies of God and your Prince. Again,
when can such a present be more seasonable than now, that so many Princes of
the earth have conspired against the Lord and our Prince the Lords anointed?
and what can more astonish the eyes, and ears of the profane hearted and
earthly minded enemies of Gods religion, and our Princes peace, than the
lightening gunpowder and the thundering Ca^non? what can more encourage and
strengthen soldiers who shall fight the battles of God and our Prince, then
skillful shooting in great and small pieces of artillery? than artificial
making of saltpeeter, gunpowder, mines, and many sorts of fireworkes? than
right use and practice of al those and many other serviceable devises? Then to
whom rather than to your Honor? when rather than now? What rather than this
martial book may I offer for a present in these martial times? seeing it is
not only a rich storehouse gathered by the forenamed Master Cyprian Lucar out
of the famous Nicholas Tart^glia and diverse other Authors in diverse languages,
but also by diverse of Master Lucar his devises greatly furnished and enriched.
Most humbly therefore I beseech your Honor according to the wonted nobility of
your well affected mind, to accept of this my present, as a sure pledge both of
my zeal to your L. and loyal care to further whatsoever may benefit my
Queen and country. The Lord of his mercy still protect our Prince, defend
our country, and preserve your Honor that long you may advance your wealth,
fame, honor and friends, your person and power, your temperance, wisdom,
fortitude, affability and liberality, to the maintenance of our happy peace,
propagation of true religion, defense of the holy Church, the Gospel, and the
glory of God.

Your Honors most humble and duetifull Orator John Harrison Stationer.

TO THE MOST PVISANT AND MERCIFVLL Prince Henry the eight by the grace of God
King of England France and Ireland, etc.
MOST RENOWNED AND EXCELlent King, I have been allured by questions which grave
and wise men at sundry times did ask of me, to consider of many matters, and
to know many things which I should not have known, nor thought, if the same
questions had never been demanded. For it was never my profession, nor at any
time have I delighted to shoot in an Harchibuse, handegunne, or in any other
small or great piece of Artillery, nor do intend to shoot hereafter in any
of them, but one only question which a skillful Gunner in Anno Domini 1531.
did ask of me in Verona, provoked me at that time to think thereupon, and by
that occasion to find out the order and proportion of shootes at marks near
hand, and also at marks far of, according to the variable elevation of the
piece which does shoot, whereof I should never have had any care, if that
Gunner had not with his said question stirred me up to deal in the same.
Moreover in Anno Domini 1537. It was reported that Soliman the Turkish Emperor
made great preparation to war upon the Christians, wherefore I did write and
publishe in haste a short Treatise of shooting in Gunnes to the end that my
devises in the same might be considered of, seen, and proved whether or no
they would be profitable for the defense of the Christians. And although my
said book did no good, and that I also made little account thereof because as
it happened the report of that war did afterward vade away like smeke, yet my
said book made many wise men of great estimation, and also some of the common
people, to trouble me with other questions of Artillery, Pellets, Saltepeeter,
and Powder, and to cause me to enter again into a deep consideration of
their said particular questions, whereby I found out and know (as I have
said before) many things of which (except the same questions had bin asked of
me) I should never have had any Consideration or knowledge. After this,
thinking with my self that he who has by knowledge, labor, or chance
invented any notable thing does merit great blame if he will not impart his
devise unto others (for if all our forefathers had kept their knowledge secret
from us, we should at this time have little differed from brute beasts) I
determined to be herein blameless, and to publish the same questions or
inventions, and for that purpose have now collected them out of one part of my
memorial, in which I use for my better remembrance to write every notable
thing that I know. This collection is divided into nine several books
according to the quality of the matter expressed in the same. And because I do
remember that my Woorshipfull Gossippe M. Richad Ventuorth (who is one of your
sacred Majesty's Gentlemen) has told me of the noble courage, liberality,
roialty, humanity, and clemency which are in your Highness, and that your
Excellency delights much in all manner of warlike devises, I am emboldened
although I lack the pithie eloquence and fine phraze of speech which is meet
for you to hear, to offer and dedicate unto your Majesty the said questions
and my resolute Answers unto them, not as a convenient thing for your Majesty
(for insomuch as the things of the most profoundest doctrine being expressed
with eloquence and in a pure style cannot come near unto the lowest step of
your Highness, these our inventions which are mecanicall and common things
told and declared in a blunt and barbarous style, may much less approach unto
the same) but I do offer and dedicate my said inventions unto you as nwe
things according to a custom by which some use at the beginning of the year
to present unto noble and honorable persons unripe and sower fruits, not for
that any goodness is in them, but for dainty and new things which do
naturally please men's minds: whereby I am persuaded to think that though all
my Inventions shall not like you, yet some of them will delight you, which
coming to pass as I desire, will embolden me to attempt hereafter more
greater matters. At your Majesty's feet lying prostrate upon the ground with
my head uncovered, and my hands joined together, I do humbly recommend my
self unto your Highness.

Nicholas Tartaglia.

AD LECTOREM.
ARdua damnosae, praeponas, praelia paci,
Pax mala saepe nocet, bellaque iusta iuuant.
Sunt longae pacis comites luxusque dolusque,
Corpora dura ducum mollit amica venus.
Plus gula quam galea, and plus lanx quam lancea, vini
Pocula quam ferri spicula, cuique placent.
Sed cum bella fremunt, sonat and taratantara praeco,
Cum simul armato milite castra scatent.
Mutantur mores hominum, mutantur amores,
Magnus and est subito, qui modo paruus erat,
Excubiae somnum superant, labor otia vincit,
Tunc Dea vana venus, vinaque spreta iacent.
Hic ducis assumit parts, hic militis arma,
Iste mucrone potens, hic eques, ille pedes.
Alter bombardis inimicas dissipat aedes,
Eminus hic hastis, cominus hic gladijs.
Si cupis a long globulis terrere superbos,
Hic discas hosts perterebrare tuos.
Tartaglia art sua multos ad tartara mittit,
Transtulit hunc nuper Lucar and art sua.
Non lucrum quaerit Lucar, non munera magna,
Laudem non fraudem, doctus habere studet,
Sed pro regina, pro relligione fideque,
Pro Christo Angligenas instruit art sua.
G. B. Cantabrigiensis.

IN DEI NOMINE AMEN.
The first book of Nicholas Tartaglia his Colloquies, concerning the Art of
shooting in great and small Pieces of Artillery,
translated out of Italian into English, by Cyprian Lucar Gentleman, who has
also augmented the volume of the said Colloquies for the benefit of his
Readers, with the Contents of every Colloquie, and with the Corollaries, and
Table that are in the same volume.
The first Colloquie.
How a Gunners Quadrant should be made and used, and how a Piece of Artillery
does shoot more ground when it is elevated at the mouth, than it will do when
it lies leuel: and how Pellets do make long and short Ranges according as the
Pieces which shoot them are elevated, and how a Table of Randons may be
made for any Piece, and how he which has a true Table of Randons for a Piece,
shall be thereby able to make with that Piece a perfect shoot at any mark
within the reach of his said Piece, and teach any unskillful Gunner to do the
same: and how he that wants such a Table shall never learn to shoot well
at any mark without point blanke, and how the outer sense tells truth in
particular things but not in universal things.

Interlocutors Francesse Maria Duke of Vrbine. Nicholas Tartaglia.
DVKE. What reasons are they which (as you say in your book dedicated unto me)
you have found out concerning the knowledge of shooting in Gunnes?


Nicholas. The proportion and order of shootes not only at marks far of, but
also at marks hard by, with what Piece you will, and with what sort of pellet
you will.


Duke. Speak more plainly, and give me an example thereof, for I do not
understand what you say.


Nicholas. I am content to show unto your Excellency, an example of my said
invention, but first I must speak of that material instrument which I have
devised and set forth in a picture at the beginning of my said book dedicated
unto you: the which instrument is made of a square piece of wood or of metal
like unto this figure B A C, and contains a quadrant, that is to say, How a
Gunners quadrant may be made.
one fourth part of a circle like unto the figure H I G K, which is to be
described with a pair of compasses upon the center H, I mean one foot of the
compass ought to be fixed in the point H the inward angle of the said square,
and the other moveable foot of the compass must describe I G K the crooked side
or arc of that quadrant: also another crooked line equidistant from the first,
as is the line E F, ought to be drawn with the said compasses: but for this
purpose the compasses may not be opened so wide as they were before, and all
the space which is between the two crooked lines, that is to say, between the
arc I G K, and the arc E F, must be divided into 12. equal parts drawn by the
edge of a ruler from the point H the center of that Quadrant, so as every of
the same divisions (which I call points) may be perceived to look or lie right
upon that center H as they do in this figure.

depiction of a gunner's quadrant

IN the same manner every of the aforesaid parts or points should be divided
into 12. A Type of the Gunners quadrant.
other equal parts: Although I have not divided this figure into so many parts,
because they would here mar the same: but a Square of an ordinary bigness
(as before I have said) may be so divided, as that all the whole Square shall
contain 144. equal parts which I call minutes. These minutes are to be marked
with more shorter lines than are the lines of the points, to this end that they
may be more easily nu^bred by the half or midst of the points depicted with
the greater lines, and that we may also know how that every point contains
twelve minutes. This done, a pin of iron or of lattin is to be fixed
precisely in the point H the center of the quadrant, and upon that pin a
moveable threede of silk or of some other thing with a plummet at the end of
the same must hang down like unto the perpendicular H M D. The use of the
Gunnets quadrant.
This Instrument will help us to judge of all the variable positions or
eleuations that may happen in any Piece of artillery whatsoever. And now
concerning the same positions or eleuations, this is to be noted, that the
first position of every Piece is to be understood when it is laid level, for
then (the longest leg of the said instrument being put into the mouth of the
said Piece, and rightly extended toward the bottom of his concauitie) the
threede and plummet which is fixed in the center of that instrument, will fall
precisely upon the line H F K as it does in the figure next following.

depiction of a piece of artillery A piece lying level.


And a Piece shall be said to be mounted one point, when (the longest leg
of our said instrument being in the mouth of the said Piece) the said threede
and plummet does fall precisely upon the division of the first point, as it
does in the figure nex following.

depiction of a piece of artillery A Piece mounted at one point or 12. mintes.


Also a Piece shall be said to be elevated two points, when the said threede
and plummet does fall precisely upon the division of the second point: and when
the said threede and plummet does fall precisely upon the third point, then the
Piece is elevated at three points: and so we must say of the fourth, fifth, and
sixth points. But when a Piece is mounted at the sixth point, then the said Piece
is mounted to the greatest elevation that it may be at. I speak this of a
Piece of Artillery, because the mortar pieces may be elevated unto all the
other points following: I mean even unto the 12. point. This which we have
spoken of points, ought also to be understood of minutes: that is to say, when
a Piece is so mounted that the said thread and plummet falls Precisely upon
the division of the first minute, that Piece shall be said to be mounted one
minute. And when the said thread and plummet shall fall upon the division of
two minutes, it shall be said to be mounted at two minutes. In like sort it
shall be said of all the rest even to the greatest elevation, that is to say,
to the elevation of the sixth point, or of 72. minutes, as this figure next
following does manifestly show. The other minutes from thence to the end are
for mortar pieces,

depiction of a piece of artillery A piece mounted at 6. points or 72. minutes.


How a piece does cast more ground when it is elevated at the mouth, then it
will do when it lies level.

How pellets do make long and short ranges according as the pieces which shoot
them are elevated.





Duke. What will you infer upon this?


Nicholas. Hereupon I will first infer that a piece of Artillery mounted at one
point shootes more farther than it will do when it lies level, and that a
piece mounted at two points will shoot more farther than at one point, and a
piece mounted at three points will shoot more farther than at two points. Also
a piece being mounted at 4. points, will shoot much more farther than it will
do at 3. points. Likewise a piece mounted at 5. points, will shoot somewhat
farther than at 4. points. And a piece mounted at 6. points, shootes a pellet
of lead a little farther than it does at 5. points. For reason teaches us
that the range of a pellet shot out of a piece mounted at 5 points, and the
range of a like pellet shot out of the same piece mounted at 6. points do so
little differ, as that upon any small advantage happening either by force of
powder, or by any other means, the piece being mounted at 5. points, will
shoot so far as it can do when it is mounted at 6. points, and perchance
farther: but when one does mount such a piece, so as they do mount mortar
pieces, that is to say at 7. points, with out doubt by mounting the piece at 7.
points, he shall not shoot so far as he did when that piece was mounted at 6.
points, also at the 8. Point, he shall not shoot so far as he did at the 7.
point. Likewise at the 9. point he shall shoot much shorter than he did at the
8. point, and at the 10. point he shall shoot less ground than at the 9.
point, and so at the 11. point he shall shoot much shorter than at the 10.
point, finally at the 12. and last point he shall not shoot so far by a great
deal as he did at the 11. point. But in this last elevation it may be
thought, that by natural reason the pellet should return back again into
the mouth of the piece, yet by many accidents which do commonly happen in that
instant when the piece is discharged, the Pellet will not precisely return
into the very mouth of the piece, but fall down near unto the same.


Duke. This is to be granted as all that which you have besides spoken, but
what will you infer upon this?


Nicho. I will secondarily infer that I have found out in what kind of
proportion or order the said shootes do increase by every elevation, and that
not only from point to point of our said instrument, but also from minute to
minute, even to the end of the elevation of the 6. point or of 72. minutes, yea
and that with every sort of pellet whether the same be of lead, iron, or
stone. Likewise I have found out in what proportion the shootes do decrease
when pieces are elevated beyond the said 6. point as mortar pieces are
elevated, How a Table of randons may be made for any piece of Ordinance. How
he which has a table of randoms for a piece, shall be thereby able to make with
that piece a perfect shoot at any mark within the reach of his said piece,
and teach any unskillful gunner to do the same, and how he that wa^teth such
a table shall never learn to shoot well at any mark without point blanke.
and that not only from point to point, but also from minute to minute, even
to the end of all the 12. points, or of the 144. minutes.


Duke. What profit will come by this your Invention.


Nicho. The profit of this invention is such, as that by the knowledge of one
only shoot out of any piece of ordinance whatsoever, each man may make a table
of all the shootes that such a piece will shoot at any elevation, that is to
say from point to point, and from minute to minute in our said instrument: the
which table shall be of such virtue and property, as that any person having
the same with him shall not only know how to shoot, but also be able to teach
every unskillful Gunnar to shoot in such sort of gunnes at any mark so many
paces, and so far of from him as he will, so that the mark be not farther than
such pieces will reach: and this notwithstanding he which is so taught lacking
such a table, cannot learn any part of this invention, fot this secret shall
be known only to him that has such a table and to none other.


Duke. If he that has such a table will not shoot himself, but cause one
other person to shoot, shall not that other person learn this secret?


Nicho. No (most excellent Lord) but that other person may be likened unto the
servants of Appotecaries which continually compound medicines according as they
are appointed by Physicians to do, and learn not thereby to be Physicians.


Duke. This seems to me a thing incredible, because you say in your said
book that you did never shoot in any gunne, and for that he which will judge
of things in which he has had no proof or experience, is oftentimes
deceived. The eye is that which gives us a true testimony of things imagined.

The outer sense reileth truth in particular things, but not in universal
things: for universal things are subject only to understanding and not to
any sense.


For the eye is that which gives us a true testimony of things imagined.


Nich. It is true that the outer sense does tell us the truth in particular
things, but not in universal things: for universal things are subject only to
understanding, and not to any sense.


Duke. You have said enough, and if you can make me to see this which I do not
believe, you shall work a wonder.


Nich. Al things happening by nature or art are thought to be wonders, when no
reason is given for the same, but your Excellency shall find my sayings herein
to be true if you will cause them to be tried with a Piece of Artillery.


Duke. I must go now unto Pesaro, but at my return from thence I will cause
all this which you have told me to be proved.


The second Colloquie.
Where a Piece of Artillery which is elevated at the mouth, will do a greater
exploite than a Piece which lies level, and where a Piece which lies level
will do a greater exploit then a Piece which is elevated, and how a Piece
which lies leuel will never shoot so far in an insensible crooked line, as it
will do when it is somewhat elevated at the mouth, or imbased at the mouth: and
how Tartaglia in this Colloquie, by these words in a right line, means an
insensible crooked line, and how it may be proved by the science of weights that
a pellet flies more heavily out of a Piece lying level, then it will do out
of the same piece any whit elevated: and how a pellet shot out of a piece lying
leuel, rangeth in a more crooked line, and more sooner begins to decline
downwards to the ground, then it will do when it is shot out of a piece somewhat
elevated: and how a pellet shot out of a piece lying leuel, will strike with
less force then it will do when it is shot out of the same piece any whit
elevated: and how as a piece is elevated from point to point, or from minute
to minute, the pellet of that piece does augment his range in an insensible
crooked line: and how the pellet of the Culuering which in this Colloquie is
planted on the plain at the foot of the hill, and at his hitting of the object
would have gone more farther than the pellet of the other Culuering on the
top of the hill (not meeting with an object to resist it) shall do the
greatest exploit upon the fort which is his resisting object.

Interlocutors Francesse Maria, Duke of Vrbine. Nicholas Tartaglia.
DVke. Tell me briefly as you think, whether a piece of artillery when it
lies leuel will do a greater effect, or pearce farther into the thing at which
it does shoot, than it will do when it is elevated?


Nich. that I may answer your question without blame, it is needful for your
Excellency to propose this question by an example or figure, and to tell me the
distance between the artillery and the thing to which it shall shoot: and
also to show unto me the quality or situation of the thing at which it shall
shoot.


Duke. Suppose for an example that it does so fall out that you must batter a
fort, which is on the top of a hill, being 60. paces high, and that at 100.
paces distant from the said hill, there is another hill of 60. paces in height,
which is equal in height with the said fort as it may appear by the figure
next following. And suppose that upon the top of this second hill you may
commodiously plant artillery to batter the said fort, and to shoot leuel with
your artillery from thence against that fort, as it may also appear by the
said figure next following. And finally suppose that you may also co^modiously
batter that fort with like ordinance placed on a plain at the foot of the
said second hill one hundred paces distant from the hill upon which the said
fort does stand, and that the said ordinance on the said plain is much
elevated before to shoot from below upwards to the said fort, as also it may
appear by the said figure next following. Now I ask of you wherher the Piece
of artillery placed on the said second hill, will be to more effect, and
pearce farther into the said fort than the said like piece of Artillery which
is placed on the plain at the foot of that second hill?

depiction of two pieces of artillery


Nicholas. Without doubt that Piece which is on the plain at the foot of the
hill will be to more effect, and pearce farther into the said forte, than that
piece which is planted on the top of the hill.


Duke. If I should be a Judge thereof, I would judge all to the contrary,
because the Piece which is to be shot from the top of the hill, is much more
nearer to the walls of that fort, than that Piece is which must be shot from
the foot of the hill: and forasmuch as this thing at which you shoot is more
nearer to that piece, by natural reason the pellet should pearce more farther
into it.


Nichol. When like pieces of Artillery are planted after one like manner in
unlike distances against an object, that follows which your Excellency does
say: but by probable reason I do find it to be otherwise in this your
question, A piece which lies leuel will never shoot so far in an insensible
crooked line, as it will do when it is somewhat elevated at the mouth or
imbased at the mouth.

Tartaglia in this Colloquie by these words in a right line, means an
insensible crooked line.

The science of waights depends upon Geometry and natural Philosophy.


for a Piece which lies leuel will never shoot so far in a right line, as it
will do when it is somewhat elevated at the mouth: and by how much the more a
Piece is elevated at the mouth, by so much it shootes the more farther in a
right line. Likewise we must understand that a Piece will shoot farther in a
right line when the mouth thereof does lie but a little downewardes, than it
will do when it stands leuel, and that by how much the mouth of the Piece does
lie more downwards, by so much it will shoot the more farther in a right line.


Duke. This is a strange and incredible tale, that one and the same quantity
and power of powder will expel more violently one and the same weight of
pellet, by one way more than by an other: therefore I desire to know the
reason which causes you to be of that opinion.


Nicholas. The reason thereof is declared by the accidents happening in
shooting, in the last proposition of the second book of our nwe science: but I
have omitted there to show the very cause of such effects, for that I would
not be tedious unto your Excellency, and because that is plainly showed in
the science of weights, the which science is of no small speculation, and
depends upon Geometry and natural Philosophy: but if it will please you
now to hear me, I will presently declare the same.


Duke. Do so with as much brevity as you may.


Nicholas. To declare this well, and that I may be the better understood, I
am compelled to set down first the definitions of some fit terms, and also
some suppositions, as the use is to do in every Science, and because the
things will be better understood by an Example than by words, I will
suppose for an Example that A.B. is a pair of Balance with two arms A.C. and
C.B. which are of a like length, and of an equal weight, and that the point C.
is the center upon which the said beam or arms do turn, and that two bodies
of equal waighte named by these two letters A. and B do hang at the ends of
the said arms. The which two bodies being supposed to be of equal weight,
and to hang at an equal length upon the said two arms A.C. and C. B. of the
supposed balance which are also supposed to be of one lust length, by the
first peticion aleaged by Archimedes in his book which he made of the center
of waightes, should incline equally, that is to say, they should stand
straight outright, so as one end of that beam do lie no higher than the
other, as it may appear by the figure next following. Also about C the
center, a circle ought to be described according to the quantity of one arm
of the said balance, and let that circle be E. A. F. B, and then the centers
of the said bodies will always go in the circumference thereof when the said
balance is turned about upon his center C.

depiction of a pair of balances

The first Definition. The said two bodies standing in the line of equality
(as they do in the figure next following) are said to be in the place of
equality. The second definition. A perpendicular being drawn from the top,
and passing by the said center C (as does the line E C F) is called the line of
direction. The first Supposition. Also this is needful to be noted, that a
heavy body is supposed to be more heavier in the place where it lies, by so
much as his descending is less oblique, that is to say, less crooked in the
same situation or place, the example of this supposition is declared in the
figure next following.



The second supposition. The descending of a heavy body is supposed to be so
much the more oblique, by how much in his descent it does take a less part of
the line of direction, or of an other line equidistant to it in the same
quantity, that is to say, in the same quantity of the circles circumference
where it turns or goes. Every kind of weight which being weyed departs
from the place of equality, is made thereby so much the more lighter, by how
much it is more departed from the said place of equality.
But this shall be better understood by the figure following. Now the aforesaid
supposition being admitted, I bring forth this proposition and say, that every
kind of weight which being waied departs from the place of equality, is
made thereby so much the more lighter, by how much it is more departed from the
said place of equality. And for example of this proposition, let the balance
A B (of the figure precedent) be turned upon the said center C, and let the
same two equal bodies A and B hanging or joining to the two ends of the two
arms of the said balance, be in the same place of equality (as above was
supposed) now I say that removing the one and the other of the said bodies
from the said place of equality (that is to say, one end of the said beam, or
of one of the said arms being put down, and the other end of the said beam,
or of the said other arm being elevated) the one and the other of those two
bodies shall be thereby made the more lighter, and they shall be by so much
the more lighter, by how much they are the more farther from the said place of
equality.

Howbeit in this figure the one and the other of these two Arkes is divided but
into three equal parts in the points L N and Q S, and from the three points
N L I, draw the three lines N O, L M, and I K equidistant from the diameter B
A, the which will cut E F the line of direction in three points Z Y X. Likewise
from the three points Q S V. draw three lines Q P, S R, and V T equidistant
from the said line A B, the which likewise will cut the said line of
direction in three points and and so the whole descent A V made with the said
body A descended into the point V, is divided into three desentes or equal
parts the which are A Q, Q S and S V, likewise the whole descent I B which is
made with the said body B in descending or returning to his first place (that
is to say in the point B) shall be divided into three equal parts, the
which are I L, L N, and N B. And every of these three and three parts or
descentes do take one part of the line of direction, that is to say, the
descent from A to Q does take from the line of direction the part C and, the
descent Q S does take the part and, and the desent S V does take the part.
And therefore the part C and is greater than the part and (as by Geometry it
may be easily proved) wherefore by the said second supposition the
descent Q S shall be more oblique than the descent A Q: wherefore by that
supposition the said body A shall be lighter in weight at the point Q, than at
the point A. Likewise because the part of the line of direction is less than
the part and, the descent S V by the said second supposition shall be more
oblique than the descent Q S. And consequently by the said first supposition
the said body A shall be more lighter in the point S, than it shall be in the
point Q. And all this in the selfsame manner may be demonstrated by the
opposite part of the body B. That is to say, the descent of it from the point
I to the point L, is more oblique than that which is from the point L to the
point N by the said second supposition. Therefore the part X Y which is taken
out of the line of direction, is less than the part Y Z. Wherefore by the
said first supposition, the said body B hanging at the point I, is more
lighter than when it does hang at the point L, and by the same reason it shall
be more lighter when it hanges at the point L than when it hanges at the point
N. Likewise it shall be more lighter when it does hang at the point N than
when it hanges at the point B the place of equality which is the thing that
was proposed.





Duke. What will you infer upon this?


Nicholas. Every piece lying level is intended to be in the place of equality.
I will prove thereby that every Piece lying level is intended to be in the
place of equallitye, A pellet flies more heavily cut of a piece lying level,
than it will do out of the same piece any wit elevated. And a pellet shot out
of a piece lying level rangeth in a more crooked line, and more sooner
begins to decline downwards to the ground than it will do when it is shot
out of a piece somewhat elevated, and it strikes with less force than it will
do out of the same piece any whit elevated.
and by the aforesaid reasons that a Pellet flies more heuilye out of a Piece
lying level, than it will do out of the same piece any whit elevated or
separated from that place of equallitie. And therefore in that place of
equality, the pellet does range with more difficulty and more sooner
begins to decline downewardes to the ground and declineth in a greater
quantity than when it is shot out of a piece somewhat elevated, that is to
say, it goes then (as the Gunners term it) much less in a right line than
when it is shot out of a piece elevated, wherefore in this question, the
effects of shootes made in that place of equality, will be of less force,
and to a less effect than in any place of elevation.


Duke. To make me understand your meaning, give me an example by a figure.


Nicho. That I may show unto you my meaning herein by a figure, I will suppose
that the pellet of a Culuering does way 20 pound weight, A Culuering which
lying leuel shoots about 200. paces, will at the eleuatio^ of 45. degrees, or
of 6. points, or of 72. min. shoot about 800. paces.
and that the Culuering according to that experience which was made at Verona
(as I have declared in the beginning of my book of nwe science dedicated unto
your Excellency) in the place of equality, that is to say lying level, will
shoot in a right line about 200. paces, and that such a culuering at the
elevation of 45. degrees, that is to say, at the 6. point, or at 72. minutes of
our Quadrant (by the reason alleged in the last proposition of my second
book of our nwe science) will shoot in a right line about 800. paces.


Duke. Do you say that a Culuering being elevated at 45. degrees, or at the 6.
point, or at 72, minutes, will shoot about 800. paces, and that the same Piece
lying leuel will shoot but about 200. paces?


Nicho. By reason I am taught so to say.


Duke. It seems to me that there is a great difference between those
shootes.


Nicho. It comes so to pass because that elevation of 6, points does differ
much from the place of equality, and according as the Piece is elevated from
minute to minute, According as a Piece is elevated from minute to minute, or
from point to point: so from minute to minute, and from point to point the
pellet of that Piece does augment his range in an insensible crooked line.
so from minute to minute the pellet of that piece does augment his raunge in a
right line: it does also the like in the points, but that is in a greater
quantity. For the piece being elevated to the first point of the Quadrant,
shootes more farther in a right line than when it is laid leuel: Also the Piece
elevated to the second point of the said Quadrant, shootes much farther in a
right line than it does when it is elevated but at one point. Likewise the
Piece being elevated to the third point, shootes farther in a right line than
it does at the second point, and so successively the Piece being elevated to
the fourth point, shootes farther than at the third point, and at the fifth
point farther than at the fourth point, and at the sixth point (as is aforesaid)
farther than at the fifth point and if the Piece should by degrees be elevated
above the sixth point, the pellet would fly more farther in a right line: that
is to say, the Piece elevated to the seventh point would shoot farther in a
right line than at the sixth point, and at the eight point, farther than at the
seventh point, and at the ninth point, farther than at the eight point, and at
the tenth point farther than at the ninth point: and at the eleventh point,
farther than at the tenth point: and at the twelfth point farther than at the
eleventh point. And at this twelfth point the pellet will fly wholly in a
right line, The pellet which is shot out of a piece mounted at 90. degrees, or
at 12. points, flies in a more perfect right line, than when it is shot out of
a piece mounted at any other degree or point.

Note that Tartaglia calls that a right line, which is insensibly crooked, and
that a crooked line, which is evidently crooked, to this end that the common
people may the better understand him.


and it will be a perpendicular above the horison. And this pellet shot out of
a piece mounted at the twelfth point, will fly in a more perfect right line
than any of the former pellets did, because in truth the going or violent
moving of a body equally heavy which is without the perpendicular of the
horison, can never have any part perfectly right as it has bin said in our
said second book of our nwe science.


Duke. Why do you call that a right line which is not perfectly right?


Nicho. That the common people may the better understand me I call that a right
line which is insensibly crooked, and I call that a crooked line which does
evidently appear to be crooked.


Duke. Proceed on.


Nicho. Now to return to our purpose, I say that if the distance between the
said fortress, and the Piece lying on the plain at the foot of the hill be
760. paces, and that the distance between the same fortress and the piece
lying on the top of the said hill be but 130 paces, in this case the said
Culuering which is planted on the top of the hill will do a greater exploit
against the walls of that fortress, than that Culuering shall do which is
planted on the plain at the foot of the said hill: the cause hereof is, for
that the said Culuering lying level, does shoot about 200. paces in a right
line as before has bin said. Then for so much as the distance between that
Culuering and the Fortress is but 130 paces (as it has bin supposed) the
pellet of that Culuering will strike the walls of that Fortress near about
70 paces before it would end his range in a right line, but the Culuering which
is planted on the plain at the foot of the hill being distant from those
walls 760 paces in a diametral line, and elevated to 45 degrees (that is to
say, to the 6 point of our quadrant) does shoot about 800 paces in a right
line, and therefore it will strike those walls only about 40 paces before it
would end his way in a right line, or be sensibly perceived to decline. In the
question proposed in this Colloquie the pellet which at his hitting would have
gone most farthest (not meeting with an object to resist it) shall do the
greatest exploit upon that object which resists.
And so that pellet which at his hitting would have gone most farthest (not
meeting with an object to resist it) shall do the greatest exploit upon that
object which resists, by the reasons alleged upon the fourth proposition of
our first book of our nwe science. Therefore insomuch as the pellet of that
Culuering which is planted on the top of the hill at the hitting of those
walls had to fly more farther about 70 paces in a right line, and that the
pellet of that Culuering which is planted on the plain at the foot of the
hill at his hitting, had to fly more farther but only about 40 paces in a
right line, I conclude in this case by those reasons, that the pellet of that
Culuering which is planted on the top of the hill shall do a greater exploit
against those walls than the pellet of that Culuering which is planted on the
plain at the foot of the hill, and elevated to the sixth point of our
quadrant. And if the pellet of this Culuering mounted to the sixth point be of a
less force, the pellet of that piece mounted at any other point under the 6
point is of much lesser force. But if the distance from the said Fortress unto
the Artillery on the plain had bin 600 paces in a diametrall line, Note.
and that from the Fortress unto the Artillery on the top of the hill it
had bin 150 paces, the Artillery on the plain mounted to the 6 point would
have stricken those walls with more force than the Artillery upon the top of
the hill could have done: for the pellets shot out of the Artillery on the
plain will beat those walls about 200 paces before the full end of their
ranges in a right line, and the pellets of the Artillery on the top of the hill
will beat those walls 50 paces before the end of their full course in a right
line. And therefore the difference of the said effects that is from 50. paces
to 200. paces, (which they make before they do sensibly decline) is about 150.
paces, and therefore the said Culuering not only at the elevation of the sixth
point of our quadrant, but also at the elevation of the fifth point does make
that effect to be more greater. But concerning this I will not stand to make
any demonstration for that I will not be tedious unto you. Then if in so great
a height (as in the last case we have supposed) the Culuering upon the plain
being mounted to the sixth point, and also to the fifth point will do a more
greater exploit than the Culuering upon the top of the hill, such great
effects will much more evidently follow in the first case which was proposed by
your Excellency, where the hill and also the Fortress were supposed to be of
equal height, and each of them to be 60 paces in height, and the distance from
the foot of one hill to the foot of the other, or from the top of the one hill
to the top of the other to be 100 paces, and the Diametrall or Diagonall line,
that is to say the distance from the said Fortress to the place at the foot
of the hill, where the Artillery is supposed to stand on the plain, by the 47
proposition of the first book of Euclide to be about 116 paces leaving out the
Fraction which should be added unto that number) and therefore the pellet shot
out of the Culuering which is planted on the top of the hill will strike
those walls about 140 paces before the full end of his range in a right line,
and the pellets of the Artillery which is planted on the plain at the foot
of the hill and mounted to the 6 point will strike those walls about 684 paces
before the full end of their ranges in a right line. Note.
And because here is so great a difference in that one of those pellets does
hit the fortress 140 paces before the full end of his range in a right line,
and the other pellet does hit the same fortress 684 paces before the full end
of his range in a right line, therefore in this question it is a plain and
evident thing, that the Culuering planted on the plain at the foot of the
hill mounted to the 6 point, 5 point, or to any other point of elevation, will
do a greater exploit against the said fortress than that Culuering will do
which is planted on the top of the hill.


Duke. You have answered well to this Question.


The third Colloquie.
How a pellet does never range in a right line except it be shot out of a piece
right up toward Heaven, or right down toward the center of the world, and by
how much more swifter a heavy body driven violently through the air flies,
by so much in that moving it is made the more lighter: and how the more lighter
a body is, the more easily will the air bear it, and by how much a heavy
body violently moving does go more swifter, by so much it does work the more
greater effect in all things which resist the same: and by how much the
swiftnes thereof does more decrease, by so much in that moving the weight
thereof which draws the said heavy body toward the ground does more
increase: and the more swifter a pellet flies in the air, the more lighter it
is and contrariwise the more sloer a pellet flies, the more heavier it is: and
how the one part of a right line cannot be more or less right than the other
part: and how the more swifter a pellet flies, the less crooked is his range.
And how we be oftentimes deceived by judging according to the sense of seeing,
and how a piece is said to shoot at point blanke, when it lying level or
equidistant to the horison is discharged, and how the waigt of the pellet
draws the pellet out of his way and right passage perpendicularly toward
the ground when it is shot out of a piece lying level, and also when it is
shot out of a piece elevated or imbased, except it be shot right up toward
Heaven, or right down toward the center of the world.

Interlocutors Francesse Maria, Duke of Vrbine. Nicholas Tartaglia.
DVke. By your arguments you have brought me into an other great doubt: for you
have said (if you do well remember) that the Pellet which does fly out of the
mouth of a piece does not fly in any part of his way in aright line, except it
be shot right up toward heaven.


Nicho. Or right down toward the center of the world.


Duke. I grant this, that shooting right up toward Heaven, or right down
toward the center of the world, the pellet does fly altogether in a right
line, and also that in both those ways the pellet does fly much more in a
right line, than at any other elevation of the piece, or in any other way
whatsoever: but I do not believe for it is unlikely, that in all other ways
except in those two, the pellet does in no part of his way fly in a right
line, for if you do well remember, Verona is a City in Italy in the country
called Marchia Taruisina.
you have told me that by two shootes proved in Verona, you found that the
said Culuering lying leuel, and carrying a pellet of 20 pound weight, shot at
point blanke, that is to say in a right line (as you judged) about 200 paces.
Now if you have found by reason that the said range of 200 paces was not
altogether in a right line, I will believe you and grant that which you have
spoken, but if such a piece cannot shoot 200 paces in a right line, will you
not grant that such a piece may shoot 100 paces, or at the least 50. paces in
a right line? A piece of Artillery cannot shoot one pace in a right line.



Nicho. A piece will not shoot 50 paces, nor one pace in a perfect right line.


Duke. This is one of your conceits.


Nicholas. Reason will satisfy men's minds, and by it, truth is discerned from
falsehood.


Duke. That is truth.


Nicho. Insomuch as your Excellency is of this opinion, that the pellet shot
out of the Culuering lying level, must in some part of his way or violent
passage go in a right line, and in the rest of his way go in a crooked line,
suppose that this were true, I would know hereby what is the proper cause why
the pellet goes so in a right line in that part where it is supposed to go so
right, and likewise what is the cause that it goes so by a crooked line in
that part where your Excellency does suppose that it does go so crookedly? A
pellet goes out of the mouth of a piece with great swiftness which is the
cause why that pellet for a little time rangeth in an insensible crooked line,
but after the force and swiftness thereof does any whitte abate, it then
begins to fly more weakly and more slowly, and afterward to decline
toward the ground and in that sort continues until it does light upon the
ground.



Duke. We find that a pellet goes out of the mouth of the piece with great
swiftness which is the very cause why that pellet for a little time or space
goes right in the air, but after the force and swiftness thereof does any
whit abate, it then begins to weaken, and to fly more slowly, and
afterward to decline toward the ground, and in that sort continues until it
does light upon the ground.


Nicholas. By how much more swifter a heavy body driven violently through the
air flies, by so much in that moving it is made the more lighter. The more
lighter a body is, the more easily will the air bear it.
Truly your Excellency could not have better answered than you have done in
saying that the great swiftness is the proper cause to make the Pellet fly
(if it be possible) in a right line, and likewise that the lack of swiftness
in the Pellet is the proper cause to make it go and decline crookedlie in his
way toward the ground, and that by how much the said swiftness
decreaseth, by so much it makes his declination or crookedness the greater,
for all this comes so to pass because every heavy body driven violently
through the air, by how much the more swifter it flies, by so much in that
moving it is made the more lighter, and therefore it goes more rightlye in the
air, because the more lighter a body is, the more easilye will the air bear
it. Notwithstanding to work his effects in that moving it takes a more
greater weight than his own. Therefore by how much a heavy body moving does
go more swifter, By how much a heavy body violently moving does go more
swifter, by so much it does work the more greater effect in all things which
resist the same: likewise by how much the swiftnes thereof does more decrease,
by so much in that moving the weight thereof which draws the said heavy body
toward the ground does more increase.
by so much it does work the more greater effect in all things which resist
the same. Likewise by how much the swiftness thereof does more decrease, by so
much in that moving the weight thereof does more increase, the which weight
provoke and draws the said heavy body toward the ground. But to work
his effects in that moving it is more lighter, or of less weight, and
therefore it makes the less effect.


Duke. I do like well of this your discourse, The more swifter a pellet does
fly in the air, the more lighter it is: and contrary wise, the more sloer
that the pellet flies, the more heavier it is.
therefore proceed on in the same.


Nicho. Then I say that of these aforesaid things which by natural reason
have been proved, this conclusion does spring that the more swifter the pellet
does fly in the air, the more lighter it is, and contrariwise the more sloer
that the pellet does fly the more heavier it is.


Duke. All this is true.


Nicho. I say also that when there is more weight in the pellet, then is there
a more provocation thereby to shoot the said pellet toward the center of the
world, that is to say toward the ground.


Duke. It is so as you say.


Nicho. Now to conclude our said purpose we will suppose that all the range
which the pellet being shot our of the Culuering may make or has made, is all
the line A B C D. And if it be possible for any part thereof to be perfectly
right, I will suppose the same part to be A B, and divide the same part into
two equal parts in the point E. and because the pellet will fly more swiftly
in the space A E (by the third proposition of the first book of our nwe
science) than in the space E B, therefore the said pellet does fly more
rightlye (by the reasons before alleged) in the space A E, than it does in the
space E B. Wherefore the line A E, shall be a more straighter line than E B,
The one part of a right line cannot be more or less right than the other part.
the which is a thing impossible. For if all the whole line A B be supposed to
be a perfect right line, the one half thereof cannot be more or less right
than the other half, and if the one half of that line should be more righter
than the other, it would of necessity follow that the other half should not
be right, and therefore of necessity it follows that the part E B is not
perfectly right.

depiction of the firing of a piece of artillery

And if any man be of this opinion, that the part A E is a perfect right line,
his said opinion may be reproved for false by dividing the said part A E into
two equal parts in the point F, and then by the reasons above alleged it
will be manifest that the part A F is more righter than the part F E, so that
the said part F E of necessity cannot be perfectly right. Likewise by
dividing the part A F into two equal parts, it is manifest by the same
reasons, that that half thereof which is next to A is more righter than that
which is next to F and so by dividing that half into two other equal parts it
will follow that the part ending in A is more righter than the other part. And
because these proceedings are infinite, it follows of necessity that not
only all the part A B is not perfectly straight, but that no part thereof (how
little soever it be) can be perfectly straight, which is that which was
required to be proved. Then it is to be seen how that the pellet shot out of
that Culuering in such sort, does not fly in any part of his range in a
perfect right line, although it does fly as swiftly as may be desired, The
more swifter a pellet does fly, the less crooked is his range.
because the swiftness (how great so ever it be) is never sufficient in such
sort to make the pellet fly in a right line. But this is true, the more
swifter that the pellet does fly, the more nearer it does approach to fly in a
right line, and yet it will never be made to fly in a right line. Therefore it
is more convenient to say in such a case, that the more swifter the pellet does
fly, the less crooked is his range.


Duke.


Nicho. We be oftentimes deceived by judging according to the sense of seeing.
the which for a great distance does appear unto us for to be very plain,
and yet by reason we know that it is sphericall: Wherefore we be oftentimes
deceived by iudgging according to the sense of seeing.


Duke. Your reasons are very good, yet I marvel to hear you say that a
pellet being shot out of such a piece with so great force does not any whitte
fly in a right line, but considering also that in such an oblique way the
weight of the pellet is much more apt to make it decline or to draw the same
pellet toward the ground, than in any other elevation, I think your sayings
are true. Yet when a pellet is shot out of a piece somewhat elevated at the
mouth, I do think and verily believe, that the pellet will range through the
air for a while in a right line, because the weight of such a pellet shot out
of a piece elevated at the mouth, is less apt to make that pellet decline
toward the ground, than when it is shot out of a piece lying leuel.


Nich. It is truth (as your Excellency does say) that the weight of a pellet is
not so apt to hinder the range of the same when the pellet flies out of a
piece elevated, as when the said pellet flies out of a piece which lies
equidistant to the Horizon, A piece is said to shoot at point blancke when
lying level or equidistant to the Horizon it is discharged.
that is to say leuel, or as the gu^ners term it, at point blanke for two
causes, whereof the first is for that, (as has bin proved) the greatest weight
is in the place of equality or leuel: The other cause is for that the said
weight draws the pellet out of his way or passage perpendicularly toward
the ground, The waigt of the pellet draws the pellet out of his way and
passage perpendicularly toward the ground when it is shot out of a piece lying
level, and also when it is shot out of a piece elevated or imbased, except it
be shot right up toward Heaven, or right down toward the ground or center
of the world.
the which kind of drawing is more vehement and stronger in that place, than
in any other elevation. For the piece being elevated by degrees, the said
weight also by degrees does go nearer toward his said way or passage, that
is to say, it does not fall there so perpedicularlie from the said passage, but
comes always more near unto the same, and so is of less strength and force
to draw the pellet out of his way or passage, besides this (as before has
bin declared) by how much a piece is more elevated, by so much the range of his
pellet is less crooked, and yet the range of that pellet cannot in any part
thereof be perfectly right, except in the two ways before specified, that is
to say, when it is shot directly up toward heaven, or directly down toward
the center of the world: Because in every other way some part of the weight
draws always the said pellet out of his way or passage, except in the
aforesaid two ways that is to say, directly up toward heaven, or directly
down toward the center of the world: in which two ways, the said weight (if
any weight be there) draws the pellet right according to the order of his
passage or way and not out of the same as by this figure you may easily
without any other demonstration perceive. And so it is in shootes flying
downewardes as well as in shoots flying vpwardes, supposing A to be the mouth of
the piece out of which B the pellet issues, and in the form of a
perpendicular, C to be the weight of that pellet B: the which perpendicular or
weight C does always draw the pellet toward the center of the world that
is to say, down toward the ground. Whereupon by reasoning as we have done
of shoots made in a right line, it will be manifest, that a pellet shot out of a
Culuering or out of any other piece, cannot go in any small part of his range
in a perfect right line, except in the two ways aforesaid, which is that
which was required to be proved.


Duke. You have defended well your reasons, and have said enough for this time,
and at my return from Pesaro I will cause your said Inventions to be proved.




The 4. Colloquie.
When a piece is twice discharged, one time after an other, at one selfsame
elevation, and toward one self same place with equal charge of powder and
like weight of pellet, the second pellet will outflye the first. And it is
more easy to move and penetrate that which is already moved and open, than
that which is closed and quiet. And a piece when it is dry and temperately
warm, does dry up the moisture in the powder which is put into the concauitie
of the same piece, and makes the same powder to take fire quickelie, and to
be of more force than it was when it was moist.

Interlocutors L Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. When a piece of Artillery is twice discharged, one time after an other,
at one selfsame elevation, and toward one selfsame place with equal charge
of powder, and like weight of pellet, I ask of you whether these two shoots
will be equal?


Nicho. Without doubt they will be unequal, because that piece will shoot
farther at the second discharge than at the first.


Prior. By what reason?


Ncho. This reason is also alleged in the 7. Colloquie of the 2. book of
Nicholas Tartaglia his Colloquies.
For two reasons, of which the first is this. At the first shoot the pellet
finds the air quiet, and at the second shoot it does find the air not only
wholly stirred with the pellet of the first shoot, but also much tending or
going toward the place at which it is shot, It is more easy to move and
penetrate that which is already moved and open, than that which is closed and
quiet.
and because it is more easy to move and penetrate that which is already moved
and open, than that which is closed and quiet, it follows that the last
pellet finding in his range a less resistance than the first pellet did in his
range, will outflie the first pellet. The second reason is this. At the first
shoot the powder being put into the piece, does oftentimes find the same
piece somewhat moist, Moist powder will not take fire so soon as dry powder,
nor work so forceably as dry powder will do. And a piece when it is dry and
temperately warm, does dry up the moisture in the powder which is put into the
concauitie of the same piece, and makes the powder to take fire more sooner,
and to be of more force than it was when it was moist.
and especially when such a piece has not bin shot in for certain days
before, through which the powder will not fire so quickly as it will do when the
piece is dry and temperatly warm, for this warmth or heat will somewhat dry
up the moisture which is in the powder, and cause the powder to fire more
sooner. Wherefore the powder does not work so forceably in the first shoot as
it does in the second, so that also by this second reason the piece will shoot
farther at the second discharge than at the first.


Prior. Your reasons like me well, and here we will end our talk for this
evening.


The 5. Colloquie.
When a piece made very hot with continual shooting for a long time together
is discharged, it shootes not so far as it did when it was less hot, and when
a piece by continual shooting waxes more hotter, then by how much the more
hotter it is, by so much the concauity of that piece is made the more
attractiue, and when a hot piece made cold with water cast into the concauity
thereof is discharged, it shoots not so far as it would have done if it had bin
suffered to cool of it self. And how dankish powder does weaken the force of
the piece that is charged with the same, and how the pellet is not expelled
forth of a piece with any other thing tha^ by the airie exhalatio^ or wind
which the Saltpeter causes.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. Yesterday in the evening you concluded and by good natural reasons
proved, that one piece being twice shot of, one time after an other, at one
selfsame elevation, and toward one selfsame place with equal charge of
powder and like weight of pellet, shoots farther at the second time than at
the first: now I ask of you if that piece should be continually shot of for a
long time together at one selfsame elevation, and toward one self same
place, whether or no the same often shooting will continually cause every one
of those shootes to outflie the other.


Nic. My Lord that will not follow thereupon.


Prior. You did say yesterday in the evening that a piece shoots farther at
the second time than at the first, for that the pellet does then find the air
moved and going toward the place at which it is shot, and for that the
powder put into the piece does then find that piece to be dry, and somewhat
warm: therefore the more oftener that the piece is shot of, the more does the
pellet by reason of the former shoots find the air open, penetrated, and going
toward the place at which it is shot, likewise the powder wherewith the piece
is recharged finds continually the concauitie thereof more drier, and more
warmer (the which warmth as you also said) dries all the moisture in the
powder, and makes it to take fire quickly, and to be of more force than it was
before.


Nic. All this is true which your Lordship says, yet oftentimes the contrary
does happen, By how much more hotter a piece is, by so much the concauitie
thereof is made more attractiue. The pellet is not expelled forth of a piece
with any other thing than by the any exhalation or wind which the Saltpeter
causes.
for by continual shooting the piece waxes more hotter, and by how much the
more hotter it is, by so much the concauity of that piece is made the more
attractiue, even as a cupping glass which is made hot with tow burned in the
same. Now for that the pellet is not expelled or driven forth with any other
thing than by the airie exhalation or wind caused through the saltpeter,
therefore by making such a piece continually more attractiue as I have said with
that more heat which suppeth and retains continually more of that wind which
should serve to expel the pellet, the virtue expulsive in that piece does
continually more decrease, and the pellet by that reason flies with less
swiftnes or less force, and consequently makes continually a less or shorter
range.


Prior. I like well of your reasons, but who does not know that the two first
accidents which give furtherance and aid to the range of the pellet (I mean
the great combustion or running of the air toward the place which is
continually shot at, and the force which increases in the powder through the
heat) are sufficient, and perchance more than enough to supply that
attractiue defect caused by the great heat of the piece? The which thing being
so, it follows that the same piece shoots always in one like sort, that is
to say, it shoots no farther at onetime than at an other, because that which
the said two accidents add thereunto, is so much as that which the third
accident does diminish, or else it shootes continually more farther, for that
the increase of the said two first accidents is more than the detraction of
the third accident.


Nic. Certainly I must confess that the said two first accidents (that is to
say the breaking of the air, and the force which increases in the powder) do
aid and help much the range of the pellet, which aid and help as it is to
be believed that sometimes it supplieth and perchance gives advantage by that
expulsive virtue which continually the piece does diminish or suppe in
according as it heateth so as peradventure the third and fourth shoot will be
as it were equal in balance or all one with the second shoot, Note.
or little differing, nevertheless it is to be affirmed, that in continuance
of time the said two accidents cannot supply the defect of the third accident,
by reason of the great heat which continually increases in that Piece, Through
continual shooting for a long while together, a piece in the end will shoot a
less distance than it did in the beginning. A hot piece cooled with water
shoots not so far as it will do after it has been suffered to cool of it
self.
and continually makes the same Piece as before has bin declared to be thereby
more attractiue: and therefore continually the said piece decreaseth or suppeth
in more of that exhalatio^ which should expel the pellet and therefore this
third accident through continual shooting for a long time together commes to
be superior to the two first accidents, and so through continual shooting for
a long while together, the Piece shootes a less distance than it did before.


Prior. If any body shall cool that Piece by casting water into the concauitie
thereof, do you not think that thereby it will shoot more farther toward
the said place?


Nicho. Without doubt when the Piece is perfectly dry and cold, it will shoot
more farther: but cooled so with water, the metal being hot does sup up of
that water, and resolves that water so supped up into an airie vapor, which
cannot continue in the hollonesse of the Piece, but is forced to go out of it
by little and little: and when this vapor does not carry with it any moisture,
and the concauitie of the Piece is very dry, then that vapor will rather
augment the range of the same Piece than diminishe the same, because the power
attractiue which was in that Piece, is expelled through the often going out of
that vapor. But forasmuch as that vapor is altogether moist it must needs
be (notwithstanding the Piece seems for to be dry when the powder is put
in to recharge the same) that such a moist vapor will make the powder somewhat
dankish, Da^kish powder will weaken the force of the pellet which is shot out of
a piece charged with the same powder.
and that thereby the effects of that powder will not be so forceable as they
would have been if that Piece had been suffered to cool of it self without
putting any water into the same.


Prior. You have well satisfied me for this evening, and because it is now late,
I pray you let us make here an end of this talk.


The 6. Colloquie.
How a piece of Artillery charged with his due charge of powder did shoot his
bullet right upon the place to which the leuel was given: and how the said
piece charged with more powder than his due charge did shoot his bullet above
or over that place, because the said bullet shot with more powder than his due
charge flied more swiftly and in a more righter way than the other bullet did
which was shot with his due charge in powder, and by that reason will always
strike above that place where the other bullet shot with less powder shall
strike. And how a bullet will never fly in a right line unto the mark at
which the level is given, except it be shot right up toward heaven, or
right down toward the center of the world.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. What was the cause that a piece charged with his due charge of powder
did shoot his bullet right upon the place to which the level was given, and
that the same piece charged with more powder than his due charge did shoot his
bullet above or over that place?


Nicho. It came so to pass by reason that the bullet which was shot out of
the piece charged with a more quantity of powder than his due charge, did fly
in a way less crooked than the other bullet did, The way which is least
crooked always extends and goes above that way which is more crooked, and
by how much a bullet flies more farther, by so much the bullet which flies
in the less crooked way will strike more higher, and come more nearer to the
right way than the bullet which flies in the more crooked way.

The right way of a bullet is above all the oblique ways of any bullet
violently issuing out of a piece toward any place.


and that the difference of both their crooked ways is more perceived in the
end of their ranges than in any other place: for the way which is least crooked
always extends and goes above that way which is more crooked, and by how
much the bullet flies more farther, by so much the bullet which flies in the
less crooked way, shall strike more higher than the bullet which flies in the
more crooked way. And the way which is less crooked, comes more nearer to the
very right way, than that way does which is more crooked. Also because that
right way, I mean that right way which is rightly extended, and lies right
with the concauitie of the Piece toward any place that you will, is always
above all the oblique ways of any bullet issuying violently out of that piece
toward any place whatsoever. Therefore that way which is most nearest to the
right way, is always above that way which is farther of from it. A bullet shot
out of a piece with more powder than his due charge flies more swiftly and in
a more righter way than a like pellet will do which is shot out of the same
Piece with his due charge in powder, and the pellet shot out of a piece with
more powder shall strike above that place where the other pellet shot with
less powder will strike.
And because the bullet shot out of a piece which is charged with more powder
than his due charge, flies more swiftly than that bullet does which is shot
with a lesser quantity of powder, and also flies in a more righter way than
the other, therefore it did strike above that place where the other bullet did
hit.


Prior. I do not well understand this which you have told me: I mean, that
the bullet shot with a less quantity of powder will not fly in so right a
way as that bullet will do which is expelled with a more quantity of powder.
Will you not grant that a bullet shot out of a Piece charged with his due
charge and quantity of powder, does fly right upon that place or mark unto
which the leuel is given within a convenient distaunce?


Nicholas. I do also deny that a bullet will fly in a right line unto the
mark at which the level is given: A pellet will not fly in a right line unto
the mark at which the leuel is given, except it be shot right up toward
heaven, or right down toward the ce^ter of the world, as you may also read
in the second and third Colloquie of this book.
And of the very same matter I did once dispute with the Duke of Vrbine of
famous memory, the father of the Duke of Vrbine that now is, I mean that a
bullet shot out of any piece of Artillery by any manner of means, does never
go, nor can go in any small part of his way upon a perfect right line,
except it be shot straight up toward heaven, or straight down toward the
center of the world.


Prior. I perceive that you say true, because if the bullet at the first shoot
had gone right upon the mark, then by recharging the piece afterward with a
more quantity of powder, the other bullet could not by any reason have
strooken above the mark, but in the very same place where the pellet or bullet
which was shot out of the Piece with less powder did strike before. And of
purpose I have devised this question because it seemed a strange thing unto me,
that the bullet did ascend above the right line by charging the Piece with
more powder, and therefore to morrow in the evening I will dispute better with
you of this matter which does like me well.


The 7. Colloquie.
When the level sight which is set upon the mouth of the piece is precisely
so high as the level sight which is set upon the tail of the piece, and he
which will shoot at any mark sees with his eye the same mark by the
extremes or uppermost parts of the said sights, then the pellet will always
strike somewhat under that mark. And when it is said that both the level
sights are of an equal height, you must understand thereby that the extremes
or tops of the said level sights are equally distant from the loest part or
ground of the concauitie in the piece, for the height of the level sightes,
and also the lonesse or shortness of the level sights, must always be
measured from the loest part or ground of the concauitie in the Canon of the
piece. And when the level sights upon a piece are of an equal height, and he
that shoots does see his mark by the tops of those leuel sights, then by how
much more farther the said mark is from the piece, by so much the pellet will
strike more under the mark. And when the level sight which is set upon the
mouth of the piece is more higher than the level sight, which is set upon the
tail of the piece, and he which shootes does see his mark by the tops of
those leuel sights, the pellet will strike more under that mark than it will do
when both the level sights are of an equal height. And when our visual line in
seeing our mark does cut the line in which the pellet flies, then the leuel
sight at the mouth of the piece is more shorter than it should be. And when our
visual line in seeing our mark does not cut nor touch the line in which the
pellet flies, then the leuel sight at the mouth of the piece is not so short
as it should be. And when our visual line in seeing the mark does touch or cut
the line in which the pellet flies, and the mark at which we shoot is in the
said touch point or in the said point of intersection, then the level sight
at the mouth of the piece has his due length and convenient shortness and the
pellet will strike in the midst of the mark, but when the said mark shall
be within that touch point or point of intersection then the pellet will hit
somewhat under that mark, and when the said mark shall be without that
touch point or point of intersection, then the pellet will hit above the said
mark. And when a pellet in his range shall cut the visual line, and ascend
above the same line, then the same pellet in his descending will cut the same
line again. And when our visuall line does cut the line of the pellet, then of
necessity it shall cut the same line in 2. places, and the first of these 2.
places cannot be very far from the piece, but the other place of intersection
must of necessity be very far from the piece, I mean in the end of the
pellets violent range. And when a pellet in his range shall cut the visual line,
and ascend above the same line, then the gunner may with that pellet strike 2
sundry marks, in 2 several places.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. Yesterday in the evening you concluded, and by good natural reason
showed, that a pellet shot out of a piece does not in any part of his way go
in a right line, except it be shot right up toward heaven, or right down
toward the center of the world, now I demand of you whence it comes that a
pellet shot out of a piece at a mark within point blanke, When the leuel
sight at the mouth of the piece is precisely so high as the level sight at the
tail of the piece, and he which will shoot at any mark sees with his eye
the same mark by the uppermost parts of the said sights, the^ the pellet will
always strike so^what under that mark.
does strike sometimes in the very midst of the mark, and sometimes under the
mark, and sometimes above the mark?


Nich. All this comes to pass by reason of the level sights that are upon
the piece. For if the leuel sight at the mouth of the piece be precisely so
high as the leuel sight at the tail of the piece, that is to say if the one
and the other level sight be equally distant from the loest part of the
concauitie in that piece, and he which will shoot at any mark sees with his
eye precisely the same mark, by the extremes or the uppermost parts of the
said two level sights, always in such a case the pellet will strike somewhat
under that mark, and the more farther that the mark is from the piece, the
more under the mark shall the bloe be, and contrariwise by how much the mark
is more nearer to the piece, by so much the bloe will be less under that
mark. the selfsame thing and with greater difference will follow when the
level sight upon the tail of the piece is more loer or shorter tha^ the leuel
sight at the mouth of the piece, I say more loer in respect of the loest part
or ground of the concauitie in the piece.


Prior. I do not understand you herein.


Nic. That you may the better understand me I will set down the figure of a
piece of Artillery with 2 leuel sights marked with these letters C and D the
which two level sights in this supposition are supposed to be of equal
height, that is to say, the extremes or tops of the said level sights C and D
are equally distant from the loest part or ground of the concauitie in the
Piece, When it is said that the level sights are of an equal height, you must
understand thereby that the extremes or tops of the said leuel sights, are
equally distant from the loest part or ground of the concauitie in the Piece,
for the height of the level sights must always be measured from the loest
part or ground of the concauitie in the Canon of the piece.
and the point E agreeing in a right line with those two leuel sights, is the
mark at point blanke which we have chosen to shoot at. Now I say that of
necessity in this case the pellet will always strike somewhat more under that
mark, be the mark as far or as near to the Piece as you will, because our
visual line (which the line C D E does represent) proceeds always or
extends it self in an equal distance from the concauitie of the Piece, or
rather from the line which is produced in a right length according to the order
of the concauitie in the Piece, or from the center of that concauitie, which in
this case we will suppose to be the line F G, and therefore the point G must of
necessity be more loer than the point E by so much as the center of the
concauitie in the canon of the Piece is loer than the point D. And hereby it
may appear, that if the pellet should fly in a perfect right line, it would
strike in this case under the mark, that is to say, in the point G. And for
that it has bin proved that in such like shootes the pellet never flies in a
perfect right line, but always in an oblique or crooked line, When the level
sights upon a Piece are of an equal height and he which shootes does take his
mark by the tops of those level sightes, then by how much more farther the
said mark is from the Piece, by so much the pellet will strike more under the
mark.
it follows of necessity that the same pellet will strike under the point G,
as if it should be said in the point I. And therefore every one that is but of
a mean capacity without any other demonstration will grant in this case that
by how much the said mark E is more farther from the Piece, that by so much the
point I will be the more loer, because the oblique or crooked way of the pellet
continually declineth or crooketh toward the ground, which is that which was
first proposed.

diagram of the firing of a piece of artillery

The second proposition is, When the leuel sight which is set upon the mouth of
the Piece is more higher than the leuel sight which is set upon the tail of
the Piece, and he which shootes does see his mark by the tops of those
level sights, the pellet will strike more under that mark than it would have
done if both the leuel sights had been of an equal height.
if the level sight which is set upon the mouth of the Piece be more higher
than the level sight which is set upon the tail or breech of the Piece, that
likewise the pellet will always strike under the mark at which you shoot,
and more under than the pellet will do which is shot out of a Piece having his
level sightes of equal height. This thing without any other demonstration is
manifest, and may be sensibly perceived by the figure next following: therefore
I will speak no more thereof, but that by these two examples, although they
are made of shoots at point blank, we must understand that the very same will
follow in shootes made after any other sort.

diagram of the firing of a piece of artillery


Prior. I do well understand both your examples, but let us now come to the
other part of our former talk, that is to say, from whence comes it that the
pellet does strike sometimes in the very midst of the mark, and sometimes
under the mark?


Nicholas. That is by reason of the condition and quality of the stroke, which
happens when the two level sights are of equal height: and also when the
leuel sight at the mouth of the Piece is more higher than the level sight
upon the breech of the Piece: that is to say, in the one and in the other of
them, the pellet hits always of necessity under the mark. Now rests only
that I should declare the condition and quallitie of the stroke that may happen
when the leuel sight at the mouth of the Piece is somewhat shorter than the
leuel sight which is on the tail of the Piece, The lonesse or shortness of the
leuel sights upon a Piece, must always be measured as the height of the same
ought to be measured that is to say, from the undermost part or ground of the
concauitie in the canon of that Piece.

When our visuall line in seeing our mark does cut the line in which the pellet
sheth, then the level sight at the mouth of the Piece is more shorter than it
should be.

When our visuall line in seeing our mark does not cut nor touch the line in
which the pellet sheth, then the level sight at the mouth of the Piece is not
so short as it should be.


and this lonesse or shortness ought always to be measured (as before has
been declared) from the undermost part or ground of the concauitie in the canon
of that Piece. Therefore I say that when the level sight at the mouth of the
Piece shall be somewhat more shorter than the level sight which is on the
breeche of the Piece, it may chance that sometimes the pellet will strike in
the middle of the mark, and sometimes above the mark, and sometimes under the
mark at which you shoot.


Prior. By what reason can it do so?


Nicholas. By this reason. When the level sight at the mouth of the Piece is
shorter than the leuel sight which is on the breech of the Piece, then alwayies
by the fifth petition of Euclide our visuall line does of necessity meet with
the right line which proceeds straight forth according to the undermost part
of the concauitie in the Piece, and for that the way in which the pellet flies
for a good space together is near unto it or not far from it, although it
be not straight nor goes in truth by the said line which proceeds straight
forth according to the undermost part of the concauitie in the canon of that
Piece. And therefore that intersection may be in such a place where the same
visuall line will also cut the line or way in which the pellet flies. And this
comes to pass when the level sight at the mouth of the Piece is more
shorter than it should be in respect of the level sight which is on the
breeche of the Piece. And that intersection may be also in such a place where
the said visual line will not cut nor touch the said line or way in which the
pellet flies. And this happens when the leuel sight at the mouth of the Piece
is not sufficiently enough more shorter than the leuel sight which is on the
breech of the Piece. Also that intersection may be in such a place where the
visual line will touch the line or way in which the pellet flies, When our
visual line in seeing the mark does touch or cut the line in which the pellet
flies, and the mark at which we shoot is in the said touch point, or in the
said point of intersection, then the leuel sight at the mouth of the Piece has
his due length and convenient shortness, and the pellet will strike in the
midst of the mark. But when the said mark shall be within that touch point
or point of intersection, then the pellet will hit somewhat under that mark,
and when the said mark shall be without that touch point or point of
intersectio^, the the pellet will hit above the said mark.
and this happens when the leuel sight at the mouth of the piece has his due
and convenient shortness in respect of the leuel sight which is on the breech
of the Piece, and then if by chance our visual line shall cut the said line or
way of the pellet, and by chance the mark unto which the leuel is given,
shall be precisely in the point of that intersection, without doubt the pellet
will strike precisely in the midst of that mark: but if by chance the said
mark shall be within that intersection, that is to say, more toward the
piece, then the pellet will always hit somewhat under the mark I mean under the
midst of it, and by how much the more remote or farther of the same mark shall be
from that intersection, that is to say, more toward the Piece, by so much the
pellet will hit more under the middle part of that mark. But if by chance the
same mark shall be somewhat without that intersectio^, that is to say, somewhat
more higher tha^ that intersectio^, then the pellet will hit above the mark,
and for a certain space by how much the more remote or farther of the same
mark shall be from that intersection, by so much the pellet will hit more above
the mark.


Pri, In this matter I do not well understand you.


Nich. Let us suppose by the figure following, Example.
that a Piece of Artillery has upon it 2 level sights marked with these
letters C and D, and that D the leuel sight, is shorter tha^ the leuel sight C,
and that F G is the line which proceeds straight forth according to the
order of the undermost part or ground of the concauitie in the Piece, and that
H I is the line or way in which the pellet flies, and that our visual line
proceeding straight forth by the tops or uppermost points of the two leuel
sights C and D, does of necessity (as has bin before said) cut the line FG,
and therefore let us suppose that our said visual line does also cut the said
line H I in the point K as it does in the figure following. Now I say that if
the mark to which the leuel is given, be precisely in the point K, the pellet
will strike precisely in the middle of that mark. And if by chance the said
mark be within that intersection, that is to say, toward the Piece, as if I
should say in the point M, the pellet will always strike somewhat under the
midst of that mark, because in all that space the pellet rangeth always under
our visual line. And by how much the said mark is more remote or farther from
the point K, that is to say, Note.
by how much more nearer M is to the piece, by so much the pellet will strike
more loer: nevertheless such lonesse in such a case can never be equal to the
difference that is between the extreme or uppermost part of the level sight
which is upon the mouth of the piece, I mean between the point D and the
center of the said concauitie or hollonesse in the piece: the which difference
is about one half part of the thickness of the piece in the breech: and
therefore when the mark to which the level is given, lies between the Piece
and that intersection, the Gunner is subject to a small error by reason of the
leuel sights. But when such a mark is somewhat without that intersectio^, as
if I should say in the point L, the pellet will strike above the mark, because
for a long way or space the pellet flies above the visuall line. And therefore
by how much the said mark is more farther from the point K, by so much the
stroke of the pellet in a long way will hit the more higher. When a pellet in
his range shall cut our visual line and ascend above the same line, then of
necessity the same pellet in his desce^ding will cut the said line again.
When our visual line does cut the line of the pellet, then of necessity it
must cut the same in two places, and the first of those two places can not be
very far from the piece, but the other place of intersection must of necessity
be very far from the piece, I mean in the end of the pellets violent range.
And it is true that the pellet going far in his crooked or natural way,
returns to cut again our visual line, because our visual line C D K L does
infinitely proceed straight forth, and the pellet does not infinitely proceed
in the way H K I, but in time begins to decrease and incline toward the
center of the world, and finally finding no resistance directs it self in
his natural way toward the said center of the world, and so by going far
it does of necessity return to cut again our visuall line in his way: and
therefore if the said mark be very far of, that is to say, so much beyond
the first intersection made in the point K, as that by chance it is also
precisely in the other second intersection, without doubt in that place which
is so far of, the pellet will strike precisely in the midst of the mark,
for that at all times when our visuall line does cut the way of the pellet, it
is necessary that it do cut it in two places, the one of which, that is to
say, the first, can not be very far from the Piece: but the other, that is to
say, the second intersection must of necessity be very far from the Piece, I
mean that it must be in the end of the violent randge of the pellet: and
sometimes that may be in his natural moving or way, and therefore in this
case when the mark at which the leuel is given is in any of the said two
places or intersections, the pellet will necessarily strike in the very middle
of the mark.

diagram of the firing of a piece of artillery


Prior. This is a very good speculation and it does much delight me, howbeit I
do not well understand this last particularitie which you have told me,
that is to say, that you may shoot and give level unto two marks set in two
diverse places, therefore give me an example thereof if it be possible by a
figure, for it seems to me a thing impossible to be done.


Nicho. In the figure following for example sake, How a Gu^nar may at one shoot
with one pellet strike 2 diverse marks in two several places.
a Piece of Artillery is drawn with two leuel sights noted with the letters C
and D according as it has been proposed, that is to say, the leuel sight D is
so much shorter than the leuel sight C, as that thereby our visuall line will
cut the way in which the pellet flies. And let all the line H I K L M
represent the whole way in which the pellet finding no resistance has or shall
violently randge. And let the line M N be a part of the natural range which
the pellet has or shall make. Now I say that if our visuall line proceeding
forth right infinitely by the extremes or tops of the two leuel sights C
and D, shall cut the said way of the pellet H I K L M N, it must needs be by
the reasons before alleged, that the same our visual line shall cut the said
line or way of the pellet in two places: that is to say, once in the right or
less crooked part H I K, and an other time in the crooked part K L M, or in
the natural way or range M N. Then supposing that the way of the pellet does
cut our visual line in the right part H I K in the point I, and in the crooked
part in the point L, as it does in the figure following, I conclude that if the
mark unto which the level is given be in any of the said two intersections,
I mean in the point I, or in the point L, the pellet will of necessity strike
precisely in the middle of that mark. But when the said mark shall be more
without the said first intersection: that is say from the point I eue^ at the
point K, the pellet will strike so much the more above the mark. And by how much
more the said mark is beyond the said point K toward the point L, by so much
the pellet will strike the less above that mark. But when the said mark is
somewhat beyond the point L, the pellet of necessity will strike under the
mark, and when the mark shall be much beyond the point L, the pellet cannot
fly unto the mark as by natural reason this may in my opinion be easily
understood.


Prior. I perceive that all this is true, and that this is in deed a very
notable speculation, howbeit in this evening I will weary you no more, but to
morrow in the evening you shall tell me the rest of this matter.


diagram of the firing of a piece of artillery

The 8. Colloquie.
When the level sight upon the mouth of the piece is not so short or low as
the level sight upon the breeche of the piece, by so much as is convenient for
it to be, then for that our visuall line does not proceed so lo as that it
may touch the line of the pellet, the pellet will always strike under the
mark: and for that in this case there is one place in the line of the pellet
unto which our visuall line will come more nearer than it will do unto any
other place in the same line, the pellet will strike less under the mark, and
more nearer to the mark which stands in that nearest place, than it will do
if the mark shall stand in any other place.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. Proceed in that matter of which we did talk yesterday in the evening.


Nicho. Yesterday in the evening (if I do not forget my self) we did speak
of all the effects or strokes that may happen when through the much shortness
or lowness of the leuel sight which is before at the mouth of the Piece in
respect of the level sight which is behind on the tail of the Piece, our
visual line shall cut the line or way in which the pellet flies: and in this
evening I will speak of all the effects or blows that may happen when the
leuel sight at the mouth of the Piece is not so short or lo as the leuel sight
at the breech of the Piece by so much as is convenient for it to be, through
which cause our visual line does not proceed so lo, as that it may touch the
line or way in which the pellet flies, therefore in such a case the pellet will
always strike under the mark, because in all that space the pellet flies
under our visuall line. But it is true that in the said line of the pellets
way, there is one certain place at which our visual line does come more nearer
to the said way than in any other place, and therefore if by chance the mark
unto which the leuel is given shall happen to be set in that place although the
pellet will strike there under that mark, yet this notwithstanding the pellet
will strike at that place more nearer unto the mark than in any other place.
Example.
As for example in the figure of a piece of artillery here under drawn, let
the two leuel sights of that Piece be noted with these letters C and D, and let
the line or way of the pellet be noted with these letters H I K, and let the
leuel sight on the mouth of the piece noted with the letter D, be somewhat
more shorter than the level sight on the breeche noted with this letter C, but
in so small a quantity that the visual line which shall go by the extreamees or
tops of those leuel sights in the line C D M L, do not touch the said line or
way of the pellet H I K. And let the point M be that place of the visual line,
which comes most nearest to the said way or line of the pellet. Now I say if
the mark unto which the level is given happens to be in the point M, the
pellet will strike under that mark, I mean it will strike in the point N. But
it will strike at that place N more nearer to that mark than in any other
place, therefore if that mark were more without from the point M, as if I
should say in the point L, or within, between the Piece and that point M, as
if I should say in the point O, the pellet would always strike more under
the mark. But it is true that it is more subject to error without, than within
that point M, as it appears to be by the figure following.


Prior. You have said enough. For I do well understand you in this matter.


diagram of the firing of a piece of artillery

The 9. Colloquie.
When the level sight which is upon the mouth of the piece shall be by so much
loer or shorter than the level sight which is upon the breech of the said
piece, as that our visuall line passing by the extremes or tops of those
level sights in taking the level of things does only touch and not cut the
way of the pellet, then the distance from the mouth of that piece to the said
contingent or touch point is so much ground as that piece can cast leuel: and
then if the mark unto which the level is given shall be in that contingent or
touch point, the pellet will strike precisely in the midst of that mark. And
when the mark shall happen to be either without or within that touch point,
the pellet will strike under the mark, but more under when the mark is
without the said touch point than it will do when the mark is within the same
touch point.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. Now go forward in the last part of the proposed matter, that is to say,
when the leuel sight at the mouth of the Piece shall have his due and
convenient shortness in respect of the leuel sight which is on the breech of the
Piece.


Nicho. When the leuel sight at the mouth of the piece shall be by so much loer
or shorter tha^ the leuel sight on the breech of that Piece, as that our
visuall line passing by the extremes or tops of those leuel sights in taking
the leuel of things does only touch and not cut the way of the pellet (as by
the figure following it does appear to do in the point M) the distance from
the mouth of that Piece to the said touch point which in the figure following
shall be the line H M, may with reason be said to be so much ground as that
Piece can cast leuel. And then if the mark unto which the leuel is given shall
by chance be found to be in that touch point, the pellet will strike precisely
in the middle of that mark. But when the said mark shall happen to be without
the same touch point, that is to say, without the point M, the pellet will
always strike somewhat under that mark, I mean so much more under the middle
of that mark as the same mark shall be more remote or farther from the touch
point, be it without or within that touch point. And it is true that the same
mark being within, that is to say, Note.
toward the Piece, the Pellet cannot strike very lo, because that lonesse
can never be equal to the height of the leuel sight which is upon the breeche
of the Piece, which may be about the one half of the thickness of the piece
in the breech, as has been said in the end of the seventh Colloquie, and
therefore in such a case the stroke is subject to a small error in respect of
that which may happen when the mark is without or beyond that touch point,
as any man of a mean capacity may consider.


Prior. Wherefore do you attribute unto the distance which is between the
Piece and the same touch point, that it is all the ground which the Piece can
shoot level and do not attribute the same to the distance between the Piece
and the point of the intersection, in which point if the mark be set, the
pellet will likewise strike in the middle of the said mark even as it does
when the mark is in the touch point, as has been declared in the seventh
Colloquie?


Nicho. Because the Point of intersection having no determinate place, may be
in very many places, according as by very many ways the leuel sight on the
mouth of the Piece may be need. Our visual line passing by the extremes of the
leuel sights may cut the line of the pellet in very many places. But when our
visuall line passing by the extremes of the leuel sights does only touch and
not cut the said line of the pellet, the said touch point cannot be but in one
only place.
less more shorter than the level sight on the breech of the Piece. But the
touch point cannot be but in one place only, the which place is more farther
from the mouth of the Piece than any other place whatsoever, where our visuall
line may meet with the line of way in which the pellet flies. Then that being
a more longer or farther concourse and less variable than any of the other
concourses which do cut the same, I think for this reason that such a
dignity ought more worthily to be given to that touch point than to any of
the points of intersection.


Prior. Your sayings do agree with reason, and this matter with the other two
matters which have been spoken of before, are three good lessons.


diagram of the firing of a piece of artillery

The 10. Colloquie.
When one or both of the level sights shall not be precisely set in the very
midst of the uppermost part or outside of the piece, then that piece will
always shoot his pellet wide of the mark unto which the leuel was given by
those sights. Also when the concauitie or hollownesse of a piece is not bored
or cast right in the midst of the metal, then that piece will shoot his
pellet wide of the mark unto which the leuel shall be given. And how the middle
part of the concauitie in a piece may be justly known: and how the leuel
sights may be rightly placed upon the outside and uppermost part of a piece
right over the middle point of the concauitie in the piece.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. You have heretofore made me to understand the cause why a pellet
shot at a mark unto which level is given, does sometimes strike in the
midst of that mark, and sometimes above that mark, and sometimes under that
mark: now I would know why the pellet does sometimes strike much wide of
the mark unto which the leuel is given?


Nicho. This may happen by two causes, the one of them is by reason of the
level sights, for when one of those sightes or both of them shall not be
precisely set in the midst of the uppermost part or outside of the Piece,
Note.
that Piece is forced thereby to drive his pellet wide of the mark. For if the
level sight on the breech of the Piece shall be set without the same point of
the midst, as for example toward our right hand, the same Piece also will
drive his pellet wide upon the same right side of the mark unto which the
level was given. Note.
And if the level sight on the breech of the Piece shall be set without the
same point of the midst, and toward our left hand, the same Piece will
also strike vvide from the mark toward the same left side.


Prior. It seems to me that this should be contrary to that which you have
said, I mean if the level sight on the breech of the Piece be set without
the point of the midst, and toward the right side, that the piece will
shoot his pellet wide of the mark toward the left side.


Nicho. It is not so my Lord, but it is as I have told you, and to the end
that this may be proved to be true by reason. I do suppose for example sake
that the piece in the figure following has on his breech a level sight noted
with this letter C set somewhat without the point of the midst and toward the
right hand, and that the level sight D which is at the mouth of the Piece is
set just in the point of the midst, and that the point E is the mark unto
which the leuel is given by the said two level sights, the which point E must
needs be wide, and toward the left side from the line F G, which is
supposed to be the way of the pellet, as it does appear to be in the figure
following. Then this point or mark E being upon the left side wide of the
pellets way, it follows that the way of the pellet lies wide from the same
mark, and toward the right side thereof as by the figure following which is
made for an example you may perceive. And such effect would much more solowe if
D the level sight on the mouth of the Piece were also without the same point
of the midst toward the other side, that is to say, toward the left side.

diagram of the firing of a piece of artillery

The second cause of such effect or inconvenience may come through the
concauitie of the piece which often times is not bored or cast right in the
midst of the metal. I mean that the same concauitie or hole is not in the
very midst of the metal, but makes one side of the piece to be more
thinner or thicker than the other side, so that although the two level sightes
be well set and perfectly placed in the very middell points upon the
uppermost part of the metal, yet that piece must needs shoot wide, for
notwithstanding the level sightes are placed in the very middle points upon
the uppermost part of the metal yet they do not stand right over the
middell of the concauitie of that piece, and for that cause such a piece
shootes wide. Wherefore to remedy this inconvenience it is necessary to
search advisedly for the very middle of the concauitie as well in the tail of
the Piece, as in the mouth of the same, and to place the level sightes over
the middle of the same concauitie for to amend that fault in the Piece. You
may see the type of this instrument which is made of two long rulers or staves
in the 23 Colloquie of this book.

How the level sights that are to be placed upon the outside and uppermost
part of a Piece, may be set in their due places right over the middle point of
the concauitie in the same Piece.


To find the middle of the same concauitie the Gunners use (as I have been
informed) two long Rulers or small staves very right and of equal breadth,
and do put one of them right into the concauitie, and down to the bottom of
the same, and the other without upon the Piece, and they join one part of that
Ruler which is above the Piece to the Ruler that goes into the mouth of the
Piece in that part thereof which is without the mouth of the same, and so where
they find the very middle of the concauitie to be, there right over the same
upon the outside and uppermost part of the Piece they do place in the tail of
the Piece, and at the mouth of the Piece the two level sightes. And this being
a way speedy enough and of small cunning, it is not to be misliked although it
may be otherwise done.


Prior. May not a way be devised to set those level sightes in their due
places without the help of those Rulers, only by discharging the Piece
oftentimes together?


Nicho. It may be so done: That is to say, if the Piece shall strike wide upon
the right side of the mark, move the level sight which is on the tail of the
Piece somewhat toward the left part, and if the Piece shall happen to strike
wide toward the left side of the mark, move the same level sight which is on
the tail of the piece somewhat toward the right side, and go on in so doing
till the perfect place where that level sight must stand is found, and then
make a durable mark in that place (if the level sight be a moveable thing) so
that at an other time you may have no cause to seek for that place again.


Prior. I do understand you well and am satisfied for this evening.


The 11. Colloquie.
How there is a proportioned length for every piece of Artillery: and how
when any kind of piece is made more longer or more shorter than his
proportioned length, it will shoot always less ground. And how this is no
general rule, that by how much the Canon of a piece is more longer, by so
much it shootes the farther: and how it is a manifest error and a very
unprofitable thing to make very long Culuerings: and how a Culuering does
shoot further than a Cannon: and how a Cannon may be made to shoot farther
than a Culuering: and how much the metal of every piece should weigh: and
how long each piece ought to be: and how much each pellet which is shot out
of those pieces does weigh: and how many Horses or Oxen must be provided to
draw each kind of piece.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia. Servant.
PRior. What is the cause that by how much the Canon of a Piece of Artillery
is more longer, by so much it shootes the farther?


Nicholas. This proposition is not general, I mean that by how much the Canon
of a Piece is more longer, by so much it shootes the farther. Note

You may know the proportioned length of eury great Piece of Artillery by
reading the 39 chapter of mine Appendix.

Note.


But this is to be believed, and to be for a truth affirmed, that to every
kind of piece there is one certain and determinate length so duly
proportioned for the powder and pellet which such a Piece does carry, that if
a Piece be in any manner of way out of that proportion, it will shoot thereby a
less ground. And therefore that you may have perfect knowledge of the
proportionate length for all manner of Pieces, I say, that it will not be a
commendable thing to make the Canons of Pieces long and short, but upon
necessity: for evermore when any kind of Piece is made more longer or more
shorter than that his proportioned length, it will shoot always less ground:
I mean when it is discharged with one and the same quantity of powder.


Prior. I think you say true, for I see that ordinarily there is allowed for
the due charge of every Canon and of every other short Piece so much powder as
does way two third parts of the pellets weight, and that there is commonly
allowed to every Culuering which is a Piece that has a more longer Canon, so
much powder as wayeth parts of the pellets weight: and I think that the
Gunners do so, because if they should charge a Culuering with no more powder
than with so much as wayeth parts of the pellets weight (as they do a Cannon)
perchance the Culuering would not shoot so much ground as the Cannon will do.


Nicho. I knew not so much before, and for that it is so as you say, I am glad
that I do know it.


Prior. There is no Gunner so unskillful but does know that this is true which
I have told you.


Nicholas. I think that this being a truth ought to be known to every
Gunner: but I marvel much for what purpose Princes do cause such Pieces to
be cast with a fault so manifest, and will not through the cost and hurt which
comes thereby redress the same.


Prior. As a Culuering is charged with a more quantity of powder than a
Cannon, so it will shoot farther than a Cannon.


Nicholas. Has your Lordshippe had any experience thereof?


Prior. No: and yet I believe that this is true which I have told you, for all
Gunners generally are of that opininion, and it cannot be otherwise, for the
hollow Cylinder of the Culuering being more longer than the hollow Cylinder
of the Cannon, and charged with a more quantity of powder than the Cannon, it
must needs be that the Culueringe will shoot farther than the Cannon. And
the cost thereof is not so great as you think it to be. for a Canon whose
Pellet waygheth twenty pound weight, is commonly charged with thirteen
pounds and four ounces of powder, and the Culuering whose pellet waigheth
twenty pound weight is commonly charged with sixteen pound weight of powder,
which is but two pound and eight ounces more of powder than is due for the
charge of a Canon, so that the cost of two pound and eight ounces of powder
(which is the excess) is but a trifle.


Nicho. I will not affirm that the Culuering shall shoot more or less
ground than the Canon, for this matter is not very plain unto me having no
perfect knowledge of his proportioned length, as before I have said, but this
is true, A Culuering being charged with no more powder than with the due charge
of a Canon will not shoot so much ground as a Canon will do.
that the Culuering charged with no more powder than with the due charge of a
Canon, will not shoot so much ground as a Canon will do. And I am certain that
he which will shoot with a Culuering so much ground as he may do with a Canon,
must needs put into that Culuering more powder than is used to be put into a
Canon. And he shall have need of so much more powder as the difference between
the two shootes made with an equal or like quantity of powder shall be more
greater. And therefore I conclude that when a Culuering whose pellet waigheth
twenty pound weight, is discharged with no more powder than is the ordinary
charge of a Canon, it may be easily perceived that the same quantity of
powder is not sufficient to make the Culuering shoot so much ground as a
Canon will do which is charged and discharged with the like quantity of the
same powder. Note.
But it may be that they which did first appoint for the charge of the
Culuering so much powder as waigheth parts of his pellets weight, have
perchance upon their experience set down that proportion to make the Culuering
shoot so much ground and perhaps more than the Canon can do. But this thing
may not be granted nor denied before proof has been made thereof:
nevertheless be it as you will, if the said Culuering charged with the same
quantity of powder which charge a Canon, shoots not so far as the Canon
will do, it is a manifest error, and a ridiculous thing to say, that this
error may be redressed by charging the Culuering with a more quantity of
powder, Note.
and that thereby the Culuering shall shoot as much ground or more than the
Canon will do. For that excess of powder being put into a Canon charged
before with his due charge of the same powder, will cause that Canon to shoot
perchance more ground than the said Culuering can do. Concerning the more
charges or expenses which your Lordship says is but a trifle, I say that the
same is much more than your Lordship does suppose it to be: for if I be not
deceived, the Culuerings being made more longer than the Canons, must also by
reason be made more thicker of metal. This being so, there is more metal
put in a Culuering than in a Canon, and consequently a Culuering is much more
heavier than a Canon, and being more heavier must also be drawn with a more
number of Oxen or Horses than a Canon must have, and there must be also a more
number of men to govern those Oxen or Horses, and a more quantity of victuale
provided as well for the cattaile as for the men which do govern the^, besides
the wages which the Prince or Comminaltie that sends forth those men by the
commandment of the Prince, do ordinarily pay unto them. And so behold what
may follow in the end through this small error committed by the Prince. But if
the error be so much in one Culuering, whose pellet waigheth twenty pound,
you shall find it much more greater in that Culuering whose pellet waigheth
30, 40, 50, or 60 pound weight, as I have learned of a Gunner who has had
experience thereof.


Prior. Without doubt there is more metal in a Culuering than is in a Canon,
and consequently a Culuering must be drawn with more Oxen or Horses than a
Canon. And of this matter I have a note in my memorial how much metal is in
every one Piece, and of what length each piece ought to be, Note.
and how many oxen or horses must be provided to draw each Piece.


Nicho. I beseech you my Lord give me a coppie thereof, for it may be that in
time to come the same will pleasure me.


Prior. With a good will. Servant bring hither unto me my memorial which is my
chest.


Servant. Here it is my Lord.


Prior. Now write as I shall tell you.

The length and weight of great Pieces made in these days do differ much from
the length and weight of pieces made in time past as it does appear in the 39
chapter of my Appendix.
and commonly contains 400 pound weight of metal, and must be drawn with
two horses.



Aspidi, whose pellet wayeth twelve pound weight, being five foot and foot
long, contains 1300 pound weight of metal, and must be drawn with six
horses.









Passauolante, whose pellet wayeth 16 pound weight, being 12 foot long,
contains 2740 pound weight of metal, and must be drawn with five yoke of
Oxen.


























Nich. Your Lordship may here make an end, for one half of that which I have
noted vvoulde have been enough.


Prior. I must tell you also of six other notes, and afterward you shall
make an end of your vvriting: I mean that there are also





every of the same Gunnes being only eight foot, and foot long, contains
4500. pound weight of metal, and must be drawn with nine yoke of Oxen.

Cortaldi, of which each pellet wayeth 45 pound weight, and every of the said
Gunnes being seven foot long, contains 2740 pound weight of metal, and
must be drawn with five yoke of oxen.

Cortaldi, of which each pellet wayeth thirty pound weight, and every of the
said Gunnes being seven foot and foot long, contains 1600 pound weight of
metal, and must be drawn with three yoke of oxen.

And so hear I will make an end.


Nicholas. Does that pound weight which I have noted contain twelve ounces or
sixteen ounces? The pound weight which does contain 12 ounces, is called the
subtle weight of Venice, and the pound weight which does contain 16 ounces,
is called the gross weight of Venice, and 350 pounds of the gross weight of
Venice do make 550 pounds of the subtle weight of Venice, as Bartholomeo di
Pas. da Vinetia, has written in his book entitled, Tariffa de i pesi e misure
and are the feet which I have noted according to the measure of Venice? Or
are they longer or shorter then the said measure of Venice?


Prior. I think that each of those pounds does contain but 12 ounces, and for
answer to your question of feet I know not what to say, for this note was
delivered to me in Barletta, and it may be that the feet before mentioned
are according to the measure of feet in that place which (as I think) does
not differ from the measure of feet in Venice.


Nicho. Now it is no matter whether or no I do learn that measure so
exactly, for it suffices that I do know that a Canon whose pellet waieth
fifty pound weight being eight foot and foot long, does contain 4000 pound
weight of metal, and that the Culuering whose pellet wayeth 50. pounds
weight, and is one of that sort, which is twelve foot long, and contains
6600 pounds weight of metal, has in it 2600 pounds weight of metal more
than is in a Canon and that this Culuering must be drawn with five yoke of
oxen more than the Canon has need of, Note
and that the same five yoke of oxen (as I think) must have five men to
govern them, whereby you may perceive to how much charge this will amount in
continuance of time and how much the excess of powder which is spent at every
shoot is worth.


Prior. The charge is great in one Culuering, and does much exceed in many,
and truly if I were in health, I would see a proof hereof, for it is a matter
of great importance.


The first Corollarie.
IN the precedent Colloquie there is mention made of the weight and length of
pieces according to the subtle weight of pounds and measure of common feet
in Venice, which does not agree with the pounds of aver de poize weight, nor
with the measure of feet of assise in England: therefore I have reduced that
subtle weight and measure of common feet in Venice, into the aver de poize
weight, The contents of the Table next following.
and measure of feet and inches of assise in England, and for the benefit of
my Readers do set forth in a Table following the names of the aforesaid
pieces, the length of the said pieces according to the measure of common feet
in Venice, and according to the measure of feet and inches of assise in
England, the weight of the said pieces, and of their pellets, according to the
subtle weight of Venice, and according to the aver de poize weight of England,
and also the number of horses or oxen which must be provided to draw every of
those or such like Pieces. Instructions by which the Reader may easily
understand the Table next following.
This Table is of it self easy to be understood and needs no other
declaration than that which the titles over every Columpe in the same does
show, this only excepted, the Reader must understand that (as Gasparo Bugati
has written in his book entitled in Italian, How the subtle wayght of
Venice may be made.
Historia universal) 24 grains of Wheat do weigh one penny weight, 24
pence do weigh one ounce, and 12 ounces do weigh one pound of the subtle weight
of Venice: and the Reader must also be instructed that (as Bartholomeo di Pasi
da Vinetia aledgeth in his book named Tariffa de i Pesi e misure) 550 pounds
of the subtle weight of Venice do make 364 pounds of aver de poize weight of
England, The difference between the subtle weight of Venice and the aver de
poize weight of England.
and that the said aver de poize weight (as we may read in Stratioticos, in
Pharmacopoea Laur: Iouberti cap. de ponderibus and mensuris, and in the Ground
of Arts) is thus made. Twenty grains of Barlie way one scruple weight: How
the Aver de Poize weight of England may be made.

What these letters Y I. and M st do signify in the Table next following.

The measure of a common foot of Venice. The difference between a common foot
of Venice and a foot of assise of England.

The measure of the Arsenall foot of Venice What the letters which are set
right against the Pieces named in the Table next following do signify.


3 scruples way one dram weight: 8. drammes weigh one ounce weight: 16.
ounces weigh one pound weight: 28. pounds weigh of an hundred weight: 56
pounds weigh of an hundred weight: 84 pounds weigh of an hundred weight: and
112 pounds weigh an hundred of aver de poize weight. Likewise the Reader must
learn that where this letter Y is in any square of my Table, it does signify,
that the pellet of such weight as is in that square expressed, is of iron, and
that the letter L in a square does signify that the pellet of such weight, as
is in that square expressed, is of lead, and that the letters M st in a square
do signify that the pellet of such weight as is in that square expressed is of
a marbell stone. Moreover the Reader must know that the measure of a common
foot in Venice (by which as I have been informed the said pieces were
measured) does contain in length (as Girolamo Cataneo in his book Dell' art
militare, and Nicholas Tartaglia in the first book of the third part of his
general treatise di numeri and misure have depicted the same) one foot, one
ynch, and of an ynch of the assise of England, and that there is an other
kind of foot measure in Venice, called the Arsenal foot containing in length
one foot, one ynch, and of an ynch of the assise of England, which ought also
to be remembered to this end, that the true measure of the said Pieces might
not by any Reader be mistaken. And to conclude, the Reader must not be
ignorant, that the letters which are set directly against the Pieces named in
this Table, do signify that the pieces against which they stand in this Table
are the very same Pieces against which the like letters are set in the
precedent Colloquie.

The 12. Colloquie.
How long the Canon or concauitie of every Piece of Artillery ought to be,
and how a moving body is alvvaies let in his passage when it does touch an
immovable body, and how the passage of a moving body is by so much more
let, as that moving body is more, and by a longer time touched with the
immovable body.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. Yesterday in the evening we disputed whether or no in all sorts of
Artillery the co^cauitie of a Piece, which is made too long or too short, does
hinder the far shooting of those Pieces, now I would understand whether by
natural reason we may appoint how long the concauitie of each Piece should
be, and aptly proportion the same for his convenient measure of powder and
pellet? You may know the proportioned length of every great Piece of artillery
by reading the 39. chapter of mine Appendix.



Nich. The length of the canon or concauitie of each Piece ought to be such, as
in the very same instant when all the powder is a fire, the pellet should be
perceived to be issuyng at the very end of the Piece. That is to say, at the
mouth of the Piece, for in that instant all the expulsive virtue of the powder
begins to work on the pellet in the chief of his fury or force, and after
that virtue explsiue has wrought on the pellet, the said pellet finding
nothing to let or resist his range (except the air) will fly more farther
than if the concauitie of that Piece had been more longer, or more shorter.
For if the concauitie of that Piece had been more shorter, the pellet would
have bin gone out of the mouth of the Piece before all the powder had bin fired,
and before all the expulsive virtue of the gunpowder had wrought upon the
pellet, and so a part thereof would have bin to no purpose. And it might easily
have hapened, that much of the gunpowder would have gone unburned out of the
Piece together with the pellet, I mean that gunpowder which was untouched with
fire. And if the concauitie of that Piece had been more longer, the pellet would
not have been precisely at the mouth of the Piece at that instant when all the
gunpowder was a fire, A moving body is let in his passage, when it does touch
an immovable body.
but somewhat more within the concauitie of that piece, and therefore the said
pellet being in the prime of his swiftnes and running along by that small part
of the concauitie which then remained for the pellet to run in, is thereby
greatly let in his way and passage, for always a moving body is let in his
passage, when it does touch an immovable body. And by so much is the passage
of a moving body more let, as that moving body is more and by a longer time
touched with the immovable body.


Prior. I do understand you well, and like well of your reasons, but I will
talk no more hereof in this evening.


The 13. Colloquie.
How a piece being charged with more powder than his due charge unto a
certain measure, will shoot more ground than it will do when it is charged
only with his due charge of powder. And how a piece being charged with a more
or less quantity of powder than that certain measure is, will shoot a less
distance than it will do with that certain measure of powder: and how the
wind which comes by reason of the powder in the concauitie of the piece does
always follow somewhat near or somewhat united unto the pellet after the
pellet is gone out of the mouth of the piece, and thereby does augment the
moving of the pellet, and how the force of the same wind does not work so
much in driving forth the same pellet when it is without the concauitie of the
piece, as it does when it is within the concauitie of the piece. And how that
part of gunpowder which is in the concauitie of the piece most nearest to the
touchhole does fire before that part of the powder which is more remote.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia. Servant.
PRior. Yesterday in the evening you declared with good reasons of what length
the concauitie of a piece of Artillery ought to be for to be duly
proportioned for the convenient measure of the powder and pellet with which the
piece is used to be charged, the which convenient measure of powder is
supposed to be so much in weight as the parts of the weight of the pellet.
Question.
Now supposing that a Cannon whose Pellet wayeth 20 pound weight has such a
due and proportioned length as is convenient for parts in powder of the
pellets weight, and that the same Cannon is charged with more powder than with
parts of the pellets weight, Answer.
I ask of you whether or no that piece will shoot more ground than it was
wont to do?


Nicholas. Without doubt it will shoot somewhat farther than it was wont to
do.


Prior. This is contrary to those reasons which you did allege yesterday in
the evening, for in this case the pellet would be gone out of the mouth of the
piece before all the powder should be a fire, and therefore that part of his
force which the excess or overplus of powder should cause would be
frustrate and in vain after the pellet is gone out of the mouth of the piece,
and therefore that piece should not shoot farther through the excess of the
powder, The wind which comes by the powder in the concauitie of the piece does
always follow somewhat nere or somewhat united unto the pellet after the pellet
is gone out of the mouth of the piece and thereby does augment the moving of the
pellet but the force of the same wind does not work so much in driving forth
the same pellet when it is without the concauitie of the piece, as it does when
it is within the concauitie of the piece.
but only the same ground which it was wont to do, because the force of the
same excess in powder is wholye vain and frustrate.


Nicho. That windy force which comes by the excess of powder after that the
pellet is out of the mouth of the piece, although it could not work on the
pellet whilst the same pellet was within the concauitie of the piece, yet the
said windy force does not therefore leave to work on the pellet after it is
out of the mouth of the Piece, that is to say, in the air: for all that wind
which comes by the powder in the said concauitie does always follow somewhat
near or somewhat united unto the pellet, although the pellet be somewhat gone
out of the mouth of the piece, and therefore it does somewhat augment that
moving. And it is true that the same windy force does not work so much in
driving forth the same pellet when it is without the concauitie of the piece,
as it does when it is within the concauitie of the same. I mean that his such
woorking shall not be proportional to the excess of powder that is put into
the same piece, but it shall differ much from that proportion.


Prior. I do not understand this proportional work.


Nicho. The proportional work is to be understood in this sort: suppose
for an example, that this our Cannon whose pellet waigheth 20. pound weight is
mounted at an elevation given, and discharged with parts in powder of the
pellets weight, and that it does then shoot 1000. paces, and that the same
Cannon is afterward discharged with so much powder as the pellet does weigh,
the which quantity of powder is once and a half so much as parts in powder
of the pellets weight, now I say if this excess of powder does work
proportionally on the pellet, then that piece will shoot at the same elevation
just 1500 paces, that is to say, once and a half so much as it did when it was
discharged with parts in powder of the pellets weight. And I say that this
piece in such a case will not shoot the same 500 paces of more ground, nor
perchance the half thereof, that is to say 250 paces. But we will suppose
here that the piece will shoot the same 250. paces of more ground, which in
the whole sum is 1250 paces. And also I say whosoever shall shoot the same
Cannon with so much powder as the pellet weigeth and part more which is in the
whole 4/3, that this second third will not increase the same range of the
pellet so much as the first third did. That is to say, it will not increase by
250 paces as by supposition it did with the first third, but it increases much
less than the said 250 paces. And likewise whosoever does add part of powder
more unto the aforesaid 4/3 parts of powder, Note.
shall thereby increace the far flying of the pellet, but not so much as the
excess of the second third did. So that each increace or excess of the
powder unto a certain measure or limite, does always cause the piece to shoot
somewhat farther. But after the excess of the first third, the said increase
by the other excesses does decrease unto that measure or limmite, and from that
limmite or measure vpwardes whosoever does add more powder shall not make the
piece to carry farther. Note.
And the excess or overplus of powder may be so much, as that it will not make
the piece to cast more ground but less ground.


Prior. You tell me of a thing that does not well like me, for you say that
you may put into a piece so much powder above a certain measure or quantity
that shall make the piece to cast more ground, and less ground, the which
thing (as it seems to me) is repugnant to reason.


Nicho. Proverb.
My sayings therein are according to reason as it may be proved by the common
proverb which says that too much enclosed breaks his cover, and for to make
this doubt plain, I must of necessity speak of extremities, and therefore if
one shall charge a piece with so much powder as the concauity of the same will
hold, leaving only toward the mouth of the piece so much of that concauitie
empty, as will scarcely receive the pellet, and shall discharge that piece
being in such a sort charged, I ask of your Lordship whether you think that
the same piece will now shoot more ground, or less ground tha^ it would have
done if it had bin charged and discharged with his ordinary charge, that is to
say with parts in powder of the pellets weight?


Prior. I think that a piece charged in that sort will break when it is
discharged, and that the same too much of powder (as your proverb says) will
break the cover that is to say, it will break the piece.


Nich. I will not dispute whether in this case that piece should by reason
break or not break, for a long disputation might be made thereof, but I will
now suppose that the same piece will not break.


Prior. In this case where the concauitie of a piece is so straight, as that it
was needeful for to make the pellet enter into the same with the force of a
rammer, I believe that thereby the said piece will shoot more farther. An
admonition.



Nicho. In all things that have bin spoken, and are to be spoken concerning the
ranges of Artillery, suppose always except it be otherwise specified, that the
pellets are equal as well in greatness, as in weight, and that they are also
equally round, for every of these accidents will make the ranges of the pellets
to vary, and therefore in this our case I say, that it is to be supposed that
the pellet which is to be shot out of the concauitie filled with powder, is of
the very same quallity of weight, measure and roundnes as that pellet is which
we ordinarily shoot out of the piece, that is to say, with parts in powder of
that pellets weight. A piece whose concauity is full of powder will shoot much
less ground tha^ it will do when it is discharged with his ordinary charge.



Prior. Supposing that to be in such sort as you say, the thing in effect is
very doubtful.


Nicho. There is no doubt in it, for it is very certain that the piece whose
concauity is full of powder, will shoot much less ground than that piece will
do which is discharged with his ordinary charge.


Prior. By what reason?


Nicho. This is the reason thereof. All the powder (how fine so ever it be)
does not fire at one instant, that is to say, the powder which is at the
touchhole is a fire before that which is farther of from that place, and the
powder which is more nearer to the touchhole is a fire somewhat before the
powder that is more farther of from the same. This proposition being granted,
it is manifest that the same part of powder which is in the concauitie of the
piece most nearest to the touchhole, That part of gunpowder which is in the
concauitie of the piece most nearest to the touchole does fiar before that part
of gunpowder which is more remote.
does fire before that which is more remote. And that I may be the better
understood, I will divide in my mind all the length of the powder which is found
to be in the same concauity into four equal parts. I say then that the same
part of powder which is next to the touchhole does fire before the other part
which is next adioining unto it, and in fiering causes so great a quantity of
windy exhalations, that ten such places as that is where the powder was first a
fiar, will not be able to receive the same exhalations and therefore according
as the same exhalations are continually caused by the powder which continually
is set on fire, so it is necessary for that exhalation to go forwards in
getting by force a more bigger place than the place of the powder which is the
cause of the same, and it cannot get such a place but by two ways, the first
of these two ways is by expelling before it with violence the rest of the
powder which is not a fire, and which is toward the mouth of the piece
together with the pellet, or else by making the piece to break, and because it
is to be thought that the same exhalations will more easily thrust out the
powder together with the pellet than make the piece to break, and especially
the pellet being at the extreme or end of the concauity, I say then that the
first fourth part of our said powder which was first a fire goes on
continually burning, and expels before it the other powder lying next before
the same and consequently that expels out the pellet, and the pellet being
very near out of the piece, at the first and least thrust which it feels in
the beginning goes out of the same suddenly, and is expelled only with the
whole and unburned powder (as has bin said) and not by the proper exhalation
of the fiered powder, the which expultion being made so in the beginning, may
not be but weak in the pellet, I say weak in respect of that it will be when
the pellet is expelled only by the windy exhalation and in the chief of the
great fury of that exhalation, besides this the unburned powder follows the
pellet going out of the piece, and within a while after falls down to the
ground, and this powder by going in the air, and then falling down upon the
ground, does much let the going of the windy exhalation which follows after
the Pellet, and hinders much the range of the same pellet. So that for these
reasons the pellet in such a case will not range very far. But such a piece
being discharged with somewhat a less quantity of powder will without doubt
shoot farther than that piece will do whose concauitie was filled with
gunpowder, for in this second manner or way all the concauitie is not full of
powder by the length of twice the thickness of the pellet, and the pellet
being in the charge will not be found so at the extreme of the piece his
mouth, but more within. And therefore the pellet will not so go out of the
mouth of the piece at the first and least thrust of the powder, but will resist
a little more than the other: within which time much more of the powder will be
a fiar, and consequently a greater quantity of windy exhalations will be caused,
and the pellet with a more force or fury shall be thrust out and expelled, I say
thrust out and expelled with the powder, and not only by the windy exhalation
as it was said of the other shoot. And so by these evident reasons in this
second shoot with less powder, I conclude that the piece will shoot farther
tha^ it did at the first when all the concauity was full of powder. And likewise
if you will also charge the piece again with a less quantity of powder, I mean
with so much powder as will not fill al his concauity by the length of thrice the
thicknes of the pellet, I say that in such a case the same piece will shoot
farther than it did when it was charged with gu^powder up to the mouth within
twice the thicknes of the pellet. And so if you will charge the piece again with
powder up to the mouth within 4. times the thicknes of the pellet, it will
shoot farther than it did when it was charged with powder up to the mouth
within thrice the thicknes of the pellet, likewise the piece being charged with
gunpowder up to the mouth within five times the thicknes of the pellet will
shoot farther tha^ it did when it was charged with gunpowder up to the mouth
within four times the thickenesse of the pellet, and so it proceeds unto a
certain measure being a mean between those two extremeties. When you are
come to that certain measure, Note.
you shall find this worthiness in it, that he which will then charge that
piece with a less quantity of powder than that certain measure is, shall
shoot a less distance than he did with that certain measure, and likewise
he which will charge the piece with more powder than that certain measure is,
We must keep a mean between 2. extremities of diverse properties.
shall also shoot a less distance than he did with that certain measure.


Prior. This is a good speculation, and it likes me well, for in truth I know
that we ought of necessity to keep a mean between two extreamities, which
are of diverse properties.


Servant. My Lord, it is now supper time,


Prior. Then let us go to supper.


The 14. Colloquie.
How the powder with which a piece of Artillery is charged, ought not to be
rammed down too hard in the piece, nor suffered to lie dispersed or too loose
in the piece, and how in all contrary extremities we must build upon the mean.
And how the powder which is very hard rammed down in the piece will not be so
soon a fire as the powder which lies dispersed or more loose. And how the
longer that it is before the Powder does take fire, the more weaker will his
effects be, and the sooner that the powder is a fire, the more forceably does
it drive the pellet, and thereby his virtue and power does work more
effectually together, and how he does weaken the force of gunpowder that
does ram it down too hard in the piece, or that does suffer it to lie much
dispersed and loose.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. What think you, is it better to ram the powder hard down in the
piece, or to leave it somewhat dispersed and loose?


Nich. In all contrary extremities we must build upon the mean, that is to
say, the gunpowder would not be too hard rammed, nor lie dispersed or too
loose, The gunpouder which is very hard rammed down in the piece will not be
so soon a fiar as the gunpowder which lies dispersed or more loose.

The longer that it is before the gunpowder does take fire, the more weaker
will his effects be, and the sooner that the gunpowder is a fire, the more
forceablye does it drive the pellet, and thereby his virtue and power does work
more effectually together.


for the gu^powder which is very hard rammed down in the piece, does more
resist the fire that comes unto it, than that powder does which lies loose,
and will not be so soon a fire as the gunpowder which lies dispersed or more
loose, and the longer that it is before the gunpowder does take fire, the more
weaker will his effects be, contrariwise the sooner that the gunpowder is a
fire, the more forceably does it drive the pellet, and thereby his virtue and
power does work more effectually together. The same thing in a manner does
happen when the gunpowder does lie much dispersed and very loose, and
especially when it lies in a long form like unto a train which is made to
set a thing that is far of on a fire: in which train that part of gunpowder is
first a fire which is at that end of the train where the fire was first given,
and afterward the fire goes burning continually and successively the rest of
the gunpowder by little and little even to the other end of that train, and
the more longer that the train is, the more longer will the time be before all
that gunpowder be a fire the very same may be applied to this case of
artillery, for the powder lying dispersed and loose in the concauitie of a
piece, does lie in a long form and fashion, and therefore it will be the
longer before it be all a fire, and for that cause the effect of that
gunpowder will not be of so great a force. He does weaken the force of
gunpowder that does ram it down to hard, in the piece, or that does suffer it
to lie much dispersed and loose.
And hereupon I conclude that the powder lying too hard rammed down in the
piece, or lying too much dispersed and loose, weakeneth the effects of that
piece, and therefore it behooves us to keep a mean (as before has bin said)
and not to be in extremities, that is to say, the gunpowder must not be rammed
down too hard, nor suffered to lie to loose.


Prior. Your opinion herein pleases me well.


The 15. Colloquie.
How a small piece called in Italian Schioppo does shoot more straighter and
more farther at a level mark than an Harchibuse can do, and how an harchibuse
will be to more effect, and pearce farther into an object placed within a
common distance, than the said Schioppo can do. And also how there is a kind of
Schioppo which will at an equal distance pearce farther into an obiest than an
Harchibuse can do.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. What is the cause that a piece which is called in Italian Schioppo does
shoot more straighter and more farther at a level mark, or in a right line,
than an harchibuse can do, seeing the Harchibuse will be to more effect, and
pearce farther into an object placed within a common distance, than that
Shioppo can do?


Nicho. The cause hereof is for that peradventure the pellet of the Harchibuse
is more greater than the pellet of that Schioppo, and that the weight of the
Harchibuse pellet does hinder the swift flying of the same pellet. As for
example: Example.
suppose that such a Schioppo will shoot a pellet of ounce in weight at length
in a right line 400 paces, and that an Harchibuse will shoot a pellet of an
ounce in weight in a right line but only 300 paces, You must vnderstanst and
that in this Colloquie N. Tartaglia does mean by these words right line, an
insensible crooked line.
now I say that in a distance of an hundred or of 150 paces, the Harchibuse
will pearce farther than the said Schioppo will do, although at that place
the pellet of that Schioppo flies more swiftly (by the reasons alleged in the
4. proposition of the first book of our nwe science) than the pellet of the
Harchibuse And therefore if it be so as your Lordship says, the pellet of
the Harchibuse should by reason be more greater than the pellet of the Schioppo.


Prior. It is true that an Harchibuse does generally carry a greater pellet then
does the Schioppo, and yet there is a kind of Schioppo which shootes pellets as
big as any Harchibuse does.


Nicolas. When a Schioppo does carye so great a pellet as an Harchibuse, and
shootes more straighter or more farther in a leuel line then an Harchibuse
does, then without doubt at an equal distance such a Schioppo will pearce
farther into an object than the Harchibuse will do.


Prior. by reason it should be so as you say, and you have spoken enough for
this evening.


The 16. Colloquie.
How a piece of Artillery will do a greater effect against a wall or any
other thing standing firm and fast upon the ground, than it will do against a
ship or Gallie moving on the Sea. And how a piece of Artillery will do a
greater effect against a ship or Gallie which does come toward it, than it
will do against a ship or Gallie which does sail from it, and how the thing
which does more let a moving body, is more thrust, stricken, and hurt with the
said moving body than that thing is which does less let the said moving body.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. What is the cause that when a pellet being shot out of a great piece of
Artillery and hitting a ship or a Gallye on the Sea, does pearce into the
ship or Gallie but a little way in respect of that it uses to do when it is
shot against a wall, for every ship or gallie (as it is well known) is made
of plancks of wood, and therefore when 2 or 3 ships lie near together, it is to
be thought that a great piece of Artillery being discharged at the^, in respect
of that it will do against a thick wall, should by reason shoot through all
their sides, yet seldom times it happens that the pellet does penetrate
through both the sides of one ship, for oftentimes the pellet rests within the
ship or gallie.


Nicho. Note.
It is manifest by natural reason that the thing which does more let a moving
body, is more thrust, strooken, and hurt with the said moving body: the
walls then standing firm and fast on the ground do let more the way or
range of the pellet than a ship or gallie does when it moves on the Sea, and
through that moving, the ship or gallie yields somewhat to the stroke of
the pellet, whereby the pellet works not that great effect, nor pearceth into
it so far as it would have done if the ship or gallie had bin well fixed and
set fast in the ground as the walls are, so that by this reason a piece of
Artillery is to more effect against a wall or any other thing standing firm
and fast on the ground, than against a ship or gallie moving on the Sea.
Note.
And a piece of Artillery will be to more effect against a ship or gallie
which does come toward it than against a ship or Gallie that does sail
from it, for the ship which comes toward the piece, comes against the range
of the pellet, and therefore the pellet does a more effect against it than it
would have done if the ship had stood firm on the Sea. And the ship or
gallie which goes or fails from the piece, yields more to the stroke of
the pellet than that ship or Gallie does which stands firm and quiet on the
Sea.


Prior. I do understand you well.


The 17. Colloquie.
How you may get out quickly the nails or any other thing which shall happen
by any manner of means to be put into the touchholes of great pieces of
Artillery.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prier of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. Tell me brieflye if by chance in the time of any sudden assault the
Artillery should be choked with nails or otherwise, whether it be possible to
devise a way to vnchoke quickly and upon the sudden the same Artillery, I say
upon the sudden, because many know how to do it, and do the same with a
certain water or oil which being put upon the touchhole that is choked,
eats the same choking, and so vnchoketh the piece. There are other as I
understand which do the same with a borer, that is to say, with such a thing as
does make the touchhole. But every of these ways require some time for to do
the same, but when a great many pieces are to be vnchoked, I would know a way
how if it be possible they might be quickly vnchoked.


Nicho. Such a thing may be done (except I be deceived) by charging all the
same Artillery with such pellets as shall go down hardly into their pieces.
Then after the pieces are so charged, lay them against the same place at which
you should have had occasion to shoot if they had been vnchoked, and having
made a train of powder within the concauitie from the mouth of the piece unto
the pellet in every piece, watch for an occasion that you may not shoot in
vain, and upon occasion offered to shoot, give fire to the train at the
mouth of the piece, and so all the pieces will do not only their ordinary
effects, but will also (as I think) in their discharges cast out the nails of
iron, or any other thing with which they were choked, and by so vnchoking of
them, there will come no hurt or discommoditie.


Prior. This is a good and speedy way, and I believe that a better way
cannot be devised than this, if the pieces in their discharges will as you have
said, cast out the nails and other things wherewith they were choked.


Nicho. There is no doubt but that the pieces will cast out in their discharges
all that which did choke them,


Prior. If it shall happen that some of the nails be so fast in the touchhole
that the pieces do not in their discharges cast them out, Question.
what is the remedy then?


Nicho. Charge the pieces again, and shoot them of in the same manner as you
did before, Answer.
but first in this case you must warm with fire the place which is choked,
Note.
and then lay claie round about that place or touchhole for to receive and
contain a little of very hot oil, which must be powered upon the touchhole or
place that is choked: Whereby the choked touchhole being made warm, sucketh in
that hot oil which will make the choking iron to be more ready to slip and
go out. Also in that case after you have charged your pieces with powder, Note.
and before you do put into them their pellets, you must with a staff make a
hole through the powder even to the breeche of each piece, and directly under
the touchhole that is choked, and in this case this secret is not from the
purpose, for I think it will perform this action without the use of the hot
oil.


Prior. I am of your opinion therein, for in the discharging of those pieces,
the raging fire does find the said hole made in the powder to be ill or not well
closed, and therefore I think it a thing needelesse to prepare hot or cold
oil for that purpose: but insomuch as it is now supper time, I will talk no
more hereof, and from henceforth we will talk of some other good matter, for
concerning Artillery I have no other question to ask you.


The 18. Colloquie.
How a pellet shot out of a piece at an ohiect which is very near unto the
said piece, does not work so effectually, nor pearce so far into that object
as it does when it is shot at the like object standing farther of. And how
the more farther that the pellet flies from the piece, the more slolye it does
go, and that where it goes slolie there it woorketh a little effect, and how
every moving thing moves always some other thing.

Interlocutors L. James of Achaia. Nicholas Tartaglia.
L. James. I know by experience that when a pellet is shot out of a piece at a
wall which stands very near unto the said piece, that the same pellet does
not work so effectually, nor pearce so far into that wall, as it would have
done if the wall had bin farther of, but by the reasons which you allege in
your nwe science, it should be otherwise, for you say there, that the more
farther the pellet flies from the piece, the more sloer does it go, and that
where it goes slolie, there it woorketh a little effect. Then by how much more
nearer the piece is to the place at which you shoot, by so much ought his
pellet to work a more effect on the place where it strikes than that pellet
will do which is shot out of a piece lying more farther of from the said
place, because the pellet that is shot out of the piece planted near unto the
same place, strikes it with a more swifter moving, and yet as I have said, I
know by experience that it will come to pass otherwise, and therefore I ask
of you what is the cause of this inconvenience?


Nicholas. Every moving thing moves always some other thing.
For an answer to your doubt, you must note how every moving thing moves
always some other thing, and therefore when the pellet is moved by the wind
which the Saltpeter causes, the same pellet together with the same wind
moves also in that very same instant the air which is near unto it within
the concauitie of the piece, and the same air moves and thrusts out the
other air consequently next unto it, and so the one air thrusts the other
air in such sort, that the said pellet thrusts and carries before it a
great quantity of air, in a very long fashion, or form, the which form
although it be but of air caused through the force of the pellets moving,
Note.
yet that air is of it self so weighty as that for a little while it
penetrateth like as it were a beam of wood the other air with which it
meets in his way: But it does not continue long to penitrate the air, Note.
for this ayrie figure for a little while goes before the pellet, and the
pellet being a heavy body, does more easily penetrate the air than the said
airy figure, and therefore the pellet does go much more swifter than that airie
figure, Note.
and in a short time leaves that airy figure behind, which in the beginning was
before it. Now to return to our first purpose, when we discharge a piece of
artillery at a thing very near unto us, this airy figure which is thrust
before the pellet (as before has been said) hits the thing at which we
shoot, before the pellet does strike it, and for that the same airy figure is
not able to penetrate the same mark the foremost end thereof which first did hit
the mark must needs rebound and return back against the residue of the same
airy figure and pellet that follows it, (and especially when the piece is
discharged at a mark lying level with the mouth of the piece) the which
return causes the pellet to meet with that residue of the airy figure being
near unto it, and makes a great striffe, that is to say, the residue of that
airy figure would go forwards and can not, partly because (as it has bin
said) it is not able to pearce into that thing at which you shoot, and partly
because of that other part which is forced to return back again, through
which strife the pellet is much let in his way, and by that means can not do
all that effect which otherwise it would do. Note. You may know how much
ground is in a mean distance by reading the 70 chapter of mine Appendix.
But when the place at which you shoot is in a mean distaunce from the Piece,
the pellet through his swiftnes will leave all the same airy figure behind it,
or at the least the greatest part thereof, so as in that place which is within
a mean distance, the pellet will work more effectually than in a place which
is more nearer to the Piece, because the pellet in doing of his effect has no
such great let nor strife with the air.


L. James. I like your reasons well, and perceive by them that it commes of no
other cause.


The 19. Colloquie.
In what place and at what distance a Piece of Artillery will work most
forceably and most effectually

Interlocutors L. James of Achaia. Nicholas Tartaglia.
L. James. There is an other doubt in which I would be resolved, and it is
this: If you plant a Piece of Artillery too near unto the thing at which you
shoot, by the reasons which you have alleged, and by the experience which I
have had therein, the effects of that Piece will not be so forceable as they
would in a mean distance. Likewise if you plant a Piece too far of from the
place at which you shoot (by the opinion of all men) the same will happen, I
mean if you plant a Piece too far of from the mark, it does not work so
effectually in the thing where it hits, as it would do in a mean distance.
Now I ask of you whether by reason a place may be appointed where the pellet
shot out of such a Piece of Artillery finding no let or resistance in any part
of his way or range shall work most effectually? Note.



Nicho. If the pellet at that very instant when it comes to join with the
furthermost part of the said airie figure (whereof I have spoken in the
precedent Colloquie) shall find there an object, then in the same place it
will work more effectually than in any other place: For if the object be more
toward the mouth of the Piece, the said ayrie figure will strike that object
before the pellet will hit the same, as it has been said in the precedent
Colloquie, and immediately after the bloe, it reboundes backwardes against the
residue of the same ayrie figure and pellet, and hinders somewhat the range of
the pellet, as has been said in the precedent Colloquie. And if the object
should be farther from that place, then so soon as the pellet is wholly gone
from that airy figure: that is to say, has left that ayrie figure behind it,
immediately it finds the air as it were quiet, whereby the pellet does with
more difficulty penetrate that quiet air, than the air of the said airie
figure which goes likewise toward the same place to which the pellet does
go: and therefore the pellet being gone from that airy figure does by so much
decrease in force as it does go more farther from it, and for that cause it
follows that his effects will be the more weaker. So that for these two
reasons, the pellet should work more effectually on that object which is
found to be precisely in the pellets going out from the end of the said ayrie
figure, than in any other place more farther or more nearer to the same.


L. James. I believe that it is so as you say: for in effect I perceive that
the pellet will strike in that place without any let of the reflection of the
air, and that between the Piece and the same place it has not been let by
the quiet air, as it will be let when it comes unto it if it go more
farther.


The 20 Colloquie.
The cause why two waddes of hay or of toe are put into a Piece at every time
when it is charged: And how Art should imitate nature which does nothing but
to some end and purpose, and how use has always been observed in many Arts
as well Mechanical as Liberal: And how the Artificer is praise worthy that
searches the cause of things used to be done in his Art: And how knowledge
is no other thing than to know the thing by his cause.

Interlocutors Bombardiero. This word Bombardiero ^oth here and in ^ other
places of this book signify him that does shoot in a great piece of artillery
and is of some called a Canoncere.
Nicholas Tartaglia.
BOmbardiero. for what cause (as you think) are two waddes of hay or of toe
put into a Piece at every time when it is charged, I mean one wadde after the
powder is put in between the powder and the pellet, and an other wadde after
that the pellet is put in?


Nicho. Until now I knew not of this thing which you have told me, I mean
that a wadde of haie or of tow is put into the piece between the powder and
the pellet, and likewise that an other such wadde of haie or tow is put into
the piece after the pellet. But it seems to me at this present, that if it be
so as you say, it were more convenient that I should ask of you the cause of
that cautell, then that you should ask the same of me, for if you use to do
so at every time when you charge a piece, Art should immitate nature which does
nothing but to some end and purpose.
you should know to what purpose it is done, because Art should immitate nature
in this thing, which does nothing but to some end and purpose.


Bombardiero. I will confess unto you that I am unlearned, and that I have
used to do so because I have seen all other Gunners use to do the same.


Nich. Use has always bin observed in very many arts as well mechanical as
liberal, and therefore I do not marvel at you nor blame you, but commend you
for searching the cause of that thing which is used to be done in your Art,
and so ought every man to do, Use has always bin observed in many arts
as well mechanical as liberal, and the artificer is praise worthy that
searches the cause of things used to be done in his art, because knowledge is
no other thing than to know the thing by his cause.
for knowledge is no other thing, than to know the thing by his cause, but now
to return to our purpose, the first wadde which is put between the powder and
the pellet is for no other cause as I think, but to sweep, bring, and keep
together in his due place all the powder which in charging of the piece was
put into the concauity of the same.

And concerning the other wadde which is put into the piece after the pellet, I
think it was first devised upon necessity, which does never happen but when
a piece is discharged from a high place downewardes at a more loer place. For
in that action the mouth of the piece lying downewardes toward the mark, it
may be (except a wadde be put in after the pellet) that the same pellet will
fall out at the mouth of the piece, and therefore to the end that the pellet
may not fall out, a wadde is put into the piece after the pellet.


Bombardiero. You allege good reasons, and yet I see that a wadde is also
usually put into the piece after the pellet when we shoot vpwardes at a mark
standing on high where no such perrell is that the pellet will fall out at the
mouth of the piece lying directly against the mark, therefore I would know the
cause thereof.


Nicholas. The cause thereof is ignorance, for if you understood the reasons
of that action, then you would not put a Wadde there, except when necessity
shall compel you to do it.


Bombardiero. I perceive that you do tell me a truth herein.


The 21. Colloquie.
How a piece which had been oftentimes together charged and discharged was
made thereby so much attractiue, as that it did suddenly draw into his
concauitie a little dog, which by chance did in going by, smell unto the mouth
of the same piece. And how if any one shall set his bare belly to the mouth of
a hot piece he shall stick so fast unto it as that he shall not be able
without great difficulty to go from it.

Interlocutors Bombardiero. Nicholas Tartaglia.
BOmbardiero. I will tell you news at which I know you will greatly marvel
and it is this. On a time being appointed to make a battery after many
shootes it chanced by a certain occasion that a piece being discharged did
rise up in such sort as the mouth thereof went into the ground, and in the
mean while that I was busy to provide laborers to bring the Piece with
leauers unto his place, a little Dog goeing by (as it chanced) did smell
unto the mouth of the same Piece, and by so doing was suddenly fast joined
to the mouth of that piece, and immediately after drawn into the concauitie of
the said Gunne, which thing when the standers by had seen, some of them
ran to help the said dog, and although they perceived him to be drawn
in even almost to the farthest end of the said concauitie, they pulled him out
being almost dead, and what became of him afterward I know not, but as I
think he dyed. Now tell me what you think of this?


Nicho. I do not marvel at this thing, for after a piece has bin oftentimes
together shot in, it waxes hot, and through that heat (as it has bin said
in the fifth Colloquie) that piece is made attractiue even as a cupping glass
which is made hot with tow burned in the same, A cupping glass is a thing
which physicians and Surgens do use and of some is called a boxing glass.
and therefore it is no marvel that the dog was drawn into the concauitie
of that piece for I believe that when a piece is very hot, if any one will
go unto it and set his bare belly to the mouth thereof, he shall stick so
fast unto that place, that he shall not be able without great difficulty to
go from thence, and in such a case a piece will be made much more attractiue
if his touchhole be close stopped.


Bombardiero. Your reasons do please me well.


The 22. Colloquie.
How there are diverse accidental causes which will make any piece of
Artillery to break: and how a piece which breaks does most commonly break
at the breeche, or near unto the mouth, and seldom times in the middle: and
how every moving thing may by two ways be let or hindered to move a side a
round and heavy body which is settled and quiet: and how every piece of
Artillery being discharged does make a roaring sound by reason that the
exhalation of wind which the Saltpeeter causes in the piece does break and
tear in pieces the air that resists the same exhalation, and how a sound is
no other thing than a bloe which two bodies that have no souls or lives do
make together.

Interlocutors Gunfounder. Nicholas Tartaglia.
GVnfounder. Whence comes it that every piece which breaks, does most
commonly break at the breeche where the powder is, or at the mouth, and
seldom times in the middle? that a piece does break in the breeche it is no
marvel, because in that place the powder does show all his force, but I
marvel much that a piece does sometimes break at the mouth, for it seems to
me that a piece should rather break in the midst of the concauitie, than at
the mouth, because the exhalation of the Saltpeter finds at the mouth of the
piece a large place to go out, which is not to be found within the midst of
the concauitie. Every moving thing may by a ways be let or hindered to move a
side a round and heuie body which is settled and quiet.



Nicholas. Concerning this matter we must think that every moving thing may
by two ways be let or hindered to move a side a round and heavy body which
is settled and quiet, the first is, to move that heavy body in the beginning,
for after it is moved, there is no difficulty to maintain the same in
continual moving: the other let which the said moving thing may receive, is
that after it has moved the round and heavy body, and that the said body
is brought to a continual moving a side, the moving thing receaues great
hinderaunce if there be any let or resistance against it, therefore I say
that by the same exhalation of wind which the Saltpeter causes, after it is
engendered in the piece, there happens two great difficulties, the first is
to move so suddenly the pellet being settled and quiet, and therefore in that
sudden accident the said windy exhalation finding the piece in that place
to be weak in the metal, or the metal to be ill united or not well closed
in the casting, or more weaker in the one side than in the other, does easily
break the piece in that place. But if by chance the metal in that place
shall resist so strongly as that the exhalation does move the pellet, then the
pellet being moved from that place, it is not to be feared that the piece will
break there, except some strange accident does happen to the pellet within
the piece as in the end of this Colloquie shall be declared. For so soon as
the pellet is in moving, that exhalation will continue with ease if no other
let do happen, but so soon as the pellet comes to the mouth of the piece, it
finds all the air without the piece, and by how much the pellet together with
the said exhalation that thrusts it to assault the air comes more swiftly,
by so much the more united and with a greater force does the air oppose it
self very strongly to resist that sudden moving, and thereuppon in that place
an other difficulty or strife rises between the exhalation within (which
thrusts forth the pellet) and the air without, that is to say, The cause of
the roaring sound which a piece of Artillery does make when it is discharged.

A sound is no other thing than a bloe which 2 bodies that have no souls or
lives do make together.


the exhalation would go out of the concauitie, and the air without does
resist the same, but in the end the exhalation within being of a greater force,
and getting the victory, breaks forth and teareth in pieces his said
enemy, and through that breaking forth of the same exhalation, the great and
roaring sound which the piece makes does come.

For a sound is defined by wise men to be no other thing than a bloe which
two bodies that have no souls or lives do make together. Therefore in this
case it cannot come of any other cause than of the bloe which is made by the
exhalation engendered within the piece, and the air without the piece. And
then the mouth of the piece being as it were in the midst of the strife, does
always suffer very much: and this is the cause that the piece lacking his due
thickness in the said place, or for some other unknown fault made in the
casting, does there easily break.


Gunfounder. I like well of your reasons, but I have yet an other doubt which
is this, that although a piece does most commonly break at the breeche where
the powder is, or at the mouth, yet sometimes it breaks in the middle of the
concauity, and therefore I do greatly desire to know the cause thereof.


Nicholas. The two causes of which I have before spoken are general causes,
and commonly they cause all manner of pieces to suffer generally in the said
two places more than in any other place, but besides the said general causes,
we must think and believe that many other causes may happen which not only
will cause any piece of Artillery to suffer more in the said two places, that
is to say, at the breeche where the powder is, Note.
and at the mouth, but also in the middle part of his concauitie. A brass
piece of artillery being made hot with shooting is apt to break.
Also a piece made of Brass metal being made very hot by often shooting
in it, is more apt to break than when it is cold. For the brass metal is
of such nature as that being hot, it will soon break. Also by how much the
more higher you do shoot with a piece, by so much that piece does suffer more
than any other piece with which you do shoot level. Also in casting of the
piece there may be cracks and holes made in the same, You may learn by reading
the 43. Chapter of mine Appendix to know whether or no honey combs, cracks, or
flawes, are within the concauitie of any great piece of Artillery.
in part not to be perceived by our senses, and in part manifest, but being
within the piece we cannot see them, and thereby the piece is more weaker in
that place than it should be, and upon this occasion sometimes without any
other particular accident, the piece breaks in that place whether it be at the
tail, or at the mouth, or in the midst.

Sometimes also the concauitie of the piece is not made precisely in the
midst of the metal, but goes more to one side than to an other, whereby
the metal upon the one side of the piece is more thinner, and upon the
other side more thicker than it should be, and therefore upon that side where
the metal is more thinner and weaker than it should be, the piece does
sometimes break: And this is as much as I can tell you concerning the causes
which do make a piece to break.


Gunfounder. You have at large satisfied me in all my doubts.


The 2. Corollarie.
ALthough Vannuccio Biringuccio in his Pirotechnia calls them liars which say
that they can tell how to make Gunpowder that shall make no noise when it is
shot out of a gunne, and affirms that it is a thing impossible to be done
with any piece of Artillery, or with any potgunne of elder, out of which boys
use to shoot paper and sloes, because (as before in the precedent Colloquie
has bin said) the exhalation of wind that is within the concauitie of a
gunne by breaking the air which without the mouth of the Gun resists the
same, does cause the gunne in his discharge to make a roaring sound, yet I do
believe that such Gunpowder may be prepared, for I have read in a learned and
creadible Author that the same kind of gunpowder has bin made, and that a Duke
of Ferrara was the first inuentour of the same gunpowder which (as my said
Author says) is of so small a force, Ferrara or Ferraria is a City in
Italy, and also it is a promontorie in Spain.
as that it will shoot a pellet scarce 12. paces from the mouth of the gunnne:
But to the end that no ill minded man shall do hurt with the same unnecessary
and unlawful kind of Gunpowder by any thing that shall be by me written
thereof, I will not hear name my said Author, nor teach any person to make
the same.

The 3. Corollarie.
IN some places at sometime it may happen that it shall be thought a needful
piece of service to break great pieces of Artillery, wherefore by occasion
of that which has been declared in the precedent Colloquie, I will here say
unto him that is desirous to learn, that this action may be performed with
smooth iron wedges, which I would have so made as every of them should be a
foot in length, and at one end thin like an edge of a knife, and at the
other end an inch thick. For when one of these wedges shall be thrust into a
piece charged with powder and pellet, and the thin end of the wedge put in
under the pellet, it must needs be a let to the moving of the pellet, and
make the pellet sticking fast within the piece by reason it cannot by any
means pass over the thick end of the wedge, to break the piece although it
was charged with no more powder than his ordinary charge. Also if you will
charge any great piece of Artillery with a full charge of such gunpowder as
I do teach you to make in the 16. chapter of mine Appendix and have marked
their with the number of 13 you shall break the piece.

Also you may break any great peeece of Artillery in what part thereof you
will after this manner. Lay the Piece in a furnace upon iron wedges or upon
stones of foot in height, and make a good fire of coals under and round
about that part of the piece where it shall be broken: Then bloe the fire with
a pair of belloes till you have made the piece very hot, and after you have
so done, take the piece out of the fire, and with an iron hammer strike hard
upon the hot part of the piece, and by so doing you shall break the same piece
in that very place. Likewise you may break any great piece of Artillery
thus. Make in the ground a ditch somewhat longer than the piece which shall be
broken, and in the bottom of this ditch cut a trenche so long as that part of
the piece which shall be made hot: Fill this trench with coals, and lay the
piece which shall be broken upon iron wedges or stones of half a foot in
height in the ditch, so as the piece in that part which shall be made hot and
broken, may lie directly over the said trench: then having covered the Piece in
that part, which shall be made hot and broken, all over with coals, and made a
wall of stones, or some other thing round about it (I mean the Piece) so as
men may work upon it, put fire to the said coals, and with belloes bloe the
fire till you have made the Piece very hot: this done, lift the Piece up out of
the ditch, and with an iron hamer strike hard upon the hot part of the Piece
till you have broken it there: which you shall quickly do.

The 23 Colloquie.
How it may be known whether a Piece which was never discharged or shot in,
will shoot right upon a mark, or wide, or a scue from the mark unto which
the leuel shall be given: And how if a Piece of Artillery be more thicker upon
the one side than upon the other, the concauitie of the piece is not right in
the midst of the metal. And how if a piece be more thicker upon the one
side than upon the other, the same piece will not shoot his pellets forth
right, but always awry toward the thicker side of the metal: And how you
may know the thinness and thickness of the metal in any part of the
concauitie in the piece.

Interlocutors Gunfounder. Nicholas Tartaglia.
GVnfounder. Is it possible that I may perceive whether a Piece which is newly
laid upon his carriage and was never shot in, will shoot right, wide, or ascue?


Nich. Your question in substance is no more than this, that you would know
whether the concauitie of that Piece does lie right in the midst of the metal
or no: and if it do not lie in the midst of the metal that you would
understand how or toward what part of the Piece that concauitie does go,
which as I think may without any difficulty be done: For I consider that this
is a thing which by diverse ways may be searched out and known. But to show
you a way by which it may speedily and easily be done, you must give me some
respite to think thereon.


Gunfounder. Think a while of it, for I have asked this doubt of many which by
their profession are Engenars, and have not found any of them able to resolve
me therein.


Nicho. I have considered of this matter, and perceive thereby, that the said
thing may be done by many ways, but to do that thing speedily and with small
a do, you must take two staves that are very right, or two lathes or rulers
well planed, Note.
of equal breadth, and more longer by one brace A brace is a measure in Venice
which contains 2 foot and of a foot of the afsise of England.
at the least than the concauitie of the Piece is, and to that part of those
staves, lathes, or rulers which exceed in length the same concauitie you must
fasten two other staves, lathes, or rulers overthwart, which must be in length,
somewhat more than half the thickness of the Piece at the tail, and set apart
one from the other almost a brace in measure, to the end they may be able to
keep a sunder the two more longer staves, lathes, or rulers in an equal
distance. And afterward you must put one of those staves or rulers into the
concauitie of that Piece, and so the other staff or ruler will be without the
Piece. How you may know whether a Piece is more thicker of metal in one place
than in an other.
Now if you will know whether that Piece is more thicker of metal in one
place than in another do thus. Lay that staff which is within the Piece close
and right unto the uppermost part of the concauitie, and then measure or cause
some other to measure skilfully how far the end or extreme part of that
staff which is without the Piece is distant from the metal of the Piece.
Afterward remove somewhat the said staff or ruler which is within the
concauitie to an other part thereof, and there measure again with good
aduisement how far the said end of that staff is distant from the metal of
the Piece, and in this second place if the end of that staff shall be
precisely so much and no more distant from the metal than it was in the first
place, you may conclude that the metal in those two places is of equal
thickness: but if that end of the said staff shall be in the second place
farther of from the metal than it was in the first place, you may conclude
that in this second place the metal is more thinner than in the first place,
and by so much more thinner as the distance from the metal shall be in the
second place greater than in the first place. Likewise if by chance in this
second place that end of the same staff or ruler shall be more nearer to the
metal than it was in the first place, then the metal in this second place
is more thicker than in the first place. And in this sort you must proceed
from one part of the concauitie to an other part thereof, and from one side to
an other side round about the Piece, and by so doing you shall know whether or
no the concauitie does go precisely or right in the midst of the metal,
for if it be found that the metal is of equal thickness, you may conclude
that according as the Piece does show, the concauitie is right in the midst
of the metal, and that the Piece will shoot his pellets foorthright, and not
awrie. And if by chance you find the metal to be more thicker upon the one
side than upon the other, you may conclude that according as the Piece does
show, the concauitie is not right in the midst of the metal, and
consequently that the same Piece will not shoot his pellets foorthright, but
awrie toward the thicker side of the metal: that is to say, if that
thickness shall be upon the right side, the Piece will shoot wide toward
the right side: And contrariwise, Note.
And afterward I thrust one of those staves (which here I will suppose to
be D C) into the concauitie of the Piece, so that it shall touch close the
uppermost part of that concauitie as it appears to do in this figure. The
instrument which here the type A B C D does represent, will serve also to
place level sights in their due places upon the uppermost part and outside of
a Piece right over the middle point of the concauite in the canon of the Piece
as you may read in the tenth Colloquie of this book.
depiction of a measuring instrument

Then I measure or cause some other to measure advisedly the distance between
the point A the end of the staff or ruler, Note.
and the metal of that Piece in the same place, and suppose that the said
distance is precisely so much as is the short line E. Then I do remove those
staves or rulers to an other place or side of the Piece, and for your better
understanding hereof, I do remove them to the opposite part of that Piece as
it does appear by the other figure, and in that place I measure or cause some
other to measure the distance that is between the said point A the end of
the staff, and the metal of the Piece, the which I will suppose to be as
much as the length of the line F. Now I say if the line F be equal to the
line E, the metal of that Piece is of equal thickness as well in the
uppermost part as in the loermost part of that Piece. But because in this case
I do sensibly find the line F to be longer than the line E, therefore I
conclude that the metal of the Piece is more thicker above, than it is beloe,
and that it is so much more thicker, as the line F is longer than the line E.

depiction of a measuring instrument

After this sort and manner I must proceed to the right side, and to the left
side, and to all the other parts or sides round about the Piece, noting
always the distances by lines for by those lines, Note.
I shall know exactly the thickness and thinness of the metal round^ about
the concauitie of that Piece, and by the reasons before alleged, I shall also
know^ toward what way or side the said Piece will shoot his pellets, which is
the thing that wa^ proposed


Gunfounder. You have told me of a good and speedy way which pleases me well.


The 4 Corollarie.
ALthough the concauitie in a Piece of Artillery does lie right in the midst
of the metal of that Piece, yet may the said concauitie be taper bored:
wherefore to know whether or no a Piece of Artillery is taper bored you must
prepare a Rammer head equal in height and compass to the concauitie in the
Piece, and that being done, thrust the said Rammer head into the said
concauitie: for if it will not go down unto the touchhole, the Piece is taper
bored in that very place where the Rammer head sticks. To know how much the
Piece is taper bored, make the like proof with a Rammer head of a less height
and compass than the first was, and by making diverse proves after this sort,
you shall know how much the Piece in every place of his concauitie is taper
bored. Such a Piece as is so taper bored that his concauitie is wyder at the
mouth than at the touchhole, is to be misliked, because the Gunner may put into
it a pellet which (though it shall seem to be a fit pellet) will stick fast
in the Piece, and by reason it will not go down unto the powder break the
Piece if it be not shot out in such or like sort as in the 27 chapter of mine
Appendix you are taught to do the same. Also such a Piece is to be misliked,
because the pellet that shall go down to the powder is so small that it will
swerve in the deliverance, and randge a less ground than it would have done,
if it had bin fit for the mouth of the Piece. But such Pieces as are not taper
bored from their mouths downwards toward their touchholes till within a
foot or a foot and a half of their touchholes, are not (as some say) to be
misliked, because such Pieces are thereby more stronger and by that means
their pellets will go more closer unto the powder: yet this can not be denied
that the ladles for such pieces must be rounder bent, and that as the sponge
which is fit for the mouth of one such Piece will not go within his concauitie
down to the touchhole or bottom, so the sponge which is fit for one such
Piece at the bottom, will be too lo for the rest of his concauitie.

The 24 Colloquie.
The cause and reason why the mouth of a hot Piece of Artillery falling into a
sandy ground, did draw a great quantity of the said sand into the
concauitie of that Piece.

Interlocutors Gunfounder. Nicholas Tartaglia.
GVnfounder. I will ask an other question of you which is this: one time as I
proved certain Pieces at Lio, At Lio which is a place with in a mile of
Venice, there is a Haven unto which yearly on the Ascension day (as William
Thomas in his book entitled, The History of Italy says) the Duke of Venice
with the Senate in their best array use to go for to throw a ring into the
water, and thereby to take the Sea as their Espowse.
it chanced after I had charged and discharged one Piece many times together
that the mouth of the same Piece fell into a very sandy ground, and that so
soon as the mouth of the said Piece was within the said ground, a great
quantity of the same sand was drawn into the concauitie of that Piece: now I
ask of you the cause of that effect?


Nicho. A Gunner did once ask me the like question as it will appear in the 21
Colloquie of this book, for as your Piece drew into the concauitie thereof a
great deal of sand, so his Piece drew into the concauitie of the same a
little dog. Therefore I will answer your question as I did answer his: that
is to say, a Piece which is discharged oftentimes together must needs wax
hot, and so soon as it waxes warm, it is made thereby somewhat attractiue
even as a cupping or boxing glass, and by so much it is made more attractiue,
as it is made more hot. Therefore it is no marvel that your said Piece drew
sand into his concauitie.


Gunfounder. I do like well of this your answer.


The 25 Colloquie.
How that level sight which is well placed upon a handgunne to shoot at a
mark lying level with the mouth of the same Gunne, and in a convenient
distance from the said Gunne, will not serve well to shoot at a mark set on a
height in a like convenient distance from the said Gun: And how he which will
shoot in such a Gunne that has such a level sight at a mark lying level
with his Gunne, and in a convenient distance from his standing, ought to take
his level at the middle of that mark: And also how he which will shoot in
such a Gunne that has such a level sight at a mark set on a height, in a
like convenient distance from his standing, ought to take his level at the
loest part of that mark.

Interlocutors Schioppetiero. This word Schioppetiero does here and in all
other places of this book signify him that does use to shoot in an
Harchibuse, Caliuer, or any other Handgunne.
Nicholas Tartaglia.
SChioppetiero. I have a Handgunne with a level sight so well placed that if I
do shoot in the said Piece at a mark lying level with the mouth of the same
and in a convenient distance from my Piece, most commonly the pellet will
strike in the middle of that mark although the said mark be a very small
thing. Now I ask of you whether or no that leuel sight being so well placed
will serve me to shoot at a mark or some other little thing espied on a
height in a like convenient distance?


Nich. It is a manifest thing that the said level sight will not serve you so
well to shoot at a mark espied on a height in a like convenient distance.


Schioppetiero. Wherefore?


Nicho. Because if you shoot at a mark lying level in a convenient distance,
most commonly your pellet strikes in the middle of the mark, and of necessity
at the end of that distance, and in that place your visuall line does touch or
cut the line or way in which the pellet must go. And because in shooting at
marks espied on a height, the pellet does go much more by a right line, or by
a less crooked line than the pellet which is shot at a mark lying level with
the Piece, as has bin said before in the second Colloquie: therefore by how
much the pellet shot at a mark on a height does go more righter than the
pellet which is shot at a mark lying leuel, by so much does that way of the
pellet come more nearer or sooner to meet and cut your said visuall line, than
the way of the pellet which is shot at a mark lying level. Then making that
intersection more nearer by shooting at a mark on a height, the thing at which
you shoot will be beyond that intersection, and so the said thing or mark
being at the said first distance, and beyond that intersection, it is
impossible by reason of your said leuel sight that the pellet shall in that
case strike in the midst of the mark.


Schioppetiero. I do not well understand your reasons, neither will I trouble
you to make me understand them, for I think you should have much a do with me
to make me perceive them. But do you conclude that if I shoot at a mark
espied on a height and at the same first distance, that the pellet will strike
above that mark or under that mark?


Nicho. I conclude that there the pellet will strike above the mark, for
always when the visual line does cut the way of the pellet, and that the mark
or thing at which you shoot is beyond that intersection^ the pellet will
strike somewhat above the mark, and by so much the more above the mark as the
said mark shall be more farther of from that intersection.


Schioppetiero. Certainly you say true therein, for you shall understand that
I have in my time killed with my Piece 2000 little birds, and my long
experience has taught me to know that which now you have told me: Note.
therefore when I have occasion to shoot at any little bird sitting on a
height upon a tree within a convenient distance, I take my mark always at the
feet of the bird, but when the bird sittes on a place lying leuel with my
Piece, then I take my mark precisely at the body of the bird, and by so doing
I do seldomtimes miss with my shoot.

diagram of a visual line


The 26. Colloquie
How that level sight which is well placed upon a handgunne to shoot at a
mark lying level with the mouth of the gunne, and in a convenient distance
from the said Gunne, will not serve well to shoot at a mark lying under the
level of the Gunners eye, and in a like convenient distance from the said
Gunne: And how the Gunner which shootes in a Gunne which has such a level
sight at a thing lying under the level of his eye, and in a convenient
distance from his standing, ought to take his level at the loest part of that
thing or mark.

Interlocutors Schioppetiero. Nicholas Tartaglia.
SChioppetiero. I have another question to ask of you which is this: if I
should shoot with my said handgun at a mark lying under the leuel of my eye,
and in a convenient distance from my standing, whether or no will the same
level sight serve me to shoot at the said mark, which will serve me to
shoot at a mark lying level with mine eye, I mean, whether or no will the
pellet strike in the midst of that mark, or above that mark, or under that
mark?


Nicholas. It is manifest by the reasons before alleged that your said level
sight will not serve you in that distance, for the pellet in that case will
also hitte above the same mark.


Schioppetiero. You answer me well, for I have learned by long experience,
that whenever I shall shoot at any little bird sitting in a place which is
under the level of mine eye, to take my mark at the feet of the same bird as
I use to do when I shoot at another bird sitting on high upon a tree or
tower, and by so doing I do seldom times miss the mark.


Nich. I am glad that by your long experience you can witness the same to be
true which I by natural reason without any practice have spoken.

diagram of a visual line


The 5 Corollarie.
ONe Luigui Collado a Spaniard finding fault with the precepts written in the
precedent Colloquie teaches his Readers to shoot at a lo mark lying within
a convenient distance in this sort following: A Gunner shooting at a lo mark
within a convenient distance, ought to take his leuel above the same mark as
Luigui Collado has written.
imbase, says he, the mouth of your Piece till by putting your eye to the
uppermost part of metal in the greatest circumference at the tail of the
same Piece, you may see that the uppermost part of metal, and the top of the
dispart upon the mouth of that Piece do lie in a right line with the lo mark.
This done, hang a line and plummet upon the uppermost part of metal in the
greatest circumference over the mouth of the same Piece, and eleuate the mouth
of that Piece till the said line and plummet shall hang without any bending
close by all the same mouth, and then suffering the Piece to lie at that
elevation you shall see (as the said Luigui Collado has written in the 80.
chapter of his book named Pratica manuale di Arteglieria) that it will in his
discharge strike the said lo mark: which is contrary to the doctrine taught in
the precedent Colloquie* wherefore I do exhort every Gunner to learn by his
practice in which of the two repugnant authors the error is,

The 27. Colloquie
When one which has shot in a Handgunne at a mark lying level with his eye,
does remove the said mark more farther from him, because he perceives that
through the fault of his level sights the pellet did hit above the mark, and
after he has so done does shoot again at the same mark, then the pellet at
the second shoot will strike more above the mark than the other pellet did at
the first shoot. And how it is no inconvenience but a convenient thing to do
that which by reason must be done.

Interlocutors Schioppetiero. Nicholas Tartaglia.
SChioppetiero. I have yet an other question to ask of you which is this.
Having shot in my Handgunne at a mark lying level with mine eye, and
perceived that the pellet did hit pellet did hit above the mark, I remove the
said mark to another place more farther of from my standing, or I go back
with my Piece to be farther of from the said mark, now if I shall shoot
again at that mark, whether will the pellet strike more above that mark, or
more under that mark than it did at my first shoot?


Nicholas. In this case the pellet will strike at your second shoot more above
the mark than it did at your first shoot?


Schioppetiero. It will do so in deed, for it chanced on a time that to prove
how far a new Handgunne would shoot level, I did shoot at a mark in a
convenient distance from my standing, and struck with the pellet above that
mark, whereupon in hope to hit the midst of the mark, I removed the mark
about ten paces farther from my standing at the first shoot, and going back
from the said mark to that my standing place, I shot again, and at this
second shoot I struck with the pellet more above that mark than I did at the
first shoot, the which seemed to me to be a thing against all reason, for I
thought then and do think so still, that by remoouing the mark to a place
more farther of from my standing, the pellet should hit more loer than it did
when the mark stood more nearer unto me: And therefore I pray you show unto me
the cause of this inconvenience.


Nicho. It is no inconvenience (...) a convenient thing to do that which by
reason must be done.
It is no inconvenience but a convenient thing to do that which by reason must
be done and it would be a great inconvenience to have it as you thought it
should be. For always when a Schioppetiero or a Gunner shootes at a mark
which lies from his Piece in a right line, and that by force or through the
fault of the two level sights the pellet hits above the mark, it is manifest
that the visual line cuttes the way of the pellet, and that the same
intersection which the visual line makes in the way of the pellet is within the
mark, that is to say, between the Piece and the mark, as it does appear by
the reasons alleged in the seventh Colloquie, and because for a very long way
together by how much the mark at which you shoot is more beyond the said
intersection, by so much the pellet will hit more above that mark, therefore
by remoouing the same mark somewhat father of from your standing, that mark
will be likewise somewhat more removed from that intersection, and by so much
as the mark shall be removed more farther of (even unto a certain limite)
by so much the pellet will hit more higher or more above the said mark: the
same in effect will follow if the Schioppetiero or Gunner will go back more
farther of from the mark. And all this which I have told you must be
intended when the pellet hits above the mark through the fault of the two
level sights, and not through the fault of him which shootes, Admonition.
for if it be by default of him which shootes, I mean if he in discharging the
Handgunne does make any moving, and that thereby the pellet does strike above,
under, or wide of the mark, our reasons extend not to help that
inconvenience, but to amend those faults which may be committed by the means
of the two level sights which are set upon the handgunne. Note.
Also you must understand that the said mark may be so much transported, and
set so far of from his first place, that not only the pellet will hit more
nearer to the mark than it did at the first shoot, but also strike the same
mark, as it does appear by the reasons alleged in the end of the seventh
Colloquie: that is to say, if by hap the mark shall be transported and set
so far of as that it be put in the same place where our visual line makes a
second intersection in the way of the pellet, without doubt the pellet will hit
in the very midst of the mark as it has been said before in the 7
Colloquie. And if by chance the mark be not put in that place of the second
intersection, but near unto it, then the pellet will not hit so precisely in
the very midst of that mark, but near unto it, that is to say, if the mark
shall be put somewhat within the place of that intersection, the pellet will
strike somewhat above the mark, and if the mark be put somewhat without that
intersection, Note.
the pellet will strike somewhat under the mark, as all this may easily be
perceived by the reasons and picture in the end of the seventh Colloquie. And
the said mark may be also transported so much from the said second
intersection, as that the pellet can not come to touch it, which by natural
reason is easy to be perceived.


Schioppetiero, I do well understand your reasons and make great account of
them.


The 28 Colloquie.
The reasons and causes why a Schioppetiero which does shoot in a Handgunne at
a mark lying level with his eye, and through the fault of his level sights
does shoot under the mark, shall by removing the said mark more farther from
him and shooting at it again strike sometimes more under the same mark than
he did before, and sometimes between the mark and the place where the pellet
did hit at the first, and sometimes precisely in the mark, and sometimes above
the mark.

Interlocutors Schioppetiero. Nicholas Tartaglia.
SChioppetiero. By occasion of the aforesaid question an other thing comes to
my remembrance, which is this: I shoot in my handgunne at a mark lying level
with the mouth of my Piece, and for that the pellet does hit under the mark
through the fault of the two level sights, I do remove the same mark farther
of from me, or go back from the said mark, now if I shall shoot again at
that mark lying in a right line with my Piece, whether or no will the pellet
at the second shoot hit more higher, or more loer than it did at the first
shoot.


Nicho. In this case there may be diverse alterations because the leuel sight
before at the mouth of the Piece may be of equal height with the level sight
behind at the breech of the Piece, and the said level fight before may be
more higher, and also more shorter than the level sight behind: Note.
If then by chance the level sight before upon the mouth of the Piece shall
be of equal height or longer than the level sight behind upon the tail of
the Piece according to the reasons alleged in the beginning of the seventh
Colloquie, by how much more farther the mark is removed from you, by so much
the pellet will strike more loer. But if the level sight before shall be more
shorter than the level sight behind and that by chance it is so much shorter
than the other, as that your visuall line does cut the way of the pellet (as is
declared in the end of the seventh Colloquie) in that case the pellet must
needs at the second shoot strike higher than it did at the first shoot, and
yet that may be under the mark: that is to say, between the said mark and
the place where the pellet struck at the first bloe, and it may be also
precisely in the midst of the mark, Note.
and it may be also above the mark: For always when the level sight before
is so much shorter than the level sight behind, as that your visuall line
does cut the way of the pellet as before has been said, and that in such a
case a Shioppetiero or Gunner does shoot at a mark lying level with his
Piece, and through the fault of the two level sights, and not through any
fault in himself does hit under the mark, it is manifest that the
intersection which the visuall line makes in the way of the pellet, by the
reasons alleged in the end of the seventh Colloquie shall be beyond the
mark: that is to say, the mark shall be between the said intersection and
him that does shoot. And therefore if the place to which the mark shall be
removed be within that intersection, of necessity the said second bloe will
be under the mark, and yet it will be more nearer to the mark than the first
bloe was: that is to say, it will be between the mark and the first bloe. But
if the mark be removed to the very place of the intersection, the pellet at
the second shoot will hit precisely in the midst of the mark, that is to
say, in the mark which lies in a right line with the mouth of the Piece. But
if the mark be removed by chance beyond the said intersection, the pellet at
the second shoot must needs strike above the mark, and it will strike so
much more above the mark unto a certain limite, as the mark is more removed
beyond the said intersection as in the end of the precedent Colloquie has
been said. But if the level sight before be somewhat shorter than the level
sight behind, and that the shortness thereof be so little, as that it is not
able to cause your visuall line to ioyn aloe with the way of the pellet, yet in
this case at every remoouing of the mark the pellet will hit under the mark, and
this notwithstanding the pellet at the second shoot may hit above that place,
and under that place, and also in the very same place where the pellet did
strike at the first shoot. For if the mark at the first shoot be by chance
set in the place where your visuall line passes most nearest to the way of the
pellet (as has been declared in the eight Colloquie) and is afterward
transported beyond that place, without doubt the pellet will strike at the
second shoot more under than it did at the first shoot: The same follows
when the mark is set beyond that place, but when the mark is set at the
first shoot within that place where your visuall line passes most nearest to
the way of the pellet, that is to say, more near unto you, and is afterward
removed for the second shoot more nearer to that place, the pellet will strike
at the second shoot higher than it did at the first: and yet that bloe will
be under the mark: that is to say, the pellet will strike between the first
bloe and the mark. But when the mark is removed without that place where your
visuall line passes most nearest to the way of the pellet, it may be removed
so little without that place, as that the second bloe will be between the
first bloe and the mark, and it may be removed so much without that place, as
that the second bloe will be under the first bloe, and it may be so
proportionally removed without the said place, as that the second bloe will
hit precisely in the place of the first bloe, and all this will appear very
plainly to him that does consider well of the figure in the eight Colloquie.
But when the level sight before has his due and convenient shortness in
respect of that leuel sight which is behind, the which thing happens very
seldom times: that is to say, that the visuall line does precisely touch and
not cut the way of the pellet, then if in such a case any Schioppetiero or
Gunner shall shoot at any mark upon a right line, and by means of the said
two level sights, and not through his own fault shall strike with the pellet
under the mark, it may be by that which has been spoken and declared in the
ninth Colloquie that the said mark is both within and without the touch of
those two lines, for the mark being so within or without that touch, the
pellet always strikes under the mark as may be easily perceived by the
figure in the ninth Colloquie. But when the first bloe is much under the mark,
it may be adjudged that the mark is without the said touch, for the mark
being within the said touch, the pellet can not hitte very lo by the reasons
alleged in the said ninth Colloquie. And if the mark being without the said
touch, be set more without the same touch, certainly the second bloe will
be much under the first bloe. But when the mark being set within the said
touch is removed to a place more farther, it may happen that the mark in the
second place is within that touch, and it may be in the very touch, and it
may be also without that touch. If the mark then in the second place be set
within that touch, the second bloe will be above or higher than the first
bloe, and yet it will be under the mark: that is to say, it will be between
the mark and the first bloe. But if by chance the mark in the second place
be set in the very point of the touch, the second bloe will be preciselie
in the midst of the mark: But if the mark in the second place be set
without the said touch, it may be so much without the same, as that the
second bloe will be loer than the first bloe, and it may be also so little
without that touch, as that the second bloe will be higher than the first,
and yet it will be under the mark: that is to say, between the mark and the
first bloe. And it may be so proportionallie without as that the second bloe
will strike precisely in that place, where the first bloe struck.


Schioppetiero. Your reasons have done me much good, for I begin now to
understand them, and where I had thought to have made an end of my questions,
your arguments have brought new doubts into my mind, so that if I shall not
be tedious unto you, I will desire you to resolve me in them.


Nicholas. Proceed for by so doing you shall not be tedious unto me.


The 29. Colloquie
The cause why a Schioppetiero or a Gunner when he stands near unto a mark
lying level with his eye, is more apt with every sort of leuel sights to
strike that mark, or to make a fair shoot at the same, than when he stands
more farther from the said mark: And how he which will shoot at a little
mark lying very near unto him ought to take his level at such a height, as
that the mouth of his Piece may cover the same mark.

Interlocutors Schioppetiero. Nicholas Tartaglia.
SChioppetiero. I perceive by your arguments before alleged, that your opinion
is if the level mark at which I shoot be not set in the point where my
visuall line meets with the way of the pellet, that I cannot strike the said
mark in the midst, the which thing on the one part as I consider must needs
be true by natural reason, so on the other part my long experience causes
me to think otherwise of the same. But before I do tell you in what part
that agrees not with my experience, I will desire you to open this doubt unto
me: whence comes it that every Schioppetiero and every Gunner generally the
more nearer he stands unto a mark lying level with his Piece, the more apt
he is with every sort of level sightes to strike in the mark or to make a
fair shoot.


Nicholas. To open your doubts concerning all sorts of differences which may
happen in the two level sights, I will first begin with this: when by
chance the level sight before is precisely of the same height that the level
sight behind is of, I mean when the level sight before is equally so high as
the level sight behind, then by how much he that shootes stands more nearer
to the mark, by so much he shall be more apt to strike in the mark or to make
a fair shoot, and this comes to pass through two causes. The first of them
is for that always as before has been said in the seventh Colloquie, that
Handgunne or Piece will shoot under the level mark, and the bloe will be by
so much more under the mark, as he which shoots is more farther from the
mark: and contrariwise by how much he which shoots is more nearer to the
mark, by so much the bloe shall be the less under the mark, and the loest
stroke which may happen in the like case shall be when he which shootes stands
so near unto the mark, as that the end of the level sight before does as it
were touch the said level mark: and the bloe which strikes least under the
mark is about so much under, as is that distance which is between the
extremes or ends of the level sights and the concauitie of the Piece, which
may be a little more than the thickness of the metal of the Piece at the
breech, Note.
which in a Handgunne may be near so much as the thickness of one finger, and
in a great Piece, so much more as the Piece shall be more thicker of metal
at the breeche: and although the pellet so soon as it is gone out of the mouth
of the Handgunne or Piece does go continually declining downewardes as has
been showed in the third Colloquie, yet in that little time while the pellet
may be seen, his said declining shall not be sensible, that is to say, it
shall not with our eyes be discerned. Therefore in a short way by reason of the
said level sightes that Handgunne may hit a little more under the level
mark than the thickness of a finger, which before has been spoken of, I say
by means of the level sightes, Note.
and not through the fault of him which shootes, for the faults and
accidental causes which may chance through his fault that shootes, are not
comprehended within our Arguments. And this is the first cause why a
Schioppetiero and also a Gunner when he stands near unto the level mark,
and shootes in a Piece that has his level sight before of equal height with
the level sight behind, is more apt to strike in the mark, or to make a
fayrer shoot than when he shall stand more farther of from the said mark:
And by the same reason, the like will happen when the level sight before is
somewhat longer than the level sight behind, for in such a case as has been
said in the seventh Colloquie, the Piece will always strike under the level
mark, and by so much the more under, as he which shootes shall be the more
farther of from the mark, and the bloe in such a case shall be at the least so
much loer than the mark, as is the space between the top of the level sight
before, and the concauitie of that Piece or a little more, the which lonesse
when the mark is as has been said very near to the mouth of the Piece, may
be little more than the thickness of a finger. But in an equal distance the
bloe will be a little more loer than is the space between the top of the
level sight before, and the concauitie of the Piece, especially in a very
short distance: So that this is the first cause as has been said why a
Schioppetiero and also a Gunner when he stands near unto the mark lying
level with his eye, and shootes in a Piece that has his level sight before
somewhat more higher than the level sight behind, is more apt to strike in
the mark, Note.
or to make a more fairer shoot than when he shall stand more farther of. But
besides this first cause I think that every Gunner and Schioppetiero does
perceive by natural reason an other cause, which is this, When a ^ner is ve^
near vn^ mark h^ take his (...) somewh^ above the same man
that always when he is very near to the mark at which he shootes, he must
not take his level at the very mark, But somewhat above the mark, for he
should by natural reason understand, that the uppermost ends of the two level
sights are above the mouth of the Piece out of which the pellet flies: and by
so doing he shall amend that little error before spoken of, which he will
otherwise commit in shooting under the mark, and make himself more apt to
strike precisely in the midst of the mark. And therefore I say when the level
sight before is of equal height or somewhat more longer than that behind, then
the Gunner and Schioppetiero (for the reasons before alleged) by how much the
more nearer he stands to the mark, by so much he is more apt to strike the
mark at which he shootes, or to make a more fairer shoot. Note.
Much more by the said reasons the very selfsame thing will come to pass when
the level sight before is somewhat shorter than the level sight behind, and
more shorter, or not so short as it should be: for in any way you will, as let
it be loer, there the visual line comes to be more nearer to the way or line
in which the pellet goes, and continually commes more nearer unto it, until it
cutteth, touches, or passes more nearer to the way of the pellet than it did
in the two former positions of the level sights. For in the same, the said
visuall line does go from the way of the Pellet, and in this continually it
commes more nearer to the way of the pellet until it commes to the aforesaid
place: And although also in this second position of the level sights, by how
much more the mark which lies level with the Piece shall be within that
place where the visuall line does meet with the way of the pellet, or within
that place where it passes near to that way or line in which the pellet
goes, by so much the stroke shall be more loer, as it has been declared in
the seventh, eight, and ninth Colloquies, and yet that lonesse may be but
little as has been also said in the same Colloquies. For the most lonesse
that may be there, is the same which was the greatest in the other two first:
that is to say, when the mark which lies level with the piece is very near
unto the level sight before, I mean the level sight upon the mouth of the
Handgunne or Piece, the which in a Handgunne can be little more than the
thickness of one finger as before I have declared. Then in a Handgunne whose
mouth is laid very near to the mark, the greatest lonesse is little more
than the thickness of a finger, but the mark being somewhat farther of from
the mouth of the Piece it must needs be that the bloe shall not be so lo
under the mark as the thickness of a finger, and it shall be by so much
less under the mark, as it shall be more farther from the mouth of the
handgunne so that it be not beyond the said intersection or touch which the
visuall line makes in the line or way of the pellet, or beyond the most nighest
part thereof. Note
Then the mark being at the least ten paces from the mouth of the Handgunne,
the lonesse of that stroke will be scant sensible. Besides this as has been
before said, when he that shootes is very near unto the mark at which he
shootes, I think that by a certain natural discretion he does not take his
leuel precisely in the midst of the mark, but a little thing above: for he
ought to know by natural reason as before has been said, that the tops of
the two level sights are somewhat above the mouth of the Handgun out of which
the pellet flies, and by so doing (as I think he does) he shall amend that
little error which the pellet would commit in striking under that mark: and for
these two causes that Schioppetiero or Gunner with that kind of level sights
generally shall be more apt to strike the mark set in a place near unto him, or
to make at it a fairer shoot than he shall do with the two first kinds of level
sights of which I spoke in the beginning of this Colloquie. For in that kind
of level sights the visual line by a great space goes as it were joined or
little distant from the way of the pellet. And therefore in all that space
which is between the mouth of the handgunne and the place where the visual
line does meet with the way or line in which the pellet does go, or where the
said two lines are most nearest, he is not subject as it were to commit any
error for the reasons before alleged by means of the level sights.


Schioppetiero. You have fully satisfied me with your reasons, for of the one
part I affirm by those reasons which you have alleged in the precedent
Colloquie, that it is impossible to strike a mark which lies level with the
mouth of the Piece, when that mark is not precisely in the point of the
intersection, or in the touch of those two lines meeting together: that is to
say, of the visuall line, and the line or way in which the pellet does go. And
of the other part it has seemed to me through my long experience that it
should be otherwise: for I have shot in my handgunne and killed therewith many
little birds, of which some have stood in a competent long distance from me,
and some of them have stood but in a mean distance from me, and some other of
them have stood very near unto me. The which thing would not so have chanced
if it had bin so as I did at the first suppose it to be. For if the level
sights upon my handgunne be such as will make my visuall line to meet with the
line and way of the pellet, it is to be believed that it does so always as it
were in one and the selfsame distance, especially when I shoot after one
sort, and charge always in one and the selfsame manner. And therefore the
thing being so, if I shoot more ground or less ground than that appointed and
determinate distance, it will be impossible to strike the very mistdest of that
mark which lies level with the Piece: But this (as before has bin said) is
already found by experience to be otherwise, Note.
that is to say, it has bin my hap oftentimes in a common distance, When you
will ^hoote at any ^itle mark which is very ^eare unto ^ou, take your ^euell at
such a ^eight as that ^he mouth of ^our Piece ^ay cover the ^ame mark.
and in a mean distance, and in a short distance, and after one and the
selfsame sort, to strike with my handgunne in the very midst of the mark,
the which thing caused me to doubt thereof, but now you have made me to
understand very well all that I doubted of, and especially for that when I shot
at any little bird which was very near unto me, I did always use (as you have
said) to take my level at such a height as the mouth of my handgunne did cover
the little bird, whereby I did seeldometimes miss the mark.


Nicholas. It pleases me well that your long experience can witness the same
to be true, which by natural reason and geometrical skill I did think in my
mind should be so.


Schioppetiero. You have made me to understand well all that I doubted, yet by
thinking upon your arguments, a nwe matter is come into my mind which I fear
to tell unto you, for that I will not be trubbelsome.


Nich. Say on, you shall not be trubbelsome to me for I desire to hear it.


The 30 Colloquie.
The reasons and causes why a Schioppetiero shooting oftentimes together in a
handgunne at a mark lying level with the mouth of his Piece, and not far from
him, may sometimes strike much above that mark, and sometimes much under that
mark, and sometimes wide from that mark, and sometimes in that mark. Also
the causes of errors which maybe committed in shooting with handgunnes: and by
how much the mark is more nearer to him which shootes by so much he which
shootes is more like to strike the mark, or to make a fair shoot at the same.

Interlocutors Schioppetiero. Nicholas Tartaglia.
SChioppetiero. In your arguments upon the precedent question you have showen
with very good reasons that a Schioppetiero shooting at a mark near unto him,
is always subject to strike under the mark, that is to say, more loer than
the mark, and that the same lonesse can not exceed the thickness of a finger
or little more, but I have seen many which by shooting often times together in
one and the selfsame handgunne at a mark lying not very far from them, have
at sometimes struck much above the mark, and at sometimes much under, and at
sometimes very wide, and at sometimes in the mark: now I ask of you the cause
thereof, for as it seems to me it is repugnant to all the reasons of your
aforesaid arguments.




Nicho. You must understand that all the errors which may be committed in
shooting with a handgunne come of sundry causes: For some of those errors are
committed only by the means of the level sights, and some of those errors
are committed only by the fault of him that shootes, and some of those errors
are committed through the fault of the one and of the other: that is to say, by
the means of the level sights and of him that shoots. Admonit^
The errors of which we have spoken in our former arguments are such as are
only committed by the means of the level sights, without supposing that he
which shootes does commit any fault or error (as oftentimes before has been
declared) therefore the errors which do simply come by the means of the
level sights, have in them a rule and measure as before in their proper places
has been declared. But the errors which do simply come by the fault of him
that shootes, have in them no order nor rule: Note.
for the most part of those errors are committed by some moving, which he that
shootes in the Handgunne does make after he has taken his level, or in
discharging the Handgunne. For every moving how little soever it be which is
made in that instant time when the Handgunne is discharged, may cause great
error at the mark which lies leuel or in a right line with that Piece. And the
error there will be by so much the more greater, as the mark shall be more
farther of from him which shootes: for the moving of the Handgunne, Note.
which may happen by drawing of breath, or by beating of the pulse, or by
shaking of the hand has for it no rule, and therefore when the mark is
precisely in the point where the visuall line does meet with the line or way
of the pellet, then by reason of the level sights, he which shootes should
strike precisely in the midst of the mark, yet nevertheless the handgunne
being moved, the Schioppetiero is subject to strike as well above the mark, as
under the mark, and also to strike wide of the mark, as well upon the right
side as upon the left side, and he may also by chance strike the mark in the
midst: and all this may happen when the mark is within or without the
meeting of the said two lines: but when the mark is without the meeting of the
said lines, the said errors will be more greater (by reason of the long
distance which is between the mark and him that shootes) than they will be
when the mark is within the meeting of those lines, By how (...) the man (...)
more (...) to him (...) shootes (...) much h^ which (...) is more (...) strike
the mark, (...) make a (...) shoot (...) same.
for then he which shootes is more nearer to the mark. And in truth by how
much the mark is more nearer to him which shootes, by so much every kind of
error will be the less, and therefore he which shootes is by so much more
subject to strike in the mark, or to make a fair shoot as has bin said in
the precedent Colloquie. And also he is subject to all those same accidents
which come when their is any fault in the level sightes, that is to say, by
the moving of the said handgunne, he is subject to strike as well above the
mark, as under the mark, and also wide of the mark. Also he is subject to
strike precisely in the midst of the mark, for the moving of the handgunne
may by chance be such, that it will remedy the fault of the level sightes
and cause him which shootes to hit the mark in the midst: But he shall do
so only by chance and not by any skill.


Schioppetiero. You have spoken enough, for by your arguments I do perfectly
understand all my said doubts.


The end of the first Book of Colloquies.
The second Book of Nicholas Tartaglia his Colloquies concerning the variable
ranges, measures, and weights, of leaden, iron, and marble stone pellets,
translated out of Italian into English, by Cyprian Lucar Gentleman, who has
also augmented the volume of the said Colloquies for the benefit of his
Readers, with the Contents of every Colloquie, and with the Corollaries and
Table, that are in the same volume.
The first Colloquie.
How a pellet of iron will outflie a pellet of lead: and how much a pellet of
iron will outflie a pellet of lead when both of them are shot out of one Piece,
at one and the selfsame elevation, and with an equal quantity of powder: And
how the air does more proportionally resist a light body than a heavy body:
And how the air does more let the range of the pellet which is shot out of a
Piece elevated, then the range of a pellet which is shot out of a Piece lying
level with the Horizon.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. Insomuch as at this present time I know not what to say more of the
quality of shootes and other accidents of Artillery, and for that I will not
stand idle after the reading of Euclide, let us speak somewhat of the
quality, accidents, and diversity of pellets, and tell me briefly whether or
no (as you think) a pellet of lead will outflie a pellet of iron, and by how
much ground the one of them will outflie the other, Iron pellets for great
ordinance were first brought into Italy by Charles the French king in Anno
Domini 1495. as Vannuceio Biringuccio in the ninth chapter of the seventh book
of his Pirotechnia writes.
when both of them are shot out of one Piece at one and the selfsame
elevation, and with an equal quantity of powder?


Nich. You should tell me also with how much powder every of the same pellets
is to be shot.


Prior. Suppose that every of the said pellets is to be shot with parts in
powder of that which the Pellet of lead does way.


Nicho. Without doubt the Pellet of iron will there outflie the pellet of lead.


Prior. By how much?


Nicho. A pellet of iron being shot out of a Piece lying level with the
Horizon, will outflie a pellet of lead as it were by one third part of his
distance, but the Piece being elevated to one point, the pellet of iron will
outflie a pellet of lead somewhat less then one third part of his distance.
And by how much the more higher that the Piece is mounted, by so much the more
does the pellet of iron after that proportion decrease and shorten his range:
so that mounting the Piece to the fifth or sixth point, the pellet of iron will
go farther than the pellet of lead little more than a fifth part of his
distance. And that your Lordship may the better understand me, I will suppose
that a pellet of lead being shot out of a Piece lying leuel with the Horizon,
does fly 300 paces in length, whereupon I say that a pellet of iron being shot
out of that Piece with the same quantity of powder that did drive the pellet
of lead (that is to say with parts of that which the pellet of lead waieth) will
fly as it were 400 paces in length, that is to say, once so much, and ^ part
more called sesquitertia proportio. But if it be supposed that the pellet of
lead at the elevation of the fifth or sixth point, does fly in length 3000
paces, then I say that the pellet of iron at that elevation with the same or
like quantity of powder, will fly in length little more than 3600 paces: that
is to say, little more than once so much and part more called sesquiquinta
proportio.


Prior. of Pieces lying level with the Horizon do?


Nicholas.


Prior. I do understand you well.


The 2 Colloquie.
Where a pellet of lead will in a manner fly as much ground as a pellet of Iron
will do: and where a pellet of lead will range more ground than a pellet of
iron will do: and where a pellet of iron will outflie a pellet of lead: and how
a pellet of lead must be shot with parts in powder of his weight: And how a
pellet of iron must be shot with parts in powder of his weight.

Interlocutors. L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. Tell me whether will a pellet of lead or a pellet of iron fly farthest
when both of them are shot out of one Piece at one and the selfsame elevation,
A pellet of lead must be shotout of a Piece with parts in powder of his
weight. Question. Answer.
and each of them with his ordinary charge: that is to say, with parts in
powder of that weight which every pellet by it self does way?


Nicho. In level shootes and in shootes a little elevated there is no great
difference, but in shootes much elevated, as if I should say at the elevation
of the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth point, the pellet of lead will fly
farther than the pellet of iron: and all this will come to pass by the reasons
alleged in the precedent Colloquie.


Prior. I had thought to have asked of you which of those pellets will fly
farthest, when every of them is shot with parts in powder of that weight which
the pellet of iron waieth, but by the aforesaid reasons I perceive that the
pellet of iron will fly farthest.


Nicho. It will do so in deed.


The 3 Colloquie.
Where a pellet of stone will outflie a pellet of iron: and where a pellet of
iron and a pellet of stone will range one ground: and where a pellet of iron
will outflie a pellet of stone.

Interlocutors. L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. What think you of a pellet of iron and of a pellet of stone? Which of
them will fly farthest? And by how much will one of them outflie the other,
when both of them are shot out of one Piece at one and the selfsame elevation,
and with an equal quantity of powder, that is to say, with parts in powder
of that weight which the pellet of iron wayeth?


Nicho. Without any doubt, reason shows us that in level shootes, and in the
greatest part of elevated shootes, the pellet of stone will outflie the pellet
of iron.


Prior. By how much?


Nicho. In leuel shootes (as for example from the place of equallitie or line
of level, unto the elevation of one only point) the pellet of stone will
outflie the pellet of iron by part of the way or distance in which the pellet
of iron goes, and rather more than less, but in shoots more elevated, the
pellet of stone will not by so much increase the length of his range, but rather
decrease the same by so much as the Piece shall be more elevated. For at the
elevation of the fourth point, the difference will be very little: that is to
say, at that elevation the pellet of iron will in a manner fly as far as the
pellet of stone. But at the elevation of the fifth and sixth point, the pellet of
iron will somewhat outflie the pellet of stone: and all this comes to pass
by the reasons alleged in the first Colloquie of this book.


Prior. This matter ought to be well considered of.


The first Corollarie.
THE stone whereof pellets shall be made, ought to be very hard, and strong
because a pellet of a soft stone (as Luigui Collado writes) will be tormented
at the mouth of his Piece, and break asunder as it flies in the air,

The 4 Colloquie.
Where a pellet of iron will fly farther than a pellet of stone: and where a
pellet of stone will fly as far as a pellet of iron when the pellet of iron
is shot with parts in powder of his weight, and the pellet of stone is shot
but with ^ part in powder of his weight: And how a pellet of stone being shot
out of a piece with part in powder of his weight will fly as much ground as a
pellet of iron of like bigness shot out of a piece with parts in powder of
his weight will do.

Interlocutors. L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior What think you whether will a pellet of iron or a pellet of stone fly
farthest when both of them being equal in bigness are shot out of one Piece
at one and the selfsame elevation, and with their ordinary charge of powder,
that is to say, when the pellet of iron is shot with parts in powder of his
weight, and the pellet of stone with ^ part in powder of his weight?


Nicholas. This is a hard question, because the proportion of the weight of
every of those pellets does differ from the proportion of the weight of the
powder which is due to each of the said bullets. Nevertheless I conclude that
at every elevation the pellet of iron will fly farther than the pellet of
stone: and that by how much the Piece is more elevated, by so much the pellet
of iron will proportionally more outflie the pellet of stone: And contrariwise,
by how much the Piece does lie more near unto the place of equality or line
of level, by so much the difference between their ranges will be the less.


Prior. I perceive by this that they which did first appoint that a pellet of
stone shall be shot with ^ part in powder of that weight which the same pellet
wayeth, Note.
did peradventure find by experience that (as you have said) it will be there
equal in flight with the pellet of iron.


The 5. Colloquie.
Where a pellet of lead will do a greater exploite and pearce farther into an
object than a pellet of iron will do: and where a pellet of iron will do a
greater exploite and pearce farther into an object than a pellet of lead will
do: And how a pellet of lead will give a greater stroke against any object,
and more shake the same than a pellet of iron will do.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. Tell me whether a pellet of lead will do a greater effect or pearce
more farther into an object at an equal distance than a pellet of iron will
do, when both of them are shot out of one Piece at one and the self same
elevation, first with an equal quantity of powder, that is to say with parts
in powder of that which the pellet of lead wayeth, and afterward with their
ordinary charges of powder.


Nicho. I have proved before in the first colloquie of this book, that the
pellet of iron at any elevation, will fly farther than a pellet of lead when
both of them are shot with the said equal quantity of powder. Therefore if
the thing at which you shoot be so far of that the pellet of lead cannot fly
thither, and that the pellet of iron may fly thither, every man is able to
judge the same though I say nothing. But if the mark at which you shoot,
shall be in a convenient distance for the one and the other shoot, and that the
same object is not of so hard a substance, as that it will bruise and beat the
pellet of lead flat, without doubt the pellet of lead by reason of his more
weight, will do a greater exploite, and pearce farther into that object than the
pellet of iron will do. The weight of a thing works more than the swiftnes
thereof.
For the weight of a thing works more than the swiftness thereof (as before
in the 16. Colloquie of the first book has been declared) but when the mark
at which you shoot is of so hard a substance, as that it will bruise and beat
the said pellet of lead flat, in that case it is doubtful whether the pellet
of iron will penetrate somewhat farther then the pellet of lead. But although
it be so, that the pellet of lead does not penetrate so far in as the pellet
of iron, yet by reason of his more weight the pellet of lead will shake the
thing which is strooken a great deal more then the pellet of iron will do. And
all this which has been spoken of the said pellets shot with the said equal
quantity of powder, will be more verified by shooting them with their ordinary
quantity of powder, that is to say with parts in powder of that which every
of those pellets does way by it self, I mean in such things which are not
apt by their hardness to batter and bruise, the pellet of lead will do a more
greater effect, and penetrate farther tha^ the pellet of iron, when every of
them is shot with the aforesaid equal quantity of powder. Likewise in those
things which by their hardness are apt to bruise and beat flat the pellet of
lead, although peradventure the pellet of iron may pearce somewhat farther in,
yet the pellet of lead will give a greater stroke and shake more the same object
than a pellet of iron will do.


Prior. This matter likes me well.


The 2. Corollary.
BY the reasons alleged in the precedent Colloquie, some men of a very good
judgment have been induced to think that a pellet of iron shot out of a
Caliuer, Harchibuse, or any such like handgun, will go through some armors or
iron cotes, which a pellet of lead shot out of the same or like piece cannot
do, and that an arrow well headed with hard steel being shot out of any such
handgun, will more easily pearce through armors, than any pellet of lead, or
iron, shot out of the same or like gunne can do: Wherefore I wish that the
truth herein might through private practice be known, and that the thing
which will be most hurtful to our enemies may in time of military service be
used.

The sixth Colloquie.
How a pellet of iron will do a greater effect, and pearce farther into an
object than a pellet of stone will do: and how part in powder of the weight of
a pellet of stone is enough to shoot the same pellet out of his piece.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior what think you, will a pellet of iron do a greater effect or pearce
more farther into an object at an equal distance than a pellet of stone when
both of them are shot out of one piece at one and the selfsame elevation,
first with an equal quantity of powder, that is to say with parts in powder
of that which the pellet of iron wayeth, and afterward with their ordinary
charge of powder?


Nich. In this question there is no doubt but that the pellet of iron will do a
more greater effect, and pearce farther into any kind of object than a pellet
of stone will do when the thing at which you shoot is not farther of than the
pellet of iron will fly, and within the reach of the pellet of stone, as it
has been also said of the pellet of lead, and of the pellet of iron in the
precedent Colloquie. Now if the pellet of iron will do a greater exploite or
pearce farther into the object than a pellet of stone will do, when both of
them are shot with an equal quantity of powder, it will do a more greater
exploit, and pearce more farther in, when both of them are shot with their
ordinary charge of powder, that is to say, when the pellet of iron is shot
with parts in powder of that which it wayeth, and the pellet of stone is shot
only with part in powder of that which it wayeth.


Prior. I have always thought it to be so as you have spoken


The 7 Colloquie.
Why a pellet shot out of a Piece did make in his going a great whisteling: and
why other pellettes being shot presently after out of the same Piece did not
make so great a whisteling in their going as the first pellet did.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. I being in the Rhodes at that time when the Turk did beseege the same,
went forth with many Pioners into a piece of ground to make Bulwarks there,
and it happened that the Turks shot a pellet at us which made such a
whisteling, as that we hearing the same a great way from us, did easily give
place unto it, and without any hurt avoided the same. After that the said
pellet was fallen down without doing any harm, every of us did return again
to labor, believing assuredly if the Turks should shoot again that we might
save our selves harmless by the warning and whisteling of the pellet. Now it
happened that the Turks did shoot again at us, and the pellet came toward us
so quietly, and with so little noise that none of us did hear or perceive the
same till it was upon us, and had killed four of those Pioners. Now tell me
what was the cause why that pellet and many other which were shot at us
afterward did fly so quietly, and made so soft a whisteling?


Nicholas. The cause thereof is grounded upon the reasons alleged in the 4.
Colloquie of the first book, that is to say, at the first shoot the pellet
found the air quiet, which did thereby more resist the flying of the pellet,
than the air being troubled or stirred could do, and that resistance was the
cause why the pellet did whistle, for the pellet did whistle by reason it did
with great difficulty penetrate the air which was settled and quiet. But at
the second shoot the pellet did not only find that air moved, broken, and
shaken by the pellet of the first shoot, but also going toward the place at
which the said pellet was shot, that is to say, going in the way of the pellet:
Whereupon the pellet finding no such resistance at the second shoot, as it did
at the first shoot, made not so loud a whisteling as it did before. And by the
same reasons the other pellettes which were shot at you presently after the two
first, did make a less whisteling.


Prior. Your reason does like me well.


The 8. Colloquie.
Where a light pellet will outflie a heavy pellet: and where a heavy pellet
will outflie a light pellet, and how the virtue, and strength of a moving
thing may be made frustrate through the weight of the same thing, and also
through the lightness of the same thing.

Interlocutors Bernard Segreo. Nicholas Tartaglia.
BErnard. Do you think that a heavy pellet will fly farther than a light
pellet when both of them are shot out of one piece at one elevation, and with
equal quantity of powder?


Nicholas. To this question I cannot make you a determinate answer, because
you do not distinguish the difference of their waights, and quantity of
powder. For it is well known that the weight of a thing, and likewise that the
lightness of the thing, does make frustrate the virtue and strength of a
moving thing. For the pellet which is shot may be so light, that it will fly
but a very little way from the mouth of the Piece. Also it may be so heavy,
and expelled with so small a quantity of powder, that the same inconvenience
will follow. Therefore it is needful for you to show the difference of their
weights, and the material substance of each pellet, and the quantity of
powder. For if the one pellet be of lead, and the other of iron, or of stone,
and each of them be shot with parts in powder of the weight which the pellet
of lead wayeth, it is manifest by the reasons alleged in the first and third
Colloquie of this book, that the pellet of iron or stone will outflie the
pellet of lead. But if one of those pellettes be of lead, or of iron, and the
other of light wood, or of such cork as is used to be put in pantables and
slippers, it is to be believed that the heavy pellet (I mean the pellet of
lead or iron) shot with his ordinary charge in powder, will fly much farther
than the light pellet, that is to say, than the pellet of light wood, or cork
which is shot with the same and like quantity of powder. And contrariwise he
which shall shoot a pellet of lead of a hundred pound weight in a Cannon of 9.
foot and in length, and likewise a pellet of wood as big or as thick as the
pellet of lead, and shall shoot the one and the other of those pellettes with a
pound or two of powder, it is to be thought that in this case the pellet of
wood will outflie the pellet of lead: Whereby we are taught to know that it is
needful to limite a proportion between the weight of the thing which is
shot, and the virtue of the moving thing.


Bernard. This discourse pleases me well for once to be satisfied in this doubt
I caused a pellet of metal to be made which was holowe within, and shot the
same, but it did not fly so much ground as an ordinary pellet of iron will
fly.


The 9. Colloquie.
How by knowing the diameter and weight of one pellet, you may tell the true
weight of any other pellet whose diameter is known.

Interlocutors L. Giulio Sauorgnano. Nicholas Tartaglia.
L. Giulio. There is a pellet whose diameter is four inches, The 23. Chapter
of my Appendix will teach you by knowing the diameter and weight of one pellet,
to tell the diameter of any other pellet whose wayght is known.
and it wayeth eight pound weight, now I ask of you what another pellet will
way whose diameter is six inches?


Nicholas. That pellet wayeth twenty seven pound weight.


L. Giulio. How is it possible that a pellet whose diameter is six inches
(which make foot) shall way no more than 27. pound weight? I think it should
way more than 60. pound weight.


Nicholas. You say true. For if the pellet be of iron, and in his diameter six
inches long of ordinary measure (which is foot) I do affirm without any
doubt that it will way about 60. pound weight.


L. Giulio. Why said you then that it would way only 27. pound weight?


Nicholas. I say if the pellet which is four inches high does way only eight
pound weight, that the pellet of six inches high will way 27. pound weight. But
if the pellet which is four inches high be of iron, it will way more than 18.
pound weight or thereabout: therefore I have answered your question according
as it was proposed.


L. Giulio. By what rule have you found out that the pellet of six inches in
height wayeth twenty seven pound weight?


Nicholas. I have found that out by this means. I did cube those four inches
(which is the diameter of the first pellet) and the cube thereof was 64.
Likewise I did cube the said six inches (which is the diameter of the second
pellet) and the cube of the same was 216. then by the rule of three I did say,
if sixty four way eight pound weight, what shall 216 way? Multiplying 216. by
8. the product was 1728. which number being divided by sixty four yielded in
the Quotient twenty seven. Therefore I conclude that the second pellet wayeth
twenty seven pound weight if the first pellet do way no more than eight pound
weight.


L. Giulio. I do well understand all this.


The 10. Colloquie.
How you may find out the diameter of a pellet which must be double to another
pellet whose diameter is known.

Interlocutors. Zanantonio. Nicholas Tartaglia.
ZAnantonio. There is a pellet whose diameter is five fingers, now I ask of
you by what means I may know the diameter of another pellet which is double to
the said pellet of five fingers in height?


Nicholas. Cube the diameter of five fingers in height, and the cube number
thereof will be 125. then multiply 125. by two, the product thereof will be
250. Finally extract the cube root of 250, and so the same cube root shall be
the diameter of the second pellet, the which cube root of 250. being extracted
in such sort as I have before declared, will be somewhat more than six
fingers, that is to say, there will remain 34/


Zanantonio. How must I order this number 34. which remains for to make of it
a convenient fraction to be added unto those six fingers.


Nicholas. I have not hitherto in any Author which has written of the
extraction of Cubike roots, read any good rule which will teach you to make a
true fraction after the Cubike root is extracted out of a number which is no
Cubike number, and the cause thereof is (except I be deceived) for that the
right way to extract a Cubike root was unknown unto them, I do not say
unknown, as though the said Authors knew not how to extract a Cubike root, or
that the rules which they have set down serve not for to extract a Cubike
root, but I will say that their rules are not so true and plain for that
purpose as they should be: for if they were true and plain to extract the
Cubike root, it would be thereby an easy matter to make a fraction of the
number remaining after the nighest Cubike root is extracted out of a number
not Cubike. By reading M. Records book called the whetstone of wit, you may
learn after the nighest cubike root is extracted out of a number not cubike,
to make a fraction of the number remaining



Zanantonio. Is not that the right way to extract a Cubike root which you have
alredie showed unto me?


Nicholas. That is the very true and right way for to extract a Cubike root.


Zanantonio. In so much as you have taught me to extract a Cubike root, I pray
you teach me also how I shall make after the nighest Cubike root is extracted
out of a number not Cubike, a fraction of the number remaining.


Nicholas. You must at this time have patience, but I promise you I will
shortly teach you, and all others that will learn, to do the same, and also
other things.


Zanantonio. If there be no other remedy I will have patience till that time.


The 2. Corollary.
YOu may also in this sort following double or treble a round pellet or any
other sphericall body. Draw a rightline of what length you will, and note
that line with A B then cross that line with another line which I would have
you to note with C D, and call the point in which the said lines do cross
one another E. This done open your compass to the length of the diameter of
that Sphere which you will double or treble, and with your compass so opened
mark upon the line E D, from E toward D, the length of that diameter. And
when you will treble the said Sphere, mark the length of that diameter thrice
upon the line E B from E toward B. But at this present you shall only double
the said Sphere, and therefore mark the length of the said diameter upon the
line E B from E toward B no more times tha^ twice as I have done in the points
F G of the figure following. Now divide the line E F into two equal parts in
the point H, and divide the line E H into two equal parts in the point L.
likewise divide the line L H into two equal parts in the point M. After this
plasing one foot of your compass in M, and the other foot of the same in G,
you must describe a semicircle which in the figure following is marked with
these letters N C G. Finally divide the said line C D into two equal parts in
the point O, and then plasing one foot of your compass opened to the
wideness of one of those parts last mentioned, in O, and the other foot of
your compass upon the line E A, draw the archeline N R C and by so doing you
may conclude, that the space N E, by the ninth proposition of the sixth book of
Euclide, is double to the space E D as it does appear by the figure following,



The 11. Colloquie.
How Vitruuius has erred in appointing a proportion for those stones which are
put into the hole of the Enguine called Balista.

Interlocutors Zanantonio. Nicholas Tartaglia.
ZAnantonio. By what rule or way does Vitruuius appoint a proportion for those
stones which are put into the hole of the Enguine called Balista?


Nicholas. I do now remember that the reason which you asked me in the
precedent Colloquie, is the very same which Vitruuius does write of in the
seventeenth Chapter of his tenth book, where he concludes, that if the stone
which is shot out of the Balista does way two pound weight, the hole at the
head of the Balista must be five fingers, and if such a stone does way four
pound weight, the said hole must be six fingers: the which determination is
like unto mine in the precedent Colloquie in respect of the whole number, that
is to say of six, and not of the fraction. For the fraction 34/ which remains
in that place tells us that the said hole must be somewhat more than six
fingers and.


Zanantonio. It may be that Vitruuius his book was ill translated.


Nicholas. It is so translated into Latin.


Zanantonio. But look I pray you whether his other determinations which follow
in that place be justly concluded.


Nicholas. Without doubt there is some error in them, but more in one than in
another. And I believe that this comes so to pass for that he was ignorant
how to make a convenient fraction of that which did remain when he had
extracted the Cubike root out of a number not Cubike, and for proof thereof
he concludes, that if a stone which is to be shot out of that Balista does way
six pound weight, that the hole at the head thereof must be seven fingers, and
for the fraction which remaynes more than the said 7. fingers, he puts down 9.
points in form like unto a circle.


Zanantonio. Who knows that the said 9. points do signify the convenient
fraction or part of a finger which that hole should be more than the said 7.
fingers, seeing we understand not the signification of the said 9 points which
is an ancient thing?


Nicholas. When it is so, it follows of necessity that in every place where
9. such points are put, they represent one and the same fraction, the which is
otherwise: for in the said places there happens fractions of diverse
denominations, as for example the hole at the end of the Balista must be 7.
fingers and about ^/^; part of a finger for to receive the said stone, that is
to say, the said hole would be somewhat less than 7. fingers, and 1/^; part
of a finger. Therefore in that place the said 9. points should signify
somewhat less tha^ 1/^ part of a finger. And for a stone of 10 pound in
weight, the said Vitruuius concludes, that the said hole of the Balista would
be 8. fingers high and more, which he does express by the said 9. points,
but I by working according to the order set down in the precedent Colloquie,
find that the said stone of 10. pounds in weight does ask a hole somewhat
more than 8. fingers and and hereupon this follows that the said 9. points
in that place do signify somewhat more than one half finger: and I found
before that they did signify less then part of a finger, whereby it is
manifest how the same 9. points have no certain signification, and that
Vitruuius was ignorant how to make a right fraction of that number which did
remain after he had extracted the cubike root out of a number not cubike. And
I say the same of all other Authors which I have read in that matter.


Zanantonio. I beleene that Vitruuius was not ignorant therein, and that this
fault is to be imputed unto the Translator.


Nicholas The same fault and a greater is in the most auncientest books which
are written in the Latin tongue, for in them it is said, that for a stone of
20. pound in weight the hole of the Balista must be 10. fingers, and the
fraction remaining is expressed by the said 9 points, but I find that the
said hole would be 10. fingers and somewhat more than of a finger, and so he
goes forwards committing errors in all his other determinations following.


Zanantonio. I marvel that the same man has erred in this matter.


The 12. Colloquie.
By the diameter and waights of one pellet of iron, the diameters and weight of
many other pellets of iron are found out. And how a pellet of lead is in
proportion to a pellet of iron of the same bigness as 30. is to 19. And how a
pellet of lead is in proportion to a like pellet of a marble stone as 4. is to
1. And how a pellet of iron is in proportion to a like pellet of marble stone
as 38. is to 15.

Interlocutors L. James of Achaia. Nicholas Tartaglia.
L. James, I pray you of courtesy show unto me in a picture how much in
length the diameter of a pellet waying so much as in Italian is called Rotulo
ought to be, and how much in length a pellet waying two Rotuli, ought to be in
the diameter, and how much in length a pellet of three Rotuli in weight ought
to be, and so of a pellet of four Rotuli, and of a pellet of five Rotuli and
of a pellet of six Rotuli, and so forth of other pellets waying so many
Rotuli as you will.


Nicholas. To fulfill your Lordships request it is requisite that you should
advertise me with great heed and good aduisement of the diameter and weight of
one pellet, that is to say, you must take a pellet the more bigger it is the
better it is, and way the same so curiously as you do silver, and measure
advisedly how much it is in the diameter, and afterward tell me the length of
that diameter, and how much the pellet wayeth and how much a Rotulo does way,
and how it is divided, that is to say, how many ounces or pounds it does
contain, Lezze is a city within the kingdom of Naples.
for there is no such kind of weight used in this place, and when you have so
done I will satisfy your Lordshippe therein.


L. James. The line here drawn is the diameter of an iron pellet which wayeth
nine Rotuli, and one Rotulo is a certain weight used in Lezze which contain
33. ounces and part of an ounce, that is to say, 100 ounces make 3 rotuli.


Nicholas. Most honorable Lord, I see by this line the diameter of a pellette
waying 9 Rotuli, and now by the same diameter I will show unto you the
diameters of many other pellettes. And for the satisfiing of others, I will
also reduce this weight of Rotuli to the weight of this place, that is to say,
to 33 ounces and for one Rotulo. And because some diameters are so long as that
they cannot be drawn at length in this leaf of paper, I will note only the
half of such diameters, so as you shall perceive the same. And if the diameter
which you have shown unto me be just, then the same diameters which I shall
Geometrically find out and show unto you will be just, but if there be any
error in that diameter which you have shown unto me, then the diameters which
I shall show unto you will be also erroneous. Likewise if your Rotulo be just
33 ounces and, and that each pound (by which I will now appointe the pellettes
to be wayed) does contain only 12 ounces, and that there is no difference
between the ounce of Lezze, and the ounce of Venice, then the said pellettes
may be wayed and tried with the weight of Venice, otherwise not.

This line hereunder drawn, is the diameter of a pellette waying 9 Rotuli,
which make 25 pounds of Vencie weight. line representing the diameter of a
pellet of iron 1



This line hereunder drawn is the diameter of a pellette waying 10 Rotuli,
which make 27 pounds, 9 ounces and of an ounce of Venice weight. line
representing the diameter of a pellet of iron 2



This line hereunder drawn is the diameter of a pellette waying 11 Rotuli,
which make 30 pounds 6 ounces and of an ounce of Venice weight. line
representing the diameter of a pellet of iron 3



This line hereunder drawn is the diameter of a pellette waying 12 Rotuli
which make 33 pounds and 4 ounces of Venice weight. line representing the
diameter of a pellet of iron 4



This line hereunder drawn is the semidiameter of a pellette waying 18 Rotuli
which make 50 pounds of Venice weight. line representing the diameter of a
pellet of iron 5



This line hereunder drawn is the semidiameter of a pellette waying 36 Rotuli,
which make 100 pounds of Venice weight. line representing the diameter of a
pellet of iron 6



This line hereunder drawn is the semidiameter of a pellette waying 45 Rotuli,
which make 125 pounds of Venice weight. line representing the diameter of a
pellet of iron 7



This line hereunder drawn is the semidiameter of a pellette waying 72 Rotuli,
which make 200 pounds of Venice weight. line representing the diameter of a
pellet of iron 8



This line hereunder drawn is the diameter of a pellette waying 8 Rotuli,
which make 22 pounds 2 ounces and of an ounce of Venice weight. line
representing the diameter of a pellet of iron 9



This line hereunder drawn is the diameter of a pellette waying 7 Rotuli,
which make 19 pounds 5 ounces and of an ounce of Venice weight. line
representing the diameter of a pellet of iron 10



This line hereunder drawn is the diameter of a pellette waying 6 Rotuli,
which make 16 pounds and 8 ounces of Venice weight. line representing the
diameter of a pellet of iron 11



This line hereunder drawn is the diameter of a pellette waying 5 Rotuli,
which make 13 pounds 10 ounces and of an ounce of Venice weight. line
representing the diameter of a pellet of iron 12



This line hereunder drawn is the diameter of a pellette waying 4 Rotuli,
which make 11 pounds one ounce and of an ounce of Venice weight. line
representing the diameter of a pellet of iron 13



This line hereunder drawn is the diameter of a pellette waying 3 Rotuli,
which make 8 pounds and 4 ounces of Venice weight. line representing the
diameter of a pellet of iron 14



This line hereunder drawn is the diameter of a pellette waying 2 Rotuli,
which make 5 pounds 6 ounces and of an ounce of Venice weight. line
representing the diameter of a pellet of iron 15



This line hereunder drawn is the diameter of a pellet waying 1 Rotulo, which
makes 2 pounds 9 ounces and of an ounce of Venice weight. line representing
the diameter of a pellet of iron 16



This line hereu^der drawn is the diameter of a pellet waying 1 pound of
Venice weight. line representing the diameter of a pellet of iron 17



This line hereunder drawn is the diameter of a pellette waying 1 Rotulo and
which make 4 pounds and 2 ounces of Venice weight. line representing the
diameter of a pellet of iron 18



Now this ought also to be known, that all the pellettes which are of one
form and bigness, are not precisely of one weight: For in one pellette the
metal may be very close and well cast, and in the metal of an other
pellette there may be through many causes diverse little holes whereof at this
present I would not have spoken, but that I thought it needful for me to
advertise you thereof to this end, if the diameters and waights of pellets do
not precisely agree with my determination of the same, that my said
determination should not therefore be ill spoken of. All things wrought of a
material sub^tance can not be so perfectly made, but that always some of them
may be made better and more perfecter.
For all things wrought of a material substance can not be so perfectly made
but that always some of them may be made better and more perfecter. Also your
Lordship must understand that if the diameter which you have showen unto me be
the diameter of a pellet of yro^ (as you say it is) all the diameters which I
have showen unto you must be intended to be the diameters of pellets of iron,
and not of pellets of lead. But if you will apply those diameters unto pellets
of lead; you must increase their weight by one half of the weight which a like
pellet of iron does way, that is to say, if the diameter be of a pellette of
iron, and that the same pellet wayeth 9 Rotuli, which make 25 pounds in weight,
then a pellet of lead cast in the like form, and of the same bigness will way
about once so much and a half, that is to say, 13 Rotuli and which make 37
pounds and pound weight: for the pellet of lead is in weight to the pellet of
iron of like form and of the fame bigness almost as it were in sesquialtera
proportione, and so we must understand of all other such pellets. And if a
pellet be made of a common stone according to the measure or length of any of
the aforesaid diameters, the said pellet of stone will way about the fourth
part of that weight which a like pellet of lead does way, that is to say, the
proportion in weight of that marble stone to a like pellet of lead, is as it
were subquadrupla proportio. And the proportion in weight of that marble stone
to the like pellet of iron is as 15 to 38. And so by the knowledge hereof you
may find out the weight of any other pellet whose diameter is known. And to
the end you may the better remember this matter, I have hereunder noted
distinctly their said proportions.

A pellet of lead is in proportion to a pellet of iron of the like form and
of the same bigness as 30 is to 19, that is to say, as it were almost in
sesquialtera proportione.

A pellet of lead is in proportion to a pellet of a marble stone of like form
and of the same bigness as 4 is to 1.

A pellet of iron is in proportion to a pellet of marble stone of like form
and of the same bigness as 38 is to 15.


The 3 Corollarie.
You may read in my first Corollary in the first book of N. Tartaglia his
Colloquies the difference between the subtle weight of Venice, and the Aver
de poize weight of England.
SOme persons by looking upon the diametral lines drawn in the precedent
colloquie, and reading in the same colloquie the pounds and ounces of Venice
weight, will not easily perceive the true length of the said diametral lines
according to seete and inches of assise of England, nor tell the true weight of
the pellets which have such diameters according to the weight which we call in
this realm aver de poize weight, Therefore for the better instruction of such
readers as are ignorant therein, I have in the table following reduced the
length of the diameters of all the iron pellets which are in the said colloquie
expressed by lines, into inches and parts of inches of the assise of England,
and the weight of the same pellets expressed in the said colloquy by the
weight of Lezze named rotuli, and by the subtle weight of Venice into the said
aver de poize weight, which contains 16 ounces in a pound, and 112 pounds in a
hundred weight, as you may more at large read thereof in my first Corollary in
the first book of N. Tartaglia his colloquies.

A Table showing the true measure of all the Diameters that are expressed by
lines in the precedent Colloquie according to the measure of Feet and inches
of Assise in England, and also the weight of iron pellets which have such
Diameters according to the weight of Lezze called Rotuli, and according to the
subtle weight of Venice, and also according to the Aver de poyze weight of
England.
The measure of all the Diameters that are in the precedent Colloquie expressed
by lines, according to inches and parts of inches of assise of England. The
weight (according to the weight of Lezze called Rotuli) of such iron pellettes
as have the same Diameters that are noted in this Table The weight (according
to the subtle weight of Venice) of such iron pellets as have the same
Diameters that are noted in this Table. The Aver de poize weight of such iron
pellets as have the same Diameters that are noted in this Table. Inches Parts
of inches Rotuli Pounds Ounces Hundred weight Pounds Ounces Dra^mes Scruples
Grains 4 356/413 9 25 0 0 16 8 5 2 9 1/^ 5 89/2065 10 27 9 0 18 6 1 0 7 29/^ 5
83/413 11 30 6 0 20 3 5 2 2 6/7 5 143/413 12 33 4 0 22 0 0 1 9 1/11 6 54/413 18
50 0 5 1 3 1 18 2/^ 7 301/413 36 100 0 10 2 7 0 16 4/11 8 132/413 45 125 0 26
11 5 0 5 5/^ 9 303/413 72 200 0 1 20 5 6 1 12 ^/11 4 280/413 8 22 2^ 0 14 11 0
0 9 ^9/^65 4 28/59 7 19 5^ 0 12 13 7 0 11 ^7/3^ 4 104/413 6 16 8 0 11 0 3 2 12
^/^ 4 0 5 13 10 0 9 3 0 0 0 3 293/413 4 11 1 0 7 5 5 0 15 5/^ 3 153/413 3 8 4 0
5 8 1 2 16 4/^ 2 390/413 2 5 6 0 3 10 6 1 17 57/99 2 238/413 1 2 9 0 1 13 3 0
18 26/3^ 1 271/413 0 1 0 0 0 10 4 2 2 42/55 2 278/413 1 4 2 0 2 12 0 2 18 2/^

The end of the second book of Colloquies.
The third book of Nicholas Tartaglia his Colloquies concerning mineral
Saltpeeter of diverse colors, Gunpowder of diverse sorts, and the cause why
some sorts of gunpowder are corned, and some sorts of gunpowder are not
corned,
translated out of Italian into English by CYPRIAN LVCAR Gentleman who has
also augmented the volume of the said Colloquies for the benefit of his
Readers with the contents of every Colloquie, and with the Corollaries that are
in the same volume
The first Colloquie.
How Saltpeeter was known unto men in old time: and how there is a mineral
kind of Saltpeeter and an artificial kind of Saltpeeter: and how there are
diverse sorts of mineral Saltpeeter: and how there is Saltpeeter of many
colors.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. Is it not a marvel that men in old time had no knowledge of
Saltpeeter which we in this age do so well know?


Nicholas. That simple has been known of a long time, for all the ancient
Physicians and natural Philosophers make mention thereof. Some of them as
namely Anicen calls Saltpeeter by the name of Baurache, for so in the Arabian
language it is named: and some others call Saltpeeter by the name of
Afronitrum, because of the Greeks it is so called: and others as Serapion,
Diascorides, The Pandecte is a volume of civil law called the Digestes but
here it signifies an hearball.

You may read of the medicinable virtue of niter in a discourse which T
Chaloner ge^tleman has published thereof, and was imprinted in London by
Geralde Dewes in Anno Dom. 1584.


and Plinnie call the same Niter, or spume of Niter, for in the latin tongue it
is so named. In the Pandecte it is affirmed that there are two kinds of Niter
or Saltpeeter, that is to say mineral and artificial. And it is said that of
the mineral kind there are four sorts, that is to say, Armenian, Affrican,
Roman, and Egyptian. Moreover Serapion says that the mines of Saltpeeter are
as the mines of Salt, for it is known that water runs out of the^, the which
water as Plinnie affirms congealeth and freeseth hard as it were a stone:
also it is found that in those mines there is a thing like unto a stone, which
is called stony Salt, also it is said that there is white Saltpeeter, read
Saltpeeter, and Saltpeeter of many other colors: and it is affirmed that there
are many sorts of Saltpeeter not only for the diversity of colors: but
because first there is found a very spungie kind thereof, that is to say full
of holes, and then there is found an other kind which is like unto a flat and
brickell plate, and of many other qualities which in a long time will not be
told one by one, and thereof one sort is more biting and more stronger than an
other. Of the artificial Saltpeeter I shall not need to speak, because at
this time it is better known than the herb Betonica.


Prior. I had thought that Saltpeeter had not been known till now of late in
this age.


The 2 Colloquie.
How men in old time did know that Saltpeeter would burn, and how they did
use to make therewith fireworkes: and how they did call Saltpeeter by diverse
names.

Interlocutors. L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. Tell me briefly whether men in old time having knowledge of natural
Saltpeeter and of artificial Saltpeeter (as before you have proved by the
authority of ancient Physicians) had also knowledge that the same would
kindle and burn so forceably as it does.


Nicholas. The said ancient Physicians and natural Philosophers do make
mention of the property which they found in it to be necessary for medicine,
and of nothing else concerning the same: But many other ancient Authors knew
that it would burn, The Snaile, Ram, and portable Towars are ingens of
war. The names by which Saltpeter was known in the old time.
for they did use to make certain fireworkes with the same for to burn the
Snaile, Ram, and portable Towars which were used at that time in the
assaults of Cities: and also to fire a Navy. But in the making of these
fireworkes some did call Saltpeter by the name of burning salt, some did call
the same stony salt, some did call the same salt practike, and others did call
the same properly Saltpeter.


Prior. Concerning this matter I would ask you an other doubt, but because my
head does now ache, I will defer to do it till to morrow in the evening.


The 3 Colloquie.
How men in the old time which knew that Saltpeter would kindle and burn, did
not know how to make gunpowder: and how gunpowder is made of Saltpeter,
Brimstone, and Cole, and not only of Saltpeter.

Interlocutors. L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. If men in the old time had knowledge that Saltpeter would kindle and
burn so forceably as it does, why should not they know also how to make
gunpowder being at this time a thing of great importance in the military Art.


Nicho. This is no good consequent to say, if men in the old time had
knowledge that Saltpeter would kindle and burn, that of necessity they
should also know how to make Gunpowder: Gunpowder is made of Saltpeter,
Brimstone, and Cole, and not only of Saltpeter.
for the powder is not made only of Saltpeter, but is compounded of three
things (as I believe your Lordship does know) that is to say of Saltpeter,
Brimstone, and Cole, and therefore it may be believed that men in the old time
which knew Saltpeter and the nature thereof were ignorant how to make gunpowder.


Prior. By reason it may be so.


The 4 Colloquie.
Why gunpowder is made of Saltpeter, Brimstone and Cole: what virtue or
particular office every of the said simples has by it self in the making of
gunpowder: and how it is more possible to make gunpowder without Cole and
Brimstone, than without Saltpeter, because all the virtue and force of the
powder depends upon pure Saltpeter, and not upon any other thing.

Interlocutors. L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. By what reason, or for what cause is gunpowder made of these three
things, that is to say of Saltpeter, Brimstone, and Cole, and not of any other
simples? and what virtue or particular office has every of the said three
materials or simples by it self in the making thereof: and what will any two
of those simples do without the third.


Nicholas. Gunpowder is made of the aforesaid three materials, because every of
them will help and supply every defect which is in any of the other two: for
the Brimstone is more apt to make the fire flame when it is touched therewith,
than any of the other two, the which flame of fire is much more apt to inflame
the Saltpeter than any other fire. And because the Saltpeter in burning is
resolved into a windy exhalation, the which is so mighty that suddenly it
will extinguishe the fllame which has taken hold of the Brimstone, and also
the flame which through the Brimstone has taken hold of the Saltpeter, and for
that the nature of Brimstone, and also the nature of Saltpeter is such that the
flame in them being extinguished there will remain no token of fire. Therefore
in mixing together only the Saltpeter and Brimstone which must be very well
pounded, and putting fire to the same the fire does kindle, and immediately
after it is extinguished by the reasons above alleged: that is to say, the
fire will not continue till all the matter thereof be consumed and burned, but
it will burn a while, and leave part of the said mixture untouched therewith.
Therefore to remedy this defect, a Cole finely pounded is added to the
Saltpeter and Brimstone, for the Cole is of that nature that it will kindle so
soon as it is touched with the flame of fire, and turns into an vnflaming
fire, the which fire without flame by how much it is more blown with any
wind, by so much the more sooner it kindles, and keeps a fire til all his
substance is turned into ashes, and therefore the mixture of the aforesaid three
materials being touched with fire, the Brimstone does immediately flame as
before is said, the which flame does not only set the Saltpeter on a flaming
fire, but also in that very instant sets the Cole on a fire without any flame,
the which fire by wind is not extinguished, but augmented, and therefore that
wind which the Saltpeter causes can not extinguish the said fire which is
without flame in the Cole, but as I have said augment it: for the Brimstone
being touched with a flaming fire, or with an vnflaming fire, cannot choose but
flame, the which flame as before has been said, makes also the Saltpeter to
flame. Therefore when the said three materials being very well pounded, and
mixed together are touched with fire, they will not leave burning till they be
wholly consumed, except there be a fault in some of the said 3. materials by
reason of moistness, or that the mixture of them is not made by a convenient
proportion. And therefore I conclude that the office of Brimstone in that
mixture is only to make a flaming fire, The office of Brimstone mixed with
Cole and Saltpeter.
and to bring the said fire unto the other two materials, and that the office
of the Cole is only to maintain the same vnflaming fire which the brimstone
brought unto it, The office of Cole mixed with Brimstone and Saltpeter.
and especially against that great wind which the Saltpeter causes. The
office of Saltpeter mixed with Cole and Brimstone.
But the office of the Saltpeter is only for to cause that so great exhalation
of wind. For in that wind consistes all the virtue, and property of the
powder: and that only is the same thing which drives so forceably each pellet.
All the virtue and power of gunpowder depends only upon Saltpeter, and the
Brimstone and Cole are mixed with Saltpeter for no other cause than to resolve
the Saltpeter into fire and wind.
And therefore I conclude, that all the virtue and power of the powder depends
only upon the Saltpeter, and that the two other simples or materials, that is
to say, the Brimstone and the Cole are put in for no other cause, than to
resolve the said Saltpeter into fire and wind: For whosoever makes gunpowder
only of Brimstone and Cole, and with a great quantity of the same will charge
a Piece of Artillery, and then put fire into the said powder, I say that
thereby the force of such powder will not be able to expel out of the said
Piece any little splint of wood, or straw. This co^mes so to pass because all
that virtue expulsive depends only upon pure Saltpeter, and not of any other
thing. Wherefore it is more possible to make powder for Artillery without Cole
and Brimstone than without Saltpeter. For we may believe that it is more
possible to devise other materials which shall do the office of Brimstone in
taking a flaming fire, and likewise which shall do the office of Cole in
maintaining the said vnflaming fire, than to find an other material which is
apt to cause so great and violent wind as that is which the Saltpeter does
cause.


Prior. It is to be believed that it is more possible to make good gunpowder
without Cole and Brimstone, than without Saltpeter, for all the virtue and
force of gunpowder (as before you have said) dependes upon pure Saltpeter, and
not upon any other thing. But forasmuch as it is now late we will make here and
end.


The 5. Colloquie.
By whom gunpowder and gunnes were first devised: how the invention of a thing
which at the first is homely and rude, will with time be made better: how the
proportion of things in making gunpowder has many times without reason been
changed: how gunpowder may be made by diverse ways: and how gunpowder ought to
be laid, and kept in dry places.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. Yesterday in the evening you declared the cause why gunpowder is made
of the aforesaid three materials, and the office which every of the said
materials, has in that mixture. Now I ask of you what he was which did
first invent gunpowder, and by what reason he has appointed that propottio^
and quantity of every of the said materials which is needful for the same
mixture?


Nicho. The common people report by the authority of Cornazano that gunnes and
gunpowder were devised by chance by a Duchman who was an Alchimist: But I
think that Archimedes the Siracusan, and most skilful Philosopher, and
Mathematician, was the first inuentor thereof: and he that wrote the Commentary
upon the first book of Vitruuius in the eight leaf is of mine opinion
therein: for as Vallurus declares in the tenth book of warfare, it is written
in diverse books that Archimedes devised a certain kind of enguine made of
iron, out of which he shot against an army upon the land with an incredible
sound or noise stones of great weight and bigness, the which thing gives us
to understand, that it was an enguine like unto a great gunne, for that it shot
very great pellets of stones (as not long ago but within this our age has been
usually done) and especially with such an incredible sound as in shooting of
gunnes does happen: the which sound (as I think) cannot be made in any other
sort of enguine, The first invention of a thing which is homely and rustike
will with time wax better because it is an easy thing to add unto the thing
devised.
except in one like unto a gunne, yet I believe in that time gunnes were made
of a more deformed fashion than now they be, for always the first invention is
homely, and rusticke and with time it waxes better, because it is an easy
thing to add unto the thing devised. And this may be applied to gunpowder,
that is to say, when it was devised by Archimedes, or by any other whom you
will, it is to be thought that it was not made at that time in such order and
proportion as it is now at this present: For I judge that from the same time
hitherto, the order to make gunpowder has been very many times altered: and
for prooffe thereof I have read in some Authors which are not very ancient
certain ways and orders to make gunpowder which differ much from the orders
and ways that have since that time been used.


Prior. Tell me briefly what proportion has been observed, and is now
observed?


Nicho. I have read in some of the most auncientest books that for to make
gunpowder a like quantity of every of the said three materials must be taken:
that is to say, so much of the one as of the other. And some other books
written since that time, wills them which will make gunpowder, to take three
parts of Saltpeter, two parts of Brimstone, and two parts of Cole. Other books
teaches us to take for the making of gunpowder ten pounds of Saltpeter, three
pounds of Brimstone, and three pounds of Cole. And in some other books we are
willed to take for the making of gunpowder twelve pounds of Saltpeter, three
pounds of Brimstone, and two pounds of Cole. In other books we are willed to
take nine parts of Saltpeter, two parts of Brimstone, and three parts of
Cole. And in other books written since that time we are willed for the making
of gunpowder for Handgunnes to take four parts of Saltpeter, one part of
Brimstone, and one part of Cole. Some other books teaches us for the making
of gross or course gunpowder, to take twenty parts of Saltpeter, three
parts of Brimstone, and ten parts of Cole. But for to make somewhat more
finer powder for the Handgunne, we are taught to take an hundred parts of
Saltpeter, ten parts of Brimstone, and thirty six parts of Cole. Some say
that for to make gross gunpowder we must take an hundred parts of Saltpeter,
twenty parts of Brimstone, and thirty seven parts of Cole. And for to make
fine gunpowder we must take nine parts of Saltpeter, three parts of
Brimstone, and six parts of the flower of Mirochea when we will prove to
make gunpowder without Cole. But I know not this herb called Mirochea, for I
did never read of any herb so called in the Pandecte, or in Auicenna, or in
any other Herball. Some other of a later time have said, that for to make
gross gunpowder we must take two parts of Saltpeter, one part of Brimstone,
and one part of Cole made of Willoe: and for to make gunpowder for an
Harchibuse that we must take three parts of Saltpeter, one part of Cole made
of young bows of Willoe, and one part of Brimstone: and for to make fine
gunpowder for a Handgunne, they say we must take of Saltpeter many times
refined 5 parts, of Brimstone 1 part, of Cole made of the twigs of a Filbert
tree, or of a young Nutte tree of one years grothe one part. Some others say
that for to make gross gunpowder we must take three parts of Saltpeter
refined, one part of Brimstone and two parts of Cole made of willoe: and for
to make gunpowder of a middle sort, they say that we must take ten parts of
Saltpeter refined, two parts of Brimstone, and three parts of Cole made of
willoe: And for to make fine gunpowder for an harchibuse, Note.
they say that we must take ten parts of Saltpeter refined, one part of
Brimstone and one part of Cole made of the clean twigges of a filbert tree.
And for to make better gunpowder, that is to say, for Handgunnes they will us
to take 27 parts of Saltpeter refined, of Brimstone three parts, of Cole made
of the clean twigges of a Filbert tree 4 parts. Some other say that for to
make more forceable and stronger gunpowder, we must take of Saltpeter refined
seven pounds, of Brimstone one pound, of Cole made of the clean twigges of a
Filbert tree one pound. Others for to make more better gunpowder will us to
take of Saltpeter refined eight parts, of Brimstone one part, of Cole made of
the young and clean twigges of a Filbert tree one part. Some for to make
gunpowder more stronger have willed us to add unto the said materials quick
silver: some will us to add thereunto aqua vitae. Some would have us to add
thereunto salt Armoniacke. Some bid us to put thereunto Campher: some will us
to make it with Coals made of the stalks of Coleworts. Others would have us to
make gunpowder with the Cole of Bulrushes, or with linen cloth burned. Some
have proved to make gunpowder of diverse colors without Cole: You may learn
to make gunpowder of diverse colors by the 16 chap. of mine Appendix.
that is to say, white, read, and gray, by putting into that mixture the
powder of some flowers of dried herbs for to serve in the place of Cole, and
to make the said colors. If I should describe these things one by one I might
have enough to say till to morrow in the morning: But to the intent you may see
the difference between those ways for the making of gunpowder, I will
describe them distinctly heereunder one by one as I have above recited them,
and also diverse other which for brevity sake have not been recited.

1 The making of Gunpowder after the most auncientest order. Saltpeter. 1 part.
Brimstone. 1 part. Cole. 1 part.


2 The making of gunpowder after a sort not so ancient. Saltpeter. 3 parts.
Brimstone. 2 parts. Cole. 2 parts.


3 The making of gunpowder after a sort not so ancient. Saltpeter. 10 parts.
Brimstone. 3 parts. Cole. 3 parts.


4 The making of gunpowder after a sort not so ancient. Saltpeter. 12 parts.
Brimstone. 3 parts. Cole. 3 parts.


5 The making of gunpowder after a sort not very ancient. Saltpeter. 9 parts.
Brimstone. 2 parts. Cole. 3 parts.


6 The making of gunpowder for handgunnes after a sort lately devised.
Saltpeter. 4 parts. Brimstone. 1 part. Cole. 1 part.


7 The making of gunpowder for great ordinance after a more newersort.
Saltpeter. 20 parts. Brimstone. 3 parts. Cole. 10 parts.


8 The making of gunpowder for great ordinance after a more later devise.
Saltpeter. 100 parts. Brimstone. 10 parts. Cole. 36 parts.


9 The making of gross gunpowder after a nwe order. Saltpeter. 100 parts.
Brimstone. 20 parts. Cole. 37 parts.


10 The making of fine gunpowder after no very old sort. Saltpeter. 9 parts.
Brimstone. 3 parts. Flowers of Mirochea. 6 parts.


11 The making of gross gunpowder after a more nwer sort. Saltpeter. 2 parts.
Brimstone. 1 part. Cole made of willoe sticks 1 part.


12 The making of gunpowder for harchibuses after a nwer sort. Saltpeter. 3
parts. Brimstone. 1 part. Cole made of young willoes. 1 part.


13 The making of fine gunpowder after a nwer sort. Saltpeter many times
refined. 5 parts. Brimstone. 1 part. Cole made of the twigges of a young
Filbert tree. 1 part. Note.



14 The making of gross gunpowder after an other sort. Saltpeter refined. 3
parts. Brimstone. 1 part. Cole made of willoe sticks. 2 parts.


15 The making of a middle sort of gunpowder after a nwe order. Note.
Saltpeter refined. 10 parts. Brimstone. 2 parts. Cole made of Willoes. 3
parts.


16 The making of gunpowder for harchibuses as in these days it is used to be
made. Note.
Saltpeter many times refined. 10 parts. Brimstone. 1 part. Cole made of a
young filbert tree which has his bark and rine thereon pilled of. 1 part.


17 The making of Gunpowder for handgunnes after a nwer sort. Saltpeter
refined. 27 parts. Brimstone. 3 parts. Cole made of young twigs of a filbert
tree which has the bark and rines thereon pilled of. 4 parts.


18 The making of a more stronger kind of gunpowder for handgunnes after a
nwer sort. Saltpeter refined. 7 parts. Brimstone. 1 part. Cole made of young
twigs of a filbert tree which has the bark and rines thereon pilled of. 1
part.


19 The making of a more finer and stronger sort of gunpowder for handgunnes.
Saltpeter many times refined. 6 parts. Brimstone. 1 part. Cole made of young
twigs of a filbert tree which has the bark and rines thereon pilled of. 1 part.


20 How gross gunpowder is now in our age made. Saltpeter. 4 parts.
Brimstone. 1 part. Cole made of a willoe tree. 1 part.


21 How gross gunpowder is now in our age made by an other way. Saltpeter. 20
parts. Brimstone. 4 parts. Cole made of a willoe tree. 5 parts.


22 How gunpowder is in our age made for handgunnes. Saltpeter refined dry. 48
parts. Brimstone cetrine. 7 parts. Cole made of Filbert or of dry hempen
stalks 8 parts.


23 How gunpowder is now in our age made for handgunnes. Saltpeter refined. 18
parts. Brimstone. 2 parts. Cole made of the wood of a filbert tree. 3 parts.


Note.
For to make well any of the aforesaid sorts of gunpowder you must understand
that the Saltpeter must be pure, Saltpeter for Gunpowder must be refined, pure,
clean, without grease, and strong.

Brimstone for Gunpowder must be clean, without dirt or any other filth, and
it must be very dry and purified, and the best coals for Gunpowder are made of
soft and young wood that has his bark and rine pilled of.


clean, and strong (the which thing is learned by practice to burn a little
thereof) likewise the Brimstone must be clean without dirt, or any other
filth, and the Coals ought not to be moist (as they will be by standing in a
dankish room) nor mixed with any dust or dirt. Finally you must understand
that such gunpowder ought to be very well beaten, and that the said 3 materials
ought also to be well incorporated together: this being done, that sort of
gu^powder will always do his effects according to his kind, so that it be
always kept dry, and therefore it would not be laid in any moist or dankish
place. And also there is another reason why it should be kept dry, Gunpowder
ought to be kept dry.
for moystnes causes the Saltpeter to dissolve into water, and it being
dissolved descends by little and little to the bottom of the vessel in which
it lies, and so the powder in the bottom of the vessel is more fuller of
Saltpeter than the powder lying in the uppermost part thereof.

By this your Lordship may perceive that by many and sundry ways the order or
proportion of quantity for the said three materials in the making of gunpowder
has been determined.


Prior. I marvel that the order to be used in the making of gunpowder has
been by so many ways altered, and I can not see by what reason men have been
moved to devise so many ways.


Nicholas. The first invention (although some say that it was found out by
chance) was as I think found out by natural reason speculatiuely, that is to
say, the same three materials being well beaten and mingled together would be
apt to make a strong and vnextinguishable fire till each matter should be
consumed: and there are good reasons why it should be so: but I think men were
instructed by experience to appoint a proportion of quantity for the said
materials: for in the first order they did work by proportion of equality,
taking so much of the one material as of the other, and although peradventure a
great quantity of such gunpowder might do some good effect, yet nevertheless
considering how that effect proceeded from the Saltpeter, an other way for the
making of gunpowder was devised by taking a greater quantity of Saltpeter,
than any of the other two materials, whereby it was perceived that this kind
of gunpowder was more stronger than the first sort of gunpowder: and so upon
such advised considerations, men have from time to time even unto these our
days changed the said order: But some of the aforesaid orders have been
appointed without any reason or judgment, and I think that they which
appointed the same orders were moved to ordain them upon no other reason,
than for that they would not do as others did, and that they might be thought
to know more therein than others. Some of them have without any reason
appointed nwe ways for the making of gu^powder by increasing the quantity of
Coals, and decreasing the quantity of Brimstone. Others increase the quantity
of Brimstone, and decrease the quantity of Coals: And others alter all the
said three materials by certain strange proportions to the intent that such
order as is so by them appointed may be thought to be devised by great
wisdom and skill.


Prior. There are some among those makers of gunpowder which can not say or do
more therein than others have said or done, but because they are ashamed to
show at any time that they have learned of others to make gunpowder, they
study to alter the way which was shown unto them.


Nicholas. It is so in deed.


Prior. You have made a long discourse upon this matter, therefore let us make
hear an end thereof.


The first Corollarie.
ALthough Tartaglia in the precedent Colloquie does affirm out of one Author
that gunnes were devised by Archimedes and not by a Duchman as Cornazano
declares yet this is to be noted that diverse men are therein of diverse minds
as it will appear by this which follows. Polidor: Virgil: Munster: and
Gilbert: Cognat: Nozeren: Invention of gunnes.
have written that gunnes were first devised in Anno Domini 1370. by a monk
whom Munster calls Bertholdus Sthwartz and Gilbert: Cognat: names Albertus
Magnus. M. John Dee our Country man in his Mathematical preface and discourse
of Menadrie says, that an Englishman was the first inuentor of gunnes though
his said invention in an other land and by other men was first executed: also
our English Chronicles do report that in An. Domini 1380. a monk did
unwillingly let fall a spark of fire upon Brimstone beaten to powder in a
mortar and covered with a tile stone, and that he seeing how the powder of
Brimstone touched with fire did suddenly flame, and lift up a great height the
said tile stone, Invention of gunpowder.
did thereupon devise a kind of gunpowder, and taught the Venetians to use the
same in iron pypes against the Genuates.

The 6. Colloquie.
When you shall make a comparison of strength between two equal quantities of
fine or gross gunpowder, you may with truth say, that the quantity of
gunpowder which has in it the greater part of Saltpeter is more stronger than
the other quantity of gunpowder which has in it the lesser part of Saltpeter:
Also when you shall compare one sort of cole whereof gunpowder may be made with
an other sort of Cole, you may affirm that by how much the cole is of a more
lighter and softer substance, by so much it is more apt to receive and
maintain fire with facility.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. Yesterday in the evening, you declared by how many ways within this
little while the order or proportion of quantity for the three materials in
making of gunpowder has been changed, now tell me which of those ways (as
well of the ways which are most ancient, as of the ways which were lately
devised) is judged to be best, that is to say, which of those sorts of
gunpowder is thought to be most perfect and of most strongest force?


Nich. Without doubt that powder is thought to be of most force and strength
which contains the greatest part of Saltpeter: I say the greatest part in
respect of all the three materials. As for example, in the first order before
noted where is taken of every material one part, the Saltpeter contains part
of the whole mixture, and the Brimstone and Coals contains parts of that
mixture. And in the second order following next after the same where is taken 3
parts of Saltpeter, 2 parts of Brimstone, and 2 parts of Cole, the Saltpeter
contains 3/7 parts of the whole mixture, and the Brimstone and Cole contain
parts of the same mixture: and because 3/7 are a more greater part than is,
therefore I say that the gunpowder made after the second order is more
forceable and stronger than the gunpowder made after the first order. Likewise
the gunpowder made after the third order will be more forceable and stronger
than the gunpowder made after the second order, for in the said third order the
Saltpeter contains 7/8 parts of the whole mixture, which 5/^ are a greater
part than 3/7: and in the fourth order the Saltpeter contains ^2/17 parts of
the whole mixture, and because 12/27 are a greater part than 5/^ therefore I
say that gunpowder made after the fourth order is more forceable than that
which is made after the third order. And in the fifth order the Saltpeter
contains 9/14 parts of the whole mixture, and because 9/14 are a lesser part
than 12/17 I say that gunpowder made after the fifth order is weaker and worse
than the gunpowder made after the fourth order. And in the sixth order the
Saltpeter contains parts of the whole mixture, and because 2/^ are a greater
part than 9/14 I say that gunpowder made after the sixth order is better and
more forceable than gunpowder made after the fifth order. And after this fashion
proceeding to examine all the other orders following (so that I be not ignorant
to work and know the broken numbers) I will easily know which of those
aforesaid orders is best or worst: that is to say, which sort of gunpowder is
most forceable and most strongest, and contrariwise, which of those sorts of
gu^powder is of least force and weakest. So by knowing how much Saltpeter is in
one of those sorts, you may make a comparison in goodness or badnes between one
quantity of gross gunpowder for great ordinance, and an other quantity of
such like gunpowder: and likewise between one quantity of fine gunpowder for
handgunnes, and an other quantity of such like gunpowder: for it would be too
long for me to set down an example for every of the aforesaid orders.


Prior. Yet I pray you show me which of all the said sorts of gunpowder is of
most force and strength.


Nicho. The gunpowder which is made after the 16 order is of more force and
strength than gu^powder made after any of the other sorts, I mean where there
is taken of Saltpeter many times refined ten parts, of Brimstone one part, of
Cole made of the young twigs of a filbert tree which has the bark and rines
thereon pilled of, one part. And this sort of gunpowder will be most strongest
for two causes: The first is, because the Saltpeter contains parts of that
powder, which are a greater part than is any of the parts in the other sorts
of gunpowder before noted: By how much cole of which Gunpowder is made, is of a
more lighter, and softer substance, by so much it is more apt to receive and
maintain fire with facility.
The second cause is, for that the Saltpeter is oftentimes refined, which
causes it to be more perfect: And also this sort of gunpowder is made of the
most perfectest Coals, for in effect by how much the Cole is of a more lighter
and softer substance, by so much it is more apt to receive and maintain fire
with facility: and therefore it is by so much the more perfect, more apt, and
more ready to do his office quickly.


Prior. Your opinion herein does like me well, and because it is now late I will
forbear until to morrow in the evening to ask an other doubt of you.


The 7 Colloquie.
How gunpowder can not be made of Saltpeter only and how in making of gunpowder
such a quantity of Brimstone and Cole must of necessity be added unto
Saltpeter as will be able to make each simple in that mixture to do his
expected office.

Interlocutors. L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. Yesterday in the evening you concluded that the 16 sort of powder is
more finer, more stronger, and of more force than any of the other aforesaid
sorts of gunpowder, because that 16 sort of gunpowder has in it a greater
quantity of Saltpeter than any of the other sorts has, the which quantity
is as much as parts of the whole mixture. Now I ask of you whether that
gunpowder would have been of more force and strength if it had been made with a
greater quantity of Saltpeter than parts of the whole mixture, and with a
lesser quantity of Brimstone and Cole than, I mean of such Coals as were put
into the said sixteenth sort of Gunpowder?


Nicholas. Without doubt it would be of more force and power, so that the said
small quantity of Brimstone and Cole be apt and able to execute their office
as they ought to do, that is to say to be on a fire quickly and to set the
Saltpeter on a fire, and to maintain fire in the same until it be wholly
resolved into fire. For if there should be so small a quantity of Brimstone
and Cole, as that thereby they should not be apt and able to execute their
said office, that composition would be unprofitable and almost to no
purpose: And therefore it is needful for you to be thereof well advised. For
if it were possible to make gunpowder only of pure and perfect Saltpeter,
without doubt that powder would be more stronger and of more power than any
other sort of gunpowder made with the same Saltpeter, Brimstone, and Cole. But
because the said Saltpeter of it self is not apt nor able to burn in a flame
quickly as Brimstone will do, nor maintain the flaming fire till all the
materials are burnt and consumed as the Cole will do, therefore it is
necessary to add Brimstone and Cole thereunto, and such a quantity thereof as
will make them apt and able to execute their said office according as before it
is said they should do.


Prior. I do understand you well, and you have spoken enough for this evening.


The 8. Colloquie.
How it is an vnnedfull thing to make more finer gunpowder for one kind of
gunne than for another.

Interlocutors L. Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta. Nicholas Tartaglia.
PRior. Yesterday in the evening you affirmed that the same gunpowder which
contains the greatest quantity of Saltpeter, and the least quantity of
Brimstone and Cole (so that the Brimstone and Cole be sufficient to execute
their office is better and of more power than any other kind of gunpowder made
in the same sort of Saltpeter, Brimstone, and Cole with a lesser quantity of
Saltpeter, and a greater quantity of brimstone and Cole: and although I
believe this to be true, yet I perceive that this rule is not general, for all
kind of Artillery, because all men know that handgunnes must be charged with
finer powder than harchibuses, and that harchibuses must be charged with finer
powder than Muskets, and Falconets, and that Faulconets must be charged with
better powder than is put into other great Ordinance: wherefore I ask of you
if it be needful to show how fine the powder ought to be made for every kind
of Piece.


Nich. I think it not needful to do so, although it be an use to do so: but
I am of this opinion, that this is a greater error than that which was told of
the Culuerings and Cannons in the 11 Colloquie of the first book.


Prior. What would you have to be done?


Nich. At this present I will not give an absolute and determinate answer to
this matter, but I will consider a little better thereof, and I hope to make you
perceive an error in this thing which brings with it other things of more
discommoditie, loss and cost than the Culuering does in respect of the
Cannons, whereof I gave you to understand in the said 11 Colloquie of the first
book.


Prior. Consider well thereof, for these things being a long time used will
importe much, and sometimes more than a man will think.


The 2 Corollarie.
VAnnuccio Biringuccio in the 10 book and 2 chapter of his Pyrotechnye
declares that gross gunpowder occupied in handgunnes or harchibuses will not
expel their pellets a quaites cast from their mouths, and that fine gunpowder
being shot out of great ordinance will break or mar them: but I suppose (as
Taertaglia in the precedent Colloquie does think) that we may put with good
aduisement so much of gross gunpowder into our handgunnes and harchibuses as
will cause their pellets to randge a long distance, and also that we may charge
great Pieces of Artillery with so small a quantity of fine gunpowder as will
be a just charge in powder for them, and in their discharges neither break or
hurt them: For a Piece which does require for his due and ordinary charge 8
ounces of that sort of gross gunpowder which is marked in the 16 chapter of
mine Appendix with the number of 1 may be justly charged, and without any harm
to the Piece discharged, with 7 ounces and a half of that sort of fine
Gunpowder which is in the said 16 Chapter of mine Appendix marked with the
number of 2, or if you will with 7 ounces and 1/9 of an ounce of that sort of
more finer Gunpowder which is in the said 16 Chapter of mine Appendix marked
with the number 3, as you may more at large read in Girolamo Cataneo his 5
book Dell'arte militare.

The 9. Colloquie.
How they are deceived which do think that gunpowder is corned for to be
thereby more forceable and more stronger. And how Art ought to follow nature
who makes all things that are made to some end.

Interlocutors Jerome Gunner. Nicholas Tartaglia.
Jerome What is the cause as you think why the makers of gunpowder do corn
fine powder for handguns and harchibuses, and that they do not corn the
gross powder which serves for great ordinance.


Nicho. I know well that you are not ignorant of the cause thereof, and that
you do ask this question of me to try what I can say thereunto.


Jerome. I ask this question of you to know the cause thereof, and not to try
what you can say thereunto, for I confess that I know not the cause thereof,
and I swear unto you as I am a true Christian man, I have asked this question
of many which make gunpowder, I say of such as have ordinary pencions of the
seignorie to make all sorts of gunpowder, ^he Arsenal (...) Venice is a ^ore
house for ^unition and ^rtillerie: and ^s William ^homas affir^eth in the
^istorie of Ita^, 600. worke^en are daily ^aged for ^erme of their ^ues to
work (...) the same ^orehouse.
and none of them could tell me any reason for the same except one which works
in the Arsenal of Venice, who answered me, that they corned the powder for to
make it to be more forceable, and more stronger, which reason did somewhat
content me, and yet not fully satisfied therewith, I come now unto you to pray
you for to show me the reason thereof and to hear whether or no you be of his
opinion.


Nicho. I can not believe this to be as you say, for I think it to be a thing
impossible that a work man should do any thing and not know to what end he
does it, and especially such a thing which he does continually. For Art ought
to follow Nature herein who makes all things which are made to some end: and
therefore I can not believe that he of the Arsenal who as you have said has a
pension of the seignorie for to make both fine and gross powder knows not to
what end gunpowder is corned for Handgunnes, and not for great ordinance,
seeing he does make such gunpower every day.


Jerome. I know it to be true that he could not give me any better reason for
that thing than that which I have told you.


Nich. Before I will tell you my opinion herein you shall go again unto him
and pray him of courtesy to tell you truly why he does corn such gunpowder.


Jerome. It is no need that I should go again unto him for I am sure he will
answer me (as he did before) that he does corn gunpowder for to make it more
forceable and more stronger.


Nicho. When he has so answered, say unto him, if you corn gunpowder to make
it have more force and strength, you shall do well to corn also the gross
gunpowder which serves for great ordinance for to make the same also to be of
more force and strength.


Jerome. I will do so, and return again unto you to day, or to morrow with
his answer.


The 10 Colloquie.
Why gunpowder which does serve for Handgunnes, Harchibuses, and other small
pieces of Artillery is corned: And why gunpowder which does serve for great
ordinance is not corned: And how many of them which do corn gunpowder, do
therein as they have seen others do, and as they have been taught, and care
not to know unto what end they do so.

Interlocutors. Jerome Gunner. Nicholas Tartaglia.
Jerome. After I parted from you yesterday, I went directly to the Arsenal, and
finding my friend there, I prayed him again if he knew any other reason than
the same which he had told me, that he would not hide it from me, and I
promised that for the same I would always account my self much bound unto
him: he swore unto me that he knew no other reason than that which he had
before told me: that is to say, they did corn gunpowder to augment the
virtue, force, and power of the same gunpowder. I answered him, why should it
not be good to corn also the gross gunpowder which serves for great
ordinance, that the same might likewise be made more forceable, and stronger
than it is? He replied, for fear that the great ordinance would break
therewith, and so I was resolved.


Nicholas. You should have answered him that upon such occasion they might
charge such Pieces with a less quantity of gunpowder than is their ordinary
charge and thereby save much gunpowder, or that they might put into the powder
a less quantity of Saltpeeter than they use to do.


Jerome. I was not so well advised as to make that answer, but it is to be
thought that all they which make gunpowder do according as they have seen
others do, or as they have been taught, and care not to search, or to know
the cause of the thing which they do, that is to say, to what end they do
it. And I will now speak of my self, how I have made both gross and fine
gunpowder, and that I did corn the fine powder which I made, and knew not to
what end I did corn it, but I did so because I had seen other Gunpowdermakers
to do the same.


Nicholas. I believe that it is so as you say.


Jerome. Tell me of courtesy your opinion herein.


Nicholas. Having promised to tell you mine opinion therein, it is reason that I
should perform my promise, therefore you shall understand that after you went
from me yesterday I considered of this matter, and in effect have found, Why
gun^der for ha^gunnes is ^ned, and gunpo^ (...) great Or^nance is corned.
that only necessity or commodity has caused men to learn the means to
corn gunpowder for handgunnes and harchibuses and not for great ordinance,
because the same corn powder will role or run much better than powder which
is not corned, as it may be perceived by a handful of corn and a handful of
meal, that is to say, a handful of corn and a handful of meal being laid
a part or a sunder upon a plain table declining somewhat on the one side,
the handful of corn will role down more easily upon the said table than
the handful of meal will do. For the meal will lie flat and more
immovable, but if it do role or run by reason of the slope lying of the
table, it will run altogether on a heap, and the corn will role there in
several parts.


Jerome. I do well understand you, but what profit comes by that kind of
roling or running?


Nicholas. You know when you carry a handgunne or a harchibuse to serve you in
your business, that it is necessary also to carry with you powder for to
charge your piece therewith so often as you will, and that such powder is
carried in a flaske, and for to charge with measure, that there is made upon
the flaske (as you know) a little pipe able to receive so much powder as is
convenient for the charge of that handgunne or harchibuse, and how there is an
enguine or spring in that little pipe to be shut within it when the said pipe
is full of powder to keep the powder within the same little pipe that it shall
not fall out of the same into the flaske.


Jerome. I knew all this before you told me of the same.


Nicholas. Although you know all the same better than I do, yet I will tell
you thereof that you may the better understand the matter following. And
therefore I conclude that if the gunpowder which is put into the said flaske be
not corned, it will be a hard thing to fill the said little pipe with the same.
For by turning up the flaske to fill the said pipe with such gunpowder as was
in the same flask, the said gunpowder will fall al together in a lump upon the
first entering place of that pipe, and choke or lock within the same all the
air which was in that empty pipe, and thereby that air will not suffer the
powder to enter therein, so as oftentimes the said pipe will be found to be
empty or not full of powder. But this thing will not so happen if the powder be
corned, for such corned powder will role more a part or seperately (as it has
been said of corn and meal) the which separation will make a way for the
air in the said pipe to go out of the same into the flaske, and to fill the
place which contained the powder that is gone into the said pipe, and by this
means most commonly the same pipe will be so full of powder as is convenient
for it to be. And for this cause men have been compelled to devise a means to
corn gunpowder for handgunnes and harchibuses, and not for great ordinance.
For (as you know) the powder is put into great ordinance and into the lowest
end of the concauitie thereof with a ladle, and therefore it is no matter
whether the powder will role or not role, and it will be superfluous to corn
powder for great ordinance, for as you know you use to carry a little flaske
full of the finest powder to put into the touchholes of handgunnes and
harchibuses, Touchpowder ought to be cor^ for handgunnes, harchibuses, and^
small pieces, but not for great ^dinance.
which powder if it be not made with very small corns, it neither will nor can
go into so little a hole by the reasons aforesaid. And therefore in this case
it is necessary to make the powder with very small corns. But it is otherwise
in great ordinance, for as I have been informed, you put powder into their
touch holes with your hand.


Jerome. It is even so as you say, and your reasons herein are very true. But I
never thought that gunpowder had been corned for such a cause, and for that I
do esteem of this which you have told me more than of 10 crowns, I do
heartily thank you for the same.


The end of the third Book of Colloquies.
blazon or coat of arms IN SPE
A TREATISE NAMED LVCAR APPENDIX, COLLECTED BY CYPRIAN LVCAR GENTLEMAN, OVT OF
DIVERSE GOOD AVTHORS IN DIVERSE LANGVAGES:
To show unto the Reader the properties, office, and duty of a Gunner, and to
teach him to make, and refine artificial Saltpeter: to sublime brimstone for
gunpowder, to make coals for gunpowder, to make gunpowder of diverse sorts and
of diverse colors, to make gunmatches, touchwood, and fire stones, to know the
weight and measure of any pellet, to make carriages, ladles, rammers, scourers,
and cartredges for any great piece of artillery, to know the proportioned
length, due thickness, and weight of every great piece of artillery, to know
what number of men, horses, or Oxen will draw any great piece of artillery, to
make platformes for great ordinance, to make gabbions of earth for the defense
of gunners in time of service, to charge every great piece of artillery with
his due charge in serpentine gunpowder, and also in corn gunpowder, to shoot
well at any mark within point blanke, to shoot well at any mark upon a hill,
or in a valley without point blanke, to shoot well at a mark in any dark
night, to mount mortar pieces to strike any appointed mark, to tell whether a
thing seen far of does stand still, come toward him, or go from him, to
make and use diverse Trunkes, and many sorts of fire works, to make mines, to
measure altitudes, longitudes, latitudes, and profundities, to draw the true
plat of any place, and to do other commendable things which not only in time
of war, but also in time of peace may to a good end be practiced.

Scientia non habet inimicum prater Ignorantem. depiction of the firing of a
piece of artillery

Anno domini. 1588

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DROIT ET LOYAL

The names of Authors out of whose Books the greatest part of this Treatise
named LVCAR APPENDIX, has been collected.
Italian Authors.
Nicholas Tartaglia. Vannuccio Biringuccio. Girolamo Ruscelli. Girolamo
Cataneo. Francesco Ferretti. Cosimo Bartoli. Gio: Francesco Peuerone. Abel
Fullone. Luigi Collado.
Latin Authors.
Daniel Santbech. Sebastian: Munsterus. Joan: Baptista Porta. Hieronymus
Cardanus. Joan: Iacobus Weckerus. Anton: Maria. Gemma Frisius, Hermannus
Witekindus. Thomas Finck. Joan: Demerlierius. Christian: Vrstisius.
English Authors.
M. Robert Record. Doctor of Phisike. M. William Cunningham Doctor of Phisike.
M. Leonarde Digges Gent. M. Thomas Digges Gent. M. Peter Withorne Gent.
The first Chapter. The properties, office, and duty of a Gunner.
A Gunner ought to be a sober, wakefull, lusty, hardy, patient, prudent, and
quick sprited man, he ought also to have a good eysight, a good judgment, and
perfect knowledge to select a convenient place in the day of service, to plant
his Ordinance where he may do most hurt unto the enemies, and be least anoyed
by them, and where his Ordinance may not be surprised by the enemy.

A Gunner ought to be skillful in Arithmeticke, and Geometry, to the end he
may be able by his knowledge in those arts to measure heights, depthes,
breadthes, and lengthes, and to draw the plat of any piece of ground, and to
make mines, countermines, artificial firewoorkes, rampiars, gabbions or
baskets of earth, and such like things which are used in time of war to be
made for offensive and defensive service.

A Gunner ought also to procure with all his power the friendship and love of
every person, and to be careful for his own safety, and for the preservation
of all those that shall be about him.

Also he ought to be no surfeter nor a great or sluggish sleeper, but he must
govern him self in all times as a wise, modest, sober, honest, and skillful
man ought to do, that through want of understanding he may never leese his
credit, nor an universal victory which oftentimes by the means of good
Gunners well managing their pieces is gotten.

Also a Gunner ought at the receite of his charge to make an Inuitorie of al
such things as shall be committed to his charge as well to render an account,
as to consider the want of such necessaries as to the Artillery apperteineth.

And when a Gunner shall be appointed to do an exployte, he ought to want
neither a fire stone, nor a tyndar box with a good steel, nor flintstones, nor
tindar, nor gunmatches, nor a flaske full of good touchpowder to kindle his
gunmatch and fire, when need shall require.

Also when a Gunner shall be appointed to do an exployte, he must lay his
powder twenty paces from his Pieces in such a place where no fire, water, or
hurt may come unto it through any person, or by reason of any wind, weather,
or otherwise, and keeping his powder always covered, he must not be unmindful
of this, that it is a very dangerous thing for a Gunner to trust many, because
a general hurt and death may thereuppon follow.

Also a Gunner that has a charge ought to have always in a readiness all
necessary things for his artillery: that is to say, wheels, axeltrees,
ladles, rammers, spunges, gunpowder, pellettes, tampions, chaineshot,
crossebarres, sustian, canuas, or paper for cartredges and firewoorkes, fourmes
for ladles and cartredges, needles, thread to sow and bind the cartredges and
firewoorkes, artificial torches, candles, lantornes, mattockes, shouels,
crows of iron, handaxes, leuers, enguines for the mounting and imbasing of
ordinance, ropes, little handbaskets, glwe or payst, horsecollers, horses or
oxen to draw his pieces, all manner of cartware, carters to guide and keep
his horses and oxen, and a sufficient number of Gunners and assistants to
charge, discharge, mount, imbase, wadde ram, make clean, scour, and cool
his pieces when they are over heated, and to have for this purpose vinegar and
fair cold water.

Also a Gunner ought always to have a gunners staff, or a partisant, or a
halbert sticking by him for a part of his defense, and he ought to put into the
cock of his Gunners staff a gunmatch, or wrappe about the lower end of his
staff, partisant and halbert a good gunmatch, which may give fire unto his
pieces of artillery when need shall require.

Also a Gunner ought not to sleep much at any time of the day, or night, when
he is appointed to serve in the field, or in any other place, nor to eat or
drink in any other room than where his pieces of artillery are planted,
because in his absence the same pieces may be choked, poisoned, and harmed by
diverse ways; and that he may many times upon a sudden have good occasion to
discharge all his pieces,

And it is requisite for a Gunner to fix upon the tail of the carriage of
his piece a chest to hold his necessary things, and to defend him from small
shot when he shall serve in a place where no baskets of earth are set to defend
him.

Also a Gunner ought to have a ruler and a pair of compasses to measure the
height and length of every piece his concauitie, and the length, depth, and
wideness of every ladle, whereby he may know whether his piece is laden with
too much powder, or is charged with a less quantity of powder than it ought
to have.

A Gunner ought to know the names, length, and weight of all manner of pieces,
and be able to tell readily how much gunpowder is a due charge for every
piece, how many times in one day every piece may without harm be shot of, how
many Gunners and assistants or laborers ought to attend upon every piece, how
many horses, or oxen will draw every piece, what sort of pieces do commonly
carry pellettes of lead, what sort of pieces do shoot Pellettes of iron,
what sort of pieces are usually laden with pellettes of stone, and what sort
of pieces have chambers, and how every kind of piece should be charged with
his powder, tampion, pellet, and wadde.

Also a Gunner must be skillful to make Saltpeeter, to refine and sublime
Saltpeeter, to make diverse sorts of gunpowder, to make coals for gunpowder, to
purify brimstone for Saltpeeter, to make cartredges, to amend and make good
again every sort of gunpowder which by any manner of means has lost his
virtue and force, and tell how much Saltpeter ought to be put into the said
vnforceable gunpowder to make it so strong as it was before, and how many times
the saltpeeter which shall be put into the said gunpowder ought to be refined.

Also a Gunner in time of service ought to forbid with meek and courteous
speeches all manner of persons other than his appointed assistantes, to come
near his pieces, to the end that none of his pieces may be choked, poisoned,
or hurt, and he ought not for any prayers or reward to lend any piece of his
gunmatch to another person, because it may be very hurtful to him in time of
service to lack the same.

Also a Gunner before he goes to do any exployte ought to consider of all
things which shall be needeful for him to have, and how far the place is to
which he must go, and by what ways he shall pass with his artillery, that
he may carry with him all things needful for his artillery and for him
self.

Also a Gunner ought not at any time to beat open the heads of his gunpowder
barrels with any iron, or stone, but with a wooden mallet which will never
fire the gunpowder as a piece of iron and a stone may do.

Also if a Gunner will charge his piece with Cartredges, he ought to set them
upright in a tubbe or some other wooden vessel, which (though it shall seem
to stand in a place out of danger for fire) should never be uncovered for any
longer time than while the same cartredges are taken out one by one to charge
the piece.

Also a Gunner ought to wash his piece within before he does first charge it,
and (after he has dried it well again by the help of 2 or 3 clean and dry
spunges, and made it very clean within) he ought to look by such means as are
declared in the 43. Chapter of this Appendix whether or no any honey combs,
flawes, or crackes are in the said piece.

Also a Gunner before he does shoot ought to consider and try whether the
trunnions in his piece are set in their due places, and finding them by the
doctrine taught in the 41. Chapter of this Appendix to be wrong set, prevent
the harm which may come thereby.

Also a Gunner before he does shoot ought to consider whether his piece is
charged with strong and dry gunpowder, or with weak and moist gunpowder, to
the end he may always lade his piece according to the quality of the
gunpowder: For as strong and dry gunpowder may drive the shot farther than the
mark, so weak and moist gunpowder may cause the piece to shoot short of the
mark.

Also every Gunner before he does shoot must consider that his piece ought to
have a due charge in gunpowder: For as when a gunner does give unto a piece
more than his duty, he ouershootes the mark, and puts the piece after it is
made hot in danger of breaking, so when he geues unto a piece less than his
duty he shootes short of the mark.

Also every Gunner must charge his piece with a fit pellet: For as the pellet
which is more bigger or more higher than it should be puts the piece in
danger of breaking, so the pellet which is loar or smauler than it should be,
will fall short of the mark, and never working his expected effect, swerve
sometimes in the deliverance out of the piece and strike wide of the mark.

Also every Gunner before he shootes ought to remember that a long wadde of
hay, straw, toe, or of untwisted ropes lying behind a pellet within any
piece will cause the pellet to strike wide of the mark.

Also every Gunner ought to know that a piece of artillery which does not lie
fast upon his carriage will shoot awry from the mark.

Also every Gunner ought to know that if the carriage of his piece does not lie
right, the piece will shoot awry from the mark.

Also every Gunner ought to know that if one wheel in the carriage of a piece
be more greased than the other wheel in the same carriage, the wheel which is
more greased will turn faster about than the other wheel, and cause the Piece
lying upon the said carryage to shoot awry from the mark.

Also every Gunner before he shootes ought to remember that if one wheel shall
recoyle faster than the other wheel, or if any thing shall let one wheel
more than the other, the Piece will shoot awrie from the mark.

Also every Gu^ner before he shootes must advisedly look whether or no both
wheels of every carriage are of equal height: For when one wheel of a
carriage is higher than the other wheel of the same carriage, the higher
wheel turns more faster than the other wheel which is more lower, and
causes the Piece laid upon such a carriage to shoot awrie from the mark.

Also every Gunner before he shootes must advisedly look whether or no both
ends of the axeltree in every carriage are of equal bigness: For when one
end of the axeltree in a carriage is greater than the other end, the Piece
that lies upon such a carriage will shoot awry by reason the wheel which
turns upon the lesser end of the axeltree runs about more easily than
the other wheel which turns upon the greater end of the axeltree.

Also every Gunner before he shootes must advisedly look whether or no the
round holes which are made in the wheels of every carriage for the ends of
an axeltree to lie in, are of equal bigness: For if the hole in the naue of
one wheel of a carriage shall be greater or wider than the hole in the naue of
the other wheel of the same carriage, the piece that lies upon a carriage
with such wheels will shoot awry, because the wheel which has in his naue
the greater hole, runs about upon the end of his axeltree more easily than
the other wheel which has in his naue the lesser hole.

Also every Gunner before he shootes must advisedly look whether or no the
holes which are made in every carriage for the trunnions of his piece to lie
in, are fit for the same trunnions, and of equal bigness: For when one
trunnion hole upon a carriage is wide, and the other trunnion hole upon the
same carriage is narrow, then the piece that has his trunnions laid in two
such unfit and unequal holes will shoot awry from the mark.

Also every Gunner before he shootes must take away all the stones which shall
lie under the tail of any carriage: For when a stone shall happen to lie under
the tail of a carriage, then the piece that lies upon the same carriage will
in the deliverance of his shot turn aside, and shoot awry from the mark.

Also every Gunner before he shootes must take away all the stones which shall
lie under the wheels of a carriage: For when a stone lies under any one
wheel of a carriage, then the piece which lies upon the same carriage will
shoot awry from the mark.

Also every Gunner before he does first charge his piece ought to try whether
or no his piece is rightly bored in the midst of the metal: For a piece
which is not rightly bored will shoot always wide from the mark, except the
Gunner to remedy that fault do use such skill as is taught in the 10.
Colloquie of Nich. Tartaglia, his first book of Colloquies.

Also every Gunner ought to remember before he shootes that if both or one of
the leuel sights upon the piece shall not be precisely set in the midst of the
outside of the piece, the said piece will drive his pellet wide from the mark.

Also every Gunner before he shootes must consider of the mark at which he will
shoot, I mean every Gunner must look advisedly whether the mark at which he
will shoot be upon a plain ground, or upon the top of a hill, or down in
a valley, or farther than his piece will shoot, that he may plant, mount, and
imbase his piece to strike the mark lying within the reach of his piece.

Also every Gunner before he shootes ought to consider whether the air be
thin and clear, or close and thick, because a pellet will pass more easily
through a thin and clear air, than through a close and thick air.

Also every Gunner before he shootes ought to try whether or no the ground
upon which the piece does lie in his carriage be plain and level: For as
when the ground is lower at the tail of the piece than it is in the place
where the wheels stand, the piece recoyling unto the lower ground will
ouershoote the mark, because in the deliverance of the shot the breech goes
downwards, and the mouth upwards, so when the ground is higher at the tail
of the piece than it is before in the place where the wheels stand, the piece
may shoot short of the mark, although it is not so apt to recoyle against a
hill as it will do down a hill.

Also every Gunner ought to weather the mark according to the hardness of the
wind, and the distance unto the mark: For as the wind being with him will
cause a pellet to fly beyond the mark according to the hardness thereof,
and the wind being against him will cause a pellet to fall short of the mark
according to the hardness thereof, so a side wind drives a pellet wide from
the mark.

Also every Gunner before he shootes ought to drive the wadde and shot home
unto the gunpowder, for when the wadde and shot do lie short from the
gunpowder, the Piece breaks many times in the vacant or empty place
between the powder and the shot.

Also every Gunner before he shootes must truly disparte his Piece, or give
allowance for the disparte, and when he dispartes a Piece he ought to set the
said dispart in the midst and uppermost part of metal over the mouth of the
Piece.

Also every Gunner ought to know that as it is a wholesome thing for him to
drink and eat a little meat before he does discharge any Piece of
artillery, because the fume of saltpeter and brimstone will otherwise be
hurtful to his brains, so it is very unwholesome for him to shoot in any
Piece of ordinance while his stomach is full.

Also a Gunner which shall serve upon the sea in any Galleon, or other Ship,
or in any great or small Galley, ought before his going to sea to consider well
of the number of trunkes, pykes, darts, earthen pottes half baked, copper
cauldrons, morters, pestels, and searces that will be needful for him in his
sea service, and also of the measure of several oils, and quantity of
gummes, camphire, and all other material and needful things for firewoorkes.

Also a Gunner which shall serve upon the sea in any Ship, ought before his
going to sea to write with good aduisement in a paper book for the owner or
Captain of the vessel in which he shall serve, the number and price of
trunkes, pykes, darts, arrows, and earthen pottes half baked, that will be
needful upon the sea for offensive and defensive service, and also the
number and price of iron hoopes, and the length and price of iron wiers or
strong cords that will be sufficient to bind fast all the said trunkes, pykes,
darts, arrows, and pottes of fire.

Also every Gunner which shall serve upon the sea in any ship ought before
his going to sea to write in his memorial or paper book for the owner or
Captain of the vessel in which he shall serve, the weight and price of every
simple and material thing that is requisite to make firewoorkes, and rokettes
for many several fightes, and diverse triumphs upon the Sea, and also the
number and price of the cartredges which he means to make for his ordinance,
and the quantity and price of fustian, canuas, or paper that will justly serve
without waste to make the same cartredges,

Also every Gunner which shall serve upon the sea etc. ought to write in his
memorial etc. the number, sorts, and prises of great and small needles, the
quantity and price of packthreede, and other smaller threede that will be
needeful to sow the bags of his cartredges, and to bind fast his fireworkes
and rochets in their cotes or couers.

Also every Gunner which shall serve upon the sea etc. ought to write in his
said memorial etc. the weight and price of so much gunpowder, and of so many
fit pellettes as will be enough for to charge all the pieces in his vessel
forty times over, and also the price of ten barrels of more gunpowder, which
he ought to have for the only making of fireworkes.

Also every Gunner which shall serve upon the sea etc. ought to write in his
said memorial etc. the quantity and price of saltpeeter, brimstone, and
cole, which will be requisite for him to have in store to amend, and also to
nwe make upon the sea gunpowder, if his provision thereof should happen by any
means to decay or consume. For the want of any one of these things cannot
without a marvelous chance be supplied upon the sea.

Also every Gunner which shall serve upon the sea etc. must with discreation
write in his memorial etc. the number and sorts of faultlesse pieces that
will be needful for his vessel and the places of the ship or vessel where
they ought to lie, and appoint in his said memorial three chambers for every
chamber piece.

Also a Gunner serving upon the sea ought always when he shall be forced by
need to nwe make or amend his gunpowder, or to make any kind of firewoorke,
to roe in a shipboate to land, or otherwise into the sea far from his
ship, and to work for the safety of his ship under a cover or tent in
his boat, or upon the land in an old desolate house standing alone from other
houses.

The 2. Chapter. How artificial Saltpeeter which is a mixture of many
substances has (as some suppose) greater virtue, and more strength than
mynerall saltpeeter: how artificial saltpeeter is made of fine and small earth
by two sundry ways: how the earth which makes artificial saltpeeter is
dug out of sellers, vaultes, stables, oxstalles, got or sheepecotes, pigen
houses, or out of the loermost rooms in other houses: how black earth which
will sparkle in a fire, or yield a sharp, biting, and mean salt taste does
make good saltpeeter: how for the making of artificial saltpeeter you must
provide a sufficient number of cauldrons, furnaces, barrelles, half tubbes,
and a convenient quantity of wood, whitelime, ashes of oak, earth, and water,
and how the said cauldrons, furnaces, barrels, and half tubbes must be placed.
Artificial saltpeeter is a mixture of many substances gotten with fire and
water out of dry and durtie ground, or of the flower that grows out of
walls in sellers, or out of that ground which is found loose within vaultes,
tombs, or desolate caves, where rain cannot come in. And (as some think)
artificial saltpeeter has greater virtue and more strength than mynerall
saltpeeter. But the best artificial saltpeeter is made of beasts dung
converted into earth in stables, or in dunghilles of a long time not used, and
above all other of the same dung which comes of gotes and hogs: And it is
requisite what dung so ever it be, that by continuance of time it be well
resolved into earth, and all the humiditie thereof being dried, that the same
earth should be as it were a subtle and fine powder. When you shall have
occasion to make of this dung or earth a great quantity of artificial
saltpeeter, The first way to make artificial Saltpeter of earth.
it will be necessary for you to provide many cauldrons, furnaces, barrelles
or tubbes, and likewise wood, white lime, ashes of old oak, and a sufficient
quantity of the said earth, and a great barn or other walled house near to
the water, that you may have enough thereof, and of every other material thing.
But first the furnaces must be made for the cauldrons, and they must be placed
thereon as they are which Diers use: Then there must be prepared ioystes so
long as the house, and so broad that upon them commodiously above ground may
stand buttes with their heads knocked out, square chestes, barrels or tubbes to
the number of 50. 60. or 100. according to the cauldrons, and the capacity of
the place, and between every two of those vessels, there must be set a half
tubbe to receive the water that shall run out: Or there would be placed a
gutter or canel of wood along under the holes of the vessels which are set
above the ground, so that it may convey all the water which comes from them
into one or two great tubbes sufficient to hold all the water that shall be
full of the substance of Saltpeeter. And in the buttes which have their heads
knocked out, barrels or tubbes: I say in the bottom of every of them, a hole
must be made on the one side with an Augar, or else three or four little holes
may be made with a good big perser, and upon them you may lay a little thin
linen cloth, or else the sweeping end of a broom, or some straw for to
keep the yerth up, and to strain the water that shall be put amongst the same
yerth which is to be wrought when it is tasted with the mouth, so that it be
certain that it contains Saltpeeter. Then there must be made in the midst
of the house where the said Saltpeeter is to be wrought a great hill, next unto
which must be made another hill half so big which must be made with two parts
of unslaked lime, and three parts of oak ashes, or other ashes which in taste
are very strong and sharp, and then the one hill must be well mingled with the
other, and with the same composition the tubbes must be filled which are set
aloft upon the ioystes within a span of the mouth, or else (minding not to
mingle with the yerth the ashes and the lime together) you may put first a span
thickness of yerth in the bottom of the tubbe, and then three fingers
thickness of the aforesaid lime, and ashes, and afterward upon the same
another span in thickness of yerth, and on that likewise another three or
four fingers thickness of lime and ashes: and so putting into the said tubbes
one rue of one thing, and another rue of another thing, you ought to fill all
the buttes, and tubbes, or other vessels that you have placed (even as above I
have said) within a span of the mouths of them, and the rest which is then
left empty, you must fill with water, the which running through all the yerth
by a little and a little, must drop into the tubbes that stand under to
receive it, or into a gutter, or canel, or where you list, so that it be
conveyed into one, two, or three sundry tubbes, or where you think good: and
so you must well and diligently gather all the water which was powered upon the
yerth after it has passed through the holes in the bottom of the tubbes in
such wise that it may bring with it all the substance and virtue of the
saltpeeter which was in the said earth, whereof by putting some of it on your
tongue you may taste, and finding it biting and very salt, To know good
Saltpeter water.
it is a token that it is good, and that you have done well: if not, power it
again upon the very same earth, or upon some other nwe earth. But finding
the first earth full of substance so much as suffices, you may again power
upon it more water to wash better the remnant of the earth: albeit this second
water would be saved in another vessel, and after this the earth may likewise
be washed the third time, to the intent that all the substance thereof may be
perfectly gotten. But this second, nor the third, ought not to be mingled
with the first, if it happen not to come of the very same taste, the which I
believe that it will not: but it must be put by it self in other vessels for
that it is good to power upon the change of the next earth, and so you may
proceed gathering a good quantity of such water, taking heed nevertheless
that it be full of the substance of saltpeeter: the which if it seem unto you
not of the same perfection as you would have it, you may power it again upon
the very same earth, or upon other nwe, til such time as it shall satisfy you,
and that you shall know it to be full of the substance of saltpeeter. Besides
this there must be made a furnace with one or two cauldrons of brass wauled
thereon, which must be so great as those which the Dyers use, and these
cauldro^s must then be filled with the said saltpeter water: the which (as
already I have told) ought to be so full of substance as may be, so that it have
about the two third parts, and make it fair and softly to boil so much till
it come to one third part or there aboutes, and after take it of, and put it
to settle in a great vessel covered, which must be well bound about with hoopes
of iron, and sure, and close in the joining thereof, to the intent it spill
not: And thus when the same water is settled, clear, and from the earth and
gross matter which in it remained diligently purged, it must be taken out, and
boiled again of nwe in the same cauldron, or in some other. And forasmuch as
at every time that it boyleth if it be not taken heed of, it turns into
skumme, and sometimes swells so much that by running over, it spilleth and
carries away therewith much of the good, the which minding to remedy, you must
take three parts of Oak ashes, and one of Lime, and moreover in every hundred
pound weight of water, there must be dissolved four pounds of Roch Alume,
and when the Cauldron boyleth take of the said water with a pot, and power into
it once or twice, specially when you see the Saltpeter water rise in skumme,
and so doing within a little while you shall see it alay, and be both clear,
fair, an of an azure color: and it must be boiled so long till all the thin
watrinesse be vapoured away, and the substance of the Saltpeter thickened, so
that it being taken out, and put in chestes, or tubbes, and cooled, may
congeale: the which is best done when the water is brought to a small
quantity, taking it out and putting it into a less Cauldron wherein it will
sooner congeale, the which water being tasted, and seen to be ready to
congeale, you may take it out, and put it into vessels of wood, or of earth
that are rough within, with certain sticks of wood to congeale, and so you
shall let it cool, and rest three or four days so as it may drop, and be
strained through some little hole in the bottom of the vessel: and all the
water which is not then congealed, you must take out, and save for to sees
again: and the Saltpeter which is in any quantity congealed, you shall find
to be according to the virtue that was in the water, or in the earth: but the
cleerenesse and fairness thereof will come of the master virtue of the water
which is put into it in the boiling, which has strength to purge it, and to
make it come as it were refined in the first seething. Now this being taken
from the sides of the vessel where it congealed, and in the water thereof
washed, you must lay it upon a Table to dry thoroughly, and the same seeming
unto you to have need, or nevertheless minding to have it above the common
use for some purpose more refined, and purified from all manner of earthie
grossness, fatness, and saltness, (which for to make exceeding fine powder
or aquam fortem, is most requisite so to be) I counsel you to refine and
purify after one of the ways taught in this Appendix.

Saltpeter may also be made of earth in this sort following, The second way to
make artificial Saltpeter of earth.
dig such earth out of floores in sellers, vaultes, stables, oxestaules, got
or sheep coats, pigen houses, or out of the loermost rooms in other houses
as is black, or that thrown into a fire will sparkle, or that is of a sharp,
biting, and mean salt taste. But dig not for any such earth more deeper than
the length of 3 inches under the face and uppermost part of the floor or
ground out of which it shall be taken, except you shall see in the earth under
that depth such white things or veins as the Italian mameth Fiocchi. To know
whether or no any Saltpeter is in earth do this, make a wooden pin of a foot
in length, and with a mallet drive it up to the head into the ground where you
mean to seek for Saltpeter: Then taking the pin out of his hole, thrust an
iron nail made read hot with fire, and equal in length and bigness to the
said pin, into the said hole. After this cover the same hole quickly and
suffer the nail to stand in it til it shall be through cold: This done, pull the
nail out of the said hole, and note well the culler of the nail. For as when
the nail so taken out of the hole shall have a pale yelloe culler you ought to
think that the earth in that place will yield plenty of Saltpeter, so when the
nail taken out of the hole shall have the natural culler of iron, you must
know that no Saltpeter will be made of the earth in that place.
Having gotten a sufficient quantity of Saltpeter earth made fine and small,
and a competent number of half buttes, hogsheaddes, or barrels that have one
hole made with an Augar in the bottom of every of them you must first cover
every of the said holes on the inside, with an earthen porenger, and stop the
said holes on the outside of the vessels with tappes and spiggets. This done,
fill up the said half buttes, hogsheads, or barrels with the said earth within
a spanne of their brimmes, and remember that although the earth about the sides
of every vessel must be rammed down, yet that part of earth which lies in
the midst of the vessel must lie loose, and vnpressed. After this power a
bucket or pale of clean water by little and litte upon the said earth: When
the earth has drunk up this water, power one other bucket or pale of clean
water in the same sort upon that earth, and continue in so doing till all the
earth in the said vessels is well moistened with water, which ought to lie in
the said vessels for the space of a day and a night one handbreadth in height
above the earth: Then pull the said tappes or spiggets out of the holes in the
vessels, and suffer all the said water to drop out into other tubbes placed
directly under the said holes: when you shall see that no more water will come
or drop into the undermost tubbes, empty the dropped water into the vessels
out of which it did drop before, and out of the same let it drop again so
long, and so much as it will into the said undermost tubbes. This water which
has so soked through the earth in the said vessels, and has twice dropped out
of the higher vessels into the tubbes that are placed under them, is called
among the Italians water of the foot, and also the wash of earth, which ought
to be saved by it self, After you have done all this, power some other clean
water (as you did before) upon the earth in the vessels, and when the same
water has dropped out of the higher vessels into the tubbes standing under
them, take all the said earth out of the vessels, and fill them again as you
did before with other like earth and then power upon this earth in the vessels
the first water called water of the foot, and wash of earth, suffering it to
drop through the same into the undermost tubbes so often till the same water
tasted in your mouth will byte your tongue, Note.
and that an egg put into this water will swim upon the top of the same.
The first water being brought by this means to this perfection, and strength,
power the second water upon the same earth (or on other such like earth if
need be) that it may by often dropping through the same be made also of a
biting taste like unto the first water, and able to bear up an egg put into
the same like as the first water called water of the foot, and wash of earth
did before. Now this second water being a very strong water must be boiled in a
Cauldron and after it has well boiled abate the fire under the Cauldron, till
you have taken of from it all the scumme which must be saved in a pot or other
vessel. When you have so done, make a good fire under the Cauldron to cause
the water that is in the same to sees or boil quickly again, and as the
water shall diminish, or seethe away, put more of the said first water unto the
same, and (as you were before willed to do) scumme the said water and keep the
scumme. when the scumme shall be thick, To know when the master water of
Saltpeter is enough boiled.
and hard, and of a French russet color, take some water with the scummer out
of the Cauldron, and let it drop upon a piece of iron, for if the water be
well and enough boiled, the drops of water will congeale upon the same iron,
and if the said drops do not congeale, it is a sign that the water in the
Cauldron is not boiled enough. When you shall perceive by this sign that the
water is well and enough boiled, take it of from the fire and preserve it,
because it is the master water. So soon as you have made an end of boiling the
second water, you ought to boil and scumme the first water called water of the
foot, To know when the first water of Saltpeter called water of the foot, and
wash of earth is enough boiled. How water of the foot and wash of earth when
it is burned, may be made good again.

Salt peter water must be suffered to co^geale in a dankish, close, and dark
place.


and wash of earth, as you did the second water till it shall cast up a scumme
of a French russet color, unto which (if it shall happen to cleave unto the
sides of the Cauldron) you must put of the other French russet scumme that was
made, and saved by you before, to boil with it, until the drops of this
water falling upon iron will congeale. If this congealed water shall be very
soft, it is a sign that the water in the Cauldron is not boiled enough, but if
this congealed water shall be very hard, it is a sign that it is burned. To
amend this fault which the very hard congealed water has, and to make the same
water good again, put some fresh and clear water thereunto, and then having
extinguished all the fire under the Cauldron, and made the same Cauldron to
stand a slope, so that the lies and dregs (which being congealed are the very
salt whereof Saltpeter is made) may not with any water run over the brimmes
of the vessel, you must (if you will make good Saltpeter) suffer the water to
settle in the same vessel, and to congeale in a dankish, close, and dark
place, and after the water which will not congeale has for the space of two or
three days dropped out of the vessel into some other tubbe, take the
Saltpeter out of the say vessel, and preserve the same water because it
being the master water may afterward be used when you shall have need of the
master water.

The 3 Chapter. How you may make an excellent kind of artificial Saltpeter of
the flower which groeth on walls: how Saltpeter water must be boiled: how
you may know when Saltpeter water has boiled enough: how Saltpeter water
which is burned may be made good again: and how Saltpeter in his refining
does waste.
TAke of flower which groeth on walls four parts, of unslaked Lime one
part: This one part of lime must be well boiled in water over a fire, and
after it has boiled enough, it must be taken from the fire, and suffered to
settle, and then it must be strained into another vessel. This done, put the
same four parts of the said flower into such a half but, tubbe, hogshead, or
other barrel as before you have been willed to prepare for earth whereof
Saltpeter shall be made, and power upon the same flower so much of the said
strained water which is named Lie, or Lime water, as will dissolve the same
flower. When the flower is dissolved, let the Lie or Lime water which has
dissolved the flower, drop out at the bottom of the said vessel into
another tubbe set under the same vessel, and boil those drops of Lie or
Lime water over a fire, till they being put upon iron will congeale, and be of
a temperate hardness, that is to say, neither too soft, nor too hard. It is a
sign (as before I have told you) that the water has not boiled enough, when
the congealed drops are too soft, and it is a token that the water is burned
when the congealed drops are too hard. But (as you have learned) the water
which is burned may be made good again with a little fresh and clear water
put unto it. After this Lie or Lime water is well and enough boiled, take it of
from the fire, scumme it with a scummer, and do unto it all that you have been
taught in the precedent Chapter to do unto the Saltpeter water that first
droppeth out of vessels filled with earth: So this Saltpeter will be good with
the first boiling, and serve for some uses without any other refining: But for
to make gunpowder it ought to be refined again though thereby it will waste a
little.

The 4 Chapter. How good Saltpeter may be known.
PVT a handful of Saltpeter upon an oken board, or upon a dry Walnut tree
board, lay upon the Saltpeter a quick cole of fire, and when the Saltpeter is
well kindeled, take the cole away from it, for now if the Saltpeter be good, it
will burn of it self, and ray much the table. But if the Saltpeter shall as
it does burn give any crackes, it is a token that the same Saltpeter has in
it Salt, and that it was refined, for unrefined Saltpeter will never crack,
and when many dregs do remain upon the table after the Saltpeter is so
burned, they show that the same Saltpeter had much grease in it and that it was
naught.

The 5 Chapter. How Saltpeter may be made to groe where none did groe before:
and how earth which has made Saltpeter may be made after the end of five or
six years to yield more Saltpeter than it did yield at the first time.
Dissolve Saltpeter in water, and wet well therewith a covered piece of ground
where you will have Saltpeter to groe, then suffer that piece of ground to lie
still for a certain space of time, and by so doing you shall see that the
Saltpeter will groe and multiply wonderfully in that place. Also it is truth
if the earth which has made Saltpeter be heaped up in a covered place where no
rain may fall upon the same, that after the end of five or six years, you
may labor the same earth again, and find in it more Saltpeter than it did
yield at the first time.

The 6 Chapter. How Saltpeter meal is made: and how Saltpeter meal without
any beating will serve among other material things to make gunpowder.
HAng a kettle with a wide bottom over a good fire and put into that kettle a
convenient quantity of Saltpeter: when the Saltpeter shall begin to bloe,
fry, and smoke, stir it about the kettle with a wooden ladle, pulling back
the Saltpeter which shall show white, and putting forward the other Saltpeter
which has not had so much fire as the said white Saltpeter, and cease not to
stir and mingle all the Saltpeter well together, so as it may not melt,
until it shall wax dry, and be like a comfette, for by so doing you shall
take away out of the Saltpeter all the grease and Salt that was in it. Then
pouring so much water into the kettle as will cover all the Saltpeter that is
in it, you must melt the same Saltpeter over a good fire, and stir it well
about the kettle with a big and round staff, until it shall wax dry
again, and be like meal, which without any beating will serve among other
material things to make gunpowder.

The 7 Chapter. How Saltpeter may be refined with water by two sundry ways:
and how Saltpeter refined with water ought to be dried.
The first way to refine Saltpeter with water.
TAke of the mixture made of Lime, Ashes, and Alum dissolved, whereof mention
has been made in the second Chapter of this book and in the first way to make
artificial Saltpeter of earth, and into every barrel of water that you have
put into the Cauldron for to dissolve the Saltpeter, power six pots full of
the strong water that is also mentioned in the said first way to make
artificial Saltpeter, and in the same quantity of water so prepared, put so
much Saltpeter as you think may well be dissolved: and with boiling make it to
dissolve very well. Then seeing it in boiling to have cast up scumme, you shall
take it out of the Cauldron, and put it into a tubbe, in the bottom whereof
you must first put fine sand four fingers thickness clean washed, covered
with a linen cloth: and by a little hole made into the bottom of the tubbe,
you shall suffer it to drop by little and little in some other vessel set
under to receive it: and so this water thus strained, you must afterward put
into the very same, or into another Cauldron to boil again, and to make the
greater part of the same water seethe away. Finally make it boil so much
until you shall see it ready to thicken, pouring now and then into the same
water a little of the aforesaid strong water, especially when it swells, and
casts up scumme. This done, power the said water out of the Cauldron into
chestes, or other vessels of wood to congeale, which (though it shall be a
great quantity) within three or four days will congeale. But if any part of
that water do not within that time congeale, then taking it out of the vessel
boil it again, and do it unto all that you did before to the other water that
is congealed. And so you must do from time to time as it gathers together,
and congealeth: and by this means you shall make the Saltpeter most white, and
fair, and much better than at the first seething.

The second way to refine Saltpeter with water.
Saltpeter may also be refined with water in this manner: put Saltpeter with
Lime well slaked into a clean Cauldron, and power upon the Saltpeter and
slaked Lime so much fair water or rather so much of the aforesaid Lie or Lime
water, as will cover and lie four inches in height above the same Saltpeter,
and slaked Lime. Moreover make a good fire under the Cauldron, that the things
in the same may quickly boil, and be ready as scumme shall rise to take it
away with a scummer. When you shall see that no more scumme will rise, then take
the Cauldron from the fire, and setting it somewhat aslope, let the boiled
water cool, settle, and clear in the same: if the boiled water will not wax
clear by this means, put ashes into it, aad boil the same water again for a
while. This done, take the Cauldron from the fire, and setting it aslope,
sprinkle fair water upon the boiled water, for by so doing you shall make the
same water clear. This water being clear, must by little and little be powered
into some other vessel so as the lies, dregs, or grounds may not go out
with the same: Saltpeter refined with water ought to be dried against the Sun
or with heat of fire.
For of the water which lies above in the vessel, Saltpeter is made, and in
the water at the bottom of the vessel, are the lies or dregs of Saltpeter.
After you have in this sort powered out the said water into other vessels, and
have suffered the same for two days space (and more if need be) to congeale in
the same vessels, you must take the same congealed water (which is Saltpeter)
out of the vessels, and dry the same against the Sun, or with heat of fire.

To know when the water in which Saltpeter is refined has boiled enough.
After you have taken the said Saltpeter out of the vessels in which it did
congeale, boil again over a good fire the vncongealed water which remains in
the said vessels, and so long as this water does boil, scumme it if it shall
cast up any scumme, and let this water boil until the same water dropping
upon iron, stone, or such like things from a piece of wood put into the water
will congeale: for then is that time to take it from the fire. Now this being
done if you shall see a thin skin to lie upon the water, scumme the same
away, and more do unto the same water all that you have bin willed to do unto
the other water which did before congeale into saltpeter.

Although this saltpeter made of the water which did lie in the bottom of the
vessels is not so good as the Saltpeter which came of that part of water which
did lie uppermost in the vessels, yet may it be made as good as the other with
so much labor as you are willed to bestow upon the other, and by putting so
much water unto it as you did unto the other, for through lack of water it
will be burned.

Saltpeter being thus refined with water will make good gunpowder: How
Saltpeter refined with water ought to be dried in a Cauldron over a fire if it
shall afterward pass through a boulter or searse.
But to dry this Saltpeter so as it may pass through a fine boulter or searse,
put it into a Cauldron over a fire of Coals whereby the Saltpeter will yield a
water, fall into the flower, and melt, and being well stirred in a Cauldron
that all the Saltpeter may feel the heat of fire, it will be a lump like a
comfet. When you shall see that this Saltpeter is dry, take it from the fire,
for through too long standing over the fire, it will yield moisture, loose his
strength and be a gum when it is burned.

The 8 Chapter. How Saltpeter may be refined with fire: and how Saltpeter may
be better refined with water than with fire.
SAltpeter in a little quantity is refined with fire after this manner which
although it be a ready way yet seldom times it is used, and albeit it serves
to get out the fatness of Saltpeter, yet for that it sends into the bottom
very much earthie dross, I like better the other ways which teach you to
purge it with water, than this with fire. But to refine Saltpeter with fire do
thus: Take an iron sallet, or some other iron, or brazen vessel, and fill it
with Saltpeter, and cover it with a cover of iron, brass, or earth, so that it
be made big enough, meet to be taken of, and put on when you list, and so as
the vessel being well covered, the heat within may not breath out. This
vessel must be set in the midst of a good fire of coals, and so the Saltpeter
will melt, which is soon perceived of the expert artificer and workman. When
you think that it is melted look upon it, and if it be not well melted,
cover it again, and let it melt well: Then the Saltpeter being well melted,
take Brimstone most finely beaten in powder, and cast some thereon: and if of
it self it take not fire, do you kindle it, and being kindeled, let it burn
till such time as the Brimstone be all consumed, so that nothing else be burnt
but the upper part and certain gross vnctiousnesse of the Saltpeter, the
which when it is burned, will leave the rest fair and clear: and then it must
be taken from the fire letting it cool in the vessel where you shall find it
(after the same is cold) all in one piece like a white piece of marble. All
the earthy dross thereof remaining in the bottom will be good Saltpeter to
make gunpowder, but not very commendable to any other use.

Some in steed of Brimstone do burn the gross vnctiousnesse of Saltpeter
with quick vnflaming coals of fire, but insomuch as the refined Saltpeter
being so burned, loses part of his force, as Girolamo Cataneo in his fifth
book Dell'arte militare writes) I will not counsel you to burn the gross
vnctiousnesse of Saltpeter with any Brimstone, or quick vnflaming coals of
fire.

The 9 Chapter. How you may sublime and purify Saltpeter by two sundry ways.
TAke of Saltpeter refined dry one part, and of the scumme or off all of iron
one part, sublime both these material things as you shall hereafter in the
tenth chapter of this book be taught to sublime Brimstone, and when you mill
make gunpowder, or fireworks of sublimed Saltpeter and Brimstone, moisten them
well with aqua vita. Also you may purify Saltpeter in this manner: Take for
every pound of Saltpeter a quart of good white wine, and putting them together
in a pot over a fire, let them sees till one fourth part thereof is sod away:
then taking the pot from the fire, suffer the mixture which is now Saltpeter
well purified to remain in it till it be dry.

The 10 Chapter. How you may sublime Brimstone, Arsenike and salt Armoniake.
MElt your Brimstone over a sloe fire in a copper or clean earthen vessel,
and with a clean ladle take away all the scumme or thin skin which will
lie upon the top of the same melted Brimstone. That done, strain the
Brimstone remaining in the vessel into an other clean pot through a thick
piece of canuasse, or through a thick strainer, and keep this strained
Brimstone which has been thus sublimed and purified for to serve in fine
gunpowder, and fireworkes.

The thin skin or scumme which shall be so taken away from melted
Brimstone with a ladle, is the grease that Was in the melted Brimstone, and
that which remains in the canuasse after the Brimstone is strained, is the
refuse and earth of the Brimstone. Arsenike and salt Armoniake are sublimed and
purified in the same manner as Brimstone is sublimed.

The 11 Chapter. How you may make Coals for gunpowder by four sundry ways.
TO make Coals for gunpowder, fix upon the ground five or six wooden
staves of four or five feet in height in the form of a round pyramid or
taper circle which at the great and loest end must be one foot and a half or
there about in wideness. Bind round about the outsides of these staves in
three or four several places bonds of toe, and then having in a readiness a
convenient number of small, short, cloven, and dry sticks of young willoe
bows without any bark or rines, pyle within the said staves up to their
tops the said sticks, which must be set upright upon their ends, and then
cover the said pyle of sticks and the staves on the outside all over with
wette straw, and lay moist earth, dirt, or clay three or four inches thick
hard pressed down all over the straw: This done, wind round about in 4 or 5
places upon the cover of clay good big bonds of toe, and make a small hole
in the very top and middle part of the said pyle of sticks, and through that
hole put fire to the said pyle. After you shall upon good aduisement think
that the fire is kindeled in the pyle, and that it has burnt well downwards
half the way into the pyle, stop up the said hole in the top, and with a
round stick so big as a man's finger, make diverse other holes as the fire
shall burn downwards through the said couers of moist clay, Note.
and wette straw, round about the aforesaid pyle for smoke to pass out at.
When you shall see that no smoke does come out at any of the holes, then the
coals are burned enough, and now to the end that they may not consume to ashes,
you must close, and stop up all the said holes, and beware to meddle any more
with the said pyle till all the Coals in the same are cold, which will be
within one day or two after the Coals have been burned enough.

The second way to make Coals for gunpowder.
Also you may make Coals for gunpowder in this manner. Build with Stone and Lime
a round furnace like a round well, and in the bottom of this furnace leave an
open place or hole through the wall two inches square, and set five or six
staves of wood in the midst of the furnace upright upon their ends in the
form of a round pyramid or taper circle, and within those staves, pyle up to
their tops small, short, cloven, and dry sticks of wood without any bark
or rines, and having set the said sticks in that pyle upright upon their
ends, cover the top of the said furnace all over with clay, or dirt, leaving
in the uppermost part thereof a hole so big as a man's great finger for smoke
to pass out at: and through the said hole in the bottom of the furnace put
fire to the said sticks. When the fire has well burned vpwardes to the
midst of the pyle within the furnace, stop up the said hole in the bottom
of the furnace with a fit stone well luted so as no smoke may come out at
that lo^rmost hole. Note.
This done, the said uppermost hole must also be stopped up when you shall see
that no smoke comes out of the same hole, for the Coals in the said pyle
being then burned enough, if any one of the said holes should afterward be
left open, all the Coals in the said pyle would burn to ashes. Finally, after
the said holes have been closed up in this manner for the space of two days and
two nights, you may uncover the top of the said Furnace, and (the heat of
the fire that was in the Coals being gone) pull away the stone below, and at
your pleasure take all the Coals out of the Furnace.

To make a small quantity of Coals for fine gunpowder, The third way to make
coals for gunpowder.
take young Hasell wood of a year old without any bark or rines, and having
cut them in short pieces, put the same pieces into a great earthen pot, or into
a vessel of iron, or brass: and that pot or vessel being close shut and
covered, lay lute or clay very well about the pot or vessel, so that it may
not breath: then make fire round about the pot or vessel, and also upon it,
til such time as you shall upon good aduisement think that the heat is well
entered in through all parts of the vessel, and that the sticks within are
well kindeled, and only through such heat without firebrandes or flame burned.
After this the Coals within the pot or vessel being burned enough, take the
fire from the pot or vessel, and suffer the Coals within the said pot or
vessel to cool before you take them out.

Also you may make in have a small quantity of Coals for gunpowder in this
manner; The 4 way to make coals for gunpowder.
Take so many dry Hasell sticks cut in short pieces without any bark, or
rynes, as will be sufficient to serve your purpose, and laying them close
together on a heap set them a fire, and after you have well burned them,
sprinkle water upon them with a broom till you have quenched their fire, and
in so doing scatter the Coals here and there, that they being so with water
thoroughly quenched may dry well again.

The 12 Chapter. How you may make a mixture of Brimstone and quickesiluer for
gunpowder: and how Brimstone which shall serve for gunpowder ought always to
be very dry, and without any fat.
MElt, scumme, and strain your Brimstone as before in the tenth Chapter of
this book you have been taught: After this melt again the same Brimstone, and
then taking it from the fire put thereunto so much quicksiluer as you will,
stirring them together with a stick until they are incorporated. When you do
put quick silver into the melted Brimstone, hold your face so far as you may
from it, An admonition.
because if any quicksiluer, or Brimstone should leap up out of the pot, and
hit your face, it would do you much hurt. Also you must understand that the
Brimstone which shall serve for gunpowder ought always to be very dry, for
that the fat of Brimstone does make dregs in gunpowder, and is offensive to
the Saltpeeter that is in any sort of gunpowder.

The 13 Chapter. How the makers of gunpowder do mingle together the simples
and material things of which they do make gunpowder: and how gunpowder must
be kept in dry vessels of wood, and laid in high rooms of houses: and how an
empty caske of wood ought to way 12 pounds: and every caske filled full of
gunpowder ought to way one hundred weight of Aver de poize weight: and how
every last of gunpowder ought to way 24 hundred weight of the said Aver de
poize weight.
SOme use to way every of the simples and material things whereof gunpowder
is made by it self, and afterward they do mingle, and beat all the same
things together. Others having beaten and searsed every simple whereof
gunpowder is made by it self, do mingle the same together. But the best and
most readiest way is to put all the Saltpeeter which you will occupy into a
Cauldron that must have so much water in it as will (when the same is made hot
with fire) suffice to dissolve the said saltpeter, which being so dissolved
ought to be washed, and laid when it is washed upon a clean and firm place or
piece of ground. This done, beat the quantity of Cole (which is to be added
unto the mixture) into very fine powder, and putting the same powder unto the
dissolved Saltpeeter, stir and incorporate them well together, and as you
do stir and turn together with a staff the Saltpeeter and Cole, you must
cast upon them a due quantity of Brimstone finely beaten, and well searsed
and continue in stirring of them together till the said Saltpeeter, Coals, and
Brimstone shall be well mingled. After this lay forth that mixture to dry a
little, and when the same mixture somewhat dried by beating the Cole till it
be subtle and inpalpable is made a very fine incorporate substance, sift it
well through a S^eue, or rather a searse: then casting water and vinegar upon
it, corn the gunpowder, and when you have so done, dry it well again, or
after it is dry, put all the same gunpowder into clean and dry vessels of
wood, which ought to be laid in high rooms of houses where little coming is
for other reasons than that it may lie there dry. And for so much as in England
we do use to put our gunpowder into wooden vessels called Caskes, 16 ounces
do make 1 pound of Aver de poize weight and 112 pou^ds do make one hundred
weight of the same Aver de poize weight.
note well that an empty Caske of wood ought to way twelve pounds, and that
every such Caske filled full of gunpowder ought to way one hundred weight of
aver de poize weight. Also note that 24 such Caskes of gunpowder are named a
Last of gunpowder, and that every Last of gunpouder ought to way 24 hundred
weight of the said aver de poize weight.

The 14 Chapter. How you may grind or beat gunpowder by six sundry ways:
how gunpowder ought not to be beaten dry: and how you may know whether or no
gunpowder is well beaten, or enough ground.
MAny men do grind gunpowder in such milles as do serve to grind crabbes to
make vergys, and appels to make sider. And some stamp the powder in a stone
mortar large in the mouth with a wooden pestell like unto a hammer or maule.
And some cause the powder to be stamped in morters with a water mill or a horse
mill, which way is the best of all other and most surest: for the powder is
thereby more finely beaten, and with less labor. Some which have not the
commodity of water make a great wheel after such sort that the cogges thereof
shall raise up many heavy pestels, which in falling down do beat the
powder lying within diverse morters of wood made in a beam of Oak: Among which
there be some that have their bottomes of brass. Some stamp gunpowder with
pestels which they hold in their hands, and tie to the end of a poole with a
cord right over a mortar of wood, or brass, and so they beat with less
pain. And some grind gunpowder with handmilles as they use to grind corn,
which is a painful and dangerous way, You shall kindle fire by rubbing two
Bay sticks together with violence. An admonition.
because such a composition ground together with stones will soon catch
heat, and be a fiar, even as by rubbing together with violence a couple of
Bay sticks, you shall straight way kindle fire. Wherefore in grinding and
beating gunpowder after this last way, or any other way, it behooves all men
to take heed that they do not grind or beat the same dry, but wet with
water to a certain degree of moistness, so that taking it up in one hand it
may cling together. Some for this purpose do moysten it with vinegar, and
some with Camphored aqua vitae, and they say that the powder will therewith be
made more stronger. But neither vinegar, nor aqua vitae, will be better than
water to make gunpowder forceable and strong, because they vaporing away,
little of their substance can remain.

Note.
By drawing gunpowder with your finger, and in like manner by breaking or cutting
with a knife a part thereof you may know whether or no it is well and enough
ground or beaten. For if in the said broken part you shall see all black
within, and no Saltpeeter, or Brimstone in the same, then undoubtedly that sort
of gunpowder is well and enough beaten. And contrariwise, if you shall perceive
any Saltpeeter or Brimstone within that broken or cut part, then it is certain
that the same sort of gunpowder is not beaten enough.

The 15 Chapter. How you may corn gunpowder.
FIrst prepare a Seeue with a bottom of thick parchment made full of round
holes, and then moystening the Gunpowder which shall be corned with water, put
the same, and also a little bowl, into that Seeue, and when you have so done,
sift the powder so as the said bowl rolling up and down in the Seeue, may
break the cloddes of powder, and make the same powder by running through the
holes of the Seeue to corn.

The 16 Chapter. How you may make diverse sorts of gunpowder: and how you may
make gunpowder of diverse colors: and how you may abate the force of gunpowder:
and how for want of aqua vitae and vinegar to moisten gunpowder, you may use
the water of Saltpeeter, or if you will the urine of a man: and how Mute
gunpowder is of little force.
To make gross gunpowder for great Ordinance.
1 Take of Saltpeeter. 4 parts. Fine Brimstone 1 part. Cole of Willoe, Hasell
or some other soft wood. 1 part.
out of every pound weight that is in the same part of Brimstone, take away one
ounce of Brimstone, and then having beaten, and sifted through a Searse every of
the said materials, or simples by it self, you shall moysten them with very
strong white Vinegar, and incorporate them together, for through that
moystnesse the powder will be made more stronger, and beaten more finer: An
admonition.
yet take heed that you do not stamp this powder so much as you shall be
willed to stamp the two sorts of gunpowder next following for handegunnes,
because it may thereby be made too strong, and able to break any great Piece
of Artillery that shall be charged with an ordinary charge thereof.

You may know whether or no this mixture is enough beaten by breaking or
cutting a part thereof, for after you have broken or cut a little part or piece
of the powder, if you shall perceive that the Brimstone is finely beaten, and
that no Saltpeeter can be seen within the same broken piece, then you may
know that this mixture of gunpowder is enough beaten.

After this mixture has been so beaten, sift it through a Seeue or searse to
make it to corn, and all that part thereof which will not pass through a Seeue
or searse beat again in a mortar, and by such means make it to pass through
the Seeue or searse that it may also be corn gunpowder, which being dried will
(as I have told you before) be best kept in close and dry vessels of wood.

To make fine gunpowder for Handgunnes.
2 Take of Saltpeeter five parts, of Coals made of young Hasell twigges or of
the wood of a young Willoe tree one part, of Brimstone one part lacking one
ounce in every pound weight that is in the same part of Brimstone: 672 parts
of this sort of gunpowder are equal in force to 720 parts of that sort of
gunpowder which is before marked with the figure of 1.
beat during the space of six hours every of the said simples and material
things by it self into fine powder, and sift each of those powders by it
self twice or thrice through a fine Seeue or searse, and then incorporate them
together. Moreover having moystened the same mixture with strong vinegar, you
ought to beat it well again, and in so doing to remember that the mixture is
beaten enough when by cutting or breaking a piece thereof you shall see it all
black within and no Saltpeter or Brimstone within the same. After the said
mixture has been enough beaten, fifth it again through a fine Seeue, and corn
it that when it is dry, the same may be kept in vessels of wood for to charge
Handgunes.

To make more finer gunpowder for Handgunnes.
3 Take of Saltpeeter six parts, of Cole made of the twigges or bows of a
Nut tree of one years groth one part, of Brimstone one part lacking one ounce
in every pound weight that is in the same part of Brimstone: 640 parts of
this sort of gunpowder are equal in force to 672 parts of that sort of
gunpowder which is before marked with the figure of 2.
beat every of the said simples and material things by it self into very
fine powder, and sift each of those powders by it self three times at the
least through a searse or fine Seeue, and remember always to beat again that
powder which remaining in the searse or fine Seeue, can not pass through the
same, to this end that every part thereof may be sifted through the searse or
fine Seeue. When you have in this manner sifted all these powders through the
searse or fine Seeue, mingle them together, and sift them again altogether
through that searse or Seeue. This done, moysten the same mixture with strong
vinegar, or Saltpeeter water, and beat it in a mortar of brass until you may
(as before has been declared) see it all black within and no Saltpeeter, or
Brimstone in the same. Moreover after this mixture has been beaten enough,
prepare a fine Seeue, and place the same right over a course searse so as the
part of this mixture which passes through the Seeue and lies upon the searse
may thereby be made corn powder, and so as the other part which shall pass
through the course searse being afterward sifted again through a more finer
searse may be very fine and subtle powder.

If any part of this subtle powder which has been so sifted through the course
searse will not pass through the finer searse, then must the same part and also
the other powder which could not be sifted through the Seeue be beaten again
in a brazen mortar, so as all the same powder may be in like manner sifted
through the said fine searse, and being corned, and well dried, may with the
rest of this sort of gunpowder be kept in close and dry vessels of wood.

To make fine corn powder for Handgunnes of that sort of gross gunpowder
wihch before in the beginning of this Chapter is marked with the figure 1.
4 Take what quantity you will of the same gross gunpowder which before in
the beginning of this chapter is marked with the figure of 1. And having
moistened the same sort of gunpowder with Saltpeeter water, or with strong
vinegar, or with fair water: beat it well in a mortar, and sift it through a
fine Seeue or searse. With every pound of gunpowder mingle one ounce of
Saltpeeter that has been refined dry, well beaten, and sifted through a fine
searse. And when you have so done, beat and moysten this mixture again until
you shall see by breaking or cutting it with a knife that the same mixture is
all black within, and that there is no sign of Saltpeeter, or Brimstone within
the same mixture. Moreover, corn the said gunpowder through a fine Seeue as
before in the precedent chapter of this book I have taught you to do. After
you have dried this corn gunpowder, and taken away from it the fine and
subtle powder, you may shoot this corned gunpowder in harchibuses and other
handgunnes: Although in very deed it is not so strong in effect as is that sort
of fine gunpowder which before in this chapter I have marked with the figure of
2, by reason the Brimstone and the Cole in that sort of fine gunpowder are
finely beaten, and that the Brimstone and Cole in this sort of gunpowder is
grossly pounded.

To make an other sort of fine corn powder.
5 Take of Saltpeeter refined dry six parts, of Brimstone mingled with a
little quicksiluer that has line in aqua vitae one part: when you have mingled
them well together and sifted them through a fine Seeue or searse put thereunto
of Coals made of an old Walnutte tree beaten into fine powder, and sifted in
like manner through a fine Seeue or searse one part, and for every nine pounds in
weight of Saltpeeter put into this mixture ounce of Campher, and then
moystening the same things with aqua vitae or with strong vinegar: beat them
well and corn their powder.

The Coals for this composition after they have been burned, and made in a pot
covered al over with lute or clay (as I have taught you in the 11 chapter of
this book, and in the 3 way to make coals for gu^powder) ought to be well wet
with aqua vitae while they are warm and after they are dry again, to be
beaten as aforesaid into fine gunpowder.

To make an other sort of fine come gunpowder.
6 Take of Saltpeeter six parts, of Brimstone one part, of Campher part,
beat, sift and incorporate all these things together as before you have been
taught to beat, sift and incorporate other like material things, and after you
have so done, beat well this mixture again, and having moystened it with aqua
vitae or with strong white vinegar, corn the powder.

If you shall want at any time aqua vitae and Vinegar to moisten the powder
which you will make, you may in stead of aqua vitae and vinegar use the water
of Saltpeeter, or if you will the urine of a man.

To make gunpowder which will take fire and burn in a moist place and in wet
weather.
7 Take of saltpeeter refined dry five parts, of Coals made of a Filbert or
Nut tree one part, of nwe unslaked Lime one part, of Campher part: beat and
sift through a fine seeue every material thing that is above rehearsed for
this composition by it self, and that done, incorporate them together. This
sort of gunpowder so made and very well beaten will take fire, and burn in any
moist place, and in wet and rainie weather.

To make gunpowder which by long keeping shall not decay in quality, nor
consume in quantity.
8 Take what quantity you will of gunpowder, and after it has been well
beaten, well moistened with aqua vitae, and well mingled, make thereof round
baules or pellettes: and when you have so done, dry them in the Sun, or in a
hot place, and put them into a nealed vessel, for (as Girolamo Cataneo
writes) they (I mean the said pellets of gunpowder so kept) will never decay
in quality, nor consume in quantity.

To make an other sort of corn gunpowder.
9 Take of Saltpeeter twelve parts, of Coals made of the wood or tree called
Tilia, or of Juniper three parts, of Brimstone two parts, and of a part:
pound all these things well, and mingle them together, and then moystening
this mixture, corn the same through a fine Seeue or searse.

To make white gunpowder,
10 Take of Saltpeeter refined dry 6. parts, of Brimstone sublimed or purged
one part, of powder of a fur tree well dried in an hot oven one part, sift
all these material things through a fine Seeue, moysten them with aqua vitae,
beat them well in a mortar with a clean pestell, and then incorporate them
together.

To make read gunpowder.
11 Take of saltpeeter refined dry six parts, of Brimstone sublimed or purged
one part, of Amber part, of read saunders one part: sift all these things
through a fine Seeue or searse, moysten them with aqua vitae beat them well in
a mortar with a clean pestell, and incorporate them together.

To make gunpowder of an azure color.
12 Take of Saltpeeter refined dry six parts, of Brimstone sublimed or purged
one part, of Spike or Lauender dried in a hot oven part: beat and sift every
material thing in this composition by it self, and incorporate them together
as you have been taught to incorporate the other sorts of gunpowder.

To make a strong kind of gunpowder and to abate the strength of any kind of
gunpowder.
13 Take of good gunpowder twelve parts, of quicksiluer one part, of the
marchasite stone one part, of the herb Colophonia one partpound al these
things well, and then mingle them together for to use. This kind of gunpowder
is of so great force as that it will cause any piece of Artillery full charged
therewith to break in pieces with a great noise, and thereby put them in danger
of their lives that shall be then near unto the same piece. But whosoever does
put into this kind of gunpowder 24 parts of burned paper, or so much of hay
seed very well pounded, and mingle well the same burned paper or hay seed with
the said gunpowder, shall so abate the force of that powder, as that it will
not make so vehement a flame, nor give so great a bloc as otherwise it would
have done. with this kind of gunpowder the ingenious Gunner may do wonderful
experiments.

To make an other kind of gunpowder.
14 If you mingle three pounds of good gunpowder, and one pound of Brimstone,
and Greek pitch together, you shall make a kind of gunpowder which will be
a fire quickly, and burn very vehemently.

A censure of Mute gunpowder.
15 Mute gunpowder was first invented (as Brasauolus says) by a Duke of
Ferrara and insomuch as it will make no noise when it shall be shot out of a
piece, the said powder is named Mute gunpowder: and some men fearing it more
than any other sort of gunpowder, do judge the same powder an unlawful thing
to be used. But knowing by the reasons alleged in the first book and 22
Colloquie of Nicholas Tartaglia his Colloquies, that it is an impossible thing
for gunpowder of any force to make no noise when it shall be shot out of a piece:
Also considering that diverse Authors, namely Hieronymus Cardanus, and Joan:
Iacobus Weckerus do affirm in their books that Mute powder is always of so
little force as that it will shoot a pellet scarce twelve paces from the mouth
of his piece, I esteem that fear of Mute powder as a vain conceit, and do
verily believe under reformation that Mute gunpowder which (as before you have
heard) is weak in force, and not much hurtful in effects, may among all men of
understanding be more tolerable then any other sort of gunpowder.

The 17 Chapter. To renew and make good again any sort of gunpowder that has
lost his strength or virtue by moisture long lying, or by any other means.
WHen you have dried all the gunpowder which shall be renewed, put so much
thereof as you will into a canuasse sachell or linen bag, and then tying a
cord very hard about the mouth of the bag, thrust the same into a clean
Cauldron, and power so much water into the Cauldron as will cover the bag:
this done, make the water to boil in the Cauldron till a drop of it laid
upon iron or stone will congeale, and while the water boyleth, remember to
scumme it as need shall require. After this remove the Cauldron from the fire,
and setting it a slope let that bag drop into the Cauldron, and when you
shall see that the water in the Cauldron is clear, pour it out by little and
little into an other vessel, so as no lies, or dregs may run out with the
water into the same vessel, because the water must there congeale. After the
water is congealed take the Saltpeeter out of the vessel, and as you did
before boil and scumme the water which shall then remain in the said vessel
till a drop of it laid upon iron or stone will congeale. Also do unto it all
that you did before unto the congealed water, and let it not grieve you to
work thus so long as any saltpeter may by this means be found in the
vncongealed water.

The saltpeeter and Brimston which were within the said bag did dissolve and
soke into the boiling water, yea the dissolved saltpeter turned into water, and
the dissolved brimstone sunk down to the bottom of the water where you may
find it: But the coals which were mingled with the said dissolved saltpeter
and brimstone remain still within the bag among the lies and dregs of the
decayed gunpowder: therefore when you have gathered together by the means
above rehearsed all the saltpeter that was in the said boiling water, and have
well dried the said saltpeter, brimstone, and coals, poise every of them by it
self, and then seeing how much the part of saltpeeter so gathered does want of
the quantity which it should have for the said parts of cole, and brimstone,
add thereunto the portion of saltpeeter which wants: That done, beat,
mingle, and incorporate them together as you have been taught to beat, mingle,
and make nwe gunpowder.

The 18 Chapter. How you may by taste, feeling, color, and burning, know good
and il gunpowder: and how among many sorts of gunpowder, you may know the best
sort of gunpowder.
GVnpowder that has so mylde a taste as that you shall scant feel it on your
tongue, is of good receite and well wrought.

By how much gunpowder is in feeling more harder, by so much it is more better.

Gunpowder of a fair azure or french russet color is very good, and it may be
judged to have all his receites well wrought, and sufficient of the master well
refined.

Lay 3. or 4. corns of gunpowder upon a white piece of paper, the one three
fingers distant from the other, and put fire to one of them: Now if the
gunpowder be good and strong you shall see them all at one time a fire, and
that there will remain no refuse or grosenesse of brimston, or of saltpeeter,
nor any other thing except a white smokie color in the place where they were
burned, neither will the paper be burnt or defiled therewith.

If good gunpowder be laid upon the palm of your hand, and set on a fire,
it will not burn your hand.

Gunpowder that has a very sharp taste, has abundance of the master not well
refined, and will give again.

If white knottes, or knottes of a french russet color, shall remain after
gunpowder is set on a fire, it is a sign that the saltpeeter in that sort of
gunpowder was not well refined, but left full of salt, and grease, especially
when the same knottes shall hiss in burning, be dankish, and leave moisture in
the place where the gunpowder was burned.

If hard, dry, and white knottes, or pearls, shall remain after gunpowder is
set on a fire, it is a sign that this sort of gunpowder was not well wrought:
An admonition.
And it behooves every Gunner to beware of such gunpowder, because if it do
lie long dry in a piece, it will wax so fine with long and dry lying, that if
you take it not out of the piece, it will in his discharge with fire put the
same piece in danger of breaking.

If small black knottes (which will burn downwards in the place where proof
is made) shall remain after gunpowder is set on a fire, they do show that
the same sort of gunpowder has not enough of the master, and that it is of
little force or strength and slow in fiering.

If a little heap of gunpowder set in a fire does make a noise, rise up with
great speed, and yield little smoke, it is a sign that the saltpeeter in
that heap of gunpowder was well refined, and well wrought, and that the
materials in the said heap were well incorporated.

If the flame of fiered gunpowder shall rise up slowly, continue long, make
little noise, and yield much smoke, it is a sign that the same gunpowder had
in it much cole and brimston, and a little quantity of saltpeeter.

If gunpowder burned upon a boorde shall black the same boorde, it is a sign
that too much cole was in the same gunpowder.

When gunpowder is moist, or full of the earth of saltpeeter, it is naught for
to be shot out of great ordinance, because it puts him in peril which
shoots with the same, and in time of need, shaming the Gunner which does
occupy it, serves to no effect.

If gunpowder be very black, it is a sign that it was made with very much
cole, or that it is moist, and when you rub it upon a piece of white paper,
it will black the same paper more than it should do.

Among many sorts of gunpowder to know which sort is best, make a little
heap of every sort of gunpowder, and then setting those heaps one from
another, mark well when you put fire unto them which of the heaps did soonest
take fire: For that sort of gunpowder which will soonest be a fire, make least
smoke, and leave least refuse, is the best gunpowder.

The 19 Chapter. To make diverse sorts of gunmatches, and other matches, which
will serve to discharge great and small pieces of artillery, and give fire to
trunkes, pykes, mines, darts, arrows, and all other firewoorkes.
Make small ropes or cords of bumbas, or of cotton wool, put the same into an
earthen pot or pan which must have in it so much strong vinegar or rather aqua
vitae, brimstone, and saltpeeter, or in stead of saltpeeter, gross gunpowder,
mingled together, as will cover the same ropes, and sees all those things
together in the same pot over a fire until the aqua vitae, brimstone, and
saltpeeter, or gross gunpowder shall wax thick and incorporate, and then
pull the same ropes well soked in that composition one after another out of the
pot, and hang one of them from another upon a pole to dry in the sun, so as
when they are through dry you may wind or role them up for gunmatches to give
fire unto great and small pieces of artillery, mines, trunkes, pikes, darts,
arrows, pottes, hollow pellettes, and all other firewoorkes.

An other way to make Gunmatches.
Take cords made of hemp that is not very fine, or of toe which is better,
although it will sooner consume, and let every cord be so big as a man's great
finger. Also choose such cords for this purpose as are nor much wreathed, this
done boil the same cords in strong lie, ashes, and a little of saltpeeter til
all the lie shall be consumed.

An other way to make Gunmatches.
Take cords made of toe, and beat them with a wooden hammer upon a quick
stone. ^unmatches which will ^rne in moist ^aces, in wa^r, under snoe ^d ice.
^ou may also ^arne to ^ake an vn^enchable ^nmatch by ^e lxxxviii. ^hapter of
^is appendix. ^atches which will ^ne and con^me very ^ickly, and ^rne his ^ote
that shall ^ade upon ^em.
Also take of turpentine, nwe wax, and common oil, of each an equal part,
cover and boil the cords in the turpentine, wax, and oil, till the said
liquide composition shall be consumed, and then take the cords out of the
vessel in which they did boil, and beat them again a little, and when you
have so done, suffer them to dry in the shadow. This sort of gunmatches will
preserve fire in any moist place, and also in water and under snoe and ye.

An other way to make matches, which will serve to give fire to trunkes, pottes,
pikes, darts, arrows, hollow pellettes, and al other such like fireworkes.
Take cords made of three or fourethreedes of bumbas spinned coursely, boil
them in a nwe nealed pot filled full of strong white vinegar, till all the
vinegar shall be consumed, then take the cords out of the pot, wring them, and
dry them in the shadow, or at the fire if you have haste to use them. You may
also boil the same cords in saltpeeter water, or in clear lie and
saltpeeter, and when you have so done, you must wring the moisture out of them:
that done you must wet them in aqua vitae, and after wring them again lightly,
and then role them in fine gunpowder, and suffer them to lie in fine gunpowder
till they are dry.

A match thus made does burn and consume very quickly, because it has been
wet in aqua vitae, wherefore you must not wet your match in aqua vitae if you
will not have it to burn and consume very quickly. Also one of these matches
after it has been thrice boiled in saltpeeter water, or in clear lie and
saltpeeter, thrice wet in aqua vitae, and thrice roled in fine gunpowder, will
burn your foot if you shall happen to tread upon it.

The 20. Chapter. To make touchwood and tinder for a Gunners Tinder box.
TAke those great things which are called old Todestooles growing at the
bottomes of nuttrees, beechtrees, oaks, and such other like trees, dry them
with the smoke of fire, and then cut them into so many pieces as you will, and
having well beaten them, boil the^ in strongly with waule flower, or
saltpeeter, till all the lie shall be consumed. After this laying them in a
heap upon a boorde, dry them in an oven which must not be made very hot,
and after you have so done, beat them well with a wooden mallet, and when you
shall have cause to use any part of those To destooles (now by the means
above declared made touchwood) rub well that part between your hands for
to make it soft, and apt to take fire. But when you will make tinder for a
Gunners tinder box, take pieces of fustian, or of old and fine linen clothe,
make them to burn and flame in a fire, and suddenly before the flame which is
in the^ does die, choke their fire, and keep their tinder so made in a box
lined within with clothe, to the end it may not be moist at any time.

The 21 Chapter. To make a stone which being wette with water, or spittle, will
flame and be a fire, and serve to light candles, and gunmatches, in such places
where by reason of rain, or other moisture, you can not light candles, or
matches by any other means.
PVt a loadestone into a pot, or other like vessel, then fill the same pot or
vessel with Colophonia and unquenched or unslaked lime, so as the said stone
may lie buried in the same Colophonia and lime. After this set the said pot
close stopped with potters clay, or with that kind of clay which is called
Lutum sapientiae, in a hot furnace, until it be thoroughly baked, and then
having taken the said pot out of the furnace, put the said loadestone,
Colophonia, and unslaked lime in an other pot, and set this pot likewise
stopped with the said potters clay, or with the clay named Lutum sapientiae, in
a hot furnace, and do this so many times together one after an other, till
the said stony mixture shall be made very white, and be dry burned, for then
the said stone is perfect, and being wette with water or spittle will flame and
be a fire: This stone being again quenched, must be kept in a hot or warm
place, and it is a needful thing for many purposes though in this place I do
teach you to make the same for no other cause than to light your candles, and
gunmatches, and to kindle fire in such places where by reason of rain, or
other moisture you cannot light, nor kindle such things by any other means.

2 An other way to make a like stone, which being well wette with water or
spittle, will flame and be a fire.
Take of quick brimston and of saltpeeter refined, of each a like quantity,
of camphire, double so much as you took of brimstone or saltpeeter, whereunto
add nwe lime made of the stone before mentioned in the first way of this
Chapter: Beat all these things together in a mortar unto so fine powder as
you may possibly do. Then the said powder being straightly wrapped and bound
hard together in a linen clothe, must be put into an earthen vessel closely
stopped with potters clay, or with clay named Lutum sapientiae, after the same
shall be well dried with the heat of the sun, set the said vessel in a
potters furnace for so long time as his pottes are baking and when the pottes
are baked (wherein you must be very circumspect) take your said vessel out of
the furnace, and use the stone which you shall find in the vessel made of the
said powder, as you have before been taught to use the stone mentioned in the
first way of this Chapter.

3 An other way to make a like stone, which being wette with water or spittle,
will flame and be a fire.
Take of the stone which you have learned to make in the first way of this
Chapter, one pound, of saltpeeter oftentimes refined four pounds, of
camphire, quick brimstone which has never been set over a fire oil of
turpentine, and tartar, of each of these a like quantity: Beat all these
things together in a mortar, until you have made thereof a fine powder: Then
sifte the same powder through a very fine seeue or searse. If any part of that
powder shall be so gross beaten, as that it will not go through, but remain
in the seeue or searse, you must put again that remaynder into the mortar, and
having beaten it into fine powder, sifte the same through the said seeue or
searse upon the other powder: After this put all the same things into a
glass, and power upon the same mixture so much burning water made of sower
wine, as will drown and cover it: When you have so done, stop the mouth of
the glass with potters clay, or with Lutum sapientiae, that no air may come
out of the glass: Then bury the said glass in dung for 2. or 3. months
space, and at every 10. days end during that time take the glass out of the
dung, and having shaken well together the said things which are in the said
glass, bury the same glass in fresh dung, that the mixture in the same dung
may incorporate, wax thick like honey, and appear to be a substance made of
one thing. All this being done, set the said glass over a hot fire, until
all the moisture within the same shall be clean dried up, and the mixture within
the glass shall be turned into a stone. After a stone is so made of that
mixture, break the said glass, and take the said stone out of it, and when
you will use this stone to light your candle, or gunmatch, or to kindle a fire,
beat some of it into powder which being wette with spittle, or water, will
flame and be a fire. This kind of stone (as Joan Baptista Porta, and Iacobus
Weckerus have written) is to be commended above all other stones, which being
wette with water or spittle will kindle and flame.

4 An other way to make a like stone, which being wette with water or spittle,
will flame and be a fire.
Take quick lime and saltpeeter refined diverse times dry, Tutia Alexandrina
unprepared calaminte stone as much of the one as of the other, quick brimstone,
and camphire, of each of the^ 2 parts: beat all these things into very fine
powder, and having sifted this powder through a seeue or searse, bind it up
hard within a nwe piece of linen clothe, and put it (I mean the powder so
bound) into a couple of Goldsmithes crosettes, or melting pots and set one of
them upon the other, mouth to mouth, bynding them fast with wire, and covering
them all over where need shall require, with Lutum sapientiae, so that it may
take no manner of air: This done dry them in the sun till the powder within
the said crosettes shall be yeallowe, and then set the crosettes in a furnace
of brick, or lime, and leave them there till the fire in the said furnace
shall be extinguished, and then taking the said crosettes out of the furnace,
you shall find within them a stone, which (when you shall use of it for to
light a match, or candle, or to kindle a fire) you must wette with water or
spitle, and put it to your match, or candle: And when you will quench your
stone again, you shall blow it out as you will blow out a candle.

5 An other way to make a like stone which being wette with water or spittle,
will flame and be a fire.
Take the Loadestone that has virtue to draw iron to him on the one side, and
to put it away on the other side, put the same stone into a pot leaded, and
put to it 4. pounds of pytch, and one pound of brimstone: then lute and lay
claye well upon the pot, and setting it in a furnace, give it a small fire
for the space of a day and a night, but augment the fire in the second day,
and in the third day more, until the stone be a fire. After the stone is a
fire, and has in such manner burned, you shall quench it, and suffer it to
cool, and keep it safe to use, for the stone is now prepared, and wetting it
with water or spittle, you may make it flame, and be a fire, to light your
candle or gunmatch.

The 22 Chapter. How you may make a stone which being wette with aqua vitae,
will kindle and flame: and how you may make an other stone, which being rubbed
well with a woollen clothe, will suddenly burn.
TAke of dry gum of a pyne tree, of quick brimstone, camphere, and calaminte
stone, of each one dram, beat all these things into powder, and add unto
that powder of Tutia Alexandrina whole, and unprepared, two drammes. That done,
thrust all these things mingled together into a canuas bag, which must be
well and hard bound round about, then fill a pot half full with powder of
unslaked lyme, and lay the bag and the confection that is in it upon the
said lyme. After you have so done, power upon the said bag up to the
brimmes of the pot more powder of unquenched lyme, and then stopping the
mouth of the pot with Lutum sapientiae, so as no air may breathe out of it,
put the said pot (after the Lutum sapientiae is through dry) into a glass
furnace, and suffer it to lie there close covered by the space of two days and
two nights. In fine take the said pot out of the furnace, and breaking it in
pieces, keep the congealed stone which you shall find in the pot, to light
your gunmatch and candles when need shall require: For this stone being wette
with a drop of aqua vitae, will flame and be a fire. But to make a stone
which being rubbed well with a woollen clothe shall suddenly burn, take of the
Calaminte stone, brimstone, unslaked lyme, pytch, ceruse, of each of these
three drammes, of camphere one dram, of asphaltum three drammes, beat all
these things into powder, and put the same powder into a strong pot well
stopped with lute, and after make a fire under the pot, increasing the same
by little and little until the powder in the pot shall be so hard as a
stone, then if you will have it burn to light your gunmatch or to kindle a
fire, rub it well with a clothe, and by so doing you shall make this stone to
burn suddenly. But when you will put out the fire that is in the stone, spitte
upon it and afterward set it in a moist place, for by such means this
burning stone may be quenched.

The 23. Chapter. How you may know the diameter or height of a pellet by the
circumference of the same pellet: And how by the diameter and weight of one
pellet you may find the diameter of any other pellet that is of a known
weight and of like substance: and how a hundred weight of pellettes does
contain 112. pounds: and how a tun of pellettes does contain twenty
hundred weight of pellettes.
MVltiplie the circumference of any pellet by 7, divide the product by 22, and
note the quotient for the diameter of the same pellet. As for example, In the
9. Colloquie of the second book of Nich. Tartaglia you may learn by knowing
the diameter and weight of one pellet, to know the weight of any other pellet
whose diameter is known.
multiply 44. the circumference of a pellet by 7, and thereof comes 308,
which divided by 22 will yield in the quotient 14 for the diameter of the same
pellet. But when you will know by the diameter and weight of one pellet, the
diameter of an other pellet that is of a known weight and of like substance,
way any one pellet, and measure the height or diameter of the same, then note
in some book for your better remembrance the said diameter and weight, for by
knowing the diameter and weight of that one only pellet, you may find at all
times the diameter of any other pellet that is of a known weight and of like
substance. And to the end you may learn to do the same, let it be supposed
that to answer this question, what is the diameter of that iron pellet which
wayeth 125. pounds in aver de poize weight? I do peruse my memorial, and
finding there that a pellet of iron of five inches and 299/413 of an ynche in
diameter does way 27 pounds in aver de poyze weight, The qua^tities compared
together are called the terms of the proportion, and in some writers the first
term namely, that which is compared is called the antecedent whether it be
equal, greater, or less than the other: and the second term namely that
whereunto the comparison is made, is called the consequent. But in Arithmetike
Boethius and other writers call the term compared dux and the term to whom
the comparison is made they call Comet.
I say that as the cubes are in triple proportion to the sides: so are the
proportions of the sides to be found by seeking the cubike roots of the two
terms of the proportion. Wherefore I do first set down the terms of the
proportion of the pellettes thus, 125/27, and I do set the cubike root of 125
which is 5, and the cubike root of 27 which is 3 in the room of the two
others thus 5/3. These two numbers do declare the proportion between the
diameters of the two pellettes, of which one that is the lesser is known to be
five inches and 299/4^3 making by reduction 2364/413 therefore I multiply that
fraction 2364/413 by 5, the cubike root of 125, whereof comes 11820/413 and
this number of 11820/413 I do divide by 3 the cubike root of 27 which gives
11820/1239 making by reduction 9 inches and 223/413 of an ynche: Whereupon I
conclude that if 5 inches and 299/413 of an ynche be the diameter to a pellet
of 27 pounds in weight, then 9 inches and 223/413 of an ynche shall be the
diameter to the pellet of 125 pounds in weight, and that after this sort by
the diameter and weight of one pellet, you may find out the diameter of any
other pellette that is of a known weight, and of like substance. But fearing
that the unlearned Gunners (who commonly esteem all that for naught worth
which they can not understand) will judge it a combrous, paynefull, and
needelesse labor to seek for the diameters of pellettes by any of the said
two ways, I do here present unto them two tables, of which one (made by a
current pellet of iron in diameter 4 inches, and 9 pounds 3 ounces in weight)
shows the diameters and waightes of 40 sundry iron pellettes, and the other
(made by a current kentish stone pellet of 3 inches and 12/13 of an ynche in
diameter, and of 2 pounds 15 ounces, and ounce in weight) expresses the
diameters and waights of forty sundry kentish stone pellettes, and have set
down for those which are yet untaught this rule, that a hundred weight of
pelletes does contain 112 pounds in aver de poize weight, and that a tun of
pellettes wayeth 20 hundred weight, I mean aver de poize weight.

depiction of the measuring of the diameter of a pellet

A Table of the Diameters and waights of 40. sundry current pellets of iron.
The diameters or heigths of iron pellets. The waights of current iron pellets
according to the old aver de poyze weight of England. Inches Parts of an ynche
Hundred weight Parts of an hundred weight. Pounds Ounces Drammes Scruples
Grains Parts of a grain. 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 1 2 1 0 0 0 4 3 2 13 41/128 1 0 0 0 7
6 0 0 15/16 1 0 0 0 12 2 1 8 91/128 2 0 0 0 1 2 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 1 10 1 0 18
21/128 2 0 0 2 3 7 0 6 9/16 2 0 0 2 15 6 0 8 71/1^8 3 0 0 0 3 14 0 0 7 3 0 0 4
14 6 2 6 97/128 3 0 0 6 2 3 2 9 11/16 3 0 0 7 9 0 2 19 81/128 4 0 0 0 9 3 0 0 0
0 4 0 0 11 0 2 1 14 13/128 4 0 0 13 1 2 1 5 5/16 4 0 0 15 0 4 2 16 127/128 5 0
0 0 17 15 0 2 12 5 0 0 20 12 2 2 15 25/128 5 0 0 23 14 1 0 8 7/16 5 0 0 27 4 5
0 15 75/128 6 0 0 3 0 1 0 0 0 6 0 7 0 6 0 5 5/128 6 0 11 6 6 0 14 1/16 6 0 16 2
3 0 10 55/128 7 0 0 21 3 6 1 17 7 0 26 11 2 0 18 81/128 7 0 4 8 7 2 17 3/16 7 0
10 13 1 0 16 67/128 8 0 0 17 8 0 0 0 0 8 0 24 9 5 2 10 125/128 8 0 4 2 4 1 12
13/16 8 0 12 2 5 2 8 111/128 9 0 0 20 10 3 1 2 9 1 0 1 9 6 2 17 9/128 9 1 0 11
1 2 0 15 15/10 9 1 0 21 0 7 0 2 59/128 10 0 1 3 8 7 0 0 0 10 1 14 9 3 2 11
117/128 10 1 26 2 7 1 1 9/10 10 1 10 5 3 0 12 39/128 A Table of the Diameters
and waights of 40. sundry current pellets of Kentish stone.
The diameters or heigths of Kentish stone pellets. The waights of current
Kentish stone pellets according to the old aver de poyze weight of England.
Inches Parts of an ynche Parts of an hundred weight. Pounds Ounces Drammes
Scruples Grains Parts of a grain 1 0 0 0 0 6 0 17 82173/152651 1 0 0 1 4 0
17 95159/170808 1 0 0 2 5 0 14 2288/4913 1 0 0 4 1 2 3 3414264/4244832 2 0 0 0
6 2 1 0 42^60/44217 2 0 0 8 7 2 1 6323/19652 2 0 0 12 2 1 0 13450/44217 2 0 1 0
2 2 13 53921/176868 3 0 0 1 5 1 2 15 96255/132651 3 0 1 11 0 0 2
2055108/2122410 3 0 2 1 5 2 10 230640/530604 3 0 2 9 3 2 13 558846/1061208 4 0
0 3 2 2 2 7 28561/44217 4 0 3 12 3 0 8 7/30 4 0 4 7 5 1 10 76140/132051 4 0 5 4
2 1 10 32965/176^08 5 0 0 6 2 2 2 2 19166/44217 5 0 7 1 6 2 2 14091/19652 5 0 8
2 7 0 6 19408/442^7 5 0 9 5 4 1 9 173/176868 6 0 0 10 9 7 1 5 106785/132651 6 0
12 0 0 1 12 134157/5^0804 6 0 13 8 0 1 3 6599^/88434 6 0 15 1 7 1 15
729270/1061208 7 0 0 16 13 6 2 3 63327/132651 7 0 18 11 6 1 2 91739/176868 7 0
20 11 7 0 8 1046/4913 7 0 22 14 1 1 15 1361000/1414944 8 0 0 25 2 6 1 1
7403/44217 8 0 27 9 5 2 19 4547/19052 8 2 3 1 0 5 5/9 8 4 15 0 0 15
95825/176868 9 0 7 13 4 0 4 2908/4913 9 10 14 5 0 8 19051/176868 9 14 2 4 0 1
21713/44217 9 17 9 1 1 0 2825/19652 10 0 21 2 5 1 19 22677/44217 10 24 15 1 1
14 152903/17686^ 10 0 14 5 2 1 97659/132651 10 5 1 2 1 15 615640/1414944

The 24 Chapter. How you may measure the circumference of any round pellet, or
sphericall body, by three sundry ways.


The 25 Chapter. How you may measure the superficies of any round pellet or
sphericall body by three sundry ways.


The 26 Chapter. How you may measure the solid content or crassitude of any
round pellet or sphericall body by three sundry ways.
of the circumference of any pellet by 49, and divide the product thereof by
66, you shall have in the quotient number the solid content or crassitude of
that pellet: as for example, multiply 1936 the square of 44 (which is the
circumference of the supposed pellet) by 49, and the product thereof will be
94864, which divided by 66 yields in the quotient 1437 and for the solid
content of the same supposed pellet. Also if you will multiply the cube of the
semicircumference of any round pellet or sphericall body by 49, and divide the
product by 363, you shall have in the quotient number the solid content or
crassitude of that pellet: as for example, the semicircumference of the
supposed pellet is 22, and the cube of 22 is 10648, which multiplied by 49
produces 521752, and this number 521752 being divided by 363 will yield in
the quotient number 1437 and for the solid content of the supposed pellet.

The 27 Chapter. How a pellet which sticks so fast within the concauitie of a
piece of Artillery as that it can not be driven home unto the powder may be
shot out of the piece without danger to the Gunner, or hurt to the piece:
and how any rusty pellet which for a long time has stuck fast within a piece
may be shot, or taken out of the piece without danger to the Gunner or hurt
to the piece.
WHen a piece of Artillery is charged with a pellet that will not be driven
home unto the powder, then the Gunner to save this piece from breaking, must so
much imbase the mouth of the piece as that fair and clear water being at
diverse and many times put into the touchhole, may for two or three days
together soke through the powder which is within the piece, and drop out at
the mouth of the piece into a tubbe set under the same for to receive and save
all the saltpeeter that was in the said powder. And after all the Saltpeeter
is by this means soked out of that powder, the Gunner pryming the touchhole
with so much fresh powder as will suffice to drive out that pellet, may give
fire to the piece, and without any danger to him self, or hurt to the piece
shoot out of it the said pellet. But when a rusty pellet has for a long time
stuck fast within a piece, put strong vinegar into the concauitie of the piece,
and with a wooden r^mmer strike hard upon the pellet till it does move: then
power the vinegar out of the piece, and having powered through the touchhole into
the piece so much powder as will suffice to drive out that pellet, fill up the
touchhole with good gunpowder, and give fire to the piece, so as the said
rusty pellet may thereby be expelled out of the concauitie in which it did
stick. But if the said pellet after all this has been done shall still
remain within the piece, then power hot scalding oil through the touchhole
into the piece, and with a long iron rod made at that end which shall go
into the Piece like unto a hogs nail, rub away the ruste lying between
the pellet and the piece, and afterward imbasing much the mouth of that
piece, strike hard thereon, I mean upon the mouth of the piece with a great
beetle, or iron hammer, and by so doing, you shall force the said rusty pellet
to role out of the piece.

The 28 Chapter. To make round pellettes of vnrounde iron pellettes by two
diverse ways.
IN winter when it does snow and freeze, cover iron pellettes which are not
round all over with frozen snow, and so let them lie in frozen snow for the
space of one night: This done, uncover the pellettes, and with a steel hammer
which must be well tempered, somewhat heavy, and like unto a Playsterers or
Tylers hammer, beat, or cut away the superfluous iron from the vnround iron
pellettes, and while you do so work upon the vnrounde pellettes, power often
times cold water upon them. By this means you shall (as Luigi Collado
writes) take away the superfluous iron from the vnrounde pellettes, and
perceive that it will be no more harder to do, Iron is more brickle in winter
than in summer. The lathe of a crossebowe is apt to break in winter, except
it be first well rubbed with a clothe.
than to cut a soft stone: For iron is more brickle in cold weather than in a
warm season, and by that reason iron pellettes shot in the winter against an
hard stone wall, do sometimes break in pieces, and the steel lathe of a
Crossebowe which is not made somewhat warm with the rubbing of a cloth, does
oftentimes in winter break at his first shoot.

Also you may make round pellettes of vnrounde iron pellettes by this way
following: Take an iron pellet which is not round, if it be a pellet for a
Minion put the same pellet into the round moulde of a pellet for a Saker, and
when you have so done, fill up the empty places in the said moulde with melted
lead, and so you shall make thereof a round pellet for a Saker. Likewise if a
pellet for a Saker be not round, you may put the same vnrounde pellet into the
round moulde of a pellet for a Culueringe, and by filling the empty places in
the moulde full of melted lead, make thereof a round pellet for a Culueringe.
And after this manner you may make a round pellet of any vnrounde iron pellet
whatsoever.

The 29 Chapter. How you may make a model or form for any Gunladle that shall
appertain unto any Fanconet, foreign piece that is not so high as a Faucon,
Faucon, Minion, Saker, Culueringe, Basiliske, Cannon, or to any other like made
piece: And how upon such modelles, or forms, gunladles for the said pieces
are fashioned: and how a Ladle for any Cannon periero may be made: and how
every cannon periero ought to have a Ladle.
TO the end you may the better understand by this Chapter how a model or
form may be made for any Ladle that shall appertain unto any Fauconet,
foreign piece that is not so high as a Faucon, Faucon, Minion, Saker,
Culueringe, Basiliske, or Cannon, or to any other like made piece: and how the
same Ladles are fashioned, behold here in a figure the pattern of a Copper
plate for any such Ladle, The Copper plates of la^les for pieces of the smaller
sort must be in thicknes at the least so much as the back of a common meat
knife, and for pieces of a bigger sort of a greater thickness.
and note this in it, that A B C does represent that part of the plate which
shall hold the charge in Gunpowder for great Ordinance, and that D A C E F G
do demonstrate that other part of the same plate which must lie round about
upon the staff of such a Ladle. This done, make a model or form of a long
and round piece of wood for every sort of such Ladle plates like unto the
picture H I, and let the model be in his round compass so much more less
than the circumference of a pellet that will fit the piece for which you do
intend to make a Ladle, as the plate of the Ladle is thick: then bend round
that part of the plate which shall hold the charge of gunpowder upon the
said model, so as the two sides of the plate may stand wide open and asunder
in a reasonable space one from an other. Moreover, having in a readiness a
strong staff, which must be round and big at one end like the said
model, and two foot or thereabout longer than the length of the concauitie in
the said piece: wind DACEFG the other part of the said plate round about
upon the big end of the same staff, and nail the said part D A C E F G
fast upon the same end: When you have done all this, the Ladle so made and
nailed upon his staff, will be like unto the picture K L.

diagram of a copperplate for a gun ladle The type of a copper plate for a
Gunne Ladle


depiction of a form for a gun ladle A form for a Gunne Ladle.


depiction of a gun ladle The type of a Gunne Ladle.


There is an other sort of ladles which do belong unto such pieces as are
called in Italian Cannoni Perieri, the name of such a Ladle in Italian is
Scaffetta, and the Gunners in Venice having always in a readiness at the
least one such Ladle for every Cannone Periero, do use with the said Ladles
to put cartredges into their Cannoni Perieri. To make a Scaffetta for any
Cannon periero, take a piece of soft wood which ought to be justly so long as
the Cartredge of the piece for which it shall serve: make this long piece of
wood round, and in his round circumference, equal to the concauitie of the
said piece. Also cleave the said round piece of wood from one end to the
other right in the midst, and make one piece thereof hollow like a ruff
tyle for a house, and let the thickness of the same hollow piece of wood be
neither more nor less than the thickness of the gum at the mouth of the
Chamber which belongs to the piece for which the Scaffetta shall be made.
This done, tie at one end of it a strong cord, and when you have put a
cartredge with this Scaffetta into a Cannon periero, you may by the help of the
said cord draw the Scaffetta out of the same piece.

depiction of the type of a scaffetta The type of a Scaffetta.


Also you may make a Ladle for any Cannon periero of a copper plate after this
manner Prepare a Copper plate, and fashion it as before you have been taught
to fashion Copper plates for Ladles which shall serve to charge Fauconettes,
Faucons, and other such pieces, and make the breadth of every Ladle for a
Cannon periero by the circumference in his Chamber, as the general rule in the
thirty Chapter of this Appendix does instruct you to make the breadth of
Ladles for other pieces by the circumference of a pellet: But in giving length
to the Ladle of a Cannon periero, you must remember that the ladle of a Cannon
periero which requires for his due charge in gunpowder ^/^ of the weight in
his pellet, ought to be in length twice so much as the diameter in the mouth of
the Chamber of that cannon periero, and that the ladle for a cannon periero
which requires for his due charge in gunpowder of the weight in his pellet,
ought to be in length so much as two of those diameters and of one such
diameter.

The 30 Chapter. Rules by which you may know the true breadth and length of any
Ladle that will hold at twice an ordinary charge in Serpentine powder for any
great piece of Artillery except Cannoni Perieri, Chamber, and mortar pieces.
1 A Ladle which shall hold at twice an ordinary charge in serpentine powder
for any piece of artillery (except Chamber and Mortar pieces) that has his due
length, and wayeth in metal more than one hundred weight, and less than one
hundred weight and a half for every pound weight in his iron pellet ought to
contain in breadth 3/5 parts of the compass of one fit pellet for his
piece, and in length the height of 3 such pellettes, or as the Gunners term
is) 3 baules.

2 A ladle which shall hold at twice an ordinary charge in serpentine powder
for any piece of artillery (except Chamber and Mortar pieces) that has his due
length, and wayeth in metal one hundred weight and a half or thereabout for
every pound weight in his iron pellet, ought to contain in breadth 3/5 parts
of the compass of one fit pellette for his Piece, and in length the height
of three such pellettes, and of of one pellet.

3 A ladle which shall hold at twice an ordinary charge in serpentine powder
for any piece of artillery (except Chamber and Mortar pieces) that has his due
length, and wayeth in metal more than 100 weight and a half, and less than
two hundred weight for every pound weight in his iron pellet, ought to contain
in breadth 3/5 parts of the compass of one fit pellet for his piece, and in
length the height of four such pellettes.

4 A ladle which shall hold at twice an ordinary charge in serpentine powder
for any piece of artillery (except Chamber and Mortar pieces) that has his
due length, and wayeth in metal two hundred weight or vpwardes unto three
hundred weight for every pound weight in his iron pellet, ought to contain in
breadth 3/5 parts of the compass of one fit pellet for his piece, and in
length the height of four such pellettes and of of one pellet.

5 A ladle which shall hold at twice an ordinary charge in serpentine powder
for any piece of artillery (except Chamber and Mortar pieces) that has his due
length, and wayeth in metal three hundred weight for every pound weight in
his iron pellet, ought to contain in breadth 3/9 parts of the compass of one
fit pellet for his piece, and in length the height of five such pellettes.

The 31 Chapter. Rules by which you may know the true breadth and length of
any Ladle that will hold at twice an ordinary charge of that sort of corn
gunpowder which I have marked in the sixteen Chapter of this Appendix with the
figure of ^, for any Fauconet, forreyne piece that is not so high as a Faucon,
Faucon, Minion, Saker, Culueringe, Basiliske, Cannon, or any other like made
piece.
TO know the true breadth of any Ladle that shall hold at twice an ordinary
charge of that sort of corn gunpowder which I have marked in the 16 Chapter
of this Appendix with the figure of 1, for any Fauconet foreign piece that is
not so high as a Faucon, Faucon, A general rule for the breadth of gunladles.
Minion, Saker, Culueringe, Basiliske, Cannon, or any other like made piece,
measure with your compass the just length of the semidiameter of a pellet that
is fit for the same piece for which you do intend to make a ladle, and
keeping your compass at that wideness draw therewith a circle upon a boorde
or piece of paper, which circle will be equal to the circumference of the said
fit pellet: This done, your compass remaining still at the said wideness,
set one foot thereof in the very edge of the circle as for example in the
circle descrybed in the margent at A, and with the other foot draw an arc
within the circle from one side of the said circle unto the other, and then
taking with your compass the just length of B C the cord of that arc,
measure out thrice the length of that cord B C upon your plate, as I have
done for your better understanding upon the line D A C E in the figure next
followinge, which represents the true breadth, length, and fashion of a
Copper plate for a Ladle which shall hold at twice an ordinary charge of the
said corn gunpowder for any fauconet, foreign piece that is not so high as a
faucon faucon minion saker, or demi culuering lower than ordinary: After all
this is done, take the same three like lengthes for the breadth of that part
of the plate which must lie close upon and about the end of his staff, and
be nailed thereunto, and then your compass still opened unto the just length
of the said cord B C, set one foot thereof in H the just middle part of the
said line D A C E, and with the other foot make in the line H D a prick at
A, and one other prick in the line H E at C, and when you have so done take
the length of that line A H C for the exact breadth of the other part of the
plate which shall hold at twice an ordinary charge of the said corn
gunpowder for his piece, if the same piece shall not be a Cannon: For the
breadth of a Cannon ladle ought to be a little less than the breadth of ladles
for other pieces, and that little part of his breadth which shall be so taken
away must be added to his length, to this end, that the Cannon ladle may
thereby be more easily turned, and roled within his piece. After you have
found by this general rule the true breadth of a ladle for any piece which
before in this Chapter has been named: You may also (if you will) with great
facility see the just length of the same Ladle in one of the three rules
following.

diagram of a copperplate for a gun ladle The type of a Copperplate for a
Gunladle.


1 A Ladle which shall hold at twice an ordinary charge of the said corn
gunpowder for any Fauconet, foreign piece that is not so high as the Faucon,
Faucon, Minion, Saker, or Culuering which has his proportioned length, and is
fortefied with his due weight and thickness in metal, must be in length 5
times the height of a pellet that is fit for the piece which shall be charged
with the same Ladle, and more the breadth of one finger, that is to say, The
breadth of a finger is here and in the 2 other rules next following added to
the length of every Ladle for to supply the want of that part of the plate
which is cut away at the top of every Ladle to make it their round like a
half circle whereby as it is thought every Ladle will do his office the
better.
that part of this Ladle which shall hold at twice an ordinary charge of the
said corn gunpowder, ought to be in length four times the height of such a
pellet, and the breadth of one finger: and the other part of this Ladle which
must lie very close upon and about the great end of a staff, and be nailed
thereunto, must be in length once the height of such a pellet: But if any piece
named in this rule shall be charged with such fine gunpowder as is marked in
the sixteen Chapter of this Appendix with the figure of 2 then that part of
his Ladle which shall hold the same charge in fine powder, must be no more in
length than thrice the height of one of his pellettes and the breadth of one
finger.

diagram of a copperplate for a gun ladle

2 A Ladle which shall hold at twice an ordinary charge of the said corn
gunpowder for any ordinary demi Culueringe, demi Culuering of the elder sort,
whole Culueringe not so high as ordinary, whole ordinary Culueringe, or whole
Culueringe of the elder sort, which lacks his proportioned length, weight or
due thickness in metal, must be in length four times the height of a pellet
that is fit for the piece which shall be charged with the same Ladle, parts
of the height of one such pellet, and the breadth of one finger: that is to
say, that part of this Ladle which shall hold at twice an ordinary charge of
the said corn gunpowder, ought to be in length three times the height of such
a pellet, parts of the height of one such pellet, and the breadth of one
finger, and the other part of this Ladle which must lie very close upon and
about the great end of a staff, and be nailed thereunto must be in length
once the height of such a pellet.

3 A Ladle which shall hold at twice an ordinary charge of the said corn
gunpowder powder for any demi Ca^non, double Ca^non, or any other like made
piece that shoots an iron pellet waying not above hundred weight and twenty
four pounds of aver de poize weight, must be in length four times the height
of a pellet that is fit for the piece which shall be charged with the same
Ladle: And the breadth of one finger: that is to say, that part of the Ladle
which shall hold at twice an ordinary charge of the said corn gunpowder
ought to be in length three times the height of such a pellet and the breadth
of one finger: And the other part of this Ladle which must lie very close
upon and about the great end of a staff and be nailed thereunto, must be in
length once the height of such a pellet: But if you will charge any of these
pieces with such gunpowder as is marked in the 16 Chapter of this Appendix with
the figure of 2, then that part of the Ladle which shall hold at twice a due
charge in such fine gunpowder for the same piece, must be in length no more
than twice the height of a pellet that is fit for the same piece, and of the
height of such a pellet.

The 32. Chapter. How you may know the diameter of any Chamber bored Cannon:
and make a Ladle for any Chamber bored Cannon.
TO make a Ladle for a Chamber bored Cannon, measure the height of his Chamber
in this sort following: Thrust down a small round iron pyn with a little
hook at his lower end through the touchhole unto the lowest part of the
piece his concauitie, and then mark with a red stone or otherwise that part
of the said iron pyn which is touched with the metal in the upper end of
the touchhole. After this pull up the said iron pyn, and suffering his hook to
stay in the metal of the piece at the lower end of the touchhole, mark
again with a red stone or otherwise that part of the said iron which is
touched with the metal in the said upper end of the touchhole: And when you
have so done, draw all the iron pyn out of the touchhole, and noting well the
space between the said two marks, add thereunto the height of the said
hook, and take the whole measure thereof for the height of the Chamber in that
Cannon: The length of a Chamber in a chamber bored piece is commonly 4. times
the diameter at the mouth of his piece: that is to say, 3 times the said
diameter for his charge in gunpowder, and once the said diameter for his wadde.
This done, open your compass within of an ynche to the wideness of of that
height, and setting one foot of your compass fast upon a piece of paper, or
upon a smoothe boorde, draw thereon with the other foot a circle which will
be of an ynche shorter in his diameter than the height of the said Chamber,
and by that circle search out the breadth of a Ladle for the said Chamber
bored Cannon, as you have been taught in the 31 Chapter of this Appendix, to
seek for the breadthes of other Ladles by the circumference of a pellet: And
when you have so done, note that a Ladle of that breadth for a Chamber bored
Cannon which shall be charged with such fine gunpowder as is marked in the
sixteen Chapter of this Appendix with the figure of 2, must be in length twice
so much as the diameter of the said circle, and parts of the same diameter:
and that a Ladle of that breadth for a Chamber bored Cannon which shall be
charged with such gross gunpowder as is marked in the said sixteen Chapter
of this Appendix with the figure of 1, must be in length thrice so much as the
diameter of the said circle,

The 33 Chapter. How you may make a Ladle for any Bell bored Cannon.
TAke a staff somewhat longer than the Bell bored Cannon, and near unto one
of his ends pearse a hole through the sides of the staff, and thrust a bygwier
into the same hole, and make it to stand fast there like a cross. This wire in
his length ought to be equal to the height or (which is all one) to the
wideness of the mouth in the Bell bored Cannon. After you have set the same
wire crossewise in the staff, thrust it into the bore of the piece so far as
it will go, that is to say, down to the mouth of the bell bore: which done,
draw the wire out of the bore, and measure the Diameter of the bell bore under
the touchhole, as you have been taught in the 31 Chapter of this Appendix to
measure the height of the chamber in the chamberbored Cannon, and add the
Diameter of the said bell bore unto the length of the said wire. Then opening
your compass to of the same length, set one foot thereof fast upon a smoothe
board, or upon paper, and with the other foot draw a circle, and make the
breadth of a ladle, and the circumference of a sponge for a bell bored Cannon,
Note.
equal to the said circle: and make this ladle in length if his piece shall be
charged with such fine gunpowder as is marked in the sixteen Chapter of this
Appendix with the figure of 2, thrice the height or (which is all one) thrice
the Diameter of that circle: But if this ladle shall serve for a bell bored
Cannon that shall be charged with such gross gunpowder as is marked in the
said 16 chapter of this Appendix with the figure of 1, then the said ladle
ought to be in length thrice the height of that circle and of that height: and
now remember that every of these two ladles does at twice duly charge his bell
bored Cannon: and that the length of the chamber in a bell bored piece is
commonly four times and a half the Diameter at the mouth of his Piece.

The 34 Chapter. How you may make Rammers for Faulconets, foreign ordinance
that are not so high as the Faucon, Faucons, minions, Sakers, Culuerings,
Basiliscoes, demie Cannons, and double Cannons: and how a Rammer and ladle
which do belong to some sort of pieces may be set upon one staff: and how a
Rammer and ladle which do belong to some other sort of pieces must be set
upon sundry staves: and how a Rammer serves to thrust home powder that shall
lie loose and dispearsed within a piece, to drive a Tampion close unto powder
within a piece, and to put a pellet close unto the Tampion: and how you may
make rammers for those pieces which in Italian are called Cannoni perieri.
TO frame a Rammer for any Fauconet, foreign piece that is not so high as the
Faucon, Faucon, Minion, Saker, Culuering, Basilisco or Cannon, do thus. A
Rammer for a Cannon and for a whole Culuering is in some countries made no
longer than the Diameter of one of their pellets, and in some places a rammer
is in length once and a half the Diameter of a pellet.

The substance and form of a Tampion.


Make at the end of a strong staff (which ought always to be two foot or
thereabout longer than the piece for which the rammer shall be made) a round
bobbe of wood, and let that bobbe be equal in thickness to the height of a fit
pellet for that piece, and in length so much as once and a half the height of
the same pellet. This bobbe of wood among Gunners is named a rammer because it
serves to thrust home the powder which shall lie loose and dispearsed within a
piece, to drive a Tampion close unto a Cartredge, or to a charge of loose
gunpowder within a piece, and to put a pellet close unto the Tampion, which
Tampion ought always to be made of soft wood, as of willoe, popler, or such
like wood, and at his foremost end to be somewhat less than at his other
end. And here by the way I must tell you that a Rammer and ladle which shall
belong to any Fauconet, foreign piece that is not so high as the Faucon,
Faucon, Minion, Saker, or demie Culuering lower than ordinary may be set upon
one staff: that is to say, the ladle may be nailed upon one end of the staff
and the rammer may be made at the other end of the same staff as this figure
following does show, and that a rammer and ladle which shall appertain unto
an ordinary demie Culuering, demie Culuering of the eldest sort, Culuering not
so high as ordinary, ordinary Culuering, Culuering of the eldest fort,
Basilisco or any sort of Cannon must be set upon several and sundry staves.

depiction of a rammer and ladle and a tampion A Rammer and a ladle upon one
staff. A Tampion.


There is an other kind of rammer which serves to beat down a Tampion of
wood, close unto a cartredge lying within the chamber of a ca^no^ periero, and
the said ra^mer may be made after this manner: make (as before you have bin
taught) a bobbe of wood at the end of a strong staff, let this bobbe be
somewhat less in thickness than the height of the mouth in the chamber of his
Cannon periero, and within one foot and a half of the bobbe end, place a
turning wheel in the said staff, and make the Diameter of that wheel equal
to the height of the concauitie in the said Cannon periero. Moreover toward
the lesser end of the said staff put two strong sticks through and overthwart,
and so you shall finish the Rammer which then will be like to this figure.

depiction of a rammer A Rammer to beat down a Tampion.


If two men after the Rammer is so made will take the said two overthwart sticks
in their hands, and putting the bobbe end of this Rammer into his Cannon
periero charged with a cartredge and a tampion, will at one instant time thrust
the said Rammer with a good strength down upon the tampion, they may through
the help of the said turning wheel (which guides the Rammer just upon the
tampion) beat the same tampion close unto the said Cartredge.

The 35 Chapter. How you may make spunges or scourers for any sort of great
pieces: and how spunges do serve to make clean soul pieces, and to cool hot
pieces.
AS every great piece ought to have his ladle and rammer, so every great piece
ought to have a fit sponge or (which is all one,) a fit scowrer serving to make
a piece clean so often as need shall require, and being well wet with clean
water, or vinegar, or rather with one part of vinegar, and two parts of water
mingled together, to cool a piece whenever it shall happen through many
shootes to be very hot: therefore to make a sponge or scowrer, provide a
staff (as you have been willed to do for a Rammer) more longer by two foot
or thereabout than the concauitie of the Piece for which the sponge shall be
made, and frame at one end of this staff a bobbe like a rammer, and let this
bobbe be somewhat less in compass than the circumference of the concauitie in
the said piece. This done, cover the said bobbe all over with a piece of
sheep skin that has long wool upon it, put the wool side outwardes, and
nail fast the same piece of sheep skin upon the said bobbe, and in so doing
remember that every sponge ought when it is thrust into his piece to stop up
very closely all the concauitie where it lies.

depiction of a sponge or scourer The Type of a sponge or scowrer for a great
piece of artillery


Note.
If in time of need such a sponge can not be provided, you may bind your
cappe or some other piece of cloth full and hard stuffed with straw or hay
upon one end of a long staff, and use the same staff so dressed for a
sponge. Also in time of need for want of a rammer, you may with a staff so
dressed thrust home gunpowder within a piece.

The 36 Chapter. How you may make Cartredges upon a round moulde or form of
wood.
MAke upon a long and round mould or form of wood like unto the picture in
the margent, a long and round bag of paper, fustian, or canuasse: Let the
round wideness of this bag be a little less than the circumference of the
concauitie in the piece that shall shoot this Cartredge, and make the length
of this bag equal to the just length of the ladle which belongs to the
piece that shall shoot the Cartredge. Moreover fashion this bag with a round
flat bottom, and then putting into the same bag so much gunpowder, as the
piece which shall shoot this bag requires for his due charge, shut up the
upper end or mouth of the bag, and when you will afterward put this bag of
gunpowder (which among Gunners is called a Cartredge) into the bore or
concauity of any gunne, remember to cut clean away (before you do put it into
a gunne) that piece of the bag which shall lie directly under and next to the
touchhole of the gunne, to this end, that only by putting fire unto the
gunpowder in the touchhole, you may without any fail give fire to all the
gunpowder in the said bag or Cartredge.

depiction of a form for a cartridge A form for a Cartredge.


Also you may make Cartredges for any great piece of artillery by these rules
following.

A Cartredge for a Fauconet, Faucon, Minio^, Saker, and Culuering which has
his proportioned length, just weight, and due thicknes in metal, ought to be
four baules in length, that is to say four times the diameter of one of their
fit pellets, and in breadth ^ baules lacking ^ part of a baule, I mean such
baules as are in the length of the same Cartredges.

A Cartredge for every Cannon and Basiliske ought to be in length 2 baules and
^ of a baule: that is to say, 2 times the Diameter of one of their fit pellets,
and ^ of the Diameter of one such pellet, and every such cartredge ought to be
in breadth 3 baules lacking ^ part of a baule I mean such baules as are in the
length of the said Cartrege.

A Cartredge for a Cannon periero, and for every other piece which shoots a
pellet of stone ought to be in length twice the diameter of the mouth in the
chamber of his piece, and in breadth 3 baules lacking ^ part of a baule, I mean
such baules as are in the length of the said Cartredge.

When you will make a bag for a Cartredge upon a mould or form, and paste or
glue together the sides of the same bag, anoint well with tallow that part
of the said form which shall lie under the paste or glue, and suffer the
bag to remain upon his form till the paste or glue shall be through dry,
for in drawing the said form out of the bag, you shall see that the bag
will then cleave to no part of the anointed form.

The 37 Chapter. How great pieces of artillery are named and how through the
intolerable fault of careless or unskillful Gunfounders all our great Pieces
of one name are not of one length, nor of one weight, nor of one height in
their mouths.
Our great pieces of artillery are known by these names: double Cannon of the
biggest sort, double Ca^non of the ordinary sort, French double Ca^non, demie
Cannon of the biggest sort, demie Ca^non of the ordinary sort, demie Ca^non of
an extraordinary sort, french demie Ca^non, Cannon with a bell bore, Cannon with
a chamber bore, Basilisk, Culuering of the biggest sort, Culuering of the
ordinary sort, Culuering of an extraordinary sort, demie Culuering of the
biggest sort, demie Culuering of the ordinary sort, demie Culuering of an
extraordinary sort, Saker of the biggest sort, Saker of the ordinary sort,
Saker of an extraordinary sort, Minio^ of the biggest sort, Minio^ of the
ordinary sort, Moiane, Passauolante or Zebratana, Faucon of the ordinary sort,
Faucon of an extraordinary sort, Fauconet, Cannon periero of the old making,
Cannon periero of the nwe making, Mortar piece, Base, Rabinet, Fowler, Sling,
Portpeece, Rebadochino, Aspidi, Smeriglio, Harchibusacrock and musket. But
through the intolerable fault of careless or unskillful gunfounders all our
great pieces of one name are not of one length, nor of one weight nor of one
height in their mouths and therefore the gu^ners books and tables which do
show that al our great pieces of one name are of an equal length, and of an
equal weight, and of an equal height in their mouths are erroneous.

The 38. Chapter. The mixture of metals whereof great pieces of artillery
ought to be made.
THe mixture of metals which is used for the making of good and serviceable
pieces of artillery, does consist of copper, tyn, and latten: and we in England
do call the said mixture in our mother tongue brass, and in Italian Bronzo. The
gunfounders do use to put into the said mixture for every fiuescore pounds in
weight of pure copper, ten pounds in weight of good latten, and eight
pounds in weight of clean tynne. The tynne (as the Gunfounders do say)
causes the said mixture to be hard, the latten helps much to incorporate the
metals together and makes the mixture to be of a good color, and the
copper does much strengthen the same mixture, although among Gunners this is an
approved verity, that the pieces of artillery which are cast of the same
mixture are apt to break after they are made hot with many shootes.

The 39 Chapter. Rules by which you may know the proportioned length, just
weight, and due thickness of metal which ought to be in great pieces of
artillery.
Length.
1 EVery Fauconet, and foreign piece, which shoots not a bullet bigger than
the bullet of a Fauconet, ought to be in length 34 times the Diameter of his
mouth.

2 Weight.
2 Every Fauconet and foreign Piece which shoots not a bullet bigger than the
bullet of a Fauconet ought to way in metal 242 pounds and of a pound of
aver de poize weight for every like pound weight of metal in his pellet:
Thickness.
Or the thickness of metal at the bottom of the bore in every Fauconet and
foreign Piece which shoots not a bullet bigger than the bullet of a Fauconet
ought to be so much as the Diameter in the mouth of the same bore, and the
thickness of metal at the touchhole in every of the said Pieces ought to be
^/^ of the said Diameter, and the thickness of metal at the trunnions in
every of the said Pieces ought to be 63/^ of the said Diameter, and the
thickness of metal at the neck of every such Piece ought to be of the said
Diameter.

Length.
3 Every Faucon, Minion, Passauolante, Saker, Moiane and Culuering, ought to be
in length 32 times the Diameter of his mouth.

Weight.
4 Every Faucon, Minion, Passauolante, Saker, Moiane and Culuering, ought to
way in metal 242 pounds and of a pound of aver de poize weight for every
like pound weight of metal in his pellet: Thickness.
Or the thickness of metal at the bottom of the bore in every Faucon,
Minion, Passauolante, Saker, Moiane, and Culuering, ought to be so much as the
Diameter in the mouth of the same bore: and the thickness of metal at the
touchhole in every of the said Pieces ought to be 9/8 of the said Diameter, and
the thickness of metal at the trunnions in every of the same Pieces ought to
be 63/64 of the said Diameter, and the thickness of metal at the neck of
every such Piece ought to be 3/8 of the said Diameter.

Length. The Cannons which have a longer length than this proportioned length
are called Basterd Cannons. Weight Thickness.
5 The proportioned length of every quarter Cannon is 28 times the Diameter of
his mouth: the proportioned length of every demie Cannon is between 21 and 25
times the Diameter of his mouth: the proportioned length of every double Cannon
is 18 times the Diameter of his mouth: and the proportioned length of every
Basiliske is bitweene 24 and 31 times the Diameter of his mouth.

6 Every Cannon and Basiliske ought to way 161 pounds, twelve ounces, three
drammes, one scruple, thirteen grains and 1/^ of a grain in metal of aver
de poize weight for every pound of like weight in his pellet: Or the thickness
of metal at the bottom of the bore in every Cannon ought to be so much as the
Diameter in the mouth of the same bore, A cannon thus fortified with metal
(as Luigui Collado writes) may be charged with in fine gu^powder of his pellet
weight. I mean such gunpowder as is marked in the sixteenth chapter of this
Appendix with the figure of 2.
and the thickness of metal at the touchhole in every Cannon ought to be
9/8 or at the least so much as the said Diameter: and the thickness of metal
at the trunnions in every Cannon ought to be so much as the said Diameter, or
at the least parts of the same Diameter: and the thickness of metal at the
neck in every Cannon ought to be 5/^ parts of the said Diameter: and the
thickness of metal at the bottom of the bore in every Basilisk ought to be
a little more than the Diameter in the mouth of the same bore: and the
thickness of metal at the touchhole in every Basiliske ought to be ^1/22 of
the said Diameter: and the thickness of metal at the trunnions in every
Basiliske ought to be 41/44 of the said Diameter: and the thickness of metal
at the neck in every Basiliske ought to be 5/^ of the said Diameter.

depiction of the ends of three gun barrells

7 There are two sorts of such pieces as are named Cannoni perieri: that is to
say, there are Cannoni perieri of the old making, and there are Cannoni perieri
of a nwe making, and the Cannoni perieri of both these two sorts are always
chamber bored.

Length.
8 The proportioned length of every Cannon periero is between six and eight
times the Diameter of his mouth.

Chamber.
9 The length of the chamber in every Cannon periero of the old making ought to
be four times and the Diameter at the mouth of the chamber.

Chamber.
10 The diameter at the mouth of the chamber in every Cannon periero of the old
making, ought to be parts of the Diameter in the mouth of the Cannon periero.

Weight.
11 Every Cannon periero ought to way in metal 80 pounds, fourteen ounces,
one dram, two scruples, six grains, and of a grain of aver de poize weight
for every like pound weight of stone in his pellet: Thickness.
Or the thickness of metal at the bottom of the bore in every Cannon periero
ought to be so much as the Diameter at the mouth of his chamber, or (which is
all one) of the Diameter at the mouth of the Cannon periero: and the thickness
of metal at the touchhole in every Cannon periero of the old making ought to
be of the Diameter at ^e mouth of the said Cannon periero, and the thickenesse
of metal at the mouth of t^ chamber in every Cannon periero of the old
making ought to be part of the Diameter at the mouth of the cannon periero: and
the thickenesse of metal at the trunnions in every cannon periero of the old
making ought to be part of the Diameter at the mouth of the cannon periero: and
the thickness of metal at the neck of every cannon periero of the old
making ought to be part of the Diameter at the mouth of the cannon periero: and
the thickness of metal at the touchhole in every cannon periero of the nwe
making ought to be so much as the Diameter at the mouth of the chamber in the
cannon periero: and the thickness of metal in the gum of the mouth of
every cannon periero of the nwe making, ought to be of the Diameter at the
mouth of the chamber in the cannon periero: and the thickness of metal at
the trunnions in every cannon periero of the nwe making ought to be of the
diameter at the mouth of the chamber in the cannon periero, and the thickness
of metal at the neck of every cannon periero of the nwe making ought to be
part of the Diameter at the mouth of the chamber in the cannon periero:

12 The length of the chamber in every ca^non periero of the nwe making, ought
to be shorter than the length of a chamber in a cannon periero of the old
making, because the gunpowder which in this our age does commonly charge every
cannon periero, is more stronger than the gunpowder which did charge in time
past the Cannoni perieri of the old making.

Mortar p^
13 The thickness of metal at the breech of every motter piece ought to be so
much as the Diameter in the mouth of his chamber: the thickness of metal at
the trunnions in every mortar piece, ought to be so much as the semidiameter of
the mouth in the chamber: and the thickness of metal at the neck of every
mortar piece ought to be ^ part of the Diameter in the mouth of the chamber.

14 The Diameter at the mouth of the chamber in every mortar piece, ought to
be equal to the semidiameter in the mouth of the mortar piece: and the length
of every chamber in a mortar piece ought to be so much as once and a half the
Diameter of the chamber.

The use (...) mortar p^ Note.
15 Mortar pieces are commonly used in the night time to shoot pellets of stone,
baules of wildefire, cases filled full of stones, pellets of lead, or square
pieces of iron: Note.
And when an expert gunner will shoot in a mortar piece he puts no wadde
upon the powder in the piece, nor gives fire to the same piece in any other
place than at his mouth with a gunmatch.

The 40 Chapter. To measure the thickness of metal in any part of a piece of
artillery.
MEasure first with a pair of calleper co^passes, or with an ynch rule the
whole thicknes of the piece. Likewise measure with a pair of other co^passes,
I mean straight co^passes, or with an ynch rule the Diameter or (which is all
one) the height of the concauitie in the Piece: then subtracting the height of
the said concauitie from the whole thickness of the Piece in that part which
was so measured, take half of the remainder for the thicknes of the metal in
that measured part of the piece: Or for lack of a pair of calleper compasses
put a girdle or string that will not stretch round about the outside of the
Piece in that part which is to be measured, and measure exactly so much of that
girdle or string as went about the piece: this done, multiply that measure by
seven, and divide the product by 22, and so the quotient will give you the true
measure of the whole thickness of the Piece in that part which was measured:
the rest of this work you must do as you did when you measured the whole
thickness of the Piece with a pair of Calleper compasses.

The 41 Chapter. How every great piece of Artillery has trunnions for three
causes: and how Gunfounders may learn to set the trunnions of every great
piece in their due places.
EVery great Piece of artillery has trunnions for three causes, of which the
first is to hold up the Piece upon his carriage, the second is to make a Piece
when it rests upon them in his carriage to move easily up and down, and at
the will of the Gunner to lie sometimes level, and sometimes mounted: And the
third cause is, that they set in their due places, and well laid upon a fit
carriage, will make their Piece in his discharge to lie fast and steadie without
any moving forwards, or backwards, downward, or toward any side, wherein
the whole inportance of the shoot does rest. When the trunnions of a Piece are
set to high, that is to say, more nearer to the mouth of their Piece tha^ they
should be, then the Piece in which the trunnions are so set will be so heavy
at his tail, as that the Gunner shall not without great pain and strength
lift it up. And when the trunnions of a piece shall be set too lo, that is to
say more nearer to the touchhole than they should be, then the mouth of their
Piece (by means of the unequal and great weight which is between the said
mouth and the said trunnions) will in his discharge fall down toward the
ground, wherefore I will not wrap up here in silence the rules by which
gunfounders may always set the trunnions of every great Piece in their due
places.

Divide the length of the Piece into seven equal parts, and in the third part
measured from the touchhole toward the mouth of the Piece set the trunnions so
as parts of the circumference of the Piece in that place where the trunnions
shall be set, may be seen above upon, the Piece between the two trunnions.
Also a Gunfounder skillful in the art of numbering, may by the help of the
golden rule set the trunnions of every great Piece in their due places after
this manner: he may multiply the length of the Piece in which the trunnions
shall be set by three, and having divided the product thereof by seven note the
quotient number for the measure of the space between the loest end of the piece
his concauitie and the place where the trunnions must be set: As for example if
a Gunfounder would know in what part of a piece which is 144 inches in length
the trunnions of the same Piece should be set, he must multiply 144 the length
of the Piece by three, whereof will come 432 which divided by seven yields in
the quotient 61 inches and 5/7 of an ynch for the space between the loest end
of that piece his concauitie and the place where the trunnions of the same
Piece ought to stand.

The 42 Chapter. How great pieces of artillery may be cast of lead? how the
thickness of a leaden piece round about the concauitie so far as the due
charge of gunpowder for the same piece will reach ought to be once and a half,
so much as the height of a pellet that is fit for the same piece: how the
thickness of a leaden piece at his neck round about the concauitie, ought to
be parts of the height of the said pellet: how any one piece of what weight
soever it is, may be drawn by the strength of many men from one place to
another. And how old rustie iron serves to make gunne pellets better than nwe
iron.
When a city or town shall be besieged that has in it no iron, or brass
pieces of artillery for offensive and defensive service, then the inhabitants
of that City or Town may in time of need cause great pieces of artillery to
be cast of lead, whereof there is no lack within any City or Town of
England, for such pieces of lead will bear well the ordinary charge of powder
and pellet, if from the touchhole so far as the due charge of gunpowder for
the same piece will reach, the thickness of the metal round about the
concauitie of the piece be once and a half the height of his pellet, and that
the thickness of the metal round about the concauitie at the neck of the
piece be parts of the height of the said pellet. An Admonition.
But these pieces being made very hot with much shooting will quickly break,
therefore the Gunners must not shoot in them when they are very hot.

Although a piece of artillery so cast of lead will be of a great weight, yet
this is to be believed that a piece so cast of lead will be easily drawn by
the strength of many men from one place to an other within a Town. For Luigui
Collado in the 71 chapter of his Pratica manuale di arteglieria says, that in
Barcellona a chamber belonging to a piece was of such weight as twenty men
might not lift it, and that poor people did use in Summer to sleep within the
said piece which had a bed or carriage more than three fadome about. And we
may also read in the second book and sixteenth chapter of Englands
description in Holle^sheads Cronicles, that the great Turk had a gunne (cast
by one Orbane a Dane) which was drawn to the siege of Constantinople by two
thousand men and seventy yokes of Oxen. This Orbane did also cast for the Turk
one other great Piece which did shoot a pellet of more weight than two talents.
Here I might take occasion by reason of that which has been written in this
Chapter to show how great pieces of artillery and pellets of iron are cast, but
I will pass over the same with silence, and refer those which are desirous
to learn how pieces of artillery and iron pellets are cast, to the
Pirotechnie of Vannuccio Biringuccio where they may read enough thereof, and
see that old rustie iron is better to make gunne pellets than nwe iron.

The 43 Chapter. How you may see, and also otherwise know whether or no honey
combs, crackes, or flawes are within the concauitie of any great piece of
artillery.
SO soon as you have charged and discharged a piece, cover very close the
mouth of the same piece all over with leather, and at the same instant cause an
other person to stop up suddenly the touchhole of the same piece: and so if
any unknown flawes or crackes do go through the metal in any part of the
piece, a visible smoke will come out of the piece through the same hidden flawes
and cracks. Also you may when the Sun shines take a steel glass, and with
the same cast the beams or shadow of the Sun into the mouth or concauitie of
the piece: for by this means a very great and clear light will be within the
concauitie of the piece, and by that clear light you shall plainly see every
honey comb, crack, and flaw within the same concauitie. But forasmuch as the
Sun does not always shine and that at some time in a bright Sun shining
day a steel glass may be wanting, you may at such times take a stick
somewhat longer than the concauitie of the piece, and having cloven one end of
the said stick for to hold an end of a candle, light an end of a candle, and
put the same into the said clift, and thrust that lighted end of a candle
sticking fast in the said clift or slit down to the loest end of the
concauitie in the gunne, and look circumspectly by the light of the same
candle whether or no any honey combs, flawes or crackes are in the concauitie
of that gunne. Also if you striking a piece of artillery upon the out side of
the metal in diverse places with an yro^ hammer shall at every stroke hear a
clear sound, it is a sign that the same piece is without any honey co^bes,
flawes, or cracks: But if you so striking the piece of artillery with an iron
hammer shall hear a hoarse sound, then without doubt there are honey combs,
flawes, or crackes in the same piece.

The 44 Chapter. How any great piece of artillery may be drawn over a soft
marrish ground, bog, or owes.
WHen you shall have occasion to draw any great piece of artillery over a
soft marrish ground, bogge, or owes, make for the same piece a strong carriage
like unto a flat bottomed bote that is broad at one end and sharp at the other
end as this figure hear drawn does show.

depiction of a gun carriage

Let the said carriage be tight, so as no water or dirt may come into it, and
when you have so done, lay the piece of artillery upon the said carriage that
it may not by any means role or fall of from it, and upon one or (if you may)
upon both sides of the soft ground cause oxen, or horses, or men (where no
oxen or horses may go) to draw all together the piece so lying in his
carriage over the same soft ground, which will not be a hard work to do,
for (as I have read) a double Cannon will swim upon such a carriage in a
water of one foot in depth, and lying upon such a carriage can not sink the
same carriage in any marrish, bogge or owes above half a foot.

The 45 Chapter. How by knowing the certain number of men, horses, or oxen
which will draw any one piece of artillery, you may tell what number of men,
horses, or oxen will be able to draw any other piece of artillery: how you
may know what number of men will in drawing counteruaile any number of horses,
or oxen: how you may know what number of horses will in drawing counteruaile
any number of Oxen: and how this is to be noted that a fraction in a quotient
number of men, horses, or oxen is not to be reckoned.
Write first in your memorial that 80 men may draw a Piece of artillery
waying eight thousand pounds in weight, and that six horses may draw a piece
of 860 pounds in weight, and that six oxen may draw a piece of Artillery
waying 1058 pounds in weight, and afterward if you shall be asked what
number of men will suffice to draw any Piece of Artillery, multiply the
weight of the Piece by which the question is asked in 80 the number of men that
will suffice (as you have noted in your memorial) to draw a piece of eight
thousand pounds in weight, and divide the product thereof by eight thousand
the weight of the Piece which 80 men may draw, and so the quotient will show
the number of men that will suffice to draw the piece of which the question
was asked. As for example it shall be supposed that this question is asked,
what number of men will suffice to draw a piece waying 860 pounds in weight?
To answer the same question, I multiply 860 the weight of the Piece by which
the question was asked in 80 the number of men which (as I have noted in my
memorial) will suffice to draw a piece of eight thousand pounds in weight,
and thereof comes 68800 which I divide by the said number of eight thousand
the weight of the Piece which (as my memorial does record) may be drawn with
fourscore men, and so the quotient yields eight (leaving out the fraction
which remains) for the number of men that will suffice to draw the same piece
of 860 pounds in weight, which by reduction makes seven hundred weight,
hundred weight, and twenty pounds of Aver de poize weight of England. Also
let it be supposed that I am required to to tell what number of oxen will
suffice to draw the said piece waying 860 pounds in weight? For to answer
this question I peruse my memorial and finding there that six Oxen will
suffice to draw a piece of 1058 pounds in weight, I multiply 860 the weight
of the piece by which the question was asked, in six the number of oxen which
will suffice to draw the said piece of 1058 pounds in weight, and so the
product thereof is 5160, and then dividing the said produced number videlicet
5160 by 1058 the weight of the piece which six oxen will draw I find in the
quotient four (leaving out the fraction which remains) for the number of
oxen which will suffice to draw a piece of 860 pounds in weight. Likewise if
I should be required to tell what number of horses will suffice to draw a piece
of 1800 pounds in weight, I would multiply 1800 the weight of the piece by
which the question is asked in six the number of horses (which as I am
instructed by my said memorial will suffice to draw a piece of 860 pounds in
weight) and divide the product thereof by the said number of 860, and take the
quotient thereof which is twelve (leaving out the remaining fraction) for the
number of horses which will suffice to draw the said piece of 1800 pounds in
weight.

After this manner (leaving out always the fraction which shall remain,
because it is not to be reckoned in an answer to a question concerning the
number of men, horses, or oxen which will suffice to draw a piece of
artillery) you may tell what number of men, horses, or oxen will suffice to
draw any piece of artillery whatsoever, what number of men will in drawing
counteruaile any number of horses, or oxen, and what number of horses will in
drawing counteruaile any number of oxen.

Weight of Pieces. Number of men which will suffice to draw the same pieces.
8000 80 860 8 Weight of pieces. Oxen to draw. 1058 6 860 4 Weight of pieces.
Horses to draw. 860 6 1800 12

The 46 Chapter. How all platfourmes for great Ordinance ought to be covered
with wooden planks: and how it is better to plant great Ordinance upon plain
and level platfourmes, than upon slope platfourmes.
Cover all platformes for great Ordinance with thick, and smooth, wooden
planks joined close together: for if great pieces of artillery be in time of
service planted upon a floor of earth, the wheels of their cariages may with
recoiles so sink into the ground, that the gunners shall not be able to manage
well the same pieces. And though some platfourmes for great Ordinance are high
behind the carriages of pieces, and lo where the wheels of the same carriages
shall ordinarily stand, to this end that the pieces lying in their carriages
upon the same slope platfourmes may after they have recoyled be speedily
brought again into their ordinary places, yet (as many expert men in the
gunners art do think) it is better to plant great Ordinance upon plain and
level platfourmes, than upon slope platfourmes, because the great pieces of
artillery which shall be discharged from such slope platfourmes will
oftentimes shoot short of their marks.

The 47 Chapter. How you may know by a gunners Quadrant, and also by a gunners
Semicircle whether or no a platfourme for great Ordinance, or any other piece
of ground, lies in a perfect level.
TO perceive whether or no a platfourme for great Ordinance, or any other piece
of ground lies in a perfect level, let us suppose that L M is the platfoume
or piece of ground upon which great Ordinance shall be planted, and that I am
required to tell whether or no the said platfourme is plain and level. For
this purpose I place my Quadrant or Semicircle upon a staff, or some other
immovable thing, and do move it up or down until the line and plummet
upon the same does hang precisely upon the line of level, that is to say in
the Quadrant upon the line H L, and in the Semicircle upon the line R S: and
then looking through the sightes or channel of the same Quadrant or
Semicircle, I do see N a mark which is level with mine eye, and fixed in a
staff or such a like thing perpendicularlie erected. After this I measure
exactly the height of mine eye from the ground, that is to say the length of
the line O L, and likewise I measure the height of the said mark N, that is to
say the length of the line N M, and because I find by so doing that the said
line N M is equal to the line O L, and that the said platform or piece of
ground does lie upon the right side, and upon the left side according as the
line L M does lie, I conclude that the said ground L M lies in a perfect
leuel. For the line L M which lies along upon that piece of ground (by the 33
proposition of the first book of Euclide) is equidistant to the line O N which
goes by the plane of the Horizon, and consequently the said piece of ground or
platfourme upon which the said line L M goes is equidistant (by the
foureteenth proposition of the eleventh book of Euclide) to the plane of the
Horizon. But if the line N M had been longer than the line O L, I would have
concluded that the same piece of ground is more lower at M than it is at L. And
contrariwise if the line M N had been shorter than the line O L, I would have
concluded that the same ground is more higher at M than it is at L. And after
this sort I will proceed to the right side, and to the left side, and prove
whether or no the said platfourme or piece of ground does lie round about
according as the said line L M does lie. And so by this supposed work you may
learn to try whether or no a platform, or any other piece of ground lies in
a perfect level.

depiction of the use of a quadrant

The 48 Chapter. How Gabbions or Baskets of earth may be made upon platfourmes
in time of military service for the defense of Gunners: and how men upon a
platfourme or upon the walls of a City, Town, or Fort, where no Gabbions
or Baskets of earth are to shadow them in time of military service, may be
shadowed with canuas, cables, ropes, wet straw or hay, mattresses or ship
sails.
PRepare a convenient number of osiar twigges or pliant rods, and for every
gabbion or basket which shall be made 16 long stakes: set the stakes of every
basket upright in the form of a circle and fast in the ground near unto the
sides of such great pieces as shall be used for defensive and offensive
service. And let each piece of ground which shall be so circularwise enclosed
with 16 stakes for a gabbion or basket, be four foot wide within the stakes.
This done, wreath about the stakes of each gabbion or basket so many of the
said Osiar twigges or pliant rods as will suffice to make every basket
extend one foot in height above the head of the taulest gunner. After you
have so done, fill up the said baskets with earth which must be thrown into
each basket by a little and little at a time, and cause a man standing within
every basket to tread well and ram down all the same earth as it shall be
so cast in. But when gunners shall serve upon a platfourme where no baskets of
earth are set to defend them, they may shadow themselves with cables, or big
ropes, with wet straw or wet hay, with dead bodies of enemies, with
mattresses, ship sails or canuas hanged stiff up so as the enemy shall not
see any mark or man upon the platfourme to shoot at, and with a line draw
up the nearer or loost end of the same mattresses, ship sails or canuas, so
often as they shall have cause to shoot at their enemies. This devise as some
men do think will be also profitable for those that shall in time of war
stand upon the walls of a city, town, or forte, because they may put up at
their pleasure the canuas, and look under the same with more safety than
through the loope or look holes in the wall at which the enemis are always
ready to shoot.

If for defense in service you will make a double Gabbion which at the least
ought to be eight foot in wideness and 25 feet and 1/7 of a foot in
compass, dig at the end of every foot in measure upon that compass, a
whole foot and foot or somewhat more in deepenesse and set upright in every of
the said holes a staff often foot in length and in compass so big as a
man's arm. This done, wreath pliant twigges of Osiar, or of nut trees, or of
oak, or of willoe about all the same erected staves up to their tops, and while
you are so occupied, cause an other man with a wooden beetle to beat down
your work close together, whereby it will be more able to resist the violent
bloe of a pellet: Also in the very midst of the Gabbion drive a strong piece
of oak into the ground, and lay other pieces of timber joined fast together
ouerthwarte the gabbion from one of his sides to the other. After all this,
fill up the said gabbion with good clay, or with black, small, and wet earth
well rammed down, or with green turfes dug out of meddowes, or with bags
full of earth or fine sand, or with bags of wool which is the best thing of
al for this purpose and take heed that you do put no stone into any gabbion
among those things which do fill it up.

The 49 Chapter. Rules by which Rabinets, Bases, Fauconets, foreign ordinance
that are not so high as the Faucon, Faucons, Minions, Sakers, Culuerings,
Basiliskes, Cannons, and all pieces which do shoot stone pellets may for
proof and also for service be duly charged with that sort of corn gunpowder
which is marked in the 16 Chapter of this Appendix with the figure of 1, and by
which you may tell what room a due charge of such corn gunpowder will fill up
in the concauitie of any great piece that shoots pellets of lead, or pellets
of iron.
1 YOu may prove all sorts of great pieces with three shoots in this manner
following. Charge every Rabinet, Base, Smeriglio, Rebadochino, Fauconet,
Faucon, Minion, Passauolante, Moiane, Saker, and Culuering which is fortified
with metal as it ought to be, for the first shoot of proof with the whole
weight in gunpowder of his pellet, for the second shoot of proof with 5/4 in
gunpowder of the weight in his pellet, and for the third and last shoot of
proof with 3/2 in gunpowder of the weight in his pellet. As for example, if a
piece which shall be proved does shoot a pellet of 12 pounds in weight, you
must charge the said piece for the first shoot of proof, with 12 pounds in
gunpowder, for the second shoot of proof, with 15 pounds in gunpowder, and
for the third shoot of proof with eighteen pounds in gunpowder.

2 Charge every Ca^non and Basilisk for the first shoot of proof with in
gu^powder of the weight in his pellet, for the second shoot of proof with
parts in gu^powder of the weight in his pellet, and for the third and last
shoot of proof with the whole weight of his pellet in gu^powder. As for
example if any Piece named in this second rule shall be proved with a fit
pellet of 45 pounds in weight, you must charge the said piece for the first
shoot of proof with thirty pounds in gunpowder, and for the second shoot
of proof with 37. pounds and pound in gunpowder, and for the third and last
shoot of proof with 45 pounds in gunpowder.

3 Charge every cannon periero of the old making for the first shoot of
proof with in gunpowder of the weight in his stone pellet, for the second
shoot of proof with 7/18 parts in gunpowder of the weight in his stone
pellet, and for the third and last shoot of proof with 4/9 parts in
gunpowder of the weight in his stone pellet. As for example, if a cannon
periero of the old making shall be proved with a fit stone pellet of 36
pounds in weight, you must charge the said cannon periero for the first shoot
of proof with 12 pounds in gunpowder, for the second shoot of proof with 14
pounds in gunpowder, and for the third shoot of proof with 16 pounds in
gunpowder.

4 Charge every cannon periero of the nwe making for the first shoot of proof
with in gunpowder of the weight in his stone pellet, for the second shoot of
proof with 5/^ parts in gunpowder of the weight in his stone pellet, and for
the third and last shoot with parts in gunpowder of the weight in his stone
pellet. As for example, if a cannon periero of the nwe making shall be proved
with a fit stone pellet of 36 pounds in weight, you must charge the said
cannon periero for the first shoot of proof with 18 pounds in gunpowder, for
the second shoot of proof with 22 pounds and pound in gunpowder, and for
the third and last shoot of proof with 27 pounds in gunpowder.

5 Also you may prove any great piece of artillery by these rules following:
charge and discharge thrice together, for proof every Smeriglio, Rebadochino,
Base, Rabinet, Fauconet, Faucon, Minion, Saker, Passauolante, and demie
Culuering loer than ordinary with the whole weight in corn gunpowder of his
leaden pellet.

6 Charge and discharge thrice together for proof, every ordinary demie
Culuering, demie Culuering of the biggest sort, whole Culuering not so high as
ordinary, whole ordinary demie Culuering, and whole Culuering of the biggest
sort which is not so well fortified with metal as it should be, with the
whole weight in corn gunpowder of his iron pellet.

7 For proof charge and discharge thrice together every Cannon, and
Basiliske, which shoots an iron pellet of less weight than hundred weight,
and 24 pounds of aver de poize weight in England, with the whole poise in
corn gunpowder of the weight in his pellet.

8 For proof charge and discharge thrice together every cannon periero and
every other piece which shoots a stone pellet of less weight than hundred
weight, ten pounds and three ounces of aver de poize weight in England, with
part in corn gunpowder of the poyse in his stone pellet.

9 For service charge every Rabinet, Base, Smeriglio, Rebadochino, Fauconet,
Faucon, Minion, Passauolante, Saker, Moiane, and Culuering which is duly
fortified with metal, with the whole weight in corn gunpowder of his iron
pellet: And note that such a charge in gunpowder fills up within the
concauitie of every Piece named in this rule, so much room as will contain
four fit pellets and the breadth of one finger joined to them.

10 For service charge every ordinary demie Culuering, demie Culuering of the
biggest sort, whole Culuering not so high as ordinary, whole ordinary
Culuering and whole Culuering of the biggest sort which is not duly fortified
with metal, with parts in corn gunpowder of the weight in his iron pellet:
and note that such a charge in gunpowder fills up within the concauitie of
every piece named in this tenth rule, so much room as will contain three fit
pellets, parts of one fit pellet, and the breadth of one finger joined to them.

11 For service charge every Cannon and Basiliske which shoots an iron pellet
of less weight than hundred weight and 24 pounds of aver de poize weight in
England with ^/^ parts in corn gunpowder of the poise in his iron pellet: And
note that such a charge in gunpowder fills up within the concauitie of
every piece named in this 11 rule so much room as will contain three fit
pellettes, and the breadth of one finger joined to them.

12 When you shall be forced in time of service to shoot out of a Cannon or
Basiliske a stone Pellet for want of iron pellettes, you shall then duly
charge the said piece with in such fine gunpowder as is marked in the 16
Chapter of this Appendix with the figure of 2, or with ^/3 in such gunpowder as
is marked in the said 16 Chapter with the figure of 1, of the weight in the
said stone pellet.

13 When any great piece of artillery shall be charged with such fine gunpowder
as is marked in the said 16 Chapter of this Appendix with the figure of 3, you
must abate 1/^ out of his ordinary charge.

14 For service charge every Cannon Periero of the old making with in corn
gunpowder of the weight in his stone pellet.

15 For service charge every Cannon Periero of the nwe making with in corn
gunpowder of the weight in his stone pellet.

16 Every piece which shall be proved, ought to lie mounted in the times of his
discharge for proof, at 30 degrees or thereabouts.

17 The gunpowder which has been named in this Chapter without this addition
fine, is of that sort of gunpowder which is marked in the sixteen Chapter of
this Appendix with the figure of 1.

The 50 Chapter. Rules by which carriages for great pieces of artillery ought
to be made.
1 THe plankes in the carriage of every Smeriglio, Rebadochino, Fauconet,
Faucon, Minion, Passauolante, Saker, Moiane, and Culueringe, Length.
ought to be in length once and a half so much as the Canon of their piece. As
for example, if the Canon of a piece be in length thirty two times the diameter
at his mouth, then the plankes in the carriage (I mean every planke in the
carriage) ought to be in length forty eight times that diameter.

2 The plankes in the carriage of every Smeriglio, Rebadochino, Fauconet,
Faucon, Minion, Passauolante, Saker, Moiane, and Culueringe, Breadth.
ought to be in breadth at their foreendes four times and the diameter in the
mouth of their piece.

3 The plankes in the carriage of every Smeriglio, Rebadochino, Fauconet,
Faucon, Minion, Passauolante, Saker, Moiane, and Culueringe, Breadth.
ought to be in breadth about their midst, I mean in those places which are
touched with the two ends of the flat tra^some in the carriage, 4 times the
diameter in the mouth of their piece.

4 The plankes in the carriage of every Smeriglio, Rebadochino, Fauconet,
Faucon, Minion, Passauolante, Saker, Moiane, and Culueringe, Breadth.
ought to be in breadth in their ends which shall lie upon the ground, twice
and a half the diameter in the mouth of their piece.

5 The plankes in the carriage of every Smeriglio, Rebadochino, Fauconet, and
such other small pieces, Thickness.
ought to be in thickness once and a half the diameter in the mouth of their
piece, to the end they may bear a proportion to their wheels.

6 The plankes in the carriage of every Faucon, Minion, Passauolante, Saker,
Moiane, and Culueringe, Thickness.
ought to be in thickness once so much as the diameter in the mouth of their
piece.

7 If a Gunner shall desire to have light carriages for his pieces, he may
cause a Carpenter to cut away from the thickness of the plankes in every
carriage, that is to say, Thickness.
from their insides between the flat transome and the tail transome so much
as part of the diameter in the mouth of the piece which shall lie upon the
carriage.

8 Four transomes, that is to say, the fore transome, the flat transome, the
upright transome, and the tail transome, are put into the carriage of every
Smeriglio, Rebadochino, Transome.
Fauconet, Faucon, Minion, Passauolante, Saker, Moiane, Culueringe, Cannon, and
Basiliske, to hold fast together the plankes or sides of their carriage.
Also the fore transome, the flat transome, and the upright transome do serve
in their carriage for other uses declared in the 3 rules next following.

^re Tran^e.
9 The fore transome of a carriage ought to be strengthened with two iron boltes
put through it, to hold up the mouth of his piece that it may not in his
discharge fall down toward the ground.

10 The flat transome of a carriage ought to be strengthened (especially if
it shall lie under a Cannon or Basiliske) with two boltes of iron put through
it, ^t Tran^e.
that it may be able to bear the weight in the tail of his piece when it is
charged: And this flat transome must lie in the sides of his carriage so lo as
may be, because the loer that this flat transome does lie in his carriage,
the more higher will his piece be mounted.

^right Tran^e.
11 The upright transome (which more properly may be called the slope transome,
considering it does lie aslope in his carriage) ought to be strengthened with
two iron boltes put through it, or very near unto it, from one side of the
carriage unto the other, that it may hold up the tail of his piece when it
shall be mounted or imbased with wedges.

12 Between the upright transome and the tail transome, that is to say, a
little above the tail transome, a strong bolte of iron must lie fast from one
side of every carriage to the other, ^mbers.
and from one limber in every carriage to the other: which limbers ought to be
set upon the ends of that bolte in the outsides of their carriages, and
stayed from moving up or down when a horse shall draw between them, with
two moveable shuttles of iron thrust into them through their sides, ^uttles.
and through the sides of the carriage a little above the tail transome.

^e centers of ^les for trun^ons.
13 The centers of the holes in the sides of a carriage where the trunnions of a
Smeriglio, Rebadochino, Fauconet, Faucon, Minion, Passauolante, Moiane, Saker,
Culueringe, Cannon, or Basiliske shall lie, ought to be distant from the fore
ends in the sides of their carriage, 3 times and a half the diameter in the
mouth of their piece. And the said holes ought to be in depth parts of the
thickness in their trunnions, for part of the thickness in the trunnions
must always lie above the uppermost part of the said holes.

^heeles for ^rriages which shall ^ue in the ^elde.
14 The wheels in the carriage of every Smeriglio, Rebadochino, Fauconet,
Faucon, Minion, Passauolante, Moiane, Saker, and Culueringe, when they shall be
used in the field, ought to be in height 14 times the diameter in the mouth of
their piece besides the thickness of the iron which lies about their ringes
to save them from wearing: that is to say the iron about the ringes of the
wheels may be in thickness 1/12 or if you will 1/10 part of the said
diameter. The height of the ringe in every of the said wheels ought to be
equal to the said diameter. The spokes between the naue and the ringe of every
such wheel ought to be in length 4 times so much as the said diameter. The
naue of every such wheel ought to be in thickness 4 times so much as the said
diameter, and the naue of every such wheel ought to be in length 4 times and a
half the said diameter.

Wheels for ^arriages which shall ^rue upon ^alles of ^ownes, sorts, and
castles. ^ Palm is in ^easure ^art of a foot.
15 The wheels in the carriage of every Smeriglio, Rebadochino, Fauconet,
Faucon, Minion, Passauolante, Moiane, Saker, and Culueringe, when they shall be
used upon the wall of a forte, castle, or town, ought to be in height double
to the height of the parapet of that wall, which parapet (as Carlo Tetti
writes in the 1 Chapter of his second book delle fortificationi) is always
in his due height 10 palms.

^ength.
16 The plankes in the carriage of every Ca^non and Basiliske ought to be in
length once and part of the length of the canon of their piece, except the
places where they shall lie be so narrow as that they cannot lie there.

^readth.
17 The plankes in the carriage of every Cannon and Basiliske ought to be in
breadth at their fore ends 3 times the diameter in the mouth of their piece.

Breadth.
18 The plankes in the carriage of every Cannon and Basiliske, ought to be in
breadth about their midst twice and a half the diameter in the mouth of
their piece.

Breadth.
19 The plankes in the carriage of every Cannon and Basiliske, ought to be in
breadth at their lower ends twice so much as the diameter in the mouth of
their piece.

Thickness.
20 The plankes in the carriage of every Cannon and Basiliske ought to be in
thickness once so much as the diameter in the mouth of their piece. But if a
Gunner will desire to have the same planks more thinner to the end they may be
more lighter, then he may cause a Carpenter to cut away in the inside of every
of these planks part of their said thicknes.

21 The wheels in the carriage of every Cannon and Basiliske when they shall be
used in the field ought to be in height nine times the diameter in the mouth
of their Piece, Wheels
besides the thickness of iron which lies about their ringes to save them
from wearing: that is to say, the iron about the ringes of the wheels may be
in thickness 1/12 or if you will 1/10 part of the said diameter. The height
of the ringe in every of these wheles ought to be equal to the said diameter.
The spokes between the naue and ringe of every such wheel ought to be in
length two times so much as the said diameter. The naue of every such wheel
ought to be in thickness three times the height of the said diameter. Fashion.
And the naue of every such wheel ought to be in length 3 times and a half
the said diameter.

22 Also note that the carriages for all pieces named in this Chapter are made
like in fashion: and that the transomes in all the said carriages are set
after one like manner.

The 51 Chapter. How with a Ladle you may give unto any Fauconet, Faucon,
Minion, Saker, Culueringe, Basiliske, Cannon, or any other like made Piece his
due charge in gunpowder: how you may in time of service charge any of the said
pieces with cartredges: and how you may safely discharge any of the said pieces.
When you will charge any Fauconet, Faucon, Minion, Saker, Culueringe,
Basiliske, When you will fill a gunladle with gunpowder that is somewhat
moist, you must fill it heap full, and not strike away the powder that shall
lie above the sides of the ladle, and beware to charge any piece with very wet
gunpowder. After you have charged a Cannon, you ought to ra^me down his charge
in gunpowder with four thrustes.
Cannon, or any other like made piece, put first your hand into the gunpowder
which you have prepared to charge the said piece, and perceauing thereby that
the same gunpowder is dry, fill the Ladle belonging to the piece that shall be
charged, full of the same gunpowder so many times as is requisite, and evermore
with your hand or some other thing strike away all the dry gunpowder that
shall lie above the brimme or sides of the same ladle. Then mounting the piece
to six or seven degrees, and standing upon one side of the piece (because it
is a perilous thing to place your whole body right against the mouth of a
piece which charged with gunpowder may through many occasions go of suddenly)
put the said ladle so filled with dry gunpowder into the lowest end of the
said concauitie, and when you have so done, turn within the piece the vpside
of the ladle down, so as the gunpowder may fall into the piece, and after the
ladle is pulled out, remain in the lowest end of the same piece. After you
have in this sort laded the piece with his due charge in gunpowder, thruste
hard with a rammer twice together and no more (except you do charge a
Cannon) all the said gunpowder home unto the lowest end of the piece, that it
may not lie dispersed or loose, nor be too hard rammed down in that place.
Also thruste a big wad of toe, hay, straw, or of untwisted ropes into the
piece home unto the charge in gunpowder for to sweep and keep together all
the said charge in gunpowder, and to cause the pellet that shall be shot out of
the same piece to range far. Then putting a fit pellet into the concauitie
of the piece (which fit pellet as our English Gunners do say ought always
for diverse reasons to be of an ynch less or shorter in his diameter than the
height of the said concauitie) drive with a rammer the pellet home unto that
wadde, and if the piece shall shoot downewardes at a mark, A fit pellet (as
our english Gunners do say) is of an ynche less or shorter in his diameter
than the height of the concauitie in his piece: But among the Gunners in high
Germany this is a general rule that the diameter of a fit pellet ought to be
neither more nor less than 20/21 of the diameter in the mouth of his piece. As
for example, a fit pellet for a piece of seven inches in diameter, must be 6
inches and of an ynche in diameter.
thruste an other big wadde of toe, hay, straw, or of untwisted ropes into
the piece home unto the said pellet, for to keep the pellet within the piece,
and to stay the pellet there, that it may not role out before the piece shall be
discharged: moreover, put good and dry gunpowder into the touchhole, and about
the touchhole of the piece like a train, and be not ignorant that after all
this is done the piece is charged, and that you standing upon one side of a
piece so charged, and touching the train of gunpowder by the touchhole of the
piece with a lintstocke or with a fiered Gun-match (which some Gunners do tie
to the end of a stick of three or four foot in length, and some Gunners do
set fast in the cocks of their staves, and some Gunners do wind about the
staff end of an halbert or partisant) may safely discharge the same piece.

Also if you will in time of service charge any of the said pieces of
Artillery with cartredges do thus: Put first a cartredge into the mouth of
the Piece, and then with a rammer thruste it into the lowest end of the Piece
his concauitie, and next drive a wooden tampion with a rammer into the same
concauitie home to the cartredge, then join a good big wadde of hay, straw,
toe, or of untwisted ropes unto the said tampion, and put a fit pellet into
the Piece close unto the said wadde: and when a Piece so charged shall shoot
downewardes at a mark, thruste an other like big wadde into his concauitie
hard upon the pellet: This done, put a long pricker into the touchhole of the
Piece so charged, and with the same pricker pearce diverse holes through the
cartredge lying within the Piece, or (which in mine opinion is a better devise)
cut clean away before you do put the cartredge into the hollow Cylinder a
piece of the outside of the cartredge, in that part which shall lie directly
under and next unto the touchhole. Finally, fill the touchhole of this Piece
with good and dry corn gunpowder, and make about the touchhole a little train
of powder, and considering that the tampion within the said Piece (if the
powder lying behind the same tampion should happen to be moist) must be
drawn out with a long iron worm, An admonition.
or cut in pieces with a long iron cheesell which will be a perilous work
to do, I counsel you to discharge the said Piece within a convenient time
after it shall be so charged with a tampion.

The 52 Chapter. How without a Ladle you may lade any Fauconet, Faucon, Minion,
Saker, Culueringe, Cannon, or other like made Piece with his due charge in
loose gunpowder.
PVt a long, straight, and smoothe staff into the bottom of every Fauconet,
Faucon, Minion, Saker, Culueringe, Cannon, and every other like made Piece that
shall be charged, and having thruste the staff down close by the metal into
the concauitie of his Piece so far as it may go, mark with a knife or with
some other convenient thing that part of the staff which is touched with the
lip or outmost edge of the Piece his mouth. Then drawing the said staff out
of his Piece, measure along upon the same staff with a compass (beginning at
the said mark, and proceeding downewardes in a straight line toward that end
of the staff which was at the bottom of the said concauitie) the just length
of the room which a due charge in gunpowder will fill up in the said
concauitie, You may see in the 49 Chapter of this Appendix what room a due
charge in gunpowder will fill up in any Fauconet, Faucon, Minion, Saker,
Culuering, Ca^non or any other like made Piece.
and make an other visible mark upon the staff at the end of the same
length, and for a distinction call it the lowermost mark. After this throe
Gunpowder into the Piece with your hands, until by estimation the Piece has
received thereof a due charge, and with a rammer (as you have been taught in
the precedent Chapter) thruste the same gunpowder down into the bottom of the
Piece, and to the end you may be guyded by the said staff to throw no more
gunpowder into the Piece than is requisite, and to take out the excess when
you have throne too much gunpowder into the Piece, put the said staff again
into the Piece home unto the gunpowder, and look where the lowermost mark
upon the same staff is: For as the Piece lacks a part of his due charge in
gunpowder if the said lowermost mark shall now be within his mouth, and has
more than his due charge in nwe gunpowder, if the said lowermost mark shall
be without his mouth, So if you have thrown into the Piece his due charge in
gunpowder, the said lowermost mark will now neither be within the mouth of the
Piece, nor without the mouth of the Piece, but touch exactly the outmost edge
or lip of the Piece his mouth.

The 53 Chapter. How you may duly charge any Chamber piece of Artillery, and
how you may charge any Cannon Periero.
PVt into every chamber so much powder as his piece requires for a due charge,
and with a rammer beat a tampion of soft wood down upon the gunpowder.
Moreover, put a big wadde into the piece at that end where the mouth of the
chamber must go in, and after the wadde thruste into the piece at the said
end a fit pellet, and when you have done all this, put the chamber into the
lowest end of the piece, lock them fast together, and cause the said tampion
to lie hard upon the powder in the said chamber, and the pellet to touch the
tampion, and the wadde to lie close by the pellet.

Every chamber piece ought to have three chambers, and when a Gunner will give
fire to a chamber piece, he ought not to stand upon that side of the piece
where a wedge of iron is put to lock the chamber in the piece, because the
said wedge may through the discharge of that piece fly out, and kill the
Gunner. But you shall charge every Cannon Periero with all these things
following in such order as I do here set them down.

First with a cartredge which must be put into the piece with a Ladle called in
Italian Scaffetta, or with an other fit Ladle whereof I have made mention in
the 29 Chapter of this Appendix.

Secondly with a tampion of soft wood which must be rammed down upon the
cartredge.

Thirdly with a wadde which must be thruste into the piece home unto the said
tampion.

Fourthly with a fit pellet of stone which must be thruste into the piece
home unto the said wadde.

Fifthly with an other wadde of untwisted ropes, toe, hay, or straw, which
must be thruste into the piece home unto the said pellet. And you may also (if
you will) put into the piece after all these things in the place of a stone
pellet, a case of wood or of white plate made like unto the figure in the
margent, and filled full of round stones, or round pellettes of lead, or
square pieces of iron like unto dice of an ynch square: But therewith note that
a case so filled with stones, pellettes of lead, or square pieces of iron must
be equal in weight to a stone pellet which is fit for the piece that shall
shoot the same case.

If a piece of Artillery which wants a cover of metal for his touchhole
shall lie a long time charged, cover the touchhole of the same piece with toe
imbrued in tallow, and the powder of cole mingled together, and lay upon the
same cover a shel, or a part of a ruff tyle, that no rain may enter into the
same touchhole while his piece is so charged.

The 54 Chapter. How you may cause any great piece of Artillery to make in his
discharge an exceeding great noise, and a marvelous rore.
WHen you will have a great piece of Artillery to make in his discharge an
exceeding great noise, charge the piece with great and hard corns of
gunpowder. For as Felix Platerus writes, by how much the corns of gunpowder
are more greater, and more harder, by so much a piece charged with them will in
his discharge make a more greater noise. Also you may by laying a piece of
thin lead, or a piece of shoe leather between the gunpowder and the wadde
within the hollow Cylinder, and by putting a little quicksiluer through the
touchhole into the said gunpowder, cause the same hollow Cylinder or gunne in
his discharge to make a marvelous rore.

The 55 Chapter. This Chapter following shows that some great pieces of
Artillery do serve to batter, and that some great pieces of Artillery do
serve to lie upon walls of Cities, Towns, Castles and Fortes, and that some
great pieces of Artillery do serve for the field. Also this Chapter
following shows how many times in one day certain great pieces of Artillery
may be safely charged and discharged, and how many Gunners and Assistantes or
Laborers certain great pieces of Artillery ought to have.
AN ordinary double Cannon duly fortefied with metal, will serve to batter,
and may safely for offensive and defensive service be thirty times charged and
discharged in one day.

A french double Cannon duly fortefied with metal, will serve to batter and
may safely for offensive and defensive service be thirty three times charged
and discharged in one day.

A demi Cannon of the eldest and biggest sort duly fortefied with metal,
will serve to batter, and may safely for offensive and defensive service be 80
times charged and discharged in one day.

An ordinary demi Cannon duly fortefied with metal, will serve to batter,
and may safely for offensive and defensive service be 108 times charged and
discharged within the space of 5 hours in one day, and it ought to have three
Gunners and fifteen Assistantes or Laborers.

A french demi Cannon duly fortefied with metal, will serve to batter, and
may safely for offensive and defensive service be sixty times charged and
discharged in one day.

A quarter Cannon duly fortefied with metal, will serve to lie upon the
wall of a City, Town, Castle, or Forte, and may safely for offensive and
defensive service be 110 times charged and discharged in one day.

A whole Culueringe of the eldest and biggest sort duly fortefied with
metal, will serve to lie upon the wall of a City, Town, Castle, or Forte,
and may safely for offensive and defensive service be 60 times charged and
discharged in one day.

A whole ordinary Culueringe duly fortefied with metal, will serve to lie
upon the wall of a City, Town, Castle, or Forte, and may safely for
offensive and defensive service be 60 times charged and discharged in one day.

A demi Culuering of the eldest sort duly fortefied with metal, will serve
to lie upon the wall of a City, Town, Castle, or Forte, and may safely for
offensive and defensive service be 70 times charged and discharged in one day,
and it ought to have two Gunners and ten assistants or laborers.

A demi Culueringe lower than ordinary, duly fortefied with metal, will
serve for a field piece, and may safely for offensive and defensive service
be 75 times charged and discharged in one day, and it ought to have two Gunners
and ten Assistantes or Laborers.

A Saker of the eldest and biggest sort duly fortefied with metal, will
serve for a field piece, and may safely for offensive and defensive service be
80 times charged and discharged in one day, and it ought to have one Gunner and
5 assistants or laborers.

A Faucon duly fortefied with metal, will serve for a field piece, and may
safely for offensive and defensive service be an hundred and twenty times
charged and discharged in one day.

A Fauconet duly fortefied with metal, will serve for a field piece, and
may safely for offensive and defensive service be a hundred and forty times
charged and discharged in one day.

The 56 Chapter. How a piece of Artillery ought not to be proved upon his
carriage: how a piece of Artillery that shall be proved ought to be made clean:
how a piece of Artillery that shall be proved ought to be without honey combs,
flawes, and crackes: and how he which has charged a piece for proof, ought
when he does discharge the same piece to stand behind a bank of earth, or
wall, until by a train of gunpowder he has discharged the said piece.
WHen a great piece of Artillery shall be proved whether or no it is duly
fortefied with metal, and may in time of service be used without fear of
breaking, take the same piece from his bed or carriage and mount it at 30
degrees, because a great piece which lies upon his carriage when it is
proved, cannot be enough elevated to suffer in time of his proof a sufficient
violence, nor without harm to his carriage be discharged. Also put the staff
of a sponge or the staff of a gunladle down ^to the concauitie of the same
piece so far as it will go, and thruste down through the touchhole of the
piece a round sharp poynted pricker of iron or steel that may touch and
prick the end of the said staff, which (if no stone, scale, or other let
be within the said concauitie) will lie under the touchhole. Then taking out
all the stones, scales, and filthe, which are within the said hollow Cylinder,
make clean the same with a scourer, or (which is all one) with a sponge, for
such things lying within a hollow Cylinder charged with gunpowder, may cause
the same hollow Cylinder in his discharge to break, or cause a moisture in the
same hollow Cylinder which will weaken the gunpowder that is there, and make it
unable to expel a pellet with so great force as it should do. After this lay
the tail of the piece upon the ground against a wooden planke backed with a
wall or bank of earth, and perceauing (by such means as before in the 43
Chapter of this Appendix have been declared) that no honey combs, flawes, or
crackes are in the said hollow Cylinder, put blocks under the mouth of the
said hollow Cylinder or gunne, to mount and eleuate the same mouth as before I
have told you unto 30 degrees. This done, charge and discharge the said piece
thrice together for his proof with a fit pellet and a due charge in
gunpowder, according as you have been taught in the 40 Chapter of this
Appendix. I say thrice together, because a faulty gunne that takes no hurt
by the first shoot, may receive a little harm by the second shoot, and
break in pieces at the third shoot. Last of all, make a train of gunpowder
from a place behind an high bank of earth or wall, unto the touchhole of the
piece, and standing always when you do prove any great piece at the end of
the said train behind the bank or wall, give fire unto the said train, An
admonition.
and beware that you do not remove from the said standing place till by
putting fire to the train you have discharged the piece.

The 57 Chapter. How you may by five sundry ways disparte any Fauconet,
Faucon, Minion, Saker, Culuering, Cannon, or any other like made piece: how you
may find out the middle and uppermost part of metal over the tail of any
piece: how you may find out the middle and uppermost part of metal over the
mouth of any piece: and how you ought to set the disparte of every piece upon
the middle and uppermost part of metal over the mouth of the piece.
1 MEasure with a calaper compass the greatest height of metal in the tail
of the piece, and also the greatest height of metal at the mouth of the
piece, subtract the lesser height out of the greater height, and take half of
the remaynder for the disparte of the piece.

2 Add the diameter of the greatest circu^ference of metal at the mouth of
the piece, to the diameter of the greatest circumference of metal at the
tail of the piece, and divide the whole length of both those diameters into
two equal parts. This done, opening your compass to the measure of one of
those equal parts, set one foot of your compass fast in the undermost part
of the concauitie at the mouth of the Piece, and extend the other foot of
your compass right over the uppermost part of metal in the greatest
circumference about the mouth of the piece, and take that height which is
between the said uppermost part of metal, and the said uppermost end or
point of your compass for the true length of the disparte of the said piece.

3 Measure with a girdle or stringe that will not stretch, the greatest
circumference of metal in the tail of the piece, multiply the measure of
the said circumference by 7, divide the product thereof by 22, and note in
your memorial the quotient number for the diameter of that circumference.
Likewise measure with a girdle or stringe that will not stretch, the greatest
circumference of metal about the mouth of the piece, multiply the measure of
the circumference last named by 7, divide the product thereof by 22, and note
in your memorial the quotient number for the diameter of the circumference
last named. This done, subtract the shortest diameter out of the longest
diameter, and take part ^ the remaynder for the disparte of the said piece.

4 Prepare a long ruler marked with inches, half inches, quarters of inches,
and with other less equal parts: Lay that ruler ouerthwarte and equidistant
to the Horizon upon the greatest circumference of metal in the tail of the
piece, let a line and plummet hang right down from the said ruler first close
without any bending by one side of the same circumference, and after close
without any bending by the other side of the same circumference, note exactly
the parts of the ruler which were at both times touched with the line, and in
like manner note exactly the point of metal in the said circumference which
lies directly in the midst between the said two noted parts. This done,
take the space between the said two noted parts for the diameter of the
said circumference, and mark with a file or some other thing the said point
of metal for the middle and uppermost part of metal in the said
circumference. Likewise lay your ruler close to the mouth of the said Piece,
and let a line and plummet hang right down from the said ruler first close
without any bending by one side of the greatest circumference in the metal at
the mouth of the piece, and after close without any bending by the other side
of the circumference last named: then noting well (as you did before) the
parts of the ruler touched at both times with the said line, and also the
point of metal lying in the circumference last named directly over the
middle part of the space which is between those noted parts, take the same
space for the diameter of the said circumference at the mouth of the piece,
and mark the same point with a file or some other thing for the middle and
uppermost part of the last named circumference. After all this, subtract the
shorter diameter from the longer diameter, and taking part of the remaynder
for the disparte of the Piece, set a straw or a piece of a small wax Candle
of equal length to the said disparte upright upon the said mark in the
middle and uppermost part of the circumference last named, and call that
straw or piece of a wax Candle, the dispart of the piece.

5 Thruste a pryming iron through the touchhole of the Piece down to the
bottom of his concauitie, and then mark with a red stone that part of the
iron which is equal in height with the uppermost part of metal in the
greatest circumference at the tail of the piece. This done, pull up the said
iron out of the touchhole, set that end of the iron which went through the
touchhole, upon the undermost part of the concauitie in the mouth of the
piece, and holding the marked part of the said iron right over the middle
part of metal in the greatest circumference above the mouth of the piece,
take the space between the said mark upon the iron, and the said middle
part of metal over the mouth of the piece, for the desired disparte which
(if it be set in his due place) will always direct you to lay the concauity of
his piece level, and right against any appointed mark.

The 58 Chapter. How with a Fauconet, Faucon, Minion, Saker, Culueringe, or
Cannon, you may always strike any appointed mark within point blanke.
AFter you have charged a Fauconet, Faucon, Minion, Saker, Culueringe, Cannon,
or any other like made piece with his duty in powder, waddes, and pellet,
according to the precepts expressed in the 49 Chapter of this Appendix,
disparte the piece, and set his disparte upright with a little wax upon the
middle and uppermost part of metal in the greatest circumference over the
mouth of the piece, and lift your piece up or down until by laying your eye
unto the middle and uppermost part of metal in the greatest circumference at
the tail of the piece, you may perceive that the mark at which you will
shoot, the top of the disparte, and the uppermost part of metal at the
tail of the piece do lie in a perfect right line and in an equal height.
Then doing your duty as you have been taught in the first Chapter of this
Appendix, discharge your piece and you shall see that the pellet shot out of
the same piece will strike the appointed mark which lies within point blanke.

When you shall have occasion to shoot at a light seen in the night time,
disparte your piece with a lighted and vnflaming wax candle, or with a lighted
gunmatch, or set a lighted gu^match upright by the disparte, that you may see
by the light of the fire in the same gunmatch, to lay the middle and uppermost
part of metal at the tail of the piece, and the top of the disparte in a
straight line with the mark, and to place the concauity of the piece right
against the mark, as before in this Chapter I have taught you to do.

The 59 Chapter. How you may know what number of feet, yardes, pases, or
scores, any piece of Artillery will shoot in an insensible crooked line, or
(as the Gunners term is) at point blanke.
CHarge the piece for whose point blanke you seek with his duty in good
corn gunpowder, and with a fit pellet, turn the mouth of that piece
toward a wall, butte, or bank of earth situated in a convenient distance
from the piece: and lay the piece level by the help of a Gunners semicircle,
or quadrante, as you have been taught in the first Colloquie of the first
book of Nicholas Tartaglia his Colloquies: Then setting the true disparte of
the piece upon his mouth according to the doctrine written in the tenth
Colloquie of the said first book of Colloquies, and in the 57 and 58 Chapters
of this Appendix, discharge the piece at a small visible mark fixed in a
point of the said wall, butte, or bank of earth that is level with the
top of the said disparte, and with the highest part of the metal at the
tail of the piece. This done, note diligently where the pellet does hit, and
evermore when the pellet so shot does strike above the mark, When the pellet
shot in this manner strikes above the mark, then the extreme and farthest
end of the point blanke which you seek, is beyond the said mark. When the
pellet shot in this manner strikes under the mark, then the extreme and
farthest end of the point blanke which you seek, lies between your piece and
the said mark.
remove the piece backwardes to an other place more farther from the said
mark, and out of the more remote place shoot at the mark again as you did
before with one sort of gunpowder and with a like pellet, till the pellet so
shot shall strike in the midst of the mark. For when the pellet so shot
does strike precisely in the midst of the mark, then by the reasons alleged
in the nynth Colloquie of the said first book of Colloquies, the number of
scores, pases, yardes, and feet, between your said piece, and the said
mark, is so much ground as your said piece can shoot in an insensible
crooked line, or (as the Gunners term is) at point blanke. But if the pellet
so shot shall strike under the mark, draw the piece forwards toward the
mark, and from a more nearer place shoot again as you did before with one
sort of powder, and with a like pellet, till the pellet so shot striking in
the midst of the mark shall show unto you by the reasons alleged in the
said 9 Colloquie, that the distance between your piece and the mark is so
much ground as your said Piece can shoot in an insensible crooked line, or (as
the Gunners term is) at point blanke.

The 60 Chapter. How the point blanke and utmost ranges are proportional in
all pieces of Artillery: How by the rule of proportion you may know what
number of yardes any piece will reach at his utmost randon: And how by the said
rule you may know what number of yardes any piece will reach at his point
blanke.
THe point blanke and utmost ranges (as some authors have written) are
proportional in all pieces of Artillery, wherefore knowing the point blanke
and utmost range of any one piece, and the point blanke of an other piece, you
may tell the utmost range of any that other piece. In like manner knowing the
point blanke and utmost range of any one piece, and the utmost range of an
other piece, you may tell the point blanke of that other piece: As for example
let us suppose that this question is asked: If a Faucon carrying point blanke
320 yardes will at his utmost randon range 1280 yardes: how far will a Saker
reach at his utmost randon that at point blanke or leuel rangeth 360 yardes? I
say, that the rule of proportion serves precisely to answer the same and all
such like questions, And that multiplying 360 in 1280, and dividing 460800 the
product thereof by 320, the quotient will yield 1440 for the number of yardes
which the said Saker shall reach at his utmost randon. Again, let us suppose
that I am required to answer this demand. If a Faucon which rangeth at his
utmost randon 1280 yardes will carry point blanke 320 yardes, how far will a
Saker reach at point blanke that at his utmost randon rangeth 1440 yardes? To
do that which is required I multiply 320 in 1440, and having divided 460800
the product by 1280. I find in the quotient 360 to be the number of yards
which the Saker will shoot leuel: or (as the Gunners term is) point blanke.
And thereuppon I conclude that after this manner by observations used in any
one piece of artillery, and by the art of proportion I may discover unto you
the force of all other pieces of artillery.

Point blanke. Utmost randon. Utmost randon. Point blanke. Faucon. 320 Yards.
1280 Yards. Faucon. 1280 Yards. 320 Yards. Saker, 360 Yards. 1440 Yards. Saker.
1440 Yards. 360 Yards.

The 61 Chapter. How you must mount your piece when you will shoot unto the
farthest end of the utmost randone.
NIcholas Tartaglia in his Epistle set at the beginning of his book named La
noua scientia declares that every great Piece of Artillery ought to be mounted
at 45 degrees when it shall shoot unto the farthest end of his utmost randon.
But William Bourne in his Treatise of shooting in great Ordinance writes that
it is needful for us to consider well of the wind before we do mount any
piece to shoot unto the farthest end of his utmost randon, because (as he
says) when we will shoot with the wind unto the farthest end of the utmost
randon, we must mount our piece at 45 degrees, and in a windy day against the
wind sometimes at 36 degrees, sometimes at 37 degrees, sometimes at 38
degrees, sometimes at 39 degrees, sometimes at 40 degrees, according as the
wind is in bigness, and in a fair calm day at 42 degrees.

The 62 Chapter. How you may mount any great piece of Artillery with a ruler,
as well as with a quadrant or semicircle unto the number of ten degrees, and
how such a ruler ought to be made: and how such a ruler ought to be used when a
piece of Artillery is by it mounted, or imbased.
THe measure of the length of the piece that shall be mounted by a ruler being
doubled, reduce into inches: after this, multiply the said number of inches by
22, and divide the product by 7, and divide again the quotient number of that
division by 360, then take the last quotient for the number of inches and
parts of an ynch, that will make a degree upon a ruler for that piece which
was so measured. As for example, I will mount a piece of 6 foot long at one
degree with my ruler, therefore 6 foot the length of that piece being doubled
makes 12 foot, which reduced into inches make 144 inches. This number of 144
multiplied by 22 produces 3168, which divided by 7 yields in the quotient
452 and 4/7: then do I divide that quotient of 452 and 4/7 by 360, and so the
quotient of this last division which is 1 and ^/3 ^/5 shows that this piece
of 6 foot in length, being mounted by my ruler 1 ynche and ^/3 9/5 of an
ynche, lies justly of the same height that it would do if it should be
mounted at one degree of a quadrant or semicircle. Now to know how much the
said piece must be mounted for 2 degrees of a quadrant or semicircle, I
multiply 1 and ^/3 9/5 by 2, and thereof comes 2 and ^/5, wherefore I say,
if the said piece be elevated by the ruler 2 inches and ^/5 of an ynche that
it lies mounted at two degrees. Likewise by multiplying the said number of 1
and ^/3 9/5 by 3, the product thereof (which is 3 and 7/5 expresses that the
said piece must be mounted 3 inches and 7/5 of an ynch for 3 degrees. And after
this order I may know how to mount the said piece with a ruler unto any other
degree to which the piece will be mounted with a ruler, for you ought not to be
ignorant of this, that a piece of artillery cannot be mounted with a ruler
above 10 degrees, because the degrees are taken out of a circumfere^ce and not
out of a straight line.

depiction of a ruler, a quadrant and a semicircle

The ruler with which pieces of artillery may be mounted is made in fashion
like unto the picture drawn in the margent, and marked as common rulers are,
with inches, half inches, quarters of inches, half quarters of inches, and
with more lesser parts of an ynch. Also in the midst of this ruler (almost
from one end to the other) there is a slitte or open place, within which a
plate of brass or lattin having in it a little hole pierced through is so
placed, that the said hole may as need shall require be moved up and down in
that slitte, and be set right against any ynch, or part of an ynche marked
upon the same ruler. And although (as it seems to me) a piece may be more
easily, and more justly mounted unto any degree by a quadrant, and also by a
semicircle, than by a ruler, yet will I not let pass to show in this place how
you must use the ruler to mount a piece by it. Wherefore when you will mount a
piece by a ruler to shoot at any mark, put first the true disparte of the
piece to be mounted, upon the piece his mouth, as you have been taught in the
57 Chapter of this Appendix, then knowing at what degree the piece must be
mounted to reach the mark, set the hole which is in the mouable plate of the
ruler right against the number of inches, and parts of an ynche that will make
justly the same degree: and having so done, set the end of the ruler upon the
tail of the piece, so as the ruler may stand upon the piece squirewise,
until you have done your work. After this (the mouth of the said piece
being laid right upon the mark) koyne the breeche of the piece up and down
until you may see through the said hole in the plate the top of the disparte,
and the mark, and when you have so done, give fire to the piece that you may
strike the said mark.

The 63 Chapter. How you may by the help of wedges lay the concauitie of any
great piece of Artillery right against a mark: how by the help of wedges you
may make a perfect shoot at a mark lying under the mouth of your Piece: and
how by the help of wedges you may cause your Piece to strike in the mark,
after it has at one shoot shot under the mark, and at an other shoot
shot above the mark.
PRepare of iron or of strong and hard wood two sorts of wedges for every
great piece of Artillery, that is to say, three wedges of one sort, and three
wedges of an other sort: Make every wedge of the one sort just so thick as
part of the height in the disparte of his piece: and let every wedge of the
other sort be no thicker than part of the said height. This done, lay the
uppermost part of metal at the tail of the piece, and the uppermost part
of metal over the mouth of the piece, in an equal height and in a right line
with the mark: and then put under the tail of the piece one of his said
wedges of the thicker sort, which (as Luigi Collado affirms) will cause the
concauitie of that Piece without any more woork, to lie right against the said
mark. But when you purposing to shoot at a mark lying under the mouth of
your Piece within point blanke, do look upon that mark by the said two
uppermost parts of metal, put under the tail of your piece two of the said
wedges of the thicker sort, and by so doing you shall make a perfect shoot
at the said mark. Also (as the said Luigi Collado writes) if your piece
lying level does shoot under the mark, and afterward (the uppermost part
of metal over his mouth being laid in an equal height with the uppermost
part of metal at his tail) does shoot so much above the mark as before it
did shoot under, you may at the third and next shoot cause your said piece
to strike in the said mark, if you will for this third shoot lay again the
uppermost part of metal over his mouth in an equal height with the
uppermost part of metal at his tail, and put afterward one of his said
wedges of the thinner sort under his tail.

The 64 Chapter. How to make a perfect shoot at any company of horsemen, or
footmen passing by the place where Ordinance does lie upon a level ground:
and also how to make a perfect shoot at any ship sailing in a river by the
place where Ordinance does lie upon a level ground: and also how to make a
perfect shoot at any moving thing passing by a place where Ordinance does lie
upon an uneven ground.
WHen any horsemen or footmen shall pass by a place where a great piece of
Artillery does lie, the Gunner must charge that piece duly with good
gunpowder, and with a fit pellet, to this end that the same piece may go off
so soon as fire is put unto it.

Also the Gunner in this case must lay his piece truly disparted upon a
level ground right against some mark in their way: as for example against
some tree, bushe, hillocke, cloud, or if it may be upon some turning way,
because in such a place they can not depart very quickly from the mark, and
in fine when the said horsemen or footmen shall come near unto that mark, or
be in that turning way, the Gunner must discharge his said piece at them.
Likewise when a Gunner will shoot at a ship sailing in a River, he ought to
plant his piece against some cloud or other mark lying from him on the
farther side of the water, and give fire unto his piece when the forepart of
the ship shall begin to be between the mouth of the piece and the mark.
But when the piece which shall be discharged at a moving thing does lie in his
carriage upon an uneven ground, the Gunner must measure by the help of a
Quadrant, or Semicircle, how many inches the ground under one wheel of the
piece his carriage is more higher, than the ground under the other wheel of
the same carriage, or for want of a Quadrant and Semicircle, he must go to
that wheel of the Piece his carriage which stands upon the loer ground,
and hanging a line and plummet down to the ground from the middle and highest
part of that wheel, measure exactly the space between the said plummet, and
the midst of the loermost part of the same wheel: for this measure shows
in like manner how much the ground is more higher under one wheel, than under
the other wheel. And when he has so done he must lay his said piece
according to that measure wide from the mark toward the more higher side of
ground: I mean if it be found by the first or second way to measure the said
difference of heigthes, that the ground under the wheel on the North side of
the piece his carriage does lie sixteen inches above the ground that is under
the wheel upon the Southside of the same carriage, the Gunner to make a
perfect shoot at the moving thing ought to lay the mouth of his said piece
sixeteene inches wide toward the North from the immovable mark that must
guide him to shoot at the moving thing.

The 65 Chapter. How much a piece must be elevated for to shoot vpwardes at a
mark upon a hill without point blanke: and by what means the mouth of a
piece may be laid right upon any mark.
When you will shoot upwards at a mark which is situated upon a hill
without point blanke you must first measure with your Quadrant or Semicircle
the space which is between your piece and the mark, and afterward mount
that piece at so many degrees as will cause it to shoot so much ground as is
in the said space: then place your Quadrant or Semicircle close by the mouth
of your piece, and move it up or down till you shall epsy through the
sightes or channel of the Quadrant or Semicircle the said mark. That done,
note the degree which was touched in this last action with the line and plummet
of the Quadrant or Semicircle, and mount the piece again more higher by so
many degrees than it was before, I mean if you did mount the piece at four
degrees to shoot so much ground as is between the piece and the mark, and
did note three degrees for the degrees which were touched with the line and
plummet of the Quadrant or Semicircle, then must you mount the piece again at
three degrees more, and so the said piece will lie mounted in the whole sum
at seven degrees for to shoot vpwardes to the mark upon the hill. And by so
doing if the piece be laid right upon the mark, you shall undoubtedly strike
the same. But if your piece do not lie right upon the mark when it is
discharged, it will strike wide of the mark so many times the measure of the
wideness that it lies at when it is discharged, as the length of the piece is
contained in the distance between the piece and the mark. As for example, if
a piece of eight foot long be planted one ynch wide from the mark lying eight
hundred foot distant from the piece, I conclude that the said piece planted
one ynch wide from the mark, will strike at the end of that distance one
hundred inches wide from the said mark.

To lay your piece right upon the mark do thus: hang a line and plummet
right over the tail of the piece in the middle part thereof, and wind the
piece until you standing behind the same piece shall see that the middle part
of the mouth of the piece does lie directly between the mark and the line
hanging at the tail of the piece: For when the middle part of the mouth of the
piece does lie directly between the mark and the said line, then does the
piece lie right upon the mark.

The 66 Chapter. How much a piece ought to be imbased for to shoot at a mark
lying in a valley without point blanke.
TO shoot downewardes at a mark lying in a valley without point blanke,
measure first with your Quadrant or Semicirle the space which is between your
piece and the mark, and afterward mount that piece at so many degrees as
will cause it to shoot so much ground as is in the said space. Then having
placed your Quadrant or Semicircle by the mouth of your piece, move it up or
down till you shall epsy through the sights or channel of the Quadrant or
Semicircle the said mark, and note what degree is touched with the line and
plummet of the Quadrant or Semicircle: that done, put down the mouth of the
piece more loer by so many degrees than it was before, I mean if you did
mount the piece four degrees to shoot so much ground as is between the
piece and the mark, and did note three degrees for the degrees touched with
the said line and plummet of the Quadrant or Semicircle, then the mouth of the
piece must be put down or (as some term it) imbased three degrees, and so
will the piece being laid right upon the mark and mounted but at one degree,
strike the mark in the valley although in the precedent chapter the said piece
was mounted at seven degrees to shoot a like distance at a mark upon a hill,
and at four degrees to shoot a like distance upon a plain ground.

Here this is to be noted that a pellet shot from an height into a lo place
can do no more harm than kill one person, or make one hole in the place where
it falls, because (as Luigui Collado has written) the pellet so shot does
more offend through his own natural weight, than by the expulsive power of
the gunpowder which did expel it out of his piece.

The 67 Chapter. How you may certainly know by the Gunners Semicircle whether
a ship upon the Sea, or an Army upon the land, or any other thing seen a
far of, does come toward you, stand still, or go from you: and how you
ought to discharge your great ordinance of diverse sorts against a ship, or an
Army coming toward you.
A Long distance being between you and a ship upon the Sea, or an army of men
moving a far of, may oftentimes through the weakness of your sight deceive
you, and make you not to discern well whether that ship, or army does stand
still, go from you, or come toward you: therefore it will be very profitable
(as I think) for you to learn how you may be always certain thereof, for to
follow your enemies when they shall fly from you, and make preparation of
defense when you shall see them come to assault you. For this purpose you shall
ascend into some high place from whence you may behold the ship or army a
far of: and having put a Semicircle to your eye, move it up or down till
you shall see through the sights, or through a channel made in the said
Semicircle, that part of the ship or army which is nearest unto you. Then your
Semicircle remaining immovable, note diligently the part of the Semicircle
touched with the hanging line and plummet of that Semicircle, and after a while
making the said line to hang again directly upon the said part which was
touched with it when you did epsy through the said sightes or channel the
ship or army, look again whether you can epsy through the same sights or
channel the part of the ship or army which was first espied: for if at your
second looking you shall behold again through the said sights or channel the
very same part of the ship or army which you did first epsy you may boldly
affirm that the said ship or army moved not between the time of the first
and second looking. And if your visuall line passing through the said sights or
channel shall not at your second looking extend to the said part, then it is
certain that the said ship or army does go from you. But if your said
visuall line passing through the said sights or channel shall at your second
looking extend over the said part of that ship or army, then you may boldly
say that the said ship or army comes toward you.

diagram of a visual line

After all this you must measure by the help of your Semicircle how far the
said ship or army is from you, and finding by your measure that the said ship
or army is within the reach of your pieces, you ought to shoot out of
Culuerings, Sakers, Minions, Faucons, and Fauconets, whole iron shot at the
same ship or army, and when the army shall come very near unto you chain
shot, cliue shot, dice shot, baules of wild fire and such other like spoiling
shot.

The 65 Chapter. How you may make a perfect shoot in a dark night at any
mark that may be seen in the day time: and how a lighted candle may be
carried in the night time so as no light shall be seen but at your will and
pleasure.
IN the day time mount your piece to reach the appointed mark, and at that
very time place the mouth or concauitie of the piece right upon the said
mark, and then having put the longest leg of your Semicircle into the mouth
of the said piece, note exactlie what degree upon the Semicircle is touched
with the line and plummet hanging upon the said Semicircle, for that degree
being written in your memorial will show you always how much the said piece
lying in that place must be mounted to reach the said mark. After this, let
fall a line and plummet down unto the ground from the middle part of the
mouth of the piece, and thrust a pin of wood or iron into that point of ground
which was touched with the plummet last mentioned. Likewise from the middle
part of the breeche or tail of the piece, let that line and plummet hang down
again unto the ground, and thrust an other pyn of wood or iron into the same
very point of ground which was last touched with the said plummet. Finally,
draw a straight line upon the ground right over both those pinnes, and make
each end of this line to reach two yardes at the least beyond the pyn next
unto it. This line lies directly under the middle part of the mouth of the
piece, and also under the middle part of the tail of the piece, and right
upon the mark, and is named therefore the line of direction. Now when you
will shoot in a dark night with that piece at the said mark, charge the
piece with his duty in powder, and with a fit pellet, and plumme the middle
of the mouth of the said piece, and the middle of the tail of the said piece,
right upon the said pynnes set in the said line of direction, that you may by
so doing lay the mouth of the piece right upon the appointed mark. Then the
longest leg of your said Semicircle being put into the mouth of the piece
koyne the piece up and down till the line and plummet hanging upon the
Semicircle shall fall exactlie upon the same degree that it touched before
when it was mounted in the day time to strike the said mark. All this being
done, you ought to consider of other things that are expressed in the first
chapter of this Appendix, and observe the same before you do shoot, for by so
doing there is no doubt but that the pellet shot out of the said piece will
strike the appointed mark in any night how dark so ever it is. Also if this
doctrine be observed at every time when you will shoot at a mark, you may
without fail strike the said mark so often as you will with diverse pieces
from sundry places in any dark night. But to the end you may see at all times
before you shoot whether or no the line and plummet hanging upon the
Semicircle falls upon the degree noted in your memorial, and wheather or no
the middle part of the mouth of the piece does lie right over the line of
direction, I counsel you to prepare a close box of boordes like a lantorne to
carry a lighted candle, and to have a door in the side of the box to open
when you will see with your candle, and to shut when you will have no light
seen.

diagram of a visual line

Example.

A piece of artillery being planted in the day time at B and mounted by a
Semicircle 3 degrees, did strike D a mark in the wall of a forte, and when the
said piece was discharged at the same mark, the middle part of the mouth of
the piece, and the middle part of the tail of the piece did lie directly over
B C the wooden or iron pinnes which stand in the line of direction, therefore
when you will shoot in the night time from B to D, you must mount this piece
three degrees, and plumme the middle part of the mouth of the piece, and the
middle part of the tail of the piece right over B C the wodden or iron pinnes
in the line of direction, and so doing you can not fail in your purpose.

The 69 Chapter. How you may carry in the night time a lighted Gunmatch so as
it shall not be seen nor be wet with rain.
HAng at your girdle as you do the sheath of your knife a hollow cane of eight
or ten inches in length, and let the Cane be open at both ends, then put the
lighted end of the gunmatch into the Cane, and as the gunmatch within the Cane
shall burn and consume, so put the lighted end of the same gunmatch more
farther or loer into the Cane, and by this means the lighted end of the
gunmatch being within the Cane can not be seen in the night, nor be wet with
rain.

The 70 Chapter. In what distance pieces of Artillery ought to be planted for
battery: In what order pieces of artillery ought to be mounted for battery:
In what sort pieces of artillery ought to be discharged for battery: and in
what measure a breach with battery ought to be: and in what manner a piece made
hot with many shootes ought to be cooled.
TO batter a wall of a Town or fort, lay your Cannons if you can at the
distance of 80 paces from the wall which shall be beaten down, and in no wise
(without constraint) more farther from that wall than 150 paces: for when
Cannons do lie 300 or 200 paces of from the wall which shall be battred, they
are planted (as Luigui Collado writes) in an inconvenient distance and unmeet
place to batter. Also lay the mouths of your Cannons so as they may strike a
foot one above an other in the wall unto of the height in the said wall, and
discharging them altogether at one instant, continue the battery, till you
have made a breach so big as at the least nine men in a rank may enter into
it.

After a piece with many shootes is made very hot, it changes his color, and
shoots weaklie, and then to save it from breaking, you ought to cool it
within with a sponge wet in cold water, or in two parts of cold water, and one
part of vinegar, or in lie mingled with a little water: and lay all over the
piece, or at the least from the touchhole to the mouth, sheep skins with
long wool on the^ dipped in the said cold water, or in 2 parts of cold water,
and 1 part of vinegar, or in lie and a little water, which lie stops the
powers of the metal in the piece, and causes it to resist heat.

The 71 Chapter. How a Gunner may outshoote other Gunners in one and the same
piece at one and the same elevation with pellets of one weight, and of one
kind, and with an equal weight of one and the same kind of gunpowder.
WRappe the pellet in linen or woollen cloth, so as it may go very stiff and
close unto the gunpowder in the piece, and by so doing you shall make the said
pellets to randge more ground than a like pellet which is not so wrapped in
cloth will do. Likewise when a Gunner shall shoot with an other Gunner in one
and the same piece, at one and the same elevation with pellettes of one weight
and of one kind, with an equal weight of one and the same kind of gunpowder,
and in all points with like advantage, he that shoots last shall out shoot
him which did first shoot in the said piece by the reasons alleged in the 4
Colloquie of the first book of N: Tartaglia his Colloquies, and in the seventh
Colloquie of the second book of N: Tartaglia his Colloquies. Also if a gunner
after he has laded a piece with his due charge in gunpowder will make a hole
with a staff of a convenient length and bigness through the very midst of
the same gunpowder, and likewise after he has duly charged his said piece
with 2 waddes of hay, straw, toe, or of untwisted ropes, and a fit pellet, will
fill the touchhole of the same piece with good gunpowder, and make an other
hole with his proyning iron through the same touch gunpowder down unto the hole
which was first made in the said due charge of gunpowder within the piece,
doubtless he shall by so doing shoot more ground than an other Gunner
ignorant of this skill can do in the same piece at one and the same elevation
with a like pellet, and an equal charge of one and the same sort of gunpowder.

The staff which shall make a hole in the midst of the piece his charge in
gunpowder ought for every Fauconet, Faucon, Minion, Saker, Culuering, French
demie Cannon, demie Cannon lower than ordinary, and demie Cannon, to be in
compass three or four inches or there aboutes, and the staff which shall
make a hole in the midst of the piece his charge in gunpowder for every
ordinary demie Cannon demie Cannon of the eldest sort, French double Cannon,
ordinary double Cannon, and double Cannon of the eldest and biggest sort ought
to be in compass five inches or thereabout.

The 72 Chapter. How you may amend high, lo, and wide shootes.
To amend an high shoot.
When a pellet shot at a mark within point blanke has struck somewhat above
that mark, lay your piece for the second shoot against the said mark in
every respect as it did lie at the first shoot, and afterward raise up the
dispart upon the mouth of your piece, till you shall see by the uppermost part
of metal in the tail of the piece, and the top of that dispart, the place
where the pellet struck at the first shoot. This done, imbase the mouth of
that piece, till the said uppermost part of metal, and the top of the same
dispart, do lie in a right line with the mark, and then giving fire to the
piece, you shall see that by this means the piece will shoot into the mark.

To amend a lo shoot.
Also when a pellet shot at a mark within point blanke does strike somewhat
under his mark, you may amend the said lo shoot in this manner. Recharge your
piece, and after you have for the second shoot laid it against the mark in
every respect as you did lay it for the first shoot, set upright upon the
uppermost part of metal in the tail of the piece a wax candle of such a
length as that you may see by the top of the said candle, and the top of
the dispart upon the mouth of the piece, the lo place where the pellet before
did hit. Then having mounted the mouth of your piece till the top of the
said wax candle, and the top of the dispart upon the mouth of your piece,
do lie in a right line with the said mark, give fire to the piece, and so
you shall shoot into the mark.

To amend a shoot wide upon your right hand.
But when a pellet shot at a mark within point blanke shall strike wide upon
your right hand, then to amend that wide shoot, recharge the piece which shot
that pellet, and laying it for the second shoot against the mark as it did
lie at the first shoot, remove the level sight upon the tail of your piece
somewhat toward your left hand, so as the top of your nwe level sight, and
the top of your piece his dispart, may be perceived to lie in a right line
with the place where the pellet before did strike. This done, move your piece
to and fro till you shall see that the top of your nwe level sight, and the
top of your piece his dispart do lie in a right line with the mark, and for
an end of this work give fire to your piece which now without fail will
shoot his pellet into the mark.

To amend a shoot wide upon your left hand.
You may amend a shoot wide upon your left hand as you have been taught to
amend a shoot wide upon your right hand, saving for the amendment of a shoot
wide upon your left hand, you must always remove the leuel sight upon the
tail of your piece somewhat toward your right hand.

The 73 Chapter. To make an engine which will make a great spoil and a
merueilous slaughter.
PLace a great piece of Artillery within a broad iron hoope, and lay a great
number of Caliuers or Muskets in the said hoope round about the said piece
according to the figure next following, and when need shall require charge and
discharge all the same pieces together. This engine discharged out of a ship
at men in a Gallie, Foyst, or any other like vessel (as Girolamo Ruscelli
writes) will make a great spoil and a merueilous slaughter.

depiction of an explosive engine

The 74 Chapter. Instructions for all those that are unskillful to handle and
use an Harchibuse, Caliuer, or Musket.
1 EVery person unskillful to handle and use an Harchibuse, Caliuer, or Musket
ought first to learn to handle and carry soldier like the said piece, and the
Flaske, and touch box belonging to it.

2 Also he ought to know that his Caliuer which shall be allowed for military
service must be in length at the least three foot and two inches, and that the
bore of his Caliuer must be in Diameter of an ynch, and in circumference two
inches and ^ of an ynche, diagram of the bore of a caliver the allowed bore of a
caliuer in Ao. Dni^ 1588
and that a due charge in gunpowder for his Caliuer is of that weight which a
fit pellet of lead for the same Caliuer does way, and that such a due charge
in gunpowder waieth one ounce and nine grains of aver de poyze weight, and
that one pound of gunpowder will make for his Caliuer 15 shootes and 115/163 of
one shoot, and that the diameter and circumference of a fit pellet for his
Caliuer must always be somewhat less than the Diamete round Circumference in
the bore of his Caliuer, and that a fit pellet of lead for his Caliuer wayeth
one ounce of an ounce two scruples, and 12 grains of aver de poize weight, And
that 11 fit pellets of lead and 127/163 of one fit pellet of lead for his
Caliuer do way just one pound of aver de poize weight.

3 In like manner he ought to know that his Musket which shall be allowed for
military service must be in length at the least four foot, and that the
bore of his Musket must be in Diameter 23/^0 of an ynch and in circumference
two inches and 43/10^ of an ynch, diagram of the bore of a musket the allowed
bore of a musket in Ao Dni^ 1588.
and that a due charge in gunpowder for his Musket is of that weight which a
fit pellet of lead for the same Musket does way, and that such a due charge in
gunpowder wayeth one ounce of an ounce, 19 grains and of a grain of aver de
poize weight, And that one pound of gunpowder will make for his Musket 8
shootes and 536/573 of one shoot, and that the diameter and circumference of a
fit pellet for his Musket must always be somewhat less than the diameter and
circumference in the bore of his Musket, and that a fit pellet of lead for his
Musket wayeth two ounces of an ounce, one dram and six grains of aver de
poize weight, and that six fit pellets and 3/9 4/^ of one fit pellet of lead
for his Musket do way just one pound of aver de poize weight.

4 Also he ought to learn how he shall in a commendable manner charge his
piece, and how he shall afterward (when need shall require) lay it to his
cheek.

5 Having learned to charge, he ought also to know how he should shoot in the
said piece at randon, and likewise how he should shoot in that piece at a
mark within the level of the same piece, and how upon a small stay in march
or skirmish he should charge and discharge speedily his piece.

6 Also he ought to prove before he has urgent cause to use his piece,
whether it be good and meet for his purpose or like to break.

7 And in a skirmish made only for practice or sport, let him take heed that
he do not charge his piece with any bullet whereby any person may be maimed
or put in hazard of his life or limbs.

8 Also for diverse reasons which are not meet to be expressed in this book,
let no person at any time use to shoot out of his piece any pellet of lead
after he has chawed it in his mouth and bitten it with his teeth.

The 75 Chapter. How to mount a mortar piece for to shoot out of the same
fireworks or great stones over walls or other high places into cities, towns,
or camps, to burn and beat down houses, tents, and lodgings within the same
places.
IT behooves him which will shoot out of a mortar piece any fireworke or
great stone for to have it fall right down upon the appointed place to know
these 3 things. The weight of the shot, how much ground his piece will shoot at
the best of the randon, and how far the place which he would burn or beat
down is from him. The said three things being known, he may easily by this
example following learn to do as he intended.

depiction of the firing of a piece of artillery

Example.

The piece will shoot the fireworke, or the great stone at the best of the
randon 800 paces, and the place to be burned or beaten down is distant from
that piece 600 paces, therefore that piece must be mounted for to do this
exploit at 48 degrees and degree. But if the fireworke or the great stone will
fly at the best of the randon 900 paces, and the place to be burned or beaten
down be distant from the piece six hundred paces, then the said piece must
be mounted at forty one degrees and almost of a degree. And when the
fireworke or stone will fly at the best of the raudon 1000 paces, and the
space between the piece and the said place does contain 600 paces, the said
piece must be mounted at six and thirty degrees and part of a degree, but for
the better understanding hereof mark well this figure following.

diagram of the use of a quadrant ^ fort to be burned or beaten down.

The ^etus or perpendiculer line.

A mortar piece set upright.



In the said figure there is a Quadrant, and upon the same with a moveable
Hipothenuasa or Index a right angled triangle is fashioned. The base of that
triangle representing the space between the piece and the mark ought to be
divided into so many equal parts as the said distance between the piece and
the mark does contain paces. Likewise the said Hipothenusa or Index
representing the way of the shot would be marked with so many of such like
equal parts as may show the number of paces which the piece will shoot at the
best of the randon to be numbered from the center downewardes. Now when a
fireworke or a great stone is to be shot out of a mortar piece unto an
appointed place, the gunner having in a readiness such a Quadrant, and knowing
how much ground his said piece will shoot at the best of the randon, and also
what distance is between the piece and the place to be Burned or beaten down,
must move vpwardes or downewardes the said Hipothenusa or Index until that
part of the Hipothenusa which is equal to the number of paces which the piece
will shoot at the best randon does touch the Cathetus or perpendiculer line of
the said triangle: And the^ he must note the degree upon the Quadra^t which is
touched with the fiduciall line of the said Hipothenusa or Index, and mount
the said mortar piece to that degree for to shoot the fireworke or the great
stone to the appointed place.

The 76 Chapter. How you may make an iron dart which being shot out of any
great piece of artillery, or out of the inguine called Balista, or throne out
of your hands against any wooden object, will burn and consume the same
object if it shall strike and stick in the same object.
MAke an iron dart of two foot in length (more or less at your pleasure) with
iron wings placed a little below the upper end like the feathers of an arrow
or Butshaft, and above or under the said wings pearce a hole through the stem
of the dart.

depiction of an iron dart

Also make a round pype of iron plate about four inches in length, and in
compass a little less than the compass of the concauitie in the piece which
shall shoot the same dart, and having pierced a little hole through both sides
of this pype put the pype filled full of the mixture following upon the dart
above the said wings, or if you will below the said wings, so as his hole may
lie directly upon the other hole which was first made in the stem of the
dart, because you must drive a nail through both these holes from one side of
the said pype unto the other side of the same pype to fasten it and the dart
together, that when the dart shall be shot out of a piece of artillery, the
said iron pype may not fly from it. Likewise I would have you to pearce one
hole at the upper end ^f this pype, and diverse other holes through the sides of
this pype, and to put into the side holes short iron pypes like unto the Canons
of pocket dagges, and to set fast these short pypes within the said great pype
so as their mouths may lie a little without the said holes according to the
picture next following, and that their other ends may rest upon a part of the
dart. For these short pypes charged with powder and pellet (as dagges ought to
be) will shoot out their pellets when the mixture in the said great pype shall
burn about them, and astonish all those that shall then be near unto them,
especially if the dart be shot from an high place downewardes. Moreover, put
upon the dart near unto his point a bag wide in the midst and narrow
toward both his ends according to the picture next following, and with a
mixture made of 12 parts of Saltpeeter, eight parts of Brimstone bruised
grossly like pepper corns, and four parts of gross gunpowder mingled
together, fill that bag, and also the said great pype of iron as full as you
can, binding well together both the ends of the said bag so filled, and
nailing the full bag unto the dart with a nail driven through a hole which
for that purpose ought to be in the dart according to the picture next
following, to the end that the said bag may not move from his place when
the dart shall be shot out of a piece of great Ordinance, or throne with your
hand. Also you shall dippe hemp in the mixture which you learned to make in
the nineteenth Chapter of this Appendix for gunmatches, and bind the same with
pack threede when it is dry round about the dart from the said iron wings
unto the said bag, laying the loose ends of the hemp toward the great pype
of iron, or in steed of hemp bind a gunmatche round about the dart between
the said iron wings and the said bag, that the mixture in the said great pype
of iron being a fire may give fire to the said hemp or gunmatche which will
carry fire unto the mixture in the bag.

depiction of an incendiary dart

And forasmuch as these darts touched with men's hands or wet with rain will
wax worse and mar, therefore cote them with canuas and wind packthreede
very hard upon the same canuas, and then cover the said canuas all over with
paste made of meal sod in water: and when the said cover of paste is through
dry, make a close and hard binding net of wiar round about upon the said
cover of paste according to picture next folloing

depiction of a cover for an incendiary dart

When you will shoot this dart put into the said hole at the upper end of the
said great pype a piece of a gunmatch, and charge not the piece out of which
this dart shall be shot with so much gunpowder as is his ordinary charge nor
with any tampion or wadde.

The 77 Chapter. To make balls or pellets of fire which being shot out of
great ordinance, or throne out of men's hands will stick fast and burn the
object in which they shall strike.
PRepare three sharp pointed bars of iron a little less in their lengths
than the height of the piece his concauitie in which they shall lie. This done,
lay 2 of those bars crossewise in their middle parts one upon an other,
binding the contingent parts of the same cross fast about with an iron wier.
Also lay the middle part of the 3 bar overthwart and crossewise upon the
middle and contingent parts of the other 2 cross bars, tying them in like
manner fast together with an iron wier, so as one point at the least of the
same double and ouertwart cross may stick fast in every object that shall be
strooken with the same. Moreover wind a gunmatch round about the contingent
parts of the the said cross till you have made upon the same a round bottom
as big as an Orrange, and then weauing the rest of the gunmatch in and out
upon the said cross bars, you shall make certain void and empty rooms
like unto birds neastes, which must be filled with a mixture that ought to be
made after this manner. Take of Saltpeeter 12 parts, of Brimstone grossly bruised
like pepper corns 8 parts, of gross gunpowder 4 parts, and with all these
things mingled together fill the said empty rooms so as your work may be a
round body like a pellet. Furthermore wind round about over the said mixture
more of the gunmatch, and upon this gunmatch wind very hard a handful of
packthreed in such sort as some men use to wind thread upon a bottom, and
when you have so done, make an other mixture after this manner. Take of
Brimstone one part, of Orpiment, one part, of Colophonia pitch or Colophonia
gum 2 parts, of Ship pitch one part, of Turpentine one part, of the wood of a
yew tree one part, of Frankensence of a part, of Oil of lynseed of a part, of
Oil of stone of a part, of vitriall grossly beaten one part: and in these
things mingled together, and boiled a little while in a copper vessel, dip toe
or bumbase much or scarsely according as you will have this pellet to burn
furiously or slowly, which toe or bumbase must afterward be wrapped round
about the pellet, and well covered over with pitch, remembering that the sharp
points of the said iron bars must stand two ynces at the least without the
said cover of pytch, and that a hole must be made through the midst of the
pellet from one side to the other to contain a gunmatch, which lying along in
the said hole shall when need requires make the said ball or pellet to
burn.

depiction of incendiary pellets

The 78 Chapter. How you may make holloe baules of metal which being shot out
of great Ordinance or mortar pieces, or throne with slings out of men's hands
among soldiers standing or marching in battle ray, will suddenly break in
many pieces and do great hurt.
EVery holloe ball of metal that shall be shot out of any great piece of
Artillery or mortar piece, or that shall be throne with men's hands among
soldiers in battle ray, ought to be made of brickle metal, as of Copper,
Lattin, Tynne, or cast iron and have a little hole in it, through which the
concauitie of that baule may be filled with fine corn gunpowder, and in which
after the said concauitie is filled with gunpowder, a short end of a gunmatch
may be put that shall fire the said gunpowder incontinently after the baule
commes among them at whom it was shot, to the end that the said baule being
unable to abide the violent blast of the gunpowder that is within his
concauitie, may thereby break in many pieces, and kill or grievously hurt more
men than one whole pellet will do.

You may also fill holloe baules of metal with that kind of gunpowder which
I have taught you to make in the thirteenth way and sixteenth chapter of this
Appendix, for the said gunpowder is of so great force, as that undoubtedly it
will break any holloe baule of brickle metal filled with the same.

Some make these holloe baules with three parts of brass, and one of tynne,
in thickenesse of an ynche, and they do melt the brass before they put the
Tynne unto it, and when such baules shall be used they fill them half full of
good corn gunpowder, and to fill up the rest of the hollonesse in this baule,
they put in three parts of serpentine powder mingled with one part of rosen
beaten into powder, and then having put into the mouths of the holes that are
in the baules a little fine corn gunpowder for to make the residue of the
stuff to fire the sooner, they shoot them out of great Ordinance, or throe
them with slings out of their hands among men in battle ray, or over walls
into towns, fortresses, and camps, to terrify, hurt, and kill all those that
at the time of their breaking shall be near unto them.

Moreover you may for that purpose make a holloe pellet of one pound of tynne,
and three pounds of copper: and this pellet being made half a finger thick,
you must pearce two holes so big as a man may thrust into them his little
finger in both sides of the pellet, one directly against the other. This done,
fill the holloe pellet full of fine gunpowder pressed down very hard and put
into this pellet thoroe the said holes a holloe pype of iron which must reach
from one of those holes unto the other, and be fast riueted in the pellet. But
before you do put the pype so into the pellet, remember to pearce about the
middle part of the pype two or three holes thoroe the sides of it, and after
the pype is riueted fast in the pellet to make this next mixture folloing.

Take of gross gunpowder sixty parts, of Saltpeeter stamped twelve parts,
of vernish in grains six parts of Spanish pitch six parts, incorporate all
these things together, and after both the ends of that iron pype are fast
riueted in the pellet, fill the said pype almost full of that mixture, I say
almostful because you must put fine gunpowder into both ends of the said iron
pype. Moreover, after you have so done you shall first anoint the outside of
this pellet all over with Turpentine, and then having roled the pellet in fine
gunpowder to make it apt to take fire quickly, you shall shoot the same out
of a great piece of Artillery with a train of gunpowder, which lying along in
the piece from the mouth of it unto the gunpowder behind the said pellet, must
first be set on a fire at the mouth of the piece. Also you may if you will put
into the said holloe baule or pellet certain square or round pieces of lead,
or diverse short pypes of iron like unto pocket dagges full charged with
gunpowder and pellettes, and fill up the rest of the concauitie in that baule
or pellet with fine gunpowder, and having anointed it with Turpentine, and
roled it in fine gunpowder, shoot it out of a piece of Artillery with a train
as above you have been taught to do.

depiction of explosive pellets

The 79 Chapter. How you may make diverse sorts of baules of wildefire which
may be shot out of Mortar pieces, and also out of other great pieces of
Ordinance: And how you may make diverse sorts of baules of wildefire and other
firewoorkes which may be throen out of men's hands with slinges, cords, or
other such like things, into a Town, Forte, Trenche, or Camp, or among men
set in battelray.
TAke brimstone, oil of brimstone, stone oil, Juniper oil, Saltpeeter very
well refined, and for every part of these things take five parts of Aspalto:
Moreover, take Goose grease, or Duckes grease, pure Greek pitch, vernish,
Pigens dunge dried and beaten into fine powder, and so much Aqua vitae as will
cover all the same things. After you have put all these things together into
a glass or into an earthen pot (which must be glased or nealed) stop close
the mouth of that glass or pot with wax, or with the clay which we call
Lutum sapientiae in Latin, and in English Lute of wisdom, and bury the said
glass or pot in hot dung for 25 or 30 days together. Then (to the end
all that mixture may be the better incorporated) set the said glass or pot
upon a soft fire, and having so done, dippe toe or linen clothe in the said
mixture, and make a round baule fit for your Mortar piece, or for an other
piece of Ordinance of the same toe or linen clothe well dipped and imbrued in
the said mixture.

2 You may also if you will take a small pellet of iron or stone, and wind
about the same so much of that toe or linen clothe well dipped and imbrued in
the said mixture, as will suffice to make the same a fit shot for your
great piece of Ordinance, or Mortar piece. But when you will throe the said
ball of toe or linen clothe with your hands, you shall hang a ringe about the
same, and tie unto that ringe a cord of a yard in length, which cord you
shall take in one of your hands, and with the same toss the ball after it is
set on a fire round about you, till you shall perceive by casting it about
that it is ready to depart from you, and then with all your strength throe it
into the appointed place.

Also Canes, holloe staves, and pottes may be filled with this mixture, or you
may fill bags therewith, and after you have set them on a fire, throe them
with slinges, or such like instruments whether you will.

3 An other kind of firewoorke which may be throne out of men's hands among
enemies set in battle ray, and which may be shot out of great Ordinance and
Mortar pieces into Towns, Castles, Camps and Ships.
TAke of the vernish which is occupied to guilde leather an hundred twenty
parts, of quick brimstone forty eight parts, of the oil of rozen or gum
twenty four parts, of Saltpeeter eyghteene parts, of the oil called Oleum
Olibani twelve parts, of Camphire six parts, of very good Aqua vitae fourteen
parts: Mingle all these things together in a pot, or some other vessel set
over a soft fire, then dip or imbrue toe or linen clothe in that mixture, and
keep the same imbrued toe and linen clothe in pottes, to throe after it is
kindled with a gunpowder match among enemies, standing or marching in battle
ray: or make of the same imbrued toe and linen clothe fit pellets for to be
shot out of great Ordinance, and Mortar pieces into Towns, Castles, Camps and
Ships: For this kind of firewoorke being well kindled, can not be quenched
wheresoever it falls.

4 An other firewoorke which may be shot out of great Ordinance and Mortar
pieces, or throne out of men's hands.
TAke of the vernish which is occupied to guilde leather 120 parts, of the oil
of rozen or gum 12 parts, of the oil of wax 12 parts, of the oil of
turpentine 8 parts, of quick brimstone 24 parts, of saltpeeter 48 parts, of
camphire 12 parts, of very good Aqua vitae 24 parts, of greek pitch beaten
into fine powder 36 parts: Mingle all these things together in a pot or some
other vessel set over a soft fire, then dip and imbrue toe or linen clothe in
that mixture, and keep the same imbrued toe in pottes, to be throne with
slinges after it is kindled, into any place that you will burn: or make of the
imbrued toe and linen clothe round balls which may be shot out of great
Ordinance and Mortar pieces into Towns, Fortes, Camps, and Ships, for this
firewoorke being kindled, can not be quenched.

5 An other firewoorke which will burn in water, and may be shot out of
great Ordinance and Mortar pieces in holloe balls of metal, and throne with
slinges out of men's hands.
TAke of good gunpowder 72 parts, of colophonia 24 parts, of common oil of
Olives 18 parts, of brimstone 12 parts, of Naphra or stone oil 12 parts: These
things being well mingled together will burn all dry things, and as by
adding unto the same mixture a greater quantity of gunpowder you may increase
the strength of this firewoorke, so by putting unto that mixture somewhat more
of Colophonia and brimstone, you may abate the strength of the same firewoorke.

After you have made a mixture of the said things, wrap the same in little bags
of linen as well and as straight bound about as may be, then having tied a
cord unto every of the said bags, hold fast the ends of the cords in your
hands, that by the same you may dip and imbrue the said bags in hot pitch,
which done, let the said bags imbrued with pitch dry: When they are dry wrap
them in linen clothe as before you did the said mixture, and afterward dip
and imbrue the said wrappers in hot pitch as before you did the bags,
through which they shall not only be defended from the moisture of water, but
also from breaking asunder with the force of fire. After this, dry the said
wrappers in the sun, and having so done, pearce a little hole quite thoroe
the said imbrued wrappers and bags and into that hole put fire: After the fire
is kindled, and has burned a while in the said hole, throe the aforesaid
composition into water, and by so doing you shall see the said firewoorke to go
down to the bottom of the water, and to rise up again to the top of the
water, and to flame and burn both on the top of the water, and also in the
bottom of the water, and never to be quenched with water.

Some use to shoot this kind of firewoorke in holloe balls of metal out of
great Ordinance, and Mortar pieces, and for that purpose they put a quantity
of gunpowder in toe, and after they have imbrued the said toe in the aforesaid
mixture of Gunpowder, Colophonia oil of Olives, oil of brimstone, oil of
stone or naphra, they fill therewith hollow balls of metal, which being also
covered on the outside with the said mixture, and shot out of great
Ordinance, or Mortar pieces with other gunpowder, will for a while fly burning
in the air, and at the length break in many pieces to the spoil and
destruction of all those that shall be strooken with any piece of the same ball.

That this firewoorke may burn the longer and be more stronger, some put unto
the said mixture Swines grease, Goose grease, brimstone that has never been
on any fire, oil of brimstone, oil of naphra, oil of lintseede, Saltpeeter
oftentimes refined, Aqua vitae or burning water, oil of turpentine, Juniper
oil, liquide pitch or vernish, oil of the yolke of eggs: and for to thicken
and incorporate those liquide things, saw duste of a Bay tree: And after they
have well mingled all these things together, and have put the same in a
glass well stopped with wax that no air may breathe out, they bury the said
glass in a doonghill for two or three months space, and at every ten days
end within that time they take that glass out of the dunghill, and having
shaken well together the mixture in the same, they bury it again in fresh
dung. After the said mixture has been so buried in dung by the said space of
two or three months, it may be used for a firewoorke, which being a fire with
gunpowder, or with a gunpowder match, will burn and not be quenched with water
till all his substance shall be consumed, and yet with dry durte, dry earth,
dry sand, and with such other dry things may be choked and clean put out.

If this kind of firewoorke shall happen to fall upon a man's helmet, corslet,
target, sword, or other weapon, it will make the same read hot, and force
the man armed with the same to throe his said armor and weapon away for to
save him self from burning.

6 An other unquenchable firewoorke which may be shot out of great Ordinance
and Mortar pieces, and may be throne in pottes out of men's hands with slinges.
TAke of Turpentine twelve pounds, of liquide pitch twelve pounds, of pitch
vernish twelve pounds, of Frankensence twelve pounds, of Camphire twelve
pounds, of quick brimstone six pounds, of Saltpeeter refined twenty four
pounds, of burning water thirty six pounds, of the oil of naphra thirty
six pounds, of coals made of willoe beaten into fine powder three pounds and
pound. Mingle all these things together, and make thereof with toe or linen
clothe imbrued in the same round balls, which may be shot out of great
Ordinance and Mortar pieces, or if you will, you may throe certain pottes
filled with the said mixture among enemies, for this kind of firewoorke is
unquenchable.

7 An other firewoorke which may be shot out of great Ordinance, or out of
Trombes or Trunkes, or throne in pottes, and which will serve for Pykes,
Darts, Arrows, or any other kind of firewoorke, and may be kept good for a
very long time.
TAke of fine gunpowder well beaten one part, of Saltpeeter refined, dry, and
well beaten one part, of brimstone well beaten five parts, of soft coals
well beaten ten parts, of vernish in grain well beaten two parts, of Spanish
pitch well beaten two parts, of Orpiment well beaten two parts, of Camphire
well beaten six parts: Also take of oil of Lynseede one part, of oil of
bays three parts, of liquide vernish two parts, of turpentine three parts:
Melte the gum, wax, and oils over a sloe fire, and when they are melted put
all the other things into them, and stir them well together till all the
oil is dried up. With this mixture you may fill Trombes or Trunkes, and
Pottes, and make thereof pellettes which may be shot out of great Ordinance,
and also out of Mortar pieces. Also you may tie this mixture unto the ends of
Pykes, Darts; and Arrows, and if you will sprinkle it with Aqua vitae, and
put it into a nealed pot well and close stopped, you may keep it good so
long as you will for such purposes.

depiction of types of fireworks

8 An other kind of firewoorke which may be shot out of great Ordinance.
TAke of Saltpeeter refined with water thirty six parts, of brimstone five
parts, of cole six parts, of Camphire three parts, beat every material thing
by it self, moysten them with Aqua vitae, incorporate them together, and make
pellets of the same mixture and shoot the same pellets out of great Ordinance.

9 An other kind of firewoorke which may be shot out of great Ordinance.
FIrst take of gross gunpowder six parts, of Saltpeeter refined two parts,
of brimstone one part, of ship pitch two parts, of gum of a Pine tree part.
Beat well all these things and incorporate them together. That done, take of
turpentine two parts, of nwe wax part, of stone oil one part, of common
oil four parts: Melte the Turpentine, Gum, and wax, and oils over a sloe
fire, and then putting into this liquide mixture the composition which was
first made, make thereof an other mixture. Then having in a readiness certain
round bags of canuas, fill every of those round bags with the said composition,
and bind every of those bags or pellets so filled round about with iron wier.
That done, cote them (as the Gunners term is) twice all over with a mixture of
brimstone and gum and wind iron wier hard upon every cote. After this make
four holes in every pellet from one side to the other, let every hole be so
big as a man's finger, and putting into every hole an end of a gunmatch well
roled in gunpowder, fill up the vacant room of every hole with good and fine
gunpowder.

When you will charge a piece of Artillery with one of these pellets, put
first into the same piece parts of his ordinary charge in gunpowder:
Secondly, make a hole with a staff thoroe the midst of the same charge in
gunpowder: Thirdly, of purpose refrayning to thruste a wadde into the piece
next after the powder, and put the pellet into the piece and close unto the
gunpowder, and so as his said holes may lie directly against the Gunpowder, and
then giving fire to the Gunpowder in the touchhole of the Piece, you shall see
that the pellette will burn, and be a fearful fire.

10 An other kind of firewoorke which may be shot out of great Ordinance, or
throne with men's hands, and will burn in water, armor, stones and every other
thing upon which it shall fall,
TAke of Saltpeeter, of cole made of willoe, of Aqua vitae, of brimstone of
Greek pitch or Spanish pitch, gum of a Pine tree, Ship pitch, camphire,
stone oil, liquide vernish and Turpentine, of each one part. Mingle all these
things together, and boiling this mixture in a Kettle over a sloe fire, make
thereof a paiste which must not be made too hard, nor too soft. Then having
in a readiness round bags of linen clothe full stuffed with pure gross
gunpowder, and well bound, cover every bag or pellette all over with the
said paiste, and wind toe upon every cover of paiste to keep fast the
paiste upon the said pellettes. This done, cover again the said bags or
pellettes all over with the said payste, and wind toe as you did before upon
every of those couers, and bind the toe fast upon the pellettes with good
packthreede, then make a hole u^ ^ery of those pellettes, even to the gunpowder
which is within them, and put into every of those holes an end of a gunmatch
well roled in fine gunpowder. Now if you will shoot any of these pellettes out
of a piece of Ordinance, you must charge the Piece with no more Gunpowder than
with half of the gunpowder which is requisite for the same Piece when it
shoots a pellette of iron, and you must thrust the hole which is in every of
these Pellettes right against the midst of the piece his charge in gunpowder.

You may also without hurt to your self throe with your hands any of these
pellettes among your enemies, if you will hurl the pellette away from you so
soon as you have kindled the Gunmatch lying within it, for after the Gunpowder
within the pellet is a fire with the said Gunmatch, the pellette does open,
and bring an unquenchable fire to the said paiste, which will burn Armor,
Stones, and every other thing upon which it shall fall though the thing be in
water.

An other kind of Firewoorke which may be shot out of great Pieces of
Artillery or throne out of men's hands.
MAke a round purse of canuasse, fill it full of gross gunpowder, and bind
well the mouth of the purse according to the picture in the margent. And then
make with a great bodkin two or three holes or a more number of holes in that
purse, and put into every of the same holes a wooden pin. After this role
the purse oftentimes in the mixture following, till you have well covered the
same with that mixture, as before you have been taught to cover pellettes with
an other mixture.

To make the mixture in which the purse must be so roled, take five parts of
gross gunpowder, three parts of Saltpeeter refined, one part of brimstone, one
part and part of the gum of a Pine tree, part of camphire, part of
Turpentine, part of Vitriall not too small beaten, part of common salt,
part of oil of stone, and of oil of Linseede, and one part of Aqua vitae:
Mingle all these things well together, and having roled the purse in this
mixture according as you have been taught before to role pellettes in an other
mixture, take away out of the purse so soon as the mixture which is upon it
is dry, all the said pinnes of wood, because they were put into the said
holes for no other purpose than to keep the said mixture out of them, and
fill up all those holes with fine gunpowder, which touched with fire will cause
the purse to burn, and be a fire that can not be quenched with any other thing
than with ashes, duste, or dry sand.

depiction of a type of firework

The 80 Chapter. How you may make diverse sorts of Firewoorkes, which being
shot in a dark night out of a Morterpeece, or out of any other piece of
Artillery, or throne out of men's hands into an appointed place, will give so
great a light as that you may discern by the same light whether or no any
enemies are in or near unto that place.
1 MAke certain round bags or balls of double folded canuasse, which being
filled with the 2 mixtures following may be fit pellets for mortar pieces,
and also for other pieces of Artillery. Likewise make some such round balls
of double folded canuasse six inches in widenes or thereaboutes, for to be
throne out of men's hands. When you do paiste or glue together the sides of
those bags, leave a hole open in every great ball, so bygge as the top of
your Thombe, and in every ball of the lesser sort no wyder than that you may
put into it the top of one of your fingers: This done, take of Saltpeeter not
much refined sixty parts, of Brimstone forty parts, of gross gunpowder two
parts: bruise the said brimstone grossly like corns of pepper, and pound the
said gross gunpowder (if it be corned) into fine powder, and incorporate all
those things together. Moreover, make an other mixture thus. Take of brimstone
48 parts, melte the same brimstone in an iron pot over a quick fire of
coals, and put to that quantity of melted brimstone 12 parts of dry and
hard gum of a Pine tree, and 6 parts of Colophonia or Greek Pitch, or
Spanish pitch, which must in like manner be melted by a little and a little
with the said brimstone. Then put to the said liquide mixture by a little and
a little, 18 parts of Saltpeeter grosely beaten, still sturring the same in
the said mixture with a staff or stick. After this remove the said pot
from the fire, and then mingle well with the said mixture 12 parts of gross
gunpowder. When you have so done, put into that mixture by a little and a
little so much saw dust of a dry Pine tree as will (after it has been
therein well sturred with a stick) soke and drink up all the said liquide
mixture. Then laying this confection while it is warm upon a rough and rugged
boorde, break the same confection into diverse pieces, so big as walnuttes or
chestnuttes, and that done let them lie till they are cold, then mingle a
convenient number of those pieces with the mixture which you did learn in this
Chapter to make first, and after you have so done, fill the said round bags
with that confection pressed down hard, and leave a hole open in every bag
of the greater sort that shall be filled in such manner with the said mixture
so big as that you may put the top of your little finger into it. After all
this, thruste a long wooden pyn thoro every such hole a finger deep into the
said mixture, and cover every such ball all over with a double folded paper
paisted together on the sides. Again, upon every such cover of paper you
must put an other cover of brown paper double folded and paisted together on
the sides, and when you shall see that all the said couers are dry, make over
the last cover upon every of the said ba^les a strong net of iron wire to
keep the confection in every ball fast together, and then pulling the said
wooden pinnes out of the holes in the said pellettes, thruste one end of a
match of five fingers in length or thereabouts, well roled in good, gross, or
fine gunpowder, into every of the said holes a finger deep, and let the other
end of that gunmatch hang out a little upon the outside of the pellettes last
cover under the net. Now when you will shoot these pellets so made, out of a
Mortar piece, or out of any other piece of artillery, take a quantity of toe,
stuff the same toe made like unto a little pilloe or cusshin with the piece
his duty in gunpowder rammed down softly, and lay one of those pellets next
upon the same cusshin, and then making a train of gunpowder from the said
cusshin unto the mouth of the piece mounted to shoot into the appointed place,
give fire to the end of the train at the mouth of the piece, and shoot
diverse of those pellettes into diverse places of that field or plain where the
thing is which you desire to see.

The pellets which for the same purpose may be throne with slinges in men's
hands are stuffed in every respect with the said mixtures as you have been
taught to fill the other pellettes for pieces, but you must cover the canuasse
of these pellettes all over with two sundry smoothe couers of thrice folded
paper paisted together on the sides, and well bound crossewise round about
with good pack threede, to this end that after they are dry you may with a
sling or cord of two foot and in length tied fast at one end to the pellet,
throe any of the same pellettes into the appointed places.

An other kind of Firewoorke which being shot in a dark night out of a
Mortar piece, or out of any other piece of Artillery, or throne out of men's
hands into an appointed place, will give so great a light as that you may
discern by the same light whether or no any enemies are in or near unto that
place.
2 TAke of Saltpeeter refined 1 part, of Brimstone 3 parts, of gum of a Pine
tree one part, of that which in Italian is called Antimonio 4 parts, and of
coals made of soft wood 1 part. Beat well all these things and incorporate
them together with Linseed oil so as the mixture may be like a soft paiste.
Then make of toe and of the said mixture pellets, and shoot them out of
Mortar pieces, or out of other great Pieces, as before you have been taught to
shoot other like pellettes: for this kind of pellet will also give a very
great light, and discover all things that are near unto the place where it
does burn.

An other kind of firewoorke which being shot out of great pieces will give a
great light.
3 TAke of turpentine 4 pounds, of saltpeeter 1 pound, and of coals made of
soft wood 4 pounds: stamp all these things together, incorporate them with
flax, and make thereof pellets or round balls. For these pellets shot out of
Mortar pieces or out of other great pieces of artillery, or throne with men's
hands into a dark place after they are a fire will give so great a light as
that you may see by it whether or no any enemy or other person is there.

An other kind of firewoorke which being shot out of great pieces will give a
great light and serve to burn the enemies munition.
4 TAke a pellet of iron in diameter 2 fingers shorter than the height of the
concauitie in the piece which shall shoot this ball or pellet that is now to
be made, and paiste paper all over upon this iron pellet, and when the paiste
is dry, cut a slash in the paper, and pull away out of the paper through that
slash the said iron pellet. This done, fill the said round and empty ball of
paper with this mixture. Take of gross gunpowder 48 parts, of saltpeeter 12
parts, of greek pitch 12 parts, of coals 6 parts, of oil of Linseede 12
parts. Incorporate al these things well together, and having filled the said
round and empty ball of paper with the same mixture, cover the ball all over
with canuasse paisted upon it, and well bound round about with packthreede,
to the end it may not fall of when the ball shall be shot out of a piece. After
this, thruste long wooden pinnes or pricks round about the ball into the
middle part thereof, and then take of gross gunpowder sifted through a ^ercer
24 parts, of turpentine 18 parts, of brimstone 6 parts, of saltpeeter 6 parts.
Moysten well al these things with oil, sees them and incorporate them
together in a liquide mixture, and imbrue well the said ball in that liquide
mixture. Moreover, when you will shoot this ball out ofa piece, let the
mixture upon the ball be dry, and pulling the said wooden pinnes or pricks
out of the ball, fill up all their holes with fine gunpowder. After this, lade
the appointed Piece with a due charge in gunpowder, and with the said ball
thrust home unto the powder. But in this action put no wadde into the piece
after the ball, because you must make a train of gunpowder within the piece
from the ball unto the mouth of the piece, and having laid the mouth of the
piece directly against the place at which you will shoot, discharge the piece
giving fire to the end of the said train at the mouth of the Piece.

An other kind of firewoorke which being shot in a dark night out of Mortar
pieces, or out of other great pieces of Artillery, or throne out of men's hands
into any place, will give so great a light as that you may see by the same
light whether or no any enemies are in, or near unto that place, and will
burn sackes of bumbase, sackes of wool, and such other things which are
sometimes hanged before a wall to defend the same from the force of battering
pieces.
5 TAke 2 ounces of Saltpeeter, 1 ounce of brimstone, 2 ounces of camphire, and
a little of man's grease or fat. Mingle all these things together, and
moysten them well in a kettle over a fire with aqua vitae, then having in a
readiness diverse pellets of wood, stone, or iron, you shall role every of
those pellettes well in the same liquide mixture, and when they are dry you
shall role them well again in that mixture: Likewise after the pellettes are
dry again, you shall role well every of them the third time in that liquide
mixture. Moreover, if these pellettes shall happen to be dry when you will
shoot them out of any piece of Artillery, or when you will throe them from you
with your hands to see who is in a dark place, you must moysten them again
with Aqua vitae.

Or you may if you will prepare certain holloe pellets of Copper plate, white
plate, or iron plate, and having made round about every of them four or six
or a more number of holes, fill the same empty pellets with the aforesaid
mixture, and with ship pitch, lean or dry gum, and quicksiluer mingled
with the said mixture, and role them well at 3 sundry times in this mixture,
as you have been taught before to role the other pellets in the other mixture,
remembering that with these pellets shot out of Mortar pieces, or out of other
great pieces of Artillery, or throne out of men's hands upon sackes of
bumbasse or sackes of wool, or upon any other thing hanged before a wall to
defend the same from the force of battering pieces, you may burn and consume
the same sackes and other things of defense.

The 81 Chapter. To make and use half baked pottes, and five sundry sorts of
firewoorkes which may be put into the same pottes, and be throne out of men's
hands for offensive and defensive service.
MAke great and small earthen pottes which must be but half baked, and like
unto the picture in the margent. depiction of half-baked pots The great pottes
ought to hold 6 or 8 pottels, but the little pottes ought not to exceed the
measure of one pottle. Fill every of those pottes half full with gross
gunpowder pressed down hard, and with one of the five several mixtures next
following in this Chapter, fill up the other halfes of those pottes: This done,
cover the mouth of every pot with a piece of canuasse bound hard about the
mouth of the pot, and well imbrued in melted brimstone. Also tie round about
the middle of every pot a packthreed, and then hang upon the same packthreede
round about the pot so many Gunmatches of a finger in length as you will, and
when you will throe any of these pottes among your enemies, light the same
gunmatches that they may so soon as the pot is broken with his fall upon
the ground, fire the mixture in the pot. Or rather put fire to the mixture at
the mouth of the pot, and by so doing make the same to burn before you do
throe the pot from you, because it is a better and more surer way than the
other: I mean than to fire the said mixture after the pot is broken with
burning gunmatches. Note.
Moreover this is to be noted, that the small pots do serve for to be throne
out of one ship into an other in fight upon the sea, and that the great
pottes are to be used in service upon the land for the defense of towns,
fortes, walls, and gates, and to burn such things as the enemies shall throe
into ditches for to fill up the same ditches, and also to destroy enemies in
their trenches and camps.

1 The first mixture with which the said pottes may be charged. Take of Gross
gunpowder sifted through a sercer 24 parts. Saltpeeter sifted through a sercer 2
parts. Brimstone sifted through a sercer 2 parts. Vernish in grain 2 parts.
Cole made of a willoe tree sifted 1 part.
Moysten all these things with Aqua vitae, and incorporate them together.

2 The second mixture which is an excellent mixture to be throne in those half
baked pottes upon enemies which will offer to scale any Forte, or wall, and is
very good to burn such stuff as shall be by enemies throne into ditches for to
fill them up. Take of Gross gunpowder 96 parts. Saltpeeter 18 parts.
Brimstone 4 parts. Liquide vernish 2 parts. Stone oil 2 parts. Green
coperesse 2 parts. Arsenick 2 parts. Assa fetida 2 parts. Ship pitch 2
parts.
Mingle all these things very well together, for the more better that they are
mingled together, the more better will the same mixture do his effect.

3 The 3 mixture with which the said pottes may be charged. Take of Gross
gunpowder 4 pounds. Greek pitch 1 pound. Vernish in grains 1 pound. Brimstone
1 pound. Saltpeeter 1 pound. Oil of stone 1 pound.
Stamp well all these things together, and make a mixture of the same as you
have learned to make the other two mixtures.

4 The 4 mixture with which the said pottes may be charged. Take of Gross
gunpowder 48 parts. Greek pitch 12 parts. Dry or lean gum 6 parts.
Brimstone 6 parts. Saltpeeter 12 parts.
Stamp well all these things together, and make a mixture of the same things.

5 The 5 mixture with which the said pottes may be charged. Take of Gross
gunpowder 10 pounds. Saltpeeter 2 pounds. Vernish in grains 1 pound. Spanish
pitch 1 pound.
Stamp all these things moystned with Aqua vitae in a mortar, and incorporate
the^ together.

You may also if you will charge the said pottes with square or round pieces
of iron and lead after this manner: Note.
Melte in a ladle or in some other thing a convenient quantity of read or
yellowe wax, and with the same liquide wax line and cover the inside of every
pot: this done, stick in the wax round about the inside of every pot so
many small, square, or round pieces of iron and lead as you shall think
needful. Then having in a readiness for every pot a holloe trunk or pipe
which in compass must be equal with the wideness of the pottes mouth, and in
length agree with the height of the pot within, you shall pearce 3 or 4 holes
in the sides of every of the said pipes, and fill the said pipes full of a
mixture thus made. Take of Gross gunpowder 10 pounds. Brimstone sifted through
a sercer 2 pounds. Vernish in grains 1 pound. Saltpeeter beaten to powder 1
pound. and sifted through a sercer
Moysten all these things with common water, and mingle them together, and
after you have put into every pot so much fine gunpowder as will lie (the
said pipes being within the pottes) between the outsides of the said pipes,
and the insides of the pottes, you shall thruste into every pot one of those
pipes filled full of the said mixture, and cover every pot all over with
canuasse well bound about and imbrued in pitch. Also when you will through any
such pot among enemies, give fire to the mixture in the pipe of that pot,
and suffer it for a little while to burn before you do cast the same pot
from you, which any man may do without harm to himself.

The 82 Chapter. To make 5 diverse kinds of firewoorkes which may be put into
pottes, holloe staves, canes, or other vessels, and throne out of men's hands
in defensive and offensive service.
TAke greek pitch, alchitrean, quick brimstone, tartar, sarcocolla, niter,
stone oil, of every of these 1 part, and of unslaked lime 2 parts and
somewhat more: Incorporate all these things together with the oil of the
yolks of eggs, then put all that mixture into a glass or into a glased
earthen pot, and having well and closely stopped the mouth of the said pot
or glass with wax, bury the same glass or pot in a du^ghil or in hot dung
for the space of a month. After the end of a month take it out of the dung,
and set the said glass or pot well and closely stopped upon a soft fire
that the mixture in the same may melte, and be liquide. This done, fill with
that licor holloe staves, canes, pottes, or other vessels made of purpose to
receive the same, and in the midst of every of them put a gunmatch, or rather
a little good corn gunpowder which will when need shall require set them
quickly in a fire.

2 An other firewoorke which may be put into pottes and throne out of men's
hands in offensive and defensive service, and may be shot out of Trunkes, or
tied to the ends of arrows or darts, and will serve to burn gates, carts,
and all other wooden things that shall be anointed with the same.
TO make this liquide kind of firewoorke put into a Cauldron Hogs grease,
stone oil, Oil of Brimstone, Saltpeeter twice refined, Aqua vitae, Greek
pitch, Turpentine, and some Serpentine gunpowder. But first the Pitch,
Brimstone, and Saltpeeter ought to be made liquide, and that done, put the
said Hogs grease, Turpentine, Oil, and Gunpowder into the said I^cor set
over a fire, that you may well incorporate the said mixture, by sturring and
mingling the same with a stick in a pot or other vessel prepared for that
purpose. After this, cover the said composition all over with good Gunpowder,
that it may take fire quickly when need shall require. After you have so done,
let it settle, that when you will use it you may through it out of your hands with
a sling, or with a cord tied unto the pot, or with a chain, or otherwise as
you shall think best.

Also you may fill certain little bags of linen with this licor, which
being bound about with cords, and made round like pellets, may be shot out
of iron Trunkes.

Moreover, you may with this liquide composition anoynte gates of Cities,
wooden Bridges, Carts, Munition, and such like things which are apt to
burn, easy to be penetrated with fire, and able to maintain fire. And you
may tie some of the said linen bags about the ends or heads of darts, or
arrows, and if you will you may fill certain linen purses full of the said
composition, and throe them out of your hands in defensive and offensive
service.

3 An other firewoorke which may be put into pottes, and throne out of men's
hands in defensive and offensive service.
YOu ought for this purpose to prepare so many pots or other vessels as you
shall think needful, and it is no matter whether the same pots or vessels be
baked or vnbaked, so that the humiditie of their earthie substance be dried up.
This done, fill those pots or vessels more than half full with Serpentine
gunpowder, and mingle with that gunpowder Greek pitch and brimstone well beaten
to powder, in quantity so much as part thereof at the least. After this, cover
the said mixture a finger thick with hogs grease strayned, to the end that
the said mixture when it shall be throne may hold together and not fall
asunder, and that it may cause the fire burning sloely to endure til it shall
fall among the enemies at who^ it was throne. When you have done all this, make
a hole through the said covering of hogs grease into the aforesaid mixture of
gunpowder, pitch, and brimstone, and having put into the said hole a short
piece of a gunmatch, or a little of good corn gunpowder, fire the said
gunmatch, or gunpowder, and keep the pot of that firewoorke in your hand til
you shall perceive the fire in it to be well kindled, for then is the time to
cast it.

4 An other kind of firewoorke which may be put into pottes, and throne out of
men's hands in defensive and offensive service.
TAke of Saltpeeter 5 ounces, of gross gunpowder 4 ounces, and of gum 2
ounces. Having beaten every of these simples by it self grossly, mingle them
together, and incorporate them with oil of Linseede: that done, fill a pot
with the same mixture, and suffer it for the space of one day to lie still in
the same pot. After the end of that day make a round hole with a pearcer, or
an auger, beginning at the mouth of the pot, through the said mixture, and
also through the bottom of the same pot, and to close up the same hole again
put into it a cane or pipe of soft wood, which being open at both ends, and
equal in bigness with the said hole must in one half be filled with gross
gunpowder, and in the other half with the said mixture. When all this is
performed, cover the mouth of the pot with a piece of canuasse bound round
about the same, and before you do cast the pot among your enemies cut a
hole in the canuasse over the mouth of the pot, and putting a suffycient
quantity of good gunpowder within that hole upon the said mixture, give fire
thereunto.

5 An other firewoorke which may be throne out of men's hands in defensive and
offensive service, and can not be quenched with any other thing than with
vinegar or urine.
TAke of quick brimstone 1 part, of orpiment 1 part of colophonia 2 parts, of
ship pitch 1 part, of vernish in grain 1 part, of turpentine 1 part, of
that which sticks like a gum in the inside of a butte of wine 2 parts, of
that which in Italian is called Tasso 1 part, of frankencense of a part, of
oil of linseede of a part, and of stone oil of a part. Beat well all these
things together, that done, boil them a little in a vessel of Copper, and
then put toe or bumbasse into the same confection, and after you have well
imbrued the said toe or bumbasse therein, make thereof pellettes which being a
fire will not be quenched with any other thing than with vinegar or urine.

The 83 Chapter. To make 5 sundry sorts of firewoorkes which will kindle with
water or rain.
TAke nwe lime made of Flintstone, calamite burned to powder, vitrioll grossly
beaten 32 parts, saltpeeter oftentimes refined 8 parts, of camphire as much as
all the aforesaid things, oil of quick brimstone, oil of turpentine,
saltpeeter, salt armoniack, in weight so much as the vitrioll, and so much of
tartar, bay salt, salt of urine, and aqua vitae made of strong wine, as will
suffice to dissolve all the same composition, which must be put into an
Alcumist glass named in Italian Boccia, so well and closely stopped with wax,
that no air may breathe out of the same, and having so done, bury the same
glass in hot dung for the space of 2 or 3 months, how be it within that time
you must remove the said glass, and change the dung in which it lies buried
at the least every ten days, to the end that the said composition may ripe
well, and be incorporated, and be like unto a licor of one kind, the which
must afterward be boiled upon a soft fire til all the oily, moisture, and all
the other moisture that is in it be vapored away, and that the rest of it be
dry, and hard like a stone. When you have in such manner made that mixture
dry, and hard like a stone, break the said glass to take out of it the said
dry and stony mixture. That being done, grind the said mixture to powder,
and when you will use the same powder, strowe it upon a place where it shall
take wette with rain or other water, for therewith it will kindle, and burn.
But forasmuch as this kind of firewoorke may sometimes fail to kindle with
rain or water, it will be expedient for you to put fire unto the said
gunpowder, for to make it kindle and burn according to your desire.

2 An other firewoorke which will kindle with rain or water.
MAke pellets of unslaked lime, quick brimstone, oil of linseede, or of oil
of Olives mingled together, and lay the same pellets where rain or other
water may fall upon them, for they being wette with rain or other water will
suddenly kindle and burn.

3 An other firewoorke which will kindle with water or rain.
TAke of the thing which in Italian is called Gloriatto one pound, of the oil
of the yolks of eggs one pound, of oil of brimstone one pound, of unslaked
lime beaten to fine powder eighteen pounds: Incorporate these things
together, and lay a quantity thereof where you will have it to burn, for when
any rain or other water shall fall upon the same quantity of mixture, it will
kindle and burn.

4 An other firewoorke which will kindle with water or rain.
TAke of baulme or of blessed oil 1 pound, of oil of linseede 3 pounds, of
the oil of the yolks of eggs 1 pound, of unslaked lime 8 pounds. Beat well
all these things together, and make thereof a confection. That done, when
need shall require lay the same confection in an open place where rain may
fall upon it: or anointe therewith gates, wooden bridges, carts, and such
like things which are apt to burn, for the thing so anointed will burn so
soon as it shall be wette with rain or other water.

5 An other firewoorke which will kindle and burn with water, and also with
spittle.
TAke of brimston oil, of the gum of the tree called in Latin Larix, in
English Larch, of the roze^ that runs out of a Cedar tree, of liquide pitch
of each 14 parts, of saltpeeter 16 parts, of the salt of that sweet gum
which is called in Latin Salammoniacum, and in English Beniemine, or of
armoniake salt, of vitriol, of lime made of tartar, of each one part, of lime
made of the lode stone, of unslaked lime made of flintes lying by the sides of
rivers, of each 5 parts, of tallowe and of duckes grease, of each six parts.
Put all these material things together into a pot, and pour into that pot so
much Aqua vitae as will drown and cover all those things. Then bury the same
pot well luted in a dunghill of horsedung for the space of 3 months, and at
every 4 days end during that time, take the pot out of the dunghill, and shake
well together all the things which are in the pot, and when you have so done,
bury the pot again in an other place of the said dunghill, and after the end of
the said 3 months, set the said pot over a hot fire until all the moisture
within the same shall be clean dried up, and the mixture within the pot shall be
as lies or dregs. Then break the pot, and keep the same lies or dregs which
you shall find there: for the powder of the same lies or dregs being wet with
spittle or water will kindle and burn.

The 84 Chapter. To make 2 sundry sorts of firewoorkes which will kindle with
the heat of the sun, and burn in water.
THere is a very thin and burning licor with which if you will anointe in the
caniculer days any wood or other thing apt to burn, you shall see that the
heat of the sun without any other fire will make the same anointed things to
burn. Some say that Marcus Graccus devised this fireworke to burn the Romans
Navy, and it is also reported that if material fire be put into this kind of
ointment it will suddenly burn, and be unquenchable, except it be choked with
dry sand, or wet with old and long kept urine, or with very strong vinegar.
Also this kind of fireworke will burn in water, and as the said Marcus
Graccus writes, it may thus be made. Take Camphire, oil of quick Brimstone,
oil of Turpentine, oil called in Italian Oglio Laterino, Juniper oil, Stone
oil oil of Lynseede, Alchitrean, Colophonia finely beaten, oil of the yolks
of eggs, ship pitch, Cera Zagora, Duckes grease strained, Saltpeeter, and
twice so much aqua vitae as all the composition, and so much of Arsinicke and
Tartar as part of the whole composition, and some Armoniacke salt, and having
put all these things in an Alcumist pot or glass well stopped with wax, bury
the said pot or glass (that the stuff within the same may putrify) in hot
doung for the space of two months. Then all the said things being in a
vessel called Storta, which Alcumistes do use, must be distilled with a soft
fire through which within six or eight hours after the said things have been
over the fire, there will come a very thin licor, into which you must put so
much pigens dung, or ox dung dried in an oven, beaten into very fine powder,
and searced, as will make of it a substance like soap, or rather a more liquide
thing,

This liquide mixture may thus be used. Anoint the thing which is to be burned
with that liquide mixture, and (as it is said) the heat of the Sun in the
Caniculer days will set the same in a fire, so as it will not only burn the
anointed thing, but also every other thing apt to take fire which is near
unto it. Galen does report that in Mysia which is a part of Asia, the dung of a
Pigen fell upon a part of a wooden windoe painted with rosen, and that after
the said dung was dry, it did kindle with the heat of the Sun, and burn
not only the said windoe, but also the whole house where that windoe was, by
reason that the dung of Pigens being dry, is apt and has power to kindle fire.

2 An other fire work which will kindle with the heat of the Sun, and burn
in water, and that may be choked with dry sand or earth, and can not be
quenched with any other thing than with stale urine, or strong vinegar.
TAke of the refuse or dregs of the gum of the Larix or Larch tree after
the distillation of the oil of the Larix or Larche tree, of the oil of the
Larix or Larche tree, of liquide pytch, of Cedar pytch, of Camphire, of the
lime or clay named Bitumen, of the d^ug called Mumia, of nwe wax, of Duckes
grease, of Pigens dung, of the oil of quick Brimstone, of the oil of Juniper
of the oil of Bays, of the oil of Lynseed, of the oil of hempseed, of stone
oil, of Philosophers oil, of the oil of the yolks of eggs, of every of
these things 60 parts, of Saltpeeter 120 parts, of salt Armoniacke seven
parts: all these things being put into a vessel of glass, must be first well
moistened, and covered with burning water, and then buried in horse dung for
the space of six months. But at every three days end during the said time,
the said vessel must be taken out of the dung, and (after the things in the
same have been well shaken together) it must be buried again in fresh horse
dung. When the said time of 6 months shall be expired, put the same mixture
into the Distillatorie vessel which is named a Seraphine, and draw out the
quintessence of the said mixture in the Seraphine, the which quintessence may
be thickened with very fine powder of Ox or Cow dung. This done, put the said
mixture into pots or other vessels, and when you will use the same fire work,
I counsel you to set it in a fire with a gunpowder match, or with good corn
gunpowder as you have before been taught to give fire unto other fireworkes,
and to throe the said pots with slings after they are well kindled, among your
enemies.

The 85 Chapter. To make balls of fire which will burn in water.
MElt in a pot over a fire two pounds of clean Brimstone, and while it is
warm mingle well therewith one pound of Saltpeeter, and half a pound of fine
gunpowder. This done, take the pot from the fire, and put into the said mixture
two pounds of gross gunpowder: after that beat in a mortar the said mixture
moystened with strong and distilled vinegar, and when you have so done, make
thereof round balls or pellets: Then wrappe every of the same balls or
pellets in canuas, binding them round about upon their wrappers as hard as
may be with packthreed, and imbrue their wrappers so bound all over with hot
and liquide pytche, and remember after the pytch is cold and dry, to make a
hole in every of the said pellets, and to put a piece of a gunmatch into every
hole for to fire the pellets when you will have them burn.

2 An other fireworke which will burn in water, and consume armor, wood, and
every other thing that it shall fall on.
TAke of Saltpeeter two parts, of Brimstone two parts, of Greek pitch or
Spanish pitch one part, of Assa fetida of a part, of Camphire three parts, and
a few grains of Barley bruised, wet in aqua vitae, and roled in good and fine
gunpowder. Beat well and sift all these materials except the Camphire, Assa
fetida, and the grains of Barley, which you shall never pound well, unless you
do first beat a Nutte or two Almondes in the mortar where the Assa fetida,
Camphire, and barlie must be pounded. This done beat very well so much
gunpowder as will counterpease in weight all the said materials, and having
sifted the same powder through a Seeue, mingle it among the other aforesaid
materials, and moysten the whole mixture with oil of Lynseed, and with oil of
stone: then having in a readiness round bags of canuas, put into their
bottomes lead, to make the round bags or balls stand upright and after fill
up those round bags with the aforesaid mixture pressed hard down. Also take
of Brimstone, Gum, and of Spanish pyth of each one part, melt them together
over a sloe fire, and while this mixture is warm, cover the said round balls
all over with the same, and bind well the said mixture upon the balls with
iron or copper wiers. Then wrap or so canuas round about the said balls, and
having covered the said wrappers with the mixture last named, bind the said
mixture upon them as you did before with iron or copper wiers: and after you
have in this manner covered the said balls thrice, make through the side of
every ball, and through the midst of the said piece of lead which you have
put into every ball to make it stand upright a hole so big as a man's finger,
and two fingers deep within the mixture that was first put into the pellet,
and then filling up the said holes with good and fine gunpowder, give fire to
the same, and when the fire is well, kindeled throe the ball from you into
water, for it will burn armor, wood, and every other thing and can not be
quenched with water.

3 An other fireworke which will burn in water and consume armor, wood, and
every other thing that it shall fall on.
TAke of gross gunpowder one part, of Saltpeeter one part, of Amber one part,
of Camphire of a part: Beat all these things into fine powder, sift them
through a fine Seeue or searser, and incorporate them together: then take more
of gunpowder well beaten so much as will counterpease in weight all the said
materials, and incorporate the same with the other mixture. After this mingle
six ounces of aqua vitae with the said composition, and also incorporate with
the said mixture, of oil petriol four parts, of stone oil three parts, of
oil of Brimstone, or rather of Juniper oil which is better two parts, and
with this composition fill certain round bags, or balls of canuas as
before you have been taught to fill other like round bags with other
mixtures. Also cover and bind the round bags filled with this mixture in
like manner as you have been taught to cover and bind other like round bags,
and having made a hole in every bag even to the mixture within the bag, and
filled the same hole with good and fine gunpowder, give fire unto the same
gunpowder, and after the fire is well kindeled, throe the ball from you into
water, for it will burn armor, wood, and every other thing that it shall fall
on, and can not be quenched with water.

4 An other fireworke which will burn in water and consume armor, wood, and
every other thing that it shall fall on,
TAke of Saltpeeter refined dry, of quick Brimstone, of nwe pitch, of
Camphire, of quick lime, of the thing called in Italian comiranti, of each one
part beaten together into very fine powder, and searced through a searcer. Also
take of old petriol oil, and oil of comuranti, melt them with nwe wax over
a soft fire, and while they are liquide and warm but not seething hot,
incorporate them and the other mixture of powder together, and of this
composition make pellets or round balls as before you have been taught. For
this sort of pellets will burn in water, and consume armor, wood, and every
other thing that it shall fall on. The Saltpeeter in this composition must be
sodde in strong vinegar, and well dried before you do beat it among the other
things to powder.

5 An other fireworke which will burn in water, and consume armor, wood, and
every other thing that it shall fall on, and can not be quenched but with
strong vinegar.
TAke of Saltpeeter refined dry one part, of Brimstone one part, of Orpiment
one part, of ship pytch one part, of Spanish pytch of a part, of vernishe in
grain one part, of Frankensence one part, beat all these things into very
fine powder, and incorporate them together: Also take of Turpentine one part,
of Sheep suet one part, of petriol oil of a part, and having made the same
to boil a little in a pot over a sloe fire, put the other mixture into it, and
incorporate them together: then dip fine toe or bumbase into the said
composition, and make pellets thereof and when need shall require give fire
unto them as before you have been taught, and through them upon enemies which
will offer to assault the fort, town, or city where you are. For these
pellets will burn in water and consume armor, wood, and every other thing
that they shall fall on and can not be quenched but with strong vinegar.

The 86 Chapter. To make a fireworke which will burn stones and iron.
TAke of Camphire three parts, of salt Armoniacke twelve parts, of oil of
Bays 24 parts, of vernish 24 parts, of Gum 36 parts, of liquide vernish
twelve parts. of Turpentine 24 parts, of Spanish pitch 60 parts, of
Brimstone 60 parts, of liquide pitch twelve parts, of nwe wax twelve parts,
of Coals made of willoe 144 parts of fine gunpowder for handgunnes twelve
parts, and of oil of Lynseede 36 parts: incorporate all these things
together and keep this confection to burn stones and iron.

The 87 Chapter. To make a fireworke which was first invented by the sons of
Amram.
TAke of liquide picth, of the gum of Juniper, of the oil and gum of
Turpentine, of the oil of that lime or clay which is called Bitumen, of the
oil of Brimstone, of the oil of Niter, of the oil of the yolks of eggs, of
the oil of Bays, of every of these things six parts, of the powder of a
dry Bay tree, of Camphire, of every of them well soked in aqua vitae fourteen
parts, put all these things together into a glass narrow toward the
mouth, and well stopped about the mouth with wax: This done, bury the same
glass in horse dung for the space of six months, and at every four days
end within that time, take the glass out of the said dung, and when you have
well shaken those things together in the glass, bury the glass again in
other horse dung, and after the end of the said six months distill all
those things in that kind of vessel which of some Alcumistes is named a
Seraphine.

The 88 Chapter. To make an unquenchable fireworke which will burn without any
flame.
TAke of Saltpeeter refined two parts, of Coals made of a fur tree of one
part, and with the whites of eggs incorporate them together. This done, role
or draw a cord made of fine wool or bombase thoroe the said mixture, and
then putting fire unto the same cord you shall see that it will burn without
any flame and be unquenchable.

The 89 Chapter. To make a fireworke which shall burn and do his desired
effect at any appointed time.
TAke of Orpiment twelve parts, of pitch one part, of wax one part, of
Saltpeeter one part, of Cole made of soft wood four parts: melt or dissolve
all these things together in water, and after they are so dissolved thrust a
gunmatch of a known length into the said mixture, and wet it well in the same.
When you have so done, and have also dried this gunmatch well again, kindle one
end of that gunmatch with fire, and noting diligently by a true watch or hour
glass, how long time it continues, let it burn for a proof till all of it
shall with the fire be consumed. And let it be here supposed that the gunmatch
which was so wet in the said mixture was three yardes in length, and that it
did continue in burning one just quarter of an hour, and that I am appointed
to burn a thing with a like gunmatch at the end of one just hour after the
gunmatch shall be kindeled, now therefore I take a like gunmatch of twelve
yardes in length which is four times so long as was the gunmatch by which I
made the said proof, because it must burn one hour, which is 4 times so
long as the other gunmatch did burn, and I wreath this gunmatch about a
staff, placing one wreath somewhat far from the other, to the end that the
said gunmatch may burn in no more places than in one only place at one time.
For if the said wreathes should be set near together, it might be that one
wreath would set an other wreathe in a fire, and thereby making the gunmatch
to do his effect before the appointed time, discredit the workman, and
frustrate his intent. Likewise if I should be appointed to fire a thing with a
like gunmatch at the just end of two hours after the match shall be kindeled,
I must take a like gunmatch of 24 yardes in length which is eight times so long
as was the gunmatch by which I made the said proof, because it must burn two
hours, which is eight times so long as the other gunmatch did burn, and
wreathing as I did before this gunmatch about a staff, I do put that end of
the gunmatch which shall be last touched at the end of two hours with fire,
in a vessel of gunpowder, or in a ball of wild fire, that it may without
fail do thereby his effect at the appointed time. Thus noting well what I
have here written, you may fire any ship, mine, forte, or any other thing at an
appointed time.

The 90 Chapter. To make a fireworke which may be used in military service,
and also in triumphs.
TAke of gross gunpowder three parts, of Saltpeeter two parts, of Brimstone
one part, of vernish in grains four parts, of Roman vitriol six parts, of
Spanish pitch six parts, of Amber four parts, of Orpiment four parts, of
Arsenike four parts, of green Coperesse two parts, and of Salt Armoniake
two parts: beat well all these things (except the Saltpeeter and Brimstone
which must not be much beaten) and incorporate them together. Also take of
liquide vernish six parts, of Petriol oil four parts, of oil of Lynseede
four parts, and of aqua vitae six parts. First put the aqua vitae alone
into the said mixture, and incorporate them well together: then put the
liquide vernish into the said composition, and incorporate them together, and
last of all put the said oils into the said composition, and in like manner
incorporate them well together. This done, you may use the said composition
for military service, and also for triumphs, and if you will put it into a
nealed pot well and close stopped, you may preserve it so long as you will for
such purposes,

The 91 Chapter. To make a fireworke which may be cast up into the air, and
may be shot out of a trunk or trombe.
TAke of Greek pytch twelve parts, of quick Brimstone two parts, of
Saltpeeter refined dry three parts, beat all these things, and make a paiste
of them with aqua vitae, and oil of Lynseede, and then of that composition
make certain pellets, and when you will charge a trombe or trunk with any of
these pellets, role them in fine gunpowder, and having made holes crossewise
thoro the sides of the same pellets, to the end that the fire may enter into
them, fill up the said holes with fine gunpowder.

The 92 Chapter. To make a fireworke which at a triumph may be cast up into the
air.
TAke of Saltpeeter refined dry two parts, of Brimstone one part and of a
part, of liquide Camphire one part, of Coals one part and part: beat all these
things into fine powder, and after you have so done take of petriol oil and
of aqua vitae of each an equal quantity, and incorporate them with the
Camphire, and with the said powder, and then make of that mixture pellets
which must be dried in the Sun: and when you will through any of these pellets
up into the air, you must first make a hole into the pellet, and having filled
up the said hole with good gunpowder give fire unto the same gunpowder.

The 93 Chapter. To make Rockettes or Squibbes which being throne up into the
air will cast forth flames of fire, and in coming down toward the ground
will show like stars falling from heaven.
TO make these Rockets you must prepare a form or model of wood of a
convenient length, and role paper upon the same four or five fold, and tie a
packthreede very hard about one end of this holloe trunk of paper, leaving
all this notwithstanding a small hole in that end. This holloe trunk of paper
ought to be of such length that it may conveniently hold all the things which
must be put into it, and you ought to put no more weight upon a Rocket than
the just poyse of the same Rocket.

When this trunk of paper shall be filled with such things as will flame and
give crackes or bloes, put fine gunpowder into the said trunk for to kindle
the gunmatch, which must lie along in the stuff that will flame and crack.
The stuff which is to be put into the Rocket for to flame and give crackes is
made of twelve parts of Saltpeeter refined, of Citrine Brimstone nine parts,
of gross gunpowder five parts and of a part mingled together with your hand.
The Brimstone and Saltpeeter must be grossly pou^ded like unto the corns of
gross gunpowder. This done, make of some hemp or toe a thing like unto a tail
of a foot or more in length, and tie a packthreed about the said tail near
unto the biggest end of it: Also at that greatest end of the tail, a holloe
place must be made like unto a birds nest, and after you have put into that
nest one part and of a part of the said mixture, wind the rest of that tail
round about upon the nest and all over the said mixture, make a round ball
thereof, and crossewise bind packthreed very hard upon it to the end that
the said ball may therewith be made very hard. And finally thrust a gunmatch
well roled in good gunpowder clean through the said ball and mixture to kindle
the said mixture, and to make this Rocket for to flame.

The 94 Chapter. To make Torches and candles which after they are lighted
cannot be extinguished with any wind or water.
TAke four cords so big as a man's finger of fine wool or bumbase, seethe
them in Saltpeeter water, and when they are dry again, role them well in fine
gunpowder and Brimstone tempered with a sufficient quantity of aqua vitae:
then take of wax three parts, of gum of a pine tree two parts, of Camphire
of a part, of Turpentine of a part, and of Greek pytch or Spanish pytch one
part: melt all these things over a soft fire, and make a paiste of the same
mixture, and cover the said cords all over with the said mixture as
chaundelers do their wax candles. This done, stick and lay the same four
cords so covered upon a dry fur tree staff, as wax candles are stuck
and laid upon like staves commonly called staff torches, and fill up the
empty places upon the staff which will be between the said cords, with a
mixture made of three parts of quick or unslaked lime, and of one part of
quick Brimstone beaten into fine powder, and moystened with a little of
Linseed oil: a torch thus made after it is lighted can not be extinguished
with any wind or water. But to make a candle for the like purpose, take the
week of a candle, and the powder of quick Brimstone, wrappe them up together
in a fine piece of lynnen cloth, and with wax make thereof a candle, for (as
Nostradamus and Weckerus have written) a lighted candle so made can not be
extinguished with any wind so long as any piece of his substance does endure.

Also you may make any nextinguishable torche in this manner: Take a long
gunmatch, and after you have boiled it in lie made of Saltpeeter, dry it well:
then take of Brimstone finely beaten 1 part, of gunpowder for great ordinance
one part, and of wax one part: Mingle al these things together, and when you
have melted this mixture in a pan, put so much of the said gunmatch into it as
will drink or soke up the greatest part thereof: then taking the gunmatch out
of the pan, cut it into pieces so long as the torch shall be, and unto the
quantity of mixture remaining in the pan, put a like quantity of the gum of a
pine tree, a like quantity of Brimstone, and a like quantity of Turpentine.
Which done, melt in that pan all the same things, and after you have there well
mingled them together, cover the said pieces of a gunmatch all over with the
same mixture, as wax chaundelers do use to cover their torch candles: and by
so doing you shall make excellent torches, which burning in a flame can not be
extinguished with wind, rain, or snoe.

The 95 Chapter. To make a fireworke which will burn and give a great light in
a Crosset.
THrust lynnen rags into oil of hempsede, and after dippe them in melte^
allow, then putting them into Cressets give fire to them, and you shall see
that they ^ll burn and give a great light.

The 96 Chapter. To kindle fire with the heat of the Sun.
IF you will lay a Crystal stone under the circle of the Sun, that is to
say against the Sun, and place a thing that may be burned near unto it, you
shall see that the heat of the Sun will set that thing in a fire.

The 97 Chapter. How you may make a Trunk or Trombe which will shoot
fireworkes, and may be used in fight upon the Sea, and in fight upon the
land: how you may make a furious and quick burning fireworke for the said
Trunk: how you may make a sloe and soft burning fireworke for the said trunk:
and how you may make diverse fortes of fireworkes for the said trunk: and how
you ought to charge the said trunk with the said furious and quick burning
fireworke: and also with the said sloe and soft burning fireworke.
TO make a Trunk take a round piece of wood in length two foot, and in
compass equal with the small of a man's leg. Bore a round hole in the
midst of this piece of wood seventeen inches long from one end of the same
piece of wood toward the other end, and make the same hole of such wideness
that a hen egg may be put into it. Likewise bore a small hole three inches
long at the other end of the said piece of wood to receive an end of a staff
of five foot long, which being put in, and there made fast, ought to be holden
in your hand when the Trunk shall be discharged. Now leaving four inches
space in wood between the bottom of this hole and the bottom of the other
hole into which the mixture for the charge of the Trunk shall be put, bind the
said piece round about for more security in three or four places with hoopes
of iron, to the end it may not break with the force of his charge. Also you
must prepare certain pypes of iron in length six inches, like canons which
are made for pocket dagges, and charging them with gunpowder and pellets, bind
them so fast with the said hoopes of iron upon the outside of the Trunk, that
they in their discharges may not fly out of their places.

The said pypes of iron ought to be set under the said hoopes, and upon the
Trunk according as they are drawn in the figure next following. That is to
say, certain of the said pypes of iron must be placed under every hoope
round about the outside of the Trunk in such order as no one of them may be
perceived to stand directly behind an other, and so as the touch hole in
every of the said pypes may lie justly upon a small hole pierced through the
thickness of the wood about the concauitie in the Trunk, to the end that the
mixture in the trombe or trunk being a fire may give fire through the said
holes to the gunpowder in every of the same iron pypes, and expel their
pellets.

depiction of a trunk or trombe [hand-grenade]

To make a furious and quick burning fireworke for the said trunk, take
twelve parts of gross gunpowder, three parts of Saltpeeter grossly bruised
like pepper corns, and some grains of Salt equal in biggenesse to the said
corns of Saltpeeter: mingle these things together, and moysten them with aqua
vitae and with a little of ox gall: but to make a sloe and soft burning
fireworke for the said trunk, take ten parts of gross gunpowder, six
parts of Saltpeeter grossly bruised, and four parts of Brimstone grossly
bruised, and to prove whether or no these things mingled together will burn
so sloly or softly as you desire that they should do, lay a small part of the
same mixture upon a board or table, and having put fire thereunto mark
diligently how the same does burn, and in so doing remember, that by adding
more gunpowder unto this sloe burning fireworke you shall make it to burn more
furiously, and that by taking away some part of the gunpowder which is in the
same fireworke, you shall make it to burn in a Trunk more sloely and softly.
Now having prepared for a trunk two such fireworkes, fill the concauitie of
the Trunk first 3 inches in length with the said furious and raging fireworke,
next one ynche in length with the said sloe burning fireworke, then again
three inches in length with the furious fireworke, after that one ynche in
length with the sloe burning fireworke, and proceed in this order till you
have filled the concauitie of the trunk full of that fireworke. Or (if you
will) you may before the trunk is full charged with both those fireworkes, put
into the trunk next unto the last course of the sloe burning fireworke one
part and part of fine gunpowder, and some quantity of gross filinges of
lead, and small pieces of glass wrapped up together in a loose piece of
paper like a pellet, and thrust lightly home unto the gunpowder, so as a
burning gunmatch lying a long by one side of the said pellet from the mouth of
the said concauitie unto the said fine gunpowder, may when need shall
require fire the gunpowder, and make the fireworke in the trunk to flame.

2 An other mixture with which the said trunk may be charged.
TAke of gross gunpowder 48 parts, of Greek pytch or Spanish pytch twelve
parts, of Camphire six parts, of glass beaten into powder four parts, of
vernish in grains three parts, of vernish in powder three parts, of dry or
lean gum two parts, of Saltpeeter six parts, of Brimstone two parts, of
quicksiluer killed with fasting spittle one part: beat each of these things
by it self, and having moistened them with aqua vitae mingle them together.

With this mixture you ought to charge a trunk in this manner: first put into
the concauitie of the trunk a little of gross gunpowder, next a little of the
said mixture, thrusting it home to the gunpowder with a wooden rammer, then a
little of bumbase or cotton wool wet in Juniper oil or in aqua vitae, after
that a little quickesiluer, and when you have so done put again into the
trunk a little gunpowder unmixed, some of the said mixture, and a little
quicksiluer in such measure and like sort as you did before, keeping still the
same order till you have filled the trunk full of the said gunpowder,
mixture, bumbase, and quicksiluer. After all this is done, cover the mouth of
the trunk with paper bound fast about the trunk with packthreede, and making
a little hole right against the mouth of the trunk, thrust into the same a
gunmatch, which lying along within the concauitie of the trunk from the
outside of the hole in the said paper cover, unto the gunpowder that is in the
trunk, may when need shall require, give fire unto the said gunpowder.

3 An other mixture with which a trunk may be charged.
TAke of Saltpeeter, Brimstone, oil of Lynseede, oil of the pyne tree, gum
melted, Spanish pitch, dry gum, of each a like portion: and when you have
mingled all these things together, charge your trunk with the said mixture.

4 An other mixture with which a trunk may be charged.
TAke of Brimstone, Orpiment, Colophonia pytch, or gum of the herb
Colophonia, nwe pytch, Vernish in grains, Turpentine, man's fat or man's grease,
Masticke, Greek pytch, Frankensence, oil of Lynseede, of each one part: beat
well all these things, and then mingle them together, and cause the same
mixture to seethe a good while in a glass. That done, dippe bumbase or toe
into the same mixture, and make thereof as it shall please you great or little
pellets. My Author Leonardo Cataneo writes that you may charge the aforesaid
trunk with these pellets, and that the same pellets being once a fire can not
be quenched with any other thing than with urine, vinegar, ashes, dust or sand.

The 98 Chapter. How you may make four sundry sorts of Trunkes or Trombes:
how you may make four sundry sorts of mixtures for the said Trunkes: how you
may make balls or pellets for the said trunks: and how you ought to charge the
said Trunkes with the said mixtures and pellets.
MAke a round Trunk of Willoe, or of Olive, or of the wood named in Italian
Bedolo, or of the wood named Onizzo, for making it of any other wood which is
not a soft and fast wood, the trunk will not only by breaking put you in
danger, but will be all in a fire upon a sudden and destroy you and your
friends about you.

Make this round Trunk three foot and of a foot in length, and five inches
in thickness from outside to outside, And let the concauitie of this Trunk
be in length thirty inches, and the Diameter of the said concauitie two
inches: also make a round hole in the breech of this Trunk four inches long
toward the loer end of the said concauitie in the trunk, and one ynch and
ynche in Diameter or wideness for to receive and hold fast the end of a round
staff which must be put into the same hole when you will use the Trunk.
Furthermore, take away the wood round about upon the outside of the trunk
six inches beneath the mouth of the trunk, in deepnesse so much as the back
of a knife is thick, and in breadth three inches, and wind or bind very hard
a strong cord, or a strong iron wier round about all over and upon the trunk
in that and in all his other like holloe places, for six inches beneath this
hollo place you must make an other like holloe place: I mean you must take
away the wood round about upon the outside of the Trunk in deepnesse so much
as the back of a knife is thick and in breadth three inches, and bind very
hard a strong cord or a strong iron wier round about all over and upon that
holloe place. Likewise you must make round about upon the trunk six inches
beneath this second holloe place, a third holloe place like and equal in
breadth and deepenesse to the said second holloe place, and bind very hard a
strong cord or a strong iron wier round about all over and upon this third
holloe place, as you did upon the first and second holloe places according to
the two figures A B and A C next following: for A B is a trunk with three such
holloe places as before have been spoken of: and A C is a trunk which has
three such holloe places bound all over with strong cords or strong wiers and
has a staff set fast in his loer end.

depiction of two trunks or trombes [hand-grenades]

After you have framed a Trunk in this sort, take of gross gunpowder which
is vncorned 72 parts, of Saltpeeter beaten like unto the seed of millet nine
parts, of Brimstone beaten and sifted six parts, of Coals made of the wood
of Willoe beaten and sifted four parts, and of vernish beaten and sifted two
parts, put all these things together in a bole of wood, and sprinkle a little
water upon them that the Coals may not be blone out of the bole, and by so
doing you shall make of those things a sloe mixture to burn in the said trunk.

Also you shall prepare balls or pellets for the said trunk in this manner.
Make a flat Cake of hemp in greatness so much as the paulme of a man's
hand, and in thickenesse so much as the back of a knife, wette well this
Hemppen Cake in aqua vitae, and after you have so done wring the aqua vitae out
of it. Then having in a readiness a mixture made of twelve parts of gross
gunpowder sifted, and of three parts of Saltpeeter sifted, put a parcel
thereof upon the midst of the said cake, and when you have so done, role
up that Cake like a Ball or Pellet which must be finger less in his
Diameter than the height of the concauitie in the Trunk, and must be well
bound round about with packthreede. Moreover, thrust six Pinnes or pricks
of Wood into this ball even unto the mixture which is within the ball, and let
every of these pricks or pinnes be of such length that one end of every of
them may touch the said mixture within the ball, and the other end of every
of them may be two inches at the least without the ball. After all this is
done, cote the whole ball with melted Brimstone, and make in this manner a great
number of these balls which you may keep till you shall have cause to use
them in trunkes: at which time you must take out of them the said pricks or
pinnes and fill up their holes with good gunpowder which will easily and very
quickly set the said balls in a fire.

When this trunk shall be charged, you must have in a readiness gross
gunpowder mingled with filings of iron in this proportion. Unto one part of the
filings of iron put 12 parts of gross gunpowder: and this done, you must first
thrust so much of that mixture into the bottom or loest end of the concauitie
in the trunk as will fill the said concauitie three inches in length after it
has been rammed down hard with a staff. And after this you shall put one of
the aforesaid balls or pellets into the trunk: and after the same pellet so
much gunpowder as you can take up and hold with your thombe and four fingers,
and after the quantity of gunpowder last named, so much of the said sloe
mixture as will fill the concauitie in the trunk three inches more in length,
and then you shall put again into the concauitie of the trunk so much of the
said gunpowder mingled with the filings of iron rammed down very hard with a
staff, as will fill the said concauitie three inches more in length, and
after the said gunpowder and filinges, one other of the said balls, and
after the said ball so much gunpowder as you can take up and hold with your
thombe and four fingers, and after this quantity of gunpowder last named, so
much of the sloe mixture as will fill the said concauitie three inches more in
length, and you shall proceed to put the said gunpowder mingled with filings
of iron, balls, gunpowder unmingled, and sloe mixture into the trunk in such
order as you did before until you have filled the said concauitie full within
ynch of his mouth, and in so doing you must put the balls in the said
concauitie directly under the said holloe places which are bound for more
safety all over with strong cords or strong wiers of iron. An admonition.
When you have so filled the concauitie of this trunk within ynch of his
mouth, bind a lynnen cloth well imbrued or coted with pitch all over the mouth
of the said concauitie, to save the gunpowder, balls, and sloe mixture in the
said concauitie from sparkles of fire, and from moisture, and let it remain
there until you shall be ready to put fire with a gunmatch, or other wise,
unto the things in the concauitie of the trunk, for then it must be taken
away. Also you must put the end of a staff of six foot long into the said
round hole of four inches in length at the breeche of the trunk, and pynne it
fast there that it may not come out again. The use of Trunkes.
With such trunkes as this is, walls may be assaulted, breaches may be
defended, and ships may be boorded. Also with such trunks the forefront of an
army may be preserved from the force of horsemen, camps, gates, fortes, and
towns, may with the fire issuing out of these trunkes be burned.

This trunk may also be charged in an other sort without any of the said
pellets: for a round box of good iron plate being made like the wooden cover
of a round Marmelaid box, and of an ynch less in his Diameter than is the
wideness of the concauitie in the trunk, you shall fill the said iron box
full of square pieces of iron or lead, and bind paper over the mouth of the
box that the square pieces which are in the said box may not fall out. And
when you will charge your trunk with this box full of such square pieces of
iron or lead, you must first put into the trunk so much of unmingled gross
gunpowder as will fill the concauitie in the trunk three inches in length after
it has been pressed down very hard: and secondly you must put into the trunk
after the said gross gunpowder so much of fine gunpowder as you can take up
and hold with your thombe and four fingers: and thirdly you must put into the
said trunk the said box of iron full of square pieces of iron or lead with
his bottom toward and next to the said gunpowder. Fourthly you must put
into the said trunk next after the said box so much of gross gunpowder as
will be enough to carry fire unto the fine gunpowder which is behind or
under the bottom of the said box. Fifthly you must put into the said trunk
so much of the sloe mixture next following as will fill the concauitie in the
Trunk three or four inches more in length. Sixthly, you must put into the
Trunk so much of gross gunpowder as you did at the first, and then you must
proceed in the aforesaid order to fill up the concauitie in the the said
trunk with gunpowder, and the sloe mixture next folloing, until the said
concauitie shall be full within ynch of his mouth. Which done, bind over the
mouth of the trunk a linen cloth well imbrued or coted with pitch, and let it
remain there till you will give fire unto the things in the trunk with a
gu^match or otherwise, for then it must be taken away. Also remember to thrust
the said iron box into the trunk so as it may lie directly under one of the
said holloe places which are bound all over with strong cords or strong wiers
of iron, as you have been willed before to place the said pellets.

The sloe mixture (which as before I have told you) must be put into the
concauitie of the trunk when you do charge the same trunk with the said
box of iron, is made of 102 parts of gross gunpowder sifted, of six parts
of Saltpeeter fifted grossly, of two parts of vernish in grain, of two parts
of quickesiluer killed, of two parts of Assa fetida, and of three parts of
Turpentine mingled together.

Upon this trunk you may also if you will put an iron hoope of 3 fingers in
breadth, and finger in thickness, and placing two sword blades very fast in
the said iron hoope according to the picture folloing, you may use the said
trunk to offend and defend as you would use a Pertisant.

depiction of a trunk or trombe [hand-grenade]

Also a long two handed sword may be aptly put into the staff of the said
trunk in this manner. Saw the staff just in the midst from the loer end
toward the upper end, and see that the part of the staff which is so sawne do
justly agree in thickenesse and length with the breadth and length of the
sword blade. This done put the sword blade into the said staff so sawne as
you would put the same blade into a scabbord, and with two rings of wood made
of purpose to slide up and down upon the said staff, you may shut the staff
so close that the blade shall not come out, and open the staff (when you will)
so wide, that the blade shall come forth easily.

The bearer of this trunk seeing his trunk in a fire may soon through it away,
and use the two handed sword that was in the staff of the trunk: and
therefore he that does bear such a trunk ought to be a curragious, skillful,
and an able soldier to use it.

depiction of a trunk or trombe [hand-grenade]

How you may make a Trunk or Trombe after an other fashion, and a mixture to
charge the said Trunk: and how you ought to charge this Trunk with the said
mixture.
MAke a Trunk of a plate of iron which ought to be so thick as the back of a
knife, put thereon three hoopes of iron, and let every of them be one ynch in
breadth, nail the said hoopes very fast upon the trunk which must be two
foot in length, and one ynche and ynch in his Diameter or wideness: all this
being done, take a round piece of wood in length one foot, and drive the said
round piece of wood six inches at the least into one end of the concauitie in
the trunk, and then put a staff into that end of the round piece of wood
which is without the said concauitie. The trunk being thus made must be
charged, and filled almost up to the mouth with the mixture next folloing. But
in so charging this trunk, forget not after his concauitie shall be filled
three inches in length, to press well and ram down the said mixture. After
you have so filled the concauitie of the trunk almost up to the mouth with the
said mixture, put into the mouth of the said concauitie a sufficient quantity
of good gunpowder, and bind a lynnen cloth imbrued or coted with pytch all
over the mouth of the said concauitie as you have been willed to do over the
mouth of the trunk before mentioned.

The mixture for this trunk is thus made: Take of gross gunpowder sifted 144
parts, of Saltpeter sifted grossly 24 parts, of Brimstone sifted 12 parts, of
Coals made of the wood of Willoe sifted 18 parts, of Assa fetida two parts, of
green Coperesse one part, of Arsenick one part of vitriol beaten one part, of
the filings of iron sifted one part: incorporate all these things well
together, and moisten them with aqua vitae.

The 99 Chapter. To tie a fireworke at the upper end of a scaling ladder.
Cover the upper part of the scaling ladder with plates of iron and in the very
top let the ladder have one or two great and strong hooks of iron to catch and
hold fast whatsoever thing you shall lay it on. Also set in the foot of the
ladder long iron pykes which may be thrust into the ground to keep the ladder
from slyding. All this being done, tie upon the the said iron plates a canuas
bag filled with some one kind of burning mixture, bind the said bag all
over with iron wiers, and cover it all over with such paste as does serve to
cover pellets and balls of wildefire. Then making holes through the bag into
the said mixture, fill up the said holes again with fine and good gunpowder,
or with gunmatches roled in fine and dry gunpowder, and when you shall have
cause to use any such ladder, give fire to the said gunpowder or gunmatches
which will cause the said mixture to burn in such manner, as no enemy will
offer to come near unto the ladder.

depiction of fireworks tied to a ladder A scaling ladder which may be folded
together.


The 100 Chapter.
1 To make three sundry Firewoorkes which will bloe up walls, towers, fortes,
and such like things, and spoil many enemies.
PVt a barrel full of fine gunpowder within a Butte well hooped, let the
barrel stand fast in the midst of the Butte, filling up the rest of the
room within the Butte with round shelles, or stones, so byg as walnuttes, or
eggs, and lay about the Butte certain gunmatches which may give fire at an
appointed time to the gunpowder in the bottom of the barrel. For if you
should give fire to the gunpowder in the top of the barrel, you would before
you could escape, hurt your self so soon as your enemy. Likewise if you
should not lay gunmatches about the Butte to give fire unto the gunpowder at an
appointed time when you may be in an other place a good distance from the said
Butte and Barrel, you would kill your self: For this kind of firewoorke
laid in a trench under the ground, or under a wall, forte, or tower, will be a
very offensive thing to all those that are near unto it when it does his
effect.

Girolamo Russelli in his book entitled Precetti della militia moderna
writes, that at the assault of Saint Andrews in Scotland Anno Domini 1542,
this kind of firewoorke did kill 321 persons, and mayme more than 600 persons.

depiction of a type of barrel firework A gunmatch to fire the powder in the
Barrel.

A gunmach to fire the powder in the Barrel.



2 An other Firewoorke which will bloe up walls, towers, fortes, and such like
things, and spoil many enemies.
MAke of good and thick plates of iron certain barrels, hoope them well with
iron hoopes, upon their hoopes fix certain thick pieces of iron of an ynche
and of an ynch in length with sharp points, and with an hard cheesel hack
every barrel in diverse places, but not thoroe, because every barrel ought to
be made very close, so as no fire may breathe out of it till the force of
fiered gunpowder with which every barrel must be full stuffed shall cause the
same barrels to break in many pieces. Also upon the head or one end of every
such barrel, fix well a holloe pipe of iron, making it to go close down
four fingers deep into the barrel, and to extend three fingers in height
above the head of the barrel. This done, fill every of those barrels with good
and fine gunpowder, and every of those iron pipes with some one kind of
mixture that will burn slolie: and when you will use these barrels in time of
military service, giving fire to the mixture in their said pipes, through them
away from you over the Town walls, or being in sea service, out of your
ship into an other ship or galey among your enemies. For so soon as the
fire in the said mixture shall come to the gunpowder within the barrel, the
barrel through the force of gunpowder, and by reason of the said hackes, will
break and fly in many pieces.

Also with iron buttes or great barrels of iron filled full of gunpowder, and
made like unto the said small barrels, you may bloe up any appointed wall or
tower, if you will lay such great barrels filled full of fine gunpowder in the
ground under the appointed place.

depiction of a type of barrel firework

3 An other Firewoorke which will bloe up Walls, Towers, Fortes, and such like
things, and spoil many enemies.
MAke of long, thick, smoothe, and well wrought plates of iron, a vessel of
eight or ten feet in length like unto the picture following, hoope the same
vessel with iron hoopes, and also make a bottom for the same vessel of like
plates of iron, laying one plate a finger breadth upon the middle part of an
other plate his thickness, and set this bottom fast in a fit creast made
round about the loer end of the said vessel. This done, hacke the vessel but
not through, in diverse places with a cheesell, and make a hole in every plate
about that loer end, and then to stop up those holes again that no fire may
breathe out of any one of them, drive an iron pin ouerthwarte into every of
the said holes. Moreover, make a little hole in the bottom of the said
vessel, and put into the same hole a pype of iron, and after you have stuffed
the said vessel full of dry and fine gunpowder, fill the said pype with a
burning mixture, or with a Gunmatch which may bring fire unto the said
gunpowder when it shall do his effect. Now this vessel being so prepared to
bloe up a wall, tower, or forte, dig a cave under the wall, tower, or forte,
that shall be blone up, which cave must be no bigger than will receive the said
vessel, and setting proppes in the ground under the said wall, tower, or forte,
give fire to the end of a Gunmatch that shall at the end of half an hour or
thereabouts after you have done all this give fire to the gunpowder in the said
barrel. For you must before that time (if you will save your own life) be a
good distance from the same place that shall be blone up with the said gunpowder.

depiction of a type of barrel firework

The 101 Chapter. How Frauncesse George of Sena was the first inuentor of
Mines: how caves or mines for the subversion of Fortes, Castles, and walls of
Cities ought to be made: and how gunpowder ought to be placed in the ouens of
such Mines, that the same gunpowder may ouerthroe and bloe the Forts, Castles,
and Walls of Cities which shall stand directly over the said ouens.
Joan: Iacobus Weckerus, and Vannuccio Biringuccio, do report in their books
that Frauncesse George of Sena was the first inuentor of Mines for the
subversion of Fortes, Castles, Sena is a city in that part of Italy which is
called Tulcane distant from Room an hundred miles.
and walls of Cities: And the said Weckerus, Biringuccio, and other authors
have written, that such mines ought to be made in this sort following.

The mouth and beginning of the mine ought not to be near unto the place that
is appointed to be blone up with gunpowder, to this end that the men of the
said place may not perceive the mine, nor issue out to molest the Pioners, nor
know where to make countermines to let the fire breathe out, or to cause the
mine by any manner of means to be of no effect. And to the intent that the
said mine may not end before it comes to the very point of ground which
l^eth directly under the said place that shall be ouerthrone, nor extend
beyond the same, you must measure exactly with your Quadrant or Semicircle the
distance between the beginning of the mine and the place where it shall end,
and note circumspectly by the help of a Geographicall plain Sphere, how the
end of the mine lies from the place of his beginning. This done, draw a
platte of a mine that may upon paper express the true proportion and symetrie
of the same mine which you do now go about to make, and instruct the Pyoners
to undermine according to the same platte.

If the Pioners shall happen to find water in the way of the mine, you must
teach them to sink wells, and to dig gutturs which may carry the water out
of the way into the same wells, and after they have laid plankes over the
said wells, to proceed in their work according to your platte. But when
the Pioners shall not be able by reason of other lettes within the ground (which
in many places will happen) to undermine according to your platte, then your
platte must be altered in such sort as the way of the mine under ground may in
breadth, length, and form, agree with the said platte.

While the Pioners do work in the way of the mine, cause them to bore diverse
deep holes in each side of the mine with a long augar, and when they have so
done, if you will lay your ear to the said holes, I mean first to one hole
and after to an other, you shall hear whether the enemies do dig any
countermyne.

Some men do think that a mine, and also a countermyne may with little or no
noise at all be thus made. Prepare strong and big augars of 8 or 9 feet in
length, bore with them diverse holes under the ground through the earth, and also
through the stones which shall lie in the way of the mine or countermyne: This
done, break down the earth and stones about the said holes with croes of
iron, and then boring other holes, and breaking down again the earth and
stones about the same holes as you did before, work forwards, and keep this
order in your work till you have finished the mine.

A mine may be made in fashion like unto TV or XY in the pictures next
following.

depiction of two types of mines

Also the Pyoners (if the ground will permit them so to work) may dig
foorthright from the beginning of the mine toward the thing that is appointed
to be ouerthrone, until they shall come near unto the ground which lies
directly under the said thing, and of some is named the Oven, and place of
greatest effect: But of necessity the way of the mine from the said near
place unto the said Oven and place of greatest effect, must be crooked and
oblique according to BDEC in the two Figures following.

After you have made a mine platte according to this doctrine or in any other
manner, you must instruct the Pyoners to undermine deep within hard ground,
and to make the way of the mine three foot in breadth, and six foot in
height, and to dig the said Oven and place of greatest effect six or seven
foot in breadth, and nine or ten foot in height, to this end that the
gunpowder laid in that place may make his vent vpwardes, and that the air
which is within the said holloe place may aid the gunpowder to open and
ouerturne the ground which is right over it.

When the said Oven and place of greatest effect shall happen to be made in a
stony ground where the stones are like to fall, then you must underprop
them with holloe pypes of timber filled full of good gunpowder: and remember
always to observe a mean in making the Oven and place of greatest effect,
because it ought in no manner of ground to be too big or too little.

The mine being finished according to your said platte, cover the ground or
floor in the said Oven and place of greatest effect with boordes, and having
stroed upon those boordes a sufficient quantity of good gunpowder, put so
many barrelles without any heads or couers, full of good and strong gunpowder
upon the same boordes, as will execute the thing appointed to be done, and in
so doing persuade your self that the better and greater the quantity of
gunpowder which shall be laid in the said Oven and place of greatest effect is,
the more greater will be the effect of the same. Moreover, for to fire the said
gunpowder when time shall require, lay a gunmatch made of fine bumbase cotton
that has been well sodde in vinegar, brimstone, and saltpeeter, well roled in
gunpowder, and well dried in the Sun, within a Trunk, Pype, or case of
boordes: which gunmatch and trunk must extend and reach in length from the
gunpowder stroed upon the boordes in the said Oven and place of greatest
effect, unto the mouth and beginning of the mine, and also somewhat without the
same, and having covered the said gunmatch all over with a train of dry
gunpowder, close up the said trunk with a cover of boordes, so as no soil or
moisture may come unto the gunpowder within the same Trunk. Or if you will,
you may tie a piece of a gunmatch unto the end of a small line, and when the
said end of a gunmatch shall be a fire, draw the same by that line running on
a pulley through a train of gunpowder made within a Trunk unto the barrels of
gunpowder in the said oven and place of greatest effect. But before you do
fire the gunpowder in the mine with a gunmatch after the doctrine last taught,
or in any other manner, you must with earth, roots of trees, blocks of
timber, stones, and such like things, wall, fortefie, and ram up the mouth
of the said Oven, or rather all that part of the mine which C D and E in the
figure next following does represent, so as no fire, or air may breath out of
the said oven and place of greatest effect by any other way than by the said
holloe Trunk. For in so much as that part of the mine which is noted in this
figure next following with E, lies not right against the said oven and place
of greatest effect, and likewise for that the place of the mine which D in this
figure following does represent, lies not right against C, and also for that
the mouth of the mine which B represents in the figure next following, is not
right against E and D, it is certain, when the gunpowder in the said oven and
place of greatest effect shall be set in a fire (after the way of the mine from
C to D is so stopped up with earth, roots of trees, blocks of timber, stones,
and such like things) that the said gunpowder will with a great and horrible
violence bloe and ouerturne all the ground and buildings over the same.

depiction of two types of mines

The 102 Chapter. How a cave ought to be made round about a Castle or Forte
that is besieged, to the intent that they which are in the said cave may hear
and perceive at all times whether or no the enemy does work to undermine the
same Castle or Forte.
WHen a Castle or Forte is besieged, and the Captain of that Castle or Forte
does fear that the enemy will undermine the same place, then the Captain (to
avoid the hurt which may come by the said mine) ought to command his
Soldiers to make a deep pit within their Castle or Forte, and from the
bottom of the same to dyg a cave under the foundation of the walls of their
said Castle or Forte, and also under the ditch which enuironeth the said
place until they shall come unto the outside of the said ditch, and from
thence to undermine on the outside of the said ditch (as the ground will
suffer them to work) round about the said Castle or Forte.

When the Soldiers have brought out of the said cave all the earth which was
in the same, they may fortefie the walls of their Castle or Forte with the
same earth, and laying sackes of wool straightly bound about with cords in
diverse places of the said cave, they ought to put upon every of the said
sackes a latten basin, and cast into every of the said basins six or eight
hard peason, to this end that they which are in the said cave may hear and
perceive at all times by those peason, whether or no the enemy does work to
undermine the same Castle or Forte, for at every stroke that the Pioners shall
strike, the peason in the said basins will undoubtedly make an audible jar,
whereof the Captain ought presently to have warning, that he may in convenient
time with countermines, or by some other policy, make the mine of his enemies
to be of no effect.

Moreover, to know whether or no the enemies do make any mine against you
this may be done: Sink diverse deep wells in diverse places toward the
suspected mine, and having made diverse holes with a long auger in the sides of
those wells, cause vigilant and skillful men to watch and harken continually
at the said holes, or in the bottom of the said wells, whether or no the
enemies do undermine toward you. But if this way shall not like you, take a
drum and set one end of it flat upon a very plain piece of ground, near
unto the head of one of the said wells, and then upon the upper end or head
of the drum lay five or six hawks belles, or such belles as are commonly
set in collars for little dogs, or for want of such belles a convenient
number of dry beans which will make a sound at every stroke given in the
mine with any mattocke or pickaxe, if the enemies do undermine within forty
or fifty paces of the said drum, and that sound will be by so much more
audible by how much more nearer to the dru^me the enemies Pioners do come.
Also you may know whether the enemies do undermine toward you, if you will
place a convenient number of copper or latten basins filled full of clean
water in the bottom of every of the aforesaid wells, and set the sides of
the same basins in the ground, for when the enemies do undermine, the water
in the basins will tremble at every bloe which shall be given in the mine of the
enemies with any pickaxe or mattocke, and therein this is to be noted, that the
more lighter the said basins are, the better will they move and bewray the
strokes of pickaxes and mattocks.

The 103 Chapter. To make a burning oil of Saltpeeter and Brimstone mingled
together for Firewoorkes.
TAke of Saltpeeter well refined one part, of Brimstone one part, beat the
Saltpeeter by it self, and also the Brimstone by it self into very fine
powder: After this incorporate them in a pot of nwe earth, putting so much
strong white vinegar into the pot as will cover the mixture. This done, cover
the pot so as no air may breathe out of it: and when the vinegar in the
pot shall be consumed, and the said mixture dry, you must distill the said
mixture in a Limbecke, and reserve the burning oil that will come from it for
Firewoorkes.

The 104 Chapter. To make oil of Brimstone for Firewoorkes.
MElte Brimstone in a pot over a fire, and taking a sufficient quantity of
the eldest read brickes that may be gotten, beat them into pieces so big as
beans: This done, put into the melted Brimstone so many of those small pieces
as will drink up all the same melted Brimstone: And after you have so done,
distill them in a Limbecke, for that which shall come out of the said pieces
of brickes thoroe the Limbecke, is oil of Brimstone which will serve for
Firewoorkes.

The 105 Chapter. To make two sorts of burning waters for Firewoorkes.
1 TAke the rines or peeles of Lemons or rather of Oranges which are better,
pull away all the white skins which stick fast on their insides, and then
distill the said rines in a limbeck: so doing you shall draw out of those rines
a burning water.

An other burning water which burned upon a man's hand will do no harm
thereunto.
2 TAke of Turpentine, of oil of stones, of Sheep suet, of Brimstone, of
unslaked Lime, of Hogs grease, of each an equal quantity: Beat all these
things to powder, and after you have well mingled them together, distill the
mixture, and keep the distilled licor for a burning water, which burned upon
your hand will do no harm thereunto, as Girolamo Ruscelli writes.

The 106 Chapter. How the clay which some men name Lutum sapientiae, and some
men do call Lute of wisdom, is made: And how the said clay will serve to
stop vessels of glass and Fornaces, and to make thick mouldes, and many
other things.
THe clay which some men name Lutum sapientiae, and some men do call Lute of
wisdom, (of which in diverse places of this book I have spoken) may be made
in this manner. Take of good white or ashie cullor chalk which will make white
pipkins, white pots, white dishes, and other white vessels, 4 parts, of common
ashes which have served in a buck of clothes part, of dry horsedung or
assedung one part, and a little quantity of the powder of a brick stone, or a
small portion of the filings of iron, beat all these things into a very fine
powder, then sifte them thoroe a fine seeue or searcer, and that being done,
mingle them together. After this, lay the said mixture upon a fair floor,
and cast or strowe one part of floxe upon the said mixture by little and
little in as equal portions as you can. Also sprinkle so much water as shall be
needful upon the said mixture. Furthermore, stir the said moist mixture
well together, first with a staff, afterward with a spade or shouel, and
make a heap thereof. When the said mixture has in that sort been well
wrought, lay it upon a boorde and moysten it again, and beat it with a spade
or shouell till you have beaten it enough, for the longer that you shall beat
and moysten it, the better it will be.

This kind of clay is very good to lute or stop vessels of glass, and
Fornaces, and to make thick mouldes, and many other things.

If you will not bestow all this labor to make Lutum sapientiae, or lute of
wisdom, then take only of the said white chaulke, floxe, horsedung or
assedung, and a few ashes. Some make this lute of wisdom without floxe, others
make the said lute of wisdom without horsedung or assedung, and every of them
does therein follow his own will: For in very deed you may by diverse ways
make lute of wisdom, as you may read in the first book and six and twenty
Chapter of the nwe Jewel of health treating of distillations. But to lute and
stop the mouths of glasses that no air may breathe out of them, such lute
of wisdom as is made after the first order is best, especially if two parts
of unslaked lime, and so many whites of eggs as shall seem to be enough, be
added thereunto, for unslaked Lime and the whites of eggs will make it more
sure, and as hard as glass, and by such means the vente of air will be the
less. Moreover, this Lute of wisdom must always be kept in a moist place,
but so as the said Lute be not kept too moist nor too dry, for the same
being dry will wax hard, and then it serves to no use, and if you shall go
about to make it soft by casting water upon it, the outside thereof will be
moist and mollified therewith, but the inside of the same will continue hard,
wherefore when the lute of wisdom is very hard, it is best for you to let it
dry well, and afterward to beat it into fine powder, and then to make
thereof again lute of wisdom in such sort as before you were taught to do.

The 107 Chapter. How you may way with feure several waightes any quantity
from one pound weight unto forty pounds in weight: how you may way with
five several waightes any quantity from one pound weight unto an hundred
twenty and one pounds in weight: how you may way with 6 several waights any
quantity from one pound weight unto three hundred sixty and four pounds in
weight: and how upon a Beam called a Stater, you may with a small weight way
things of very great weight.
HOw needful a thing it is for those that do deliver or receive Gunpowder
and pellets by waights, and also for those that do make Gunpowder, Cartredges,
and Firewoorks by proportion and waights, to know how they may only with 4
waights way any quantity from one pound weight to 40 pounds in weight, and
with 5 waights any quantity from 1 pound weight to 121 pounds in weight, and
with 6 waights any quantity from one pound weight unto 364 pounds in weight,
and how they may way upon a Beam called a Stater, with a small and light
weight, great things of a very heavy weight, I need not rehearse because
every man will confess that it is a point of vanity to use many things when a
few things will serve our turn, as this Latin sentence does declare: Frustra
fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora. Therefore I advise those that
ought to have understanding in the science of waights to note well this which
follows.

Four several waights will way any quantity from one pound weight unto 40
pounds in weight, if the first of those four waightes be of one pound, the
second of 3 pounds, the third of 9 pounds, and the fourth of twenty seven
pounds in weight. As for example, a quantity of 6 pounds in weight will be
justly wayed if you put the said quantity and the weight of 3 pounds in one
scale, and the weight of 9 pounds in the other Scale. Also you may way a
quantity of 21 pounds in weight, if you will put the said quantity and the
weight of 9 pounds in one Scale, and the weight of three pounds, and the
weight of 27 pounds in the other Scale. In like manner with five waights, that
is to say with the said weight of 1 pound, with the said weight of 3 pounds,
with the said weight of 9 pounds, with the said weight of 27 pounds, and with a
weight of eighty one pounds, you may way any quantity from one pound weight
unto 121 pounds in weight. Also with 6 waights I mean with the weight of one
pound, with the weight of three pounds, with the weight of nine pounds, with
the weight of twenty seven pounds, with the weight of eighty one pounds, and
with a weight of two hundred forty and three pounds, you may way any
quantity from one pound unto 364 pounds in weight.

depiction of weighing scales

When you do way any quantity in an unknown pair of balance, An admonition.
I counsel you to way the quantity first in one scale of the same balance,
and after in the other scale of the same balance: For as a quantity wayed in
a true pair of Balances will be of one and the same weight in both the scales
of that balance, so a quantity wayed in a false pair of Balances will be of
more weight in one scale than in the other scale of false Balances. And
besides all this, it is needful for you to know that some false Balances are
so subtillye made, that their beams will lie in an equal height, and bear
the tunges of the same false Balances upright between their cheeks, when
their scales do hang empty.

But if you will way your things with a Stater, To make and use a long Stater.
make first a plain and smoothe beam of iron in fashion like a Pyramid or
four square Taper, in length one yard, and in thickness about part of an
ynche, and then upon a strong pin of iron called the first Axeltree set
ouertwharte and very fast in the great end of the Beam, hang a pendant hook
of iron, that winding and moving to all sides may claspe and hold fast all
the ropes of the scale in which the things that shall be wayed must lie.
Moreover, fix an other strong Axeltree of iron in the said Beam as a
parallel to the first, and distant from the same about ^/21 part of the Beams
length. Also you must set the tung of the Stater Squirewise upon the beam
right over this second Axeltree, and put the cheeks of the tung upon the
ends of the second Axeltree, so as they may easily move up and down upon
the same. And it is expedient that these cheeks should have in their
uppermost end a ringe or hook by which the Stater may be always hanged up
when need shall require. Next after this, you must lay in the scale of the
Stater depending by ropes from the first Axeltree, so much of known weight as
being reckoned with the weight of the scale and the weight of the ropes
belonging to the Scale, will make both ends of the Beam to lie without any
declyning in an equal height: Which is perceived by the tung of the Stater
when it does stand right up between his cheeks. Furthermore, to this weight
which has made both ends of the Beam to stand precisely equidistant to the
Horizon, and is supposed by me to contain fifty pounds, you shall add ten
pounds of more wayght, and that being done, you shall hang a ringed poyze of
ten pounds in weight upon that part of the Beam which is marked in the
Figure following with B F. Now the said poyze hanged upon B F the longer
part of the beam, must be moved to and fro until the tung of the Stater
shall be perceived to stand very upright beetweene his cheeks, to this end
that the part of the Beam which is then touched with the ring of the poyze
may be exactly marked with a small notch or with a fine line. When you have
made there such a notch or such a line, lay ten pounds of more wayght in the
scale, and because the tung of the Stater will now enclyne toward A the
greater end of the beam, remove the said poyze toward F, until the tung
of the Stater standing upright between his cheeks, shall show again
equality of wayght, and then as before you have been taught to do, make an
other notch, or draw an other line upon that part of the beam which is
touched with the ringe of the poyze. For the space between these two notches
or lines will exactly show a distinction and separation of ten pounds in
wayght. Unto which if you add the first wayght which is supposed to be
fiftye, and the second wayght which was ten, the total sum of the whole
wayght which the ringed poyze does counterpeyse in the notch or line last
made, amounts to seventy pounds.

Finally you must mark upon the beam the space that is between the two
notches or lines so many times as the beam will receive the same. For the
notch or line in each of those spaces is a distinction of ten pounds in
wayght, so that if you will divide every of those equal spaces into ten
equal parts, and every of these ten equal parts, into sixteen equal
parts, the beam will not only show the places of pounds in wayght, but
also the place of every ounce that is in each of the said pounds. For every
of those equal spaces do give equal increase, and look what proportion the
supposed weight of 50 pounds (which made both ends of the beam to lie in an
equal height) bears to the ringed poyze, the same proportion does B F the
longer part of the beam bear to A B the shorter part of the beam: And
because B F the longer part of the beam is twenty times so much in length as
A B the shorter part of the beam, and that the ringed poyze wayeth ten
pounds, multiply 10 in 20, and thereof rises 200, unto which add the
supposed weight of 50 pounds, which did make the beam to lie as a parallel
with the Horizon before the ringed poyze was put on upon the same, and so the
product thereof will be 250, wherefore I conclude that this Stater with his
said ringed poyze of 10 pounds will show the true weight of any quantity
that does not way above 250 pounds.

depiction of a shore stater [weighing beam] The Type of a shorre Stater


To make and use a long Stater.
You may also way with a longer Stater great Ordinance, lastes of gunpowder,
Tons of pellettes, Ankers, Belles, Pillars, and such like heavy quantities
if you will frame this longer Stater according to these precepts following,
which differ little from the former rules that do teach you to make the lesser
Stater. For having prepared a strong beam of wood like unto a ship maste
twelve yardes in length, fix the first Axeltree of yr^ ouerthwarte, and very
fast in the greater end of the Beam, and place the second Axe^tree of iron
very fast in the Beam as a parallel to the first Axeltree, and distant one
yard from the same. Likewise drive a strong pin of iron ouerthwarte in the
smaller end of the Beam, and after you have set the tung of the Stater
squirewise upon this beam, right over the second Axeltree, hang up the
Beam in a reasonable height by both ends of the second Axeltree upon two
strong pieces of timber standing upright and fast in the ground, according to
the Picture following, so as the Beam hanging in that sort may easily move
up and down between them. Moreover, hang the scale of this Stater upon the
first Axeltree at the greater end of this Beam, putting depiction of a shore
stater [weighing beam] into the same so much of known weight as being reconed
with the weight of the scale and ropes belonging to the scale, will make both
ends of the beam to lie without any declining in an equal height. All which
weight shall here be supposed to be 460 pounds, and for a distinction shall be
named the first weight. Now a long Stater being thus made, take away the scale
from the first axeltree, and hang it upon the said pin of iron at the
smaller end of this beam, and then the quantity which shall be wayed being
fast tied with ropes and hanged upon the same first axeltree where the said
scale did hang before, you shall put into the same scale hanging now at the
smaller end of this beam, so many known waights as will lift the quantity
which is to be wayed from the ground, and make the tung of the Stater to
stand very upright between his cheeks. For as B C the longer part of the
beam being eleven yardes in length, is eleven times longer than A B the
shorter part of the beam, so the quantity that hanges upon A to be wayed,
is eleven times more in weight than are the known waights in the scale, and so
much more as is the said supposed weight of 460 pounds, which was hanged upon
the first axeltree to make this beam lie parallel with the horizon. Wherefore
supposing that the weight which has been laid in the scale hanging at C over
and above the said weight of 460 pounds is 1030 pounds, I multiply 1030 by
11 and thereof comes 11330, then I add thereunto the said supposed weight
of 460, which made both ends of this beam to lie in the place of equal
height, so the total sum being 11790 shows the true weight of the
quantity that hanged at A.

The 108 Chapter. To make three sundry ointments which will heal any person
scalded with hot Saltpeeter water, or with any other hot licour, and cure
all those which shall be burned with hot iron, or gunpowder.


An other ointment to heal scaldings and burnings.


The 109 Chapter. To make a Plaster which will heal without pain any
wrenched or broken arm, hand, leg, foot, or ioynte, and all manner of
bruses.
TAke of mirte named in Italian Mortella, ship pitch, gum of a Pine tree,
tallowe of a Got, frankencense, masticke, and garden woormes, wash well the
said worms in water, and then dry them in an hot Oven to powder. Also beat
the said frankensence, masticke, and mirte to powder, and after you have so
done, mingle together one part of the powder of mirte, one part of the
powder of frankensence, one part of the powder of masticke, and one part of
the powder of garden woormes. Moreover, after you have melted in a pot over a
sloe fire the said gum and ship pitch, put Gotes tallowe into the pot
among the said melted gum and pitch, and when the said tallowe is there also
melted, put all the said parts of powders into the same pot, and mingling
them well with the other things which are melted in the same pot, seethe all
those things together for a while over a fire till they shall begin to wax
somewhat hard. When you have so done, take the pot from the fire, and spread
some of that mixture in the pot thick upon a white and soft piece of
leather, and then while it is warm lay the plaster upon the grieved place,
and suffer it to lie there till it do fall away of it self.

This plaster (as Girolamo Ruscelli writes) is of such virtue that it will
draw the bone out of ioynte into his place, and take away all the pain. Also
it is a sovereign plaster to be laid upon a broken bone or ribbe, or upon
any bruise within a man's body, or within any part thereof, and it takes away
all the pain thereof without any danger, and when it has done his cure, it
will of it self fall away from the place that was grieved. When you cannot get
of the said woormes, you may make the plaster without them, although the
plaster which has such woormes in it is of more virtue than the other
plaster made without those woormes.

The 110 Chapter. How a Gunner cannot mount any piece of Artillery to make a
perfect shoot at a mark without point blanke, except he do know the
distance between his piece and the mark, and how for the same reason, and
also for other causes, the Author of this Appendix does show in the Chapters
following diverse rules concerning the mensuration of Altitudes, Longitudes,
Latitudes, and Profundities, and the platting of fields, mines, and other
places.
COnsidering that (as Nicholas Tartaglia in his epistle at the beginning of his
Book entitled La noua Scientia writes) a Gunner cannot mount well any piece
of Artillery to make a perfect shoot at a mark without point blanke, except
he do know the distance between his Piece and the mark: Also considering
that a Gunner may have occasion to measure Altitudes, Latitudes, and
Profundities, and to draw upon paper the platte of fields, mines, and other
places, I will now before the end of my Book show in certain Chapters, some
plain, infallible and necessary rules for mensuration of Altitudes,
Longitudes, Latitudes, and Profundities, and for the drawing of plattes which
shall contain the true proportion and symetrie of any field, mine, or other
place, so as every Gunner shall be able thereby to tell how far any place in
his platte is distant from other.

The 111 Chapter. The bigness fashion, and use of an Instrument named a
Gunners Semicircle: and of an Instrument named a Geometrical Square.
TO perform my promise made in the last Chapter, I must first show you the
fashion, bigness, and use of an Instrument named a Gunners Semicircle, which
ought to be made of hard, smoothe, and well seasoned wood, as of Oak, Wallnut
tree, Pear tree, or rather of Cipresse wood, because the Cipresse wood will
not warpe with the heat of the Sun, nor with any moisture. Also the said
Semicircle fashioned and divided like unto his type here drawn, ought to be
at the least so big as the said type, and from his center a plumbe line
ought to hang down, but in place of the two sight holes which may be set
upon the said instrument, you shall (if you will follow my counsel) make a
straight narrow and shalloe channel along in the Ruler A B from the point D to
the point E, and likewise an other straight, shallowe, and narroe channel in
the Ruler B C, from the point F to the point G. This done, cover those channels
with a thin piece of wood in such manner as you may (notwithstanding the said
couers) look through those channels at any mark whatsoever. A Semicircle thus
framed will serve to lay any great piece of Artillery level, to mount all
manner of great pieces unto any elevation, to imbase the mouth of any piece for
to shoot at marks in valleys, The use of a gunners Semicircle.
to measure heigthes, depths, and distances, to level all manner of grounds,
and to do all such things as may be done by a Gunners Quadrant. Moreover for
mensuration of Altitudes, Latitudes, and profundities according to the Rules
following, The use of a Geometrical square.
I do exhort you to prepare a Geometrical square of a convenient biggenesse,
and to make it of metal, or of Cypress, like in every respect unto his Type
here placed, Saving that I would have you to divide the Quadrant in your
Geometrical square into ninety equal parts called degrees, and every side
of your said square into 1200 equal parts, and the Index of your Square into
1697 and 191/^394 of like equal parts which in this side of Paper for want of
room I could not do.

depiction of a gunner's semicircle

The 112 Chapter. To take the height of the Sun with a Quadrant drawn within
your Geometrical square.
SET your Geometrical square plumbe upright upon his side or end V X, and
set his side Y X right against or toward the Sun. This do^e, raise up
and down the Index of the square until the Sun shall shine duly through
his two sight holes, and then look what degree in the edge of the Quadrant is
touched with the fiduciall line of the said Index, for the degree to touched
does show exactly the degrees of the Suns height at that present time.

depiction of the use of a gunner's semicircle

The 113 Chapter. How you may measure at one station in a Sun shining day
with your Geometrical square, and also with an Haulbert or any other staff
perpendiculerly erected, the altitude of any Tower, or other thing whose shadow
length is known.
SET your Geometrical square upright upon his side or end V X, and with the
Quadrant drawn upon the said square, take the height of the Sun as you have
been taught in the last Chapter. This done, when the Sun is 45 degrees in
height, the fiduciall line of the index will lie directly between the right and
contrary shadow, I mean upon the line V Y and then the shadows of all
things perpendicularly elevated are equal to their bodies. Wherefore after you
have measured the length of the shadow which a Tower does give, you may note
that measure for the altitude of the same Tower.

depiction of the use of a gunner's semicircle

If the Sun be above forty five degrees in height, the Index will fall upon
the right shadow of the square, and forasmuch as then the shadows of all
bodies perpendicularlie erected are shorter than their bodies, you must now
multiply all the parts in one side of the square in the measure of the
shadow which the Tower to be measured does give, and divide the product
thereof by the part of right shadow touched with the fiduciall line of the
Index, and take the quotient number for the height of the said Tower.

depiction of the use of a gunner's semicircle

But if the Altitude of the Sun be less than forty five degrees, the said
Index will fall upon the contrary shadow of the square: and seeing that then
the shadows of all bodies perpendicularly erected are longer than their
bodies, you shall multiply the part of contrary shadow touched with the
fiduciall line of the Index in the length of the shadow which the Tower to be
measured does make, and having divided the product thereof by all the parts in
one side of the square, take the quotient number for the altitude of the said
Tower.

depiction of the use of a gunner's semicircle

How by the known length of a shadow which a Halberte or staff perpendiculary
erected does give in a Sun shining day, you may know the height of any Tower
or other thing which gives at the same time a shadow that may be measured.
IN a Sun shining day pitch upright a Halberte of a known length by the
Tower or other thing whose Altitude you would know. This done, measure the
length of the Halberts shadow, and also the length of the shadow which the
said Tower does give. For as the altitude of the erected Halbert is in
proportion to his shadow, so the desired altitude of the Tower is in
proportion to his shadow: Therefore multiply the length of the Halbert in the
length of the shadow which the Tower gives, divide the product thereof by the
length of the shadow which the Halbert does give, and take the quotient number
for the Altitude of the said Tower.

Example.

The Tower to be measured gives a shadow of 125 feet in length, and the
erected Halbert of eight feet in length does make a shadow of twelve feet in
length, therefore multiply eight in 125, and the product thereof will be 1000,
which divided by twelve yields in the quotient 83 foot and four inches for
the altitude of the said Tower.

Shadow Altitude. 12 8 125 83 and ^.

The 114 Chapter. How you may measure with your Geometrical square at one
station any approchable altitutde: also how you may with Arithmeticall skill
measure the Hipothenusall distance between your said station and the top of
the said altitude.
SET your Geometrical square plumbe upright upon his side or end V Z. This
done, move the Index of the square up and down, till you may see through his
two sightes, the top of the altitude to be measured: then noting well what
equal part in the side of the square is touched with the fiduciall line of the
said Index, look whether the said part is in the side of right shadow, or in
the side of contrary shadow. For if the said equal part be in the side of
right shadow (which happens when the space between the base of the altitude
to be measured and your standing is shorter than the said altitude) you must
multiply the measure of the space between your standing, and the base of the
said altitude, in all the parts that are in one side of the square, and divide
the product by the equal part touched with the fiduciall line of the Index in
the side of right shadow, and then adding the height of the center of your
square above the base of the thing to be measured, unto the quotient thereof,
take the total sum of that addition for the measure of the said approchable
altitude.

Example.

S T is a Tower whose altitude I will measure, R T is the space between the
approchable base of the said tower and my standing, which space is 40 feet. Q
or V the height of the center of my square above the said base is 5 feet. V Z X
Y is the square set plumbe upright upon his side V Z, and V P is the fiduciall
line of the Index which pointing directly from mine eye at the center of the
square, to the top of the said Tower, touches the 800 part in the right
shadow, therefore I multiple 40 feet the space between R and T, in 1200 the
whole number of parts in the whole side of the square and thereof comes
48000 which divided by 800 the part touched with the fiduciall line of the
Index in the right shadow, yields sixty feeete: then adding five feet for
the height of the center of my square above the said base unto the said number
of sixty, I take the total sum thereof which is 65 feet for the altitude of
the said Tower.

depiction of the use of a gunner's semicircle

If in this work the fiduciall line of the Index shall touch a part of
contrary shadow (which happens when the space between the base of the
altitude to be measured and your standing, is longer than the said altitude)
then multiply that part of contrary shadow in the measure of the space
between the said base and your standing, and after you have divided the
product thereof by all the parts in one side of the square, add to the
quotient the height of the center of your square above the said base, and take
the total sum thereof for the altitude of the said Tower.

But if in this work the fiduciall line of the Index shall fall between the
right and contrary shadows upon the line V Y, then adding the height of the
center of your square above the said base, to the measure of the space between
your standing and the said base, take the total sum or length thereof for
the altitude of the said Tower.

Now by knowing the height of the said Tower, and the measure of the distance
between your standing and the base of the said Tower, you may by the art of
numbering tell the true measure of the Hipothenusall distance between your
station and the top of the said Tower: a thing needful to be known, and of
great account in making sealing ladders for military service. Therefore to do
this thing, square the distance between your standing and the base of the
Tower. Likewise square the height of the said Tower, and joining their squares
together, take the square root of the total sum for the Hipothenusall
distance between your standing and the top of the said Tower.

Example.

Square four pearches the measure of the distance between R your station and
T the base of the Tower, and the square number thereof will be sixteen. Also
square three pearches the height of the Tower T S, and the square number
thereof will be nine. Now add both those squares together and thereof will
come twenty five, whose square root being five is the measure of pearches in
the Hipothenusall distance between R your standing, and S the top of the
said Tower.

depiction of the use of a scaling ladder

The 115 Chapter. How you may measure with your Geometrical square an
Hipothenusall distance, and an altitude of a Tower or any other thing
perpendicularlie erected.
IF the distance from your station unto the altitude of the Tower which shall
be measured be less than the same altitude, as for example if your station be
at A, and M N be the altitude of a Tower which shall be measured, set your
square upright so as his angle X may stand upon A, and his angle Y, may lie
directly between the said angle A, and N the top of the said Tower. This
done, lift up the Index of your square till you may see through his sights N
the top of the said Tower, and then noting what part in Y Z (the side of
your square) is touched with the fiduciall edge of the said Index, which here
for example I will suppose to be twelve, multiply 1200 the whole number of
parts in one side of your square by one foot the distance between the center
of your square and the piece of ground at the said A and so the quotient
thereof will be 1200 which being divided by twelve the number of parts touched
with the fiduciall edge of the said Index will yield in the quotient 100 feet
for the measure of the Hipothenusall distance between A your station, and N the
top of the Tower.

depiction of the use of a gunner's semicircle

After you have in this manner found out the said hipothenusall distance set
your square upright at A upon his side V X, and moving the Index of your
square up or down till you shall see through his sightes N the top of the said
Tower, note what part of the Index is touched with Z Y the side of your square,
which here for example I will admit to be 1360: then working by the rule of
proportion multiply 1200 the whole number of parts in one side of your square
by 100 the measure of the said hipothenusall distance, and thereof will come
120000, which divided by 1360 the part of the Index touched with Z Y the side
of the square, yields in the quotient 88 feet and 4/17 of a foot for the
altitude of the said Tower N M.

The 116 Chapter. How you may artificially measure with a Gunners quadrant, and
also with a gunners Semicircle, the altitude of any thing perpendicularly
erected, although you may not go to it, nor see the base thereof: and how you
may measure with the same instruments the Hipothenusall distance, and
Horizontall distance of that altitude.
PVt your gunners quadrant to your eye or hang your said quadrant upon a
staff fast fixed in the ground, so that you may at your pleasure without
stirring of the said staff, lift up or put down the quadrant till you have
espied through his two sights A the top of that altitude. In the scale of the
quadrant the 72 parts which shall be next unto your sights are called the
parts of right shadow and the 72 parts which shall be on the other side of
that scale are called the parts of contrary shadow.
Then note upon what side of the scale, the line and plummet of the quadrant
does fall. If the said line shall happen to fall upon the parts of contrary
shadow (as most commonly it does in such kind of mensurations) note the parts
of that shadow touched with the said line, and by the number of those parts
divide 72 (the whole number of parts of one side of the scale) and reserve the
quotient thereof. As for example, if the line shall fall upon twelve parts,
divide 72 by twelve, and the quotient to be reserved will be six. Afterward
remoouing your quadrant, mark the place of your standing, and go so far as
you list directly forwards toward the desired altitude, or directly
backwardes from the same. Then putting your instrument to your eye or hanging
your instrument again upon a staff as you did before, lift up, or put down
your quadrant til you may epsy again through his said sights A the top of the
said altitud, and note advisedly upon how many parts of contrary shadow the
said line fell: by which number of parts divide again 72, and subtract the
quotient thereof from the first reserved quotient, and keep the remainder
thereof. As for an example, if at the second standing the said line shall fall
upon 36 parts of contrary shadow, divide 72 (the whole number of parts of
one side of the scale) by the said number of 36, and the quotient thereof will
be two. This number of two you must subtract from the other reserved quotient
which was six, and the remainder thereof will be four: this remainder of four
must also be reserved. Then measure the space between the first and second
standing with what kind of measure you will, and the number of that measure
divide by four the remainder which you did last reserve, and to the quotient
thereof, add the height of your eye from the ground, and so you may conclude
that the total sum thereof is the altitude of the thing seen: as for
example suppose the space between your two standings to be 156 paces, then
divide 156 by four, and thereof comes thirty nine, to this thirty nine
add the height of your eye from the ground (which you shall also suppose to
be two paces) and so the total sum being forty one shows the height of A
B. But to the end this kind of mensuration may be the better understood, I
will give you an other example thereof which shall differ from the aforesaid
example, and in this example following I will suppose the side of the square to
be divided only into twelve parts.

Suppose again that your first standing is in the place marked with C, and
that at the same standing the said line does fall upon the tenth part of
contrary shadow (as it does in the figure following) and that at your second
standing in the place marked with V, the said line falls upon the eight part
of contrary shadow (as likewise it appears to do in the said figure) and
that the space between C and V contains 285 feet, and that from your eye to
the ground, that is to say from E to C or from X to V there are four feet.
Now divide twelve (the whole number of parts of one side of the scale) by 10
the part of contrary shadow touched with the said line at the first station
and the quotient will be one and the which you must reserve. Then divide again
the said number of twelve by eight the part of contrary shadow touched with
the said line at the second station, and the quotient will be one and. Out of
this one and subtract that one and which was reserved, and so there will
remain 3/20. By this 3/20 divide 285 which is the number of feet in the
distance between C and V, and the quotient thereof will be 950. To this 950
add four feet for the height of your eye from the ground, or for the height
of E above C, or for the height of X above V, and so the total sum thereof
being 954 feet is the true measure of the altitude A: that is to say of the
line between A and B which B is an invisible point by imagination conceived
directly under the said A within the ground T.

depiction of the use of a gunner's semicircle

To make a demonstration hereof, from your eye at the second station, that is
to say from X to your eye at the first station, that is to say to E, draw the
line X E, and produce the same line in your imagination till it meet with the
said line A B within the ground T, in the point F, which is also an invisible
point conceived by imagination to be within the said ground, and level with
your eye, I mean with X and E, And because the triangle A E F, is like unto
the triangle L P Q of the first station, such proportion as the line or side A
F has unto the line or side E F, the same proportion has the side P Q to the
side Q L. Wherefor (by the 13 and 21 definition of the seventh book of
Euclide) so many times as the said P Q is contained in the side Q L, so many
times the side A F is contained in the side E F. And because the side P Q
contains ten parts of the one side of the scale, and the side L Q contains
twelve of those parts, therefore the side L Q contains the side P Q once and
part thereof, and so it follows that the side E F contains the side A F once
and part thereof. And now although you be ignorant of the altitude of A F, and
of the distance between E and F, yet you know that the said distance E F
contains the height A F once and part thereof. Then reserving this 1 and, go
to your second standing where you shall find the triangle X F A, to be like
unto the triangle L P Q of the second standing, and that so many times as the
side P Q (which is eight parts of the scale of contrary shadow) is in the
side L Q (which is 12, the whole number of parts of one side of the scale) so
many times the height A F is contained in the distance X F, and because the
side P Q (that is to say 8 parts) is contained once and in the side L Q (that
is to say in 12 parts) therefore the height A F is likewise contained once and
in the distance X F. Therefore subtracting the distance E F from the distance X
F (that is to say 1 and from 1 and) there will remain 3/10 for the difference
E X, so as the said difference E X will be 3/10 of the said height A F. And
because the said difference E X is such as is the line V C (by the 34
proposition of the first book of Euclide) and that the said line V C is
supposed to contain 285 feet, therefore it follows that there are 285 feet
in 3/10 of the height A F. By reason whereof the whole height of A F should be
950 feet, as before has been said. Then ioyn 4 feet which is supposed to be
the height of E C and of X V unto the said number of 950 feet, and so the
total sum thereof will be 954 feet which is the whole height of A B,
because the height of F B does likewise contain 4 feet. And therefore as the
side P Q of the first standing is in proportion to the side or Hipothenusal
line L P, so is the height A F to the Hipothenusall distance A E. And because
the side P Q is in proportion to the side or Hipothenusall line L P (by the 47
proposition of the first book of Euclide) as 10 is to the nighest square root
of 244 (which number of 244 is the sum that came by adding the square of 10
to the square of 12) therefore multiply 950 feet by 15 and 19/30 which is the
nighest square root of 244 and divide the product thereof by 10, and the
quotient will yield 1485 feet and two inches for the Hipothenusall distance A
E. And for so much as the distance between E and F is so much as the height of A
F and part more (as before has been proved) therefore take of the height A F
that is to say part of 950 feet which is 190 and add the same sum of 190
to the sum of 950 feet the height of A F and thereof will come 1140 feet
which shows what number of feet are in the Horizontall distance that is to
say between E and F and between C and B.

And in like sort you must proceed to find out at the second standing the
Hipothenusall distance between X and A, An admonition.
and the Horizontall distance between X F, but it behooves you to note in
this kind of mensurations by two standinges, that sometimes your eye in one
standing will not be so high from the ground as it will be in the other
standing, especially when your Instrument hangs upon a thing that stands fast
in the ground. And although that difference is but little, yet many times the
same will breed great errors, and therefore to avoid the occasion of such
errors, I exhort you to provide a line and plummet which may reach from the
center of the quadrant to the ground, and direct you at your first standing
and also at your second standing. Moreover to avoid errors, I counsel you to
hang your Quadrant so as it may turn upon no other part thereof then upon
his center, but now to return unto our purpose, if by chance you shall
stand so near unto the altitude as that the line and plummet of the quadrant
falls upon the right shadow, you must work otherwise than you did before, I
mean you must divide those parts cut with the said line by 12, and in this
case the quotient must always be set down like a fraction, the which
fraction you must reserve, and after you have marked the place where you
stood, go from thence so far as you list in a right line forwards or
backewardes, and then placing your said Instrument again as you did at your
first standing, lift the said Instrument up or put it down, till you may
through his sights see A the top of the altitude. This done, note advisedly
upon what part of right shadow the said line and plummet falls, and that
part divide by twelve (the whole number of parts of one side of the scale) and
the quotient thereof must of necessity be set down like a fraction: This
fraction subtract from the other fraction first reserved, or in plainer words,
subtract the lesser of those two fractions from the greater, and reserve the
remainder thereof. Then measure the space between your first and second
standing by feet, paces, or any other kind of measure that you will, and
divide the number of that measure by the remainder which was before reserved,
and add unto the quotient of the said division the height between the center
of the said Instrument and the ground, and by so doing you may conclude that
the total sum thereof is the altitude of the thing seen.

For an example hereof, if at the first standing the said line and plummet
shall fall upon the third part of right shadow, divide that number of three
by twelve (the whole number of parts in one side of the scale) and the
quotient thereof will be in a fraction. Reserve this fraction of, and then
mark your first standing with a staff set upright under the center of your
Instrument and then go from thence backwardes in a right line so far as you
list, and placing there your Instrument as you did at your first standing,
move it up or down till you shall again epsy through the said sightes A the
top of the said altitude. Then look upon what part of right shadow the
said line and plummet falls, as if by chance it fell upon the fourth part,
divide that fourth by twelve, and the quotient will be in a fraction. Now out
of the fraction which was before reserved, subtract the last quotient which was
and so ^/12 will remain: then having likewise marked your second standing
with a staff set upright under the center of your Instrument, measure the
space between the staff at your first standing, and the staff at your second
standing: which space in this example I suppose to be eight paces. Now divide
this eight by 1/1^ the remainder last mentioned, and the quotient thereof will
be ninety six, and add unto the said number of ninety six the height
between the center of the Instrument and the ground (which in this example I
will suppose to be one pase) and so the total sum amounting to ninety
seven paces shows the height of A B. The demonstration of this work is to be
made by the similitude of triangles and their proportional sides as before the
other demonstration has been made.

In this kind of mensurations by two standings, you must be very circumspect
that the staff upon which your quadrant shall hang do stand plumbe upright
both at your first standing, and also at your second standing. For otherwise
it will make you not a little to err: which thing may be easily done by the
help of your said quadrant, or by letting fall a line and plummet close by the
side of that staff.

The 117 Chapter. To know by the help of a Gunners Semicircle how many miles,
paces, yardes, or feet, any ship lying at Rode in the Sea, or Tower, or any
other mark upon the land in sight, is from you.
To measure lengthes some say we should avoid hills and desire plains, for
that otherwise great errors will ensue. But in this kind of mensuration no
such matter is required, for here it shall be only needful at the time of
your measuring to have ground enough to go directly backwardes and sidewise
from your first standing. This commodititie of ground enough had, whether that
ground be level or otherwise, work thus. Lay your Semicircle flat and level
upon a stool, or some other such thing, and move the same about till you
shall epsy through D E the channel in the ruler A B the ship or other thing to
which you will me^sure, and (your Semicircle so remaining immovable) look
through the said channel E D at some other thing lying directly in a right
line 200 yardes or feet more or less at your pleasure, behind your standing,
which thing so espied shall here for an example be marked with the figure of 3.
Then (the Semicircle remaining still immovable) look through the channel F G
in the ruler B C, at some other thing lying sidewise in a right angle 100 yards
or feet more or less from your first standing noted for an example with the
figure of 1, and that thing so espied shall in this place be noted with the
figure of 2. After this co^uey your self and your Semicircle from your first
standing unto the said thing which has here been marked with the figure of 3,
and lay your Semicircle there flat and level as you did before, but so as the
end of that channel which is marked with E do lie right over the point here
marked as aforesaid with the figure of 3, and that by moving the Semicircle
about, you may at the last perceive through the said channel D E, that 1 the
mark at your first standing does lie right between you and the thing to which
you measure. Now without moving of your Semicircle look again through the
said channel F G at some other thing lying sidewise in a right angle from 3 the
mark of your 2 standing, and go in a right line toward the same thing last
espied, till the said mark which has here bin noted with the figure of 2
shall stand right between you and the thing to which you measure, and there
make a mark which in this example shall be the figure of 4. This done, measure
exactly the distance between the mark 1, and the mark 2, and call it the first
distance: also measure exactly the distance between the mark 1 and the mark
3, and call it the 2 distance. Finally, measure the distance between the mark 3
and the mark 4 and call it the 3 distance. Now subtract the first distance from
the third, and reserve the remainder for your divisor, then multiply the 3
distance by the second distance, and divide the product by your reserved
divisor, and so the quotient will show the true length from the mark 3 unto the
ship, tower, or other thing to which you did measure.

depiction of the use of a gunner's semicircle

At the figure of five there is a ship lying at Rode in the Sea, and from 6,
7, 8, and 9, a platfourme with ordinance upon the land, I am required to
measure unto the said ship, wherefore making my first standing at the place 1,
I measure from thence unto the place 2 which lies sidewise 200 yardes in a
right angle from 1. Again I measure from the said place 1, unto 3 the place
of my second standing which lies 300 yardes in aright line with the said
ship behind my first standing. Also I measure from the said place marked
with the figure of 3 unto the place 4 lying 240 yardes sidewise in a right
angle from 3, and situated so as the said place 2 does lie in a right line
between it and the said ship: then subducing 200 from 240 I keep the
remainder which is 40 for my divisor, and after this I multiply 300 by 240
whereof comes 72000 which divided by 40 my said reserved divisor yields in
the quotient 1800 yardes for the longitude between 3 the place of my second
standing and the said ship.

The 118 Chapter. How you may measure a short distance as the breadth of a
town ditch, or narrow river, without any Geometrical Instrument, or
arithmeticall knowledge.
STanding right up with your body and neck upon the side of a town ditch,
or narrow river, put your feet close together, and behold with one eye a
grass leaf, stone, or other mark in the opposite side of the same ditch or
river, and in so doing pull down your hat or cap over your eye till you may see
no other thing beyond the mark so espied. After this keeping still your body
and neck upright, your feet joined together, and your one eye fast shut,
turn your self toward the plainest piece of ground that is about you, and
mark well that part of ground which you shall epsy under your hat or cap most
farthest from your station, for the distance between the midst of your feet
and the said farthest part of ground, is equal to the breadth of the said
river.

The 119 Chapter. How you may at one station measure upon an height with a
Geometrical square a longitude upon plain.
SEt your Geometrical square very upright upon his side or end X Y over the
plain where you will measure an unknown longitude. This done, move the Index
of your said square up or down till you may epsy through his sights the
farthest end of the desired longitude. Then note diligently the parts of the
square cut with the fiduciall line of the Index. And if the parts so cut be in
the contrary shadow, multiply the whole number of parts in one side of the
square, by the number of feet or yards which are in the height between the
center of your Instrument and that part of the plain which lies directly
under the same center, and divide the product thereof by the parts cut in the
side of your square, and note the quotient for the true measure of the desired
longitude. When the parts so cut shall be in the right shadow, multiply the
parts so cut in the height between the center of your Instrument and that part
of the plain which lies directly under the same center and having divided the
product thereof by the whole number of parts in one side of the square, note
the quotient for the true measure of the desired longitude. But if the fiducial
line of the said Index shall lie directly between the right shadow and the
contrary shadow when you epsy through the said sights the farthest end of the
desired longltude, then the height between the center of your Instrument and
the part of the plain which lies under the same center, is equal to the
desired longitude.

Example.

Admit that B C is an unknown longitude between a ship and a gallie tying at
Rode in the Sea, and that to measure the same longitude I have set my
Geometrical square plumbe upright upon his side or end X Y in A the maine top
of the ship directly over B one end of the said longitude, and that when I
saw through the sights upon the Index the gallie at C the farthest end of the
desired longitude, the fiduciall line of the said Index did cut forty parts
of contrary shadow, and that the center of my square is ten yardes above the
said B, therefore I multiply 1200 the whole number of parts in one side of
the square by ten the measure of the height between the center of my square
and B, and the product thereof being 12000 I divide by forty the parts cut in
contrary shadow, and so the quotient yields three hundred for the number of
yardes in the measure of the said longitude.

This one example gives light to the ingenious Reader to work in mensurations
of longitudes when the fiduciall line of the index shall cut parts in the
right shadow of the square, and also when the same fiduciall line shall lie
upon the square directly between the right shadow and the contrary shadow,
wherefore I do omit to set down here more examples in so plain a matter.

depiction of the use of a geometrical square

The 120 Chapter. How you may measure with a Geometrical square at two
stations any longitude in sight.
TO measure at two stations an unknown longitude which here shall be supposed
to be A B, lay your Geometrical square flat and level upon a stool, or
upon a foot made of purpose to hold it up. Then setting the fiduciall edge
of his Index upon the line H I which passes directly from H to the beginning
of the equal parts marked upon X Y a side of the square turn the square upon
the stool or foot (his Index remaining steadfast upon the said line H I) till
you may epsy through the sights upon the said Index, B the farthest end of
the said unknown longitude. This done, the square remaining immovable turn
the fiduciall edge of his Index to the line V Z which passes directly from V
to the beginning of the equal parts marked upon Y Z an other side of the
said square, and then looking again through the said sights, note some mark a
good space from you: the farther this mark is from you, the better it is for
your purpose: then pitchinge up a staff right under the center of your square
in A, conueye your square unto the said mark which here I will call C, and
recon to be 40 yardes from A, now the square being laid again flat and level
upon a stool, or upon a foot, right over C as it was before at A, put the
fiduciall edge of the Index upon the said line H I, and turn the square
upon the stool (the Index remaining immovable upon the said line H I) till
you may see through the sights upon the same Index the staff in A. After this
the square remaining immovable, turn the said Index to and fro till you may
see through his sights B the extreme part of the desired longitude, and note
diligently what part of contrary shadow is then touched with the fiduciall
edge of the Index, for if you will multiply the whole number of parts in one
side of the square by the number of yards between A and C your two stations,
and divide the product thereof by the part of contrary shadow touched with
the fiduciall edge of the said Index, the quotient will show you the true
measure of the said longitude.

Example.

Admit that at C your second station the fiduciall edge of the Index did
touch the 100 part of contrary shadow, and that you did then see through the
sightes upon the same Index B the extreme part of the desired longitude.
Then multiply 1200 the whole number of parts in one side of the square by 40
the number of yardes between A and C your two stations, and divide the product
thereof which is 48000 by 100 the part of contrary shadow touched with the
fiduciall edge of the Index at C your second station, and so the quotient will
yield 480 yardes for the desired measure of the said longitude A B.

depiction of the use of a geometrical square

The 121 Chapter. How you may measure with a Geometrical Square, any distance
or breadth lying in a plain and leuel ground, with your eye or station how so
ever the same breadth or distance is situated.
BEing required to tell the distance or breadth between two Towers which for
example may here be named Q and R, measure first how far either Tower is from
you, which you may do by sundry ways before taught, and then laying your
Geometrical Square flat and level upon a stool, or upon a foot made of
purpose to bear it up, turn the Square about till you have set H I a line
upon one side of the said Square right against Q the Tower next unto you. For
if R the other Tower were nearer to you than the Tower Q, you should first lay
the line H K right against the same Tower R. This done (the Square not being
removed) turn the Index to and fro till you may see through his sightes the
said Tower R, which in this example (as before I have told you) is the
fardest Tower from you. Then opening your compass to so many equal parts in
the side of the Square as there are yards between the center of the Square and
the tower Q. which I will here suppose to be an hundred yardes, set one foot
of your compass in the center of your Square, and with the other foot of your
compass make a fine visible mark at M upon the line H I, and when you have so
done, open your compass again to so many parts in the side of the Square as
there are yardes between the center of your Instrument and the said Tower R,
which I will likewise suppose to be an hundred and fifty yardes, and putting
one foot of your compass in the said center, make an other fine visible
mark upon the face of the Square with the other foot of your compass at N,
close by the fiduciall edge of the said Index, which ought now to lie in that
place where it stood when you did last see through his sightes the said Tower
R. Moreover, open your compass to the space between those two marks M and N,
and lay your compass so opened upon the parts in the side of your Square,
and so you shall perceive how many yardes are between the Tower Q and the
Tower R. For look how many equal parts are beetweene the two feet of your
compass, so many yardes are beetweene the Tower Q and the Tower R, and
therefore if sixty one parts shall be between the two feet of your
compass, you may boldly affirm that the distance or breadth between the
Tower Q and the Tower R does contain sixty and one yardes.

^derstande ^teous rea^, that M ^ght to stand (...) this picture (...) the end
of (...) line which ^tendeth (...) the side (...) the square (...) the fiducial
^ge of the ^ex, and N ^ght to stand (...) that end of (...) said line ^ch
adioy^th to the fiduciall edge of the index, H ought to stand at the center of
the square, and I ought to stand at the lowest ^de of the square where the
equal parts begin, and that between H M are 100 equal parts, between M N
61 ^uall parts, and between H N 150 equal parts.
depiction of the use of a geometrical square

The 122 Chapter. How you standing upon the top of a hill or dry ditch may
measure with a Geometrical Square the deepenesse of the same hill or ditch,
and the breadth of any dry ditch or valley.
TO measure the deepenesse and breadth of M N O a ditch or valley, measure
first his breadth MN as you may do by sundry ways before taught, which
breadth shall here be supposed to be eighteen yardes. Likewise measure by the
precepts before given, the length or depth of M O, which here shall be supposed
to be fifteen yardes, this done, square 15 the measure of the depth M O, and
the product thereof will be 225. Likewise square 9 which is of the measure of
the breadth M N, and the product thereof will be 81. Then subduce the square 81
from the said square 225, and out of the remainder which is 144 extract the
Square root, which being 12 shows the number of yardes that are in P O the
depth of the ditch or valley. Also in this manner if you stand upon the top
of a hill, you may measure the height of the same hill.

depiction of the use of a geometrical square

The 123 Chapter. How you may draw a platte of any piece of ground which
shall contain the true proportion and Symetrie thereof, in such sort that you
may tell how far any place in the platte is distante from other.
TO draw a platte of any piece of ground, prepare an Instrument made of
metal, or of Cypress wood like unto the Figure following. And after you have
set it flat and leuel upon a foot, or upon a stool in an high place from
whence you may see round about many other notable places, Note that the
variation of every compass in England is 11 degrees and of a degree, and that
for the same cause in every compass within England, the North point lies
directly against the North pole, and the South point lies directly against the
South pole, when the needle of the compass does stand directly over the north
and by East, and South and by West points in the compass.
turn this Instrument named a Geographicall plain Sphere to and fro upon his
foot, or for lack of a foot, upon a stool, till by the aid of his needle
you have made all his Semidiameters to point unto their proper quarters. This
done, the Instrument remaining steadfast, direct the Index with his two sights
to every place that shall be set forth in your platte, taking your marks
through the said sights in the midst of every of them, and note in a Table by
it self the degrees cut with the said Index in the Circle, which may be
called the Angles of position, or Angles of sight, and so make a table of your
first station. Then remoouing your Instrument to one of the highest places
noted in your said Table, pitch your Instrument in the high place which you
have chosen for your second station in all respects as you did at your first
station, and turning the said Index so as you may see through his sightes all
the places which you did see before at your first station, Note again in an
other Table the Angles of position, or Angles of sightes, writing the name of
every place and his Angle of sight by it. After this, at your coming home lay
a protractor (which is a circle made of wood or mettalle, divided into 360
equal parts like unto C D the Figure following) upon a sheet of paper, and
making a prick thoroe the center of the said protractor in the said paper,
which prick shall represent the place of your first station, write with a cole
at the edge of the protractor by every degree or Angle of sight his place, and
then laying your protractor aside, draw with a cole straight lines from the
said prick which represents your first station unto the places so noted.
Again putting the center of your protractor right over the line which points
from your first station unto your second station, and having regard to place
the prick of your second station from the prick of the first station, so as the
crossing of like lines may be within the compass of your said paper, turn the
protractor to and fro keeping his center upon the said line, till it do lie
in every respect as it did upon the prick of your first station, and when you
have so done, make thoroe the center of the protractor in the said line a
prick, which must represent the place of your second station, and write with a
cole as you did before at the edge of the protractor by every degree or Angle
of sight his place. After this taking up the protractor from the paper, draw
with a cole straight lines from the prick of your second station unto the
noted places, and looking diligently upon the crossing of every two like
lines, write thereon a figure, star, or other sign, and the name of his
place. Now to know how far every place is distant from other, measure by your
Instrument, or by a wier line the distance between your two stations, and
divide the right line in your paper between the prick of your first station
and the prick of your second station, into so many equal parts as there are
feet, yardes, pases, or perches between your two stations, and then opening
your compass to one of those parts, you may measure from place to place, and
say that there are so many feet, yardes, pases, or perches (according to the
denomination of that one part whereunto you open your Compass) as you find
parts.

Example.

Purposing to draw the platte of a piece of ground which has upon it a
Beacon, a Tower, a house, a church, a windmill, a hill and a mount, I do first
set my Geographicall plain Sphere in all respects according to the precepts
before declared upon the hill from whence I may see all the aforesaid places,
and then by turning the Index of my Instrument to every of those places, I
find that it cutteh at the middell part of the Beacon, 80 degrees, at the
middle part of the Tower 95 degrees, at the middle part of the house 110
degrees, at the middle part of the church 130 degrees and of a degree, at the
middle part of the windemill 155 degrees and of a degree, and at that part of
the mount where I will make my second station 180 degrees, whereupon I make a
table of my first station after this manner. The Table of my first station.
The Beacon 80 degrees The tower 95 degrees The house 110 degrees The church
130 degrees The windemill 155 degrees The mount 180 degrees

This done, I transporte my said Instrument unto that part of the mount which
I have noted for my second station, and placing it there in every respect
according to the precepts before declared, I turn again the said Index unto
every of the said noted places, and by so doing see that it cutteth at the
middle part of the said beacon 40 degrees, at the middle part of the tower 65
degrees, at the middle part of the house 80 degrees, at the middle part of
the church 100 degrees, at the middle part of the windemill 120 degrees and,
wherefore after I have measured the space between my two stations, I make an
other table of my second station thus. The table of my second station.
The Beacon 40 degrees The tower 65 degrees The house 80 degrees The Church 100
degrees The windemill 120 degrees ^

The space between my two stations is in measure 200 yardes.

diagram of the use of a protractor

Moreover, I do lay my portractor upon a sheet of paper, and having made a
prick in the same paper with the point of a needle thrust through a little hole
in the center of the same protractor, I make a point with a cole in the edge
of the protractor at every degree and part of a degree noted in the table of
my first station, and then taking my protractor up from the paper, do draw
straight lines unto every of those points, and write with a cole their names.
After all this I do put the center of my protractor right upon the line which
points from my first station unto my second station, in a reasonable distance
from the prick that represents in the paper my first station, and making an
other prick in the said line with the point of a needle thrust through the
hole in the center of the protractor, I do turn the protractor to and fro
keeping his center over the prick last made, till I have set it in every
respect as it did lie before upon the prick of my first station, and having
made a point with a cole in the edge of the protractor at every degree and
part of a degree noted in the table of my second station, I put the protractor
aside, and draw straight lines from the prick made for the place of my second
station unto every of those points, noting well the crossing of like lines.
That is to say, where the line of the Beacon drawn from the prick of my first
station meets with the line of the Beacon drawn from the prick of my second
station, and where the line of the Tower drawn from the prick of my first
station meets with the line of the Tower drawn from the prick of my second
station, and so of the rest: for other intersections or crossinges in this
work are not to be regarded.

Also to know how far every place in this plat is from other, I divide the
space before the prick of my first station, and the prick of my second station
into so many equal parts as there are yardes, which for example I here suppose
to be 200, and then drawing straight lines from every one of these noted places
unto other, and opening my compass to one of the said equal parts, I measure
how many times it is contained in every of the said lines, and say that the
number of yardes in the length of them is as this Table following does show.

A Table showing the distance of every place from the two stations, and also
the distance of every place from other: and therein this is to be noted that 1
signifies the first station, 2 the second station, 3 the Beacon, 4 the Tower,
5 the house, 6 the Church, and 7 the Windemill.
FRom 1 to 2, 200 yardes. From 1 to 3, 193 yardes and of a yard. From 1 to 4,
350 yardes. From 1 to 5, 375 yardes. From 1 to 6, 425 yardes. From 1 to 7, 395
yardes and ^ of a yard: From 2 to 3, 300 yardes. From 2 to 4, 391 yardes and
of a yard. From 2 to 5, 362 yardes and of a yard. From 2 to 6, 358 yardes and
of a yard. From 2 to 7, 283 yardes and ^ of a yard. From 3 to 4, 166 yardes
and of a yard, From 3 to 5, 218 yardes and 2/11 of a yard. From 3 to 6, 316
yardes and ^ of a yard. From 3 to 7, 340 yardes. From 4 to 5, 88 yardes and ^
of a yard. From 4 to 6, 208 yardes and ^ of a yard. From 4 to 7, 275 yardes.
From 5 to 6, 120 yardes. From 5 to 7, 195 yardes and of a yard. From 6 to 7,
107 yardes and of a yard.
In this manner by changing my stations I may make diverse plattes expressing
the true proportion and distances of Cities, Towns, Havens, Castles, Fortes,
Camps, Mines, Hills, and all other notable places within a whole Region.

Laus Deo.
Gutta cauat lapidem non vi, sed sape cadendo,
Sic homo fit sapiens non vi, sed saepe legendo.

The end of Lucar Appendix.
AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Dawson, for John Harrison the elder, at the Sign
of the Greyhounde in Paul's Churchyard, And are there to be sold. 1588.

blazon or coat of arms IN SPE

Amendements of faults made in printing the three books of Colloquies.
Faults. Page. Line. Amendmentes. Body moving. 12 43. and 44. body violently
moving 6160 28 50 6146 be loer 53 22 be more loer. which contain 33 64 50
which conteins 33 here and end 70 44 here an end. is in our 74 9 is now in
our Amendments of faults made in printing Lucar Appendix.
Faults. Page. Line. Amendments. IN some other 10 18 into some other and do
it unto 10 26 and do unto it that time 10 52 the time. into the flower 11 11
into flower in a Cauldron 11 12 in the cauldron and vinegar 14 10 or vinegar or
after 14 11 and after. full of round 15 3 full of little round their tinder 21 1
the tinder being well wette 21 21 being wett a whole foot 41 23 whole of a
foot The 65, Chapter 57 14 the 68. Chapter said pellets 59 45 said pellet next
mixture 66 37 mixture next and put 70 23 put piece and close 70 24 piece next
and close by it 73 17 by them bloe the forts 93 4 bloe up the forts before 119
21 between


