CERTAIN EXPERIMENTS CONCERNING FISH AND FRVITE: Practiced by JOHN TAVERNER
Gentleman, and by him published for the benefit of others.

ANCHORA SPEI


LONDON, Printed for William Ponsonby. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR EDMOND ANDERSON KNIGHT, LORD CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE
COMMON PLEAS.
RIGHT Honorable my good Lord, it was my bap lately to light upon a Book
dedicated unto your Lordship, by one M. George Churchey, entitled, A new book
of good husbandry, and entreating of fishponds, and ordering of the same:
which book, as it should seem, was first written in Latin by one James
Dubrauius, but translated into English by the industry of the said Master
Churchey, wherein his good meaning and travel is greatly to be commended. I
thereby gathering that your Lordship took some delight in that practice, and
being before that time minded to put in writing certain experiments, that my
self had observed concerning those matters, did presently conclude with my
self, humbly to crave that the same may pass under your L. protection: your
virtues also deserving that I should make choice herein of your Lordship before
others, as one unto whom the whole commonweal of this Realm in general is
greatly bounden, for the great and painful watchings, care and travel you
take in administration of Justice in your place and calling: and therefore I in
particular, find my self willing (if by any means I may) to move unto your
Lordship any delight or liking, though never so little. And if your Lordship
have been any practiser of these delights, I mean making of fishponds, or
planting of fruit, I doubt not but you shall in this little Treatise, find
somewhat that you knew not before, and thereby your delight that way augmented,
which, if it so happen to be, my expectation herein is most amply satisfied:
Beseeching the Almighty, to bless, preserve and keep you and all yours, with
such felicity, as your heart desires.

This 22. of Ian. 1600. You Lordships in all humblenes, JOHN TAVERNER.

To the Reader.
GOOD Reader, in seeking to shun that Monster Idleness, and having a desire by
all honest means possible, to benefit this my native country of England, and
finding my ability otherwise insufficient to perform the same, I have thought
good to set down some experiments that my self have had concerning fish and
fruit: of which two things, especially of fruit, although many authors have
more learnedly written, yet many of them being strangers, inhabiting in
Climates far differing from ours here in England, do also for the most part
teach how such fruit as their countries bring forth are to be used, of which
kind of fruits here in England we have little or no use. As also concerning
fish, there are none that have written in our vulgar tongue to any purpose that
ever I have seen, saving that one Master Churchey has procured to be
translated into English a Treatise compiled by a stranger, a Morauian (as I
take it.) Howbeit by reason the translator (as it should seem) had no great
experience in that matter, he therefore that shall practice, shall find great
want in that book to supply his desires that way. Notwithstanding the good
endeavor of Master Churchey is greatly to be commended, neither is my meaning
herein to say what may be said in these matters, but only what things my self
have observed and practiced. And if I should set down by way of preface, the
exceeding great benefit that might grow to this Realm, by practicing to have
abundance of the two foresaid commodities, the preface would grow to a greater
volume then now the whole book contains. And although I know that many men
can say more then my self can do herein, yet I also believe that most men know
not so much: for whose sake I have compiled this little treatise, by which, if
they take either profit or honest pleasure, I have my desire. Farewell.

CERTAIN EXPERIMENTS CONCERNING FISH AND FRVITE.
FIrst it is requisite to speak of ponds, I mean such as be necessary,
profitable, and convenient to be used with us here in England, not such in
which the prodigal Romans used to spend their superfluous wealth and
treasure, rather for vain ostentation, then for any honest recreation of mind,
or profit unto themselves, or the common wealth: whereunto I would wish our
country people in all their actions to have chief regard. It should seem
that many of the Romans employed incredible wealth in making of ponds, in
which with sea water, they kept diverse kind of sea fish, for delicacie and
wantonness, rather then profit: for that such kind of ponds were only made
near unto the sea side, whereas the like fish might more conveniently be taken
in the sea it self. I would rather wish the greatest store of our ponds to be
made far up land in the inmost parts of the Realm, unto which places fish
cannot well be brought from the sea, to be eaten fresh whilst it is good, and
sweet. The ponds I mean to speak of, shall be of two sorts: the one dug
right down into the ground by labor of man: the other made with a head in a
valley between two hills, by swelling of the water over grassie ground, not in
former times covered with water. Those that are dug right down are for the
most part but small, and serve indeed to little use, unless it be to keep
fish in for the winter time, to spend as need requires, or to feed fish in:
otherwise of themselves they are not able to sustain any number of fish, in
any good sort, to increase in grouth or goodness of meat, and therefore I
mean not to speak much of such ponds. But the other kind of pond made with a
head being rightly ordered, as hereafter is mentioned, will give great
nourishment to fish without any feeding save of it self. It is therefore
requisite for him that would have good fish, to have two such ponds with heads
so made, as with their sluices he may lay them dry when he pleases, and again
to fill them with water when he shall think good, to the end that one of them
may lie dry one year, and the other the next year. The greatness of his
ponds may be according to the aptnes of the place where he makes them, and to
the cost he means to bestow. And that valley that has not any sudden descent
but descends by little and little, having also some littell rill or brook
running through it, is fittest for this purpose: by reason that in such places
a man shall with least charges in making the head ouerflow greatest quantity
of ground. The said ponds are to be made as follows.

The making of a pond for fish.
Having a place convenient, viz. a valley between two hills, and some small
brook or rill running through the same, you are to dig a channel or pond as
it were from the one hill to the other, overthwart the valley: and with the
earth that you take out of the same to make your head. Always making your head
down the stream from the channel, so that the channel shall be the deepest
place of your pond, and in no wise to dig any earth, or to make any channel on
the backside of your head: for that will much weaken your head. You must also
begin the foundation of your head not hard by the brim of your channel, but
some eight or ten foot from the same, least the weight of the earth of the
head cause your head to slide into the channel: and raise your head not
upright, but slopewise for caluing or slipping down. And look how high you
mean to make your head, and so much it is requisite to be in breadth in the
top thereof, and three times that breadth in the bottom: as for example: If
you mean to make your head ten foot high, it had need to be ten foot broad in
the top, and thirty foot broad in the bottom, otherwise it will hardly lie,
but calue and slip down again, unless you force it with timber. Howbeit
such may be the nature of your earth, as a light sand, or only chalk, that it
will not stand without timber, otherwise a stiff clay mingled with gravel, is
best for such a head: if your soil be a light sand, or altogether a gravel,
or chalk, it will hardly hold water. It is not good to put any timber in your
head to bear it up, but rather only earth being broken very small, and watered
with water often times as you raise it: for that will cause it to bind closer
and surer then any ramming or timber work will do. I suppose the Spring time,
and Autumn to be best for the making of such heads, especially if you water it
well and break the earth small, that it may dry again and settle. In the
making of the head, Where to lay your sluice.
you are to lay your sluice in the head against the deepest place of your
channel, being made of a whole piece of timber, or at least wise the forepart
thereof being a whole piece, and the residue of one or two pieces more, being
joined very close, and stopped with hair and tar in the joints: for if
therein be never so small a hole, it will spoil your head at the sewing of
your pond. Having made and hollowed your trough, hewn through at the tail,
but close at the end next to the pond, you are to nail thereon a strong board
or planke, very close in all places: or else which is better, a slab being
before the hollowing of your trough, sawne from the same: then turn that side
downward, and then the upper side will be that which before was the bottom of
the trough: at the end whereof next to the channel in the upper part thereof,
you are to make the tampion hole square, and likewise make a square tampion to
shut close in the same, with a steal, either of the same piece which is best,
or else strongly mortised with a bouetaile mortice into the said tampion, and
so reaching up as high as the top of your head, or at least to the uppermost
part of the water. And the best fashion for the head of your sluse, is two
strong planks, fastened on each side of the tampion hole, being in breadth
somewhat broader then the square of your tampion, and grated boords nailed
before and behind the same, some two or three foot from the bottom. But for
the more speedy sewing out the water, you may make as it were a nose of grated
boords before the tampion, at the bottom of the sluice, of some three or four
foot long, and a foot deep. The residue of the sluice may be boorded up to
the top with boords vngrated, and I think grated boords to be better for this
purpose, being made with a hand saw, rather then holes made with piercer or
augur. The trough of this sluice had need be laid so soon as you begin to make
your head, because it may convey the water from you, which else will trouble
you in making the channel.

The sluice made, and the channel dug, it may be you shall need more earth
to be carried in dung-carts or barrowes which you are still to keep mingled
with water, and the earth broken small: in frostie weather it is good working of
any such head. Also take heed you put not in the said head, any dung or turfs
of grass, that will turn to dung: but only good earth. When the head is
raised, it is requisite to settle well before you fill the same with water, and
therefore not good to fill it full the first year, but rather half full: and
to store it with such fish as you mean to keep therein, When to store your
ponds.
in January, February or March: after which time it is not good to carry or
handle any fish all the summer time, until it be October or November. The
colder the weather is when you handle your fish, the better: unless it be for
such fish as you mean to spend presently. Not good to handle fish in hot
weather.
But store-fish being taken or handled in hot weather, will be sick, and not
prosper long time after, and perhaps die thereof, although not presently.

And to speak of fish, I mean such as are usually kept in ponds or lakes, I
will divide them into two sorts: those that live by ravening and devouring of
other fish, and the others that live upon seeds, roots, weeds, corn, worms,
and such like: for as there are some beasts that do live chiefly and naturally
by flesh of other beasts, and other some that live only by corn, grass,
fruit, and such like, and will at no time taste of flesh: Ravening fish.
so there are fishes much like in nature. The fish that live upon ravening and
devouring of other fish, are the Pike, the Trought, the Perch, and the Eele:
and these kinds will not naturally feed upon corn, roots, seeds, grass, or
such like. Fish not of the ravening kind.
But the Carpe, the Breame, the Tench, and the Roch, live naturally upon corn,
seeds, grass, worms, bodes, flies, and such like: and will not naturally
feed upon any other fish, neither has nature given them means so to do, for
that the foresaid devouring fish have only dog-teeth, or sharp teeth,
wherewith they bite and hold any other fish that they take: and when that by
griping and biting it, they feel it dead, and cease to struggle or strive,
then they swallow it down whole. The other kind do not so: but having teeth
only like unto man, broad and flat do grind and chew all their meat before
they swallow it: and it is as unnatural for the Carpe, Breame, Tench or Roch
to eat another raw fish, as it is for a sheep or a cow to eat raw flesh. The
sharp and devouring teeth in the Pike, Perch, Trought and Eele, are easily
seen and perceived, but so are not the flat grinding teeth in the other kind
of fish. Howbeit if you search diligently the head of the Carpe, Breame, or any
the other aforesaid of that nature, and of any bigness, when it is sodden you
shall find two nether jaws, having in each iaw a row of flat teeth, like to
the eye teeth in a man, and apt to grind and chew withal, with which two
nether jaws they grind their meat against a certain flat bone in the roof
of their mouth, or upper part of their throat, which is commonly called the
stone in the Carpes head, and is in steed of his upper iaw and teeth, and of
many thought to be a remedy for excessive bleeding at the nose for man. The
like is in the head of the Tench and Roch, although by reason of the smalnesse
it is not easy to be found. Of the same nature also is the Barbill, Cheuen,
Dace, Bleke, and river Roch: although I have not seen them usually in any
pond. Howbeit they will live and wex in a pond, especially the river Roch, but
not spawne, unless it have great store of watea running through it
continually, neither will the Trought spawne in any standing poole, but will
live and grow very fat and good, if the pond be of any greatness, as some five
or six acres of ground, or more, and that he may have good store of small fry
to feed on, and will also be very fat and good all the winter long, by reason
he does not spawne as aforesaid.

The best fish in my opinion is Carpe, Breame, Tench, and Perch: howbeit if
your pond be not above four or five acres of ground, a Breame will be five or
six years at the least, A Breame long in growing, and a great increaser.
before it be of any bigness to eat, as also they will ouer-store any pond
with fry, which is a great hinderance to the growth of your bigger fish. Having
stored your pond, as aforesaid, you shall find that the first year your fish
will spawne exceedingly. The first year your fish will spawne exceedingly.
Howbeit if any water run through your pond, your fry will very hardly be kept
in: for that all the beginning of the summer they will go away against the
stream: and in the latter end of the summer they will go away with the
stream, The nature of fish.
if they be not with very good grates kept in, and herein you are to use very
great diligence. And therefore your pond being full of water, it is good to
convey away the residue in some ditch, along hard by the one side of your pond,
casting the bank of your ditch toward the pond: the leuel of the water will
direct you where to make your ditch: so may your convey away your superfluous
water. No water to run through a pond in the Summer time.
If any water run through your pond, especially in the Summer time, it will
also make your fish lean with laboring against it, as it is their nature to
do, and also in manner impossible to keep in your fry.

A pond being thus ordered, and your fish therein feeding all the Summer time,
How to order your fish at sewing time.
it is requisite that about Hollantide next you sew your pond, taking out all
your fish: the best, and such as you mean to spend that winter, to put into
small ponds, or stews, whereas with a dragge you may take them again as you
need to spend them: the other store-fish you may put into the like pond, as
aforesaid, either new made, or one that has lien dry all the Summer before. To
preserve over many fry, is a hinderance to the owner.
Howbeit if you have any great number of fry, especially of Breame, it were
better to preserve but part of them, and the residue to put into some stew or
small pond with Pikes: To feed Pikes with your superfluous fry.
so shall you always have good Pikes, and also your Carpe, Breame, and Tench
will be very fat and good. If your ponds be not ouerstored with fry, your pond
being sewed, and your fish bestowed, it is good to let that pond you last
sewed, to lie as dry as you can by any means all that winter, and the next
summer until Michelmas: and then to fill it with water of the first flood that
happens about that time: and sew your other pond between Michelmas and
Hollantide, using the same as is before rehearsed. As for having any fish to
spend in the Summer time, it is requisite to trust to your angle, a bownet, a
tramell, or such like: by which means you shall seldom fail of some fish for
your spending. If you should keep any Carpe, Breame, or Tench in stews in the
Summer time, they will wex lean, unless you do feed them with corn: as
barley, sod pease, or oats, or any other kind of corn. It may be hear
expected I should set down some proportion of number of fishes, having regard
to the greatness of your pond, and the greatness of the fish. Surely as the
fertility of some soil will nourish double the number of cattle that some
others will do, even so of pondes: if the soil be a fat clay, or other good
ground, it will nourish double the number of fish, that a lean barren heath
ground or dry sand will do. Howbeit the ordering of a pond in such sort as
aforesaid, and to lie dry every other year, will much mend any ground every
year, especially if in the Summer time when it lies dry, cattle, and
especially sheep may feed and lie therein, as hereafter shall appear by good
reason. Howbeit in an indifferent soil, I suppose you may well keep four
hundredth Carpe, The proportion of fish according to the greatness of your pond.
Breame, or Tench, for every acre, supposing your fish to be eight or ten
inches in length: and the greater your pond is, the greater number in
proportion it will keep: as for example: a pond of four acres will much
better keep 1600. fish, then a pond of two acres will keep eight hundredth of
like fish: for every hundredth of such fish as aforesaid, you may keep half a
hundredth Perches in the same pond, after you are once sufficiently stored of
fry, and not before: for that a Perch is a very great deuourer of fry,
especially of Carpe. I have seen in the belly of a small Perch sixteen or
seventeen small Carpe fry at once: but having sufficient of fry, they do
good in a pond, rather then otherwise: and will themselves be very fat and
good. The Pike is in no wise to be admitted into your great ponds, with your
other fish, he is so great a deuourer, and will grow so fast having his fill of
feeding, that being but eight or ten inches in the beginning of Summer, he may
be eighteen or twenty inches before Hollantide, at what time he will eat
more fish every day, then will suffice a man, and will feed only of Carpe
before any other fish, if there be Carpe fry in the pond. Howbeit having two
such ponds as aforesaid, made with heads, you shall every year have
sufficient store of reffuse fry, to feed some good number of Pikes withal,
wherewith they will be made very thick, sweet, and well grown, but not
fat, unless you have some store of small Eeles, wherewithal to feed them
some month or six weeks before you take them to spend: for that only that
feeding upon Eeles, being cut in pieces, so as they may stir in the water, and
yet not be able to escape away, will make the Pikes very fat.

The causes moving to have a pond lie but one year with water and fish, Causes
why ponds should lie dry every other year.
and the next year empty and dry, do hereafter ensue. First by that means
you shall avoid superfluous number of fry, which greatly hinder the growth
and goodness of your greater fish. Secondly, by that means you shall so
proportion your pond, that it shall never be ouerstored. Thirdly, by that
means your water shall always be excellent sweet, by reason it ouerfloweth
such ground as has taken the sun and air all the summer before: wherein
also if cattle do feed, or especially be fodered and lie, their dung and
stale together with the natural force of the Sun at the next Spring
ouerflowing with water, will breed an innumerable number of flies, and bodes
of diverse kinds and sorts, which in a fair sunshine day in March or April,
you shall see in the water as thick as motes in the Sun, of which bodes and
flies the fish do feed exceedingly. Also great store of seeds, of weeds, and
grass, shedding that summer that it lies dry, is a great feed to your fish
the next Summer after, when it is overflowed with water. The said bodes do for
the most part breed of the blowings and seed of diverse kinds of flies, and
such like living creatures in the summer, when your pond lies dry, in the
dung of cattle, and otherwise: and take life and being the ne^t Spring time by
the natural heat of the Suune, together with the moisture of the fat and
pleasant water, as aforeiaid: for surely many and sundry kinds of flies that
fly about in the air in Summer time, do take life in the water ouerflowing
such ground where they have been left by the blowings and feed of other flies.
And I have often observed and beheld in a sunshine day, in shallow waters,
especially where any dung or fat earth is therewith mingled: I say, I have
seen a young fly swim in the water too and fro, and in the end come to the
upper crust of the water, and assay to fly up: howbeit not being perfitly ripe
or fledge, has twice or thrice fallen down again into the water: howbeit in
the end receiving perfection by the heat of the sun, and the pleasant fat
water, has in the end within some half hour after taken her flight, and
flied quite away into the air. And of such young flies before they are able
to fly away, do fish feed exceedingly. Fourthlie, your fish shall every
year have feeding in proportion to their increasing in bigness: for it
stands with reason, that Carpes or other fish of twelve inches long, will
require more feeding then so many of si^e inches long will do: but chiefly by
means aforesaid of sewing every year, What makes sweet fish.
you shall have opportunity to be rid of the great increase of fry, and your
greater fish more sweet and fat then any other has by far.

Fish will live in a manner in any pond, and without any feeding, or such other
industry as aforesaid: but then they are forced to live upon the muddie earth
and weeds that grow in such ponds, and being so fed, they will eat and
taste accordingly: and there is as great difference in taste between fish that
is kept as aforesaid, Great difference in goodness of pond fish.
and other fish that is kept in a standing pond without feeding or other
industry, as is between the flesh of a Lark, and the flesh of a Crow or
Kite. And I suppose that that is the cause that most men are out of love with
all pond fish, because they never tasted of any good or well ordered pond fish.

That Summer that your pond lies dry, as aforesaid, if there happen to grow
any sower or rank weeds therein (as many times there will) it is good to cut
them up, and being dried with the sun, to burn them, so shall you have
sweet grass, or young weeds come in their place, that cattle will feed on,
and also the heat of the sun shall much amend your ground. Also trench out
the water, that it may lie as dry as may be possible: and if you can plough
it, and have Summer corn therein, as bucke or barley that Summer that it lies
dry, I think it very good.

I have heard the common people in the fenne countries affirm, and that very
earnestly, that their fishes do feed of ashes, by reason that in a dry
Summer, when much of their fenne grounds lie dry, and are pastured with
cattle, then toward the winter time such rank grass, sedge, reeds, or
weeds, as the cattle do leave uneaten, they will burn them with fire, to the
end that the next Summer such old sedge, reeds, or weeds, may not annoy the
coming up of young and better sedge, reeds, or grass. And the common people
find by experience, that after such a dry Summer, as aforesaid, all the next
Winter the water ouerflowing those grounds, their fish will be exceeding fat
and good: and therefore (say they) surely the fish do feed upon the ashes of
the weeds, and such like burnt as aforesaid. But the truth is, in such a dry
Summer as aforesaid, the cattle then feeding in such grounds as then lie dry,
do bestow therein great quantity of dung and stale, wherein is bred great
abundance of such bodes, flies, and worms, as aforesaid: as also the natural
and lively heat of the Sun piercing such grounds, does make the same
pleasant and fat, and to bring forth the next Summer many herbs and weeds,
the seeds of which do yield unto fishes very great food and nourishment, and
not the barren dry ashes, as before is imagined.

He that cannot have such ponds as aforesaid, The second sort of ponds.
and having but some small mote or other horse-pond in his ground, that
stands continually full of water, may often times have a dish of good fish,
if he will bestow some feeding of corn, How fish may be fed in such ponds.
as sod barley or pease, cheese-curds, or blood of beasts, to throw into his
pond in the summer time, for that fish being not of the ravening kind, do then
only feed. But it behooves to do it in such sort, as he may be assured that
the fish do eat it, and that he be not beguiled with duckes, geesse, or such
like. He may therefore make a square thing of some two foot broad, of Elm
boords, with ledges some three or four inches deep, and therein sincke his
corn with a line tied unto the four corners thereof, so that he may pull it
up and let it down when he pleases, and after the fish have once found the
use thereof, you shall well perceive they will haunt it. Sweet grains in small
proportion are also good, but if they be once sower or mustie, the fish will
not feed on them, and also they will stench your pond. The Tench good to be
fed.
The Tench of all other fish will best like to be fed, as aforesaid, and will
be very good, sweet, and fat, and next unto him the Carpe.

It is with fish as it is with other creatures, for like as one acre of ground,
will hardly feed one ore throughout the year, to keep him in good plight and
fat, yet so much corn or hay you may lay in that acre, that you may feed
therein ten or twenty oxen. And even so, although one acre of ground
ouerflowed with water, will naturally, and if it self keep but 300. or four
hundredth Carpes, or other fsshes: yet so much feeding you may add thereunto,
that it may keep three thousand or four thousand in as good plight as three
hundredth or four hundredth without such feeding. The great increase of fish.
Of all creatures fish are the greatest increasers in number: and so great is
the increase of them, that I do verily suppose the Sea it self and all fresh
rivers likewise, would be ouerstored if they did not devour one another in very
great quantity: yet have they many other enemies besides fish, that do
continually pray and feed upon them: as, for pond fish, first the small Eeles,
when the Carps, Breams, Tenches, or Roches do lay their spawne in eggs in
spawning time, you shall many times see six, Eeles and afterward Perches great
deuourers of fry.
ten, or more small Eeles follow them, and as the spawne falls from them they
eat it, as also Duckes will do the like. Afterward so son as it is quick,
the Eele, and especially the Perch, will devour it in great quantity before it
be able to swim any thing fast. After that, it is food for the Kings fisher,
Fish have many enemies to destroy them.
all kind of shel-foule, the Bitture, the Hearne, the Cormorant, and the
Ospray. And when it is at the greatest, as if it be a Carpe of three foot
long, the Otter will kill him: otherwise all ponds would quickly be ouerstored,
if it also go not away with floods, which is greatly to be foreseen. I
remember myself did once put three spawning Carps into a pond that was some
three acres of ground, and with them nine or ten milters about February, and in
November next following I did sew the same pond, and of those breeders I had
9000. and upwards of Carpe fry, notwithstanding all the foresaid enemies: and
surely a Breame will increase in number much more. How fish do breed.
The ingendring and breeding of the like fish as aforesaid, I have noted to be
in this manner, sometime in May, and sometime in June, as the season happens
to fall out apt for generation, the water by Gods providence having then a
natural warmth to perform the same, the male fish by course of nature, will
chase about the female, seeking copulation: and as in all other creatures, so
in this the female seems to shun and fly from the male, so that you shall
see three, four, or five male fish chase one female, and so hold her in on
every side, that they will force her to swim through weeds, grass, rushes,
straw, or any such like thing that is in the pond, wherein she being entangled
and wearied with their chasing, they find opportunity to join in copulation
with her, mingling their milt with her spawne, sometime one of them, sometime
another, at which time the spawne falls from her like little eggs, and
sticks fast to the said weeds: some eight, nine, or ten days after which
time it quickneth, takes life, and has the proportion of a fish: yea two or
three days before it quicken, if you take such an egg and break it upon
your nail, you shall perceive the proportion of a fish therein. After it is
quick it moves very little for some fortnight or three weeks, and then it
gathers together into sculles by the shore side, where the water is shallow:
howbeit the Tench fry will lie scattering in the weeds, and not flote in
sculles.

And if there run any water from your pond, you shall not possible keep Eeles
out of the same, they will come into the same against the stream. Their manner
of breeding is very uncertain and unknown, The breeding of Eeles very
uncertain and unknown.
but undoubtedly they are bred in the brackish or sea water: and at the first
full Moon in May they begin to come into all great rivers, and out of great
rivers into lesser rivers, and out of those lesser rivers into all small
brooks, rils, and running waters, continually against the stream all the
beginning of Summer: as likewise with the first flood that comes about
Michelmas, they covet to go down the stream, and will not stay until they
come into the deep and brackish waters, if they be not taken or let by the
way. I know that some hold opinion that they breed of the May deaw, for proof
whereof they say if you cut up two turfes of grassie in a May morning, and clap
the grassie sides of those turfes together, and so lay them in a river, you
shall the next day find small young Eeles between the said turfes: and so you
shall indeeede, for the most part do. Howbeit not therefore they do breed of
the deaw, for if you likewise take a little bottle of sweet hay, straw, or
weeds, that have had no May deaw fallen thereon, and sink it in a river at
that time of the year, and take it out suddenly the next morning, and you
shall find likewise many small Eeles therein. The reason is, at that time of
the year that river being full of such young Eeles, they will creep into
every thing that is sweet and pleasant. Eeles come from the brackish and sea
water.
And for proof that the said Eele fry do come out of the brackish waters
against the stream into all other Rivers, Rils, and Ponds, if in the beginning
of the Summer you do diligently observe at the tail of any water Mill, In the
river of Seuerne I have seen great store of these small Eele fry taken going
against the stream, when they are no greater then a wheat straw.
especially near unto any great river, you shall see them in great numbers
early in the morning, and late in the evening, in June or July at the chinckes
and holes in the floud-gates to labor exceedingly to get up against the
stream, although they be often times driven back with the violence of the
water, yet cease they not still again to labor until they have gotten up
against the stream. The like do Salmonds, Eeles go against the stream, and so
does most other fish in the spring time.
Barbils, Troutes, Roch, Date, Cheuin, Gogions, and other river fish at Weres
and Dammes in great rivers, for that they covet to spawne in shallow waters,
and not in the deep: the which thing when they have performed, Fish covet to
go down the stream in the latter end of the Summer.
they then presently covet to go down the stream until they come unto the
brackish or sea water.

It may be here expected that I should set down the baits to be used for all
kind of pond-fish, Baits for every several fish.
for all seasons of the year, but therein I have not had such exact knowledge
to prescribe unto the diligent practiser any better then himself can find out.
I have found that the Carpe, Breame, and Tench, being used to feeding, will
bite at the red worm, paste made of dough, or the grasshopper, most part of the
Summer season. The Tench also is a fish very easily taken in a Bownet, and
whosoever has of them in his ponds, it behooves him to take great heed that
he be not deceived by lewd people.

The shallow or pond Roch with the red fins will spawne in most ponds. The
river Roch and Dace will not spawne in any pond: howbeit if your pond be near
any river, and that there run any water from it in the Summer time, you shall
find that they will come into the same against the stream, where you would
think it impossible: and so will Pickerell and Perch. And I have heard some
affirm very constantly, that water-fowle do often times bring the spawne of
such fish in their feathers into ponds. Many opinions concerning breeding of
fish.
Others will affirm, that the heat of the Sun may draw up such spawne of
fish before it be quick, and so the same taking life in the moist air, may
afterward fall down in a shower of rain into a pond: the reason that has
moved many men so to think, is, because they have found such kind of fish in
their ponds, where they are sure that they nor any other have ever put any
such. Howbeit surely the same have come into the said ponds against the
stream, as aforesaid, in Summer floods, and not by any such other monstrous
generation as is last before mentioned. And somewhat to say of the growth of
fish: as nature may be helped by art in other things, so likewise in fish very
much: for that a Carpe may with feeding the first year be brought to be six
inches long, and the next to twelve or fourteen inches, whereas in ordinary
ponds without feeding, they will hardly be brought to be fourteen inches in
five or six years.

I do not think that ground would yield unto the owner any other way so much
benefit, as to be converted into such ponds with heads as is before mentioned,
if only fish were spent upon the days by law ordained for that purpose in
this Realm: the which thing if it were observed, no doubt would turn this
Realm to incredible benefit, many and sundry ways. But now those that should
spend such fish, will rather bestow their money in Rabbets, Capons, or such
like. Howbeit I am persuaded that fish used as aforesaid, and dressed whilst
it is new taken, is very wholesome for man's body, and also more delicate then
most kinds of flesh.

A Breame will be very long in growing, before it come to any bigness, A
Breame very slow in growth.
as commonly five or six years before he be a foot long, but if your water
be not very great, he will hardly be a foot long in ten years.

The Tench will grow and prosper very well: howbeit will never be so great as
some Carpes will be.

I have seen a Carpe of xxxiii. Carpe.
inches between the eye and the forke of the tail, but never any Tench above
two and twenty inches of like measure.

The Pike will grow exceedingly, if he may have his fill of other small fish:
as, the first year to twelve or fourteen inches, the next to twenty or two
and twenty inches.

And whosoever has ponds with heads as aforesaid, shall every year very
conveniently feed some good number of Pikes in some ditch or small stew with
refuse fry.

If you have such ponds as aforesaid, often or twelve acres of ground or more,
near any river where Troughts are, Troughts may be kept in ponds.
you may get Troughts to put into such ponds with your other fish, so there be
no Pikes amongst them. Howbeit when you come to sew your pond, and that the
water comes any thing near the mud, your Troughts will then die: yet have I
seen them grow exceedingly in such a pond in one year, and to be very fat and
good: howbeit they must be very charily handled in the carriage, and a few of
them carried in a great deal of fair and clean water, and that in cold
weather, and may not be handled with hands, but in a hand-net very charily: and
so likewise are all other fish to be used, especially such as you mean to
keep for store.

If you have Carpes in small ditches, in the month of March, at what time
Todes do engender, the Tode will many times covet to fasten himself upon the
head of the Carpe, and will thereby inuenime the Carpe, in such sort that the
Carpe will swell as great as he may hold, so that his seals will stand as it
were on edge, and his eyes stand out of his head near half an inch, in very
ugly sort: and in the end will for the most part die thereof: and it is very
dangerous for any person to eat of any such Carpe so inuenimed.

It is not sufficient that fish be alive and swim away when they are put into
a pond, Fish to be charily handled in the carriage.
but if they be bruised or take heat in the carriage, they will be long before
they recover again and fall to their feeding, and sometime never recover, but
after long pining and sickness, do in the end die also.

The Carpe of all pond fish will abide most hardness in carriage: The Carpe
will abide most hardness.
next to him the Tench, then the Breame, Pike, and Perch. A Carpe in the winter
time may be carried alive in wet hay or grass that is sweet for the space of
five or six hours.

If you carry any fish in water, let not the Tench or Eele be carried among them,
Tenches and Eeles not to be carried with other fish.
because they cast great store of slime, which will choke and kill your other
fish, especially Pike or Perch.

A Pike will hardly feed of any thing except it stir and be alive, but the
Perch and Eele will feed of the small guts of sheep being cut, or of any
garbage of Chickens, Coneys, or such like, and of blood of beasts.

The Tench, Perch, and Eele, being used to be fed, will not lightly fail to
bite at an angle anytime the Summer half year.

The feeding of fry the first year will make them quickly past many dangers,
as of being past danger of eating of some other fishes and fowls, as also past
danger of going away at grates, or at the holes of water rats in banks. Also
they will be of a larger and greater growth then ever they will be not being
fed: and it behooves to feed them with such food as they are able to feed
on: as, the first month with otemeale, or some other meal sodden, and being
cold may be like a gelly in thickness, a very little in quantity to be laid in
shallow places, where only the fry do haunt, and not the greater fish. A
Carpe fry will begin to feed when he is not above an inch long, at what time
also they will begin to gather together in sculles after some fortnight or
three weeks, you may then make their meat thicker, and increase in quantity
as your fry be of ability to eat it, giving to every kind of fry such
feeding as his nature requires.

It is not good to handle any kind of fry whilst it is very young and
tender, or at least wise not in hands, but in some small mashed hand-net, that
is flat and not deep like a bag or a sack, and a few at once, that they
rub not one upon another.

The second year you may feed your fry with sodden barley or malt steeped
in water, and the third year with sodden pease: for like as any kind of
beasts, especially such as chew not the cud, do take more nutriture out of
sodden corn, then out of corn being raw: so fishes being of nature more cold
then other creatures, take less nutriture of raw corn then any other
creatures do. And if you feed your fish with raw corn, you shall find it come
from them in their dung not half concocted, whereby a great part of the
feeding thereof is lost and does not good. It may be demanded if it will quite
the cost, to have fish in this sort fed. Surely if corn be not excessive
dear, it will bear the charges very well: for that a small quantity of corn
will suffice a great many of fish. Howbeit the other way before mentioned, with
ponds with heads, and to lie dry every other year, is less troublesome, and
will breed very excellent, good, sweet, and fat fish: so that they be not
ouerstored, although they have no feeding by hand.

The more that a pond lies open unto the Sun, the air, and the winds, the
better it is for your fish.

The leaves of any kind of trees, but especially of oak, falling into any pond,
is noisome to the fish, and so is the green boughs of oak, or any other wood
except willow*

The haunt of cattle unto any pond is very good, and nourishing to the fish,
especially of kine and oxen, and chiefly when such cattle do feed where corn
has been newly mown or reaped, for that therewil then remain in their dung
much corn and seeds of grass, which the fishes being not of the ravening
kind do feed on.

The fish that be not of the ravening kind, do feed little or nothing in the
winter time, but do lie either in holes in the banks, or in weeds in the
bottom of the ponds, to shun the extremity of cold air.

The ravening kind do feed in the winter season, although nothing so much as
in the Summer season.

Some will hold opinion that the Pike will not eat the Perch, because of his
sharp finnes, but I have often times seen two or three small Perches in the
belly of a Pike, and likewise in the belly of an Eele. And I have likewise
seen a Pike choked sometime with eating of a Perch, when as he has swallowed
the Perch with the tail foremost.

But the Pike will not lightly meddle with the Perch if there be any store of
other kind of feeding for him in the pond of other small fish.

It is also requisite that the Pike be helped, so that he labor not over much
in chasing of his pray before he take it, as to have the tails of the small
fish cut off, when you throw them into the stew or small pond unto your Pikes,
to the end they may with the more ease take them, The Perch and Eele will feed
of blood of beasts as aforesaid, and likewise of the small garbage of sheep
and such like being cut small, and also of small fry of fish, either dead or
alive.

THE PREFACE CONCERNING FRVITE.
IF the benefit arising unto the commonwealth through the abundance of fruit
were well weighed and pondered, there would be laws established for the
increase and maintenance thereof throughout this Realm. Many countries as
Gloccster-shire, Hereford-shire, Worcestershire, great part of Kent and Sussex
are so replenished with fruit, that it serves the poorer sort not only for
food a great part of the year, but also for drink the most part of the
year. I have known in those countries many men that have 12. or twenty
persons vprising and down lying in their houses, that do not spend most years
two quarters of malt for their drink (but only cider and perry) and also do
yearly sell great quantity. And there is no doubt but in most countries in
England there might be the like, if men would generally plant fruit, and
notwithstanding take as great commodity in effect by pasturing or earing of
their ground as they now do. But in many places the short estate that men have
in their holdings, and the discommoditie they find in stealers, do discourage
them. Howbeit if men would generally plant in their hedge-rowes, balkes and
other places, it would be a very small matter to any one man, although poor
folk did now and then take some part of the same. Howbeit it were very
necessary that some law were established to punish such offenders, not so much
in respect of the value of the thing, as in that it discourageth men to set and
plant fruit, and that respect were had to Moses Law, viz. that so long as the
same extends but to the filling of their bellies to expel hunger, it is the
more to be borne withal: but if they shall also carry away to any value, there
is no reason but that it should be severely punished. I am also persuaded that
cider and perry is very wholesome for the bodies of natural English people,
especially such as do labor and travel. It is also by experience found to be
very good to furnish ships withal for long voyages by sea, for that a small
quantity thereof will relish and give good taste unto a great deal of water:
and very great commodity might arise to this Realm, if we were able to spare
malt to serve the Low countries withal, or rather the same being made into
bear, for that our Themes water does for that purpose pass any other water
whatsoever: which thing in time might be very commodious unto our Prince in
respect of custom, and likewise to the whole Realm, in respect of maintenance
of Navigations by transporting the same, besides other commodities not here to
be spoken of.

CERTAIN EXPERIMENTS CONCERNING FRVITE, AS FOLLOWS.
FOR planting of any great quantity of fruit it is necessary first to sow in
some bed (being before hand well trenched two foot deep, A nurcery of plants
and grafts.
and the earth broken small and laid light but not dunged) the kernels of
apples, crabs, or pears. The kernels of apples may be gotten in some good
quantity of such as make apple pies to sell in markets or market towns. The
keruels of crabs or pears, are to be picked out of crabs that are stamped for
veriuyce, or pears ground or stamped for perry: which kernels being sown in
such beds as aforesaid, being kept from cropping of cattle or Coneys, and also
kept with weeding, will in two years be ready to remove and to be set in beds
three foot asunder one way, and a foot the other other way, the body being
cut off half a foot above the ground, in which beds having stood one year,
they may then be grafted with what fruit you please, a handful above the
ground is best grafting, which beds being kept with weeding, you may also
commodiously plant strawberies under your grafts. Within three or four years
after the grafting, they will be ready to remove into an Orchard, where you may
plant them to continue: but if you mean to plant them in your hedge-rowes in
your ground where cattle comes, they had need to be of six years growth
after the grafting, because you may then the more conveniently tie bushes about
them, or other provision to keep them from cattle: but the wild choke pear
that is never grafted, will make very good perry.

Also one other way to plant an Orchard may be done by planting of small
crab-stockes in beds in some nurcery as aforesaid, three foot asunder one way,
and one foot the other way, the ground in the said beds being first trenched
two foot deep, and the mould laid light, and the stock cut off half a foot
above ground: and the next year the same to be grafted close by the ground, or
at the most four inches above the ground, to the end that if the first
grafting happen to fail, it may be again grafted the second time. Howbeit
some also do use to graft five or six foot high, and upon great old
stocks, the same is not greatly amiss: howbeit the other way is far better
as I take it, for that the siences so grafted five or six foot high, are many
times broken down with fowls lighting on them, and many times broken down
with the wind in the joint when they are 3. or 4. years old, which is a great
displeasure unto the owner.

Above all things you must foresee, An especial note to be observed.
that the ground of your nurcerie or orchard be not naturally over wet or
moist. It cannot lightly be too dry, for that the roots will naturally run
downwards, until they come unto sufficient moisture: but if the root of any
plant be once set too deep, he cannot help himself: it is against nature for
the root to grow upwards, but will rather grow mustie and die.

The third way to plant an Orchard, is by setting of slips of trees of cider
fruit, which is the speediest and readiest way in shortest time to have store
of such fruit. But that kind of setting does seldom prosper but only in some
few especial kind of cider fruit. As also an Orchard so planted, will not
continue above forty, or at the most fifty years, but it will decay again.

In planting of an Orchard the greatest care is to be had, Wet grounds unfit
for an Orchard.
that the ground be not too wet: for that a tree planted in such ground cannot
prosper: or if it grow, it will not bear other then spotted and cappard
fruit, either apple, pear or plumme, neither will it shoot out or grow in
any good sort. If your ground be naturally wet, it must be helped with making
of trenches between every row of trees, so as the water may draine away, at
the least three foot deep: and whereas the ground is inclined to moisture,
you are to set your trees very shallow, as half a foot deep, and rather to
raise a hillock of earth about your tree root, then to set your tree too deep
near the water. An especial matter to be noted in planting of any trees
whatsoever.
And here note, that every ground has an upper crust of earth, which by the
natural heat of the Sun, and pleasantness of the air piercing the same, is
made more fruitful then the residue of the earth is: which upper crust in some
grounds is a foot, some two foot, and in some three foot deep: also in some
grounds not above half a foot deep. And under the same upper crust is either
a hot chalk, a dry sand, a barren gravel, or a cold lean clay, or lome, or
such like. It is therefore requisite that you set your young tree in such sort,
as that the roots thereof may run and spread in that upper crust, for that if
you set him any deeper, you spoil all.

In many places in a chalk ground, where such crust as aforesaid is very
shallow and not past half a foot deep, you shall see most of the roots of
the Elmes Ashes, and other trees there growing, to run naturally even three
or four inches above the earth: which thing they do to shun the extreme heat
of the chalk. The like experience shall you also see in a wet or moorish
ground, a great part of the root of great trees to run also above the ground,
for that they do naturally shun the extreme wet and cold of such grounds.

The fattest and fruitfullest ground is not best for fruit, for that the trees
growing in such ground will be very subject to be eaten with cankers, as also
the fruit will be much wormeaten.

I suppose the best ground for an Orchard is a wheat ground, or that which is
as it were a mixture of clay and sand, but in no wise inclined to wet or
springs of water.

If you plant your trees twenty foot one way and thirty foot the other, Many
men are at great charge^ in planting of Orchards, and yet can have no good
fruit, only by reason their trees are at the first set too deep: howbeit do
not perceive the reason thereof.
you may then very conveniently either plough broad ridges, or mow your
Orchard between every rank of trees: and such plowing will also do good unto
the roots of the trees, especially if you turn your ground upward unto the
roots of your trees some three or four plowings together, making your forrow in
the midst between every rank of trees, especially whereas the ground is
inclined to wet.

It is also requisite that the place where you set your tree, be dug wide
and deep, to the end that the roots may have loose earth to run into: by
which means the root spreading and increasing, it will send out the more
nourishment and strength into the top.

Also when you plant your young trees in your Orchard, it is requisite to cut
off all the top, otherwise he will be in danger to die the next Summer, by
reason the root cannot the first year be able to give nourishment unto many
boughs and branches. Many covet to have their trees six or seven foot high
before they branch out in top, but I have found very great inconvenience in so
doing, for that when such trees come to bear fruit, the bodies will not be
able to sustain the tops, but that they will bend down, and often times
break in sunder with the weight of fruit: but to branch at some four foot
in height, I take to be the best, especially where comes no cattle to crop
them.

In my opinion there were no fruit to be compared unto the Pippin, if it were
not so subject unto the canker as it is. There be many kinds of good apples,
howbeit will not bear past once in five or six years to any purpose. Some
other kinds will bear every second year exceeding full. Of both which sorts
I have diverse kinds, howbeit cannot give proper names to every of them. The
good bearing fruit is fittest for cider, so it be also naturally moist and not
dry. Howbeit the pear makes the more delicate drink then the apple will do:
and I have seen some perrie of that strength, that it will warm the stomach
even like white wine, and taste as pleasantly. And I am verily persuaded, that a
ground planted with wild pears otherwise called choke pears, would be very
beneficial unto the owner: for that such kind of fruit is fittest for perrie,
as also for the most part does bear very full every year: and until your
trees be of some ten or twelve years growth, you may take commodity by
ploughing or mowing your ground, and grasing the same with horses, and
afterward by mowing and grasing the same with any other cattle, especially if
you set your trees twenty foot asunder one way, and thirty foot another
way, as aforesaid.

The Pear will prosper in a ground inclined to wet better then the apple will
do.

There is a disease in trees, which is called a canker, whereunto the pippin
chiefly is greatly subject, and the same does spoil many trees. I know no
better remedy for the same, then to cut it cleave out in the winter time,
which oftentimes does help the same, so that the bark will again ouergrow
the sore, and do well: but if it have once gone more then half about the tree,
it will hardly be ever recovered: and for the most part the best and most
delicate fruit is most subject to this infirmity. It may be here expected I
should treat of all kinds of grafting, as to graft in the cleft, in the leaf,
in the noch, or otherwise: but surely for apples, pears, or most kind of
plummes, I have found to graft in the clift some four inches above the ground
to be the best. Howbeit the Abricocke plumme, the vine, and such other as have
great store of pith, they are fittest to be grafted in the leaf, or eye (as
the call it.) The third way to graft in the noch, the cyent must be in effect
as great as the stock, and such grafts for the most part grow to be top
heavy, and therefore that kind of grafting to no great purpose in my opinion.

Some writers teach, that apples may be grafted upon the willow, the Elm, the
Ash, Alder, and such others: but a man had better be without such fruite-trees
in his Orchard then to have them, for that they will have a taste of the stock
that they are grafted on. An apple is not good to be grafted, but upon the
stock of the wild apple or crab, as likewise the pear and warden upon the
wild pear stock.

If you graft a Pear or a Warden upon a white thorn, it will be final,
hard, cappard, and spotted.

The Medler is good to be grafted upon the white thorn.

The Quince is best to be planted of the wild siences that grow out of the root
of other Quince trees, and so likewise the Philbard.

The Chestnut and Walnut are to be set of Nuts: and besides the commodity of the
fruit, do also become very good timber.

The Chestnut timber will outlast the heart of oak, to lie either always wet or
always dry, or sometime wet and sometime dry.

The perry will not last well above one year, but the cider will last good two
or three years.

FINIS.

