THE AMENDMENT OF LIFE, COMPRISED IN four Books: Faithfully Translated
according to the French Coppie.

Written by Master John. Tassin, Minister of the word of God at Amsterdam.

MATH. 3. v. ^. and 4. v. 7. Amend your lives for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand.

LONDINI Impensis Georg. Bishop. 1595.

To the chief Magistrates and Governors of the Town of Amsterdam: Grace and
peace from God the Father, and from his Son Jesus Christ, our only Savior.
MY very good Lords, as Saint John propounds unto us two sorts of
children, of whom he calls the one the children of God, and the other the
children of the devil: so does the holy Scripture plainly testify, that in
the day of judgment there shall be a marvelous difference between the one
and the other. For the one shall incomprehensibly and eternally be blessed, and
the other extremely and infinitely accursed and wretched. This difference which
shall then appear between the children of God and the children of the devil,
does advertise and admonish us, that there ought also to be a great difference
between them, even in this life. And in deed every one may well understand
that the way to heaven is one, and to hell another, and consequently that the
works and affections of Gods children are of one sort, and the works of the
children of the devil of another. Nevertheless, so brutish are many become,
that they never think upon this difference between the one and the other,
neither in regard of this life, nor of the life to come. Others thinking
slightly thereupon, do never take information of this difference, to understand
it: Others somewhat understanding it, are so dazeled with the glistering show
of the world, and so carried away with the lusts of the flesh, that they have
no care thereof: Yea even among the children of God, living in this perverse
world abandoned to all wickedness, we see very few that do make show of that
difference, that in this life should be between them and the children of the
devil. Now Saint Matthew in this sentence, Amend your lives, for the kingdom
of heaven is at hand: having comprehended the summarie of the first Sermons of
Jesus Christ and S. John the Baptist, does to this purpose teach us. First,
that all the duties of the children of God are contained in this word Amend:
also that the same is it that represents the difference between them and the
children of the Devil, in this life. Secondly, that the apprehension of the
kingdom of heaven to be so near us, ought mightily to induce us to
Amendment. Upon this consideration, to the end to correct the negligence, or
rather the brutishnes of men in this point, I have upon this argument framed
these four books: In the first, showing how many dangerous follies there are
that hinder man from Amendment. In the second, Wherein we are to Amend. In the
third, who ought to Amend: And in the last, have I laid down the causes that
should induce us to Amend our lives, gathered out of the names and attributes
of Jesus Christ, and out of this reason by him self set down, For the
kingdom of heaven is at hand: The whole tending to make us to understand and
indeed to practice the difference which even in this life ought to be between
us and the children of the Devil: to the end to hope with incomprehensible
joy to behold for our selves the most blessed separation that shall be
between them and us, when we shall be lifted up into the fruition of the
eternal glory that is prepared for us in the kingdom of heaven. And upon three
principal reasons have I resolved and emboldned my self to present and
ded^cate them to your Lordships. The first is general, comprised in three
points. First, in consideration of the seruent zeal and holy affection that
you do testify to the preservation and maintenance of the true and pure
religion: Secondly in regard of your justice and politic government,
administered with such discretion, wisdom and equity, that al your loving
Subjects are in duty to acknowledge and confess themselves to be blessed
therein: Thirdly in respect of your wonderful courtesy, which you vouchsafe
to extend to the faithful, fled into this town: who live under your
authority and government in as great case, liberty and freedom, as possibly
they might in their own native countries: Which example of your clemency is
also seconded by the marvelous humanity of your subjects toward those that
are harbored among them. The second reason is in respect of the French Church,
to the service whereof it has pleased God to call me. In that your Lo. have
permitted and authorized the holy public ministry with all things necessary
to the same: That you have provided the^ of a larg and convenient Church. That
you give maintenance to the^ for three ministers: Lastly that you exercise and
perform a verierare and true Christian charity to the poor of the same
Church. And this your wonderful charity, with other the virtues before noted,
do I here set down, first to the end that all and every the members of the
said French Church, may more and more perceive how deeply they are bound to
be your faithful and obedient subjects: Secondly that they may understand and
the more diligently put in practice their duty, in fervent prayer unto God for
your health and prosperity: Lastly, that all other Magistrates may in heart
be moved to imitate the example of those virtues that shine in your Lordships.
The last reason is particular to my self: in regard of the desire, that you
had to retain me to the service of this Church, which your selves vouchsafed
to testify, in that besides your liberality extended to the two other
ministers, you offered to provide me also both of a house and maintenance: As
in effect it pleased you at my coming to make demonstration of your favor,
liberality and affection toward me in that behalf. Whereupon all such graces
as God has vouchsafed to bestow upon me, being in reason and upon just cause
unto you due and vowed: I have formed and do acknowledge my self bound to
dedicate and present these my four books of Amendment of life unto you: to
the end that being published under your name, they may witness as well my
bounden duty unto you: as also my desire (according to my small ability) to
employ my self in the service both of the Church and your Lordships.
Beseeching God, most magnificent and virtuous Lords to maintain you in his
holy protection, and with his holy spirit to guide you in all your affairs,
with increase of all prosperity both spiritual and corporal. And
particulerly so far to favor me with his grace, as so to bless this small
work, together with the affection wherewith it is unto you presented, that
being acceptable to your Lo. It may especially redound to the advancement of
the kingdom of Jesus Christ. From your town of Amsterdam. This last of June.
1594.

Your most humble and obedient servant. John Taffin.

The Contents.
The first Book. Of man's follies, and that his wisdom consists in the
Amendment of the same.
That the word translated Amend you, signifies to be better advised. And why.
Chapter. 1. Follio. 1. Of the first folly, to think that there is no God.
Chap. 2. Follio. 4. Of the second folly, to think better of man then of God.
Chap. 3. Follio. 24. Of the third. To think to live ever. Chap. 4. Follio. 33.
Of the fourth. Not to know wherefore we do live. Chap. 5. Follio. 39. Of the
fifth. By the outward appearance to judge of man's felicity or misery. Chap.
6. Follio. 50. Of the sixth. To put more co^sidence in our enemies then in our
friends. Chap. 7. Follio. 59. Of the seventh. To think our selves wise. Chap.
8. Follio. 65.
The second Book. Wherein man ought to Amend.
That man knowing what Idolatry and superstition is, ought wholly to abstain
from all participation in the same. Chap. 1. Fol. 70. That it is not enough,
that we separate our selves from Idolatry: but that we must moreover join
with the Church of Christ. Chap. 2. Fol. 77. That we ought diligently to
frequent Sermons. Chap. 3. Fol. 80. That in duty we are to participate in the
holy Sacraments. Chap. 4. Fol. 91. That we ought to assist at common Prayer.
Chap. 5. Fol. 97. Of the duty concerning domestical and private prayers of
every faithful man. Chap. 6. Fol. 101 Of our duty in reading the holy
Scriptures. Chap. 7. Fol. 105. That we must put in practice the word of God.
Chap 8. Fol. 117. Of charity in general. Chap. 9. Fol. 120. Of Alms and
relief of the poor. Chap. 10. Fol. 125. Of Covetousness. Chap. 11. Fol. 152.
Of Pride and Ambition. Chap. 12. Fol. 168. Of Sumptuousness and excess in
apparel. Chap. 13. Fol. 183 Of Riot and superfluity in banquets and feasts.
Chap. 14. Fol. 192. Of Voluptuousness in general. Chap. 15. Fol. 199. Of
Drunkenness. Chap. 16. Fol. 205. Of Adultery and other whoredoms. Chap. 17.
Fol. 215. Of Daunces. Chap. 18. Fol. 228. Of games at hazard, as Cards and
Dice. Chap. 19. Fol. 249. Of Envy. Chap. 20. Fol. 255. Of Backbiting and
slaundering. Chap. 21. Fol. 262.
The third Book. Who ought to Amend.
Of the duties common both to the man and the wife. Chap. 1. Fol. Fol. 274. Of
the particular duty of the wife to her husband. Chap. 2. Fol. 285. Of the
particular duty of the husband to his wife. Chap. 3. Fol. 293. Of the duties
of fathers and mothers to their Children. Chap. 4. Fol. 297. Of the duties of
Children to their fathers and mothers. Chap. 5. Fol. 316. Of the duty of
Magistrates to their subjects. Chap. 6. Fol. 327. Of the duty of subjects to
the Magistrates. Chap. 7. 374. Of the duties of the ministers of the word to
their Church. Chap. 8. Fol. 385. Of the duties of the Church to her pastors.
Chap. 9. Fol. 416.
The fourth Book. Of the causes of Amendment.
The first cause why we should Amend, taken of the Authority of Jesus Christ
to command us. Chap. 1. Fol. 422. The second cause, is drawn from the name
Holy attributed to Jesus Christ: And does briefly entreat upon election,
reprobation and Gods providence. Chap. 2. Fol. 426 The third cause, derived
from the predestination and providence of God, entreated of in the former
Chapter. Chap. 3. Fol. 448 The fourth cause, grounded upon the name Emanuel,
attributed to Jesus Christ. Chap. 4. Fol. 464. The fifth cause, drawn from
these titles. Holy, Wonderful, a counsailer. The strong and mighty God. The
prince of peace: The father of eternity. Attributed to Jesus Christ. Chap. 5.
Fol. 473. The sixth cause, derived of these two names. Jesus, Christ. Chap 6.
Fol. 485. The seventh cause, gathered of the signification of this word, Amend.
Chap. 7. Fol. 497. The eight cause, taken of the reason added by Jesus Christ,
where he says. For the kingdom of heaven, or of God, is at hand. Chap. 8.
Fol. 499. The ninth cause taken hereof. That the kingdom of God which we
look for in heaven does admonish us that in this life we are strangers
pilgrims and trauelers, Chap. 9. Fol. 506. The tenth cause derived from the
kingdom of heaven which is in us. Chap. 10. Fol. 516 The eleventh cause, taken
of the holy ministry, called the kingdom of God Chap. 11. Fol. 520. The
twelfth cause taken hereof. That by the kingdom of heaven is signified the
blessed felicity of the children of God in heaven: The kingdom of God in us:
and the holy ministry. Chap. 12. Fol. 533. The thirtenth and last cause of
Amendment, derived of this saying of Jesus Christ, The kingdom of heaven is
at hand. Chap. 13. Fol. 540.
Faults escaped.
Page 40. line 2. for same Read sun. Pa. 79. l. 11. at the end. R. in heaven.
Pa. 124. l. 28. pronouncing. R. procuring. P. 162. l. 2. so plenty as, R. as
plenty of, P. 164 l. 37. hateh, R. loves. P. 180. l. 41. so to resist. R. so
to employ our forces to resist, P. 224 l. 2^. and 22. as also, R. otherwise, P.
257. l. 31. grounded upon, R. pining at, Ibidem l. 34. setting sure footing is
brought, R. pining away is worn, ib. l. 37. soul, R. ha^t, P. 259. at the end
of the page, read. at the good of others, and rejoices at their. P. 267. l.
27. show, R. shame, P. 295 l. 21. prone, R. reprove, P. 323. l. 22. grieved, R.
revealed, ib. l. 32. after mother, Re. to his Disciple John, P. 341. l. 22.
after should, R. not, and l. 40. after did, R. not, Pa. 387. l. 14. put out,
own, Pa. 403. l. 39. after delivered, R. to the death, P. 409. l. 16. path, R.
youth, P. 412. l. 41. passion, R. parson. P. 417. l. 14 carnal, R. eternal,
P. 428. l. 36. after ghost, R. to say, P. 450. l. 1. that, R. thereof but, P.
465. l. 39. after cleanse. R. our selves, P. 467. l. 20. we R. ye. P. 482. l.
25. after resolve, R. to walk, P. 496. l. 37. after that, R. never P. 498. l.
9. amend, R. be damned, P. 499. l. 29. best Re. least, P. 505. l. 41. after
if, R. we believe these things that, and l. 1. God. R. we. P. 513. l. 40. hand,
R. heart, P. 515. l. 4. wine R. wives, P. 519. l. 6. after this, R. joy. and l.
16. after retain, R. in us, P. 526. l. 36. after the, R. dark. and for dark.
R. Devil, P. 527. l. 8. sign R. Cyon. and li. 28. dead into, R. mortified in.
P. 534. l. 20. hands. R. heart.

OF AMENDMENT OF LIFE. The first Book. Of the foolishness of Man, and that
his wisdom consists in amendment of the same.
That the word translated Amend, signifies, to be better advised, and why.
Chap. 1.
IT is a matter worth the noting, that the whole sum of the first sermon of
Jesus Christ, as also of Saint John the Baptist, is by S. Matthew comprised in
these words, Amend your lives, Math. 3.2. Math 4.17
for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Hereby does the holy Ghost teach us,
that the first thing that is to be preached in the Church, and sounded into
our ears: that especially and above all things we are to learn in the
Gospel: whereupon principally we should set our hearts and minds: To be
brief, the same which we ought chiefly to practice, is this first sermon of
Jesus Christ, and of his forerunner Saint John, Amend your lives, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand. Now the word which the holy Ghost does ordinarily
use throughout the new Testament, and namely in this first sermon, whereby to
express Amendment, signifies understanding, advice, and wisdom, after the
knowledge of our error, corruption, and transgression. Thus the Amendment
whereto we are here exhorted, consists in this, that where before time we
have been so foolish and unadvised, as to follow our own corruptions, and so
to offend God, we may hereafter obtain understanding and sense, evermore
walking in the fear and obedience of God.

2 Out of this Sermon therefore, considering the property of the word which
Jesus Christ does use, we gather two things: the first, that it is an extreme
folly to live according to the flesh, and so to give over our selves to sin:
and contrariwise, that the beginning of wisdom is the fear of God, Psalm.
111.10. Proverb. 1.7
and walking in his ways. The second, that man naturally is inclined to this
folly: namely, to give himself over to his lusts, and consequently to offend
God: for otherwise it were in vain by so notable a reason to exhort him to
shun the same. As concerning the first point. The holy Scripture in many
places terms sinners fools, and sin ^^oli ^nesse. Moses foreshewing the
corruption and rebellion of he I raelites, Deuteronomy. 32.5
says thus: They have corrupted themselves toward God, they resemble not his
children, but are a froward and crooked generation. Iere. 4.22.
Do ye thus reward the Lord, O ye foolish people and unwise. My people (says
the Lord) are foolish, they have not known me, they are foolish children and
have no understanding. They are wise to do evil, but to do well they have no
knowledge. Again, See (says Saint Paul) that ye walk diligently, not as
fools, but as wise men. And writing to Titus, Titus 3.3.
he speaks more plainly, saying. We our selves were in time past unwise,
disobedient, deceived, serving the lusts and diverse pleasures, Prou. 1.22
living in malitiousnes and envy. Solomon in his Proverbs does usually so take
it. Wisdom (says he) cries out, O ye foolish, how long will ye love
foolishnes, and the scornful take their pleasure in scorning, and the fools
hate knowledge? And so in many other places, But that we may the better
understand what a foolishness it is to offend God: the holy Ghost, especially
in the old Testament, and sometimes also in the new, does signify this
Amendment, by conversion and turning to the Lord. Oh Israel, says the Lord by
Jeremy, Iere 4.1 Iere. 31.18
If you return, return unto me. Again, Convert me, O Lord, and I shall be
converted. Again, I desire not the death of a sinner, says the Lord, but
rather that he convert from his wickedness and live. Exech. 33.11
Convert ye, O ye house of Israel. Likewise sometimes in the new Testament, Be
ye better advised, that is to say, Amend, says S. Peter and S. John, Act.
3.19
and convert. And S. Paul says, that he showed them of Damascus and others,
that they should repent and turn to God, and do works worthy amendment of
life. Act. 26.20
This phrase of speech teaches us, that man's life resembles a pilgrimage,
wherein whosoever offends God, by walking after the world and the flesh, he
does (as it were) turn his back to God, to heaven, and to life: and goes to
the devil, to death, and to hell fire. And contrariwise, that converting and
turning to God by Amendment of life, he turns his back to death, to hell,
and to the devil: and goes to God, draws near to him, and directs his
course to heaven and to life everlasting. Is there therefore any greater
foolishnes than to offend God? that is to say, to turn from God and life
everlasting, and to go after the devil and death? If any man should
voluntarily call himself into the fire, or into some river, either stab
himself, or drink poison, men would not say that he were a fool, but rather
that he were frantike and besides himself: What shall we then say to those,
who willingly offending God, do cast themselves into hell fire, and into the
bottomless pit of eternal death? To the end therefore that we may amend, it
is requisite that we retire, convert unto God, and return to him. But how?
Even by ceasing to offend him, and by walking according to his word: for so do
we turn back from the devil, from death, and from hell, Let us, I say,
convert and turn unto God, yea, let us draw near unto him: yet as Saint
Austen says, not by changing of place, Prosper in his sentences out of S.
Austen.
for he is every where, but by alteration of manners: for, as he adds,
According as we grow like or unlike unto him, so do we either approach or she
back from him.

3 For the second point. This exhortation Amend, that is to say, Be ye wiser
and better advised, together with the reason thereunto added, whereby to induce
us so to do, do sufficiently, as is aforesaid, show that man of his own
nature is inclined to this folly and rage, namely, to apply himself to all
corruption and sin, and so for the amending of his life ought to become wiser
and better advised. Now notwithstanding we might note many examples of this
folly, yet at this present we will consider only of seven of the chiefest. And
in the mean time as the number of seven does commonly signify perfection, so
will we thereby declare that man is perfectly foolish, until he change his
mind, that he may amend. And these be the follies.

1. Not to believe that there is a God. 2. To account more of man than of God.
3. To think to live ever. 4. Not to know wherefore we live. 5. To judge of
man's felicity or misery by the outward appearance. 6. To believe our enemies
sooner than our friends. 7. To think our selves wise.
4 These seven follies are the cables of vanity, and the roapes that draw on
iniquity. Of these does Esaias say, Woe unto them that draw iniquity with
cords of vanity, Esa. 5.18
and sin, as with cart ropes. For by these cords and cables, he
understands certain false opinions and perverse imaginations, wherewith the
devil quenching in men all feeling of sin and apprehension of God, draws
them (as it were) with cords and cables to all iniquity, and consequently to
the pit of hell. Of these he sets down three examples. The first of
profane persons, scorners of God, who say, Let him make speed, let him have
his work that we may see it, and let the counsel of the holy one of Israel
draw near and come, that we may know it. Secondly, of those that call evil
good, and good evil* that make darkness light, and light darkness: that make
bitter sweet, and sweet bitter. Thirdly, of those that are wise in their own
conceits, and skillful in the consideration of themselves. The explaning
therefore of these seven follies before mentioned, may stand as a commentary and
opening of these cords and cables mentioned by Esaias, as also to show that these
follies tend only to persuade man that he is a beast, and that after his
death he is to attend neither good nor evil: thereby to stay all his thoughts
and affections upon this temporal life, to plunge him in the pleasures of the
world and the flesh, and consequently, to take from him all holiness and
religion. Inasmuch therefore as we are now to amend our lives, we must learn
to renounce these seven follies, and to be wiser hereafter.

Of the first Folly. Not to believe that there is a God. Chap. 2.
THe first and principal folly, is the same whereof the Prophet David
speaks, Psa. 14.1. and 53.1
speaks, saying: The fool has said in his heart that there is no God, Of
those that in their hearts do say thus, there be two sorts, the one
pronounce it with their lips, the other with their woorks. A^ for the Jews, of
whom David here speaks, they in their woorks showed, that their hearts did
say, that there is no God. And t^is does he note, where for proof thereof he
adds, They are corrupt, and become abominable. But among Christians there
are some (a matter of extreem terror) that say both in heart and mouth, that
there is no God. Yea, and this impiety has taken such hold of diverse, that
they will not stick to say it, and that not whisperingly, mumbling, or between
the teeth, but even with open throat. And in deed in many places they dispute
no longer of differences, concerning the hope of salvation and service of God,
but now the question is, whether there be a God. Yea, it is a common phrase,
when a man affirms that there is a God: Who did ever see him, that we may
believe him?

2 The sole representation of such a blasphemy might suffice to terrify our
hearts, and to make us to sweat even water and blood for anguish: That
Christiandome should afford any so abominable monsters as should deny God:
God, I say, not only the creator whom we may behold in his works, but also the
redeemer, that is to say: God revealed in the flesh, justified in the spirit,
1. Tim. 3 16
seen of Angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed upon in the world, and
lifted up into glory. This verelie is a just and terrible judgment which God
executes upon those, whose hearts and minds are plunged and so swallowed up in
the pleasures of the world, and the flesh, that they never think upon God, no
more then if there were none. It is a horrible vengeance that God lays upon
those, who to the end without remorse of conscience, to give themselves over
to their own abominations and corruption, do maliciously go about to choke up
these relics or remainders of the image of God, namely: That there is a God,
a providence, and a righteousness in God. As David also notes, Psalm. 10 4
that all the imaginations of the wicked do concur that there is no God. It
is the punishment that those men do deserve, who when they swear, for affirm
any thing, do spue out of their polluted lips this blasphemy, I renounce God.
To be brief. It is the payment wherewith God justly punishes the extreem
ingratitude of such as contemn the incomprehensible treasure of the doctrine
of the Gospel, treading under foot the most precious blood of Jesus Christ.
And himself has pronounced, that such people do deserve a more horrible
judgment then the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrha. Math 10, 15
It is also the last plague and persecution wherewith Gods children toward this
end of the world shall be tried: when these monsters shall scorn their
simplicity and constancy, in refraining from evil, upon their assured hope
in God, and for fear of his name.

3 But as there is no wound more mortal, than the same that plucketh forth
man's heart or soul, so is there no poison or pestilence of greater force,
suddenly in men to kill all faith, hope, and charity, with the fear of God,
and consequently to cast him headlong into the pit of hell, than to deny the
principle and foundation of all religion, namely, that there is a God. To the
end therefore to arm the elect against such an extreme and pernicious
temptation, and to make those that shall suffer themselves to be carried away
with so bitter a temptation, the more inexcusable in the day of judgment: we
will produce against these Atheists sundry witnesses, against whom no
exceptions can be taken: and first, all Jews and Christians, because they
allow of the old Testament: secondly, all men living: thirdly, all creatures,
as well those that have essence only, as those that with essence have life,
and those that with essence and life, have motion and feeling: and lastly man,
although he speak nothing, who besides his essence, life, and motion, is also
endued with reason. And in deed, the creation, preservation, and guiding of all
these creatures, do with a loud voice proclaim that there is a God. And
first we will begin with those that allow the old Testament to be the word of
God, and consequently with all Jews and Christians that are, or ever were. For
as in the old Testament, the testimonies that there is a God are most evident,
infinite, and of sundry sorts, so is it a desperate presumption and
impudency, to go about to deny that, which by so many millions both of Jews
and Christians have evermore been believed and confessed.

4 If these Atheists do say, that both Jews and Christians have all bin
deceived by believing the holy Scripture, whether of the old or new Testament,
and consequently all testimonies of the divinity therein contained: What book
have they so authentical or ancient as the Bible, wherewith they may, to the
contrary, prove that there is no God? Again, how can they shun the conviction
of their own consciences, which will force them to acknowledge that the holy
Scriptures proceeded from God, if they will consider but these reasons following.
First, they make no doubt whether the books attributed to Plato, Aristotle,
Polibius, Liuie, Demosthenes, Cicero, Homer, Virgil, and such others, were
written by those men to who^ they be attributed. What reason the^ have they to
demand whether the Bible were written by Moses, Joshua, Esdras, David, the
Prophets and Apostles? They also (at the least in general terms) do approve
the contents of the said profane books, whether for history or for doctrine.
With what malice are they then possessed, that should cause them to deny a
God, which is the principal and fundamental argument of all the books of the
Prophets and Apostles: especially considering that if this foundation should
be false, all the rest were but lies and vanity. Likewise, these men that
registered the holy Scriptures, never labored after the glory of man by
ostentation of any new invention: For all of them, even from Moses to the
Apostles, have had one and the same matter subject of their writings, namely,
this self same divinity. Neither have they sought after glory, reputation,
nobility of descent, or virtues: but have set down, (as in sundry places we
may perceive) even their own infirmities and transgressions, yea, sometimes
matter of reproach to themselves, and to their posterity. Profane writers do
ordinarily tend to magnify the virtues and valiant actions of men, to the end
to give the^ the praise: But the holy scripture every where tends to glorify
God, even in every thing that may beco^mendable in man: Showing that al
victories, deliverance, aduanceme^t to dignity, and virtue: to be brief, that
all goodness comes of God, and not of man.

5 As concerning the contents of the holy scripture, it is the same that only
lays open the very fountain of man's corruption, and that shows how great
and pernicious it is. The multitude and grieuousnes of his sins: The horrible
punishment that they deserve not only in this world, but in the world to come:
Only this holy Scripture teaches the assured remedy against these horrible
inconveniences: so that man feeling himself worthy of all misery, even of
eternal death, does notwithstanding find himself content and joyful in the
midst of the tribulations of this life, and blessed in the assured expectation
of an incomprehensible and eternal felicity. This Scripture laboreth wholly to
humble man, and to exalt God. It exhorts man to renounce wickedness, and to
apply him self to righteousness: to despise present and temporal goods, that
he may aspire to those that be spiritual, invisible, and eternal. To be
brief, it teaches as well true holiness and piety toward God, as true
love, peace and concord among men, earnestly exhorting them to these duties.
Who is it then that ought not to have a feeling of this in his own conscience,
that this holy scripture proceeds from God;

6 Moreover, in other books we find counsels, exhortations, and reasons to
persuade. Here we have express and precise commandments, whereby it appears
that a superior speaks, that gives commandment to his inferior: namely, God
to man. The holy Scripture prescribes a Law, not only to the body or in
external causes, but also to the spirit, cogitations and affections of the
soul: It is therefore the spirit of God that speaks, who only has dominion
over the soul, and knows the affections and passions of the same. In this
holy Scripture we find promises and threats of eternal weal and woe, as
well to the soul as to the body. It is then the Eternal and the Almighty,
that both promises and threatens: This holy Scripture teaches us the same
thing, which the creation of the world does: namely, that there is a God,
almighty, all-wise, most good and beneficial. He therefore that is the Auctor
of the creatures, is also the Auctor of the holy Scripture. In this Scripture
we find predictions of matters, which man's understanding could never foresee:
yea, the very time of the performance of the same is many times noted,
sometimes a hundred years, a thousand, yea, three thousand, before they came
to pass. Yet are they always fulfilled in their due time: of necessity
therefore, God must be the Auctor of the same.

7 Again, all the Philosophers together in their many volumes have neither said
nor taught so righteous, so holy, and so necessary matter, as does this holy
Scripture in the ten words of the law: yea, even in these two short sentences.
That we should love God with all our heart, with all our strength, and with all
our soul: and our neighbor as our self. From God only therefore must this
doctrine proceed. The style likewise of this Scripture is simple and without
affectation, and yet it penetrateth and pierces the heart and conscience, far
more deeply then the writings of the most excellent Orators in the world.
Whence should such efficacy proceed, 1. Cor. 2.4.5
but from the spirit of God, which is the Auctor thereof. This is it that S.
Paul expressly notes, saying. Neither stood my word and preaching in the
entising speech of man's wisdom, but in plain evidence of the spirit and of
power: That your faith should not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power
of God.

8 This holy scripture propounds unto us the history from the beginning of
the world, with the doctrine ever since continued among both Jews and
Christians: yet (which is well worthy to be marked) we find no contradiction or
disagreement, either in the histories or doctrine, that may not easily be
unfolded and reconciled. But as for other books, they begin their Histories
two or three thousand years later. And what discord do we find in their
writings, both in their histories and in their doctrine* Again, there are no
books for the maintenance and confession of the doctrine whereof, both men and
women, even by thousands from age to age, Princes, merchants, artificers,
learned and unlearned, have voluntarily resolved, even with cheerfulnes to
abandon fathers, mothers, husbands, wives, children, goods, dignities, yea,
life it self, and suffered torments that cannot be sustained by any one that
is not holden up by some divine power. Yet here may you behold Martirs, that is
to say, authentical witnesses, that this holy scripture proceeds from God.
This also is the reason, why of all other books, the Devil, an enemy to God,
and to the salvation of mankind, has most endeavored to falsify, to corrupt,
and to abolish this holy Scripture: thereby as it were confessing that
proceeding from God, it is repugnant to him, and necessary for man's salvation.
And yet has the same bin miraculously preserved and kept in his integrity,
even with the danger of their lives that were guardians thereof: yea, which is
more, even by the Jews themselves, the sworn enemies to Jesus Christ, of whom
the Law and the Prophets do bear witness. And therefore S. Augustine compares
them to Stationers, who in their shops do keep many books, but for the use of
other men. They have bin preserved therefore undoubtedly by his only
providence, who was their Auctor. And to this purposeis the example of the time
of Antiochus most notable: For in his days, 1. Mac. l. 57 59.
namely in the hundred and five and fortieth year of the Grecian Monarchy,
did they deface and burn all the books of the Law that could be found, and yet
within two years after, 1. Mac. 3.37 48.
even in the hundred and seven and fortieth year of the said Monarchy, was the
book of the Law found again among the Jews. Yet who did ever object either to
the Jews or Christians, that the books of the old and new Testament, were
foisted in or invented by men, except these Atheists, because they would deny
that there is a God?

9 Again, many of those that from time to time have made war against the
holy Scriptures, seeking either to falsify or utterly to abolish the same, and
persecuted the professors thereof, have felt the smart of Gods horrible
judgments poured upon them, and departed this life in most wonderful and
terrible manner, which (no doubt) was a vengeance that God, the author of this
Scripture, executed against them. As in deed many of them have bin likewise
forced of themselves to confess their torments to proceed from the hand of
God, stretched forth to punish their impiety. By the premises therefore it
sufficiently appears, that the disaduowing and denying of the holy Scripture
to be the word of God, proceeds not of ignorance, but even of perverse
obstinacy and malice, and therefore that we have justly produced so many
millions both of Jews and Christians, professors of this holy Scripture, as
witnesses that there is one God, against all those that in malice reject the
same, least they should be forced to confess that there is a God.

10 If this suffice not, we will secondly produce for witnesses all people and
nations of the world, that have bin spread over the whole earth from the creation
of the world to this day. For they all with one consent, do acknowledge that
there is some God or Gods. A certain philosopher and heathen Orator has
written, that there is no nation so barbarous, as not to confess that which
these wretches do deny, namely, that there is some God, and these be his
words. Among all men of whatsoever nation, this is one constant and resolute
opinion, that there be Gods: for it is a matter even borne with man, Cicero in
his second book of the nature of Gods.
and (as it were) graven in his soul. What these Gods are, there are sundry
opinions, but that there are Gods, no man does deny. And all his second book
he applies to prove that there are Gods. All philosophers, historiographers,
and Poets do make mention of their Gods, whom they invoke and call upon.
Would man, who by nature is proud and stout, stoop to Images of wood, stone,
silver, or gold, either offer any sacrifice to the same, or look for any
goodness in the service and worship of them, if this opinion, that there is some
God, whom if they think to prosper, they must invoke and call upon, were not
graven in his heart? Admit most men throughout the whole world do worship false
Gods, yet does their said worship testify that this is common among them, to
believe that there is some God. Likewise that in their several opinions, they
all do suppose that they worship one true God, and so do manifestly condemn
those that think there is no God. Which is more: Even the diversity of Gods
that is in the world, does evidently declare, that to believe a divinity, is
no doctrine learned in the school of man, neither any agreement among men:
but rather that nature (the common mother of all) has taught them that there
is a God, and thus they that deny it, are no partakers of man's nature.
Moreover, swearing, or the oath that is commonly in use with all nations, either
for the maintenance of the truth, or for the true performance of what soever is
inuiolably promised, is another plain proof, that al men living do confess
that there is a God, who knows the secrets of all hearts, loves truth, and
punishes falsehood.

11 Some replye, that whatsoever the world believes concerning God,
proceeds only of the craft and policy of those that have sought to
purchase authority for their laws and decrees, under color of communication
with the Gods, from whom, say they, they have received whatsoever they have
commanded to men. But this gloss which they pretend, would be of small
account with men, were not this persuasion, that there are Gods, whom they
should fear to offend, first graven in their hearts. For had they not believed
it, they would boldly have scorned those that should boast of such communication
with the Gods. And therefore even those men who^ they charge with such policies,
are also witnesses that al men do believe that there is a God. Again, peruse al
books that ever were written, from the beginning of the world to this day, and
see how many notable persons we shall find that ever maintained this
blasphemy, that there is no God. Plut. in the decrees of Philo. li. 1. c. 7
Cicero in the first book of the nature of Gods.
Well do they make mention of one Diagoras a Melian, and a poet: of one
Theodorus a Grecian: of one Ephemerus a Tegaean, and some others accounted to
be Atheists. But why were they so accounted? Not because they utterly denied a
God (for even Diagoras begins his verses with a confession, that all things
are ordered by a divinity:) but rather for that they scorned the Idols and
multitude of Gods. As Ephemerus was termed an Atheist, because he writ that the
Gods of the Gentiles have been excellent personages, whose portraitures having
been reserved for remembrances, were after converted into Idols. We also read
that Protagoras the Abderite, Cicero in his first book of the nature of Gods.
for writing in the beginning of his book, I wot not what to say, whether
there be Gods, or whether there be none, was by the commandment of the
Athenians banished their town and territories, and his books openly burned:
whereby many were made more slack in the profession of the like opinion,
considering that the only doubt whether there were Gods, could not escape
punishment. True it is, that certain Philosophers termed Sceptiques, called
the same again into question. But the reason was, because their profession was
to doubt of all things, even of those which they did both see and touch, yea,
and whether themselves were or were not. They that believe not their own
senses, that black is black, that fire is hot, that snow is white, that ise
is cold: in brief, that doubt of every thing that is, and whether each thing
be such as we see it, feel it, hear it, etc. are surely deuoide of sense, and
yet not so senseless as the Atheistes: for those men do but doubt whether
there be Gods, but these men do utterly deny that there be any. Thus we
see the testimonies and confessions of all people and nations in the world,
for the space of five thousand years, (for so long it has continued) who all
with one consent do condemn the blasphemy of those, that to the contrary
dare affirm, that there is no God.

12 Moreover, the very devils do believe that there is a God, and do tremble,
Iam. 2 19.
as says Saint James. And hereof we have many testimonies among the writings
of the Heathen. Among others, Apollo that God, or rather devil, so famous
among the Ethnikes, says thus. We devils that haunt both land and sea, do
tremble at Gods scourge, under whom the whole world does quake. These
Atheists therefore are more incredulous than the very devils: and least they
should tremble with the devils, do choke up all remembrance of God: yet has
experience from time to time, and even to this day taught us, that they which
most impudently would seem to believe no divinity, have bin and are the first
and loudest confessers of the same, whensoever it vouchsafes to be reveled by
thu^der, earthquakes, and such other extraordinary works: for the horrible
terror which then affrighteth the^, forces the^ even to cry out and confess,
that their denial of God grows only of their drousines in his ordinary
works, considering that being wakened by the extraordinary effects of his
power, with trembling and terror they acknowledge that there is a God. Again,
even in Gods ordinary works, they do by speech confess that which they will
not believe. For when they say, it raineth, it snoweth, it haileth, it
blustreth, it is hot, it is cold, etc. If a man should demand who does all
this, it would amaze them. And why? Because it is a common persuasion with all
men that it is God, and that those works are proper to God only. As
contrariwise, when at the entering into, or beginning of any communication, if
a man shall say, he writes, he commands, he walks, he eats, he
comes. This were an inconsiderate phrase of speech, and would minister
occasion to demand who it is that writes, commands, walks, eats or
comes. And why? Because those actions are common to many. But the other being
proper to God only, men never ask, who haileth, who raineth, who snoweth, etc.
because every man refers those works to God. Those likewise, who to the
end to deny God, do refer such works to nature, do even in their own
speech condemn themselves, in that they say not, she raineth, she snoweth,
she haileth, as speaking of nature: but do say: it raineth, it snoweth, it
haileth, as speaking of God. Concluding therefore this purpose: first, all
Jews and Christians: secondly, all Heathen throughout the whole world, do
with one voice confess that there is a God: And lastly, the very Atheists
them selves, both in trembling and speech, do many times acknowledge that,
which willingly they would deny, namely, that there is a God.

13 Now let us go forward, and come to other creatures, yet comprehending man
also, who all without speaking shall testify that there is a God. Of these
there are four sorts. The first have essence only, as the elements, the sun,
the moon, the earth, the stones, and the water. The second have essence and
life, and are called Vegetative, as herbs, trees, and all plants. The third
have essence, life, and sense, as souls, fishes, and other beasts. Finally,
others have essence, life, sense, and reason, as man. Now to begin with the
first; if we ask, which was first, Essence, or no Essence? The answer is
plain, and by all men confessed, namely, no Essence, and this does neces^itie
require: for otherwise the elements, the earth, the sea, to be brief, even
every thing that is, must have been from all eternity, and have had no
beginning. Behold, here is already one absurdity, which man's understanding
does gainsaie. As also it is a most resolute point, that whatsoever is eternal
and without beginning, is also immortal, and without ending. That which is
from ever, is also for ever. But every thing that is (God excepted) is by
nature subject to change, corruption, death, and end. Nothing therefore that
is, is eternal and without beginning, but God who gives beginning and essence
to every thing that is. Moreover, if that which is, had bin from all eternity
and without beginning, then must it of necessity ensue, that the elements,
the earth, the water, even so many things as are, must be so many Gods,
considering that nothing can be from all eternity, or without beginning, but
that which has his essence of himself, and consequently, God only. And
therefore to deny a beginning in any thing that is, is to acknowledge the same
to be a God, whereof it would follow, that for the denying of one God, we
should be forced to confess that there be as many Gods as there be elements,
stars, stones, grains of sand upon the earth, or drops of water in the sea: If
then we must confess, that any thing that is, has not ever bin, but have
had some beginning, then must it ensue, that there is a God, who of nothing
has made that that is, even as it is written, In the beginning God made heaven
and earth. Genesis 1.1
Thus we see how that which has essence only, even without life, sense, or
reason, does nevertheless without speaking, evidently testify, that there is
a God, that gave unto it essence and beginning. And in deed any thing that is,
is either a creature or a creator: But if the creature presupposes and
acknowledges a creator, and consequently a God: Then do the elements the
earth, the sea, the stones, and in brief, every creature by his essence,
testify against the Atheists, that there is a God, their creator.

14 If they reply, that every thing that is, is of it self: we will demand,
since when? If they answer, from all eternity, how can they prove it?
Besides, they must make as many Gods, as there be things that have essence, as
is before showed. Otherwise it cannot be chosen but that they have bin since
some time. Which if they grant, then let them tell us since what time that
that is and before was not, made it self, and thereof lay down some proof.
But contrariwise, if of nothing nothing be made, as the Philosophers do define,
then could not that which was nothing, make it self some thing, and assume
any essence, considering it was nothing. Thus it follows, that it is
contrary to all reason and man's capacity, to say that any thing that is, is
come of it self. And therefore we must grow to acknowledge a God, who only
having been from all eternity, Exodus 3
gives essence to all that is. As also in respect thereof he is called among
the Hebrews Iehoua, Apoc. 1, 8
signifiyng this word Essence, and with the Greeks (...), signifiyng, he that
is, because God is of himself Essence, Romans 11.36
and gives essence to his creatures, as it is written, Of him, and through
him, and for him are all things.

15 But let us farther consider every thing that is, in state as it is. The
Philosophers are of opinion that the earth, together with the sea, do contain
in compass or circuit six thousand, three hundred Dutch miles. Also, that the
body of the Sun is a hundred, sixty, and six times greater than the earth.
How great then is that heaven wherein the Sun is contained? Or rather, how
great is the highest heaven which inuironeth all other heavens that do
compass the same, wherein the Sun has his habitation, yea, and with a
marvelous distance? How many stars be there in the sky? How many drops of
water in the sea? Or how many grains of sand upon the earth? If all the men in
the world, kings, or philosophers, who have not only essence but also life,
sense, and reason, cannot without matter precedent make one drop of water, one
stone, or one candle. How can these creatures of such incomprehensible greatness
as are the heavens, of such wonderful brightness, as are the Sun, the Moon,
and the stars, and so abundant as are both land and sea, having not so much
as essence, give to themselves essence, yea, and such essence as they now have?
Yet speaking only of essence, common sense does also deny that. Let us
therefore conclude, that there is a God almighty, who being of himself, from
all eternity, in his time has of nothing created both heaven and earth,
according as Moses has affirmed, saying, Genesis 1.1
In the beginning God made heaven and earth.

16 Moreover, experience teaches, that the heavens have their motions: But
whence come those motions, even motions of such incomprehensible swiftnes, that
as we see by daily practice, the Sun in four and twenty hours compasses
the whole earth, and consequently in one hour runs two hundred sixty Dutch
miles. Besides, the heaven where the Sun has his abode, is from the earth
1202700. leagues. How many leagues then does he daily run in his own
heaven? A matter incomprehensible to man's capacity. But every motion,
especially in things that have essence only and no life, does of necessity
presuppose a moouer that causes the motion. And this do we plainelye see in
the Earth, in Stars, in Water, etc. which have no motion, but from others.
The motion therefore of the heavens do evidently testify that there is a God,
who being of himself immovable, gives motion to all his creatures.

But who disposed the wonderful order which we find to be in all creatures
that have but essence only, that an inferior heaven should be comprehended in
a greater, and that again in an other greater, and so consequently of the
rest? Who placed the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars in their heavens and places?
Who formed and continues the double motion of the Sun in all seasons, from
East to West, from one pole to another? Who so established the four elements
under the heavens, that the region of fire enuironeth the air, the air the
water, and the water the earth? The nature of contrarieties is one to destroy
another, as the water to quench the fire, and the fire to dry up the water:
yet are these four elements kept in such accord, that of the same being mixed
and united together, all bodily creatures are formed, and do consist, not
consuming or disordering one of another: It must their needs be that there is a
God, the creator, preserver, and conducter of the elements.

18 Who guides the course of the heavens in so certain and inuariable a
measure, that a man may foretell at what hour a hundred years hence the Moon
or Sun shall be eclipsed? Who placed the heavy lump of the earth as a
center to the world, and hanged it in the air? What hands do withholde the
sea which lies higher than the earth, from drowning the same? Can this
wisdom, conduct, and power, which do thus shine in these works, be found in
any thing that was not, to place it self in essence, and so to direct guide,
and maintain it self? Had these creatures had their essence from all
eternity, yet could that which had only essence, without life, sense, or
reason, have established such an order, course, and consent? to be brief,
this work of such incomprehensible wisdom and power? We must therefore
confess, that any thing that has only essence, considered, as is aforesaid,
does exclime against the Atheists, and cry out that there is a God, the author
of the same: as David says, Psalm. 19 1
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handie
work. Again, The pillars of the earth, says Hanna the mother of Samuel, Sam.
2.8
are the Lords, and he has set the earth upon them. Psalm. 104 9
And David says, But God has set the sea a bound which it shall not pass,
neither shall it return to cover the earth. As also Job does more at large
declare. Job. 3^


19 As for those creatures which have Vegetative life, as herbs and all
plants, the same are also so many unreprovable witnesses, that there is a God.
No man can give that which he has not: but the earth has only essence and no
life: Likewise the Sun which warmeth the earth, the rain that waters it, or
the seed whereof the plant does come. The life therefore of herbs and plants
does loudly testify that there is a God, the author of the same. Again,
whence came such diversity of herbs and pla^ts in one self ground? So many
kinds of trees, some fruitful, some unfruitful? And among the trees that
bear fruit, so many sundry sorts, as apples, pears, cheries, plums, etc.
Also among apple trees, so many kinds of apples: among pear trees, so many
sorts of pears: likewise of chery trees, plum trees, and all others that
bear fruit. Each sort notwithstanding either of apples, pears, or cheries,
etc. bearing some diversity in form, color, and savor, or taste. The like in
herbs. Come into a meadow, look upon a garden, how many kinds of herbs
shall you see of several forms, colors, tastes, or smells. And whereof
proceed all these herbs and trees, their leaves and fruit, their shape,
color, and smell, and their several properties and virtues? They proceed
neither from the earth, from the sun, from the rain, no neither from the
seed. The eye sees it, the capacity knows it. The whole therefore proceeds
from God. And in deed, sow in one self ground one self herb, under one
self form, and let it be watered with one self water, yet do no other kind
of herbs spring up? But some will say, that it is of the seed, that the life
and diversity of herbs, trees, flowers, and fruits does proceed. Yet keep
the seed out of either the earth, the sun, or the rain, and it will lie dead
and bring forth nothing. And open the seed, therein peradventure may you
discern some small sprout having essence, yet wanting both life, form of
herb, color, or favor thereof. It must needs then have some other original
than from the seed only. And whence, but even from God? Again, what is the
cause that one kind of seed still brings forth one kind of herb, with
all the stems, leaves, color, savor, property, and virtue a like? Have these
small sprouts, which have only essence, understanding also to agree to bring
forth herbs alike? Are they able to do it, either to give that which they
have not? If not, then some other must employ his power and wisdom, and that
is God, as it is written. Genesis 1.11
In the beginning of the world he ordained, that every tree and herb should
bring forth seed to increase, according to his kind. And therefore so many
herbs and trees as we see in gardens, meadows, and forestes, are so many
witnesses against the Atheistes, that there is a God.

20 Now let us speak of those creatures that have not only essence and life,
but also sense or seeing: As fish, souls, and other creatures. First as
concerning their generation: For example, we might demand of those men that
do believe that there is no God, whether was first, the hen, or the egg: For
the egg comes from the hen, and the hen out of the egg. If they
answer, the egg: How came that egg without a hen? Or how could that which
was not, make it self an egg? Or how did that which was an egg, having only
essence, give it self life? Since also that feeling comes of sense, how could
a thing that had only essence, give it self sense to hear, see, taste, smell,
or feel either cold or heat? Again, if there be not also a cock with the
hen, or that the hen sits not upon the egg; the egg will rot and bring
forth nothing. How therefore could the egg, if it were before the hen, bring
forth the hen, considering there was neither cock nor hen, as also that
the egg had only essence, but neither life nor feeling? If they say the hen
was before the egg, yet will not that suffice: For of necessity there must
also have been a cock with the hen before the egg, for otherwise the egg
would never have yielded a hen. It must needs then be that God having created
heaven and earth of nothing, of that which never was either egg or hen, Genesis
1.
has created the cock and the hen to bring forth eggs, from whence the
hens have their original, as Moses teaches.

21 But yet let us mark how the hen proceeds from the egg. Imagine the
egg to be under the hen; what is in the egg A substance having only
essence, but neither token of life, o^ form of soul. Come again within a few
days, and ye that perceive the head of a little chicken piercing the egg ^he^^
with her head and cloven beak: Look upon the eyes and shape of the head:
Mark what is in it; hear the voice: Come to the body consider the wings and
the feet: What is in the body: the ^^^ers, the diversity of colors and to
conclude, the life and motions thereof. Remember that all this was wrought
within the egg shell, whereto (...) any man set hand or understanding. Who
the^ without touching the inner side of the egg, has formed such a creature,
only through the hens warming of the egg, who knew not what the did? Who so
will not acknowledge it to be only God, does combat against his own
conscience and reason. Moreover, who is the cause that hens eggs always do
yield chicke^s, and the eggs of other souls young ones according to the kind
from whence they came? Does this diversity of souls rest either in the eggs
or in their substance? Every man knows no. The small chickens therefore
issuing out of their shells, are witnesses sufficient against the Atheists, that
there is a God, who has created and formed them.

22 Next, let us behold other souls, flying in the air. Al weighty things
fall toward the earth: What is it then that bears up the souls in the air?
If they say, the wings: Put the wings of a swanne upon a dead sparrow and cast
it up into the air, yet will it fall to the ground, wings and all. The soul
therefore must have life, neither is that enough: For in her wings she must
also have very artificial motions, together with a wonderful industry to fly
maruailous swift: Some times to turn short, some times to mount aloft as the
lark, and sometimes to stoop very low as the swallow. And whence proceeds
this industry and skill, but from God? Again, who created the air to bear
them up: Meat to nourish them: and endued them with industry to make their
neasts, but God? But this may suffice for souls. Neither shall we need to
aledge like testimonies for the divinity, as may be noted in fishes and other
creatures, who all with one consent do agree in their generation, shape, life,
nature, property, and other considerations to proclaim that there is a God,
from whom they take their essence, life, feeling, and motions.

23 Lastly, let us come to the chief handiworke of God, which is man, of the
philosophers termed the little world, because that in him we may discern as it
were an Abridgement of the whole world, yea more then is to be seen in all the
world besides. For man, besides his essence, life, and sense or feeling, has
also reason and understanding. The frame of man's body in every part thereof,
both internal and external, considered, does sufficiently testify him that
created it, to be a master workman. And in deed, who could so exactly
proportion all the members of the body: So dispose and order it, that every
part the^of has relation to the use and service one of another, together with
the preservation of the body, under the conduct of a spirit that governs the
whole, which without motion gives several motions to all the members of this
body, with reason and understanding to guide every member in his action,
representing to it self things pas^, present and to come, near or far off,
concealed and ^^dden in the sea, within the center of the earth, above the
heavens, or in the bodies or hearts of men, and declaring the imaginations
thereof by the diverse motions of the tongue: And albeit such a spirit be in
us, yet can we neither see nor comprehend it? Howbeit man composed of such a
body, of such a spirit or soul, cannot be from all eternity, as in other
creatures we have proved. The time was that man was not, that he lived not,
that he had neither feeling nor reason. Whence the^ came the first man, who was
nothing? How could that which had neither life, feeling, nor reason, give it
self that which it had not? How could that which was no spirit, make it self a
spirit? How could that which had neither understanding nor reason, make it
self understanding and reason? When thou see a man, Genesis 1.
thou presupposest a father, and to that father another father, and so upward,
until at last thou come to Adam: There art thou put from thy natural
discourse, and presupposing a father for him: and so art driven to acknowledge
God to have created the first man, as Moses also rehearses. He that sees
only the portraiture of a man, does immediately conceive a painter, and if it
be a fair piece, his first question is, Who made it? If a dead piece of work
shall make us conceive a living worke-man, much rather should a living piece of
work, namely, Man, make us to conceive a quickening worke-man, even God, who
only is able to give essence, life, feeling, and reason.

24 Now let us proceed to the woman. If man were of himself, must woman be so
also? If she likewise were of her self, how came she to be subject to man? How
did she so conveniently dispose all parts of her body to the generation of
children? To the nourishing of them in her womb, with her own blood? To such
painful childbirth? To the changing of her blood into milk, in her paps and
dugges, so convenient for the suckling of her child? Man and woman having
essence, life, sense, and reason, cannot nevertheless engender either when
they will, or what they will, male or female, neither frame or shape one only
member of the little babe conceived in the mothers womb. How then could man
and woman even before they had life, feeling, reason, or so much as essence,
come by understanding, power, and consent to make themselves that which they
were not, to give themselves that which they had not, and to agree to make the
one male, the other female? Man therefore and woman, are the very work of God,
the almighty and wife work man.

25 Besides the testimonies of all people and nations that ever were, who all
do confess that there is a God, we have propounded four sorts of
creatures, who without speech do each for it self testify against the
Atheists, that if they will not confess and acknowledge a God, they are
undoubtedly blind, senseless, deuoide of understanding or soul. Now let us
consider all these creatures jointly and together, throughout the whole world.
First, if all things be of themselves, or from all eternity, did they make
themselves such as they now are indiuisibly, or in particular? If every grain
of sand, every drop of water, every clod of earth, every stone, every kind
of herb and plant, every bird, since, creature, male or female. If I say,
every of these creatures made it self, and never was before or from all
eternity: First, to the end to deny one God they confess millions,
considering that whatsoever is of it self, as also any thing that is from all
eternity, is God. Secondly, all creatures having only essence, life, and
sense, are by nature subject to corruption, as experience teaches, and
therefore they cannot have been from all eternity. For whatsoever is
eternal, is immortal, and not subject to corruption or change. But how could
they have made themselves of nothing, considering that notwithstanding their
essence and life, they cannot preserve themselves, but are subject to change,
corruption, and death? If they say, that at the beginning there was some
lump, whereof every one was formed, we would demand, who created that
lump, And so must we return to the saying of Moses, who writes, that In the
beginning God created heaven and earth, Genesis 1.
and the earth was without form and void. We would also demand, since this
lump was without shape, life, motion, or understanding, whence came this
distinction of creatures, so far differing each from other: some having
only essence, others essence and life, others essence, life, and feeling, and
others all four, essence, life, feeling, and reason? Who made such an
vneqeuall division? Who subjected the Sun and Moon to the use of man? The
earth to nourish herbs and plants? The herbs and plants to nourish cattle?
The cattle and since to nourish man? In this so unequal a proportion and
subjection repugnant to nature (by nature the great will not willingly subject
themselves to the small) whence comes so good agreement and obedience?
Necessarily therefore we must conclude, that there is a God, a creator,
diuider, and conductor of his creatures, who protecteth the order that he has
established among them.

26 Then let us look into this universal world, and therein behold the
heavens beautified with the Sun, the Moon, and the stars, the earth
clothed with herbs, plants, and creatures, the sea replenished with water and
fish, man endued with understanding and reason, brought into this world (as it
were) into a palace, abounding in all goodness, and here inioying so many
creatures in such numbers and diverse sorts. Who hears not this universal
world, in every part thereof exclaiming against these Atheists, that there is a
God? Who is he, which passing through a forest, and there finding some
building, though half decard, will not immediately imagine the steps of some
men, who passing that way have thereto set their hands: (for it could not be
the work of any other creature) How then can any man possibly behold this
excellent frame of the world, and not judge immediately, that a greater than the
world or man, has thereto set his hand? What man, when he sees a fair house
gallantly built, will think that it has stood from all eternity, either that
it built it self, and not rather presuppose an Architect, or builder? How much
rather should this frame of the world directly lead us to the creator? And
what man is he, who acknowleging his essence, his life, his senses, his soul,
understanding and reason, withal, contemplating this world created for him,
will not immediately confess that man is created for a greater than himself,
namely, for his creator? The soul moving and guiding the body, is truly the
image of God, moving and guiding the world and man in the use of the same.
Wherefore, like as he cannot have essence, life and motion, but the same must be
to him a certain testimony of his soul living within him: so the essence,
life, sense, motion, and understanding of all that is in the world, is an
assured and steadfast ground to believe that there is a God, the creator,
preserver, and guider of this universal world. Act. 17.21
Even as an ancient heathen, alleged by saint Paul, does say, In God we all
do live and move. Neither can any man use his senses in the contemplation of
the world, and inioying of so many creatures and benefits of God, daily poured
upon him, but as if with his hand he felt him, he must needs perceive there is
a God. And therefore not amiss said a certain Ethnike, That he that denies a
God, Auicenna, an Arabian.
is not besides his wits, but even utterly is deuoid of wit.

27 These wretched Atheists do reply, Who did ever see God, that we may
believe him. Which is as much, as if they should say, that we must believe no
more than we see with our eyes. And thus to the end to deny God, they renounce
the other four bodily senses, together with the understanding and reason of
their soul, and so grow to brutishness. Nevertheless albeit they see not
the heat in a burning coal, yet if they be touched therewith, they cry out
and confess that it is hot. They see not the coldness of Ise, yet by
experience they confess it is cold. They see not the bitterness or sweetness
of meat or drink, yet do they by taste believe the bitterness of gal, and the
sweetness of honey. They confess the sound of a bell and musical instruments,
albeit they see the^ not, but hear them only. They likewise believe an air
that they breath, and a wind that blows, yet never see either: A woman
feeling the motions of the babe in her womb, believes that she is with
child, albeit she see it not.

28 If they say that experience teaches them to believe all these things,
then let them renounce their blasphemy, Who has seen God that we may
believe him? And let them believe that there is a God, of whom they both see
and feel such experience, and so certain and mighty effects both in the
world and in themselves, as is before showed. If they can believe that they have
eyes and a forehead, albeit they see them not but in a glass: let them also
believe there is a God, whose image they see engraven throughout this
universal world. If being in a prison, where they see but a glimpse of a Sun
beam, they nevertheless believe that the Sun is up and shines over the earth:
wherefore do they not likewise believe that there is a God that guides the
world, when they are forced to feel, no^e, and confess so many whole beams of
his eternity and providence shining in the world? By discourse passing from
the river to the fountain, and from the fountain to the spring, they believe
that the river has a spring: why are they not likewise guided by their
discourse from the creatures to the creator and author of the same? from the so
excellent frame of the world, and from man, to the master Architect and
builder? But it evidently appears, that these people do maliciously sight
against their own consciences, against their bodily senses, and against al
discourse of their understanding, to deny that there is a God, by demanding,
Who has seen him that they may believe.

29 But this is the subtlety and poison of the devil. By this self reason
and argument do they also conclude, that they have no soul, that there be no
devils, that there is no hell, for of all this they see none: and this to the
end that they may the more outragiously, as beasts, give themselves over to the
lusts and passions of their flesh, without fear of God, of devil, or of hell,
and so live without remorse of conscience. This truly is a cable and mighty
cha^^e, by the devil bent to draw them to all iniquity, and so to heap up
fiery mountains of Gods terrible wrath against such monsters. Rightly
therefore have we placed this as the chief and principal folly in man, To
believe there is no God. For as it extinguisheth all fear of evil doing, so
does it quench all affection to piety, love, holiness, and patience. To be
brief, it is the very means to transform man, not into a beast, but into a
devil. Let us constantly therefore renounce this extreme folly and madness,
yea, let us abhor all such cogitations, and believe that there is a God, a
creator, and a redeemer, who by his providence guides the whole world, and
especially his Church. Also that undoubtedly he will punish all Atheists and
other Infidels with incomprehensible torments, to continue without end: and
that he will grant to the faithful, life, comfort, and eternal glory. Let
the assurance and apprehension of this truth, make us to amend our lives, so
that by renouncing this folly, which would cast us headlong into hell, thorough
so horrible a blasphemy, as to deny God, we may be better advised, and turn
to the Lord, increasing in faith, and fructifying in all good works all the
days of our life.

The second Folly. To esteem more of man than of God. Chap. 3.
WE have already spoken of those that deny God both in heart and mouth. Now are
we to entreat of the folly of these, who professing the knowledge of God, do
deny him in their works, Tit. 1.16.
as Saint Paul says. This folly rests in those that esteem more of man than
of God. For, to confess God, and yet to esteem less of him than of man, is to
deny him. And this folly does possess many, and proceeds of this
incredulity, that confessing that there is a God, they do not apprehend his
divinity, that is, that by his providence he guides all things, that he is
the sovereign good and well doing, that he is holy, that he hates iniquity,
that he is righteous and will punish it, that he is true and almighty to
fulfill his promises, and to execute his judgments, and in wisdom infinite.
This incredulity and corruption procures us first to love man more than God:
secondly, to repose more confidence in man than in God: thirdly, to fear man
more than God. And these are three evident proofs and most assured
testimonies, that we esteem more of man than of God. Also that confessing God
with our mouths, we deny him in our works. Now let us proceed to the first
proof.

2 Gods commandment, as also ou^ duty, do import that we should love God
with all our heart, with all our strength, with all our soul. The reason.
Because he is God, Secondly, because he is our God. Being God, as he has bin
from all eternity, before the creation and redemption, he is worthy to be
loved infinitely: and in as much as he is our God, our creator, and our
redeemer, he deserves that we should love him for his incomprehensible
benefits bestowed upon us. Nevertheless the common course of man does evidently
declare, that we love man more than God. And in deed let the husband examine
the love he bears to his wife, the wife hers to her husband, the parents
their affection to their children, and the children theirs to their parents,
and many others, the love that they bear to their carnal friends, and they
shall all find that they love man more than God. Let us proceed to the proves.
We cannot abide that any man should speak evil of him whom we love, so that
if the husband hears his wife evil spoken of, or the wife her husband, each
of them grieueth at the injuries, and cannot brook them in quiet: but when we
hear God our father evil spoken of, or blasphemed, who is moved at it? Who
finds himself so much grieved, as to procure amends, and prosecute
punishment for the same? Every man rejoices to hear his commendations whom
he loves, so that if in company any man speaks of the virtues of our
children, of our father, of our brother, or of any of our entire friends, we
rejoice and are glad of it: but even in the same company, let any man read
the praises of God set down in diverse of the Psalms, namely, in the
103.104.105.106. etc. who thereby feels himself so touched to the quick, as
in heart to rejoice and be glad thereof? We also are ready to talk of those whom
we love, and do rejoice when others do minister occasion to speak of them,
which we will be sure to take hold of, and to prosecute: but when we do speak
of God, o^ if in company any once chance to begin, how is his motion
seconded or prosecuted? nay rather, how soon is it given over and let die? We
do not willingly forget him whom we love heartily, whereupon we have a
proverb, He that loves heartely is slow to forget. We call to mind his face,
his gesture, his speech, his countenance: but when do we think upon God? how
do we remember him? or wherein do we call to mind his majesty, his works, and
his favors toward us? Moreover, if to the end to spare for our children, we
desist from the releef of the pore, and deny the maintenance of the service of
God and his church, and holy ministry, are we not thereby convict of loving man
more than God? Our carnal children more than our heavenly father? To be
brief, how many be there who being overcome and transported by affection to
parents, to the husband, to the wife, or to the children, do omit that part of
their duty toward God, Math. 19.37
which concerns the confession of his name and obedience to his word? Yet
Jesus Christ manifestly declares, that in so doing we love man more than God.

3 By these examples and many others that might be noted, it does evidently
appear, that we love, and consequently do esteem more of man than of God, and
so do manifestly renounce God in our works and hearts, Augustine in his
confessions.
whom we confess with our lips. S Augustine says, that we love God less than
we ought, when we love any thing besides him, which we love not for his sake.
What will it be when we shall love man, not for Gods sake, but even in spite
of God, in that we love him more than God? It is so great a folly, that Jesus
Christ him self has pronounced that we be not worthy to be his, Luke 14.^0
unless we be ready and resolved to hate our nearest kindred and best
friends for his sake. To the end therefore that we may amend our lives, we must
renounce this folly, and hereafter be better advised, that we may love God
more than man, yea, even that we may love God only and not man, but in God
and for Gods sake.

4 The second proof rests in this, that we fear man more than God. In case
of any transgression punishable by the magistrate, no man is so prodigal of
his life or honor, neither so desperate, as to offer himself to the sergeants
or Judge. And why? Least he should be apprehended and punished. Thieves and
robbers do lurk in woods and dens, that they may the more covertly execute
their wickedness. John 3.20
Housebreakers and other thieves do chose the night to steal in. To be brief,
Whosoever (as Jesus Christ says) does evil, he hates the light, neither
comes to the light, least his deeds should be reproved. Yet God sees all
that is committed in the woods, in the darkness, and in secret: all our
imaginations, desires, passions, and enterprises punishable by his law, not
with the death of the body, but with everlasting damnation, are in the
presence of his majesty: yet are we as sore afeard of offending him as
displeasing of man? or ha^^^g offended him, do we stand in as great fear of
punishment as when we have committed some trespass punishable by man? Or are
not al transgressions that are punishable by the magistrate, punishable also in
Gods judgment? Inasmuch therefore as those men which commit such things, do
shun the light for the fear of man, and yet in secret do boldly commit them
in the sight of God, they thereby do manifestly declare, that they fear man
more than God. Every man can confess, that the fear of God is the beginning
of wisdom, and that thereby we restrain from evil. Psalm. 111.10 Prou. 1.7
Prou. 16.6 2. Sam. 11
David and Solomon have so pronounced it. Yet when David had committed
adultery in the sight of God, and that afterward he called Vrias, to minister
to him occasion to go to bed to his wife: when he had made him dronk, and then
had caused him to be slain, redoubling his sins in the sight of God, to the
end to hide the^ from men: did he not declare that ^ee feared man more than
God, who did see al? Genesis 37
Did not the children of Jacob show that they feared their father more than
God, when they sent him Joseph's bloody coat, thereby to make him think that
some wild beast had devoured him, and so to prevent his ^ust wrath and
indignation? But did not God hear them when they said, Behold, this our
dreamer, come let us kill him, and we shall see what his dreams will avail
him? Did he not see when they let him down into the pit, and afterward sold
him? Durst they have so entreated him in the presence of their father Jacob?
Surely they feared Jacob a man, more than God. Let but some magistrate of a
town threaten every one that shall take Gods name in vain, that for every
oath they shall loose a tooth, and the greatest swearer will soon be reformed,
and so beware, that albeit through his former accustomacie he loose some of his
teeth, yet will he be sure not to loose all. God threatens that he will not
hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain, yet how many be there that
can talk without swearing? To be brief, to what guile, deceit, vice, and
iniquity punishable in the sight of God with everlasting death, does man
wholly give himself, which he would be ashamed to commit in the sight of man?
yea, from the which if the magistrate should take notice, and inflict any
punishment for them, they would utterly abstain?

5 But whereof comes this folly, that we should fear man more than God?
Even of this, that confessing God with our lips, we do notwithstanding not
believe that God is God, that is to say, that he sees all things, that he is
holy, to hate wickedness, righteous to punish it, and almighty to take
vengeance thereof. Gods forbearance to execute his threats, makes man to
imagine that he either sees not, either hates not, either cannot, either is
not able to punish his iniquities, concluding, Psalm. 10.13 M^t^. 24.48
as David in their person says, that God will make no inquisition, and so do
they more boldly give themselves to the works of iniquity: much like that
evil servant mentioned by Saint Matthew, who seeing that his master tarried
long, in the end concluded that he would not come, and thereof took occasion
to do evil: even as Solomon also notes saying, Because sentence against an
evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the children of
men is fully set in them to do evil. But is not this a foolish malice, that
whereas Gods patience and long suffering should stir up and induce men, Eccle.
^.11
as S. Paul says, to repentance, that contrariwise thereof they take occasion
to deny his righteousness and providence, that they may the more boldly offend
him. The prophet speaking of some wicked ones, who without fear of God wronged
the widows, and trod the fatherless under foot, shows, that they
strengthened themselves to wickedness, saying: Romans 2.4 Psalm 94
Tush, God sees not. Is it not a manifest denial of God, to imagine him to be
blind? But as he adds, Is it not an extreme folly to think that he that
formed the light, and gave sight to the eye, sees not, but is blind? Or he
that formed the heart of man, and so knows the depth thereof, does not also
see the works of the same?

6 Behold how and wherefore we fear man more than God, and confessing God with
our lips, we deny him in our works, which truly is a mere folly. And in deed
naturally we most fear him that has most power, and means to execute his
threats, him whose threatenings are most dangerous and hurtful: to conclude,
even him whose threatenings are not in vain, but most certain. Any one will
sooner fear the threatening of a man than of a child, of a magistrate than of
a private person, the loss of life than the penalty of some portion of money,
the threatninges of a sober man than the scolding speeches of a foolish and
hairbraind woman. But is not God more able than man to execute his threatenings?
All creature are at his commandment to do his will, even Angels, men, or
devils. The air through corruption to infect, the sea to over whelm us, the
land to swallow us up, and the beasts to devour us. Wants he arrows in his
quiver to shoot forth at men? With how many strange and horrible plagues did he
smite the Egyptians? What water pooles found he when all the world was so
drowned that the waters stood fifteen cubits above the highest mountains in
the world? Exodus 5.9.10.
Ge. 1.7.
Let us read the 26. of Leuit. and the 28. of Deuteronomy. and there note with how
many sorts of plagues and calamities he can and will punish such as rebel
against his commandments, neither can any counsel or strength withstand him.
Act. 17.26
Contrariwise, what power has man to hurt, since that in God he lives, he
moves, and has his being? What may he do against his will, without whose
power he cannot stir one finger, live one moment, or have any being.

7 Secondly, how far may man's threatenings extend? Even to the loss of goods
and those bodies that are subject to death. But God has power over all souls,
and therefore Jesus Christ admonishes us not to fear those that kill the
body, and no more, Luke 12.4
but fear him (says he) who when he has killed has power to cast into hell,
yea, I say, fear him. Neither can man afflict, but for a time, but Gods
punishments are everlasting and without end. The threatenings of man are many
times light and vain, yea, and soon altered and reuersed: but as God is
righteous and true, so his threatenings are evermore put in execution, either in
this world, or in the world to come, unless we prevent them by Amendment of
Life. Nahum. 1
The mighty God (says the Prophet Nahum) is ielous, and the Lord reuengeth,
and has wrath at his commandment. The Lord will take vengeance of his
adversaries, and reserueth wrath for his enemies. The Lord is slow to anger,
but he is great in power, and will not surely clear the wicked. The Lord has
his way in the whirle wind, and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of
his feet. He rebukes the sea and he dries it, and he dries up all the
rivers. Bashan is wasted and Carmel, and the flower of Libanon is wasted. The
mountains tremble for him, and the hills melt, and the earth is burned at his
sight, yea, the world, and all that dwell therein. Who ca^ stand before his
wrath, or who can abide in the fiercenes of his wrath? His wrath is powered out
like fire, and the rocks are broken by him. If the power and will of God be
such in the execution of his threatenings, even threatenings not against the body
only, but also against the soul: then in reproof of this folly, to fear man
more than God, does the Prophet Esaias justly say, Esa. 2.22.
Cease you from the man whose breath is in his nostrels, for Whreein is he to
be esteemed? Again, Esa. ^1.12.
Who art thou that thou should fear a mortal man, and the son of man
which shall be made as grass, and forgettest the Lord thy maker, that has
spread out the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth? The rather
therefore to amend our lives, let us hereafter be better advised, in fearing
God more than man, and so esteeming more of God than of man, or rather not
esteeming man, but in God: and withal, let us remember that those men have
reason to fear man, that fear not God more than man.

8 The third proof consists in this, That we repose more trust in man than
in God. And this folly proceeds from three original springs. First, we are
so brutish, that as beasts apprehend no more than is before their eyes, so we
believe no more than we see. We see that men have means to help us, but we
see not God neither know his power. And this is the cause that we trust more
to man that promises our sustenance, than to God who promises to provide for
us, Mat. 6.26.
and never to forsake us: yea, than to God who sends us the school of
souls, herbs and flowers, of them to learn, that man being far more
excellent and precious in the sight of God, ought wholly to rest upon him for
his sustenance and life.

9 Secondly, we are so addicted to the flesh, that we account nothing to be a
blessing, but what delights the flesh. And so when men do promise things fit
and commodious for the same, we trust to them more then to God, who promising
many blessings, assistance and relief, does not always fulfill those promises
after the lusts of the flesh, but to the good of the spirit and salvation of
the soul. Thus albeit he performs to us more then it seems he has
promised, namely spiritual and eternal gifts, in stead of carnal and
temporal: yet can not our flesh comprehend that he has fulfilled his
promises. Thus when in sickness, poverty or prison, man promises recovery,
assistance or delivery, we trust more in him then God, who in his word makes
the like promises: For flesh knows no other relief, succor or delivery
then that which is bodily, which God often times changes into spiritual and
everlasting, more excelent in deed, yet less known to man.

10 The third cause rests in the time of performance of promises. God in his
wisdom does sometimes use long delays (as flesh does imagine) in the
performance of his promises: Whereupon man naturally, whot and impatient,
beholding that which he esteems nearer and more ready at hand, trusts more
to man then to God. Romans 5.4.
Hereto we may add, that as S. Paul says, Experience engenders hope. And
therefore as man finds help and relief in men, who being of ability, do
also love him: And on the other side, knows not Gods providence, who seedeth,
succoureth and delivers him from many inconveniences and dangers: So he
weeneth, that by experience he finds more help in man then in God, and
therefore reposeth more trust in man then in God. Hereof it comes to pass,
that children lean rather to their father and mother the^ to God: That when
the mother has given her child, his breakfast, he is content and craves not
so much as may serve him for five or six days after, as looking that the
shall give him more the next day. Whereas contrariwise, albeit Jesus Christ has
taught us at our heavenly father to crave our bread for one day, yet we would
wish that he would even this day give us provision both of bread and clothes
for all the days of our life. Thus the wise with her children, living upon her
husbands labors, is at rest: But if he die, in lue of trusting to God, the
husband of widows, and father of Orphans, she houleth and lamenteth, as
fearing hunger and want. Thus when a father has purchased some pension for his
child's life, or has commended him to some friend that has promised to see to
him as to his own, he departs in more quiet, and in more confidence that his
child is well provided for, then if he had commended him unto almighty God,
who can never die, and whose love to thi^ child surmounteth all love of man.
Thus a weak Prince, being entered alliance with some strong and mighty King,
thinks him self more safe, then if he were alyed with God, who promises to
be his protector and savor. Thus the servant relieth upon his master and
mistress for his food and wages: While we contrariwise, serving God, are in
continual care for our sustenance and life, unless we have a gage in hand,
namely, goods and provision requisite. Thus we can be content to deliver three
or four hundred pounds to some merchant upon his bare letter, in hope at the
years end to receive our money again with some profit: yet can not find in our
hearts to trust God with ten crowns, when he sends his children, the brethren
of Jesus Christ to ask them, with promise that he will answer for them and
return them with great profit that shall continue for ever.

11 If thou reply that thou never see God restore^d answer, the fa^^th
oftentimes in thy self, who wilt not open thine eyes to see and acknowledge,
that, it is he who preserves thee with his blessing and increases thy goods.
Moreover, is thy money that thou lendest to man, returned thee within three
days* Can thou not be content to forbear, it a whole year? And with God a
thousand years are but as one day, he is faithful: The time of his payment is
peradventure nearer then thou think: for thou know not whether thou shall
live a year, or perhaps a day. But that is it that we said before: Thou
beheuest no more then thou see: Thou think nothing good, but what sauoreth
of the flesh: some small delay of payment makes thee to think t^^t God is
bank^out: And being not acquainted with God^, providence, thou ^^^lest more in
man then in God: And so, esteeming more of man then of God, thou renounces^
God. But to the end to correct this folly, acknowledge and confess that herby
thou do abolish al faith and hope of things ^^^sible and to come, and buriest
up Gods providence, together with the daily experience of his care for us,
wherein he shows himself our comm^^^ (...) father, our protector and savor.

12 Moreover, thou art to understand that true confidence is grounded upon
three pillars. Fri^^, upon assurance that God knows as well our necessities,
as the remedies requisite for the same: secondly, that he is able to help us:
thirdly, that he is willing. If therefore any of these three do fail, our
trust is in vain. So contrariwise, whosoever trusts in him that knows his
want, and the remedy for the same, and withal is both able and willing to
deliver him, the same man is well grounded and cannot be deceived in his hope
and expectation. There is no certainty in the power, will, or knowledge of
man, But God contrariwise in his infinite wisdom knows all things, in his
power can do all things, and in his will, will do all things which he thinks
fit and convenient for our good and salvation. It is mere folly therefore to
trust more in man than in God. That we may then Amend, let us change our
minds, and hereafter repose more trust in God than in man, yea, in God only,
and not in man. And to that end, let us remember how the holy Ghost curses him
that does otherwise, saying: Cursed be the man that trusts in man, Iere 17.5
Psalm 1.
and makes flesh his arm, he shall be like the barren heath in the
wilderness. And contrariwise, Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord. He
shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of waters, Psalm 146.
that shall bring forth her fruit in due season. Put not your trust (says
David) in princes, nor in the son of man, for there is no help in him. And
why? Because when they have taken upon them to help you, God takes away
their breath, and all their enterprises do come to naught. But thy God, O Sion
(says he) lives from generation to generation, and therefore blessed is the
man that has God for his help, whose hope is in the Lord.

13 Some men there are possessed with this double folly, that albeit they trust
in man, yet will give out, that their trust is in God. But they deceive
themselves: for properly their trust depends upon the pledges that God has
given them, not upon God. As when they are well provided for, when they are
gotten into a good trade of merchandise, when they have great revenues, strong
towns, mighty armies, fathers, mothers, husbands, and so forth. But in deed
when these pledges and means do fail them, then is their trust in God gone,
then they weep and lament, then they fear and tremble. To be brief, all
trust in God is laid aside, he shall have no more honor among them, than
usurers have among other men, because they trusted the pawnes, but not the men
that delivered them. Let us therefore learn even without pawnes or pledges to
put our trust in God. Let us depend only upon him, and assure our selves of
his help and succor, when all man's help fails. Let us remember, that
trusting in man more than in God, and so esteeming more of man than of God, we
do renounce God, yea, we even rob him of his divinity, wherewith we cloth
man, as Esaias well notes, saying: Esa. 31.3
Woe unto them that go down unto Egypt for help: The Egyptians are men and not
God, their horses are flesh and not spirit By the premises therefore it
appears, that we love and fear man more than God, and that we repose more
confidence in man than in him, and consequently, that we esteem more of man
than of God, and that confessing God with our lips, we renounce and deny him
in our hearts and works. That we may therefore Amend our lives, let us
renounce this so pernicious solly, to esteem more of man than of God. And
contrariwise, let us love and fear God, reposing our whole confidence in him
only, as in him who only is unto us all in all: for man is nothing but in God.

The third Folly. To think that we shall live ever. Chap. 4.
ANtigonus who succeeded Alexander the great in part of his dominions, being
recovered of a certain sickness, said: Plut. in his Apothegines
That by the same, among other documentes, he had learned that he was
mortal. Wherein he lays open the common opinion of man, who thinks that
he should live ever. And in deed such is our inclination to incredulity,
that upon the long dela^e of any thing that we have a while expected, we
conclude that it will never come to pass. So the evil servant mentioned by
Saint Mathewe, seeing his master tarry away so long, Mat. 24.48
imagined and concluded that he would never come. 2. Pet. 3.3
Heereto has the saying of Saint Peter relation, In the last d^ie there will
come mockers, which will say: Where is the promise of his coming for since
that our fathers dyed, all things continue alyke from the beginning of the
creation. Thus we see how the scorners, only of the dela^e of the coming of
Christ, can take occasion to believe that he will not come at all. As also
when God himself by his servants threatens them with death, they turn it to
a scorn, saying: Let us eat and drink, Esa. 22.13 Esa. 28.15
to morrow we shall die. Again, We have made a covenant with death, and with
hell we are at agreement: Though a scourge run over and pass thorough, it
shall not come at us. Even so we likewise, when we hear of death, yea, and
daily see the examples thereof, yet because it forbeareth us a while, and
takes no hold of us, do imagine with our selves, Cicero in hi^ book of old
age.
that it shall never come at us. And this is it which a certain Ethnike, the
prince of all Latin Orators signified. Where he said that there is no man so
over taken with age, but that he weeneth to live yet one year longer. Thus
does he think to live ever, considering that albeit he has lived a hundred
years, yea two hundred, yet still he is of opinion that he may live one year
longer, and when that is past, yet one year more: and so by one and one, for
ever.

2 This does the common course of man confirm. We all with our lips do
confess that once we must die, and that death is the gate either to heaven or
to hell, which not withstanding, what one person does live, as either hoping to
go to heaven, or fearing to go to hell? If we see that resolutely within two
or three days we must die: then is there none of us but is sorry that he
offended God, that ever he lived in fornication, drunkenness, deceit, riot and
other excess, in a bad conscience deuoide of the fear of God. Then will we
desire to recover, that we may Amend: Then will we vow to God that if he will
prolong our lives we will walk uprightly: Then will every one with that he had
cut off some of his pleasures and excess, to the end therewith to have
relieved the necessity of the poor: Then who could not be content wholly to
have been given to the service of God: to have had more care of his soul then
of his body: of the life to come then of the life present? We confess that
when death draws near we will use these and such like complaints and
lamentations. Yet now whiles God graunteh us time and means to live according
to the same, why do we it not? Wherefore do we not make have to live in like
sort as being at deaths door, we wish we had? Surely because we never think
to die.

3 When a man after condemnation is returned to prison, all his mind runs
upon death: he detesteth his former life: he falls upon his knees to pray to
God: he regards no soft bedding, delicate fare, or costly apparel. Yea if he
be such a one as fears God, all his cogitations are bent to life
everlasting: and forgetting the world and worldly business, he conce^^eth
great joy in that he is so near the gate and possession of the kingdom of
heaven. This sentence of death passed upon us the first day that we came into
this world. Our souls are as in a prison in our bodies: we attend only the
time of execution: we all confess we must die, yet w^t we not whether
within a day or an hour. All this notwithstanding, who either feels or
shows himself ready, or who provides to die as does he that has received
his sentence from an earthly judge? But what is the cause of this our dullness
and folly? Even because we think not to die, but do imagine that our lives
shall last for ever.

4 If either woman or maiden preparing costly raiment, with exquisite attires
wherein to show her self at some marriage feast, should begin to find her
self evil at ease: and withal that her Doctor or Physician having felt her
poulse, should assure her to dye within one fortnight, would she think any
longer to proceed with her pomp, feasting and pastimes? No, she would then
fall to weeping and prayer, to giving of alms, and reproving the vanity of
the world, she would advertise her companions to beware and to avoid the same.
But God who knows the length of our days, has already warned us of our
death: he says it is at hand: he has not promised fourteen days, neither
two, nor one, no not one hour. Wherefore do our minds then run upon the
course of the world? Why do we so delight in vanity, riot and excess?
Wherefore do we not rather employ our selves upon meditation of heavenly and
eternal felicity? And why do we not bestow our time in such works as in our
death may minister comfort and joy? Forsooth because we think to live ever.

5 We do read of Philip, king of Macedon and father to great Alexander, that
every morning one of the gromes of his chamber at his first waking, said unto
him, O king remember thou art a mortal man. There is also a common posie,
written upon many tablets and ringes Cogita mort, that is, Think to dye. Why?
Was king Philip so forgetful of his mortality that he must be put in mind
thereof every day? Or must we Christians be put in mind of death by painted
tablets or ringes? But as the end as well of the speech to the king, as of this
tablet tends only to advertise us to live as we should dye, so are they
likewise objections to convince us of such folly and giddiness, as makes us
to think that we shall not dye: Which truly is a great folly.

6 We commonly use to say, that experience is the fools s^hoole-house: The
reason: For that albeit they be not capable of discourse and reason, yet at
the least by experience they can learn that apples and pears will at length
rot, that green trees once cut down do grow fear: that grass mowen down
does wither: that flowers gathered do fade: for all this does experience by
the effects teach them. And this doctrine of experience is so certain, that
if a Philosopher should go about to prove the contrary by reason and
discourse, as for example That fire is cold and snow hot, he should show
himself but a fool ready to be referred to the school of experience, and
willed to put his finger in the fire, or hand into the snow. Yet are our
selves more foolish, in that so much experience cannot persuade us to believe
that man is subject to die.

7 Where the Apostle says, that it is appointed that all men shall die. Heb.
9.27
He says no more than has been confirmed by a contynuall course from the
beginning of the world. And thereof does the holy Ghost offer to our view the
registers and tables. As in the fifth Chapter of Genesis Moses writes that
Adam lived 930. years, and then died, Seth lived 912. years, and then died,
Malaleel lived 895. years, and then died, Iared lived 962. years, and then
died, Methuselah lived 969. years, and then died, Lamech lived 777, years,
and then died. Is not here a table which most lively does represent unto us
our mortality, or that we also must die? And in deed, if they that lived nine
hundred years and upward, could not finally be exempt from death, how think
we, with whom the strongest and of best constitution do not live much above
70. or 80. years at the most, and yet few so long, to live ever and not to die?
David was better advised when he said, What man lives and shall not see death?
Psalm. 8^.49
Shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave?

8 But let us leave this little discourse to such as have as little reason, and
proceed to the mirrors and looking glasses that God sets before us. Can we
walk thorough the Churchyardes, and by the graves and sepulchers, and not be
admonished of death? Can we see a dead corse carried to the ground, or hear
the bells ring for a funeral, but the same shall be unto us as a heralde
crying in our ears, O men remember that you are mortal? Are not the heads and
bones of the dead packed up in charuell houses, or laid by the walls, so many
witnesses that we also must die. The world has continued 5530. years, yet does
experience teach us, that if so many millio^s as in all that long time have
lived, Gen 5.24 Heb. 11.5 ^ King. 2.11
not one has escaped death but only Enoch and Elias, who both were translated
and saw not death. Of whom then have they that now live purchased exe^pption
from death? nay contrariwise, sentence is past that they also must die. Psalm
82.6
David speking to the kings and princes of the earth, says thus: I have said,
ye are Gods, ye are all the children of the highest: But ye shall die like men,
and ye princes shall fall like others. Is it not then a double folly in us,
yea, are we not more foolish than the veriest fools, that in this universal and
continual schole of experience, that has stood ever since the beginning of the
world, we cannot yet learn that we must die?

9 But behold yet an other great abuse. This life which we take to be
immortal, is of very small continuance. We think to live upon the earth for
ever, and yet we live but a small time. Psalm. 90.10.
Moses in his Canticle says. The time of our life is threescore years and
ten, and if they be of strength, fourscore years. Of every thousand that come
into the world, hardly shall you find two or three that live to 70. or 80.
years: and yet Moses in the same Canticle says, that this long life of 70. or
80. years is soon gone and we flee away: What shall we then say of the life
of 40 30. or 20. years? Wised. 5.8.
In the book of Wisdom we read that such as looked never to die, but lived
in pleasures, wealth, and honor, did notwithstanding plainly confess their
folly and abuse saying. What has pride profited us, or what has the pomp of
riches brought us? All those things are passed away as a shadow, and as a post
that passes by: As a ship that passes over the waves of water: or as a bird
that flies through in the air: or as when an arrow is shot as a mark. Psalm.
102.12. 1. Chron. 29.15. Psalm. 144.4. Job. 8.9. Psalm. 103.15. Esaias. 40.6. Psalm.
73.20. Job. 8.9. Job. 7.6. Iam. 4.14.
In how many places does the holy Ghost compare man's life to a shadow going and
vanishing away? How often to the grass, yesterday green, this day cut down and
withered? How often to a flower, yesterday flourishing, this day gathered and
faded? How often to a dream or to a nights watch? Job says, that we are of
yesterday. And in an other place. My days are swifter then a weuers shitle,
and S. James compares our life to a vapor which appears for a while and
then vanishes away. Yea the heathen have also noted it, of whom one does say.
In our birth we begin to die: an other, that life is a race from one mother to
another, namely, to the earth. An other: That man is a bubble. And another,
being demanded what the life of man was, made no answer, but entered into his
chamber and straight came forth again: And being required of an answer, said,
that by his going and coming forth he had answered. Thereby signifying that
life is but a passage in and out. Yet do we not so take it. We resemble those,
who beholding the index or hand of a Dial, do by their sight deny that it
goes, albeit experience of every half hour do show the contrary. For so do we
imagine that the course of our lives wastes not.

10 But reckoning the life of a child first by days, then by weeks, Genesis
47.9.
so by months and years before we be aware his life is run even to death.
The Patriarch Jacob, after he had lived 130. years said unto Pharaoh, that
his days had been short, the rather in respect of his ancestors who had
lived 800. or 900. years. What comparison may we then make, where the
strongest that now are, do not live above 70. or 80 years, 1. Ioh. 2.18.
with the eternity that shall ensue this present life? It is not as a drop of
water in respect of the whole sea. So S. John calls the time from the coming
of Christ in the flesh, to the consu^mation of the world the last hour, fitly
dividing the continuance of the world into three or four hours, of which two
or three are spent, so that now we are come to the last. If a thousand and five
hundred years and more, are with him but as one hour, then can 70. or 80. be
but one minute, how long so ever we account the^. It is therefore extreme folly
to think to live ever and not to see death, considering that our longest life
is but a moment.

11 Since then that this false opinion causes us to forget heaven for earth,
the soul for the body, and heavenly treasures for earthly goods, that we may
the rather Amend our lives, let us be of another mind, and now being thoroughly
persuaded that we must die, and that shortly, that there is nothing more
certain than death, or more uncertain than the hour of the same. In sum,
that our life is but as the course of a day, or of an hour, yea, rather as a
minute of time, let us so live as if we were every day to die, yea, every hour
of the day, let us live in such sort, as at the hour of death we may be glad
that we had lived, let us employ this day, hour or minute of life upon such
things as may tend to the joy and glory everlasting, let us walk this day as
if this night we should come to the eternal habitation, let us not build where
we cannot long continue, but in heaven where we shall dwell for ever, let us
make our provision, not where our pi^grimage is so short, but that we may live
where we shall remain for ever, let us take heed that the thorns of this world
catch no hold of us, to detain and hinder us in our course to heaven, from
whence he that is excluded is for ever accursed. The bell at the gate ringeth,
the porter cries out, Make have: let us remember the ten virgins, Math. 25.1
and take oil in our lamps, that when the bridegroom comes, we may go into
the marriage. For one day, or hour, or one minute of carnal pleasures, let
us not deprive our selves of perfect joy which shall never be taken from us:
let us endure stormy weather for one day, that we may have a thousand
millions of years of fair weather: let us patiently bear the tribulations of
one moment of time, which will breed us great comfort for ever: let not the
revenue of one ma^s life, whose life is but a day, deprive us of the riches
allotted to the life of Christ, Ioh. 16.^.
who lives for ever: let us not for one apple, which even already begins to
rot, loose the everlasting fruit of the tree of life, 2. Cor. 4.17
and for the purchase of goods, which immediately we must leave, let us not
forsake the tresures which we may enjoy for ever.

12 To conclude, since undoubtedly we must die, and we know not the time, which
surely will be shortly, let us live as men already adjudged to death, let us live
as not knowing the hour thereof, yea let us live as knowing it to be at hand.
And because it is so hard a matter to persuade us that we must die, and that
shortly, let us say with Moses the man of God, Teach us O Lord, to number our
days, Psalm. 90.12
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. This prayer seems of small
importance. For who cannot reckon from 70. or 80. years? But herein he shows
man's dulnes, that he cannot comprehend the shortness of his life, by counting
that it is not past 70. or 80. years at the most. Also that the holy ghost must
teach us, that as he adds, we may apply our hearts to wisdom. Thereby showing
that the knowledge of the shortness of this life, shall endue us with wisdom
to shun the vanities thereof, that we may apply our minds to those things,
whereof the blessed fruit shall remain with us for ever. Thus we see, how by
renouncing this folly, namely, To think to live ever, and by believing that we
must all die, and that shortly, we shall be better advised, and so amend our
so short life, that at the departure therefro, we shall through Christ enter
into life everlasting.

The fourth Folly. Not to know wherefore we live. Chap. 5
THe folly to think to live ever, is, as we have showed, great, yet is the^
another as great, and no less pernicious, that does accompany it, namely, That
we know not wherefore we live. And in deed, if you question with men, and ask
them to what end God has created them, or wherefore they live: for the most
part you shall have either no answer, or an answer to no purpose. There are, as
is aforesaid, four sorts of creatures in the world, among who^ man is the most
excellent, yet aims lest at the purpose of his creation. First, some have
essence only, as the earth, the sea, the stones, and such like creatures:
secondly, some with essence have life, termed Vegetative, as trees and herbs:
thirdly, some with essence and life, have sense or feeling, as fishes, souls,
beasts, and so forth. Lastly, there is man, who with essence, life, sense, or
feeling, has also understanding and reason. Now ask of man wherefore God
created the earth, he will say for the habitatio^ both of men and beasts, and
the nourishing of herbs and trees. Wherefore the sea and rivers, for navigations
and nourishment of fishes? Wherefore stones, to serve for buildings: secondly,
wherefore God created herbs and trees, he will say, for the food of man and
beast: thirdly, wherefore God created fish, souls, and other creatures, he
will say, some for food, others for draught and burden, and others for other
uses. Yea and ascending higher, he will say that God created the s^^^ to give
light and to minister heat: the air ^o give breath and so of other creatures.
Lastly, ask of man him self, wherefore God created him and to what end he
lives, he will answer. That he knows not. Or if he tell his mind plainly,
he will say: for him self: The poor artifi^er, to nourish his family: the
merchant to enritch himself: The Courtier or Captain, to grow into reputation
and to attain to dignity or honor: others (who are worse then beasts) to take
their ease. Generally all, in this life to provide themselves of whatsoever the
lusts of their flesh may desire: To be brief, experience does evidently
declare, that there is not almost any that knows wherefore he lives, or that
refers not his life to some other end the^ he should.

2 This is a folly worthy great reproof, that man endued with understanding,
can yield a reason for the essence and life of other creatures, yet himself
being the most excellent of all others, wotteth not wherefore he lives, or
wherefore God has given him understanding. This is a most pernicious folly, and
replenished with all ingratitude: for whereas all other creatures created for
man, do continually tend to the end and purpose of their creation, namely, to
serve man, in giving him all things needful for his maintenance: man only not
knowing wherefore he lives, inuerteth the purpose of his creation, referring
to himself his essence, life, feeling and understanding. He manifestly sees
that among al other cretures there is not any created for it self, but to serve
other: yet himself being endued with understanding, is so folish as to think
that he is created not for any greater then himself, but even for himself
only.

3 To the end therefore that we may Amend our lives, we must be better advised,
and understand wherefore we live. The holy Scripture teaches us, that there
are three principal ends of man's life: First, that he should glorify God:
Secondly, that he should attain to life everlasting: And thirdly, that he
should refer every part of his vocation to the service of God. But as the
knowledge of God is a requisite and necessary direction of our lives to these
three ends, so are we especially to exercise and employ our lives in the
knowledge of God, to the end that knowing him, we may refer our lives to the
ends aforesaid. As concerning the first and sovereign duty, which is to
glorify God, it consists in this. That with our mouths we confess, and in
our works we do show, that in our hearts we account him to be as he is, and as
he declares himself toward us. This does S. Peter teach us, where he says
that We should show forth both in words and works, 1. Pet. 2.9:
The virtues of him that has called us out of darkness into his maruailous
light. But what are these virtues. That he is a God almighty, all good, all
wise, merciful, holy, righteous and true. As David, where he exhorts all men
to praise God, for a reason why, adds: Psalm. 117.
For his mercy is multiplied upon us, and his truth endures for ever. That for
the glorifying of God, we must in our hearts acknowledge, in our words
confess, and in our deeds declare him to be the same as he is, it appears
by the four principal points wherein the service and glorifying of God does
consist, and where to the same may be referred: namely, that we repose our
whole confidence in him: that we obey him according to his will: that we call
only upon him in all our necessities: and that we acknowledge al goodness to
come from him. This ought to be the principal end of our life.

4 God has set open two most large schools wherein he reuealeth himself
unto us, that we may glorify him as is aforesaid. First, the creation of the
world. Secondly, the redemption wrought by Jesus Christ. As touching the
creation. God, where he might have contented himself with his glory which he
had from al eternity, vouchsafed notwithstanding to reveal himself to man,
to the end that he knowing him, might confess and magnify him. He therefore
created man to his own Image and likeness, to the end that by the beams of
his brightness, holiness, righteousness and truth, together with the
dominion unto him granted over al creatures, he might be led to the knowledge
of the son of righteousness, goodness, holiness, wisdom and power: to love
him, to put his trust in him, to obey his will, to call upon him, to
acknowledge that all goodness proceeds from him: and so to glorify him. And
whereas notwithstanding the fall of man, God nevertheless does communicate
with us, causing us to feel the wonderful effects of his goodness, wisdom
and power continually and in all seasons: withal, Act. 17.21.
considering that in him only we are, we live and we have our motion: It were
a most monstrous case, that we should not refer to his glory, our knowledge
and feeling of him, which we gather in the communication of so many his graces,
whereof he is both author and preserver.

5 Moreover, the creation of man was as it were his triumphant entry into this
godly palace of the world, built only for him, to the end that the continual
contempl^tion of the wisdom, goodness and power of God shining in the frame
of this world, might be to him a continual argument to know and glorify the
creator thereof. Romans 1.19.
And this does Saint Paul note saying, What soever may be known of God is
manifest in man. For the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power
and Godhead, are seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his
works. There to adding, that men by the same neither knowing nor glorifying
God, as God, should be without excuse. Herein manifestly declaring that the
creation and building of the world, ought to draw us in duty to know and
glorify God. And because God principally shows his power and wisdom in the
heavens, the same are many times called the throne and habitation of the
highest. Esa. 66.1. Act 7.48. Psalm. 19.2.
In that sense does David say The heauen^ declare the glory of God, as most
apparently shining in them, and proceeding forward in this matter, he
attributes to the^ a speech heard and understood throughout the world, whereby
they preach this glory of God. Too great therefore is our ingratitude, if
making our selves dease, we will not hear these heavenly heroulds, when they
summon us to acknowledge and glorify God in them and with them. Psalm. 19.4.


6 To this purpose this also is worthy the noting: That God where he might
have created the world in one day, did nevertheless employ six days
distinctly, as it were to give us leisure to contemplate the work of every
day. Genesis 1.
Moreover, that to the creation of every days work himself gave testimony
that it was good. What ingratitude is it in us if we shall not both diligently
contemplate his works, and getting a taste of the wisdom and goodness of God
in the same, yield unto him al glory and praise? Since therefore that he has
created us for his glory, and the world to be a mirror to behold the same:
also that we can not live, but that continually we must both see and feel in
Gods creatures his power, wisdom and infinite goodness toward us: the
principal end of our lives ought in the creation of us to his image, and the
framing of the world for our use, to teach us more and more to know God, that
we may serve and glorify him.

7 The second point, which yields yet greater knowledge of God, and more
strictly binds us to glorify him, is the contemplation of our redemption
accomplished in Jesus Christ, Colos 1.15.
and of our regeneration, the blessed fruit of the same. Christ is called the
image of the invisible God, yet not in respect only of his divinity, but also
of his humanity. What a representation of Gods wisdom does there shine in
the union of his human nature with his divinity, that in one person there
may be together very God and very man? What a testimony of Gods holiness, is
his dislike of sin, and his justice to punish it, since to exempt us from the
punishment due to our sins, he laid the same and with all rigor executed
it upon his own, and well-beloved Son Jesus Christ? What mercy, goodness, and
love shines in this redemption. That he so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son to the end that all that believe in him might not perish,
Ioh. 3.16. 1. Ioh. 4.9.
but have life everlasting? What a seal of his truth, in that notwithstanding
the ingratitude and unworthiness of the world, he yet in his appointed time
sent the seed of the woman, promised to our forefathers, Genesis 3.15.
to break the Serpents head? To be brief, what power showed he in this
redemption wrought by Jesus Christ, Gal. 4.4.
wherein he surmounted and overcame the devil, sin, death, and hell? But
what does such an image of God, so expressly represented before our eyes in
the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, accomplishing our redemption, shoot at,
but to give us to understand, and earnestly to feel the wisdom, holiness,
righteousness, mercy, truth, goodness, love and power of God the father of
Jesus Christ. That we might love him, put our trust in him, clean unto him,
and call upon him, acknowledging him to be the inexpuiseable fountain of al
goodness, and so glorify him? And the rather, because by this means we are
reclaimed from death and everlasting damnation: we be made the children of God
through the same Jesus Christ, and inheritors of his kingdom and glory.
Rightly therefore do we say that the end of our redemption should tend to
increase our knowledge of God, that we may glorify him. That it is the duty
whereto Saint Paul exhorts us, saying. You are bought for a price, 1. Cor.
6.20.
therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit, for they are Gods. Also
in another place. Ephesians. 1.6.
God has chose^ us to him through Jesus Christ according to the good pleasure
of his will to the praise of the glory of his grace.

8 There is yet another consideration. When Christ gave sight to the blind,
raised the dead, healed the sick, and wrought other like miracles, Mat. 9.8.
Luke 13.13.
the same were so many testimonies and seals of his divinity, and
consequently arguments to induce men to glorify him. As he himself says,
speaking of the sickness of Lazarus, This sickness is not unto death, but for the
glory of God, Ioh. 11.4.
that the son might be glorified thereby. For his raising from death was a
testimony of his divine power. But we al are naturally, as concerning the soul,
dead in sin, blind and sick of a hundred diseases. And as the soul is more
excellent the^ the body, so the illuminating, restoring to life and curing of
the diseases of the soul, are miracles, more excelle^tly representing the
divine power and grace, then those of the body. Of necessity therefore these
miracles being performed in us through faith in Jesus Christ do bind us to
glorify him. And how? By effectual demonstration, that where we were blind,
sick and dead in spirit, we are now illuminated, cured and raised again to
life. And indeed the motions, affections, and holy works of Gods children,
being assured testimonies that in soul they be illuminated and risen again,
are the true means to glorify God. Contrariwise, if we walk as men yet blind,
in the darkness of ignorance: as men sick, polluted in vice and corruption: and
as men yet dead in sin: We do so much, as in us lies, abolish the miracles of
Jesus Christ, and consequently his glory. In this respect Saint Peter says.
Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, 1. Pet. 2.1^.
that they which speak evil of you as of evil doers, may by your good works
which they shall see, glorify God in the day of the visitation. Mat. 5.16.
And in the same sense says Jesus Christ. Let your light so shine before men,
that seeing your good works, they may glorify God your father.

9 But what argument is this, to glorify God in our holy conversation and good
works? Because, as we have before said and showed, the same be testimonies and
effects of our spiritual resurrection, and consequently of Gods power, goodness
and mercy toward us. Whereupon the ignorant, seeing that we, who in the time of
our ignorance were dead in sin, and given over to all vice and corruption,
since we were illuminated in the truth of the Gospel, have by this spiritual
resurrection, declared such an alteration in us, that now we are contrariwise
become as it were new creatures, walking in pureness, holiness and love: may also
glorify God in two sorts: First in this miraculous alteration that they see in
us, as being a work truly proceeding of the power and goodness of God:
Secondly, in this, that by such miracles they be moved to allow and embrace
the same religion which we profess, as being convict that it is truly of God
and not of man: Psalm. 65.1.
To conclude, where David cries out, O God, praise waits for thee in Sion:
He manifestly declares unto us that they which be regenerate through the
redemption in Jesus Christ, are burgeses of Sion and members of the Church, and
bound to praise God: And also that we frustrate God of his duty and
expectation, Psalm. 119 175
if we refer not out whole lives to his glory, saying with David. O Lord let my
soul live, that I may praise thee.

10 The second principal end of our life should tend to attain to life ever
lasting. John. 3.16.17
And indeed: In as much as God has sent his Son into the world that the world
through him might be saved, and that he so loved the world that he has given
his only begotten son, to the end that all that believe in him might not perish,
but have life everlasting, It thereby appears that as the end of our
redemption accomplished in Jesus Christ, is the saving of the elect, so we that
believe in him should in all the course of our lives aim at this, To be
saved by him. Otherwise we do so much as in us lies, reuerse that excellent
and wonderful work of our redemption. God has created man without comparison,
more excellent than beasts, yet if man be not saved, nor attaineth to life
everlasting, he is much more miserable than the brute beast, which passing
over this life a great deal more easilye than man, after death feels no
evil: and contrariwise, the man which aims not at this life everlasting,
after all his calamities and both bodily and ghostly tribulations in this life,
at his death enters into incomprehensible and eternal torments. If man, who
naturally desires felicity, could comprehend the felicity of such as attain
to the kingdom of heaven, likewise the misery and woe of those who at their
decease do pass into everlasting death, the very horror of the death of these
wretches, together with the sovereign felicity of the blessed, would make him
earnestly to covet after life everlasting, and to esteem this incomprehensible
felicity to be one of the principal ends of his life. Such therefore as do
never propound the kingdom of heaven for the scope of their lives, are no men
but beasts, for they never think their souls to be immortal, they believe not
that they must die, neither do they remember that after death there is a hell
and eternal fire prepared for those, who living here, do never seek after
life everlasting. Yea, Mat. 16.26
What does it avail a man (says our savior Jesus Christ) to win the whole
world, and to loose his own soul. Luke 9.23
This life being unto him a high way to death, and to a fiery torment that
shall never be quenched.

11 Let us not therefore make riches, honor, or other carnal commodities the
level of our lives, but let us aim at the celestial and eternal life, as
Jesus Christ admonishes us, saying, John 6.27
Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for the meat that endures to
everlasting life. Again, Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness,
Matthew 6:33.
and all other things shall be ministered unto you. But we cannot attain to
this eternal life without the knowledge of God, that we may put our trust in
him, call upon him in all our necessities, obey his commandementes, and with
thanksgiving acknowledge that all goodness comes from him. And in deed, we
cannot trust in God, neither call upon him, unless we be assured of his will
and power to help us, neither can we obey him with any kindly obedience,
which consists in love, unless we know how deeply we be bound both to love
and obey him: as also we cannot acknowledge all goodness to proceed from him,
unless we know him to be the fountain of all goodness. This therefore must
be the end of our life, even to increase in the knowledge of God, that by
reposing our confidence in him, by calling upon him, by obeying him, and by
acknowledging him to be the fountain of all goodness, we may attain to
life everlasting.

12 True it is, that in the creation of heaven and earth, and in the conduct
and government thereof, he reuealeth himself unto us, and makes us to feel
that he is a God almighty, al wise, al good, and well doing, howbeit
especially in Jesus Christ, as is aforesaid, do we know God. God, I say,
our God, father, and savior, almighty, wise, holy, righteous, merciful,
good, and true. And this is the knowledge wherein God is truly glorified, and
by the which we obtain life everlasting, as Jesus Christ himself does
teach us, John 17.1
saying: Father, the hour is come, glorify thy son, that thy son also may
glorify thee: As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to all them that thou have given him. And this is life eternal,
that they know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus
Christ. And in deed, as when a man is loath to go out of his way, it is
requisite he should know both whether and which way to go: so have we both in
Jesus Christ, very God and very man. For in that he is God, Augustine of the
City of God, li. 11. c. 2
and consequently, life, to him we must go: and in that he is man, by him we
must come unto God, and be united with him, that we may obtain life
everlasting. And in that sense does he call himself the way, John 14.6
the truth, and the life. If he be the life, he is the place whether we must
go: and if he be the way, by him we must travel to attain to life
everlasting. As also by calling himself the truth, he teaches us that he is
the accomplishment and truth of all that before time was figured touching life
everlasting, and the means to attain to the same. Thus the second principal
end of our life should consist in knowing of God, through his son Jesus
Christ: and knowing him, to put our trust in him, to call upon him, to obey
his commandementes, and to acknowledge him to be the fountain of all
goodness, that so we may glorify him, and glorifying him, attain to life
everlasting.

13 Moreover, the end of glorifying of God and our salvation, will be a ready
means to make us to live according to God, for it will be a continual
advertisement and rule to bridle us from al thoughts, affections, words, and
deeds, contrary to the glory of God and the salvation of our souls,
considering that being contrary thereto, they overthrow the two principal
ends of our life.

14 Now let us come to the third end of our life, which is to be considered in
the particular vocation of every man. This end ought not to be our profit,
honor, or other carnal commodity, but that in serving of men we may serve
God. God the creator and redeemer can well enough preserve both our bodies and
souls without the ministry of men: but thus far he honoreth us, as to
vouchsafe to work his works by us. 1. Tim. 4.16
And in this consideration does he give, and has given us shepherds and
ministers of his word, to the end, as S. Paul says, to save those that harken
unto them, by illuminating their hearts, creating says in them, and by
reforming them to obedience through the means of the holy ministry, with the
efficacy of his holy spirit, blessing the labors of his servants. In this
respect also, vouchsafing there should be food for the body, he has appointed
some to be husbandmen to til the earth, some to be millers, and some to be
bakers. For the furnishing us of apparel, that some should be shepherds, some
shearers of sheep, some carders, some spinsters, some weuers, fullers, diers,
tailers, etc. For the providing of us of houses, that some should be
carpenters, masons, etc. To be brief, that there should be an infinite number
of artificers and merchants, whose function is, to furnish all things requisite
for the entertainment and maintenance of the body. He also ordains kings,
princes, and magistrates, by their authority to keep every one within the
compass of his vocation, and so to execute their office, in the maintaining of
the good and punishing the wicked. Thus God fulfilleth his work and will in the
preservation of our bodies and salvation of our souls, Col. 3.24
by the emploiment of men in his service, every one according to his vocation.
Neither is there so much as the bondsman but does serve God by serving his Lord
as S. Paul says, That by faithful service to their masters they serve the Lord.

15 Hereby it appears that the end of man's life ought to rest in the serving
of God, by serving of men in their vocation. It does not therefore consist
only herein, that the artificer should get sufficient to maintain his family,
the merchant to obtain ric^es, other men credit, dignity, and carnal
commodities: For this is the serving of our selves, not of God, albeit men for
the most part do thus corrupt and profane their labors, works, and life,
living to another end than they ought. And in deed, if any man give alms to the
end to be seen of men, every one will confess that his deed is naught worth.
If a minister preach Gods word, only to get reputation, and not simply for the
salvation of souls, he prophaneth his vocation: In like manner, the merchant
in his trafique, seeking not to serve God by serving of men, but to enrich
himself, peruerteth his vocation and the course of his life, because he lives
not to serve God, but to serve himself.

16 Why, will some man say, Has not God commanded every man to labor in his
vocation for the maintaining of his family? It is true, but we do misconster
this ordinance of God. For his meaning is, that every man should have this end,
to serve God by the serving of men. And in reward and recompense of the service
that we do him, he ordains that the artificer shall receive the reward of
his labor, as from the hand of God, whom he serves by serving of men, and so
may have wherewith to maintain his family: That the merchant should sell his
commodities for more than it cost, wherein the surplussage is the reward that
God paieth him for his service. Likewise that the servant, man or woman, shall
receive food and some wages for service don to God in serving of men. Who so
therefore makes not this the end of his vocation, namely, to serve God by
serving of man, he does not refer his life to the right end, and so
prophaneth and peruerteth the same.

17 Herein do we greatly wrong our selves, for, if we lived to serve God in
our vocation: besides, that this service done to God, should be rewarded in
this life, it would also be a path and way to attain to the inheritance of
heaven, as Saint Paul teaches us, saying: The servants that faithfully serve
their masters, do serve the Lord Christ, Col. 3.24
and therefore shall receive of the Lord the reward of the inheritance of
heaven. As also the same Apostle says, Through bearing of children the woman
shall be saved, 1. Tim. 2.15
if she continue in faith, love, and holiness, with modesty. The poor woman
bearing her fruit, bringing it forth, and noursing her little one, abides
much pain, sorrow, and anguish. But if she think that God, who vouchsafes
to continue the world by generation, has called her to this vocation, and that
her whole end in all the service that she does to the little babe, how vile
and filthy so ever, do aim at the service of God, by serving the child: let
her be of good courage, for by such serving of God in her vocation, she shall
be saved, and shall receive great reward in the everlasting inheritance. Yet
not that this service in her vocation is any merit, but only a path
wherethrough God leads her to the possession of the celestial inheritance,
and a work which shall not be without reward in the life everlasting.

18 It is also a great consolation to all those that are called to any base or
vile office in this world, because if they consider that in serving man they
serve God, their vocation cannot be base or vile in the sight of God. His
majesty is so great, that there is no vile or contemptible office or calling in
his house. And therefore if a poor servant when she sweepes the house, and
does other business that seems base, does think with her self that God
has called her to that vocation, and that serving her master or mistres, she
serves God, she shall reap great contentation, and is to expect a reward,
far greater, without comparison, than any mortal man is able to give. For as
God is great, so does he greatly esteem of service done unto him: And such is
the excellency of his children, that they are not to imploie themselves in the
service of men, were it not that they hope for better reward than from men.
His will therefore is, that in serving of men they should look for reward, not
from men only, but also from God, considering that by serving of men they do
serve God. And thus so long as we direct the end of our lives in this sort to
serve God, by serving of men: we shall never need to doubt, or to take care
for the maintenance of our bodies in this life, but may wholye repose our
selves upon so good a master, whom we serve. And in deed, if the servant
that faithfully serves his master is not to care for his necessities, but
looks, and that justly, that the master whom he serves should provide for
the same, should not we do God great injury and dishonor, if referring our
whole lives to his honor, we should fear that he would suffer us to starve?

19 Moreover, if we had perfectly learned that the end of our lives should
tend to serve God by serving of men, that one lesson would subvert all
fraud, deceit, extorsion, and unlawful trafiques. For by deceiving thy
neighbor, and wrongful incroching of his goods into thy hands, can thou
serve thy neighbor, or God, who cannot aduow, but does detest all such
iniquity? No, but contrariwise, the injury done to thy neighbor, proves
that in hew of serving of God, by seeking to serve thy self, thou seruest the
devil, who will return but a woeful reward to his servants.

20 By the premises we perceive the danger of this fourth folly, and how
pernicious it is not to know wherefore we do live. To the end therefore to
Amend our lives, let us be better advised hereafter, and learn first, that
the principal end of our lives should tend to increase in the knowledge of
God, that knowing him we may glorify him, and to our selves obtain life
everlasting. Next, that every man in his vocation have this intent, To serve
God by serving of men, and so to fulfill the sum of the law, which imports
that we love God with our whole heart, and our neghbour in God, and for the
love of God.

The fifth Folly. To judge of man's felicity or misery by the outward
appearance. Chap. 6.
THe fifth folly rests, In judging a man's felicity or misery by the outward
appearance. This folly is so much the rather to be noted, as it is more common,
even in the children of God, and the rather to be rejected, as it is the more
pernicious. The Prophet and author of the 73. Psalm, confesses that himself
was overtaken with this folly, esteeming the wicked, by reason of their
prosperity, to have been blessed, and contrariwise, such as walked in
pureness and holiness, drinking up tribulations in abundaunce as water, to
have been accursed. Yea, he acknowledges that the outward prosperity of the
wicked, and the afflictions of the righteous, did so trouble him, that his
feet had almost slipped to join with the wicked: that he thought there had
been no providence in God, and that therefore it was lost labor to serve him
in holiness. But afterward he plainly confesses, that this was an extreme
folly, that he was almost become a brute beast, that he knew nothing, and
that in the sight of God he was but a beast. Jeremy touched with the same
error, Iere. 11.7
enters into argument with God, demanding why the wicked should prosper,
and the righteous be in tribulation. Io^. 11 6.7 Psalm. 22.2 Psalm. 13.2 Psalm.
79.5 Psalm 77 10. Esa. 49.14
Job also confesses, that it troubled him and made his flesh to tremble. How
often does David complain, resting only upon the outward show of his
troubled estate, as if God had forsaken him, as if he had forgotten him, as if
he had been angry with him, as if he had withdrawn his grace and mercy
from him? The Church of Israel, considering her afflictions, entered into
opinion and complaint, that God had forgotten and forsaken her To be brief, al
men naturally have respect to the outward appearance, deeming such as do
prosper to be blessed, and the afflicted to be accursed.

2 This perverse judgment proceeds of another folly and abuse, even this:
That we imagine that all grace, savor, blessing, and felicity, rests only
in honor, riches, and carnal commodities. But as this spark of the image of
God sometimes gives light to our minds, that all things depend upon Gods
providence, yet fall we into this error, to think that God in his wrath and
displeasure rejects all those that are afflicted, and that contrariwise he
loves and favors such as do prosper: and thereof we conclude, that the
afflicted are accursed, and the wicked blessed. As for others, who attribute
all to fortune and adventure, and know no other good or felicity but this
life, they likewise fall into the same error, as thinking all that prosper in
this life to be blessed, and the afflicted to be accursed. And this causes
the wicked to flatter and harden their hearts in all iniquity. Much like to
the Sicilian tyrant, who when he had despoiled the temple of all the gold
therein, Dionisius.
having a fair wind upon the sea, said, You see that the immortal Gods do
favor sacrilege and Church-robbers. The like blasphemies does the prophet
Malachie attribute to the wicked in his days, saying: It is in vain to serve
God, Malach. 3.4.
and what profit is it that we have kept his commandments, and that we
walked humbly before the Lord of hoastes. Therefore we count the proud
blessed, even they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God,
yea, they are delivered. Besides, what is the reason that many having knowledge
of the truth, do yet rest plunged in idolatry? And others also that had
forsaken it do return thereto, but even that considering of the outward
appearance of Idolaters, inioying their goods, dignities, and carnal
commodities, and the afflictions of such as follow Jesus Christ, they think
them to be more blessed than those that carry the cross of Christ?

3 What likewise is the reason that so much people, yea, even so many nations
which profess religion, do give over themselves to unlawful traffic, to
fraud, deceit, and other iniquities? Even this, that they imagine that those
men which do most abound in riches and carnal commodities, albeit wrongfully
gotten, are nevertheless more blessed than the poor afflicted that walk
sincerely and uprightly. Our sight is so thick, and our eyes are so dim,
that we cannot penetrate beyond the outward prosperity, and come to the sight
of the iniquity that lurketh under the same, which is undoubtedly accursed by
God, and brings forth mischief notwithstanding whatsoever color it be
shaddowed and clothed withal. We discern only the prosperity of the one,
and the affliction of the other, but do never look to the cause and end of
the same. We see the garment only and not the body, or the body, but not the
soul, the outward work, but not the workman.

4 Let us therefore apply this to our purpose. In the first Psalm it is
said, Blessed is the man that does not walk in the counsel of the wicked,
nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful. And
this may we well believe, if we but look upon the wicked, the sinners, and
scornful, either upon a scaffolde, or upon a ladder ready to be executed to
the death, or cast into hell. But if thou considerest these wicked ones, these
sinners, and scorners, clothed in wealth, adorned with honor, rejoicing in
carnal commodities, thy mind will alter. For, casting thy e^e upon the
garment, the delight of the flesh, thou will think them blessed, yea, thou will not believe the doctrine of David, who says, thou can not be blessed
unless thou renouncest the wicked course of the wicked and sinners. Thou
resemblest those, who seeing a man in a goodly bed, served with all dainties,
and with sound of music, do think him much blessed, but himself
contrariwise feeling the intolerable anguish of the gout or collike, will
complain as a miserable and wretched man.

5 This folly also, to judge by the outward appearance, is so much the greater,
as that thereby we do conclude that we are brute beasts, void of an
immortal soul. Likewise, that being beasts, we are more miserable than all
other beasts. Beasts, fishes, or souls have easier lives than men, especially
than the children of God, who above all other are subject to tribulations.
These creatures wanting understanding, do many times pass over the whole
course of their lives without feeling any calamity, until death, whereof
likewise they have no apprehension. They live without care, sorrow, or other
passions that trouble man. And therefore if man, as beasts, have no immortal
soul, these creatures are more blessed than he, and consequently, the wicked
that live at ease and in prosperity, are much more blessed than the afflicted
children of God, if after death they have no feeling of good or evil. But if
we be fully resolved that man is not a beast, but having an immortal soul,
is after his death to look to go either to heaven or to hell, we will no
longer by the outward appearance judge that the beast, much less the wicked man
in all his triumph, is more happy than the afflicted children of God. Luke
16.19
If afflicted Lazarus, and the rich man, triumphing in pleasures, had had no
immortal souls, men might with some reason have adjudged Lazarus accursed,
and the rich man blessed. But that judgment is to pass upon beasts only.
For as for them, being no beasts, but endued with immortal souls, albeit the
rich man was honorably buried, and Lazarus with beggerie, yet the rich man's
soul being cast into hell fire, cried out that he was, and is accursed: and
that the soul of Lazarus being by the Angels lifted into heaven, was and is
blessed. We read that Croesus king of Lidia, inioying great abundance of
wealth, Plu. in the life of Solon.
and all other prosperity that might make a man blessed in this world, on a
time demanded of Solon, one of the seven wise men of Greece, whether he
thought there were any man more blessed than himself. But Solon answered,
that no man was to be called blessed before his death. Rightly did Solon there
reprove the folly of Croesus, who thought himself blessed in uncertain
prosperity. As Solon likewise being accounted so wise, showed his follye, by
signifying in such an answer, that Croesus had been blessed if he had
continued in such prosperity until his death. Yet if Solon judged that
Croesus could not think himself blessed in all his prosperity, what would
he have judged if he had been a Christian, and had seen the change of
Croesus prosperity, not into that calamity that befell him when Cyrus
afterward took him prisoner, but even into hell and death everlasting? Might
he not, and that justly, have said that Croesus, notwithstanding his
prosperity, even albeit the same had stuck by him unto his death, was never
blessed, but most accursed.

6 Plato, a Heathen, confirms the same by a notable discourse, Plut. in his
consolation to Apolonius
which Plutarch indeauouring to comfort Apollonius upon the death of his
son, does allege. This evermore, says he, was one resolute opinion, that
whosoever departed this life and had lived virtuously, at his death he was
transported to the Islands of the blessed, and there feeling no inconvenience,
inioyed sovereign felicity. And contrariwise, they which lived wickedly and
unjustly, were sent into the prison of justice and vengeance, called Tartarum.
At the first, sentence was awarded by living Judges, and while men were yet
alive, but the same day that they were to die. Howbeit there grew such abuse
herein, that complaint was brought from the Islands of the blessed, that some
were sent thither, that had been wicked and perverse livers. And thereuppon
was the occasion of such abuse examined, which was sound to proceed of this,
that judgment was given while the men yet lived, clothed with honorable
carcases, with riches, nobilitye, and other like qualities. In respect whereof
they found many witnesses, who making their apparaunce before the Judges,
affirmed for them that they were men that deserved to pass to the said
Islands of the blessed. The cause of the error once found out, it was decreed,
that from thence forth there should no judgment pass until after death, when
the souls should be deprived of their bodies, and that also not by men yet
alive, and subject to be abused by the outward show, but by spirits who
should see nothing but the spirits and naked souls of those whom they were to
give sentence upon, to the end that they which in this world had wrought
wickedness in their honorable bodies, clothed with nobility, riches, and
such other qualities, might be sent to torments: and contrariwise, that they
who during their lives had kept righteous, h^lye, and virtuous souls, albeit
in poor, abject, and afflicted bodies, might pass into the Islands of the
blessed. This was the discourse of a Heathen man, who had attained some sight
of the truth, albeit entangled in ignorance and error, yet fitly confirming
our argument, namely, that we must not judge of man's felicity or misery by
the outward appearance.

7 This folly of judging by the outward appearance, does yet proceed farther.
For it can take no place, (at the least wherein to stay and settle it self in
man's heart) but only among those that deny Gods providence, namely, those
that think there is no righteous God, that administreth justice. For confess
that there is a God, and that he is righteous, and thou can not judge of
man's felicity or misery by the outward show. Thou can not (I say) judge
whether he that lives in prosperity be blessed, or another in affliction
cursed. For since most usually the wicked do prosper in this life, and
contrariwise the children of God have most trouble, what should become of Gods
justice, whose nature is to reward evil to the wicked, and good to the good?
A certain Bishop of Verdune, in his Chronicle reports, that one Almauri,
king of Jerusalem, on a time demanded of a certain Doctor, how he could prove
another life after this. The Doctor asked him whether he believed there was a
God: Which when he had granted, It suffices, said the Doctor. For if there be
a God he is righteous: if he be righteous, he must administer justice, in
rewarding the good and punishing the wicked. Now thy self, said he, have
known such a wicked man, who always living in pleasure and honor, slept in
peace. Thou knew such another, a very good man, in continual tribulation,
even to the death. If therefore there be a righteous God, it cannot be
chosen, but there is another life, wherein this good man rests now in
bliss, and the wicked man in woe. Whether this was a true report, or but a
fiction for example and doctrine, yet does it surely most playnelye teach us,
that he that by outward prosperity judges a man to be blessed, and by
tribulation to be accursed, denies a God, in that he denies his justice.
The doctrine of this history or example does Saint Paul also confirm,
saying, That the tribulations of the faithful, laid upon them by the wicked
that are in prosperity, are a manifest testimony of the judgment to come,
far other than the fools do by the outward appearance imagine. The reason he
also adds, saying: 2. These. 1
For it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you, and rest to you that are troubled. Which justice if it be not
executed in this life, he concludes, that it shall be in the latter coming of
Jesus Christ to judgment.

8. It is blasphemy against God, says David, to say that he will not regard
man's transgressions, to punish them according to his justice. We will not
therefore say, Psalm. 10.13.
that the sinner living in pleasure, already condemned in the sight of God,
and waiting but the hour of eternal death, can be blessed, or more blessed
than the faithful and troubled man, who walks through tribulations, to take
possession of the kingdom of heaven. For if by outward appearance we judge the
wicked man that is in prosperity, to be blessed, and the good man that is in
affliction, accursed, we shall abolish Gods justice, yea, even God himself.
And this is the rather to be noted, to the end that when the children and
servants of God do find themselves sometime pricked with this temptation,
they may the better stand upon their guard, with constancy to resist the same.

9 Some men in old time rejected the book of Ecclesiastes, Philast in his
catal. of heretics. c. 132. Iac. Chrisost. polit. in the preface before the
com. on the Canticles.
thinking that Solomon wrote it in his old age, after he had been carried
away by the multitude of his wives. Alleging, that in that book he placed
man's sovereign and chief felicity in the pleasures and lusts of the flesh,
as if there were no other life after this. Some Epicures likewise in our time,
do abuse it to the like purpose, alleging that there is nothing better than
to take pleasure, for at death they see not what becomes of the soul of man
no more than they do of beasts, with many other such like speeches, which tend
to that purpose. But they themselves are in deed very beasts, so to
understand and misconster it. For Salomons meaning tended rather to confirm
the same which we do seeeke to maintain, namely, that no man may by the
outward show judge of man's felicity or misery, because all things fall out
alyke to the one and to the other. And that is his meaning, where he says, Man
knows not either the love or hatred of God toward him, Eccles. 9.1 Eccle. 3.19
if he will judge by the outward show. Then he passes to beasts, saying: No
man sees what becomes of the souls either of man or beasts, namely, with
bodyly eyes. Eccl. 8.12.13.
But when he adds, that It shall be well with them that fear the Lord, and
do reverence before him: but it shall not be well with the wicked, he shall
be like a shadow, because he fears not before God. When also he exhorts to
keep Gods commandementes, protesting that it is the whole duty of man, and
that concluding his speech, he says, Eccl. 12.13.14
that God will bring every thing to judgment that man has done throughout
the whole course of his life, withal adding, that the spirit shall return to
God that gave it. He does sufficiently show that he believed the immortality
of the soul and the life everlasting. But where he seems to commend those
that take their pleasures, Eccl. 5.17
saying, It is comely to eat and drink cheerfully: he means in the common
opinion of the foolish and unadvised, who resting upon this life, and the
judgment of felicity or misery by the outward show, without remembering that
man's soul is immortal, d^ imagine him to be as a beast, among whom such as
are best used are most happy. Howbeit as man is a creature of much more
excellency than a beast, and yet if we regard but the outward show of this
life, the beast is much more happy than man. So we must necessarily believe
that there is another life after this, and therefore conclude, that it is mere
folly to judge of man's felicity or misery by the outward show.

Psalm. 37.
10 Neither is it in vain, that David so earnestly exhorts us to take heed of
this folly and error, to judge by the outward show: as also he is never weary
of admonishing us, not to envy those who outwardly seem happy, but constantly
to depend upon the Lord, and to walk vprightlie in his sight. And in deed
this judgment by the outward show, is not only repugnant to faith, but
utterly abolisheth the same: and not faith only, but also hope and desire to
walk in the fear and obedience of God. The Apostle to the Hebrews says,
that Faith is the ground of things which are boped for, Heb. 11.1.
and the evidence of things which are not seen. Saint Paul also teaches us,
that hope is of things which we see not. Now the foundation and object of
faith is the word of God, Romans 8.23
pronouncing and assuring us, that the righteous and holy, suffering
persecution for his name, are happy, well beloved, and blessed of God: yet
can thou not see this but with the eye of faith: and therefore, in judging of
a man with thy bodily eye to be accursed in his tribulations, thou do abolish
faith. Hope is founded upon the promise of celestial, spiritual and eternal
goods to come. If therefore when thou see a faithful man in trouble thou
presently do judge him to be accursed, thou do abolish hope, which
regards not the time present, but to come. Again, if we were to depend upon
the external judgment and to say that the wicked that are in prosperity, are
blessed: who will dispose himself to endure poverty, and other afflictions,
by walking uprightly and in holiness? Nay, will not all men rather apply
themselves to fraud, injury, extortion and other iniquity, since riches,
honor, and other carnal commodities will redound to their bliss and
felicity?

11 By the premises we may see, what a dangerous and pernicious folly this is,
to judge of man's felicity or misery by the outward show, whereby we abolish
the immortality of the soul, God and his righteousness, says, hope, and all
care and desire to walk in the fear of God. That we may therefore Amend our
lives, let us hereafter be better advised, and judge of man's felicity or
misery, not after the outward show, Mat. 5.
but according to the infallible and assured testimonies of Gods word. Thus
when the ear shall hear these sentences. Blessed are you poor in spirit:
Luke 6.28. Amos. 6.1.
that hunger and thirst: and that mourn: Blessed are you when men hate you and
cast you forth, and say all manner of evil against you for the son of man's
sake. Again, Woe be to you rich men, woe be to you that be satisfied and
rejoice: we be to you that live at ease in Sion. Faith will judge according
to Gods word, that the faithful in affliction are blessed, and the wicked in
prosperity most accursed. Yet if the eye beholding the riches, honor and
commodities of the wicked, should judge them to be happy: faith leaning to
the testimony of Gods word will beat down and suppress the false judgment
of the eye, concluding that it is mere folly to judge of man's felicity or
misery by the outward show: And albeit the world and the flesh do cry out
to the contrary, yet will we harken to, and steadfastly hold this sentence
pronounced by him who is truth it self, saying, Say ye, it shall be well
with the just, for they shall eat the fruit of their works. but woe be to
the wicked, Esa. 3.10, 11.
who seeks after iniquity, for the reward of his hand shall be given unto
him.

10 Let us remember the contents of the 92. Psalm, where David exhorts us to
praise God, to declare forth his mercy and truth, to rejoice in his works,
to cry out that they are glorious, and his thoughts very profou^d. What
thoughts and works? Even that the wicked do spring up like grass, and all
workers of iniquity do flourish that afterward they may be rooted out for
ever. And hereof to give us the more assurance, directing himself to God,
Psalm. 92.
he says. For lo thine enemies O Lord, for lo thine enemies shall perish,
and all workers of iniquity shall be destroyed. But the righteous shall
flourish like a Palm tree, and shall grow like a Cedar in Libanon. Such as be
planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our God.
They shall bring forth fruit in their age, they shall be fat and
flourishing. To declare that the Lord is righteous, and that no iniquity is in
him. And in as much, says he, as man, resembling a brute beast, knows
nothing, and that the fool understands not this work of God, he is the
more diligently to meditate upon this Psalm, which, as the inscription
imports, is a Canticle for the Sabbath, wherein David shows that we are to
rest from all other cogitations, that with quiet minds we may meditate upon
this doctrine. Entering, as in another place he says, into the Sanctuary of
God, and in his word considering the accursed end of the wicked that live in
pleasures, and prosper in wicked consciences: Whom God has set in slipperie
places and caused to sall headlong: Psalm. 73.
how suddenly they are destroyed and horribly consumed. As a dream when one
awaketh: when thou raisest us up thou shall make their image despised. Whereupon
he concludes that it is good to be always with God, and to be guided by his
counsel, with assurance that he will receive us into glory. And therefore
with him let us say. Whom have I in heaven but thee? And I have desired none
in earth with thee: For lo, they that withdraw themselves from thee, shall
perish, thou shall destroy all them that go a whoring from thee. But as for
me, it is good for me to draw near to God, he is my comfort: I have put my
trust in the Lord that I may declare all thy works. Let us therefore repose
our selves in this only wisdom: to believe in him that knows both the
outside and the inside, things present, and things to come: who only is our
competent judge and faithful witness, and cannot lie: Behold how without
leaning to the outward show, we may conclude that the sinner in all his
prosperity is accursed, and the faithful in affliction blessed, likewise how
the contrary opinion is like unto chains and strong roopes to draw men to
live as the wicked and profane persons. 1. Cor. 15.18.
Thus by consideration of the premises, breaking a sunder these cursed roopes
and chains, we may be encouraged to persevere in good works, as knowing
that our labors shall not be in vain before the Lord.

Of the sixth folly. Rather to believe our enemies then our friends. Chap. 7.
AS it is a great folly to Repose more confidence in man then in God, as is
before showed, so is this also a most inexcusable folly Rather to believe our
enemies then our friends. Eccle. 37.11.
In Ecclesiasticus we read this notable advertisement. Ask no counsel for
holiness of him that fears not God: neither of justice of him that has no
justice: neither of a woman touching her of whom she is jealous: neither of a
cowarde in matters of war: neither of a merchant concerning exchaundge: nor
of a byer for the sale: nor of an envious man concerning thankfulness:
neither of the unmerciful touching kindness: nor of the slothful for any
labor: nor of an hireling for the finishing of a work: nor of an Idle
servant for much business: Harken not I say to any of these in any matter of
counsel. If it be a folly to ask counsel of the man that is not so much our
enemy as his own friend in any thing that may concern his own person or
action: What a folly is it to follow the counsel of our enemies that labor
only after our destruction? Of such enemies there are three principals. Who
all are so much the more dangerous, because they dwell in us and round about
us, and to whom naturally we are much inclined to give credit. The first is
self love, or after the usual phrase of the Scripture, our flesh: the second
the world and the third the devil.

2 As concerning the first. Ephesians. 4.21.
Most certain it is that all the lusts of our flesh are so many enemies,
seeking to seduce us, as faith Saint Paul, and fighting against our salvation.
The same says Saint Peter also, 1, Pet. 2.11.
where he shows how our carnal lusts do fight against our souls: Romans 8.
This enemy says Saint Paul, is so dangerous and pernicious that he
engendereth death and damnation in us, Iam. 1.14.
and therefore he threteneth us that if we believe this enemy, we shall
die. Saint James, likewise compares these lusts to a wicked mother, that
conceiueth and brings forth iniquity, and consequently death. All which
notwithstanding, we grow so foolish and senseless as to give ear and credit
to our flesh, rather then to God, whose love toward us is most certain and
incomprehensible. But I pray you, whereto does our flesh counsel us? Only, to
covet riches, and to obtain the same by any means, whatsoever, to aspire to
pre-eminence and excellency above all others: to follow the pleasures and
lusts thereof, 1. Tim. 6.
with other like affections. Yet do we know that God condemns all these
wicked and damnable counsels, Mat. 20.26.27. Mat. 23.12. 1, Pet. 5.5. Luke
21.34. Heb. 13.4. Colos 3.5. Ephesians. 4.22. Romans 8.13. Mat. 16.24.
declaring that Covetousness is the root of all evil: Also that Such as
covet to be rich, fall into temptations and snares and into many foolish and
noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction. Protesting that
they that will be first shall be last, and he that exalts himself shall
be brought low. That he resists the proud but gives grace to the humble:
Exhorting us to take heed that our hearts be not overcome with surfeating
and drunkenness: pronouncing woe against whoremoungers and adulterers. To be
brief, that in many places he admonishing us to mortify this our flesh, to
put it off, to deny it as an enemy that gives us deadly and damnable
counsel.

3 Nevertheless let every man examine his own conscience, and consider the
common course of men, and so judge whether every one in general seeks not to
become rich, to grow into credit, and to be exalted above his fellows:
Whether they do not love and hunt after the commodities and lusts of the
flesh: Whether they envy not such as get before them: To be brief, whether
they give not more credit to the counsel of the flesh then of God. Experience
is but over evident. The only example and plain confession of Saint
Augustine, Augustine in his meditations. Cap, 4.
a man endued with great wisdom and holiness, shall at this time suffice.
He speaking of covetousness, ambition, pride, pleasure and other the lusts
and affections of the flesh, says thus: I have a whole army of traitors
within me, who under color of friendship are mine enemies. And yet behold,
with them have I lived from my youth up: them have I pleased, them have I
believed, They be the friends whom I made much off, the master whom I
obeyed, the Lords whom I served, the domestical servants with whom I was
conversant, the councelours whom I trusted. If therefore it be such a folly
to believe our enemies, let us hereafter be more circomspect and wiser: Let
us no longer credit this enemy, which does so possess us, that he is even
our self. But let us believe God, our true and perfect friend, as knowing
assuredly that all his counsels are faithful, and that all his commandments
do tend to our good and salvation.

4 Our second enemy to whom we give too much credit, is the world. By the
world, we understand the common course of mankind, which is, to give themselves
to wickedness, regarding only this present life, without any care of the
kingdom of heaven. In respect hereof does Saint Paul call the world wicked,
and S. John says That the whole world is set upon iniquity. The same Apostle
sets before us sundry examples of the corruption and wickedness of the
world, saying. All that is in the world, Gal. 1.4. 1. Ioh. 5.19. and 2.16.
as the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life, is
not of the father of heaven. By the lusts of the flesh, he understands a
desire to live at ease and delicately, without caring for any thing, but what
may concern the profit and commodities of this life. By the lusts of the eyes
he comprehends the vanity of unchaste looks, bravery, pomp, and other
superfluities. And by pride, ambition, haughtiness, vain confidence and self
love, evermore conjoined with the contempt of others.

5 This world is unto us a mighty and strong enemy, in respect that being so
corrupt and vicious, it inuiteth, and by the example thereof allureth us to
follow it, and so to abandon our selves to the same corruptions, wherein (such
is our folly) we are ready to believe it. And indeed experience shows, how
easily we are drawn to confirm our selves there to. The ease of the flesh
which some men do enjoy. The lusts and pleasures wherein they do rejoice. The
riches that make them to be honored. The reputation to be mightier then others,
with the banquets and sumpteous attire, do all make a fair show, whereby to
flatter, move and allure us to follow them. And as every one is ready to
believe whatsoever he desires, so do we easily suffer our selves to be
persuaded to follow this world, whereto we are naturally inclined.

6 That the Adamant draws the iron unto it, is truly a secret of nature: but
for the world to draw us there to is a matter as natural, as for the water of
a river to run down the chanel, as for a chariot to run down a steep
hill: or seeing another yaune to yaune after him, or hering another sing, to
fall on singing. For being naturally given to the corruptions of the world, we
shall need no soliciting thereto, the only sight of the thing we love, is
sufficient to hale us forward, yea eue^ to force us. As the wanton harlot
allureth her lover: the bayte upon the hook the fish: and the infected air
infecteth all that live in it. The world resembles a violent stream, that
carries away all such trees as have taken no sufficient root. To be brief it
falls out with us as with those that live among colliers or millers, who
hardly can shun defouling with collow or meal.

7 And indeed, it is but too common, that where we ought through our holy
conversation to allure the worldlings to follow us, contrariwise the world
being stronger then we, carries us away therewith. Phil. 2.15.
Whereas it were our parts to serve as burning lamps, shining in the midst
of a crooked and perverse generation, whereby to withdraw the worldlings out of
their blind and crooked ways into the paths of light, truth and salvation:
contraiwise the darkness of the world does quench our light, and cause us to
wander in the darkness. This does Chrysostom note, saying: If the good
converse with the bad, the good will sooner grow worse, then the bad better:
also one scabbed sheep will sooner infect ten clean ones, then the ten
clean ones will cure one scabbed one. Yet if we suffer our selves to be so
persuaded by the entisements of the world, that after the examples of others we
do but a little neglect the care of our souls that we may gather goods, and
that we follow others in the lusts of the flesh, in superfluity of banquets
and costly attire: the gold, the silver, the exquisite moueables, the apparel
and food, will be unto us so many fools cappes upon our heads, crying out
alowd that we are indeed very fools, that will believe our enemy. Iam. ^.4.
Ioh. 2.15.
If then we purpose to Amend our lives, we must be better advised. We must
remember that we can not continue friendship both with the world and with God:
And that the love of the world is enmity with God, and so with S. John's
exhortation conclude: not to love the world: but wholly to resolve to leave and
forsake the counsel of the world, which is our enemy and to believe the
counsel of God our true and perfect friend.

8 Our third and principal enemy is the devil. Whom Jesus Christ does
therefore term, the enemy, which also this name Satan does signify, Mat.
13.28
thereby to advertise us to take heed of him. And indeed all his counsels and
endeavors do tend to death, and therefore is he also called a man-slaier and a
murderer from the beginning, and so did he show himself toward our
forefathers, Ioh. 8.44.
when under color of favor to Eve, he persuaded her to eat of the forbidden
fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Genesis 3.
Whereupon God even then proclaimed as it were with the found of the trumpet,
open war between Satan and us saying. Genesis 3.15.
I will put enmity between him and the seed of the woman. If he durst
presume to enter into the earthly Paradise to assault and deceive our first
fathers, while they yet did bear the image of God: Also, if sense, Mat. 4.1.
Luke 4.1.
he durst be so bold as to follow Jesus Christ into the wilderness, and there
assault him with his temptations forty days and forty nights, and lastly to
make those three mighty assaults mentioned by the Evangelists: are not we to
look that he will be, 1. Pet. 5.8.
as Saint Peter says, as a roaring Lion round abount us, seeking whom he may
devour? He also is so much the more dangerous an enemy because he is
invisible, because he is never weary of sighting, 2. Cor. 11.14.
because he can transform himself into an Angel of light, Ciprian in his
tenth tract in zeal.
that he may the more easily seduce and deceive us. Saint Ciprian expounding
this place of Saint Peter says. The devil sets before our eyes entising
pleasures, that by the sight of them he may supplant our chastity. He tempts
our ears with the sweetness of music, that by the hearing thereof, he may
weaken our Christian strength: By bitter words he moves our tongue to evil
speaking, and and by injurious deeds provoke our hands to sight and slay:
he offers unrighteous gain, whereby to enduce us to fraud, and pernicious
profit, to kindle covetousness in our souls: he promises temporal honors,
whereby to defeat us of Celestial: he shows falsehood, that he may take
from us all truth. To be brief, he practices cunning in time of peace, and
violence in persecution? Is it not then extreme folly, yea even desperate rage
to believe such an enemy?

9 But you will say, who will be so unadvised as to ask or take counsel of
him? When speaks he unto us? Even when under the pretense of Gods providence
he gives or offers unto thee riches, honor, dignity, pleasures, carnal
commodities: to be brief, prosperity in all thy affairs. For think thou
that he will not propound with them the like condition as he did to Jesus
Christ, when he said, Mat. 4.9.
All these will I give thee, if thou will worship me? Indeed he does not
always speak so like a devil: But coming as a friend to serve thy turn,
and to please thee in thy desires, thou shall well find that in effect he
tempereth some poison or pernicious counsel among: either that thou should
dissemble the known truth, yea even renounce it: or to neglect the holy
ministry: or to dispense in practices nothing agreeing with charity, equity,
or upright dealing: yet covered with the cloak of custom and iniquity of the
time, which will not bear better dealing, telling thee that if thou be a
sheep the wolf will devour thee: that the simple are not to deal in the
world: and that thou must live and houle with the wolves.

10 Neither is this all, he mixeth yet another poison, that is, he lifts
thee up in thy wealth, that he may make thee to trust therein: to employ it in
pleasure and superfluity: to forget that thou art a mortal man: In sum, to
imagine that thou need not the help either of God or man. On the other side
(for he can turn all into poison) he will take away thy goods and bring thee
into poverty: he will molest thee with long and tedious sickness: he will
make thee a skorne unto men: Hereupon he will seek to persuade thee that thou
may justly murmr against God, complain of him, forsake him, reject, and
even drive him away when he offers himself, as did the Gaderinites when
they drive away Jesus Christ, because of their hogs whom the devils had
carried headlong into the sea: Mat. 8.34.
yea, which is the tipe of all mischief, even to curse God, whereof the
history of Job is a manifest mirror. Again art thou a great sinner? He will
set before thee the rigor of Gods justice to plunge thee in despair. Do
thou trust in his mercy? Job. 1.
He will provoke thee to sin, under pretense of friendship both to God and
thee, alleging that Where sin abounds, grace does more abound: Also that
one Peccaus before thou die, Romans 5.20.
will suffice for all. If thou appliest thy self to walk uprightly in the
fear of God, he will counsel thee to think thy self a Saint and of great
merit in the sight of God. Does he find thee well resolved in the doctrine of
Gods providence, as he found Jesus Christ, Mat. 4.
when he alleged that Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
comes out of the mouth of God: He will solicit thee to abuse it, by
tempting of God, as he thought to have surprised Jesus Christ, when he exhorted
him to cast himself from the top of the temple. To be brief: his illusions
and temptations are infinite.

11 Now let us mark the common course of men, yea even of many of those that
profess the knowledge of God: and let us judge whether most of their works be
not even so many examples witnessing that they believe and follow the counsel
of their enemy Satan: let us remember that al such thoughts, imaginations,
motions, affections and temptations before mentioned, be the counsels of our
enemy Satan: That it is an extreme folly and madness for a man to believe
his enemy: that for the amending of our lives, we must be better advised, and
believe him who is our true and perfect friend, eue^ our God, who speaks to
us in his holy Scriptures, which only do contain assured, holy, and
healthsome counsel. Of his love toward us we cannot doubt, since he has given
us such a pledge, as his son crucified for us. He cannot, neither will he
lie, or deceive his children whom he has undertaken to make blessed. Let us
therefore oppose the counsels of Gods word, against whatsoever the counsel of
our enemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil. Let us follow the example
of David, Psalm. 119.105 24.9
who protested that Gods word was a light to his paths: that the testimonies
of the Lord were his counsels: that a young man shall amend his way by walking
according to the word of God. Let us take heart in the example of Christ,
against the illusions of the devil and our other enemies, Ephesians. 6.17
laying hold upon the sword of his spirit, which is his word, and with him
let us say, It is written, It is written. Psalm. 9.5
Let us remember that Jesus Christ from God his father took the name of a
counselor, to advertise us that we ought to receive and believe his counsels
only, Joshua 1.
and not the counsels of our enemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil. To
be brief, let us put in practice the same which God in old time enjoined to
Joshua, namely, day and night to read and meditate upon the book of Gods
law, and to live after the contents of the same. And so let us assure our
selves, that according to his promise, we shall direct our course wiselye, and
prosper in all our attemptes. Thus we see, that to the end to Amend our lives,
and hereafter to be better advised, we must beware of this Folly, and never
believe our enemies better than our friends.

The seventh Folly. To think our selves wise. Chap. 8.
THis seventh folly, shows man in all extremity and perfection to be a fool.
For being entangled in the six follyes before mentioned, and many others, he
nevertheless thinks himself wise, and well advised. Among a hundred men that
walk up and down the streets, you shall not find one that will be
contented to be called fool or mad man, but will think himself injured: for
every man desires to be thought wise. Yet, they that believe not that there is
a God: they that esteem better of man than of God: they that think to live
ever, and yet know not wherefore they live: they that judge of man's felicity or
misery by the outward show, and they that believe their enemies rather than
their friends. Are not all these in thinking themselves wise, even perfect
fools? yes, and so have we at large proved them.

2 Yet may this folly be more generally considered, in that man (at the least
for the most part) thinks himself to be but a man, created for this
temporal life, and not a Christian, believing life everlasting. For thereof it
falls out, that man being wise, discreet, and advised, as concerning the
world, yet a Christian, foolish and senseless, in matter appertaining to life
everlasting, thinks himself wise, and is in deed but a fool, because he is
wise in the less, and a fool in the principal: wise as concerning men, and
this temporal life, but a fool as concerning God and life everlasting. And we
shall find many presidents, counselors, advocates, physicians, philosophers,
merchants and artificers, wise, discreet, and advised in their art and
vocation, who all in the vocation of Christianity are but fools, ignorant,
and senseless. They are very perfect in matter concerning this present life,
but ignorant and foolish in matter of life everlasting. Neither is it any
marvel. For every man in youth learneth a phrase, mystery, or art, whereby
to grow wise and expert in his vocation, and so to provide for this present
life: but few there are that learn the skill to be true Christians, wise, and
well advised. Behold therefore, how weening to be wise, because they be wise
men, they be but fools, in that they be ignorant and unadvised Christians.

3 By experience we see, that the advocate can be skillful and learned in the
understanding of the civil laws, and pleading other men's causes, yet
understands nothing in Gods law, whereby to plead his own cause against the
devil, and so be justified in the sight of God. The physician can be skillful
and expert in the cure of bodily diseases, and yet not know wherein the cure of
so many the diseases of his own soul does consist. The Arithmetician can
multiply numbers, yet wotteth not how to reckon to 70. or 80. years of his
life, Psalm. 90 12:
but as all the rest, must be forced to pray to God to give him grace to
understand how to count his days, that he may apply his heart to true
wisdom. The Geometrician can be skillful in measuring the earth, yet has no
knowledge of heaven, either of Jesus Christ, who is the way to come thereunto.
The Astronomer is well seen in the course and greatness of the Sun, yet has
no skill in the Son of righteousness, our Lord Jesus Christ. The philosophers
perfect in a number of the secrets of nature, are nevertheless ignorant in the
mysteries and secrets of the eternal salvation of the soul, revealed in the
Gospel. The merchant can keep his book of accounts, to know his estate, and
who is indebted to him, yet wotteth not he what account he must make to God
of his life. The Smith is skilful in making of keys, yet understands not
what the keys of the kingdom of heaven are. Every one can tell what fruit
apple trees, pearetrees, plumtrees, etc. do bear, yet few know what fruit
Christians should bear. To be brief, there be men enough wise and advised, but
few Christians wise and well instructed. What is it for an advocate, a
physician, a merchant, or an artificer, to be wise in his profession, and yet
in Christianity to be a fool, ignorant, and unadvised. To be accounted wise
among beasts that have no immortal soul, yet to be so much the more foolish
and unadvised, as that in serving men wisely and God foolishly, he loses
both body and soul for ever. Augustine in his myrrour for sinners. cap. 6
S Augustine reproouing those that take greater delight in the writings of
Plato and Aristotle, than of the Apostles, calls them fools. His reason:
because they reaped knowledge, like to their study, leaves in sted of fruit,
that is to say, words and no virtue. So men generally thinking themselves wise,
because they be so in matters of this life, are yet foolish and sensles, in
that they understand not what is requisite for the obtaining of life
everlasting.

4 What does it avail us, says S. Augustine, subtly to search out,
Augustine in his book of the spirit and the letter. cap. 1. and. 2
and plentifully to comprehend the nature of all things, if we have no
knowledge of our selves? This sentence, Know thy self, for the excellency
thereof, was thought to be brought from heaven. The rather, to the end that man
standing in necessity of the knowledge of himself, his ignorance, poverty,
and misery, might humble himself, and seek his felicity from other than
himself. The wise Socrates said, that he knew but one thing, viz. that he knew
nothing. And therein he spoke better than he was aware. For if man knowing
much (as he did) must notwithstanding confess that he knows nothing, in
comparison of so much as he is ignorant of, even in such sciences as concern
not life everlasting: how much rather must he, were he double as wise as ever
was Socrates, confess that he knows nothing, if he have no knowledge in the
heavenly knowledge, requisite to the salvation of our souls? It is therefore a
hellish opinion for a man to think himself wise when he is a fool, likewise to
be a wise man, yet a foolish and untaught christian. Jesus Christ speaking to
the pharisees, who thinking themselves skilful, said, Are we also blind? Said
unto them, If ye were blind, Ioh. 9 40
you should have no sin: But now you say, We do see therefore your sin abides
in you. Thereby showing, that as the beginning of a cure consists in the
knowledge and feeling of the hurt, so the beginning of our sight rests in the
knowledge that we are ignorant and fools. That we may therefore Amend our
lives, we must give over this folly whereby we think our selves wise, and
hereafter being better advised, confess that we know nothing, so long as we
know not Jesus Christ. Besides, that how wise, discreet and expert so ever we
be in worldly matters, yet knowing our selves to be fools and senseless in
thinking our selves wise, while we are ignorant Christians, we may be better
advised, increasing in whatsoever may make us become true Christians, and
consequently, the children of God, and inheritours of life everlasting.

5 This is the knowledge of all knowledge, and consists in two points.
First, in that which Saint Paul says, I am not determined to know my other
thing, 1. Cor. 2.2
but only Jesus Christ, and him crucified. Therein declaring, that he that
knows not Christ, knows nothing, but is a fool and deuoid of sense, how
wise and discreet so ever he is in the sight of the world: so he that truly
knows Jesus Christ, how simple so ever the world accounts him, is perfectly
wise and well advised. Secondly, this knowledge consists in the beginning of
wisdom, Pro. 1.7
as the holy Ghost calls it, namely, in walking in the fear of God.
Whereupon David adds, that they which walk in the fear of God and keep his
commandments, Psa. 111.10
are wise. And on the other side Salomo^ protests, that such as despise this
wisdom and discretion are fools. Job. 28.^5
Job more largely speaking thereof, says: Wisdom is more to be esteemed than
silver, gold, precious stones, or any worldly goods. Then discoursing upon
the wonderful works of God, in the knowledge whereof it seems there rests
great wisdom, he concludes his speech, saying: Then did he see it, and
counted it, he prepared it also and considered it. And unto man he said,
Behold, the fear of the Lord is true wisdom, and to depart from evil is
understanding. Hereby we see, that as they that do know Jesus Christ, and walk
in the fear of God, are truly wise: so they that have not this wisdom are
very fools, albeit they think themselves wise, in that being esteemed wise
men as concerning the world, they are in deed foolish Christians in the sight
of God.

6 These seven aforesaid follies do evidently declare, that with great reason
the holy Ghost warns us in the first sermon of Jesus Christ, and of John the
Baptist, that for the good and due Amendment of our lives, the knowledge and
feeling of our natural follies ought to admonish us to be more wise,
circumspect, and better advised hereafter. For, as in believing that there is
no God, In thinking better of man than of God, In thinking to live ever, and so
not to live as if we should die, In not knowing wherefore we live, and so
living at randon, not for the service of God and our neighbors, but for our
selves, In judging Gods children in respect of their outward tribulations to
be accursed, and the wicked thorough their prosperity to be blessed,
Believing our enemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil, rather than God
our perfect and faithful friend. To be short, in thinking our selves wise,
because we are wise as men, and yet are ignorant and fools as Christians.
Being, I say, possessed of all these follies, the same are against us so many
ropes and strong chains in the hands of our enemy the devil, wherewith to pull
us on to sin, and to make us continually to offend God, to heap iniquity
upon iniquity, and consequently to turn away from God, from heaven, from
life, and everlasting glory, and to follow after satan, and so to cast our
selves into the hell fire, in to death, and into everlasting damnation: And
contrariwise, if believing there is a God, and esteeming him to be as he is,
all wise, almighty, all just and true, we do love, fear, and put our whole
confidence in him, If believing that we must die, and that shortly, we do
apply our hearts to wisdom, living as we would even at death wish we had
lived: If knowing wherefore we do live, we do refer the whole course of our
lives to the glory of God, to our salvation, and to the service of our
neighbors: If judging of man's felicity or misery, not by the outward
apparaunce, but by the testimony of God in his word, we do even perceive that
the children of God, albeit in tribulation, are blessed, and the wicked, though
in prosperity, accursed: If renouncing the pernicious counselles of our
enemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil, we do listen unto, and believe
the counsels and admonitions of our God. To conclude, if considerding, that all
discretion, knowledge, and wisdom of man, without the knowledge of Christ, and
the skill of salvation, be but folly. Also, if understanding that we be but
fools and men deuoid of knowledge, so long as we are not wise and well
advised Christians, and therefore we convert and return to God, and walk in
the way that shall bring us to heaven, to life, and to everlasting glory: If
(I say) we do thus convert and amend our lives, according to the will of God,
we shall finally become inheritours of his kingdom, through his son Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The end of the first Book.
WHEREIN MAN IS TO AMEND. The second Book.
That man knowing Idolatry and superstition, ought wholly to abstain from all
participation in the same. Chap. 1.
WE have before declared, that the greatest Folly wherewith man is possessed,
is the offending of God. And contrariwise, that the beginning of all knowledge
and wisdom rests in walking in his love, fear, and obedience. Also, that
as all men are naturally inclined to this Folly, namely, to offend God, so we
ought by amending our lives, hereafter to become more wise and better advised.
Now are we more particularly to understand, Wherein we are principally to
amend. The first point therefore to be entreated of, consists in this, That
man having obtained knowledge of the truth, ought to renounce all Idolatry,
and in no wise to participate in the same. Many there are, who with their
bodies assisting at Idolatry and superstition, do nevertheless maintain,
that they deserve not to be reproved, because they disallow the same in their
hearts. These men should remember, that since Christ suffered both in body and
soul for the redemption both of our bodies and souls, reason would that we
likewise should glorify him, as Saint Paul says, both in our bodies and
souls, which are his. And in deed, inasmuch as man consists both of body and
soul, we are to cleanse both body and soul of all pollution, that we may, as
Saint Paul admonishes, fulfill our sanctification. 1. Cor. 6.9.20 1. Cor. 7.1
It is therefore a most sacrilegious and intolerable division, to give over
our bodies to the service of the devil, when we say that we reserve our souls
to God. Will the worst husband among men be content, that his wise
prostituting her body to whoredoome, shall say for excuse, that she reserueth
her heart for him? S. Paul says, our bodies are Christ's members, and that
applying them to whoredom, we take them from the body of Christ, and make them
the members of an harlot. But the holy Ghost calls Idolatry whoredom: he
therefore that with his body assisteth at Idolatry, dismembreth himself from
Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 6
and makes himself a member of the Idol.

2 In this consideration does the Apostle exhort the Corinthians, to fly from
Idolatry: and least they should reply as these men do, saying: We disallow it
in our hearts: we know that the Idol is nothing: 1. Cor. 10
he adds, I speak as unto those that have knowledge, not to the ignorant.
Then does he bring them back again to their own judgment, and the feeling of
their own consciences by the use of the supper. For as the communicants by
eating the bread and drinking the wine, have a participation in Christ, and are
made his members, so they that be assistants in the sacrifice of the Idols, and
do eat of that that is sacrificed unto them, are made partakers of the Idols,
even of the devil, as he expressly says, because that which is sacrificed to
Idols, is sacrificed to the devil. But (says he afterward) ye cannot drink
the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils: ye cannot be partakers of the
Lords table, and of the table of devils. And to the end to prevent all
replication, he adds, Do we provoke the Lord to anger? Are we stronger than
he? And this he says, to show us that notwithstanding whatsoever we aledge,
that we do not apply our hearts thereto, or that we know that the Idol is
nothing, yet in that we assist with our bodies, we provoke the wrath and
indignation of God, we levy war against him, even a woeful war to us,
because God being stronger than we, will overcome us. Spoke not the same Apostle
to those that had knowledge of the truth, when he said, Be not unequally
yoked with Infidels, 2. Cor. 6
for what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? And what communion
has light with darkness? what concord has Christ with Beliall, or what part
has the believer with the Infidel? What agreement has the temple of God
with Idols, for ye are the temple of God, as God has said, I will dwell among
them and walk therein. Here he speaks of the whole man, and consequently not
of the soul only, but also of the body, as in another place he says, Our
bodies are the temple of God, and therefore he adds, 1. Cor. 6.19 2. Cor. 6.18
Esa. 52.
Come out from among the Idolaters, and separate your selves, sath the Lord,
and touch not unclean things, and I will receive you. I will be your father,
and you shall be my sons, and my daughters, says the Lord. If God will not
receive us to be his sons and daughters, and if he will not be our father, but
upon condition, that we touch no polluted thing, then contrariwise, those men
that voluntarily do touch them, and yet do notwithstanding maintain that still
they are the children of God, do gainsaie the very truth, and deserve to be
cast off at his hands.

3 When God to comfort Elias, said, 1. King. 19.18
I have yet reserved to my self 7000. in Israel, eue^ all the knees that have
not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth that has not kissed him: does he not
show, that he co^de^neth all outward adoration and bodily reverence to the
Idol, and accounts them marks of reprobation. As also saying by Esaias, I
live, Esa. 45.23
every knee shall bow unto me. He shows that all adoration, even in body,
is an homage due to God only. When satan said to Jesus Christ, Math. 4.9.
All these kingdoms will I give thee, if falling down thou will worship me: It
would have sufficed him, if Jesus Christ would have made him but an outward
reverence with his body only. And I pray what do the tyrants, persecuters
of Gods children pretend, but to cause men with their bodies to countenance
their mass? For as they cannot command the heart, nor know the inward
secrets of man, so do they require only the outward view and obedience of
the body. And in deed, such as persecute, even against their own consciences,
the children and servants of God, will not stick to whisper unto them and
say, Believe what ye will, so ye go to mass. If it were lawful to abandon
our bodies to such idolatry, as in heart we do condemn, the cross of
Christ should be abolished, and all persecution taken away. A man might so
profess himself a Jew and Turk, yea, he might countenance and assist all
the greatest and most abhominablest Idolatries in the world, so long as in
heart he dislyked of them. But then what should become of Christ's martyrs?
Wherefore have they suffered death? Why did not they, reserving their hearts to
God, abandon their bodies to the service of Idols, Dan. 3 Manut. and Morel,
upon the pas. of S. Cyptian. And in Saint Augustines sermon of Ciprian the
martyr. And of his passion after the old manuscripts.
and obey the commandments of Idolatrous kings? When Nabuchadnezzer commanded
to worship the golden Image, he required only the outward adoration and
reverence, and yet the three Hebrew princes chose rather to be cast into the
burning furnace, than to obey it. S. Ciprian was herein so certain and so
fully resolved, that when the tyrant offered to save his life, if he would
obey his commandment, and offer incense or sacrifice to the Idol, counselling
him to think upon it: he constantly answered, that he needed neither
consultation, nor deliberation in so just a matter: that he would rather die
than show any testimony of approving such Idolatry. Yet might he have escaped
by yielding only his body to idolatry, and keeping his heart unto God. Some
Judges there are, who having knowledge of the truth, do give sentence of
condemnation against the faithful: in heart disalowing the sentence, yet in
mouth pronouncing the same. Exodus 20.4
Are these men, think you, excusable in the sight of God? When God in his law
forbids making any graven images, or liknes of any thing: Speaks he to the
hand, or to the heart? Likewise when he adds, Thou shall not bow down to them
nor worship them. When (for so the word that he there uses does signify) he
prohibiteth not only to worship and serve the^ in mind, but also he speaks of
the whole man, and rather more expressly of the body, forbidding all
adoration and outward service invented by men.

4 Saint Paul protests that Idolaters shall not inherit the kingdom of God.
1. Cor. 6.10.
Here he speaks to the members of the Church and so to those who knowing the
truth, did not in heart allow of Idolatry: he therefore threatens those that
shall assist thereat in body. Likewise Gods horrible judgments executed upon
diverse, even in our time, as upon Frances Spiera an Italian, and others, who
knowing the truth became notwithstanding assistants at Idolatry and false
service, alowing in body that which they in heart condemned, do take away all
excuse, and make those worthy double punishment, that do pollute their bodies
in Idolatry, and so show an outward testimony of allowing that which their
heart (co^demning the actio^ of the body) do abhor. To be short, what is this
assistance at the mass, and bowing of knees before the Idol, but an actual
testimony that they allow all the Idolatries and blasphemies there committed?
It is an opinion and impression which they seek by their assistance to infuse
into others: It is as if that the body should cry out and say, you see of what
religion I am. The body speaks in liew of the mouth. And thus instead of
confessing Christ and his truth, they do in action renounce him: and so are to
look for no other sentence then the same which Jesus Christ himself has
pronounced, saying. Mat. 10.3^.
Whosoever shall deny me before men him will I deny before God my father. If such
men could but a little comprehend how villanously Christ is dishonored in the
mass, how his office is usurped, his sacrifice abolished, his death made
frustrate, and the institution of his holy supper reuersed, the zeal of the
house and glory of God would even eat up and consume their hearts, whereby they
should be moved to shun and abhor the same, and never to be assistant
thereat.

5 It may seem to some, that I need not to stand so long upon so plain a
case. But there be hipocrites, that dare allege, that they do it because they
would not offend their neighbors. This surely is a goodly charity. First, they
speak against their consciences: for their own hearts do convince the^ that it
is only self love, with the fear of the loss of their goods, dignity,
country, kindred and friends that induces them to such dissimulation. Moreover,
that contrariwise they do by their going to mass and worshipping the Idols,
offend their neighbors. For what is offense, but to cast a stone in a blind
man's way to make him to stumble, that is to say, to give the ignorant occasion
to offend God by confirming them in their error: 1. Cor. 8.9.
and becoming an example, to such as have some knowledge of the truth, to
induce the^ to commit Idolatry with us? It is therefore a double offense, and
deserves double punishment in the sight of God. S. Paul, sharply reproving
such as did eat of things sacrificed to Idols, shows what a stumbling block
they thereby make themselves to the ignorant. Take heed says he least by any
means this power of yours, to eat indifferently of al things, be an occasion
of falling to the^ that be weak: For if any man see thee which have knowledge
sit at the table in the Idols temple, shall not the conscience of him which is
weak be boldned to eat those things which are sacrificed to Idols? And through
thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, Romans 14.23
for whom Christ died. Because that thou who know that the Idol is nothing
and therefore that the flesh sacrificed thereto is not polluted therein, abusing
thy power that otherwise thou have to eat, do by thy example induce the
ignorant to eat without faith and so ^o sin. If then the eating of the thing
which in it self is lawful, is an offense to thy neighbors, and a means to
make him to perish, because after thy example, he eats without faith: how
much more grievous is the offense of those, who by assisting at the mass, and
other Idolatries, in their own knowledge damnable before God, do confirm the
ignorant in their error, whereby they continue their offense to God, and enduce
others to follow them in the same? That good old man Eleazar chose rather to
die, 2. Mac, 6.
the^ by his dissimulation to induce the Jews to eat swines flesh, and so to
offend God. Yea this favor they offered him, that he should eat flesh allowed
in the law that he might commit nothing prohibited therein, only he should
dissemble and make the world believe that it was swines flesh. This is a
wonderful constancy and notable example, to condemn al such as by their
dissimulation give others occasion to offend God.

6 They also make abuckler of the example of Naama^ the Assirian but according
to the proverb, 2. King. 5.
they cover themselves with a wet sack. First, where he speaks of bowing
himself in the temple of Remmon, when his master leans on his arm, he
therein does service to his king, not to the Idol, and so it was but a civil
bowing in respect of his office, and tended not to religion. This does he
confirm plainly protesting he will worship no strange Gods: besides yt he
prays that the bowing be not imputed to him. Such therefore as will excuse
their adoration of Idols by his example, ought rather to confess their sin and
to crave pardon at Gods hand, not for a politic bowing proceeding of some
office, but rather for their worshipping of Idols. Yet is there thus much more.
This Naama^ not only protests that he will not worship any strange Gods, but
also he craves two Asses laden with the earth of Judea, yt at his return into
Syria, he might there upon worship the true God, and so make profession of the
true religion but these men do not abstain from sacrificing to strange Gods,
so far are they from forsaking the false worship of Idols, and public
worshipping, as Naaman did of the true God, according to his word. But albeit
there were (as there is not) some color in this example of Naaman, yet what
reason have they, leaving a path alredie beaten by the example of so many
martyrs, and approved by so many testimonies of Gods word, to enter into a
blind way, where they see the steps but of one heathen man, who was but
newly entered into the knowledge of the true God?

7 As for the example, of S. Paul, Act. 21.26.
in causing his head to be shaven in Cenchrea, and purifieng himself in the
temple with other Jews, The same is but badly alleged, and worse argued from
a matter indifferent (as at that time these ceremonies were, Christ being new
risen) to manifest abomination and Idolatry. As also it is an abusing of Paul's
zeal and charity, who conformed himself, in this matter indifferent, to the
Jews, that he might win them to Christ, to execuse their love of themselves,
in that they conform themselves to the Idolatrous, only for the preservation
of their goods, dignities, and other carnal commodities.

8 As concerning that which they allege out of Baruch, Baruch. 6.3.
where he says, When being captives in Babylon ye shall see Gods of silver,
of gold, and of wood, borne upon men's shoulders, and the multitude before and
behind worshipping of them: beware that ye be not like unto them, but say in
your hearts, O Lord we must worship thee. First, Jeremy says not, Bowing your
bodies before the Idols, say in your hearts. But rather this sentence, as also
the whole sequel of the Chapter is a condemnation unto them. For it does
evidently appear, that the authors intent was to persuade them that these
Idols were false Gods, and therefore that not they were to be feared or
worshipped, but only the true God. Likewise, speaking of the Babilonians that
carried and worshipped their Idols, he says expressly to the Jews. Be not ye
like unto them. As in deed with what conscience could they have worshipped
those Idolles before men, when in their hearts they said and protested before
God, that he only and not the Idols was to be worshipped? Moreover, where the
Author in the same Epistle adds, that all they that do serve them shall be
confounded By that threatening, he indeuoreth to divert the Jews therefro, In
brief, his intent is to teach the Jews, being strangers among the
Babilonians, and in their persons all those that shall hap into the like
condition and estate, when they shall chance to see the ignorant carry their
Idols in procession and serve and adore them, not to do as they do, neither to
fall upon them to beat down their Idols, but rather to lift up their hearts to
God and to say. O Lord, thee nly must we worship. Let the^ therefore, in liew of
wresting this sentence of Baruch to dispense with themselves to be Idolaters
with their bodies whereby to persuade that they be so in their hearts, obey
Jeremy who enjoined those poor Jews, captives in Babylon, to make confession
of their religion, by condemning the Idols and mainteining the true God. Iere.
10.11.
You shall say thus, says Jeremy, The Gods that have not made the heaven and
the earth shall perish from the earth and from under these heavens. He has
made the earth by his power, etc. Wherein we are to note, that albeit Jeremy
writ al his prophecies in Hebrew, yet this one sentence is set down in the
Caldean or Babilonian speech, thereby admonishing the captive Jews to disaduow
Idols, and to confess the true God plainly and sensibly, in a language known
to the Idolaters. If this confession be required of these poor captive Jews,
how can these men be excused, who being at liberty to depart from among the
Idolaters, do assist at their Idolatry, thereby to give the world to understand
that they also are Idolaters, and therefore dare not utter one word in reproof
of the Idols?

9 Since therefore that the first sermon both of Christ and of John the Baptist
do notably proclaim, Amend your lives: Let all such as have attained to the
knowledge of the truth, resolve with themselves to renounce all Idolatry and
superstition, and utterly to deny all assistance and participation whatsoever
therein either in heart or body. Let them remember, that all abandoning of their
bodies to Idolatry, is a profanation of the temple of God: That the yielding
of the body to the devil, and reserving the heart to God, is intolerable
sacrilege: That the denial of the true God and the worshipping of the devil,
is detestable hypocrisy: That thereby they blaspheme Jesus Christ and honor
the Idol: that they give offense to their neighbors, as well by confirming
some in their errors, as by inducing others to follow their examples. But
especially let them remember, that their pretended excuse, will redound to
their double damnation. For if he who thinking to worship God, yet of ignorance
through worshipping an Idol offends and deserves death: surely then he that
boweth his body to worship that which he knows to be an Idol, 1. Con. 10.20.
Luke 12.47.48.
yea a very devil, as S. Paul calls it, offends in far greater measure, and
deserves greter punishment. And so does Christ himself pronounce concerning the
disobedient servant, who knowing his masters will and not doing it, Exodus 20.5.
shall be beaten much more grievously the^ he that was ignorant thereof. And
indeed, it is not only a simple sin and transgression, as in the ignorant:
but more contempt and misprision against the majesty of the lawgiver, as God
in many places complains of his people that they have despised him, Romans 5.20.
yea even hated him as himself faith in his law. And hereto likewise may be
referred the sentence of the Apostle, where he says. That God gave the law,
that sin might abound: because the knowledge of the law, taking away
ignorance, makes the transgression to be conjoined with contempt and despising
of God.

10 The more therefore that we know the inconvenience of Idolatry, the more we
are to detest, abhor, and fly from it, and never flatter our selves in the
presence of God who knows our hearts. It is but a foolish enterprise to
undertake to deceive the Lord, or to think to prosper by offending him. We
fear the loss of our goods, dignities, country and life, if we go not to
mass with other men and counterfeate our selves to be Idolaters as they are:
yet we fear not to loose the treasure and inheritance of heaven, life
everlasting and the kingdom of God by polluting our bodies in Idolatry, even
by the assured testimony of our own hearts. We are not to order our duties
after the easements of our flesh, but according to the word of God. The means
to obtain safety and felicity consists not in provoking God to wrath by
serving of Idols: but if we desire his mercy and favor toward us, we must
renounce and deny our selves and the world that we may worship and serve him
only. Let us obey S. John, who says. 1. Ioh. 5.21. Psalm. 97.7. 1. Cor. 6.20.
My little children keep your selves from Idols. And let us remember that the
holy Ghost pronounces woe to all those that worship Idols. And contrariwise
blesses all those that adore and glorify God both in heart and mind.

That it is not enough that we separate our selves from Idolatry, unless we
also join with the Church of Christ, by frequenting Sermons, communicating in
the Sacraments, and coming to common prayer. Chap. 2.
AS repentance and Amendment of life consists in this, that we forsake sin
and apply our selves to goodness: So it is not enough that we keep both
bodies and souls from Idolatry and superstition, unless that also seperating
our bodies from Idolaters, we adioine our selves to the Church of Christ by
hearing his word, receiving the Sacraments, and calling upon God in the name of
Jesus Christ. The titles that the holy Ghost attributes to this Church, do
evidently declare unto us, of how great importance to the glory of God and
salvation of mankind, this duty of joining with the true Church is. First, it
is in many places called the kingdom of God, yet not without great cause: For
as this kingdom consists in evident and assured knowledge of the true God
and of his Son Jesus Christ, in faith, righteousness, peace, and comfort, of the
holy Ghost, in sanctification, to be brief, in everlasting life and glory: So
is it in the church wherein God manifests himself and reueales his truth and
pleasure. To the members thereof he gives faith, righteousness, holiness, peace
and joy, and finally life and glory everlasting. Contrariwise the kingdom of
Satan consists in ignorance, Mat. 13.
infidelity, corruption, vice, sin and iniquity: in a bad conscience, trouble
of mind, despair, death and damnation. The members therefore of Christ's Church
are the kingdom of God, retired from the power and dominion of Satan, to the
end that God may reign in them by his spirit and the scepter of his word: as
contrariwise all that are without the Church do belong to the kingdom of
Satan: as S. Paul also does say of the excommunicate, that they be delivered
to Satan, who reigns without the Church of Christ. 1. Cor. 5.5. 1. Cor
6.9.10. Luke 13.28. Act. 1.47.
This likewise is confirmed, in that the same title of the kingdom of God,
whereby the Church is signified, is also attributed to that blessed and glorious
estate which the elect shall enjoy after the resurrection. Wherein we are taught
that theris such a conjunction between the Church and that glorious kingdom of
Jesus Christ, that it is as it were the suburbs and gate thereinto: whereupon
also al they that refuse to join with the Church can pretend no portion in
this kingdom of heaven. For the path to felicity imports an ascension from
the kingdom of God upon earth to the kingdom of God in heaven. And that does
S. Luke note, saying that God did daily adioyne unto the Church those that
should be saved, thereby signifying that such as refuse to adioyne themselves
thereto, do minister no occasion to imagine that they have attained the way to
salvation and life everlasting.

2 By another title are the premises confirmed in that the Church is called the
house of God. For as the holy scripture speaks of two sorts of children only,
the one the children of God, the other of the devil: 1. Tim. 3.15. 1. Ioh.
3.10.
so are there but two houses: the one wherein the children of God are gathered
and norced together: the other wherein the children of the devil are scattered
abrod. So many therefore as are in the Church, are the children and domestical
servants of God, as S. Paul also calls them: Ephe. 2.19.
And contrariwise they that do refuse to adioyne themselves thereto, are
forreners and strangers, as the Apostle names the^. Christ himself, Ioh. 14.2.
where he says that In the house of God my father there be many ma^sions,
attributing the same title of the house of God to the heavenly City, which is
the congregation of the elect in heaven, replenished with the glory of God, as
he does to the Church and assemblies of Saints, which do enjoy the ministry,
does admonish us that the house of God upon earth, is the ready way there by to
climb, and the gate that we are to enter at into this house of God. And
co^seque^tly that they that refuse to enter into the house of God upon earth,
have no access or entry into the house of God. 1. Tim. 3.15.


3 This Church is also called a pillar of the truth, in two considerations:
first, because that without the same there is nothing but lying, and
consequently the dominion of the devil, the prince of darkness, and father of
lies: Secondly, to advertise us, that all they unto who^ God has revealed his
truth, are by this title aduowed to be pillars thereof, by confessing, preaching
and defending it before and against all men, yea even by suffering for the
same. Whereby it evidently appears, that such as will not make profession but
refuse to join with the Church, do deserve to be given over to the power of
the father of lies, because so far as in the^ lies, they suffer the truth to
fall and be brought to naught. Gal. 4.26.
But especially we are to note this title Mother attributed to the Church,
which shows her to be the mother that brought us forth: the nouise that
suckled us with her two pappes of the word and Sacraments: the tutrix that
brings up, guides and governs us, until that having put of this mortal
flesh, we become like unto the Angels. And since it is the will of God, that al
they to who^ he vouchsafes to be a father should acknowledge the Church for
their mother: those that shall refuse to adioyne themselves thereto are not Gods
children. Which is more. S. Paul calls this Church, Ephesians. 4.
the assembly of Saints and body of Christ, teaching us that as the members
thereof are aduowed to be Saints and members of Christ: so they that do refuse
to adioyne themselves thereunto, are holden, as being no Saints nor members of
the body of Christ, to be the members of Satan, Mat. 12.43.
whom the Scripture terms the unclean spirit. Which consideration should
minister as great terror and confusion to these, as contentment and consolation
to the members of the body of Christ. When Jesus Christ therefore and S. John do
call upon us to Amend, they do admonish us that among al other things,
renouncing Idolatry, we are especially to adioine our selves to the church of
Christ, to the end to become members of his body, whereby departing from the
kingdom of Satan we may have entry and access into the house of God, where
having the Chruch for our mother, we shall be assured to have God for our
father: and finally renouncing al falsehood we shall be made pillars and
supporters of the truth, by confessing and maintaining the same all the days
of our lives, to the glory of God and the salvation of our souls.

That we ought diligently to frequent Sermons. Chap. 3.
THe premises shall we much the better understand, when we shall more
particulerly be instructed what the Church is, by the marks of the same: And
these are comprised principally in three points: In the pure preaching of the
word of God: In the lawful administration of the Sacraments: and in the
public invocation of one only God in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Concerning preaching Jesus Christ, says: My sheep hear my voice and follow
me: Thereby declaring that so many as hear the voice of Christ are his flock
and his Church, Ioh. 10.27.
and to that sense in another place he says, He that is of God, hears the
voice of God. But how can we hear Jesus Christ who is in heaven? Ioh. 8.47.
He that hears you, says he to his Apostles, Hears me. It follows then
that he that refuses to hear Jesus Christ, Luke 10.16.
when he speaks by his ministers, is none of his sheep: And this indeed is
evidently confirmed by the scope and right use of the preaching of the Gospel,
noted in these titels which the holy Ghost attributes thereunto. The
ministry of reconciliation: 2. Cor. 5.18 Ephe. 6.15. Act. 14.3. Act. 20.32.
Act. 13.26. Act. 5.20. Phil. 2.15.
The Gospel of peace: The word of grace, salvation, and of life everlasting.
For who be Christ's sheep, the children of God and members of his Church, but
only they that are reconciled to God: That have peace of conscience: That
feel Gods favor and grace in their souls: And that wait for salvation and
life in Jesus Christ according to the most assured testimonies of his holy
Gospel? Whereupon we see there is nothing which we are to hold more dear
or in greater estimation then the ministry of the word.

2 Except we be illuminated, we cannot be saved. Now where Jesus Christ calls
his Apostles The light of the world. Mat. 5.14. Esa. 49.6. Act. 13.47.
And S. Paul says, that God has sent him to be a light and salvation to the
Gentiles: The same is likewise meant by all those that are called to preach the
Gospel. Neither are they called light in respect of their persons, but of
their doctrine. Who so therefore desires to see clearly into the way of
everlasting life, must diligently give ear to those whose preaching is the
light. John 3.5.
No man (says Jesus Christ) can come into the kingdom of God unless he be
regenerated. Saint Paul who calls himself the father of the Corinthians, and
says, 1. Cor. 4.15
that he has begotten them to the Lord, does sufficiently declare, that this
regeneration is wrought by preaching of the Gospel. Without faith we can
neither please God nor be saved. The same Apostle says, that Faith comes by
hearing the preaching. If we be not saved, Heb. 1 16. Ephesians. 2.8 Romans 10.15 1.
Tim. 4.16
we are for ever accursed. Saint Paul writing to Timothy says, that by the
faithful discharging of his duty, he shall save both himself and those that
shall hear him. The same Apostle says, that when Jesus Christ ascended into
heaven, he gave gifts unto men. And what gifts? He gave some to be Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, Ephesians. 3.8
some Pastors and teachers for the gathering together of the Saints, for the
work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ. If
therefore we desire to be reestablished into life, gathered unto Christ, and
made lively stones in the temple of God, John 21.15 1. Pet. 4.2 Act. 20.28
we must use this gift of Christ, even to hear sermons by the ministry of
the pastors. Jesus Christ commands Saint Peter to feed his lambs, and Peter
exhorts his companions in the holy ministry, to feed the flock of Christ.
As also Saint Paul speaking to the Bishops of ^phesus, who were come to
Miletum, shows them that the holy Ghost had established them in that
vocation, to the end they should seed the Church of God, which he had
purchased with his blood. He therefore that seeks the food of his soul,
least it should famish and die, Math. 16 15
must labor that it may be fed with the word of God, through the preaching of
the same. Which is more, Preaching is named the key of the kingdom of heaven,
thereby to declare, that as by preaching of the Gospel, heaven is opened to
all that give ear thereunto, and do believe the word preached, so al such as
condemn the hearing thereof, are excluded from the same.

3 Experience has evermore borne witness, and even to this day do testify, what
numbers have bin illuminated, reconciled to God and drawn to salvation and
life everlasting, through the preaching of the Gospel. In one day (says S.
Luke) by the preaching of the Apostles there were added to the Church about
three thousand persons. This efficacy of the preaching of the Gospel, Act.
2.41. Luke 10.18
does Christ confirm saying, that when his disciples did preach it, he saw
satan like lightning fall down from heaven: therein showing us, that satan by
the ministry of the pastors preaching the Gospel, is banished and destroyed.
Do we not even in our days see how by the ministry of men, Math. 13.31
preaching the Gospel, the little grain of mustard seed, as Christ termed
it, is grown into a great tree, that with the branches and fruit thereof
ouerspreadeth many provinces and kingdoms? As therefore there is no famine more
dangerous, than is that whereof Amos speaks, Amos 8.11 Math. 9.48.
saying, God shall send a famine, not of bread but of the hearing of the word
of God, so is there no harvest more necessary and blessed, than that which is
reaped by the workmen of Christ, when they preach the Gospel.

4 And in deed, albeit men when they preach the word, have not in them virtue
and power to illuminate, to give faith, to convert hearts and to save souls, 1.
Cor. 3.7
(for he that planteth, and he that waters, as S. Paul says, are nothing,
but he that gives increase) yet is this one point, which most soueraignlye
commands the holy ministry of the word, that God who has ordained it,
does also accompany it with the efficacy of his holy spirit, that it may
illuminate and save men. Esa. 59.21
This is my covenant with them, says the Lord, My spirit which is upon thee,
and my words which I have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of the seed of thy seed,
from henceforth for ever. 2. Cor. 3.8 Gal. 3.2.
And this is most singularly performed in the preaching of the Gospel.
Hereupon Paul calls it The ministry of the holy Ghost. And in another
place he says, that the Galathians received the holy Ghost by hearing of the
faith preached. And therefore speaking of himself and his fellows, 1. Cor.
3.9.
he says thus, We are Gods laborers, because that God employing them in his
service, wrought in them by his spirit.

5 Yet for the more commendation and authority of the ministry of the word,
Luke 10.16 John 13.30.
Jesus Christ aduertiseth us, that it is not so much that mortal men speak
unto us, as in deed it is God in them and by them. He that hears you, says
Jesus Christ to his Apostles, and consequently to all preachers, hears me,
and he that receives you receives me. In this sense did the Prophets usually
begin their sermons, Ier. 1.9.
saying, Thus says the Lord, Hear the word of the Lord: and made an end,
saying: For the mouth of the Almighty has spoken it. And where Jeremy
rehearses that God speaking unto him said, Ezech. 33
I have put my words in thy mouth: it imports the same that Ezechiel sets
down, Apoc. 10.8.
saying, God gave me a scrowle to eat, and commanded me to declare his words:
thereby signifying that his preaching was but an utterance of the words
declared in the scrowle that he had delivered him to eat. As also S. John at
the commandment of the Angel, eat a book which the Angel gave him, with
this addition, Thou must yet prophecy to many nations. Therein declaring that
his sermons were a delivery of that which God had written in that book. Psalm.
95.1
Heb. 7 18. and 4.7. 2. Cor. 5.20 1. These. 2.
David likewise exhorting the people of his time to convert to the Lord, for
the authorizing of his doctrine, says thus: If at this day ye will hear the
voice of the Lord, harden not your hearts. The Apostle exhorting the Hebrews
to give credit to the Lord, uses the same sentence, saying: This day if ye
hear the voice of God harden not your hearts. The same does S. Paul expressly
confirm, saying, We are the ambassadors of Christ, as if God exhorted by us.
And thereupon he testifies to the Thessalonians, that they received his
doctrine, not as the word of man, but as the word of God. Adding, as in truth
it was. True it is, there is a difference between the ministers of the word
and the Prophets and Apostles, nevertheless, if we be bound to receive the
doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, as the word of God: and that the
faithful ministers, preaching their doctrine, do likewise preach the word of
God: then they that in these days do contemn the preaching of the faithful
ministers, do, as Christ said to his Apostles, contemn and reject God in
them: and therefore the vengeance by Jesus Christ himself denounced against
those that would not hear his Apostles, who said, That it should be easier for
Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for them, Math. 14.
will likewise fall upon the contemners of the preachinges of the faithful
pastors of our time. And they who for their contempt, incredulity, and
obstinacy in evil doing, shall at this day be bound in earth by the
ministry of the word, Math. 16.19
shall also be bound in heaven. It is not therefore, because man has this
power in him self, neither is it so great an offense not to hear men speaking
unto us, but because God speaks by them, and therefore whosoever despises or
resists them when they preach the word of God, he does despise and reject
God in them.

6 The premises do sufficiently show, in what reverence we are to hold the
ministry of the word, what a blessing it is to enjoy it, how earnestly and
diligently we should frequent sermons, especially in consideration of the
benefits which we reap by them, as illumination, reconcilement to God, and
participation of salvation and life everlasting. For this cause does the
Devil, our ancient enemy, labor to divert men heerefrom, and to bring them
out of taste, saying unto some, If God would speak unto us either by
himself, or by his holy Angels, we would very willingly believe and
obey him: alleging to others, That they can read Gods word in their houses,
that they have very good books, and that they can hear no better
instructions in the sermons of men, than in the preachinges of Jesus Christ
written by the Evangelists: neither any better doctrine than in the writings
of the Prophets and Apostles. But hereto we answer, that our selves are also
in duty to read the holy Scriptures, as hereafter we will more at large
declare. In the mean time, it is abominable rashness and presumption in man,
to seek to allege reasons against the express declaration of the will of
God. Albeit we should not understand for what cause God would speak unto us by
the ministry of men, or that thereby he would bring us to salvation, yet might
it become us to humble our selves in his sight, and without replying, to obey
his commandments and ordinances, as certainly believing that to his elect he
appoints nothing but in his wisdom and goodness, to his own glory, and to
their felicity and salvation. And in deed first, ever since the fall of Adam,
men have bin so estranged from God, by reason of sin and their own corruption,
that they cannot abide the presence of God, especially when he speaks to
them. And therefore this was in old time a common saying, Iud. 13.22.
We shall die, for we have seen God. Likewise, the people of Israel hearing God
speaking unto the^ in mount Sinay, Exodus 20.19
said unto Moses, Speak thou unto us, and we will hear thee, but let not the
Lord speak, least we die. And God accepting this confession of their
infirmity, together with their demand, said unto Moses, They have said well,
and therefore I will hereafter speak unto them by the ministry of men,
Deuteronomy. 18.17
raising them up Prophets, and putting my words in their mouths. This
experience of the people of Israel, that they were not able to hear God
speaking unto them: their demand, that he would speak to them by men: the
approbation thereof, and Gods promise to send them prophets, do declare, that
it is an intolerable presumption, if in stead of using the ministry of men,
we will needs have God himself to speak unto us.

7 Nevertheless, albeit God would not offer himself in such majesty, as to
terrify men when he speaks unto the^, yet may we note sundry notable
reasons that move him to use the ministry of men. First, it is a good proof
of our humility and obedience, in that he is content we should be taught and
brought to salvation by the ministry of men, that be like unto our selves, and
sometime our inferiors, for so will God have the glory of our faith and
salvation to himself, but if himself should speak unto us, or send his Angels,
some might say, It is no marvel though men obey, for who will not believe God
when himself speaks unto us? Who dare disobey him? But since they be men,
and many times of low degree, yea, even such as want the perswasiue words of
man's wisdom, 1. Cor. 2.4.^
as Saint Paul confesses of himself: then, as he also adds, Faith must be
from God, and not from man. And therefore is it not requisite, that the holy
Ghost should persuade us, that when we hear men speaking unto us, we hear
God speaking by them, and so do receive their, word, not as the words of
men, but as the word of God? In this sense does he also say, that the pastors
do bear the treasure of the heavenly doctrine (as it were) in earthen
vessels, to the end to try our humility and faith, 2. Cor. 4.7.
whether without respect of the base and mean estate of the men, we can find
in our hearts to esteem of and accept the heavenly treasure which they present
unto us. Secondly, is it not a great honor that God does to man, when from
among men he chooses some to be his ambassadors, and, as it were, his own
mouth to preach and proclaim his will, together with the mysteries of our
salvation, and to bear witness of his great mercy, goodness, and love
toward us, and of that eternal glory which he has prepared for us in
heaven?

8 Thirdly, the establishment of preaching is an excellent and convenient mean
to maintain love, union, and truth among men. If there were no preaching but
only private reading of Gods word, we should presently find a horrible
confusion in the doctrine, when every one shall expound the holy Scripture
after his own sense and understanding. As also by experience we do but too
plainly see that they which contemn preaching, do finally fall into diverse
opinions and errors. Heereto had S. Paul especial regard, when he writ to the
Ephesians, There is one body, and one spirit, Ephesians. 4.^4.
even as ye are called in one hope of your vocation. There is one Lord, one
faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, which is above all, and
thorough al, and in all. But unto every one of us is given grace according to
the measure of the gift of Christ. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on
high he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. He gave unto some
to be Apostles, others to be Prophets, others to be Evangelists, and others
to be pastors and doctors, for the gathering together of the saints, for the
work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ, till we
all meet together in the unity of faith and knowledge of the son of God unto a
perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ, that we
henceforth be no more children, wavering and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, but let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow up into
him which is the head, that is, Jesus Christ, by whom all the body being
coupled and knit together by every joint, receives increase of the body,
unto the edifying of it self in love, through the grace that is ministered
according to the measure of every member.

9 By this discourse the Apostle Saint Paul does manifestlye declare, that
this gathering together of the Saints, this building up of the body of
Christ, our full growing up in him that is the head, our steadfast abiding in
the doctrine of truth, and union in the faith of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, are all wrought by the ministry of the word, which Jesus Christ
has ordained in his holy Church. To be short, that preaching is, as it were,
the knitting and joining of the sinews, to unite the faithful into one body.
Whosoever therefore despises or rejects this order and benefit of Jesus
Christ, he tends only to scatter the Church, or utterly to destroy it.
Neither is the light of the sun, yea, even meat or drink so necessary and
profitable for the preservation of this present life, as is the ministry, for
the upholding of the church and bringing us to salvation and life everlasting.

10 The premises thoroughly considered, do also teach us the reason why God,
where he might have used the service of Angels, to reveal unto us the doctrine
of salvation, Act. 8.26.
and to instruct us by the reading of his word: vouchsafed to speak unto us by
the ministry of men like unto our selves, whereof we have sundry notable
examples. The Eunuch, treasurer to Queen Cand^ces, read upon his chariot the
book of the prophet Esaye. Act. 9.9.
God was not satisfied with this his affection and duty, neither did he send
an Angel to expound it unto him, but employing the minister^e of man, he sent
him Philip. When Jesus Christ appeared to Paul and converted him, yea, even
spak unto him, he could also have instructed him himself, Act. 10.3.
or have sent some Angel to do it: but he contrariwise sent him to Ananias,
that at the mouth of an a^ he might learn his will. The Angel sent to
Cornelius the Centurion, to declare unto him that his prayers and alms were
come up before God, in liew of teaching him, appointed him to send for Saint
Peter, that of him he might understand the doctrine of salvation. What man
therefore is he that now dare, either by expectation of revelation from heaven,
or by contenting himself only with reading, presume to reuerse or control
the order established in the wisdom of God for the teaching of men, and the
bringing of them to salvation by the ministry of men? What confusion might
ensue of such rashness and presumption? What ingratitude against God, to
contemn such an honor and reverence done unto men, and a benefit of such
great excellency, yea, even of profit and necessity? Truly therefore
inasmuch as the preaching of the Gospel is termed the kingdom of God, Col. 4.
such as do despise and reject it, do make themselves not only unworthy
thereof, but also most wretched and accursed instruments to advance the
kingdom of satan. Rather therefore apprehending the incomprensible treasure of
the ministry of the word, let us with the Prophet Esaias and the holy
Apostle Saint Paul say, O how beautiful are the feet of them that bring
glad tidinges of peace, and do also bring glad tidinges of good things.

11 Neither must we imagine or think with our selves, Esa. 52.7. Romans 10.15.
that being a little entered thereinto, we need not to hear any more
preaching, for even all the days of our lives must we be Christ's scholars in
the school of his Church under the ministry of men. As also the faithful in
old time were called disciples, whereby the holy Ghost signifies unto us,
Act. 11 26.
that the children of God must continue daily disciples, and so learn in
Christ's schole, until that departing out of the same they ascend into heaven.
And in deed such as being impotent and weak, when they have some voyage or
journey in hand, and therefore do take a wagon or a horse, and when they
have rid some fifteen or twenty leagues, do not straight way, without
consideration of they: business, leave their horse or chariot, but do retain
the same until they come to their iourneyes end: but our journey will never
be at an end, until that by death we be lyfted up into heaven. The
forwardest among us, as the holy Apostle Saint Paul says, do yet know but
in part. 1. Cor. 12.13. Ephesians. 4.13
And the ministry is ordained to profit us, until we become to be perfect
men, and have attained to the perfect measure and full age of Jesus Christ, as
the same Apostle more at large does teach us. And this perfection and age of
man is never accomplyshed until death. And truly as the office of the
ministry consists in feeding the flock of Jesus Christ by the preaching of
his holy word, so this word Food, does teach and admonish us, that as
for the time of our living and being in this world, we do stand in need
of food for our bodies, so can we not forbear preaching and teaching for the
feeding and nourishment of our souls, until we be lifted up into heaven.

12 But were thou as skilful as Saint Paul, yet must thou confess that thou
still stand in need of the holy ministry. 1. Cor. 14.3. 2. Tim. 3.16.
For preaching is ordained not only to teach us that which we know not, but
also to reprehend our vices, to exhort us to our duties, to comfort us, and to
strengthen us in the faith and obedience of God. Whatsoever he be therefore
that knows himself, he does sufficiently by these reasons and
considerations understand that he has need of the holy ministry all the
days of his life. Scholars have nothing to learn but knowledge, and that
even of humane doctrine, and therefore their studies have a limitation: but
preaching is ordained, not only for increase of knowledge, but also to teach
us to put our knowledge in practice, that is to say, to advance us continually
more and more in faith and amendment of life: wherein we shall never be
perfect until death. By the premises then it does appear, that every one
that has any purpose to obey this exhortation of Jesus Christ and of Saint
John, where they say, Amend your lives, must resolve to join with the Church
of Christ, that diligently and carefully they may hear his word all the days
of their life. Also, that it is the duty of every Christian, to put in
practice this saying of the Prophet Esaie, Esa. 2.2.
In the latter days the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared
in the top of the mountains, and all Nations shall flow unto it, and many
people shall go and say, Come let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to
the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will
walk in his paths. And that we may inioye such a benefit, let us even feel
in our selves that burning affection and desire, which that excellent Prophet
David had, Psalm. 27.4.
that with him we may pray to God to give us grace, that we abide and remain
in his temple all the days of our lives.

13 Some there are that confess, that indeed it is their duty to do this,
but they can not resolve, least they should be known to be of the religion,
and so loose their goods, dignities and otherworldly commodities. Is not the
soul more precious then the body? Must we not have more respect to the soul
then to the body? In a time of famine we can be content to sell al for bread,
rather then to die for hunger. Genesis 47.
Did not the Egyptians give all their money, their cattle, and finally their
possessions to Joseph, for corn? Nay more then so, we will even snatch bread
out of the fire? And lastly, if we have no other means, we can be content
to leave country, kindred, and friends, and to travail into foreign countries
to seek for food, rather then to die for hunger. But why do we not as much for
our souls. The famished soul cries out, I must live: And is it not mere
rashness to think to live without food? We must therefore forsake all, for to
obtain the spiritual food of the word: we must even wrest it from out the
fire and persecution, or else depart into some other country, where it may be
had freely. And thereto does Jesus Christ lead us, when he says, Labor not
for the meat which perishes, but for the meat that endures unto everlasting
life. Should we call in question his promise, who says, Seek first the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all other things shall be ministered
unto you? Has he not effectually declared unto us, what care he takes to feed
those that follow him to hear his word? Behold, there were sower thousand,
besides women and children that followed him into the desert to hear his
doctrine: They knew not what to eat: but Jesus Christ had a care thereof. I am
moved in compassion toward this multitude, said he, for three days have they
been with me, and have nothing to eat, and I will not send them away fasting,
least they faint by the way. Hereupon he blessed seven loaves and a few fishes
and gave unto them, so that they were all satisfied.

14 Some scorners and blasphemers will say, let God take care for the soul,
and I will take care for the body. But contrariwise, let us say, Let us take
such care for the soul as God has commanded, and he will care for the body,
as he has promised. Let his promise be unto us as the pitcher of oil, and the
barrel of meal to the Widow of Sarepta, that never wasted: even a more
certain rent then the money in our purses, or the goods in our houses. What
will it profit a man to win all the world, and to loose his own soul? What a
folly were it to buy a house for the body, laying out so much thereupon, that
for want of goods the body so well housed must die for hunger? Even so, what
shall a man get by keeping his goods for to feed and cloth the body, which is
the house of the soul, and in the mean time suffer the soul to pyne away and
die for hunger? Since therefore the question now depends upon the amendment
of life, let us resolve to frequent and hear the preaching of the Gospel, and
so to feed our souls with the word of God, turning away our eyes from all
encumbrances offered by the flesh, and assuring our selves that we can catch no
harm by obeying God, and seeking food, life, and salvation for our souls.

15 Others there are, who albeit they may freely without danger frequent
Sermons, are nevertheless marvelous cold and negligent in that duty, who think
it sufficient that they have the liberty, albeit they use it not? Such men
respect only the commodities of the flesh and the world. They be profane in
their hearts and deuoid of religion, accompting of no other God but their
riches, neither religion, Augustine of the manners of the Catholic Church.
but a care and skill to purchase wealth and to grow mighty in the land. S.
Austen rehearses three degrees of woe. He, says he, that has not that he
loves cannot be said to be blessed. Neither he that has that which he loves,
if his love be hurtful unto him: Neither he that has that which is
soueraignely good and profitable if he loves not that which he has. Now as we
may, to sample the first, bring in those who loving the holy ministry, have
no means to come by it, and the second, such as love superstition and
Idolatry and do enjoy it: so for the third, among others we may place those
that are in place where they may freely and commodiously have the use of the
holy ministry of the word and sacraments, but do not love it, and therefore
do either neglect it, or peradventure despise it. These men shall incur Gods
double judgment, for contemning and treading under foot the food of their
souls and the incomprehensible graces which God offers unto the^ in the
preaching of his word They be men that think not themselves to be men: for
they live as beasts, that care only for the body and this life, but make no
account of the soul and life everlasting. If sometime they come to a Sermon,
it is but for a fashion, because it is an honor to be of the religion. But let
them harken to Jesus Christ, who cries, Amend your lives, and to that end
meditat upon that which we have spoken, that thereby understanding that the
preaching of the word is ordained to build Gods house and the body of Christ,
which is his Church, to illuminate us with the truth, to strengthen us in
says, to reprove our vices, to exhort us to live acording to God, to comfort
us in our afflictions, to be short, to save us: That understanding I say how
profitable and necessary it is, they may awake from their giddiness and take
heart to hear diligently the Sermons, to the glory of God and the salvation of
their souls. Let them not think the time bestowed at Sermons, to be lost, as
some do: but let them assuredly believe that they cannot better employ their
time, then in the preservation of the life of their souls, in increasing the
health of the same, in strengthening their hearts against all temptations and
mortal assaults, and in the more certain apprehension of the kingdom of
heaven, and the riches of the glory prepared for the true disciples of Jesus.
Christ in glory everlasting.

Of our duties to communicate in the holy sacraments. Chap. 4.
NOw let us come to the sacraments. As concerning baptism, in as much as among
all Christians, except the Anabaptists, the institution and ordinance of Jesus
Christ, to baptiste children, is observed, reserving to another place the
corruption of not knowing, much less practicing the use of our baptism, we
will proceed to the supper. The supper was ordained principally for two
reasons. The first: As a mother having brought forth her little one, does not
forsake it, but nurseth and brings it up: So Christ having ordained baptism
to be as a seal and pledge of our spiritual new birth into his Church, did
institute the holy supper, to the end that by participation in his body and
blood, we might the more be strengthened in this assurance, that Christ is
ours, together with all his benefits, and so feed our souls spiritually to
life everlasting. And indeed as there is no salvation but in Christ, so does not
Christ any whit profit us, except we believe that he is ours, together with all
his benefits. Well is he presented unto us in the preaching of the Gospel, but
there be yet two other points, and those very notable, in the communion of the
holy supper. For God who in his preaching speaks generally to al men, in his
holy supper directs his particular promise, and as it were by name, to every
the co^municants therein. And not so satisfied, he also delivers them a seal
and visible token to assure the^ that his pleasure is that Christ with all his
benefits should as certainly belong to every of the^, as they see, touch and
tail that they be partakers of that bread and wine that is delivered unto the^.
He the^ that cares not to be confirmed in this assurance, that Christ with all
his benefits is his, is possessed with too much pride, if he thinks it
needles, either that he profane it, as not feeling what a comfort and joy it
is to have assurance of his salvation in Jesus Christ. The second reason is,
that we presenting our selves at the Lords table, may by so doing make as it
were a public protestation that we have no fellowship with Idolaters and
heretics, neither with the world: But that we take our selves to be the
children of God, and the members of the body of Christ, that we look for life
and salvation through him only, and so show forth the benefit of his death,
and all this in remembrance of him to his glory. The first reason declares how
necessary the use of the holy supper is in regard of our selves: The second,
how requisite it is to the glory of God and the edification of our neighbors.
We might also add a third reason: That is, that the holy Supper is a seal of
our union and knitting together into one body, under our head Jesus Christ, as
S. Paul expressly says, That we who are many, are but one bread, and one
body, because we are all partakers of one bread. And thus those men that
voluntarily do abstain therefro, do deprive their souls of their food, Christ
of his glory, and by their evil example, do minister offense to their
neighbors. To conclude: They separate, or rather keep them selves separate
from the body of Christ. Hereby it appears, that they which be negligent,
and care not for communicating in the Lords Supper when he gives them
opportunity, do deserve not only not to be accounted members of Christ's
Church, Nomb. 9.9.
but also to incur the most horrible judgment and vengeance of God: As God
in old time declared by Moses: That the man that did not celebrate his
passover should be cut off from among the people, and bear his own sin,
because he offered not the offering of the Lord in due season.

2 Again, we see in sundry reformed Churches a number of negligent hearers of
sermons; but yet are there many more that care not for communicating in the
Lords Supper, and that upon sundry considerations: first, some that live in bad
consciences, in whordome, theft, drunkenness, or other iniquities, from which
they are not determined yet to abstain, do forbear the communion, as doubting
least they should aggrauate their condemnation, according as says S. Paul, 1.
Cor. 11.
He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own
damnation. These men do resemble those, who living in fornication do refuse to
marry, least thereby their fornication, which they are not minded to give
over, should be the more grievous, as being converted into adultery. They may
also be likened to those, who hating their neighbors, when they say the Lords
prayer, Our father which art in heaven, etc. do leave out this petition,
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, as
imagining that if they should say that, they should pray to God not to forgive
their own sins, because they forgive not their neighbors. But as they who
living in fornication and will not marry, least they should forsake their
adultery, are in a woeful estate: so the others that ask no forgiveness for
their transgressions, and seek to continue in hatred against their neighbors,
are worthy double condemnation: one in respect of their hatred that they
continue: the other, for their sins, for the which they ask no forgiveness.
Even so, they that forbear the holy Supper, in respect of their bad
consciences, do pronounce sentence against themselves, namely that they deserve
double death: first, for their sin which they do continue in wicked
consciences: and secondly, because they separate themselves from the communion
of Christ, in whom only is the fullness of life. What shall they then do? Let
them put away their wicked conscience: Let them dissolve the bands of Satan:
Let them come forth of hell: If they say that they can not so far master
their affections: Why? have they married themselves to fornication, hatred,
theft and other like iniquities, upon condition that they will never be
divorced from the same? surely that is a token, that they do not steadfastly,
believe that there is a hell prepared for such liners. Or at the least, the
pleasure that they take in their sin, does quench all remembrance thereof.
Otherwise, the sole apprehension of this horrible and unquenchable fire, would
force them to give over the wickedness that leads and draws them thereto.
And indeed if in a mighty tempest they should chance to find themselves upon
the sea in danger of drowning, they would a thousand times protest to forsake
their bad consciences, that so they might submit themselves to the obedience of
God. But how can they lie down and sleep upon a pillow of fornication, theft
hatred, and other wickedness, giving themselves as a pray to Satan, if God in
his long suffering should not recover them? Let them flatter themselves at
their pleasures: for if they continue in abusing the patience of God, and
abstaining from the holy Supper to the end to go on in a wicked conscience,
their estate is most woeful and accursed. As he therefore, who wanting the
gift of continency, and living in fornication, ought to abhor it, and to
provide himself of a remedy by marriage: so as often as they have
aduertisment, or hear of the celebration of the Lords supper, let them at the
least think themselves wakened and summoned to renounce their wicked
consciences, and by participating in the holy supper, to separate themselves
from the society of the wicked, to glorify God, and to be confirmed in faith
and courage, to go forward from good to better.

3 Others do forbear the communion, because they will not submit themselves
to Ecclesiastical orders and discipline. If we might admit of every one
indifferently, or that we would not care although afterward they lived other
wise then might beseem the children of God, or were occasion of offense to the
weak, then would they surely come to communicate: But if they may not be
admitted before they have talked with some minister or elder of the Church, yea
and peradventure be forced to bear with some Christian admonition, in case
they do not afterward walk in the course of Christianity: they will rather
choose to deprive themselves of the communion. As also to the end to confirm
them in this mislike, they shall find some discontented persons who to mislike
the order of the Church, will even against their own consciences charge it
with the title of a new tyranny and inquisition. Yet must we confess that
the Church of Christ cannot consist without some order, and as S. Paul says,
All things must be done in order and decency. 1. Cor. 14.40.
If no City, or family can long continue without establishment of some order
and government: Then the more excellent that the Church is, the more necessary
it is therein to erect and observe some government, which we term
Ecclesiastical Discipline. Doctrine is as it were the soul of the Church, and
order as the sinnewes of the same to uphold it. If the Church which is Gods
house must not be a receptacle and harborow for dissolute persons and
unbelieving vnthrists, and as both the Prophet and Jesus Christ himself
terms them a den of thieves: Then must there be some order, Iere. 7.11.
Mat. 21.13.
whereby to purge and preserve it from such.

4 Particularly, if the holy supper be ordained for the faithful, the children
of God and the members of Jesus Christ: Such as have the government of the
Church, must also have some testimony that they that desire to adioyne
themselves thereto and to communicate therewith, are taken to be such as
approving the purity of the doctrine, do not lead any offensive life. And
as for those that are once admitted to the communion, they may continue therein
by trying themselves, because by the rule of charity we are to believe that
they persevere in the faith, godliness and love, until either by revolt from
the doctrine, offensive conversation, or obstinate refusal of Christian
admonitions and exhortations, they show themselves unworthy the communion,
whereto nevertheless upon testimony of their repentance and amendment of
life, they may be again admitted. Let those therefore that stumbling at this
order do deprive themselves of the communion, even judge in their own
consciences, whether it be not meet that order be maintained, and all
persons subjected thereto, rather then to bring in such confusion, as
indifferently to receive to the Lords supper all fornicators, drunkerds,
thieves, murderers, and other like offensive people: whereof might ensue a most
grievous profanation of the Lords table, to the condemnation as well of those
that so shall be admitted, as of them that voluntarily do admit them. When
Christ and Saint John do cry, Amend your lives, they speak also to such
people, that they understanding how requisite this order is for the happy
conduct of the Church in the fear of God, accommodating themselves thereto,
may so dispose of themselves as to communicate in the Lords supper to his
glory, and their own comfort and salvation.

5 Some there are that voluntarily do abstain from the communion, because
they cannot, say they, resolve where the Church is, as stumbling at the
infirmities of such as do communicate, and still finding more fault in the
Church then in themselves. These men shaming to be reputed either half
Papists, or of no Religion, do sometime frequent Sermons: but they stay
there, and join themselves to no Church. Yea they even do seem to rejoice
when they hear of any the offenses or infirmities of any of the members of the
Church, that thereby they may have some color to stand a loose. Yet must they
confess that there is a Church in the world, and that they must join
themselves thereto, if they desire to be in Gods house, and partakers in the
promises made to the Church: To be short, if they look to be saved. By
alowing no Church, they separate themselves from the true Church that is upon
earth, and consequently from the entry into that which is in heaven. If
themselves should be in the fields overtaken with some sharp storm of
wether, would they stand still and seek no covert, until some great thick
leaued tree would offer it self to defend them? Are they without fault? The
only pride that possessing them, makes them to condemn all Churches,
considering they join themselves to none, does sufficiently show, that they
are not restrained so much by the particular faults of some of the Church, as
by their own offenses and corruptions, Mat. 18.1.
and consequently have such a mislike, that they think no bread good. In
Christ's Church which consisted but of twelve Apostles, there was one traitor:
Mat. 26.65.
There were ambitious disputations who should be chiefest in the kingdom of
Christ: They all forsook their master, and S. Peter thrice denied him. Mat.
26.69.
How many faults and corruptions did Saint Paul note and reprove in the
Church of Corinth, and the seven flourishing Churches of Asia? Apoc. 2. and ^
Yet all that joined in these Churches, and in them were partakers of the holy
supper, were accounted faithful and chosen, and contrariwise they that kept
themselves without, unbelievers. Neither is it a matter indifferent, or at men's
liberty, whether they shall communicate or abstain: but a precept from God:
Do this, says Jesus Christ in remembrance of me. And S. Paul, Let every man
try himself, Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.28. Mat. 26.27. Number. 9.13.
and so eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. Again, Take eat, Take
drink ye all. God in old time ordained, as is aforesaid, that they that had
opportunity to eat of the passe-ouer, and voluntarily did abstain, should be
rooted out from among the people, that is to say, be no longer accounted any
members of Gods Church. We must therefore obey God and fear his judgments,
and so resolve to join with his Church and communicate in the holy supper of
the Lord.

6 There is a certain decree ascribed to Zepherin Bishopp of Rome, wherein he
ordains that all Christians should communicate at the least once a year. In
the decretal. Cap. Omnis depen. and Remiss. Platina in his life.
If we consider the state of the Church in his time, we shall find that they
oftener did communicate, then they now do in our Churches. And indeed this
communicating should be better frequented then it is. Neither did Zepherin
mean to permit or allow them to communicate but once a year, but rather to
reprove the corruption and sloth of those, who desiring the name of Christians,
did never communicate: and so showed themselves unworthy of that name, if by
communicating with the faithful in the holy supper of our Lord Jesus Christ,
at the least once a year, they separated not themselves from the Idolaters and
heathen, showing some testimony of their Christianity. Let them that we
speak of therefore consider, by what title they may be called Christians, since
they never communicate in the supper of Jesus Christ. Neither may they reply,
as some do, that in joining with one Church they condemn all others: for it
is true that all assemblies that entitle themselves the Church of Christ, are
not so, yet to acknowledge or allow of none for fear of condemning of the rest,
is to deny and condemn Christ in not condemning those, who calling themselves
Christ, are Antichrists. If a man bring a payment in gold, where among there
be some pieces that seem light or counterfaite, thou do not straight say,
I will take none, least by taking so much as I take to be weight and current,
you should complain that I reject the rest: but thou will bring thy balance
and touchstone, and then will thou take so much as thou find to be weight
and current, and boldly refuse the rest. Let these men therefore set before
their eyes the marks of the true Church, as their touchstone and scales, and
by them consider where they are, thereto also adjoining prayer to God, that he
will direct them by his holy spirit, and so knowing the true Church and joining
themselves thereto. Amend their lives by communicating in the holy supper of the
Lord.

Of our duty to assist at public Prayer. Chap. 5.
AS concerning public or common prayer, Genesis 17.7. Act. 9.14.21. 2. Tim.
2.19. Psalm. 14.4: Esa. 56.7. Mat. 21.13. Ioh. 16.23. Mat. 18.19.
considering that thereby the holy Scripture signifies the whole service of
God, also that his servants are called people calling upon God, it already
appears that such as despise the same, do cut off themselves from the degree
of Gods servants. Where God calls the temple the house of prayer, he shows
that the principal part of that service which he requires of us, is that we
should assemble to pray and call upon him, as indeed these public prayers are
of great efficacy. For albeit all private prayers directed to the heavenly
father in the name of Jesus Christ, have promise to be heard: yet is it not
without cause that Jesus Christ aduertiseth and promises us, that if two
faithful do agree upon earth, whatsoever they demand of their heavenly
father, it shall be granted. This is a favor, as it were peculiar to the
Church, and noted by David, where he says. Praise waits for thee in Sion,
Psalm. 65.2.
and unto thee shall the vow be performed. Herein he shows that the prayers
of the Church signified by Sion, are so sure to be heard, that God who hears
them, looks for praise in the^, as indeed it is his duty whose prayers are
heard to yield thanks and praisings to God. And truly as when a whole
Burgeoysie of a City do come before their Prince and with one voice crave
pardon for some offense, or beg some grace or favor, the Prince will be more
moved, then if they being absent, some one man should speak for the whole:
Even so when the whole Church assembled together does with heart and mind in
the presence of God acco^panie the prayers which the preacher, as the mouth of
the congregation, pours forth, let them be assured that those prayers do
penetrate the heavens, and that God is moved to hear them. Not that he is
subject to passions (as we) but that by the feeling of our affections he
vouchsafes to assure us of his mercy and goodness toward us. When, Amb. de
paenitent.
diverse how few so ever says S. Ambrose are assembled together, being united,
they are great. And the prayers of a great multitude cannot possibly be
contemned.

2 Likewise all people and nations in the world, even the Idolaters have
evermore had their assemblies, and therein public prayers: This sense or
feeling being graven in all men's hearts that have any religion, that they ought
to call upon their God: that it is an honor that God requires at their hands:
and the true means to purchase his blessings toward them. But in Christian
Churches there is also this farther reason: That their public prayers are as
it were a public renouncing of all sects and society with Idolaters and
profane people: an acknowledgement and confession of the true God, and a
public sanctification of his name to his glory. And therefore, Act. 16.13.
as the Jews in old time, so since have the Christians evermore very carefully
observed this duty of piety and service to God, as appears by the writings
of the Apostles and Prophets, and by all Ecclesiastical histories. And to this
purpose does S. Luke rehearse that Paul and his companions being at the town
of Philippos, came forth upon the Sabbath day, and went to the rivers side
where they used to pray. This undoubtedly was some out corner where the
faithful used secretly to meet to call upon God. So that albeit every man
privately might have prayed in his house, Act. 21.5.
and so have avoided both the pain and danger, yet knowing that in duty they
were to separate themselves from Idolaters, and the efficacy of the prayers of
the congregation, they overcame the fear of the danger, and met in that place
especially to pray, and with one consent to pour out their prayers to the
Lord. When S. Paul and his companions departed from Tirus, all the congregation
with their wives and children brought them out of the town, and kneeling with
them on the shore, prayed. Shall we in these days find this zeal among
Christians? No: men will be ashamed to imitate it and to kneel down upon a
shore to pray to God publicly. And yet the faithful of those times never did
it without both reason and fruit. It is therefore a holy ordinance of God and a
most profitable exercise to come together to call upon the Lord. As also it is
yt ^uty of al faithful carefully to come to such prayers, that they may be
pertakers of the fruits of the same: especially in time of great calamities, or
upon fear or liklihood thereof. We should eue^ extraordinarily come together to
call upon God, as we read that the prophet Joel in the name of God commanded
Blow the trumpet in Sion sanctify a fast, Ioh. 2.15.
call a solemn assembly, gather the people sanctify the congregation, gather
the elders, assemble the children, and together cry unto the Lord in prayers
fervent and extraordinary, old and young, none exe^pted. And as every one in
respect of himself is thereto bound so is it not enough that he faithfully
employ himself only, unless he solicit and exhort others, according to the
prophecy of Zachary saying. The enhabitants of one City shall say to
another. Up, let us go and pray before the Lord, and seek the Lord of hoasts,
I will go also. Zach. 8, 21.


3 Neither is it enough that in body we be present at prayers, unless we also
lift up our minds to heaven. 1. Cor. 14.16
For if when the Pastor speaks in the name of the Church, every man at each
petition says not in heart Amen, feeling a fervent desire to have his petition
granted, then is there both vanity and hypocrisy, and eue^ in this point may we
find great corruption and infirmity in many. For how many are there who all the
time of prayers do stand as men without life, thinking upon nothing? How many
be there whose minds are wandering? How many that have no feeling or desire of
the benefits that we crave at Gods hand? To be short, how many be there whose
hearts and minds are entangled and buried in earthly affairs, even when their
hands are lifted up to heaven? As this vanity therefore is odious in the sight
of God, so for the ame^ding thereof, let us be both diligent comers to common
prayer, and so touched with a lively feeling of the same, that we may reap the
fruits thereof. And to this purpose let us remember that the devil fears
nothing more the^ the prayers of the Church, and that there is no exercise of
godliness wherein we are more often, more fervently or more attentively to employ
our selves. For albeit the devil be always at hand, ready to induce us to
wickedness, yet is his readiness most when he sees us disposed to pray, that
then intruding himself into our hearts, and drawing away our cogitatio^s, he
may hinder the sanctification of the word of God and the most excellent fruit
of our prayers. Let the experience of this corruption and vanity in all
prayers, both public and private, with the difficulty in amending the same,
albeit it be troublesome unto us, yet make us more wary, and the better to
stand upon our guard, to the end that so soon as we feel our selves amiss and
our thoughts otherwise distracted, we may remember that Satan is at hand, and
among other our prayers, beseech God to drive him from us, and to give us grace
to lift up our minds to heaven, and with one heart call upon him, that finally
we may receive the fruit of our prayers.

4 By this deduction of the titles and marks of the Church before mentioned, it
does manifestly appear, yt they which refuse to join thereto and become members
thereof, are not in the kingdom and house of God: that denying to take the
Church for their mother, they ca^ not call God their father: that they deserve
as concerning the soul, to languish and die, because they reject the food
thereof, and that they are worthy to incur the vengeance pronounced by Christ,
importing that in the day of judgment he will deny them before God his father,
because they would not confess him before men. We can with S. Austen confess
that there be wolves in the sheepe-fould and sheep without: Mat. 10.32.
neither must we deny but there be many hypocrites in the Church, whom God will
finally disclose and reject, to their confusion, or cast headlong into grievous
damnation, because they profaned the honor and graces to them presented by
the Lord in his Church. 2, Tim. 2.19.
Likewise God forbid we should say that all that are out of the visible and
external Church should be reprobates in the sight of God. God knows his, he
waits, he bears with them, and finally he calls them: touching their
hearts, he makes them to feel their fault, either inserting them into his
visible Church, or even in the midst of the Idolaters, through his great
mercy and power, saving them in his kingdom and glory, when until the very
hour of their deaths, there is no show or appearance that they be the children
of God, as it happened to the these that was hanged by Christ Jesus. But as by
the judgment of love we are bound to think all to be elect that are joined to
the Church, until they minister occasion either by revolt or bad conversation
to think otherwise, so have we no ground to account those that refuse to join
thereto to be members of Christ, because they bear not his marks or tokens,
until by amendment they renounce the kingdom of Satan, which is without the
Church, and settle themselves in the house of God, as his children, there to
call upon him and to be fed with his spiritual food to life everlasting. And
in deed, Since in heart we believe to righteousness and with our lips do make
confession to salvation, Romans 10, 10.
as S. Paul says, it is in vain for us to boast of faith whereby to be
justified, unless we confess Jesus Christ, that we may obtain salvation by
true faith justifying us in Christ.

5 Since therefore that the Church, called the kingdom of heaven, is like unto a
precious pearl, Mat. 13.44.
and a treasure hid in a garden, which when a man finds, he sells all that
he has to buy and enjoy it: Let us account nothing so dear or precious, but
that we may be ready and resolved to leave it, to get into the Church of
Christ. To this purpose let us remember the zeal of David, who being deprived
of this benefit, bitterly complained saying. As the heart brayeth for the rivers
of water so pants my soul after thee O God: My soul thirsts after God,
saying: When shall I come and appear before the presence of God? Psalm. 42.1
Psalm. 84.1 Psalm. 26.8.
In another place also, what a desire shows he to be in the temple of God?
O Lord of hoasts, says he, how amiable are thy tabernacles? My soul longs,
yea and faints for the courts of the Lord: for my heart and my flesh
rejoices in the living God: Blessed are they that dwellin thy house and praise
thee continually. And in another Psalm. O Lord I have loved the habitations of
thy house, and the place where thy honor dwells. If David a man, yea a
Prophet, so excellent in faith and virtue, so plainly and so often does
confess how needful it was for him to be in the Church of God, feeling
himself as it were ravished with a fervent desire to enjoy such a benefit:
What may we feel, even we who are so ignorant, so weak, so corrupt, and among
so many dangers and assaults? Will we how health-some and necessary this grace
for us to be in the Church of Christ is, so far would we be from retiring
therefro, or deferring to join thereunto, that contrariwise, we would even run
chearefully to get a room therein. Yea we would rejoice and boast of such a
benefit and savor, Esa. 44.5.
saying with the Prophet Isay. One shall say, I am the Lords, another shall be
called by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the
Lord, and name himself by the name of Israel. When therefore we hear Jesus
Christ and S. John crying Amend your lines. Let us know that the principal
point wherein we are to Amend, consists in renouncing and denying both in heart
and body al Idolatry and superstition, and in adjoining our selves to the
Church of Christ, there to hear his word attentively: to participate in his
sacraments holily and devoutly and with our whole affections to assist at
common prayers.

Of the duty both of domestical and private prayers of every faithful.
Chap. 6.
NOw as we have showed that public prayers in the Church, and the preaching
of Gods word, are unto us most profitable and necessary, so are we to
understand, that notwithstanding the same we are not nevertheless to neglect the
use both of Domestical and private prayer, nor yet to forbear the reading of
the holy Scripture in our houses. These be two points, wherein, as in that they
be more common and pernicious, in respect of negligence and sloth, so are we
the more heartily in duty to seek to Amend. As for the prayers which every
householder is to practice among his family Morning and Evening, we will speak
of them hereafter, where we entreat of the duties of householders. But for the
private prayers of every particular person, there is no man, but besides his
public and domestical exercises, ought daily to exercise himself therein.
Were we endued with the true knowledge both of our selves and our estate and
condition, and of the efficacy of prayers, we should need no solliciter to put
us in mind many times to present our selves before God: to pray him more and
more to reveal his truth: to increase in us faith, love, and patience, and
other his spiritual gifts: to mortify our corruptions: to strengthen us
against the temptations and assaults of the flesh, the world and the devil: to
provide us of such and such necessaries whereof we are in want: to preserve us
from so many dangers wherewith we are environed: To be short, to grant us his
holy spirit, happyly to conduct us all the days of our life. He that feels
not the necessity of such graces, and consequently of prayer to obtain them,
is senseless and void of al understanding, as also every man perticulerly in
his vocation has great need of Gods assistance and consequently of prayers:
Parents, that God will give them grace virtuously to bring up and well to
nurture their children: Ministers of the word, in holiness to employ themselves
in their ministry: Marchaunts and artificers, faithfully to follow their
traficke and trades: Generally all men, that God will vouchsafe to bless them
in their vocations, works and labors. And besides there may be many of our
acquaintance whose estate and condition binds us to pray to God for them also.

2 To be brief, there is not any, but after all private petitions accomodated
to the time, to the persons, or to the occurre^ces, ought daily to put in
practice the doctrine of Jesus Christ, where he says. You shall pray thus, Our
father which art in heaven etc. as follows. In this form of prayer teaching
us that every of us ought daily to present himself before God, is a procurer
first of his glory, then of the benefit and salvation of the congregation. The
zeal of Gods glory, as also our love toward our neighbors do bind v^ daily
to make this prayer, and that with greater diligence and feruencie, because
that making it as it were from the month of Christ, the author thereof, we
shall be assured of hearing, and consequently it shall make greatly to the
advancement as well of the glory of God, as of the good and salvation of our
neighbors: whereupon also, as God in the obedience of his law, does more
respe^t the obedience of his children, then the work it self, so may we say
that this prayer, whereby in the three first petitions we seek the glory of
God, and in the three last the good and necessities requisite both for the body
and soul, as well of our neighbors, as of our selves, being daily with heart
and mind poured forth, is as it were a fulfilling of the law, the sum
whereof consists in this, that we love God with our whole hearts and our
neighbors as our self.

3 Moreover, in these prayers lifting up our hearts unto God, and so
communicating daily with him, we do by little and little forget the earth and
the world, and do grow spiritual and heavenly: Even as Moses in old time
having conuersed with God forty days and forty nights, when he came down
to the people, seemed to have shining beams in his face. And indeed as by
little and little we learn the manners and language of those with whom we do
ordinarily converse, besides that by such conversation there breeds a certain
affection between them more then others: so by this our conuersing with God in
our prayers, we learn both the manners and language of heaven: and in our
selves do perceive some increase of love toward God. Which is more, as we
are but to much inclined either to our selves, or at other men's soliciting to
some riot or iniquity, so when we call to mind that in the morning we have
prayed unto God that he would vouchsafe to keep us, also that at night we are
to return again to do the like, the same is unto us a mighty bridle to
restrain us from wickedness and to retain us in due obedience toward God.
Besides, as when we pray unto him, we have regard to his promises, and the
experience of his benefits, and so call him father, beseeching him to guide us
as a father does his children, the same is a good means to strengthen our
faith, and a foundation of comfort in every vocation and estate whereinto it
pleases God to call and place us: assuring our selves that by such prayers
every thing that shall come to pass, shall be according to the work and
conduct of our father, yea even the accomplishment of his will, which cannot be
bad unto us. To be short, such as through Gods grace do daily exercise
themselves therein, do by experience find what a comfort, benefit and
contentation they receive by the same.

4 This is the reason why the most excellent servants and children of God have
been the rather addicted thereto. How seruently did Moses employ himself
therein, when he continued groueling before God in prayer for the space of
forty days and forty nights. Likewise Samuel, when he said. God sorbid
that I should sin against the Lord and cease praying for you. Deu 9.18. 1.
Sam. 12.23. Psa. 119.147. Psalm. 88.14. Act. 10.2.4
Especially the princely Prophet David, who in his Psalms sufficiently
declares that he was as it were tied thereto by daily exercise. As
perticulerly where to this purpose he says. I prevented the morning light to
pray to God, Again. My prayer preuenteth thee in the Morning. Cornelius the
Centurion so labored therein that he prayed continually. Whereby finally the
Lords Angel said unto him, Pphil. 1.4. Ehe. 1.16. Col. 1.9. 1. These. 1.2. and
5.17. Col. 4.2.
that his prayers were come in remembrance before God. S. Paul in many
Epistles protests that he ceased not night and day to pray for the Churches.
As also in many places he carefully commends himself to their prayers, and
by his example exhorts us to pray without ceasing, and to persevere in prayer
with watching and thanksgiving.

5 That we may the better therefore employ our selves in this duty, it is
meet that we practice the saying of Jesus Christ? When thou prayest enter into
thy chamber, Mat. 6.6.
and when thou have shut thy door, pray unto thy father which is in secret,
and thy father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly. True it is,
that this exhortation tends especially to reprove the hipocrisy of those that
seek to make a show, and to boast of their devotion: yet with all it ministers
a general and very profitable instruction, that we should exercise our selves
in prayers, not only in public, but also private, withdrawing our selves
solitarily and apart, to employ some time therein, with assurance that it shall
not be without fruit. And to that purpose we read that Isaac went from among
his family into the field to pray: That Peter went into the top of the house
(among the Jews the roofes of the houses were flat) to pray: Did not Jesus
Christ many times go a side alone to pray to God his father? Genesis 24.63. Act.
10.9. Mark. 6.46. Mark. 1.36, Luke 6.12.
Saint Mark says that he went up into the mountain to pray: Also, that
rising while it was yet night he went forth into a desert place and prayed.
And Saint Luke says, that being gone into the mountain to pray, he spent
the whole night in prayer. As therefore by his example, we ought to seek out
all secret opportunities, whereby we may the more freely lift up our hearts to
God in prayer: So when we find our selves alone, upon occasion or otherwise in
the house, or in the fields, by night or by day, such solitariness should be
unto us as a warning and allurement by and by to think upon God, that we may
pray and praise him. For as the spirit cannot be Idle, so being alone from
noise, company, or companion to talk with, it gives occasion to the children
of God that are not to much entangled in worldly affairs, to enter as it were
into familiarity with God, and to call only upon him.

6 And in as much as we are but meanly inclined and given to these spiritual
exercises, it might well beseem the children of God to bind themselves to
certain hours: not in superstition, but for a remedy to our in firmities,
because otherwise we will many times ouerslippe the whole day without this
duty. But having limited some certain hour for that employment, the striking
of the clock will admonish us of our duty, that we should not let it
escape. David, a man greatly exercised in prayer, practiced this course, as he
shows saying, that he called upon the Lord at night, Psalm. 55.18 Dan. 6.10.
August. 10 Proba.
in the morning, and at noone day. Daniel also thrice a day entered into his
chamber, to pray to God. And Saint Augustine writes, that the brethren of
Egypt in his time, used many prayers to God, but very short, cast forth as
darts into heaven, least through tediousnes, the seruencie that ought to be in
prayer might quail. By the premises therefore it appears, that for the
amendment of our lives, we ought according to the exhortation of Jesus Christ
to correct the negligence and sloth that has taken hold of us, and to imploie
our selves in prayer and private supplications, and thereto hereafter to give
our selves with such zeal, Luke 21.36 Psalm. 4.6
that by continual watching and praying to God, our petitions in all things
may be made known to him by prayers and supplications, with thanksgiving, as
being assured that the more that we exercise and accustom our selves
thereunto, the greater shall be our comfort and affection to abide therein to
Gods glory, and the benefit and salvation both of our neighbors and our selves.

Of our duty to read the holy Scriptures. Chap. 7.
AS for the reading of the holy Scriptures, wherein every one ought diligently
to exercise himself, experience sufficiently teaches, that when without
danger of fire it was prohibited us, we then burned in seruent affection to
read: but now when lawfully we may do it, and that we be thereto daily
exhorted, either we have no books, or if we have any, we never look upon
them. How many whole families admitted to the holy supper shall we find, that
have not among them all one Bible, no not a new Testament? And how many of
those that have them, do bestow daily one quarter of an hour in reading upon
them? Nay, how many days, yea, even weeks do they pass over without reading
any one word therein? They surely think it enough that they have them, to
make show of them upon some cupboord or deske? Chrisost. in his third Ho.
upon John. cap. 4
Saint John Chrysostom noted the like corruption in his time. Let us be
ashamed, says he, that a woman having had five husbands, and she a Samaritan,
should be so diligent and attentive to learn, that neither the time, neither
her business could withdraw her from Christ's mouth, where she might be
taught, and yet that we do never enquire any thing concerning instruction in
heavenly matters? Which of you at your return to your houses do apply your
selves to any thing worthy Christians? Which of you seeks after the sense
of the holy Scriptures? Truly none. We many times find you in hand with the
Chesse board, and playing Tables, but seldom with books. If ye have books,
it is as if ye had none, for they be locked up and kept in coffers: your
only care is to have them of fine parchment and say^^ written, not that ye
may read them, but to make them an ostentation of your wealth and ambition.
Heereto he adds, The use of the Scriptures is not to have them in books
only, but to read and print them in our hearts. As in those days there was
no printing, so were books rare and very dear, and in that respect did men use
them for an ostentation of their riches, and showed their ambition in this,
that having books fair written and in fine parchment, they referred them not
to their right use, namely, to read them, and so to take profit to salvation.
But in these days where there is such plenty of books, through the help of
printing, men care not for having them, much less for reading in them.

2 Before the new Testament was translated into our tongue, some would take
pains to copy our Chapters, which their Curates being well minded to religion,
had secretly translated: now many will grudge a small portion of money for the
price of a Bible, yea, even of a new Testament. And this has been a
perpetual infirmity. Poor men (says Chrysostom) do excuse their
negligence in reading Gods word, Chrysostom upon John, Tom. 5. ^o. 10 upon the
first Chapter.
^lledging want of books, and means to buy any. A little will I ^^^ake unto
them, and ask them whet^^r they have not all to^^^e necessary for their
trades and occupations, notwithstandi^^ whatsoever hinderaunce of their
poverty? Is not this a mere ^olly to excuse themselves by poverty in this
case, and yet to have no want of things necessary for their occupations? (...)
he had cause to complain when there were no books, but such as were in
written hand, and consequently dear, how much more bitterly might he
comp^aine of the negligence and sloth of our days, in all this great plenty
and abundance of good books, that by the help of printing may be had for so
little money? Chri. his third sermon of Lazarus
See thou not (says he in another place) the worke-men in mettalles, the
Golde-smith, the Siluer-smith, and all others that exercise any occupation,
keep all their tools ready and in good order? Albeit hunger compels and
poverty pincheth, yet will they rather bear all, than sell any necessary or
needful tool of their occupation, to feed themselves withal: yea, many had
rather borrowe upon usury, than pawn forth any one tool, and good reason:
For they know that by pawning forth their tools, they do deprive themselves
of all ordinary means to get their livings: and contrariwise, that by keeping
them, they may with profit discharge their debt. But as hammers, stithes, and
pinsers are the tools of their occupations, wherewyth to get their liuinges:
so the books of the Prophets and Apostles, and all the books of the holy
Scriptures, are the tools of Christianity, wherewith to obtain salvation and
life everlasting. And as artificers with their tools and instruments do
finish their work, so by the reading of the holy Scriptures our souls are
corrected, formed, and renewed. Which is more, Artificers cannot transform
earth or wood into silver or gold, only they can by their art and
workmanshippe give form and shape unto things: but by the reading of Gods
word thou may of a wooden or earthen vessel, make a vessel of gold or
silver, as the holy Apostle Saint Paul teaches, saying: In a great house are
not only vessels of gold and of silver, 2. Tim. 2.20 z. 1
but also of wood and of earth. If any man therefore purge himself from
these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the
Lord, and prepared unto every good work. Thus concluding his speech, he
says, Let us not be neglygent to buy books: For even the sight of them, as he
adds, shall put us in mind of our duties, as well to withdraw us from
sin and iniquity, as to cause us to persevere in holiness and
righteousness, and to pray to God to give us grace so to do.

3 What excuse shall we pretend in the sight of God, when in this abundance
and easy means to get books by the help of printing, we are so loath to buy
them, and so careless of reading them: thereby showing our selves most
unthankful and unworthy that favor and grace at Gods hand: considering
withal, that we are so often and earnestly exhorted to our duties in reading
and meditating upon his word? Let the word of Christ, (says Saint Paul)
dwell in you plenteous^ie in all wisdom, Colos 3.1^
teaching and admonishing one another. He speaks to the Collossians, both to
men and women, and wills that this doctrine of the Gospel should be so
familiar unto them, that it might take root in them, whereby to be instructed
both for themselves, and to teach others. We have (says Saint Peter) a most
sure word of the Prophets, 2. Pet. 1.19
to the which ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a
dark place. He compares the writings of the Prophets to a candle shining in
the dark, and therefore exhorts us to take the same to be our light, Psalm.
119.105 Ephesians. 6.17
as David also says, The word of God is a light to my steps. Saint Paul
calls Gods word the sword of the spirit, wherewith he wills us to be
armed to fight against the devil. But how shall we take this sword in hand,
unless we become diligent readers of the holy Scriptures, wherewith after the
example of Jesus Christ, Math. 4. Romans 15.4.
to resell the temptations of the devil, saying: It is written, It is written.
If (as Saint Paul says) all that is written, is written for our learning,
that we may have hope by patience, and comfort in the Scriptures. Shall not
we make vain the providence of the heavenly goodness, which has given and
preserved the Scriptures for us, if we do not with diligence read in them, to
the end thereby to be comforted and strengthened in patience, 2. Tim. 3.16
hope, and faith? If all holy Scripture be given by inspiration from God, and
be profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness, ought not we diligently to exercise our selves in reading and
meditation thereof, to the end to reap such excellent fruit of the same?

4 Men are flatterers, and we are blind in our own corruptions, whereto we
are naturally affected, and therefore it is most necessary that we should
often hear God speaking unto us in the holy Scriptures, instructing,
improuing, correcting and exhorting us to our duties. When the young man
mentioned by Saint Luke, asked of Jesus Christ what he should do to obtain
everlasting life, Luke 10.26
Christ answered, What is written in the Law? How do thou read? Thereby
showing that the Law is written for us to read, that in it we may know
what we are to do in discharge of our duty toward God. When the cursed
rich man prayed Abraham to send Lazarus to his brethren, Luke 6.29
he answered, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them read them. He
thereby taught us that we must read the Scriptures, and in them learn the
means to escape everlasting torments with that cursed rich man, and never
hope of any man's coming from death to teach us. David, a most excellent
Prophet, was well instructed in the Law, yet the hundredth and nineteenth
Psalm does at large declare, Psalm. 119 Dan. 9.2. Act. 17.11.
how diligent and careful he was in reading and meditating. Daniel,
notwithstanding his many revelations, left not off the reading of the books
of Jeremy. Saint Luke highlye commends the Birrheans, because they were of
better stomach than the Jews at Thessalonica, to receive with all readiness the
word preached by Saint Paul, and daily to confer the scriptures, to know
whether it were so, and so the better to gather knowledge by the conference of
the Scriptures, with the truth which they had heard, that they might be the
rather confirmed therein. This zeal and diligence of the Birrheans shall rise
up in judgment against us even against us, who having heard the preaching, do
no farther endeavor by reading the Scriptures, to confirm our selves more and
more in the heavenly doctrine preached unto us. Act. 8
Queen Candaces Eunuch, might well, as it seems, have exempted himself from
this duty, being in his journey, yet riding on his chariot, he read the
Prophet Esaie: but we Christians will almost be ashamed to show our selves so
religious. Yet might this diligence of a great Heathen Lord, as yet ignorant,
together with his fervent affection to read the holy Scripture, make us to
blush for shame, for that we do neglect so many our convenient opportunities
and great leisure to read the doctrine of the Gospel, so clear and full of
singular consolations.

5 Saint Augustine reports, that himself was converted to the true Christian
religion by reading the holy scriptures: In his confessions.
also that he was moved to the said reading, by hearing the voice, as it
were, of some little child singing and saying, Take and read. Romans 13.14
And that obeying that voice, he lighting upon this place, Put on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof:
was converted to the Lord whom he had so mightily wythstood. How many
thousands even in our days have there been converted and illuminated by
reading the Scriptures, and other good books written upon the same? But this
is the mischief, that many are content with some small taste, and dark or weak
beginning, and never think it necessary daily to go forward, albeit
undoubtedly such a beginning of light and comfort should kindle their hearts,
and cause them to imitate the laborers in the mines of silver and gold, who
when they have found a good vain of metal, do follow it to the end. But the
end of this golden vain of the holy Scripture will never be sound: for the
farther we read, the more we shall find, and such are the pleasures
thereof, that the more we eat, the more will our appetite increase.

6 It is surely marvelous, that all the endeauours of satan, ever seeking to
deprive us of the holy Scriptures, cannot be unto us a manifest advertisement
and assured testimony of the commodity or rather necessity of reading the
same. For to what end did he in the days of Antiochus seek to abolish all
the books of the law? 1. Mac. 1
Or to what purpose did he in the Romish Church procure that the people might
not be permitted to read the holy Scriptures, especially in a vulgar or
known language? Could he more evidently declare himself to be the prince of
darkness and father of lies, than by taking from the people of God the light
and truth of Gods most holy and sacred word? May we not thereof gather, that
in us he fears nothing so much as the reading of the same? Or ought we not
with greater courage to grow more diligent and fervent in this duty? This
zeal did appear, when by Satan we were oppressed with this effect, that
we might not read: but as violence is assuaged, so our zeal is quayled. The
fire appears not, because the stone lights not upon the steel. Yet,
says Saint Augustine, he that cares not for reading the holy Scriptures,
August. in his 56. sermon to the brethren in the wilderness. Esa. 5.13 1. Cor.
4.38
sent out of paradise, is to fear not only deprivation of eternal felicity,
but also that he can never escape everlasting punishment. For the neglect of
reading Gods holy word is so dangerous a matter, that the Prophet in great
sorrow cried out, My people are gone into captivity, because they had no
knowledge. For, he that is ignorant, shall be ignorant, Undoubtedly God will
not vouchsafe to know him in eternal felycitie, which in this life cares not
to seek after God by reading the holy Scriptures. It were good that we feared,
Math. 25.12
least we should hear the same that was said to the foolish virgins when
the doors were shut, I know you not. Why, shall he not know those whom
he will send into everlasting fire? Yes, so far forth as not to aduowe
those, who in this life cared not to know him, to be his in the day of
judgment. Prou. 28.9
And therefore are we dilygently to note the saying of Solomon, He that
turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be
abominable. He therefore that desires that God should hear him, must first
hear God. For, how can he pretend that God shall hear or grant his
petitions, considering that himself cares not for hearing of God, when he
speaks unto him in his holy Scriptures? Then proceeding in his purpose, he
adds this complaint. Some Christians, yea, even some of the Clergy, when
they are upon a journey, do prepare bread, wine, oil, and so forth, or
other things: since they care so much for the flesh or body, can they not also
care for feeding their souls by diligent reading of the holy Scriptures?

7 Be diligent, says Chrysostom, before the Sermon, Chrisost. upon John. Ca
1 Homil. 10. Tome. 5
to take into your hands the Gospels that we are to read, and in your houses
repeat them many times, seeking diligently the understanding of the same, then
give attentive heed to the Sermon, so shall I more easily teach you by reason
of your perfectness in the sentence which you shall have read at home, and
being your selves soon instructed, you shall be the more ready to teach
others. If any man pretend excuse upon his business and employmentes either
publyke or private, surely it is a great abuse, so much to give himself
thereto that for temporal affairs and worldly commodities, he should
neglect the study of such as be eternal. The time that they sometimes spend
even by whole days together in conuersing with their friends, in walking for
their pleasures, in plays and pastimes, and in long sittinges, wherein they
never excuse themselves by any of their businesses, will take from them all
excuse whatsoever in the day of Gods judgment. You use such dilygence, says
he, about these base, abject, and vain trifles, that you account such as be
spiritual and concern heaven, to be utterly unprofitable and of no value.

8 Some there are which think reading to be a study to belong only to the
Minister, and for the most part they will content themselves with a Sermon,
and as for the rest they will dispense therewyth, that they may the more
liberally employe the rest of their time in the affairs and business of this
life. Neither is this any new corruption crepte in of late. For it had taken
root in the time of Chrysostom, who also then complained thereof, and sharply
reproved it, Chriso. in his 2. Tom. and 2. hom. upon the first of Math. Also
in his 3. sermon of Lazarus.
as utterly dislyking of the same. You will answer (says he) I am no
Monk, I have a wife, and children, and charge of family and householde. But
see, this is the plague that corrupts all, that ye will lay the whole
burden of holy reading upon the Monks, as if it belonged unto them only:
notwithstanding contrariwise, it be more requisite and necessary for you than
for them. For such as through worldly conversation do daily receive wound
upon wound, and one infection upon another, are in the greater need of
celestial and heavenly physic. Chriso. 3. sermon of Lazarus.
And heereunto he adds also, That it is a great deal worse to think or
imagine the holy Scriptures to be fruitless or unprofitable for them, than
to be utterly ignorant in them. And in another place prosecuting the same
argument, he says, Therefore I desire you not only to come hither often to
hear the holy scriptures read unto you, but also that in your own houses you
take in hand the holy Bible, and with fervent desire to profit, you receive
what so ever you find therein. And soon after, Loose not, I beseech you by
your negligence such a commodity, but even in your houses attend the reading
of the holy scriptures. Chrysostom upon the Epistle to the Colos. Hom. 9
The same Chrysostom upon these words of the Apostle, Let the word of God
dwell plentifully in you, says thus. You that live in the world, you that
have wives and children, mark how the Apostle commands you especially, to
read the holy Scriptures, and that not slightly or for a fashion, but
plentifully and with great diligence. Then he adds, Buy the Bible, which is
the medicine of the soul: at the least the new Testament, the writings of the
Apostles, the Acts, and the Gospels, that therein you may diligently reap daily
instruction, for the ignorance in the scriptures is the cause of all evil.

9 Others there are that care not for reading the Scriptures, because therein
they find no taste or comfort: and this is an evil sign. For as he that for a
while has been kept eating, and therefore refuses good meat for want of
appetite, must think that his stomach is not well, so he that finds no taste
in the reading of Gods word, may well feel that his soul is sick. Yet should he
follow the counsel that the Physician gives to his patient, to whom he says,
Eat, by eating your stomach will come to you. But this their want of taste
proceeds hereof, that they be not acquainted with the phrase of the holy
Ghost, and so do resemble those, who hearing a sermon, but not being perfect
in the language, do therein reap neither instruction nor comfort to
salvation. It were good for those men many times to hear God speaking unto
them, by reading the holy scriptures, so shall they by little and little learn
the speech of the holy Ghost, even as men use to learn other languages,
through the exercise of hearing, reading, and speaking. Some spices there are,
which without brusing do yield no smell, but the more they be chafed the
sweeter they are: even so is it with the holy scriptures, such as read but
little, can find no taste, but the more they be perused and read, the more
do they yield forth the treasures and pleasant fruits hidden in them. And
in deed, says Chrysostom, the cause why many do understand nothing,
proceeds not so much of ignorance, as that they will not daily have the
writings of the Apostles, or read them. That which we know, Chrysostom in his
preface on the Epistle to the Romans.
says he afterward, if we know any thing, comes not so much of the
excellency of our understanding, as of this, that being, as it were tied to
the writings of the Apostle, we never leave reading them. If you therefore will
in heart apply your selves to diligent and earnest reading, you shall
understand that which you desire, For the saying of Jesus Christ, Seek and you
shall find, is true.

10 It is likewise a vain and frivolous excuse to allege, that the holy
Scripture is dark and profound, and that we understand it not. Plato, says
Jerome, writ for few, Hiero on the 86 Psalm. To. 8. Chriso. in his 3. sermon of
Lazarus.
and few do understand him: but the Apostles writ not for few, but for all.
And therefore Chrysostom says, Truly the grace of the holy Ghost has so
disposed and moderated the holy Scriptures, that both publicanes, fishermen,
tent-makers, shepherds and Apostles, fools, and men unlearned, may by those
books be saved. Least also some fool might have recourse to any excuse in
the difficulty thereof, he has vouchsafed that the things there spoken,
should be easy, and that handy-craftes men and servants, widows, and the
most ignorant among men, should reap some benefit and profit by the reading
thereof. For they whom God from the beginning has accounted worthy the grace
of the holy Ghost, have not set down all these things for any vaineglorie,
like the Heathen, but for the salvation of their hearers. The Prophets and
Apostles have written their books easy and plain, as public Doctors for the
world, so as every one may learn their contents by reading and meditating
only. Again, how will thou understand the contents of the Scriptures, when
thou will scarce so much as look upon them? Take the books in hand, read
the whole history, remember such things as are plain, and refer darker
places to another time. But if by continual reading thou can not find the
meaning, get thee to some wiser man, or to some Doctor, and impart to him
those things that are written, declaring thy fervent desire: then if God sees
such a readynesse and diligence, albeit no man would teach thee, yet would he
himself undoubtedly declare them unto thee. Remember the Queen of the
Aethiopians Eunuch, who albeit he was a Barbarian, Act. 8.28.
a man troubled with many cares, one that understood not what he read, yet
would not pass his journey without reading, how much less being at home in
his own house? Also if he read so diligently when he understood not, what
did he after he was instructed? And in deed, God seeing his zeal and
diligence, sent Philip to teach him. Neither will God at this time despise our
desire to profit in his word, but will make us to feel the fruit of this
promise, They shall all be taught of God. And therefore says Saint Augustine,
John 6.45 Augustine of Christian doctrine.
the holy Ghost has so moderated the holy Scriptures, that he has provided
to remedy the dark places, by others more easy and plain. For hardly is
there any obscurity, but is laid open and expounded by some other place in
the same Scripture. Augustine of blasphemy against the holy Ghost.
And herein does the wisdom and goodness of God appear. For, as he
says in another place, as by easy places we are fed, so by the more hard
and difficult are we exercysed: by these we put away sorrow, by the others
famine.

11 Others there are that take no profit by reading Gods word, because they
read it as it were some profane book, and never think that it is God that
speaks to them, neither give any attention to the reading thereof, and so
feel no fervent desire to profit to salvation, or to reform their lives. To
be short, even without praying to God to give them his holy spirit. But we
must join to our reading both piety and fear of God, with a desire to amend
our lives, as it is written in the Psalms. The secret of God is revealed to
them that fear him, Psalm. 25 14 Ioh. 7.17. Augustine of the profit of
believing. c. 6
and his covenant to give them understanding. Again, If any man (says Jesus
Christ) will do the will of my Father, to him it shall be given to know my
doctrine, whether it be from God, or whether I speak of my self. Every man
may out of the holy Scriptures, says Saint Augustine, draw so much as may
suffice to satisfy and replenishe his spirit, in case he read them with
devotion and holiness, according as Christian relygion requires. Moreover,
we are to pray unto God, August. upon the Epistle of John. Tract. 2
that he will grant us his spirit of understanding. Jesus Christ, says
Saint Augustine, did open the hearts of his disciples, that they might
understand the Scriptures. Let us likewise pray unto him to give us the like
grace, and to open our minds, and he will hear us. This prayer is to be
used before reading, and of every man put in practice: for if the prophet
David, Psalm. 119
so perfectlye instructed in the law of God, does notwythstanding so often
pray unto him to give him understanding to comprehend it: which of us has
not need to pray unto God that we may profit in his holy word? Let us
also account this doctrine of Saint Augustine as a holy rule, August. upon Ioh.
Tract. 18
namely, to read the holy Scriptures with fruit and due reverence, that in
those things which we shall understand according to the analogy of faith, we
may rejoice as of a good food: but for that which we cannot understand
according to the rule of faith, to defer the comprehension thereof. Yet in
the mean time let us not doubt but even the same which we cannot comprehend,
is both true and holy.

12 To conclude, as Saint Peter admonishes us, Let us be always ready to
give account of that hope that is in us: 1. Pet. 3.15
And that we may effect it, and duly discharge our selves, Chrysostom upon
John, ho. 16. toward the end.
let us be careful and diligent in the practice of this our duty toward the
holy Scriptures. It is a strange matter, says Chrisostom, that a Physician, a
Shoemaker, a Tailor, generally every Artificer is ready and able to yield a
reason in defense of his profession and trade: and yet the Christians can give
no account of their religion. And yet ignorance in other Arts is no
hinderaunce but in this life: but ignorance in religion is hurtful to the
salvation of the soul. That we are so fervent and earnest in applying our
minds to other sciences, and yet in that which is most necessary for us, and
as it were, the fortress of our souls, we are so negligent and slothful.
This says he, causes the heathen to remain obstinate in their errors, and
to skorne our religion: For they studiing to maintain falsehoode, and we not
knowing how to defend the truth of our doctrine, they conceive that ours have
no soundation, and thereof do take occasion to blaspheame Jesus Christ, as if
he cunningly abusing the simplicity of the people had deceived and
circummented them. The same occasion do we also minister as well to those of
the Romish Church, as to the Anabaptists and other sectaries, whereby to
remain obstinate in their errors, because most of us are so ignorant, as you
shall find very few able to yield any reason of the hope of their salvation,
no not so much as to show wherefore they have forsaken the Church of Rome and
will not go to Mass.

13 Now as negligence in reading the holy Scriptures breeds this offense, so
is there yet another greater and more dangerous: And that is that we still
abide in the former corruptions of the world and the flesh, whereas contrariwise
we should resemble burning torches, to give light to the poor and ignorant,
we should, I say, be wholly renewed and ravished in spiritual and heavenly
business: As in truth were we more diligent and fervent in reading the holy
Scriptures, we might greatly profit in this duty, for as in our prayers we
speak to God, so in reading God speaks to us. Either is there any sitter
means or of greater efficacy for the reforming of us into newness of life,
than by daily hearing them speaking unto us, teaching, admonishing, reproouing,
and comforting us, setting before us the blessed estate of the kingdom of
heaven, and lifting up our minds into the contemplation of Gods graces, and of
the life and glory everlasting? There is no passion of our souls, Chrisost on
Genesis Hom. 29
says Chrysostom, but needs physic and cure from the holy Scripture.
Also whatsoever increase of strength grows to the bodi^ by meat, the like
grows to the soul by the reading of the holy Scripture. To be short, as a
bar of iron by long lying in the fire waxes hot, red, and of the nature of
burning fire, so that soul that daily imployeth it self in reading and
meditating the word of God, grows to be spiritual, divine, heavenly, and
kindled in the love of God. The reading of the holy Scripture, Chriso. third
sermon of Lazarus.
says Chrysostom, is a strong fortress against sin, and the ignorance
thereof, a great danger ready to cast us headlong into a deep gulf and
bottomless pit. To know nothing of the holy Scripture, is a great maime to
salvation. It engenders heresies, it begets corruption of life, and it
makes a mixture of heaven and earth. Truly it cannot be, it cannot be (I
say) that that man shall depart without fruit, who takes pleasure in the
continual and attentive reading of the Scriptures. As therefore this
admonition of Jesus Christ, Amend your lives, ought continually to sound in
our ears, so acknowledging our negligence, and former sloth in dayling
reading Gods word, Aug. cap 22. of his meditations.
let us heartily give our selves to amend, practicing the same which Saint
Augustine says of himself: I delight O Lord, to hear of thee, to talk of
thee, to write of thee, to devise of thee, and in my heart to print whatsoever
I read of thee. For this cause also do I enter into the pleasant meddowes of
the holy Scripture, I gather the green herbs of holy sentences, I eat them,
I chewe them, I gather them together, and I keep them in the coffer of my
remembrance. Let us, I say, do our duties better hereafter, so that
endeavoring and applying our selves with our whole hearts and minds to the
reading and meditating of the holy Scriptures, with an carnest desire to
profit, and prayer to God to grant us his holy spirit, we may proceed in
the knowledge of his heavenly will, that so being instructed and ready to
render a reason of the hope of our salvation, we may feel within us the
efficacy of this doctrine, making us to renounce the earth, the world, and the
flesh, that through true and lively faith we may aspire to the inioying of the
heavenly glory, and finally attain thereunto, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

That we ought to put in practice the word of God. Chap. 8.
NOw as we understand, that in duty we are to join with the Church of Christ,
carefully to frequent Sermons, devoutly to communicate in the holy Sacraments,
namely, in the Supper, zealously to assist at common prayers, fervently to
exercise our selves in private prayer, and diligently to read Gods word: so
the principal end and purpose of all these duties does import, that we should
order our lives according to the will of God, and thereafter put in effect and
practice as well whatsoever we learn in the word and Sacraments, as also
every thing which in our prayers we beg at Gods hand. For as medicines do
minister health to none but those that take them, whose nature also is strong
and well prepared to receive their operations, so is it requisite that they
which hear and read Gods word, should receive and apply it to themselves, and
pray unto God to prepare them, and by his holy spirit so to dispose their
hearts, that the doctrine and exhortations may work their operation in them.
And in deed, if the end of all sciences, as an ancient philosopher teaches,
consist not in the knowledge, but in the practice, the same ought especially to
take place in Christian religion and doctrine. He that studieth civil law or
Physic, is not straight satisfied with the knowledge that he has gotten, but
proceeds to practice. One becomes an advocate, a counselor, or a
president, the other spends his time in the cure of diseases. They that have
learned the art of sewing, of cordwainrie, of draperie, and so forth, yet are
not reputed taylers, cordwainers, or drapers, unless they do in act exercise
those sciences, which is in deed, the purpose of their apprentishippe: in like
manner, let us never look to be Christians or Gods children, notwithstanding
we have learned the manner thereof, unless we also perform the works of
Christians, and of the children of God. Blessed are they (says Jesus Christ)
that hear the word of God, Luke 11.28 Romans 2.13. Iam. 1.22.
and keep it. Again, The hearers of the law are not righteous before God,
but the dooers of the law shall be justified. We must therefore, as Saint
James says, be doers of the law, and not hearers only, otherwise we shall
deceive our selves. And in deed, as the holy Scripture is full of exhortations
to obedience to the will of God and Amendment of life, so it imports not
only that we should know that we must amend, but also that we amend
really and in deed. Luke 16.6
The fig tree that bare no fruit was threatened to be cut down: a Sun
without light, Iam. 2.17
is but a painted Sun: a coal without heat is dead: a body without motion
lives not: even so says without works is dead, and the Christian that
brings not forth the fruits of the spirit of Christ, belongs not to
Christ, and so is no Christian. After we have shorn our heads and our beardes,
Romans 8
before we come forth we look in the glass whether it be well, how much
rather ought we, after we have heard the Sermon, the end whereof tends to
amend our lives, immediately to look upon and peruse our souls, to the end
to see whether our corruptions and vices being cut down and mortifyed, the
same be clear and pure in the sight of God. For as a certain Philosopher in
old said, The use of the bath, and of the word that purges not, is vain
and unprofitable: and therefore says the Apostle Saint Paul, Ye have not so
learned Christ, if so be ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, and
the truth is in him. That ye cast off, concerning the conversation in time
past, the old man, which is corrupt through the deceivable lusts: Ephe.
3.20.21 22.23.24
and be renewed thorough the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. Still
laboring, that in the end we may be found irreprehensible, without spot,
wrinckle, or blemish, and that the image of God may be restored and shine in
us. This is it that we are now to entreat of.

2 Here have we work enough cut out. For what is man become by the
transgression of Adam? Even the very same as the Apostle Saint Paul
describes him, saying: There is none righteous, no not one: there is none that
understands: there is none seeks God: they are all gone out of the way?
they have been made altogether unprofitable: Romans 3.10
there is none that does good, no not one: Their throat is an open sepulcher:
they have used their tongues to deceit: the poison of Aspes is under their
lips: whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness: Destruction and
calamity are in their ways: and the way of peace have they not known: the
fear of God is not before their eyes. True it is, that some sparks of the
image of God do yet remain in man, but very few, small, and of no strength:
which also we do quench, or at the least so abuse, that man is never more
deuoyde of reason, than when he suffers himself to be lead by reason, and
of those sparks he is to look for no profit, but that thorough them he
shall be made the more inexcusable in the day of the Lord. Many beasts and
fowls do in virtue go beyond man. The Dove in simplicity, the Ant or Emet
in diligence and industry, Esa. 1.
the Storke in kindness, the Dog in love and fidelity, the Ox and the Ass
in memory and acknowledging of benefits, the Lamb in meekness, the Lion in
magnanimity, the Cock in wakefulnesse and lyberalitie, the Serpent in
wisdom, generally all in sobriety and contentment: But in vice man passes
them all: For he is more traitorous and cruel than a woolfe, more crafty and
subtle than a Fox, more proud than a Peacocke, more voluptuous and
unthankful than a Hog, more dangerous than an Aspick. Moreover, al vices
and wickedness whatsoever that rests particular and several in sundry
beasts, are altogether or for the most part in one man. For we shall see one
man both covetous, proud, crafty, cruel, envious, unthankful, and a
thief. To be short, as many members united make one body, Romans 6.6.
so the holy Apostle Saint Paul terms this heaping of vices in man, the
body of sin, every vice being, as it were, a member to that body. It is
said that in a sheep every thing returns to profit and commodity, the
flesh for food, the wool for clothing, the sinnewes for strings for musical
instruments, and so forth: But contrariwise, every thing that is in man, is
either naught or tends to evil. The reason, to beguile and deceive: the
liberty, to riotous licentiousness and other wantonness: the eyes, to see
and behold vanity: the heart, to covet and thirst thereafter: the hands, to
beat, to strike, and oppress: the feet, to run after sin and
wickedness: the tongue, to backbite, lie, and blaspheme: to be short, all the
members are instruments of iniquity, Romans 6.19
as Saint Paul terms them.

3 Hereby may every man whatsoever he be, perceive and know that Christ's
exhortation, saying, Amend your lives, stretches very far. Also that many
are the vices that we are to amend, especially considering how Saint Paul
admonishes us, Romans 8.13. Ehe. 4.22. Col. 3.9. Math. 16.24
not to mortify two or three members of this body of sin, but the whole body,
as also to put of the old man, and as Jesus Christ says, to deny our selves.
In the deduction of this matter, we will therefore deal sometimes with the
names of the virtues which we are to put in practice, and sometimes of the
vices that we are to shun, according as the names do import some
generality, or do best fit our intent. So shall every one understand, that
the amenment of life consists in the denial of vice, and contrariwise in the
advancement of virtue.

Of Love and Charity in general. Chap. 9.
WE will begin with love, which has two respects. The first is to God, Math.
22. 1. John. 4.19 Ephe. 2.4 Romans 5.8 John 3.16
as it is commanded, that we should love him with all our heart, with all our
strength, and with all our mind. The second, to our neighbor, whom we ought
to love as our selves. As for our love to God, the same, as Saint John says,
proceeds of his love to us, We love him because he first loved us. He loved
us even when we were dead in sin, when we were his enemies, yea, he so loved
us, that he gave his only begotten and well-beloved son to die for us. This
his incomprehensible love toward us, does therefore bind us most fervently to
love him. And in deed, as a cold stone by liyng three or four hours in the
warm Sun, gathers heat, so this love of God shining upon our souls,
should kindle them in his love. 1. Ioh. 4.16 1. Ioh. 4.7 John. 13.33 August.
upon John's gospel. 1. Cor. 13
As for love toward our neighbor, we are the rather to desire it, and to put it
in practice, because it is the mark of Gods children, the disciples of Jesus
Christ. And therefore says Saint John, God is love, and he that loves is
borne of God, and knows God. And as all Gods children are the disciples of
Christ. Hereby also (says Jesus Christ) shall men know that ye are my
disciples, if ye love one another as I have loved you. They that are not my
disciples, says Saint Augustine in the person of Christ, do notwithstanding
participate in many other my benefits. They have not only nature, life, sense,
reason, and common preservation among al mankind, but also the gift of tongues,
the sacraments, prophecy, knowledge, faith to work miracles, distribution of
their goods to the poor, yea, even the giving of their bodies to fire, but
because they have no love, they are as sounding brass and tinkling cimbals,
they are nothing. It is not therefore by these my benefits, Augustine in praise
of charity,
which even they that are not my Disciples may also have, that men shall know
you to be my Disciples: but only in this, that ye love one another: Likewise a
man may receive the sacraments, and yet be wicked, but no man can have love and
be wicked. Not without reason therefore does Saint Paul, writing to the
Galathians, say. Neither circumcision avails anything, neither
uncircumcision, Call, 5.6.
but faith which works by love. In which sentence the Apostle shows, that
in the kingdom of Christ the matter wherein we do most testify our faith:
which is of greatest account: and whereto we are especially to apply and give
our selves, is love, Augustine in praise of charity.
which also Saint Augustine calls the fountain of all goodness, as
covetousness is the root of all evil.

2 That this love may be pure and true, Augustine in his confessions, Prosper
in his sentences of Augustine,
it must so proceed from our love of God, that we may love our neighbor in
respect of that love which we bear to God. For as Saint Augustine says, we
love not God so much as we should, if we love any thing but him, which we love
not for the love of him, and therefore in another place he says. Blessed is he
that loves God, and his friend in God, and his enemy for the love of God.
Hereby are we to gather three points: First, that albeit some heathen may seem
to have done works of great charity and love, yet was the same no true or
lively charity, which is proper and peculier to the children of God: for they
only do know and love God, and their neighbors for Gods sake. And indeed love
ought to proceed from a pure heart, as both Paul and Peter does teach. By faith
our hearts are purified. 1. Tim. 1.5. 1. Pet. 1.22. Act. 15.9.
None therefore but the faithful have true love which proceeds not from the
love of themselves, but from their love to God. Secondly, it appears in this,
that in vain we boast that we love God, if we love not our neighbor for his
sake. This is it that Saint John notes, saying. If any man say, I love God,
and yet hate his brother, the same is a lier. For he that loves not his
brother whom he sees, 1. Ioh. 4.20. Rom, 13, 10,
how can he love God whom he sees not? And this commandment have we of him,
that he which loves God, loves his brother also. Thirdly, hereby we
understand the truth of the saying of Saint Paul, that Love is the fulfilling
of the law. For if we cannot love God, unless we love our neighbor, neither
our neighbor, unless our love to him proceed of our love toward God: It must
needs follow, that loving our neighbor, we also love God, and so fulfill the
law, which is comprehended in this: That we love both God and our neighbor.

3 The better that we may yet understand what our love ought to be, we are
diligently to note the commandment of God, that we should love our neighbor as
our self and explane this duty by two very natural and just rules which
necessarily do ensue. The first, by this ancient proverb, common even among
the heathen. Lampridius in the life of Alexander Seuerus.
Do no otherwise by another, then we would be done unto. Alexander Seuerus, an
Emperor endued with many excellent virtues, had this sentence ordinarily in
his mouth, thereby reproving such as wronged or iniuried others. Yea in
publishing any sentence of condemnation against transgressors, he caused the
same to be added as the ground thereof. Do no otherwise to another, then thou
would be done unto. To be short, he had such a liking, and so heartily
embraced this sentence, that he caused the same to be written and engraven in
his imperial palace and in many public works. The other rule rests in
this, which Jesus Christ commands saying. Mat. 7.21.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do ye to them. Now
the love of our selves imports, that men should not only forbear doing of
us hurt, but also that they should do us good. Draco, Licurgus, Solon and other
lawgiuers have written and set forth many good laws, whereby to maintain man
in equity and upright dealing: many Philosophers have written good books for
the framing of the manners of men: Yet all their great volumes, their long
discourses, and the multitude of their laws, have always had great
imperfections, and tended as it were to the ordering but of the outward man,
and so in part to make men hypocrites, because they could never attain to the
knowledge of true Christian love. But God in one only short sentence, saying:
Love thy neighbor as thy self, has comprehended the whole duty of man, one
toward another, that they may live together in all equity: peace, love and
felicity. And thus may these two natural rules, Do no otherwise to another
then thou would be done unto, and Do as ye would be done unto, be
sufficient commentaries upon all Christian policy. In this sense did Saint
Paul justly call this love, Col, 3.14.
the bond of all perfection. And indeed if we would love one another as our
selves and declare our love by these two natural rules, then should there be
among us, neither fraud, injury, wrong, nor deceitful dealing. Then should
all ambition, pride, covetousness, envy, hatred, evil speaking, and other
like passions cease. We should see nothing but equity, peace, concord, 1. Cor.
13.4
love relief and mutual assistance. And these fruits of love does Saint Paul
note saying. Love suffers long, it is bountiful, love enuieth not, love does
not boast it self, it is not puffed up: It disdaineth not, it seeks not her
own things, it is not provoked to anger, it thinks none evil: It rejoices
not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth: It suffers all things, it
believes all things: It hops all things, it endures all things. To be
short, if we practice this love, we shall even in this life begin to taste
the blessed estate of the kingdom of heaven, whereto being lifted up, we
shall love one another as our selves, and rejoice at our neighbors good, as at
our own. Let us always therefore remember this commandment, that we love
our neighbor as our selves, and heartily let us endeavor to show it by the
practice of these two rules, still harkening to nature, who cries saying. Do
no otherwise to another then thou would be done unto: And Do as thou
would be done by.

4 We are also farther to consider, 1, Pet. 1.22. 1, Pet. 4 8.
that this love must not be cold, but seruent: not slack, but earnest and
vehement, as Saint Peter admonishes us. And that it may be such, it is
requisite first that we hold nothing so dear or so precious as to be always
ready to employ our selves for our neighbor, yea even to the spending of our
lives, John 3.16
after the example of the love that Jesus Christ showed unto us, as Saint John
says: Hereby have we known his love, that he gave his life for us. So are we
also to give our lives for our brethren. Secondly, the heat and seruencie of
our love and charity ought to be such, as might su^mount any thing that
should quail it, as ingratitude, hatred, injury, or vnworthienesse of our
neighbors. And indeed if we must love our neighbor for the love of God: If
the Image God in him does thereto bind us. If being parcel of our flesh we
ought thereto to be affected: then notwithstanding whatsoever vnworthienesse
be in him, yet God must not loose his right: his image is not utterly defaced:
Neither is that conjunction wherewith God binds us together, taken away. Luke
10.29.
Therefore does Jesus Christ by the parable of the Samaritan teach us, that
every one known, unknown, stranger, yea even an enemy, as were the
Samaritans to the Jews, is our neighbor, whom we must love as our selves.
And so did Jesus Christ, Mat. 5.43.
correcting the false gloss of the Pharisees, expound it, saying. You have
heard that it has been said. Thou shall love thy neighbor and hate thine
enemy: But I say unto you love your enemies. And which is more, he wills
that we should testify this love, not with our lips only, but also in
deeds and works, by blessing those that curse us, by doing well to those that
hate us, and by praying for those that molest and persecute us.

Exodus 23.4.5,
5 This did Moses in his days teach, saying, If thou meetest thy enemies Ox or
his Ass going astray, thou shall bring him to him again: Again. If thou see
thy enemies Ass lying under his burden: leave thy business that he may not rise
alone, yea leave thy business and help him up. 1. Cor. 9.9
Or as others do expound it. See thou do not forsake him until his master
has first forsaken him: Cares God for beasts says S. Paul That he should
thus commend them to us. Is it not rather hereby to show us what we are to do
to the person of our enemy, since we are bound to such a duty to his Ox or
his Ass, Romans 12, 20.
as Saint Paul teaches us, saying. If thy enemy hungereth, give him meat: If
he thirst give him drink. And because the practice hereof is very difficult,
Jesus Christ himself, Mat. 5.45.
the rather to induce us to this duty, protests that In so doing we shall be
the Children of his heavenly father, who makes his sun to shine upon both
good and bad, Mat. 5 46.
and causes his rain to fall upon the righteous and the unrighteous. Hereby
we gather, that if our charity be bound^d only to our friends, and that we
extend not the same even to our enemies, it is not the charity of the children
of God, but as Jesus Christ adds, of publicans and infidels. Also in works
and deeds if we show not the love that we bear to our enemies, it is in
vain for us to protest that we wish them no more hurt then to our selves, or
that we love them, or wish as well to them as to our selves. The holy history
expressly notes, that Absalom used no hard words to his brother Ammon who had
defouled Thamar the said Absalons sister: Yet loved he him not, neither wished
his good, but in his heart nourished cruel hatred against him, which he
finally declared by pro^^^^^g him traitorously to be murdered. And thus it
appears, that speaking neither well nor ill, betokens hatred and malice.
For love can not but both speak well and do well even to her enemies.

6 This love is the rather to be esteemed and commended, because the gifts of
speaking with tongues, working of miracles, prophesying, and such like, are
nothing without love. Yea which is more then al those gifts, even faith and
hope shall have an end, but love, as Saint Paul says, abides for ever. Albeit
therefore that by faith and hope we be made heirs of wonderful joy and
felicity, yet is the effect and fruit of love greater, in this respect, that
thereby the joy of our particular felicity, obtained by faith, shall be
infinitely doubled and increased for every of the electes sakes, whom we shall
then love as our selves, and whose felicity will be unto us as great a comfort
as our own. Thus we see what love is required at our hands, and how much we
are to esteem it. Now if we would examine our selves, and try our love with
the same which God requires at our hands, as is before showed, we shall find
that it comes very short. And indeed what man loves his neighbor as
himself, and that for the love of God? Who does not many times by his
neighbor otherwise then himself would be done by? Who deals with another as
he would be dealt by? Who is resolved to give his life for his brethren? Who
loves his enemies as himself, and in heart prays for them? If love, as is
aforesaid, suffers long: if it enuieth not: if it seeks not her own: if it
thinks none evil: if the patience thereof be such as that it endures and
sustereth al things: 1. Cor. 13
Then does it sufficiently appear that we do wrongfully boast our selves to be
the children of God, because his character cannot be seen in us, which is
love: or that in purpose to amend, we do not mislike our own corruption. When
therefore we hear the holy Ghost say, Amend your lives. Let us be assured that
he does admonish us so to increase in this love, that we may love God with all
our hearts, and our neighbors as our selves: and that to the same end these two
natural rules may continually sound in our ears: and that our consciences by
the same examining all our words and works, may be our judge to condemn
whatsoever we shall peradventure do to others which we would not should be
done to our selves, and to reprove our want of love, when we do not that to him
that we would have done to our selves that so in amending whatsoever it shall
find in us not conformable to this love, we may daily increase therein, and
thereby more and more get printed in us the Character of Gods children and of
the true Disciples of Jesus Christ. And now let us proceed to another
examination of our love.

Of Almos and relieuing of the poor. Chap: 10.
AMong other the testimonies of our love, and charity, the due relief of the
poor is not the least. And indeed in vain do we boast of charity, unless
we practice the same by relieuing the poor in their necessities. Who so has
this worlds goods, 1. Ioh. 3.17
says Saint John, and sees his brother have need and shuts up his
compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? Whereto he adds.
My children let us not love in word, neither in tongue only, but indeed and in
truth. This duty of love did the Apostles of Jesus Christ so heartily commend,
that finding themselves to agree in the doctrine of the Gospel with S. Paul,
Gal. 2.10. 2. Cor. 8.9
they commended nothing unto him, but to remember the poor. And thereof was
himself also very careful as he does affirm in his Epistle to the
Galathians, and did effectually show the same in his second to the Corinthians.
As also it is not amiss to note that the last judgment and sentence of
felicity or misery shall be pronounced in part upon the performance or
neglect of this duty to the poor in affliction. Mat. 25.


2 This relief of the poor is commonly termed Alms, which word signifies
pity and compassion. The rather to teach us, that this relief must proceed
of compassion, through the feeling of their afflictions. And this does Esaias
declare, saying. If thou openest thy heart to the hungerie, and satisfiest the
needy soul, thy light shall shine in darkness, and thy darkness shall be
as the none day. The word which the Prophet here uses, Esa. 58.10.
signifies as much as if we should say, if thou pullest forth thy heart to
give to him that hungreth: thereby teaching us, that true Alms imports the
opening and communication of our hearts, by feeling the necessity of others and
therefore does S. Augustine say, Augustine his first book of visit the sick.
c. 3. 1. Cor. 13.3
that if our relief ministered to the poor, proceeds not of love and
compassion, it never ascends into the presence of God. Hereto may we also
refer this sentence of S. Paul: If we give all that we have to the poor, and
have no love, it profits not. Yea says a good ancient father: In heart to
take compassion of the poor, is more then to give them our goods: for he that
gives, imports external things: but he that takes compassion, opens and
gives his own heart. This compassion proceeds of the union that God has
made between us, in that we all discending from Adam, are as it were one body
and one flesh. As Esaias exhorting us to this compassion, does say. Hide not thy
self from thy own flesh. Esaias. 58.7. Heb. 1^:3^
Which the Apostle also confirms, saying. Remember them that are in bonds,
as if ye were bound with them, and them that are in affliction, as if ye were
also afflicted in the body. And indeed as Saint Paul says. This union should
breed such a feeling of the weal or woe of the members of this body, that we
should rejoice for the prosperity of the one, 1. Cor. 12.26, Romans 12, 15. 1.
Cor. 12.25; 1. Ioh. 3.17
and be sorry for the misery of the other, and as in another place he says,
that we should weep with them that weep. Otherwise, as he adds, there is
no conjunction in the body, but division and partiality. And in that sense
Saint John denies that there is any love in him who seeing the want and
necessity of his brother, closes up his bowels, by the bowels signifieng the
compassion and mercy wherewith he should be moved at the sight of the poverty
of his brethren. Jesus Christ also to assure us that he will take compassion of
us whom we are persecuted for his name, says, Act. 9, 5. Zach. 2, 8, Deuteronomy, 32,
10.
that he is persecuted in us that are the members of his body. Yea he
protests that who so touches us, touches the apple of his eye. Thereby
declaring that as the apple of the eye is so tender that it may not be touched
but with great grief, so the conjunction between him and us is such, Psalm.
17.8
that he seeleth our afflictions, and thereof takes great compassion. After
whose example, we likewise ought in our selves to feel the necessity and want
of our neighbors, because they be our flesh, and members of the same body, and
so to apprehend their pain, anguish and sorrow, as thereby to be moved with
compassion toward them,

3 In as much therefore as in the consideration of a woeful estate, the
apprehension that we take by the ear, can never so forcibly move the heart, as
that which comes by the eye, Cicero,
says an ancient Orator, every man ought diligently to visit the poor in
their tribulations: to the end that with their eyes beholding those that lie
upon the straw, that are sick, that are naked, that quake for cold, that want
bread, that mourn for the lamentation of their poor children that cry for
hunger, that are lodged in places where we would scarce lay our dogs: this
spectakle might move the bowels of their hearts to take compassion of their
poverty. In this consideration Jesus Christ is not content that we give to the
poor bread, drink, or cloth only, but also does require us to visit him in
his members. I was sick says he, and ye visited me, and therefore S. James
says. Pure religion and undefiled before God, Mat. 25.36. Iam, 1, 27.
even the father, is this to visit the fatherless and widows in their
adversities. And indeed as visitation will undoubtedly engender compassion in
the heart, so will it the more abundantly stretch forth the hand to the
relief of the needy: and this does experience daily teach us. And therefore
such as think it a great grace of God to be charitable to the poor, as indeed
it is, are to exercise themselves in the visitation of them, to the end to
comfort them both in word and deed, which gives great efficacy to the word.
This exercise of charity ought the mighty and rich men of the world to put in
practice: for as by visiting the poor, their humility would minister great
force to their charity, so would such visitatio^ move their hearts the more
liberally, with their abundance to relieve the needy.

4 But because most men do think it to rest at our own choice, whether we
will relieve the poor or not, let us contrariwise assure our selves that it is
a matter commended by God which we may not neglect whenever God ministers
occasion and means least we, offend God, and deserve everlasting damnation.
And indeed it is a work of charity, which charity is unto us commanded by
God, and comprehends the summarie of the second table of the law. God in old
time prescribed to his people this duty of charity, saying. Because there
shall ever be some poor in the land, therefore I command thee, Deuteronomy. 15, 11
saying, Thou shall open thine hand unto thy brother, to thy needy, and to thy
poor in thy land. To which effect Saint Paul also commands us, to impart to
the necessity of the Saints. Also, to do good unto all, but especially to the
household of faith, Romans 12.13. Gal. 6.10. Heb. 1.16: 2. Cor. 9.10
and because we are so negligent in this duty, the Apostle wakeneth us saying.
To do good, and to distribute forget not, for with such sacrifices God is
pleased. Saint Paul calls Alms the works of righteousness, because there
is nothing more righteous before God, or wherein we stand more indebted unto
man, then to relieve his necessity by love. God in old time forbad the people
of Israel saying. Leuit. 19.9
When you reap the harvest of your land, you shall not reap every corner of
your field, neither shall thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest. Again,
Thou shall not gather the grapes of thy vineyarde clean, neither shall thou
gather every grape of thy vineyard, but shall leave them for the poor and for
the stranger. Since God shows himself so liberal unto us, as to permit us
to reap for our selves the harvest and Vintage, yet withal testifies unto us
such a care of the poor, that he commands us to leave unto them whatsoever
shall remain of the said harvest and vinetage: Deuteronomy, 26, 1. Exodus 23, 19. and
34, 22. Numb; 15.17. Exodus 22.19.
will it not at this day be a great testimony of disobedience and ingratitude,
not to impart to the poor some small portion of the plenty that he has put
into our hands? In old time God commanded his people to offer unto him all the
first fruits of such goods as grew to them from the earth: Moreover the first
loaves of the first dowe of the new corn: also the first licour pressed either
out of the olive or out of the grape. And this was an acknowledgement that the
land that they possessed was the Lords, and an homadge testifieng that all the
goods that they enjoyed, proceeded from his liberality. In consideration
therefore, says David, that our wealth comes not to his hands, he at this
day substituteth the poor in his place, Psalm. 16.2
as he also adds saying. But unto the Saints that are upon the earth, am I
wholly inclined. And therefore whenever the poor, or the deacons in their
name do come unto us, we are to take them to be Gods receivers, that come to
challenge his right at our hands: And in refusing to pay unto them the homadge
that we owe unto God, for the goods that we hold of him, sending the^ away
empty, and not relieuing their necessities, we do commit not only theft, but
also sacrilege. The image of God that the poor do bear about them, should be
some reason to know them, and Gods commandment to relieve them, is their
commission and letters patents, which we cannot disaduow without great
contempt to his majesty.

5 The ten commandments of the law of God do undoubtedly comprehend the
whole duty of man to God and to his neighbor, and thereof it follows that
the relief of the poor and all other the works of charity are therein
comprised and commanded. But in which commandment of the law? In the sixth:
Thou shall not kill. What is the ground and reason of this commandment?
Because man's life is dear and precious in the sight of God, he forbids all
hurting of it, and commands us to preserve it. As therefore he prohibiteth
whatsoever may tend to the hurt of man's life, so does he command any thing that
may serve to the maintenance thereof: and consequently it appears that all
relief requisite for the preservation of the poor is here commanded unto us.
And being commanded by this word, Thou shall not kill: It necessarily ensues
that he which relieueth not the poor at their need, is a murderer. And in
deed, as we quench a lamp, not only by blowing it out, but also by keeping
away the oil that should seed it: or as we quench fire, not only by
casting on of water, but also by keeping away wood from it: And in a great
drought as many herbs do die, not only by plucking up, but also for want of
watering: so is man's life taken away not only by sword or violence, but
also by not ministering unto his necessities. And therefore Saint Ambrose
says, He that refuses the poor in their necessity, Ambrose upon the Psalm
Beati imaculati. Luke 6.9.
kills them. Let us therefore, as he adds, beware we bury not their
lives in our coffers. Jesus Christ himself confirms the premises. For when
upon the sabbath day he purposed to heal the man that had the withered
hand, he asked of the Pharisees that were offended thereat, whether it were
lawful upon the sabbath day to do good, or to hurt: to save, or to kill:
thereby showing, that the deferring of the cure of the poor man, was an evil
deed, yea even murder. Moreover, God forbids to steal, but when we give
to the poor, we give nothing of our own, only we distribute to them that
which is theyrs, yea, which it were the every to keep from them. It is the
hungry man's bread, says Saint Ambrose, that thou keep locked up, and the
naked man's garment that thou reseruest. If thou can help him, thou take
from him whatsoever thou deniest him in his necessity. And indeed, every man
must think that he is not master and Lord, but only steward of those goods
that God has put into his hands. And therefore as a receiver, a treasurer or a
steward, if he keep back that which he is commanded to furnish or deliver
forth, is an unfaithful servant and a thief, even so are we so long as we
retain that wherewith we should relieve the poor in their necessity. And as
the Moon receiving her light from the sun does impart it unto men, so are
men to impart unto the poor of the goods which they have received from the
Lord. Think not therefore that the relief of the poor is left at our choice:
for it is Gods commandment as is before declared, and so it is disobedience,
ingratitude, unrighteousness, sin, yea even murder and sacrilege in the
sight of God, because we relieve not their necessities according to such
ability as we have received from the Lord: And albeit such murder and
sacrilege passes untouched by the sword of the magistrate, yet in the
presence of God it is worthy of death and everlasting damnation.

6 Which is more through this neglect and contempt of the poor, we do so much
as in us lies, overthrow Gods providence. For in as much as he is our creator,
it is also his part to feed and maintain us: and he therefore so far
honoreth some, as to give them more plenty of goods then to other some: Yet not
that they should riotously wast them, but rather to lay them up, that they may
be his ministers, 2. Cor. 9.12.
to nourish and relieve the needy, so that if we neglect the poor, their
want their hunger and nakedness will cry out upon us before God, and accuse
our infidelity and ingratitude: And God hearing their cry and being therein
dishonored, will take revenge thereof. Basil. Hom. 1.
But contrariwise when we do relieve the necessity of the poor, our
charity, says Saint Paul, causes them to praise God, by acknowledging his
care of them, in that he gives to men both charity, and means whereby to
relieve their necessity. God by this his providence, says Saint Basil, has
ordained for man two crowns, for the poor, the crown of patience, and for
the rich, the crown of liberality: And as the poor do deprive themselves of
their crown by impaciencie and murmuring: so ought the rich by helping the
poor, to strive to obtain the crown of liberality. And to this purpose,
they are to remember this sentence pronounced by Jesus Christ, as Saint Paul
says, It is a more blessed thing to give then to take. Because he that
takes, receives only corporal assistaunce: But he that gives, Act. 20,
35.
besides the commodity of means whereby to help himself and the honor to
be a steward of Gods goods, he also purchases a crown and a permanent
treasure in life everlasting. And this is one point which should also kindle
us in the duty of charity.

7 Most men do imagine, that all that they give to the poor, is so much
diminution of their own goods and loss to them, yea even as money cast into
the sea, And this their false opinion grows hereof, that in their conceit
they reap no profit thereof in this life: because they do not apprehend the
reward promised in life everlasting: But these men should first remember the
proverb: he that pays, empouerisheth not. But we are endebted to the poor
in their necessities: Whatsoever then we give them, is not money lost, but so
much employed toward the discharge of our obligation in the sight of God.
Moreover, by this mistaking, they abolish faith which assures us, not of
things that we see with our eyes, but of things invisible, neither of that
which is present, but of that that is to come. As therefore the promise is the
foundation of faith, so are we careful to meditate thereupon, that we may
assure our selves that our charity has great reward in the sight of God, and
so be stirred up thereto. First it is one thing to be noted, as is aforesaid,
Mat. 25.
that the sentence which Jesus Christ shall pronounce in the day of judgment,
shall be grounded upon the help and relief, or neglect and contempt of the
poor: as also that the Son of God shall call and bring into the possession
of the inheritance of his everlasting kingdom, all those that shall have
ministered food or apparel unto the poor, that shall have visited the sick,
or in general have relieved those that have been in affliction: and
contrariwise shall send all such as have been negligent and slack in these
works of charity, into everlasting fire with the devil and his Angels. And
as he shall call the one sort the blessed of God his father, and the other
the cursed, so shall the sentence be imediatelie executed, as the holy
Evangelist Saint Matthew reports, and such as have been merciful shall enter
into everlasting life, and the others into everlasting torments of hell fire
prepared for the devil and his Angels. This sentence should continually ring
in our ears: not that we should think our selves able through these works
of charity to merit this everlasting kingdom, considering it is called an
inheritance, and has been prepared for us, as Jesus Christ himself says,
from before the foundations of the world: also that he purchased it for us by
dying for our redemption: and hereof he assures us by the testimony of the
holy Ghost ingendering faith in us, but because these works of charity are
the true fruits, effects, and marks of our faith, and consequently of our
election and adoption: and the way whereby he wills us to walk toward the
possession of his everlasting kingdom. To the end also that we should not
doubt of the performaunce of this sentence, Jesus Christ aduoweth whatsoever
our doings to the poor, whether to their relief or to their contempt, to be
done to his own person. Yea I say he will make account of it and reward it,
as if it were done to himself. Were it not our duty therefore to abhor all
contempt of the poor? For who would not think him either mad or desperate
that should deny Jesus Christ of meat and drink in his hunger or thirst, or
cloth in his nakedness, or harborrow in his necessity? Every one would even
spit in his face that should show himself so unthankful and perverse: Or
who would not even take the bread out of his own mouth, and the garment from
his own back to relieve Jesus Christ if in his own person he should show
himself unto us naked or famished? Who would not think it a great blessing
to lodge him in his house, and by displacing himself, to lend him his bed? Who
would not go to meet him, and with old Abraham and Lot, say unto him. If I
have found favor in thy sight, Genesis 18.3. and 19.2.
I pray thee turn into my house and take thy repast? The contempt and neglect
of the poor in this behalf does, to our confusion, mightily cry out that
we believe not Christ, where he protests that whatsoever we do to the
poor, we do it to himself: and so are we convict of this incredulity.
Besides we may boldly say, that the relief given to the poor in the name of
Jesus Christ, is unto him more acceptable, then if it were given to his own
person: because that in relieuing the poor, besides our charity, we also
show faith apprehending the truth of his promise, where in he accepts any
thing done to the poor, as done to his own person.

2. Cor. 9.6.
8 Moreover the holy Ghost many times compares Alms to the seed cast into the
ground, and thereupon Saint Paul expressly says. He that sows sparingly,
shall reap sparingly, and he that sows liberally, shall reap liberally.
Augustine of the words of the Lord.
The poor man's field says S. Augustine is fruitful, and does quickly and
plenteously return that which it has received: The husbandman byeth land,
oxen, and horse, and feeds them: he tilleth his ground, he casts in seed,
and all upon hope of a doubtful and uncertain harvest: but in giving to the
poor it is not so: he shall not need to lay out any money for fields or
cattle: neither to till or soil his ground. God does show and offer it ready
prepared sit for to receive the seed, which being cast into the hands of the
poor, returns assured, plentiful and everlasting fruit. If any man should
offer his land ready tilled, and soyled, and will us to sow it, upon condition
the crop should be our own, we would never tarry for much entreatie, nay,
rather then to want seed we would sell our clothes for such a purpose, since
therefore that the poor are a fat and fruitful soil, ready prepared by the
Lord to receive our seed, what is that let that hinders us from sowing in
that ground, by imparting of our goods to the poor, especially considering
that there is neither frost nor drought, neither weed nor darnell, nor
grasshopper, nor army of soldiers to debar us from reaping the everlasting
crop thereof. By experience we find, that if we keep our corn long in the
garner, it will at length take heat and spoil, but in sowing it, we do not
only keep it, but also it is increased, and greatly multiplied. Even so is it
with our goods, or rather better: for seeking to keep them, they do not only
decaie, Mat. 6.19.
as Jesus Christ says, by ^ust, moath or otherwise, but also they do corrupt
us by a perverse confidence that we repose in them, and by the pride and
surquidrie which they engender in our hearts: Where contrariwise being sown and
scattered in the hands of the poor, they are safely preserved and laid up for
us with increase in the kingdom of heaven.

9 Again, Alms is called not only seed, to teach us that we shall reap a
blessed croppe thereof: Pro. 19.17
but also it is likened to a loan made unto God. Salamon expressly says,
that he that shows mercy to the poor, lends to the Lord. If we think
nothing lost that we lend to a goodman, and one that is of ability, but look
to receive it again: much rather may we look to recover that which we have
lent to the almighty and faithful Lord. What excuse may we pretend in the
presence of God, when sinners do lend to such as be like to themselves, Luke
6.34.
upon an uncertain hope to recover their loan: and yet we refuse to lend unto
Christ, when in his members he desires to borrow, and becomes him self
surety for it, with promise of great reward, as Saint Luke says. Lend to the
poor, looking for nothing again, and your reward shall be great in heaven?
Luk, 6.35,
Of two things we must confess the one: either that we do not make so much
account of the spiritual and everlasting usury and reward, is of a little
money subject to loss, which at the farthest we must forgo at death: either
else that we account that which we lend forth upon usury to men, by nature
liars, to be more safe, then that which we lend to him that is truth it self,
who cannot shrink or become banquerout, a payment worthy diverse covetous
persons that trust more in man, then in God. Augustine in his Epist.
If thou will be a good Merchant, says Saint Augustine and an excellent
usurer, give forth that which thou can not keep, if that thou may
receive that which thou can not loose: Give a little, that thou may
receive a hundred times as much: Again give a temporal possession for an
everlasting inheritance. And again Christ says unto thee, give me of that
which I have given to thee: I ask but mine own, give and restore: I have
been a liberal giver to thee, now make me thy debtour, and I will pay thee
everlasting goods. If some mighty towneship should use such liberality
toward her Burgeoyses, as to deliver them good letters and sure assignations
to receive for a hundred in ready money, a hundred of Annual rent for life,
who would not deliver forth his money to such profit? But God promises to
these that shall give to the poor a much greater rent without comparison, and
that not for a temporal life, but for a hereditarie and everlasting rent. What
then is it that lets or stays us from coming and delivering our money to
him by the hands of the poor? Even our incredulity, because we think all that
we give unto them to be our loss: Albeit contrariwise it is the only way to
keep our goods for ever. But all that we keep during our lives, is lost at
our death: so that which in our life time we give to the poor we shall find
again after our death, and enjoy it in life everlasting, as Jesus Christ also
says, that God his father will reward us openly, for that Alms that we give
in secret. Mat. 6.4.


10 To this end also does he counsel us to inuit to our feasts, not the rich
men that are able to requite feast with feast, but the poor that are not able
to restore, and thou shall be, says he, blessed, Luke 14, ^2.
because they can make no recompense: for thou shall have the reward in the
resurrection of the righteous: and in that sense does he also exhort and teach
us to use the wisdom of the unjust steward; for saying, Make you friends of
the unrighteous Mammon that when you want they may receive you into everlasting
habitations, he shows that the unjust steward had that descretion, Luke 16.5.
to give away his masters goods, though with a bad conscience, that thereby he
might be able to live when he should be put from the administration of his
masters goods: much rather then should we give to the poor that which god has
lent us, seeing we have from him both a commandment to do it, and a promise,
that whatsoever we give, we shall find it again in heaven, when by death the
administration of our goods shall be taken from us. And therefore if we be in
love with goods, it is best for us to enlarge them to the poor, that they may
transport them for us to heaven, and there purchase for us an everlasting
tresure, he is unjust and unfaithful, says a good father, Leo upon this Give
and it shall be given to you. Chrirostome upon this. Lay not up your treasures.
etc.
that coueteth not to retain that which he loves with all his heart, for ever.
What a folly is it, says Chrysostom, there to leave thy goods, from whence
thou must depart, and not rather to send the^ before thee to the place where
thou go to enhabite. Let thy goods be where thy country is. He that hordeth
up treasure upon earth, has nothing to look for in heaven. Why look thou
up to heaven, where thou have laid up nothing? whatsoever thou do for thy
soul at thy death, shall be nothing, and the rest shall thou loose. If we be so
desirous to keep our goods safe, how can we do better the^ to make use of the
admonition of Jesus Christ who says. Luke 12. 33. Mat. 6.89.
Sell that ye have and give Alms: make you bags which wex not old, a
treasure that can never fail, in heaven where no thief comes, neither moath
corrupts.

11 Since God so commends and commands Alms and relief of the poor, even
with assured promises that whatsoever we give unto the^ is a tresure fasly laid
up for us in heaven, and shall be again restored unto us with plentiful usury
and everlasting reward: what else have we to do, but to Amend our former
negligence and sparing, and more and more to increase in the works of charity,
and relieuing the poor, by giving liberally according to our ability, as S.
Paul says: according to the goods that God has imparted unto us? And this is
yet one thing that we are to note, namely, that as many are ashamed to give
nothing to the poor, 2. Cor. 8.11,
so their giving is always as little as may be, and comes from them as if a
man should pluck some rib out of their sides. If it concern the private
benefit of the poor, there must be some long Oration to prepare and induce them
to their duties. If a man come to them again in any short time, then will they
complain that still we come to them, that we never leave begging: the poor,
will they say, must not be fed so fat, and many do abuse their Alms: Then
will they come in with their losses, the smalnes of their traficke, their
sclender gain, their household charges: To be short, ye shall find them
wonderful full of invention and cunning to excuse themselves, that they may
give as little as may be. But if they wist how profitable it were to give to
the poor, and what a savor God shows us when he vouchsafes to touch our
hearts with a purpose to distribute liberally to the needy, then will they
thank those that come to summon and stir the^ up to their duties, and so will
resolve to give largly according to the portion that they have receued of the
Lord.

12 To this duty may the example of the Macedonians greatly incite us: to who^
S. Paul gave this commendation that in the great trial of affliction, 2. Cor. 8
they enioied plentiful comfort, and in the depth of poverty they abou^ded in
the treasures of their simplicity: They were sore afflicted, yet feeling
abundance of joy in God, without respect to the consideration of their
poverty, or standing upon any long discourse of distrust, but in all
simplicity depending wholly upon Gods providence, they thrust their hands into
the bottomes of their coffers, to help the poor with that small remainder
that was left, being ready as S. Paul testifies of the^, to distribute to their
power, yea even beyond their power. And so far were they from needing any to
entreat or solicit them, that even with great instancie they required S.
Paul to receive of them that which they had contributed: And this relief did
they call the grace of God and fellowship in relieuing the Saints. This example
of the Macedonians ought every man continually to behold, to the end that the
rich by consideration of the willing liberality of these poor Macedonians,
might be ashamed thus to keep back their abundance, and that others which be
not so welthy, might nevertheless, acknowledging their duties, be ready to
give, if not as the Macedonians, more then their ability would bear, yet at
the least according as God has made them able. Esaias speaking of the conversion
of Tyrus, says. Her occupying and her wages shall be holy unto the Lord: It
shall not be laid up, nor kept in store: but her merchandise shall be before
them that dwell before the Lord, Esaias. 23.18.
to eat sufficiently, and to have dureable clothing If merchants and other
welthy persons would well consider this example of the Tyrants, they should
understand, that all that they have ought to be consecrated to the lord, and
that it belongs not so justly to the^, as to the poor and needy servants and
children of God. And albeit God suffers them to be more honorably clothed and
more daintily sed, yet ought they so to enlarge themselves, that when their own
garments be of fine cloth, the poor may have freeze, and when they eat
whitebread, the poor may be satisfied with brown.

13 As these titles be attributed to Job, that he was an upright and just man,
and one that feared God, Job 1. Job 31.16
so did he declare the same by his works of charity, protesting that he never
denied the petition of the poor, neither caused the eyes of the widow to
fail, that he eat not his morsels alone, but that the fatherless has eaten
thereof: That from their youth he brought them up as he had been their
father, and that from his mothers womb he had governed the widdowe: That he
never let the naked perish for want of clothing, but that their loins blessed
him, because they were warmed with the flecce of his sheep. Cornelius the
Centurion was an Ethnike, and a soldier, Act. 10
yet having some knowledge and fear of the true God, he so extended his
alms, that the Angel testified thereof, saying, Cornelius, thy alms and thy
prayers are ascended before the Lord. And God sent Peter unto him, to instruct
him more largelye in the doctrine of the Gospel. Let all Christians,
especially such as profess themselves to be of the reformed Churches, behold
themselves in the mirror of these examples, and thereby be ashamed of their
negligence and sparing from the poor. Let these examples stir up and inflame
their hearts to imitate the same, and so far to surmount them, as in doctrine
they have more instructions, and in examples more plenty before their eyes,
which, no doubt, will take from them all excuse in the day of judgment,
except they amend, and increase in the works of Charity: especially let them
ever remember the example of Jesus Christ, who as Saint Paul says, albeit
he was rich, yet made himself poor, 2. Corint. 8.0
that by his poverty we might be made rich: Christ was verily rich, not only
as God creator of all the world, but also as man, united to the divinity,
being made the universal heir of all things Nevertheless he voluntarily
dispossessed himself of all worldly riches and honor, Heb. 1.2. Heb. 12.^^
so far forth as to be content to be borne in a poor st^ble, not having so
much ^s a pillowe to lay under his head. And why? To the end to reestablish us
in our dominion over all creatures, Luke 27. Math. 3.20
which was lost by the sin of the first Adam, as also to purchase for us the
treasures of spiritual and everlasting riches. But herein consists our
felicity, that we conform our selves to Jesus Christ, and as Saint Peter
says, follow his steps. Whereupon God might require us to give both our
selves and all that we have, 1. Pet. ^.21 2. Cor, ^, 5
to the service and relief of the poor, as Saint Paul testifies of the
Macedonians, that they surmounted his hope, giving not only the very bottom
of their goods, but even themselves to the Lord. Yet God in mercy does so
far spare us, that he is content we should be disposers of his goods, but
so, that the poor may have a part, as the Apostle shows: 2. Cor 8.15.
where he notes the Manna in old time given to the people of Israel. Moses
rehearses, that he that gathered more than he needed for the sustenance of
his family, Exo. 16.18
might not reserve it till the next day, but was to leave the rest to those
that had not gathered sufficient for their families, so that he that had
gathered much, had nothing left, and he that had gathered too little, yet
wanted not. Let us in like sort so take the goods, that God has imparted unto
us for the maintainence of our families, that at the least we give of our
abundance to the poor, for the relief of their want and necessity.

14 The example of the charity of the primitive Church penetrating into our
hearts, might move us to practice this duty. There was not, says Saint Luke,
any needy person among them, for all that possessed lands or houses, Act. 4.34
sold the same, and brought the price of that which was sold, and laid it at
the Apostles feet, and this was distributed to every man according as he had
need: It would in these days be a wonder to see any man sell his house or land
to relieve the poor, so far are Christians now from this duty of charity.
Yet the commandment to love our neighbor as our self, and consequently to do
to him as we would be done by, exhorts us to this duty, if need require,
even to sell our goods to relieve the poor, Ephe. 4.2^
for so would we do for our selves in case of necessity by sickness, or
otherwise. And in deed, if Saint Paul command that we should labor with our
hands, to have wherewith to relieve the needy, it appears that our labor or
our goods whatsoever, we are to employ in relieuing the necessity of the
Saints: as also we see that God in many places most earnestly commends unto
us the poor, by express commandementes, by excellent promises, and by notable
examples, as is before showed.

2. Cor. 8 Romans 15.26 Act. 11.29.
15 Moreover, this duty we must practice, not only to those that are among us,
but we must also extend our charity to other churches, that want wherewith to
relieve the necessity of their pore. So did the Macedonians contribute beyond
their ability for the relief of the poor faithful that were at Jerusalem:
so did the Achaians strain themselves and depart with their goods to the like
end: so did the faithful and disciples at Antioch (when by the prophesy of
Agabus they were warned of the famine that should take hold of the whole world)
determine every man according to his ability to send somewhat to the brethren in
Judea, to relieve their wants: so did S.Paul ordain among the Corinthians,
Apoc. 1.10
that the first day of every week (which since was called sunday) each of the^
should lay up and make, as it were, a little tresure, of so much as through the
goodness of God they could spare, to the end to have the same in readiness at any
gatherings for the relief of the poor faithful at Jerusalem. 1. Cor. 16.1.
The like order did he prescribe to the church of Galatia. Hereby may we more
and more perceive, how far our charity should exte^d, and how worthy reprofe we
are in the sight of God, if we neglect the pore that are among us, and do not
releue their necessities.

16 Whatsoever is before spoken of our duties to relieve the pore, does
sufficiently declare, that they which shall despise them and not help the^ in
their need, cannot but expect a horrible vengeance from God, as Christ Jesus
has already set down, saying that in the day of judgment he will say unto
them, Math. 25.41
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, provided for the devil and
his Angels, for I was hungry and a thirst, I was naked, a stranger, and sick,
and ye cared not to help me. If many times we could consider of the
incomprehensible greatness and eternity of this punishment, how durst we despise
the pore in their necessities? Or can we think the sentence unjust,
considering that we are sufficiently advertised that we contemn Christ Jesus
in the person of the poor? Or how dare man desire God to take pity of him, to
pardon his sins, or to succor him in his calamity, seeing himself will take no
compassion of his neighbor, James 2.13. Mat. 5.7. Macrobius,
neither relieve his necessity? Judgment without mercy (says S. James) shall
be unto him that shows no mercy. Contrariwise, Blessed are the merciful,
says Christ, for they shall have mercy. We read that in Athens there was a
Church dedicated to Mercy, whereinto none might enter, but such as by the
Senate were deemed merciful and gentle: whereupon the people upon a desire to
go in, would study to exercise themselves in the works of mercy and
gentleness: neither could there be any greater injury offered to an Athenian,
than to object unto him that he never came within the Church of mercy. But as
we may justly term heaven the true temple of mercy, so have even the Heathen
taught us, that none shall enter therinto, but they which have done the works
of mercy. And if the Athenians applied themselves to the same, because they
would not be challenged that they never came in that temple built by men, how
much more fervently are we to imploie our selves, least we fall into this
objection and horrible judgment, that we shall never enter into the temple of
heaven? In vain, says an ancient father, do they lift up their hands unto
heaven, to crave pardon for their sins, which refuse to extend the same to
the poor in tribulation. And to the same purpose does Solomon say, He that
stops his ear at the cry of the poor, Prou. 21.13 Genesis 19.24 Ezec. 10.49
shall also cry and not be heard. The punishment inflicted upon Sodom and
Gomorrha was horrible and terrible, and Moses reports their heinous and
abominable iniquity, yet the Prophet Ezechiel therein notes also contempt of
the poor, as their principal iniquity, or at the least as the step whereby
they ascended to the fulness of wickedness: Behold (says he) this was the
iniquity of their sister Sodom, Pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of
idleness was in her, and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand
of the poor and needy. Let these threats and horrible vengeance so touch our
hearts, that we no longer despise the poor, but relieve them according as
God makes us able.

Aug. to Julian, Epist 111. 2. Cor. 8.12
17 Neither must we reply, as some do, that all that we can do is but a little.
For God (says Saint Augustine) asks no more of us than he has given us. If
willingness go before (says Saint Paul) it is accepted according to that a man
has, not according to that he has not. So that albeit thy gift be small,
yet thy affection shall be of no less estimation with God, than if being a
rich man, thou gave a great sum of thy abundance. Exodus, 35.22.
The oblation of the poor who in old time for the tabernacle of the Lord
offered goats hair and sheep skins, was as acceptable unto God, as the
oblations of the rich that offered vessels of gold. Moreover, the poor man's
alms, Aug. que: 12 4 of the old and new testament.
says Saint Augustine, is more to be esteemed than the rich man's: for the
rich man gives, as relying upon his abundance, but the poor man as depending
only upon the Lord: And threfore the poor widows mite cast into the box,
was of greater account with Jesus Christ, than the great presents of the rich,
and his reason was, For they of their superfluity have cast in their
offerings, but the widdowe of her penury has cast in all the living she had,
Luke 21.
even that which her self might well stand in need of.

18 True, will the flesh say, but if we give so, and besides be bound to
relieve those that are fair from us, as is aforesaid, our selves may soon
want and stand in need. Heereto does Saint Ciprian answer, Ciprian of works
and alms.
saying: If thou give liberally to the poor, thou fear lest thy goods
should fail thee, yet, thou wretch, thou wo^test not, that fearing the loss
of bodily goods, thou want both life and salvation: and caring lest thy
goods should fail, thou never think how thy self do wast, in that thou
love riches, better than thy soul. Also doubting least thy goods should be
lost for thee, thou loosest thy self for thy goods. But yet what husbandman,
when he is to sow, will make any difficulty of fetching corn to that use
out of his garner, for fear of want? Or rather will he not hope, that by
sowing of his corn, he shall in harvest reap it again with increase, both to
relieve his family and to sow again? Even this does Saint Paul answer
and teach saying: God is able to make all grace to abound in us, 2. Cor. 9.8
that we always having all sufficiency in all good things, may abound in
every good work. And in deed as he adds, He that finds seed to the
power, will likewise minister bread for food, and increase the fruits of our
benevolence. He that gives to the poor (says Solomon) shall ^^t want, Prou.
28 ^7
but he that turns away his face shall abound in all misery. These
promises might be an assured pledge unto us, that by releeuing the poor we
shall not impoue^^sh our selves, Plutarch in the life of Alexander.
but the Lord will provide for all our necessities. We read that Alexander
the great departing out of Macedonia toward Persia, gave all his goods to his
friends and servants: which when Pe^dicas perceived, he asked him what he
reserved for himself: To whom Alexander answered, Hope: Then Perdicas refusing
his gift, said that he also would be a partaker in his hope. If he upon an
uncertain hope could be content to give awa^e all his goods, what excuse may
Christians make, who albeit they have an assured foundation of certain hope in
God, they will notwithstanding deny even a small portion of their goods unto
the poor? If the example of Alexander was able to induce Perdicas, to be
content only to participate in his hope, how shall Christians be excused,
when by the examples of Christ, of Job, of the Centurion of the Macedonians,
and so many others, they cannot be moved with them to participate, in hope of
spiritual and everlasting riches in heaven, yea, even of Gods blessings in
this life, as is before showed, by liberal distribution to the poor? Again,
Who blesses man's labor? Who preserves his goods exposed to so many dangers?
It is God, said Hanna the mother of Samuel, that inricheth and makes poor.
We are therefore greatly deceived, 1, Sam, 2, 7
to imagine that we shall rather by being unfaithful servants and stewards,
con^inue the administration of Gods goods, than by distributing the same
faithfully, according to his will and pleasure. One only banquerupt will be
enough (without any thanks at Gods hands) to carry away and defeat us of more
at one time, than great and bountiful liberalities and almeses to the poor can
do throughout our life time, which nevertheless will be so many sacrifices of
sweet savor unto the Lord. Besides, we ought to account his promises more
certain than money in our purses, and bread in our cupboordes. They should be
unto us as a spring always running, wherein our purses should serve but as
cesterns, and those all broken and cracked in many places. This confidence in
Gods promises should more content us, and make us think our selves better
provided of wealth and assurance, than such as abound in all wealth, and have
their houses furnished therewith. The widdowe of Sarepta was more rich and
better assured of food than any in all the Country, 1. King. 17
because by Gods promise she was certefied that her cruse of Oil and her
barrel of Meal should not fail her.

19 Others do extend their reasons farther, namely, to their children, Plu. of
the covetousness of riches.
for whose sakes they cut off the due relief of the poor, to the end to leave
them the more riches. But these men deserve to be sent to school among the
Heathen, who without respect to this duty of Charity, did nevertheless
reprove and condemn this excessive and dangerous care. And in deed, many
times it comes to pass, that when the parents do leave to their children
great wealth, before the second or third generation one unthrifty successor
shall squander away and wast all that they have gathered by wronging both
themselves and the poor: Besides, What can children learn in such a school,
but likewise to keep their goods after the example of their parents, without
any care of the poor? Better it were to induce and frame them to Charity, by
giving liberally to the needy. The love and relief of the poor is a goodly
inheritance and favor of God. Blessed is he that trayneth up his children
therein: better it is to be charitable than rich. In the time of a great famine
in Israel, the aforenamed widdowe of Sarepta had but one handful of meal for
her and her son, 1. Kin. 17.10
yet the Prophet Elyas coming unto her, willed her to make him a cake, and
promised her that her meal in her barrel should not fail her: She believed
him, and brought him the cake, albeit it was all that was left for her self
and her son. This was a notable example of faith and of Charity. And in
deed, soon after she found the truth of the Prophets promise: for in her
barrel she had, as it were, a fountain of meal, whereof she and her son
lived so long as the famine lasted. If therefore thou have many children,
Ciprian of works and alms.
says Cyprian, be the more careful to bring upon them Gods blessing and
favor, by distributing to the poor. Deliver unto him the goods that thou
would keep for thy children: let him be their tutor, guardian, and
protector. No man shall wreast out of his hands the patrimony that thou have
delivered him to keep. This does the Prophet David by experience confirm,
saying, I was young, Psalm. 37.25.
and now am old, yet did I never see the righteous man forsaken, neither his
seed begging their bread: He daily gives to the poor, and lends, and his
seed is blessed. And in another place he says, Psalm. 112.5
The good man gives alms and lends, he distributeth to the poor, his
righteousness remains for ever, and his horn shall be exalted.
Contrariwise, sparing and keeping from the poor to make his children rich, is
the subversion of himself, his house, and his children. Of what heavenly and
everlasting treasures do thou voluntarily deprive thy self, for the leaving
of worldly riches to thy children, who peradventure may abuse them to their
confusion and everlasting dampnation? Must the enriching of thy children be a
cause to suffer Gods children to die for hunger? Must thou leave the members of
Christ naked, that thou may cloth those with excess, who peradventure
thereof may take occasion to offend God, yea, it may be, even to deny Jesus
Christ? What answer will thou make in the day of judgment, when he shall
object unto thee, that thou did deny him meat, drink and cloth? Will
he, think thou, accept of this excuse, I spared my goods to enrich my
children? He commanded thee not to leave them wealth, but to relieve the
poor. If thou love thy children better than God, can thou think that he
will acknowledge thee to be his child? What is it to thee although thy
children inherit but six or seven hundred in sted of a thousand? Or how many
sacrifices of sweet savor may thou offer to God out of the two or three
hundred that thou shall diminish from them, which unto thee will be a mighty
treasure to everlasting life?

20 Some again seeing the manifest and evident sparing of such as they take to
be better provided for than themselves, with murmuring complaints will give
out and tell those that come to demand any thing for the poor, that they
must solicit and call upon the others, and so seek by all means to excuse
themselves, that they will by their good wills give very little or nothing at
all. But Chrysostom does very fitly make them answer, saying. Chri. hom.
65 upon Math. cap. ^9. tom. ^.
Thou wylt say that such a man is rich, and gives nothing, or very little:
But what is that to thee? So much the more wonderful and commendable is thy
charity, if thou having less than he, art more lyberall than he. Neither
marvelled the Apostle at the Macedonians because they gave, but because being
poor, they gave so liberally. Judge not another, but of thy self make thy
self so commendable, that thou may eschew all accusation. For the greater
torments do attend thee, if in that whereof thou condemnest others, thy self
do not thy duty, but art guilty of the same fault. Let us not judge
others, neither let us have an eye to their sloth, but let us look upon our
Lord Christ, and of him take example of all good works. Have not I, says
he, given unto thee heaven he benefits? Have not I redeemed thee, that thou
might look upon me? Wherefore then, leaving thy Lord, do thou look
upon the work of thy fellow servant? I have set you an example, that you
should do as I have done. Moreover, seeing among men thou have examples of
charity, in Abraham, Job, and others, why do thou not imitate them, rather
than stumble at those whom thou do look unto?

21 Others again, to excuse themselves from giving of their goods to the
poor, will play the good husbands, and say that many do abuse alms. This
is in deed but too true: yet no doubt as well they that take alms without
need, as they that do abuse it, 2. These. 3
shall one day, as sacrilegious persons, feel Gods judgments for it. But as
Saint Paul reproves such people, and exhorhorteth them to their duties, so he
commands us that we should not notwithstanding desist from well doing. The
husbandman never looks that all the seed which he sows, should bring forth
fruit, but that some shall be devoured by the fouls of the air, and some
otherwise, yet does he not therefore forbear to sow: even so must we sow
our alms, notwithstanding we be assured that all is not well bestowed. We
must use discretion and dilygence, that we may be faithful stewardes, not so
severe as to forget the simplicity of charity so highly commended and praised
by Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 13, 5, 7
who says, Love imagines no evil, Love believes all things, Love hops for
all things. And in deed it is better to feed and cloth two wicked ones with
one child of God, than for fear of helping the wicked, to suffer one of Gods
children to perish for hunger or cold. The merchant is many times deceived in
his expectation of gain, by tempests on the sea, by banqueroutes, and
otherwise, yet does he not give over his traffic. When Job had clothed the
needy with his wool, he said that their loins did bless him: Job. 31.20
thereby teaching us, that albeit the lips of the poor whom we have clothed,
should curse us, and that he should abuse the relief that we have ministered
unto him, yet his loins comforted with our garments, shall testify our
charity toward him, and bless us in the sight of God. Esa. 49.4
The Prophet Esaie exhorts Gods servants, the preachers of his word, to be
strong and of good comfort, albeit the seed of their doctrine fructify but in
few, showing them that their labor and work is nevertheless before the Lord.
Even so is it with the goods that we distribute to the poor, albeit some do
abuse them, yet is our charity in the sight of God. Let us therefore use
discretion and diligence in the well bestowing of our alms, and reprove those
that abuse the same, yet let simplicity and charity so guide us, that under
color of neglecting those that are unworthy, we do not refuse to relieve
those that in deed are poor and needy.

22 Many times such great husbands are the men that do most abuse the goods,
whereof God has made the^ not absolute Lords, but stewards. They be as
prodigal in their own uses, as niggardly to the poor. They exceed in rich and
costly attire: in vnordinarie and sumptuous diet: to be short, in all
superfluous, unprofitable, carnal and worldly expenses: but if there be any
speech of helping the poor, there is nothing to be had, they have never a
whit too much to satisfy their own prodigality and ambition. But what
account can they give of their administration in the day of judgment? Will
Christ in his account pass these articles? So much spent in riot, so much in
excess and banquets, so much in the pleasures of the flesh? Can they allege
that they had not wherewith to help the poor? No, the former articles will
convince them: so shall they be convict as well for despising the poor, as for
abusing the benefits, whereof they should have been faithful stewardes. If
Saint Paul commands us to work with our hands, to the end to get
wherewyth to relieve the needy, how much rather should we, according unto
Gods will, cut off part of our superfluity and excess, Hierom upon the
Epistles.
therewyth to help such as want? It is a kind of sacrilege, says Saint
Hierome, to give the goods of the poor to such as be rich enough. Let the
hungry boweles commend thy charity, not the panches of those that are
bursten with thy abundance. Oh woeful calamity of mankind, says Saint
Augustine, August. in his sermon. 132 of the time.
how many may we find that do urge and compel those that be already
satisfied, to drink more than be comes them, and yet will deny even a
glass of small drink to the poor that beg at their door? Those men do
never consider, that the drink which even perforce they offer to drunkardes,
ought rather to be given unto Jesus Christ in the persons of the poor, Math.
25
as himself has said: Whatsoever you have done to one of the least of these,
you have done it unto me. We do commonly say to those that have enough,
ye eat not, and so urge them to eat, and yet do deny a morsel of bread to
the hungry. When men have delicate wine and dainty fare, which do but too
much whet on the stomach, we use to call upon them to make good cheer, and
in the mean time forget them, who having peradventure never a bit of bread to
give to their children, do weep and lament. Had the rich man that lived in
pleasures, Luke 16.
taken pity of Lazarus that lay at his gate, and cutting off part of his
superfluity, relieved his necessity: in sted of torments in hell fire, he
had received the crown of Charity, as Lazarus received the crown of patience
in life everlasting. Let us beware, least the superfluity of our banquets,
apparel, and other vanities, that are good for nothing but to displease God
and offend our neighbors, be not unto us as tormentors, and burning coals
in our consciences in the da^e of judgment, calling for vengeance against us
for our contempt of the poor in their necessity. Neither let us complain of
the marvelous increase of the poor that want relief, but let us accuse our
own coldness and slacknesse in distributing for their succor and relief.
Can we complain of want of ability, when our only superfluity being cut
off and gathered together might suffice? What man at his death could not with
that he had cut off and employed the same upon the relief of the poor? Or
who could not at that time be content that he had after the example of the
poor widdowe, or the Macedonians, imparted unto them of his substance in their
necessity, Luke 21.14 2. Cor. 8.3
considering that the same should have been unto him so much treasure in
Heaven?

23 Let us therefore amend our former negligence and sloth, and while we have
time, as Saint Paul says, Do good unto all, but especially to those that be
of the householde of faith. Gal. 9, 10
They all do bear the image of God, they all are of our flesh, whom we must
love as our selves. We cannot therefore neglect and contemn them without
great injury to God and our selves, and breach of that unity that God has
made among us: yet as there is greater affinity between the members of Christ
and as the image of God does more clearly and evidently shine in them: so are
we more bound to care for their relief, and to do good unto them in their
necessities. Let us then imploie our selves herein while we have time, which
may be considered in three points. First, while God lends and gives us
wherewith, for we know not whether by fire, war, banqueroutes, theft, or
any other inconvenience our goods shall be taken from us. The husbandman
hearing of approach of some army, and fearing thereby the loss of all his
grain, which might by them be carried away or wasted, himself would transport
as much as he might into the town, and commit the custody thereof to some
friend: even so we being advertised of the dangers, which daily experience
does acquaint us withal, how the man that this day abounds in all
prosperity, by to morrow is made a beggar: let us deliver so much of our goods
to the poor as conveniently we may, before we loose all: let us by their hands
transport at the least some part thereof into heaven, and there deliver it into
the custody of Jesus Christ, who in the da^e of judgment will restore it us
to our everlasting joy. Secondly, let us do good to the poor while we live
here, for, as is aforesaid, all that we give in our life time, shall remain
to us for ever, and what we leave at our death, that we loose. Thirdly, let
us do it while the poor come among us, or that others do crave it in their
name, for we must think, that then God makes us a sign to give, and
whispereth in our ears, saying: Now is the time to do well, let not this
occasionslip. Thus we see that doing good to the poor while we have time
and means, we shall give them occasion to praise and bless God, and he,
acknowledging us to be his children, will so fair favor us, that in the
great day of the Lord, standing at the right hand of Jesus Christ, we shall
hear this blessed and comfortable speech directed unto us, Come ye blessed of
God my father, inherit the kingdom of heaven prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. Math. 25.34


Of the duty of the Poor.
24 HEreto will we add some few instructions touching the duty of the
poor. First, as almighty God in commanding the rich to relieve the
necessity of the poor and needy, and for the same promising such great and
everlasting reward, as is before mentioned, should thereby so pierce and take
possession of their hearts, as to constrain and make them both liberally and
cheerfully to relieve them: so are the poor therein to conceive a steadfast
foundation of comfort, as understanding thereby how careful the Lord is for
them, who ordains men (whom he has endued with wealth) to be his servants,
through whose ministration he will provide for their necessities. They are
therefore to assure themselves, that God does not despise or neglect them: but
because in his wisdom he has decreed that there shall be both rich and poor,
his will is to use the rich in the relief of the necessities of the poor.
When Jesus Christ, to the end to induce the rich to perform their duties, did
protest that whatsoever they did to the poor, either in releeuing, or in
contemning them, they did it to himself: Could he more certainly assure them
of help and relief, than by aduowing such relief as they received, as
performed to himself, and such contempt or denial as was used in their
behalfes, as done to himself in their persons? Could he declare any greater
care or affection to the poor, than by recommending them to us as his own
person? Could he more lively testify how highly he esteems, or how
heartely he accepts of their relief, than by bringing into his kingdom all
those that have relieved their necessities, and by thrusting such into hell as
have despised them?

25 If the poor do call God their father, can they doubt of his love, either
that he loving them, is not also willing to help them in their necessities?
Withal considering, that by his Apostle he charge us not to forget to do
good, Heb. 13.16
and to distribute, thereto adding, that with such sacrifices he is pleased. If
a mother cares for her child before it be borne, providing for it such things
as may be necessary when it comes into the world: think you that your
heavenly father cares not to provide for the necessities of his children
already borne into the Church, who do call him father, and say unto him, Mat. 4.4
as it were by the mouth of Jesus Christ, Give us this day our daily bread?
Surely there is no doubt but he is wylling to relieve their necessities, as
also they may be well assured of his power to do it. First, in regard of that
which Jesus Christ teaches, Man lives not by bread only, but by every
word that proceeds out of the mouth of God: Exo. 28.18 1. King, 19.8 Mat.
4.2.
They are to learn, that even without any natural or ordinary means God
can feed them, only with his blessing, the example whereof we have in Moses,
Helias and Christ, who lived forty days without meat. And in deed as he can
when he purposes to send a famine, Leuit. 26
whereby to deprive man of the means to live, so take away the strength of
bread, (...) but eat a man never so much, it shall not nourish him: So can he
bless even one morsel of the bread, that it shall yield us more sustenance
than we ordinarily receive of greater plenty. He can so multiply it, as he did
in the wildernesses, Math. 14.19,
where he fedd five thousand men with five loaves. He can provide us of food,
as he fed his people in the desert for the space of forty years, sending them
Manna from heaven, and as he did by them, Deuteronomy. 8.3 Exodus 16.35 Deuteronomy. 8.4. 1.
King. 17.14 1. King. 17.6
so cause that our garments and shoes shall not wear or consume. He can
bless our bread and oil, as he did for the widow of Sarepta, so that using
that which we have, it shall not diminish. To be short, he can use the service
of Ravens to bring us food, as he did for Elias. These testimonies and
examples of Gods will and power, might assure the poor that God will provide
for their necessities, to the end that they in assurance of faith may trust
and depend upon him only.

26 By this assurance of Gods will and power, they ought to be stirred up to
pray unto God, that he vouchsafe to provide for their necessities: and their
prayers must proceed of faith. For the will of God is, that we beg of him
whatsoever we steadfastlye believe that he can and will give us. Rom, 10, 14
And in that respect it behooves them to pray to God to touch the hearts of
the rich, and to move them to charity and compassion, that they may stretch
forth their hands to relieve those that stand in need. They are moreover to
understand, that as God has ordained the office of deacons to provide for
their relief, acknowledging therein his wisdom and goodness, they are
diligently to pray unto him, to send such deacons as may be endued with gifts
and graces requisite for such an office, to preserve them under his protection,
to guide them with his holy spirit, and to strengthen them, that they may
overcome all labors and difficulties, so that following their charge faithfully
and cheerfully, they may by that means receive, as it were, at the hand of God,
all meet relief for their necessities, and thereby praise God for his care
over them, and for the means that he uses in releeuing their want and
necessity. Let them therefore beware of murmuring at their own poverty,
because others have such plenty and wealth. Let the^ think that this is ordered
by the skillful providence of God, who being their father, loves them, and
loving them, wishes their good and salvation. And as he is able to do
whatsoever he wills, so would he make them as rich as other men, if he
thought it expedient, but being wiser than we, we ought as obedient children to
be content to be lead by him.

27 Besides prayer, it is also convenient that every one should labor in his
vocation to maintain his familye, by caring for to keep it without alms,
Exodus 20, 9
except upon great necessity. First, God has commanded that we should labor
six days in the week, wherein every one is so to discharge his duty, as
if he were to give account unto God for such time as he loses in idleness
when he might work, Psalm. 1^8.2
but does it not. Secondly, they are to remember, that as David says, the man
is blessed that eats the labors of his own hands: wherein he shows, that as
such as will not work, that they may live of their own labors, do therein
feel the curse of God: so does not man's felicity consist in having great
riches heaped up for him, but rather in that he laboring in his vocation, and
contenting himself with a mediocrity, does eat the fruit of his own labors.
In correspondence whereof, in the time of Saint Paul, 2. These. 3.11
when there were some that already walked licentiously in idleness, who lived
curiously, and meddled in things nothing appertaining to their vocation: he
charge and exhorts the^ in the name of Christ, to labor to eat their bread
in quietness. How grievously would he now therefore reprove those that never
work but against their wills, and do less than well they are able, waiting
upon the relief of the Church, as if it were a certain rent, and take no
care to husband that which they get either by work or by such relief? Yet how
much more sharply would the Apostle reprove others, who being wholly given to
idleness, the mother and nurse of all mischief, do haunt Tauernes, there, in
stead of getting by their labors, to spend in drinking, suffering their wives
and poor children in the mean time to starve for hunger, if they had not
relief from others, whereon also they will depend: 1. Tim. 5.8
showing themselves cruel and unkind to their wives and children, yea, even
worse than Infidels, as the Apostle terms them, because they have no care of
their families. Let such therefore as receive the alms and relief which they
might well spare, either by earning by their own labors, or soberly sparing
that is ministered unto them, think and well understand, that they are but as
Church robbers in the sight of God, who sees all, and to whom all must yield
account in the day of judgment.

28 Moreover, if the poor do think their calling to be base and contemptible
in the sight of the world, let them look upon Jesus Christ, the prince of
glory, their savior, who made himself poor to inriche us, and comfort
themselves in that they bear his image in their poverty, 2. Cor. 8.9
which they may assure themselves selves is blessed, sanctified, and made
honorable in the poverty of their head Jesus Christ. Let them imagine, that
the servant which is as well used as his master, has no cause to mislyke. If
they be poorly or meanly housed, let them behold Jesus Christ, the creator
of heaven and earth, borne in a stable, in stead of a cradle, laid in a manger,
afterward protesting, Math. 10.24 Ioh. 15.20. Luke 2.7 Math. 8.20 Genesis 18.11 2.
Cor. 11.27
that the foxes have holes and the birds of heaven neasts, but the son of man
has not whereon to rest his head. If their lodging be homely and base, let them
look upon the Patriarch Jacob, who took a stone for his pillow. If their
clothing be pore, let them remember that S. Paul was molested with nakedness.
If at any time they hunger, thirst, or be a cold, let them hearken to the
same Apostle, protesting that himself also hungered, thirsted, and was a cold:
as also that the same which he says of himself, he also affirms in his
fellow laborers of the Lords work, Unto this hour we both hunger and
thirst, 1. Cor. 4.11
and are naked. If in sickness or otherwise thirsting, they have but water, or
small beer: let them behold Jesus Christ upon the cross, John 19.28
to whom in his thirst they ministered vinegar to drink. If after wealth and
dignities they be fallen into poverty, Heb. 11.24
let them think upon Moses, who when he might have bin called the son of
Pharao, Exodus 3, 1
refused it, and accounting reproach with Christ, to be greater riches than all
the treasures of Egypt, forsook all and became a shepherd, and not for his
own, but for another man's.

29 If rich men have, as it seems, greater commodities as concerning the
flesh, and are in greater estimation with the world, let the poor think, that
many times they sleep not so quietly as they: also, that their carnal
commodities have their recompense in cares and labors of mind, wherewith they
are more troubled than the poor. Let them also remember, Math. 13.22
that riches make not a man blessed in the sight of God, for they are also
common to the wicked, Luke 16.9.
yea and oftentimes do minister occasion to offend God as also they be
sometimes termed thorns, and unrighteous Mammon. Math. 19.23
And in that sense Jesus Christ pronounced that it was a very hard matter for
a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. And contrariwise, Luke 2.8.
Math, 11.5 James 2.5
as in old time the good tidings of the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ was by
the Angel first delivered to the shepherds, so usually the Gospel is
especially preached to the poor. As also S James says, that God has chosen
the pore of this world, which are rich in faith, and heirs to the kingdom
that he has promised to them that love him. To be short, in being poor, 1.
Tim. 6.17
they have not any such occasion or temptation to to be proud, or to trust in
the uncertainty of their treasures, as the rich men, but to repose themselves
upon the living God, to depend wholly upon him, and daily to say, Give us this
day our daily bread, and daily to wait for the same, Luke 15.
as for Manna descending from heaven. To conclude, as the prodigal child,
having goods, in the wasting of them, gave himself to the world and the flesh,
but having fallen into poverty, thought upon his fathers house, and returned
thereto: so should the discommodities and wantes which the poor do find in
their estates, loosen their hearts from the earth, and cause them to aspire to
the house of their heavenly Father, where they shall enjoy all spiritual and
everlasting treasures.

Of Covetousness. Chap. 11.
Already have we spoken of Charity, and Alms proceeding therefrom. To this
virtue there is nothing more opposite than covetousness, whereof we will now
entreat. And that we may the better understand what this vice is, we are to
note, that the word Avarice, signifies covetousness. The Grecians term it
sometimes, Desire of Silver, sometimes, Desire to have more. And in deed, as it
is hard for a man that loves silver, to moderate his covetous affections and
desires, so by experience we perceive, that the man that loves money, and
longs to have more, that is to say, the covetous man, is insatiable in his
affection, always hungring, still out of taste, evermore burning in a fervent
desire to increase that which he has. That which he has, he accounts
nothing, and still aspireth to that he has not. And as that which he has
not, is among men infinite, so is man's appetite never satisfied. When our
children ask more to breakfast than we think meet, we chide them, and
say, Better fill their bellies than their eyes, or at the least if we fill
both their hands, they depart contented, and will not peradventure crave their
breakfasts again in three or four days: but the covetous man, whose eyes of
covetousness are greater than his bellye, and whose desire exceeds his
necessity, is not content with his hands full, and enough for many days and
years: but coueteth after all that is in the world, yea, if he might
possibly have it all, yet would he not be satisfied. Saint Augustine
compares a covetous man unto a sepulcher, which never cries, Augustine to
Iulia^, Ep. 111
Enough: yet is there some difference between them, for the sepulcher, says
he, consumes all that it receives, but the covetous man, never employing that
which he has, will not nevertheless cry enough. He is never satisfied with
silver, Eccle, 59.
says Solomon, he imagines that he wants all that other men have. Brute
beasts, says Saint Augustine, even the greatest raueners, are sometimes
satisfied: neither hunt they after their pray or give themselves to rauine, but
when they hunger: but both the heart and hand of the covetous man are still
stretched forth to rob and reaue. Epicurus said, that nothing could suffice
the covetous man: Augustine upon the words of the Lord.
Purses and coffers may well be filled but covetousness has no more bottom the^
a bottomless pit. When the Emperor Lacinius had replenished all with gold and
silver, yet did he even with sighs bewail his poverty. And indeed
covetousness never regards that it has, to be therewith content, but what
it has not, Eusebius. in his first book of Constantine in is his Eccl. History.
to covet there after. It resembles a river whose spring is small, yet by
receiving other brooks and streams grows strong and violent. The covetous
man resembles them that are sick of the dropsy, who by drinking are never
satisfied, but still increase in thirst. His heart is like a flame which is
never abated with quantity of wood, how much so ever a man lays on, well may
it for a while be suppressed and yield forth nothing but smooke, the witness
of a hidden fire, but breaking out, it waxes greater according to the
abundance of wood.

2 In this respect the more the covetous man has, the greater are his wishes.
And indeed the wish of the Artificer is one, of the Merchant another, and of
the King another. The Artificer, to attain to wealth, wishes some four or
five hundred Florens: the Merchant, eight or ten thousand, and the King,
whole realms to be adjoined to those he has. Thus they that have most,
Seneca in his book of Moralities.
do wish for most: Therefore says Seneca, the poor man content, is richer
the^ the richest covetous man: for the poor man desires little, the rich man
coueteth much. Thus may we understand this old proverb, that the one half is
more then all, because the covetous man not contenting himself with the one
half, depriueth himself of the enjoying thereof, and increasing that which
he has, increases his covetousness, which the more vehemently that it
burns in him, the more poor and needy does it make him: For no increase can
satisfy that mind which wants contentment The more the Lacedaemonians had,
says Justin, Iustine lib. 6.
the more according to man's nature, did they covet, and therefore having
conquered and joined to their dominions the power of the Athenians, they
began to covet and affect the Empire and dominion of all Asia. This
corruption does Esaias manifestly lay open, and with all pronounce Woe to the
same, saying. Woe be unto them that join house to house and lay field to
field, Esaias. 5.8
till there be no place, that ye may be placed by your selves in the midst
of the earth. He shows that this couetise and avarice is so insatiable, that
it extends even to all that it has not, in so much that it coueteth every
foot of land in the world, even as if the covetous man should alone possess
the universal world, and that there should no other inhabitant dwell upon the
earth.

2, Pet. 2.15, Genesis 31. 2. King. 5. 1. Sam 8.3. Luke 16, 14. Ioh. 12.6. Act.
8.18. Act. 19. Act. 16.19 Esa. 56.11. Iere. 6, 13. and 8 10. 2, Tim. 3.2, 2.
Pet. 2.3. Jerome in a certain Sermon,
3 This is a common disease among men, as experience has always declared:
neither need we to represent it by the examples of Balaam, Laban, G^ezie, Ioell
and Abia the sons of Samuel, the Pharisees, Judas, Simon Magus, Demetrius the
silver smith, the masters of the maid that had the Pithonicall spirit, and
such like. The only testimonies of Esaias and Jeremy, speaking of their time,
shall suffice. They all look to their own way, every one for his advantage,
and for his own purpose. And Jeremy says. Even from the greatest to the
least they all apply themselves to covetousness. Our Lord Jesus Christ, and
Saint Paul by reproving and condemning covetousness in sundry passages, do
show that it was a common disease in their days. As also the Apostle
foresheweth that in the latter days there shall be covetous men. And as Saint
Peter says, seducers and false Prophets that by covetousness shall make
marchandises of souls, and this, as they note, shall be no less in their
days then before, as by experience we do find: which is more, where all
other vice, says S. Jerome, do with age wax old, only covetousness with age
grows young and gathers strength. Seneca in his book of Moralities.
And yet says Seneca, it is a monstrous case that an old man should be
covetous. For there is nothing more senseless then the less way we have to
go, the more to load our selves with provision, and as our way shortneth, so
to increase our burden. The shortness of our life reproves the large extent of
our covetousness. There is no reason that we should take or carry any great
provision for our journey, Cicero in his fourth Tusculan.
when the place that we go unto is at hand. But herein may we understand how
truly Cicero spoke, when he said that the disease that lurketh in the raines,
and is tied to the bowels, and which waxing old cannot be pulled up, is called
covetousness.

4 Yet is there nothing more pernicious, or that engenders greater corruption,
sin, iniquity, and strange diseases then this cursed covetousness, which makes
a man to be at enmity with God, with his neighbor, and with himself: And
this is it which we are first to note, to the end we may utterly renounce it,
and so mend our lives according to the commandment of our Savior Jesus
Christ. They that will be rich, 1. Tim. 6.9.10
says Saint Paul do fall into temptations and snares, and into many foolish
and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction: For the
desire of money is the root of all evil, which while some lust after, they
err from the faith, and pierce themselves through with many sorrows. Even this
only sentence might suffice to make us to abhor covetousness: For, because
the tempter is evermore ready and at hand, we daily pray to God that he lead us
not into temptation: and yet we still feed our covetousness which drowneth us
therein. The devil does daily pitch his nets to overtake and hale us into
hell: and covetousness causes us to stumble there into. Moreover it engenders
such folish and noisome desires that they drown men in destruction and
perdition: And what may a man say more, but even term it the root of all
evil, and thereto ad that they which delight therein, do fall from the faith,
which is the fulness of all mischief? To conclude: As the fi^h swallowing the
hook together with the bait, is taken and killed, so covetous men do pierce
themselves through with a thousand sorrows, which do entangle them in death
everlasting. Covetousness therefore is as the fire and the stithy, Diogenes
Plutarke in his Apotheg.
yea where the devil forgeth a thousand chains of iniquity to pull men to hell,
and a thousand fiery darts where with mortally to wound men, by poisoning their
hearts with all vice. As a certain Ethnik in old time said, Saint Bernard upon
the Canticles Sermon 39.
that covetousness is the Metropolitan City of all corruption and vice: And
S. Bernard compares it to a Lady in a chariot, whose wheels are four vices
Cotempt of God: Inhumanitie: forgetfulness of death: and faintness of heart, or
mistrust: whose two horses, are nigardlinesse and rauine, and whose carter is
desire to have.

5 To be short, covetousness resembles a wicked mother bringing forth sundry
wicked children, Col. 3.5
enemies (as is aforesaid) both to God and man: yea even to him that harbors
and norisheth them. First S. Paul calls the covetous man an Idolater, and
covetousness Idolatry, but why? Because the covetous man makes silver his God:
he reposeth more confidence in his riches then in God: he loves silver with
his whole heart, eue^ more the^ God: he forgets and despises the service of
God, to the end to serve his own covetousness and desire to have: When his money
is in his coffer he thinks himself more safe then through all Gods promises.
If by a banquerupt or otherwise he loose some portion of money, it does more
trouble and grieve him, then to loose the kingdom of heaven by offending God,
he will without comparison be more sharp set upon getting of money, then upon
calling upon God, or hearing his word. Mat. 6.24. Luke 16.13.
Jesus Christ plainly protests that No man can serve two masters: but he
shall either hate the one and love the other, or he shall cleave to the one and
depise the other. And the rather to show whereof he speaks, he adds, that
we cannot serve God and Mammon. Can there be any greater iniquity then to
despise, yea even to hate God? Yet let men flatter themselves as they list,
this is the cursed fruit of covetousness, as Jesus Christ himself affirms.
And least any man should wrongfully complain, as thinking he might
notwithstanding he were covetous, yet love God and serve him, Christ, who best
knows the strength of man, does resolutely protest that No man can serve two
masters. And indeed when for love of money thou do that which God
forbids, or neglectest that which he commands, do thou not despise God,
to please thy covetousness? To steal other men's goods, or to deceive men by
giving counterfaite come for good, is a villainous vice, Mal, 1.8
yet covetousness persuades men so to do, not only to men, but even to God:
as the Prophet Malachie obiecteth to the Jews, that they offered for sacrifice
the blind, the lame and the sick beasts, whereas by the law they were
commanded to offer those that were found: Again that as thieves, or
sacriledgious persons they robbed God, defrauding him in his tenthes. What
moved Judas an Apostle to become a sacriledgious person, in stealing money from
the poor? Also as the fulness of al impiety, to betray, Mal, 3.8. John 12.6
Mat. 26.15. Chrysostom in his 9. Hom upon Matthew,
sell, and deliver to the death for thirty pence, his master, his Lord, the
son of God, etc?

6 Now if the covetous man does wrong and injury unto God, so does he also in
sundry sorts and manners to his neighbor. Chrysostom calls the covetous
man an enemy to all men, and indeed he has infinite wicked, cruel and lewd
means to draw other men's substance into his own purse, without sparing of
any: imagining all others to be cast forth for a pray, that he may rob and
reaue at pleasure. Ezech. 22.13.
Ezechiell, where he says, I have smitten my hands upon thy covetousness,
that thou have used, and upon the blood which have been in the midest of thee,
does show that mixing blood with covetousness, the same has bred in him al
cruelty and inhumanitie against his neighbor. Iere. 22.17,
As Jeremy also, speaking to Ioachim king of Judah does note, saying: Thine
eyes and thy heart are but only for thy covetousness, and for to shed innocent
blood and for oppression and wrong. Whence came these corruptions which the
Lord forbids, as devouring of the poor with usury: Exodus 22, 25. Deuteronomy. 16,
19 Leuit. 19.13. Deuteronomy. 27.25. Leuit. 19.35. Deuteronomy, 25.13.
taking gifts which blind the eyes of the wise: keeping away the wages from
the hireling: receiving rewards to shed innocent blood: selling by false
measures and waights, or counterfaite merchandise: removing the bounds or
marks of their neighbors land: to be short, treading our brethren
underfoot? Truly even the root of covetousness brings forth these cursed
fruits. Were they not the fruits of covetousness, which Esaias so sharply
reproves in the princes and governors of Gods people, where he says. Esaias.
1.23.
Thy Princes are rebellious and companions to thieves: every one loves gifts
and follows after rewards: they judge not the fatherless, Salust in his
Catelinarie.
neither does the widows cause come before them? Covetousness, says a
certain heathen, puts all things to sale: It overthrows faithfulness and
honesty among men.

7 How many plots does the covetous man lay to cut the poor man's throat,
devising and practicing sundry shifts to sell his corn dear, and all other
wares at so high a price, that so he may suck the very blood of the poor?
The Jews have in our days but too many Disciples, whom the Prophet Amos
likewise does reprove for the like covetousness, saying. Hear this, Amos. 8.9
O ye that swallow up the poor, that ye may make the needy of the land to
fail saying. When will the new month be gonne, that we may sell corn? And the
Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, and make the Ephah small, and the
shekell great, and falsify the waights by deceit? That we may buy the poor
for silver, and the needy for shoes: yea and sell the refuse of the wheat?
All inhumanitie, cruelty, fraud, guile, treacherous practices and infidelity
does the covetous man invent and practice to encroch other men's goods. O blind
covetousness, even without all sense? Thou dwelling in man under a false
semblant of self love, make him to become an enemy both to God and man, as
is before showed: yea and which seems more strange, even to himself, as now
we shall understand.

8 Riches, says Ecclesiasticus, beseem not a nigard, Ecclesi. 14.
and what should an envious man do with money? He here speaks of the
couetuous man that enu^eth his own good, as he adds. He that gathers
together from his own soul, heapeth together for others that will make good
cheer with his goods. He that is wicked to himself, to who^ will he be good? For
such a one can have no pleasure of his goods. Preacher, 4, 7.
There is nothing worse then when one enuieth himself: and this is a reward of
his wickedness. In this sense says Solomon. I have seen vanity under the
sun. That is, the man that is alone, and has no second: neither has he son
or brother, yet is there no end of all his travail: neither can his eyes be
satisfied with riches: neither does he ever think. For whom do I travail and
defraud my soul of pleasure? This also is vanity, and this is an evil
travail. To the like purpose and the rather to confirm it, the same Solomon
says also thus. I have seen an evil under the sun, and it is much among men.
Preach. 6, 1, 2,
A man to whom God has given riches, tresure and honor, and he wants
nothing for his soul of all that he desires: But God gives him not power to
eat thereof, but a strange man shall eat it up: This is vanity, and this is an
evil sickness. The covetous man is like a rich Orphane that dies in his
youth, before he may enjoy his goods: he is in effect as poor as he that has
nothing, according to the old proverb. The covetous man wants as well that
which he has as that he has not: as says also an Ancient Poet. He is
always poor and needy, that loves or coueteth money. Covetousness makes
him labor to have all, as if all should be his, and hinders him from the use
of that he has gotten as if nothing were his own. He is not master and Lord,
but keeper and storer of his money. There is no tirant so cruel as
covetousness, which with care and labor slays the man that is subject
thereto. It draws him through fields and woods, sea and land: in the cold of
winter and in the heat of summer, night and day: in rain, wind and danger,
admitting no rest, and all to seek and hunt after goods: Yet does it grant
him only the sight, but not the use of them: yea it debarreth him of his
necessary meat, drink, cloth, and other his necessities. To be short, if a
King should use such cruelty to his subjects, he would be called a tyrant.
Every man would abhor him, and seek to get out of his subjection: yet
covetousness holds a man so sure, that the more he purchases for it, the
more does it subdue him to the service thereof, so binding and bewitching him,
that he takes a pleasure and thinks himself happy that he may be so
tyrannised. Yet does it hold him in that wretched estate and miserable
condition which the Poets in old time noted of Tantalus, who standing among
fruit and in water up to the lips, yet dyed for hunger and thirst. Through
his labor he replenisheth his sellers, garne^s, and costers with goods: but
Lady covetousness lays up the keys and takes from him the use of them
either for himself or for others, as Lucian compares her to a dog lying in
the hay, which when he can not eat, with his barking, he will not suffer
others to eat thereof. As also the Indian Ants or Emets, who gather the gold
and keep it, yet neither can use it, neither will suffer men to have it, so
far forth as they may. To be short, the covetous man does take great pains
to get, but has no pleasure in the use. He resembles the Mule, who going
laden with gold and silver, yet eats nothing but hay.

9 There is moreover this inconvenience in it: that he being as it were the
bondsman of covetousness, subject to labor to get, and to care to keep that
he has gotten, and wanting the use thereof, yet if he perhaps loose any
portion thereof by thieves, banquerupts or otherwise, he falls into great
afflictions and torment with sorrow and grief, as Saint Bernard very well
notes, Bernard in a certain Sermon.
where he says. The getting of riches consists in great labor: the
possession and keeping of them in much care and fear: and the loss of them in
extreme sorrow and heaviness. These be three cruel tyrannies which she
practices over man: and yet urging him to such difficult, unreasonable and
pernicious matters, she so bewitcheth him, that he is more ready to obey her
then God, who commands the things that be easy, just and profitable. This
does Saint Augustine note in this sentence, Covetousness says unto man. Let
me be possessed of thee: Augustine up on the 125. Psalm.
but Jesus Christ answers, thou commaundest things difficult, but I such as
are easy: Thou layest upon him an heavy burden, but mine is light: O man,
suffer not covetousness to possess thee: for she commands thee to abandon
thy self to the winds and tempests of the sea: But I command thee,
standing at thy door, to give that thou have to the poor. Thou art slothful
to do a good work, yet thy courage will serve thee to pass the seas. When
covetousness commands thee, thou seruest it: but when God commands thee,
thou hate him. This verily is a frantike rage in man, thus to submit himself
to covetousness which engenders so much vice and iniquity: making him an
enemy both to God, to men, and to himself. We are therefore so to abhor it,
that it be not once named among us, Ephesians. 5.3.
as Saint Paul does give us warning.

10 Moreover, in as much as Avarice is a love of silver, and a coveting of
riches: Let us for a second remedy consider whether there be any ground or
occasion why we should so love them, Mat. 13, 22,
or covet after them. Jesus Christ saying that the deceitefulnesse of riches
choaketh the good corn of Gods word does thereby declare, that they resemble
a wanton strumpet, such a one as by her beautye causing many men to lust after
her, depriueth such as give themselves to enjoy her, of all virtue, honor and
felicity: That they be like unto wine, which by the sweetness and delicacie
thereof, allureth man to excessive drinking, yet with all takes the man from
the man, that is to say, his senses and reason from him. And indeed as the good
corn of Gods word is a sanctified seed of salvation and life, so the falsehood
and deceit of riches does in such sort draw men to abundance, and with all to
the perverse use of the same, Luke 16.9.
that thereby this seed of salvation and life everlasting is choked up. In
another place our Lord Jesus Christ calls the^ riches of iniquity, either
because they ordinarily do spring from iniquity, or else that they do
engender and bring forth iniquity. Saint Paul writing to Timothy, says
thus: Charge them that are rich in the world, 1. Tim. 6.17.
that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain riches.
Riches do commonly breed pride, arrogancy, contempt of others, pleasures,
pomp, forgetfulness of God, despising of eternal felicity, peruers
confidence, Basil in his Sermon. against covetousness
and other like plagues. And this does Basil signify, where he says, that the
mad man desires nothing so much as to get water, by reason of his excessive
distemperature: yet is there nothing that so much tormenteth him: for the only
sight thereof is able to cast him into his fit, and to trouble him, and so it
is with riches: Every man longs for them, yet are they the only things that
increase his longing, trouble his mind and replenish his heart with passions.
When rich men, says Socrates, will use their riches, they pollute them selves
with pleasures and pride: when they list to keep them, care consumes them and
eats forth their hearts when they labor to get them, they grow wicked and
full of all misery. Chrysostom very fitly compares them to wild beasts,
whom a man can hardly take, and when he has them, he must take great care
how to keep them from doing hurt. And in truth as he that walks in the rain
shall hardly escape wetting, or he that traueleth in the whote sun eschew
heat: so is it almost impossible for a rich man to avoid vice and corruption
by his riches. Mark. 10.23,
And hereof speaks Jesus Christ very resolutely, saying. How hardly do they
that have riches enter into the kingdom God? True it is he afterward
expounds this speech saying. Children how hard is it for them that trust in
riches to enter into the kingdom of God? But then adding that It is more easy
for a Camel to pass through a needles eye then for a rich man to enter into
the kingdom of God, He declares how hardly a rich man can escape confidence
in his riches, and consequently enter into the kingdom of God. Psalm. 62.11.
And in this respect does David admonish us when riches abound, not to set our
hearts upon the same: 1. Tim. 6.17.
as Saint Paul also preaches to the rich that they should not put any trust in
their riches.

11 Riches do not only engender a false confidence in the same, but become also
a poison to humility, modesty, courtesy, and al other virtues, which it
transformeth into pride and arrogancy, as the Apostle notes in the place
before aledged. Some have written that Bucephalus the horse of Alexander the
great, so long as he was naked, would suffer any man to back him: but if he
were once furnished with the royal Sadle, Bridle, and other furniture, he grew
so proud that no man might ride him but the king: even so many who in their
poverty were modest, humble and virtuous, by increase of wealth have changed
their virtues into vice. Plut. in the life of Phocio^.
Thus we see that there is no less care and labor to beware that riches hurt
not, then sorrow and pain in getting them. Thus did Phocion, albeit a heathen
man, very well understand. For when great Alexander sent him a linge su^me of
money, asking him that brought the present, what moved Alexander to send him
such a present, and by the answer understanding that it was in respect of the
same of his virtue: he refused it, saying: Let him leave me as I am. Wherein he
showed, what regard the virtuous man should take, least riches should change
him and make him vicious. Plut. in his Laconicall Apotheg.
The Lacedaemonians, according to Licurgus Laws, expelled from among them all
unprofitable members, as Cooks, Players, Sophisters and such like. Also the
use of silver and gold, using no money but of iron, and so did utterly banish
covetousness. And so long as they observed this discipline, they remained not
only virtuous, but also invincible to other nations: And contrariwise as soon
as forsaking Licurgus laws, they had opened a way to wealth, covetousness
crept in, who making them vicious, delivered them into the power of their
enemies. And indeed as these mountains that contain mines of gold and
silver, are otherwise barren: so they that have riches, and veins of gold and
silver, are in their hearts made unprofitable to the service of God and man.
True it is, Riches are Gods good creatures and instruments of virtue to those
that can well use them, as Saint Paul well notes, saying: 1. Tim. 6.
God gives us all things to enjoy, to do good, to be rich in good works,
ready to distribute and communicate: Laying up in store, for our selves, and
making a good foundation against the time to come, Luke 16.22.
that we may obtain eternal life. Neither do we simply condemn either the
rich or their riches. Poor Lazarus was received into the bosom of rich
Abraham. But the desire and possession of them is dangerous unto man, who
naturally is inclined to pervert the use of Gods good creatures. To man they be
so plenty as Sugar and fruit in the power and liberty of a child: as pleasant
wine to a dru^kerd, and as a sword in a mad man's hand, to use rather to hurt
the^ to do good. At the least, it is evident that they can not make a man
blessed: for otherwise God would more plentifully distribute them to his
well-beloved children in Jesus Christ: whereas contrariwise they are more common
to the wicked, who for the most part are better provided of them, whiles the
poor is more advanced to the kingdom of God. The gallant Bridles and golden
Sadles do nothing amend the horse, but rather his agilitie, nimblenesse and
strength. Every beast, says Epictetus, is esteemed by his virtue: and shall man
be so by his wealth. Musical instruments are to no use to him that cannot play
upon them, and so are riches unprofitable to him that cannot use them. As the
horse is of no use without a bridle, so are riches without reason. Well may they
make a vicio^s man more honorable in the sight of the world: but as fair
Tapisserie, which covers soul and broken walls. Besides, they are endued
with another dangerous use: for they draw flatterers, who are eue^ so many
poisners of virtue. How many other dangers are they also subject unto? Lay not
up for your selves tresures upon the earth, Mat. 6.19.
says Jesus Christ, where the moth and canker corrupt and where thieves break
through and steal. Whereof we have experience enough in so many banquerupts,
robberies by sea and by land and persecutions for the name of Christ: besides
that albeit a man has the use of them whiles he lives, Seneca in his
proverbs. 1. Tim. 6.7.
yet at death he must forsake them. To this necessity is every covetous man
driven, never to do good until his death, according to the proverb, and then
he leaves his goods to his heirs. And indeed as we came naked into the world,
Eusch. in the life of Constantine. lib 4
so must we certainly carry forth nothing with us. Great Constantine,
speaking to one of his courtiers, said. Oh covetous man, how far shall thy
insatiable couetise extend? Then with a Iaueling that he had in his hand,
marking out a man's length upon the ground, he said unto him. When thou have
gotten all the world, yet at the last thus much must be thy portion, if thou
can obtain that. Let the covetous man therefore that minds to Amend
according to Christ's exhortation diligently think, that in lou ng and
desiring riches, he loves and coueteth vanity: he loves and coueteth the
thorns that choke all virtue: yea he loves and coueteth the roots of all
mischief, and the fountains of al vice. In liew of coveting, if he have any,
let him imagine, how to avoid then allurements and abuses, as understanding
that in riches, in stead of virtue and felicity, he shall find occasion of
corruption and misery.

13 The third remedy consists in careful meditation upon the horrible
vengeance and grievous punishment which the covetous me^ must of necessity
expect from him who justly detesteth such vice. Are we not already to note this
one point, yt as charity is the gift of God proceeding from his favor and
grace, so contrariwise, covetousness is a vengeance which he pours upon those
who^ for their sins he has given over into a reprobate sense, as S. Paul also
notes? God so detesteth the covetous person, that if any of those that
profess his word, does give himself to that vice, Romans 1.29. 1. Cor. 5.11.
S. Paul wills us to hold him excommunicate, and not to eat or converse with
him. And this he says to confirm that which he has said in another place:
namely, that the covetous man shall not enherite the kingdom of heaven, and in
that sense does S. James summon the^ to Gods judgment seat, admonishing the^
to consider of his horrible vengeance. 1. Cor. 6.10, Iam. 5.1.
Now, says he, ye rich men, houle ye and weep for your misery that is at
hand, your riches are corrupt, and your garments are motheaten, your gold and
silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh as it were fire, ye have heaped up treasures for the last
days. Behold, Gregory in a certain Homely. Augustine up on the words of the
Lord. Ambrose of Naboth the Iesralite. Augustine in a certain Sermon.
the hire of the laborers which have reaped your fields (which is of you kept
back by fraud) cries, and the cry of them which have reaped is entered into
the cares of the Lord of hoasts. The covetous man says S. Gregory in this life
burns in desire to get, and care to keep that he has: but hereafter he shall
burn in fire of everlasting torments. What a madness is it says Augustine, to
win gold and to loose heaven. The covetous man says Ambrose has as it were
steps to covetousness, and the more that he climeth, and ye higher that he
goes, the greater is his fall. What shall be his last fall for gathering, says
Augustine, considering that he has lost himself before he make any gain?
Covetousness is a horrible giddines, which makes man insatiable to climb high
yt he may fall low: to kindle the fire of Gods wrath, that he may feel ye
everlasting slain thereof: and to lose the celestial tresures to get
terrestrial riches, which fill him with vice and misery.

14 If they say that in this life at the least they shall reap commodity,
pleasure and felicity by the^: let them think how miserably they are therein
deceived: First, be they such beasts, as they cannot consider what this life
is? If they cannot deny but they must die, what co^tentation can they reap in
cutting the wood and making the fagots, wherewith they shall hereafter burn for
ever? we read of an Ethnike, who being demanded whether he had rather be
Socrates, wise and virtuous, or Crassus welthy and lustful, answered in life he
would wish to be Crassus, but in death Socrates, which he said in respect of
the felicity and reputation which he imagined in Socrates after his death,
and he had some reason, if being Crassus in his life time, he might have been
converted into Socrates at his death. But since that might not be, he
confesses that he who in this life is Crassus, unless he be a beast deuoide
of soul, is in death most wretched, as consequently also in life, which in
such men is no other but a path to woe, and an increase of misery. Are not
these covetous men then in this life miserable, considering that they be
wretched, except they be beasts, in that it is a heavy curse to them, that
they be men endued with immortal souls? If there remained in them any spark
of the image of God? If they had any remorse of conscience: would not the same
be to the^ a tormentor, urging them to exclaim that they are miserable in the
midst of al then wealth? As if a man vexed with the Gout or with the
Collicke, should lie in a rich bed, and have al pleasures that might be, so
that to men's seeming he should be thought most blessed: and yet in himself he
should feel all misery and sorrow. Again, albeit such were the dulnes of his
conscience that he should have no apprehension of the state to come, yet can
he not be so happy as beasts, who have neither labor in getting, neither
care in keeping neither grief in loosing, as is before mentioned: which also
Gregory notes in this only fear to loose saying. If a covetous man spieth a
stronger then himself, he fears that he will take away his goods: If a weaker,
that he will steal them: whereupon he adds, O poor wretch: he endures as
much hurt, as he fears to endure. Neither fears he without cause. For as
among a flock of sheep, the Wolf always choseth the fattest, and the Egle
among Geefe the best, so do thieves and robbers among men, lay for the richest.

15 Which is more. It is a proverb, that covetousness makes but a small
hill: for many times it is with the covetous as with Aesops dog, who swimming
with a piece of flesh in his mouth and seeing the shadow thereof, taking that to
be another piece of flesh, opening his mouth to catch that also, lost the same
which he before had, so the covetous man being insatiable, and every way
seeking to increase that he has, does many times loose that which is in his
hand. Prou. 15.27. Prou. 28.16.
To conclude, He that hates covetousness, says Solomon, trobleth his house: but
he that hates rewards shall live. Likewise in another place. He that hates
covetousness, shall prolong his days. Thus the covetous man having even in his
self imagination, no felicity but in this life, is much more miserable, because
through his couetosnes he shortneth the course of his felicity. If the covetous
man kindles an unquenchable fire for the life to come (unless he be a
senseless beast) even in this life he shall feel a tormentor of his wicked
conscience which astonishing him, in liew of pleasuring him with that which he
takes for his felicity, ministers to him nothing but hinderaunce, fear,
care, anguish and heuinesse. The only meditation and apprehension of these
vengeances and judgments of God against the wicked, should so pierce our
hearts, that we might, abhorring covetousness, Amend our lives.

16 The fourth remedy is this, that as the principal spring of covetousness is
distrust of God, so we may learn so to rest upon his providence, that daily
begging of him our daily bread, we never doubt, but that he will give us all
things necessary for this life, and never forsake us. And this does the
Apostle note, saying: Let your conversation be without covetousness: Heb. 1^.5:
and be content with those things that ye have: for he has said, I will not
fail thee, Col, 3, 5.
neither forsake thee. It is a kind of Idolatry as S. Paul notes, to put the
confidence of life in goods. And herein, as in many other things, we do great
injury and dishonor to God: For as gold of it self can neither feed, nor
cloth us: so that which we buy with gold or silver, proceeds not out of the
gold or silver, but from Gods providence, neither can it minister any help
without Gods grace and blessing. If wrongfully thou have gotten gold, it is
accursed: what blessing can thou then look for in it considering the same
comes not, as is aforesaid, from the favor of God? If thou have any
substance well come bye, thou have them from the hand of God: for it is he
that has given them. Should this pledge of his care for thee, engender
mistrust of him? Experience, says S. Paul, engenders hope. Romans 5, 4.
Thou, as fearing least he should take from thee that which he has given thee,
or that he would not give thee more at thy need, wilt have it against his
will, and as it were in despite of him: But it will prove to thee poisoned
bread, and cursed money

17 Imagine therefore that life is better then food, Mat. 6.25. Genesis 1.
as Jesus Christ said, and the body of more value then the raiment or
sustenance. Before the creation of man, the world was made, where into he was
brought as into a palace replenished and adorned with all goods, created
expressly for his use. And before the soul the body was created to receive
it. Since he nourished the body before it was borne into the world, and by his
only providence provided it of sustenance in the mothers breasts, and through
her care of clothing before the birth, shall we call into question his
fartherly care over us? Mat. 6, 26.
Shall we that are borne, and that put our trustes in him, fear that he will
fail or forsake us? We are more precious in his sight, then either fowls or
herbs, of whom nevertheless, he shows a manifest care to feed them. Will
the householder take care to water the herbs of his garden, or fodder his
cattle, and suffer his men and maids to famish for hunger and thirst? Will he
take care for his men and maids, and let his own children starve? Moreover,
have not we our living, our being and our moving from God? What will all the
worlds good the^ avail us without Gods blessing? Act. 17, 28. Luke 12.15.
Take heed and beware of covetousness, says Jesus Christ, for though a man
has abundance, yet his life stands not in his riches. Since our life
depends not upon our riches, but upon God only, let us put our trust, not in
our goods, but in God, upon whose pleasure our goods do depend, who also has
promised that he will not forsake those that put their trust in him.

18 Among the rest, there is yet one mischief, and that is this. We are
gluttenous and licorous children. And knowing that our heavenly father will not
please us in our foolish appetites, we will provide for our selves, and that
plentifully, that we may have the less need to depend upon him. Whereas
contrariwise our duty requires that we should be content with our daily bread
that we crave at his hands, even for every day that we crave it, and not to
heap up riches for the last day as S. James says. Many that say to God Give
us this day our daily bread, Iam. 5, 3.
would be very loath he should take them at their word, as concerning
themselves, and daily give them bread but for a day at once: but such men by
using that prayer do make a skorne of God. And therefore let us learn to depend
upon his providence, and to that end to moderate our appetites: let us renounce
covetousness, and behold we have wealth enough. Let us practice the speech of a
heathen philosopher to a covetous man: Plato, Democritus.
Labor not to increase thy possession, but rather to diminish thy
covetousness. As also another being asked how a man might become rich,
answered: by growing poor in covetousness. Socrates being demanded who was the
richest: he (says he) that coueteth least, and is content with a little. And
indeed the remedy to quench his thirst that is vexed with a whote fever,
comes not of giving him drink, but of taking away his fever, which causes
his thirst. Even so the way to grow rich, ^s not by heaping of riches, but by
diminishing the couetise of the same. Augustine in his confess^on
It will be, says S. Augustine, no grief to be deprived of riches, if a man
be not desirous to have them. Yea which is more. Socrates very well said that
man is never so happy, neither so fully enjoys his desire, as when he is
willing to desire nothing. Nature is content with little. And man should never
be poor, if he could live according to nature. Chilon the Lacedemonian, whose
reputation and glory was such that when he was dead, all Greece celebrated his
funerals, and accompanied his body to the sepulcher, while he lived used many
sententious speeches: but among the rest there were three of such estimation
that they were written in letters of gold: The first, that there is no better
knowledge then for a man to know himself: The second, that the end of al
strife and contention, is misery: The third, that man ought not to covet too
much, but to be content with that which may suffice and costeth little, so long
as it is ordered according to nature, and not according to our lusts which are
infinite and miserable. Manlius Curious. Plut. in his Apotheg.
To this effect do we also read of a certain Roman captain, to who^ the
Embassaders of the Samnites offered a great sum of money, to the end to divert
him from taking the charge and conduct of the wars against the^. When he had
heard their Oration, he showed them a little pot upon the fire, containing a
few herbs and roots for his supper and answered, that he which was content
with such a supper, need not so much money and so sent them away. When King
Archelaus sent for Socrates with promise of great riches, he returned him
answer, that at Athens meal cost but a halfepenie, and water nothing.

19 But what is the end of al these labors, travails and dangers that we in
our for to get the^? Is it not rest? Yet might we both sooner and with more
safety attain thereto, if we could be content with so much as might suffice.
And to this effect we read yt when king Pirrhus determined to leauie war
against the Romans, his cou^sellor Cyneas to the end to divert him therfro,
asked him saying, well Sir: When we have overcome and taken Italy, what shall we
the^ do? Pirrhus answered: we will pass into Sicil: thence into Libia and
Carthage. And what more said Cyneas? Then will we go into Macedonia, said the
king, and conquer all Greece. Again, said Cyneas, what shall we then do? We
will then said Pirrhus take our rest, and pass our time in pleasure. Then said
Cyneas. Why do we not even now take this rest and ease, but that we must needs
with such pain danger, labor and travail go to seek that which already we
have in our hands? This wise counselor sitly showed him that if he could be
content with his own realm, and not have coueted after other men's, he might
have enjoyed rest, and been more happy, the^ by seeking to conquer other men's
and so to endanger himself after great labors to enjoy none. For contentation
only ministers rest and gives happiness.

20 Now therefore, since both Jesus Christ and Saint John in their first Sermon
do admonish us to amend, and that this vice of covetousness is so common
among men, so deeply rooted in their hearts, so dangerous and pernicious: Let
us to the end to refrain therfro, diligently meditate upon the remedies before
mentioned. And first that we may deny this cursed couetise, let us remember
that it is the mother and nurse of most wretched fruit, which causes us to
become enemies to God, to our neighbor and to our selves, as we have more at
large declared. Secondly let us not forget, that riches are so far from
giving contentment and making men happy, that contrariwise they engender a
thousand sorrows and cares: they are unto us as thorns that choke the good
seed and the original of all virtue in us, which they change into vice and
so make us most miserable and wretched. Thirdly, that the vengeance and
horrible punishment which God inflicteth upon the covetous even in this life,
but especially such as he will pour forth upon them after this race, make us
to abhor this covetousness which is the root of all evil. Lastly, let us
learn not to put our trust in these vain and uncertain riches, but in the
living God, and depend wholly upon his providence in all things necessary for
the maintenance of this life. And let us apprehend the treasures of the
everlasting kingdom, contenting our selves with so much as God allows us for
this our pilgrimage and journey from earth unto heaven. But because it is God
only that works in us both the will and the performance, let us fervently
and continually pray unto him to purge our hearts from this covetousness,
working in us by his holy spirit, whatsoever he requires of us in his word.
Psalm. 119.36.
And with David let us say, O Lord, incline not my heart to covetousness, but
to obey thy precepts. And with Solomon let us say this prayer. Give me neither
poverty nor riches: feed me with food convenient for me: Prou. 30.8.
least if I be full I deny thee and say, who is the Lord, or least if I be
poor, I steal and take the name of my God in vain. Now let us proceed to
ambition.

Of Ambition, and Pride. Chap. 12.
AS Avarice is an excessive coveting of riches, so ambition i^ an unmeasurable
desire of honor, glory, and reputation with men. That we may therefore the
more plainly lay open this vice, we will consider it in three sorts. First
in that man, not content with his estate, coueteth to be greater, and to have
more reputation and honor. Secondly, in that he pretends a glory and praise
in the gifts and graces which he has received from the Lord: and this kind
of ambition may properly be termed arrogancy and pride. Thirdly, when man
says or does any thing whereby to seem to have or be more than he has or
is, and it may well be termed boasting. As for the first, Genesis 1.26 Genesis 3
it is most lively presented unto us in the fall of man. Adam being created
after the image of God, and appointed Lord and master over al his creatures,
was not content with that excellency and greatness, but by the instigation of
Satan, coueted and endeavored to be greater, yea, even to be like unto God.
This plague has so infected his posterity, that there is no imp of Adam but
is tickled, yea, and wounded with this desire to be great, even greatest of
all. And in deed as the covetous man is never satisfied with money, so is the
ambitious never full with glory and honor. Ambition, says Seneca, Seneca in
hi^ Epistles.
never suffers man to rest in the same measure of felicity which himself
has before time wished. No man is content with the same estate that he has
attained unto, but seeks a higher. Man is never satisfied so long as one may
go before him, for Ambition suffers him not to see whence he came, how
far thee is gone, or whether he does aspire. Every soldier desires to be
Captain: being a Captain, he climbeth higher, and seeks from degree to
degree to come to be a king, yea, if he might attain to be Emperor of all
Europe, he then would covet to be Emperor of the whole world. Great Alexander
was not content with the realms that his father left him, and therefore
undertook the conquest of all the world, yea, when he had obtained a great
victory against Darius king of Persia, refusing the offer that he then made of
his daughter in marriage, and half his dominions, he answered, That as there
was but one Sun in the world, Justin in his 11. book.
so would he be the only king in the world. How many such Alexanders are
there in these latter days? Whereto tended this royal device taken of the
increase of the Moo^, Until she fill her whole compass. Also of an Emperor,
Farther. Be not these evident testomonies that man's heart is ambitious and
insatiable: that it is so far from being satisfied by increase, that the
same increase does whet the appetite and still minister more increase to the
insatiable coveting of more honor and glory?

2 There is not any that in estate or dignity, either in town, province, or
kingdom is second, but he aspireth to climb and to be first, if not in the
principal degree, as king, yet to be next to his person, as Jonathan said to
David, Thou shall reign, and I will be next to thee. 1. Sam 23, 17. Math.
20.20
The mother of the Apostles John and James, made a petition to Jesus Christ,
that in his kingdom the one might sit upon his right hand, 3. John 1.9
the other on his left. Saint John also taxed one Diotrephes, that coueted to
be chiefest in the Church. Plu. in the life of Iuli. Caesar
The Roman Emperor Julius Caesar, when some marvelled that in a little town
where they passed through, there was strife who should be greatest, freely
said, that himself had rather be the chiefest in that little town, than the
second at Rome. Were not the Apostles at controversy who should be greatest?
And did not they demand of Jesus Christ who should be greatest in the
kingdom of heaven? Mark. 9.34 Math. 18.1
They imagined that Christ should reign upon earth, as Solomon before had
done: and before they saw the crown upon his head, they demanded which of
them should have the chiefest offices. Which is more, he that might attain to
the sovereignty of the whole world, would yet seek to be greater, and if
it lay in him, to climb even into heaven, and as Adam did, to be like unto
God. Some are of opinion, that the sin of the Angels that were turned to
devils, proceeded of the like ambition, Esa. 14.13
taking it to be the same which Esaie notes, where he speaks not directly
of them, but of Nabuchadnezzer king of Babylon, declaring him to be in deed of
the race of Adam, in these words, I will ascend into heaven, and exalt my
throane above, besides the stars of God? I will sit also upon the mount of
the congregation, in the sides of the North, I will ascend above the height of
the clouds, and I will be like to the most high. All the kingdoms of the
earth could not satisfy the ambition of great Alexander, Valerius in his
first book
who by the readinges of Anaxarchus, understanding that his master Democritus
maintained that there were sundry worlds, cried out, saying: Woe is me,
wretch that I am, that have not yet attained to the possession of one of them.
Whereupon Valerius fitly notes, yet speaking as a Heathen man, that mortal
man esteems his glory to be straighted, because it is bounded in one
world, which nevertheless might suffice for the habitation of all the Gods.
He also writ to the Lacedaemonians, requiring them to place him among the Gods,
and to offer sacrifice to him, Plutarch in his Apotheg.
as unto a God. Whereupon one named Damis, scorned his ambition, and said:
Well, let us give Alexander leave to be called God.

3 It is no marvel that the Heathen so exalted themselves, considering that
some who not only take upon them the name of Christians, but also do boast
to be Saint Peter's successors, have grown to as great ambition. For the
Bishops of Rome, not contented with the title of Bishops of the first sea, have
taken upon them to be called universal Bishops, heads of the Church upon
earth, placed themselves above kings and Emperors, compared themselves to the
Sun, and Kings and Emperors to the Moon, because as the Moon has no light
but from the light of the Sun, so kings and Emperors do hold their power and
dignity from them: yea, they proceed farther, and share with God, Cap. Satis.
Did. 69
suffering themselves by their parasites, to be called Gods upon earth.
Whereupon Pope Nicholas concluded, that since God might not be judged by man,
neither might the Popes. And this is it which Saint Paul foretold, 2. These, 2.4
that Antichrist should exalt himself against all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, so that he does sit as God, in the temple of God, showing himself
that he is God. Thus we see that the ambitious man is insatiable, and cannot be
satisfied with all the glory of the world, but that he must also climb into
heaven to become God, even he who being a poor worm upon the earth, and
coveting to be great, like unto God, through his ambition fell so low, that
he is not now worthy to be mentioned among the least creatures in the world.

4 As this ambition burning in the heart, flameth even up to heaven, so is there
no vice, corruption, sin, or iniquity, Bern. in his 40. Sermon.
but it engendereth, and in deed, the eldest daughter of the first sin,
namely, of the incredulity of Adam and Eve, could not but be a fruitful
mother and plentiful in vicious, pernicious, and damnable children. Ambition
(says Saint Barnard) is a secret poison, a hidden sin, a forger of fraud,
a mother of hypocrisy, a spring of envy, a fountain of all vice, a moath to
holiness, a blinding of the heart, converting remedies into diseases, and
medecines into languishing. First, what poison or plague is more mortal than
ambition, whereby man seeking to be equal with God, was made like unto the
devil, not only worthy of death, but also so vicious and corrupt, that at
every moment he hastneth more and more to death. Psalm. 51.7 Ephesians. 3.2 2.
Sam. 15.2.^ 4.5
This unthankful ambition which was also the breeder of disobedience, has
infected us with this plague and scabbe, that we are conceived in sin, borne
in iniquity, and by nature the children of wrath. It is truly a forger of
fraud and mother of hypocrisy, for ambition disguiseth it self into a
thousand fourmes and shapes, to the end to deceive others, and by abasing
them to exalt it self. How did Absolon, being reconciled to his father David,
flatter the people, taking one by the hand, 2. Sam. 15.6
kissing another, speaking kindly to all, offering to favor them in their
business, and to procure their dispatches? And to what end was all this? Even
to steal the hearts of the people, as the holy Ghost says, and to turn them
from his father David, so beating a path to come to the kingdom. Ambition is
the ape of Charity, Charity is patient for eternal goods, Ambition endures
all for temporal honor, Charity is courteous to the poor, Ambition to the
rich. Charity endures all things for the truth, Ambition for vanity.
Moreover, as Saint Barnard says, that it is a spring of Envy: so Saint
Augustine calls Envy the daughter of Ambition. And truly the ambitious man
ever enuyeth the prosperity of others, either of those that are greater than
he, because he is not so great as they, or of his inferiors, least they
should attain to his greatness, or of those that are his equals, because they
be equal with him.

Number. 16 2. Kin. 1 1 2. King. 15 1. King. 16. Iud. 9.5 2. Sam. 15 and 18.
Platina in his life.
Again, there is no iniquity or cruelty so heinous, but Ambition will urge a
man thereto. What moved Corah, Dathan and Abiron to murmr against Moses and
Aaron, and to stir up sedition? Athaliah to murder all the kings seed, that
she might reign? Sellum Zembri, and many others to murder their Lords and
princes? Abimelech to murder his seventy brethren, the sons of Gedeon?
Absolon that hypocrite and ungrateful person, to drive his own father from
his kingdom, and with his army to prosecute him and to destroy him? Pope
Siluester the second, to consent to give himself to the devil, that he might
attain to the papacy? To be short, there is nothing so deuillish, but man by
Ambition may be urged thereto.

6 The second kind of Ambition, which we call Arrogancy and Pride, is no other
but a mere sacrilege against God, in that man attributes to himself the
glory of those graces which he has received from God. And this arrogancy
may be considered in two sorts: first, when man glorifyeth himself, in the
gifts and graces of God: secondly, in that he seeks and takes the glory of
another, rejoicing when it is attributed to him, and sorrowing when it is
denied him. Concerning the first, man is so unthankful to God, as if he give
him either knowledge, wealth, dignity, virtue, or any other commendable or
excellent gift, he attributes the same to his own industry, and in hew of
giving the glory thereof to God, he assumeth it to himself, and waxes proud
thereof. Saint Paul was a chosen vessel to preach the Gospel, yet does he
confess, that himself was in danger of being exalted above measure, through
the abundance of revelations, 2. Cor. 12.7 1. Cor. 8.1 1. Cor. 1.26.
had not God provided a remedy. Again, where he says that knowledge pulls
up, he notes this to be a common infirmity among al men, namely, of the
increase of Gods gifts, to take occasion of pride In this consideration, as
he writes to the Corinthians does God usually call the poor, contemptible,
simple, and fools, to the knowledge of the Gospel, rather than the rich,
mighty, noble, and wise: to the end, that if any will glory, he should
glory in the Lord: thereby declaring, that if God should call the rich, the
mighty, the noble, and the wise, they in liew of giving the glory, praise,
Ephe. 2.^
and thanks to God, would assume it to themselves. The same does he also say in
another place, Ye are saved by grace through faith, and that not of your
selves, neither of works, least any man should boast himself. Wherein he
also notes, that if by good works we should obtain salvation, albeit their
goodness proceed from God, yet would we boast of our salvation, as if by our
own works we purchased the kingdom of heaven.

7 Among all other reasons why God does not at full sanctify us in this life,
albeit he has made us his well-beloved children by faith in Jesus Christ, is to
be observed, our inclination to pride. And in deed, if we do boast of
frivolous matters, as of fine dancing, leaping, running, gallant garments, and
other like vanyties, what would we do if in this life God should indue us
with all holiness and other virtues? How proud and glorious would we become?
Truly it would be our utter ruin: for the arrogancy and pride that would
spring thereof, would provoke Gods wrath against us, to deprive us thereof, as
unthankful persons, and to punish us as sacrilegious wretches, that rob God
of his glory. In Prospers sentences.
In this respect does Saint Austen say, that humble confession in wicked
works, is better than proud ambition in good. And therefore he says farther,
Ibidem.
The first vice that conquered man will be the last to conquer: for when man
has overcome all other vice and iniquity, then is the greatest danger, least
the soul finding it self victorious, should boast more in it self than in
God.

8 But let us proceed to other the gifts of God, Genesis 16.4 1. Tim. 6.17
Agar finding her self with child by Abraham, grew so lofty and proud, that
she despised her mistres. Saint Paul admonishes Timothy, to charge the rich
men in this world, that they be not high minded, thereby declaring, that
riches usually do engender pride. To this effect we read, that Assuerus
sitting upon the throane of the glory of his kingdom, made a feast to all his
princes and officers, that he might boast unto them of the riches of the
glory of his kingdom, Genesis 16.4 1. Tim. 6.17 Hester 1.4
and the honor of his great majesty. Also, that Haman, the Jews enemy,
having sent for his friends and his wife, reported unto them the glory of his
riches, Hester 5.
and boasted the multitude of his children, and all the things wherein the king
did magnify him above all the princes and servants of the king.
Nabuchadnezzer walking in the royal palace of Babylon, Dan. 4.27.
boasted of his greatness saying? Is not this great Babel, that I have builte
for the house of my kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of
my majesty? Thus does the unthankful and sacrilegious person boast of the
gifts and graces of God, attributing to himself the praise due to God only.

9 The second point of this arrogancy and pride, consists in seeking and
accepting the praise due unto others, and in taking pleasure therein. And this
also is a very common and dangerous plague Saint Augustine says, that it is
not enough that we covet not the honor, either that we make but small account
thereof when it is denied, except we also practice our selves in refusing it,
and withal, take no pleasure when it is offered us. Yet contrariwise, it is
seldom seen, says Cicero, that any man, after some notable exploit or
piece of work, forbeareth to crave commendation and glory, In his familiar
Epistles,
as a reward of his labors: and himself being of the same stamp, by his
Letters desires a friend of his to write the history of his dooinges, and
therein somewhat to his praise, for (says he) my self am also somewhat
covetous of glory. Alexander the great esteemed Achilles blessed, because he
had Homer, Plutarch in his life. Cicero in his Orat. for Archias. Plutarch in
his life.
an excellent Poet, the recorder of his deeds and glory. Themistocles showed
no less ambition, when being demanded in what voice he was most delighted:
He answered, In the same that most commends my virtues. In concurrence
whereof, being on a time at the famous exercises of Olympus; where the people
casting their eyes from the wrastlers upon him, as not satisfied with his
sight, pointed also to him, and showed him to strangers, with testimony of
great applause, he so liked of that glory, that speaking to his friends he
said, that that day he had reaped the fruit and reward of all his pains and
trauayles for Greece. We see also even in little children, the draughts and
beginning of this vainglorie, they will leap, they will hoppe upon one leg,
they will endeavor to read well, they will show their writing, and will
greatly rejoice in praise and commendation. Let a man tell them that they be
fair, or wise, or that they have a gaie coat, and so forth, they will even
be proud of it. To be short, there is no man but loves to be praised. And
that is the reason, that when a man deserves to be reproved, there must be
long excuses, the blame must consist in few words, and those sweet, for
fear of offending: but in matter of praise and commendation, it must be
spoken freely and with open throat, there shall need no entreaty to take it
in good worth, we know that we shall be welcome, and have free audience,
yet can we take no pleasure in such commendations without sacrilege against
God, in that thereby we accept and receive the glory to our selves, which is
due to him only. Nevertheless, what Christian is there, Plut. in his
Laca^nicals.
that hates to be praised and commended? The very Heathen do herein shame
us: As among others, Theopompus, who when he heard that there were certain
honors decerned unto him by publyke authority: in liew of rejoicing thereat,
he wrote, that Time would increase honors and wealth, and abate such as were
superabundant. The like modesty did Socrates show: for when he heard a
certain discourse of Plato, tending highly to his commendations, he cried
out, saying: Oh what a number of untruths does this young man report of me.
And so would not in any wise allow of such commendations.

10 Christians in duty ought not only to ensue this modesty, and to reject
such glory as may be attributed to them, but aso to declare unto whom it
appertains, that it may be given where it ought. As Saint Peter when he had
cured the lame man, and saw the people marvel thereat, said: Ye men of
Israel, why marvel ye at this? Act 3.
Or why look ye so steadfastly an us, as though by our power and godliness
we have made this man go? This miracle has been wrought by faith in Jesus
Christ, and therefore the praise and glory thereof belongs to him, and not
to us. Paul and Barnabas proceed farther, for seeing that for healing a lame
man at Listra, the Licaonians thought them to be Gods, and would have offered
sacrifices unto them, they in great horror rent their garments and sharplye
reproving them, told them that the praise and glory thereof belonged to God
only, and to him must be given.

11 Of this second point of arrogancy and pride, proceeds such grief and
sorrow, as we take when we are defrauded of the honor, glory, and
reputation which we pretend and look for at the hands of others. Hester 3
Haman, mentioned in the history of Hester, seeing that Mardocheus would not
stoop and bow, to do to him like honor as others did, grew into such wrath
and rage, that he practiced the death of the said Mardocheus, together with
all the Jews that dwelled within the hundred and seven and twenty provinces
of king Assuerus. Another most horrible example we have in the person of
Achitophel, who being taken to be the wisest and grauest counselor among the
Jews in his time, 2. Sam. 17
seeing that Absalon had preferred the counsel of Chusay the Arachite before
his, being unable to brook that abasement of his glory and reputation, for
despite went and hanged himself. Pelaretus, a Lacedemonian, though a Heathen,
practiced a clean contrary virtue: Plutarch in his Apotheg.
for seeing himself not chosen to be one of the three hundred (this was a
dignity of honor at Sparta) was so far from grieuing thereat, that he made
public demonstration of great contentment and joy: and when the Ephori
meruailing thereof, demanded his reason: He told them that he rejoiced at
the good of the common wealth, because he saw there were three hundred better
and more worthy to govern than him self. Where shall we find one Christian
heart that so loves his common wealth, as that he will rejoice to see many
preferred before him in dignity and honor, as being thereby persuaded, that
they may be more virtuous and profitable to the common wealth than himself.

12 The third kind of Ambition, is vain boasting or presumption, as when a
man speaks or does any thing, to the end to seem to have more than he
has, and to be that which he is not. Some there are so ambitious and foolish
in this point, that the less they have whereof to brag, the more they boast
themselves, and so their bragges are as testimonies of their ignorance, want,
and misery. When the shadows of our bodies grow great, it is a sign that the
Sun begins to depart from us: and in like manner it is an argument whereby
to prove that virtue decaieth, when presumption augmenteth. As full vessels
make small noise, and when they yield a great sound, it is a sign they be
empty: even so vain glory and much boast is a token of small virtue. As also
the poor pedlers that have but their packs, do in every market show all that
they have, when the great merchants do make but some small show of the
merchandise, whereof they have great plenty: so do these men by their
boasting declare themselves to be deuoyd of that whereof they set the greatest
face, and so deprive themselves of the glory that they seek for, and so it
falls out with them in manner as we ordinaryly see, that the shadow flies
from those that run after it, and follows those that fly from it. Also as
the ears of corn that hang their heads, are ordinarily well taken and full,
and those that stand upright, do make us to think that there is little in
them: so they that walk in humility, and exalte not themselves, neither seek
for glory, are most endued with virtue, and other commendable qualities, when
contrariwise, the great boasters by their proud speeches, do show themselves
deuoyde of the same. Experience also teaches, that as the valleys are
ordinarily fruitful, so the hills the higher they are, the more is their
barrenness. Let these men therefore no longer deceive both the world and
themselves, neither let them be such fools, as to be content with the false
appearance and no effect: Let them endeavor to be in deed that which they
would seem to be, namely, wise, holy, and virtuous, otherwise we may liken
them to such as covet rather the name of a king, than the kingdom, or to be
king in deed. Withal, let them remember, that as such impudency and boasting
is intolerable among men, so when it is practiced in matter concerning the
service of God, it is no less than detestable hypocrisy in his sight.

13 We have already declared, that ambition and desire to be mighty,
together with such arrogancy and pride as makes man to glory of himself, to
rejoice when glory is given unto him, and to grieve when it is denied him,
taken from him, or diminished, are common faults and deeply rooted in men's
hearts, and wythall very dangerous: as also is boasting, as when a man seeks
to seem to be more tha^ he is, or more than he has. What more is there now to
be done, but that as Jesus Christ exhorts us to amend, so to the end to obey
him, we consider upon all convenient means to correct and utterly to mortify
this cursed ambition, pride, and boasting. Plutarch of self praise.
Plutarch has in writing left unto us many good rules and aduertisements, to
help us herein. First, he wills us to beware that we take no occasion to
praise our selves, when we hear the commendations of others, especially of our
equals and inferiors, for then does our ambition naturally desire that they
should also speak of us. As when we see another feed sauorly before us, it
makes our mouths water to eat with him. Or, as experience shows, when
another man yauneth, we open our mouths and yaun with him: but we are more
inclined to praise our selves, when others do report our virtues and
commendable works, for therein are we tickled until we laugh again, and clawed
where it does itch. Likewise if the reporter thereof speaks soberly or with
the least, we can not longer forbear, but as if we meant to reveal some
theft, and sought to recover the same, we are straight urged to tell the rest,
yea, and rather than to loose one jot of our commendation, more than all. Many
times also it chances, that under pretense of praising the virtues of another,
we cunningly do slip in, and show forth our own. As when a man exalting the
humility and affability of a king or prince, reports that he gave him his
hand, and thus and thus honored him, pretending thereby to let men understand,
that him self is of good estimation and worthy honor. And herein do we
Christians many times offend, when under color of praising God for his gifts
and graces poured upon us, we rehearse them to the end our selves may also
have some part of the glory. This is a counterset glory given to God, that our
selves may have a share therein. Some there are that reprove others, and sharply
rebuke them of their faults and infirmities, propounding themselves for
examples of the contrary virtues, and this is common with age, who therein
seek to set a face upon their own glory to the dishonor of others. Others we
shall also find, who under pretense of humility do minister occasion of their
own praise, and so make their humility abait to catch their praise. They will
abase their gifts, graces, virtues, and commendable actions in the presence of
such as know them well enough, thereby to give occasion to gainsaie them, and
so the more amply to commend them, yea, they would be loath a man should
consent to their own speeches. These aduertisements might suffice to warn us
to beware of praising our selves. To conclude, we are to imagine, that as it is
a grief and trouble to us to hear the boasting and proud speeches of others,
so least we should give like cause of trouble to others that hear us, and
withal incur the reputation of vaineglory, we are to beware of praising our
selves. These be good aduertisements delivered by Plutarch. But in as much as
they tend chiefly to frame a requisite modesty and seemlynesse among men, that
shunning the obloquy of ambition and arrogancy, they may purchase the praise
due to humility and modesty, we will stand no longer upon them, but
proceed to the consideration of such things as may utterly unclothe us of
ambition, vainglorie, and boasting in the sight of God.

4 First, let us remember the horrible vengeance that God in old time has
executed upon the ambitious and proud. What a fearful punishment was
inflicted upon Adam and Eve, Genesis 3
when they labored to be like unto God? 2. Ephe. 3 Psalm. 51.7
That by birth we are the children of wrath, conceived in sin, borne in
iniquity, subject to a thousand both bodily and spiritual corruptions and
tribulations, bond slaves both to temporal and eternal death, and by nature
more miserable and wretched than brute beasts: These be the accursed fruits
of this root of ambition, which might cause us to abhor and detest it. What
judgment did God execute upon Haman, the enemy of the Jews, Herste. 7.10 2.
King 11. 2. Sam 18
who was hanged upon the same gallows that he had erected for Mardocheus?
What revenge did he take of Athaliah, who having murdered all the kings seed
for to reign, was her self slain? How fearful and horrible was the death
of Absolon, who hanging upon the tree, Esaias 14. Dan. 4
was stroke thorough and slain, when with his army he pursued his father
David? What judgment did Esaie denounce against Nabuchadnezzer? And as Daniel
declares, it was put in execution, when after he had exalted himself in
pride, he was driven from among men, and eat grass like an ox for the space
of seven years, his body being watered with the deaw from heaven, until his
hair grew like to the feathers of an Eagle, and his nails like the claws of
birds? Neither must we omit the notable example of Herod, who, after he made
a plausible Oration, and that the people commended him, saying, It is the voice
of God and not of man, Act. 12.21
was presently stricken with Gods hand, because accepting and allowing of the
glory given to himself, he gainesaide it not, neither gave it to God, and
was eaten with worms and died miserably. Let these judgments and this
vengeance of God keep us in fear of this plague and poison: even as such as
are put to execution, are so many judges and heralds pronouncing sentence of
death against all those that commit the like crimes as they are executed for.
And in deed, the holy Ghost cries out and testifies, 1. Pet. 5.5 Math. 20.27
Math. 23.12
that God resists the proud, and gives grace to the lowly. Again, He that
will be first among you (says Christ) shall be minister, and he that exalts
himself shall be brought low. If man therefore covet to be exalted, God is his
adversary: if upon arroga^cie he attributes to himself the glory due to God,
he must look that God will be his enemy, as he does protest, saying, I will
not give my glory to another. Esaias 42.8
It falls out with the ambitious, as Ou^d writes of Iearus, who taking upon
him to fly with wings made of wax, when he came near the Sun, his wings
melted with the heat thereof, and he fell into the sea, which of his name is
yet called the Iearia^ sea: even so the ambitious, the higher they rise in
glory, the more they approach the heat of Gods wrath, and so do melt and fall
into the gulf of eternal confusion. The man that takes upon him to climb a
tree, the higher he goes, and the nearer he comes to the top, the
greater is his danger. As he that is condemned to be hanged, has no liking of
the ladder, because he knows that the higher he climbeth, the nearer he is
to his death, and therefore could be content the ladder should be either
broken or burned, if he might have his desire: even so ought we to detest this
ambition and pride, and endeavor to deny and to mortify the same, as knowing
that to desire greatness is to desire mishap, and that pride and arrogancy is
the highest step wherefrom man is cast headlong into utter ruin.

15 Surely it is marvelous, that men should so delight in these vices, Bern.
of Consider. li. 1
which do but torment them even in this life, and confound those that have
them in possession. Oh ambition, says S. Barnard, the cross of ambitious men,
how do thou torment mankind? Thou please all men, yet is there nothing
more mighty in torment, or more grievous in trouble: And truly if we could
cut off these vices of ambition and pride, our minds would sure grow content
and quiet: we should not thus consume in envy, care, and a number of other
passions which trouble and molest our minds: we should not sell our liberty, and
become slaves upon an uncertain hope of dominion, neither engage our
consciences to the devil for kingdoms. Moreover, as poison put into good and
sound meat, makes it mortal, so pride, taking occasion of Gods graces to
boast it self, August. upon the 58. psalm.
does by such sacrilege turn us unto destruction. Arrogancy, as S. Augustine
says, is a deadly sin, because that the farther that man proceeds in virtue,
the greater is his temptation, whereby he loses all that he had profited.
August. in his book of Nature and grace.
All other sins, says he in an other place, are to be feared in misdeedes, but
arrogancy most in good. And truly as man has no cause to boast of his
wickedness and misery, Chriso. in his 29. hom. upon John.
so in his virtues does his pride grow, take increase and nourishment, causing
him many times the more virtue he is endued with, the more to be proud. And
therefore Chrysostom compares it to a worm that breeds in the wood, and
eats it: also to rust, which growing out of iron, consumes it. Whereupon he
adds, that vainglory and arrogance are full of thorns that choke up virtue:
and a beast that has many armed heads, against those that are possessed of
him. Many are of opinion, that young vipers do kill their dams in their birth,
and such is our corruption, that it causes pride to spring out of virtue, and
withal, this wicked child to be the deuourer of his dam. We are therefore so to
resist other corruptions, that still we must reserve the principal to fight
against this wickedness, which grows up in virtue, and poisoning the good
gifts which we receive of God, does overthrow that man who otherwise is
holy, wise, and endued with virtue.

10 To these purposes, we must imagine that there is nothing less convenient
to man than ambition, pride, and arrogancy. Let man, (says Saint Augustine)
for whom the son of God humbled and abased himself, August. upon the 18.
psalm
be ashamed to strive to be mighty and high minded. Seeing that man seeking to
be higher than he was, is fallen from the height where he was placed, reason
requires, that now he humble and abase himself, contenting himself to be
low in his own sight, that he may recover his loss, and be mighty in him
that humbled himself for him. Esaias 24.23
If the Moon (as Esaie says) shall be abashed, and the Sun ashamed, when
the Lord of hoasts shall reign in mount Sion and in Jerusalem, and when glory
shall be before his ancient men: shall we poor sinners, clothed in
iniquity, and replenished with infection of sin, lift up our heads in the
presence of Gods majesty? Shall not we rather be, as it were, swallowed up in
the gulf of shame and reproach? To us belongs open shame, Dan. 9.7
says Daniel. If the brightness of the Sun dimmeth the light of the
Stars, shall not the Sun of Gods glory utterly extinguish all excellency
and glory of man?

17 Again, let us weigh our bodily miseries, the vice and corruption of our
souls: in brief, all our iniquities, against whatsoever may in us be
excellent, honorable, or wherein we do boast: and surely the counterpoise
will way down our pride, and replenish our countenances with confusion and
shame. Let us set our ignorance against our knowledge: the virtue that we want,
against that which we have: our sins, against our righteousness, and our
corruption, against our holiness: so shall we soon quench all arrogancy and
presumption. Let us not compare with the devils in exalting our selves, but
with the Angels in humbling our minds. It is thought that the peacocke so full
of fair feathers, having only two foul feet, standing proudly in the circle
and contemplation of his beautiful trains, so soon as he sees his feet, which
he thinks to be foul, straight humbles himself, and abateth and seeks to
hide his feathers: how much rather ought we, by the feeling, sight, and
apprehension of many our foul feet, and corrupt and perverse passions that
reign in us, to humble our selves, and to abate our pride, ingendered of a few
feathers, which have only some small beginning and appearance of beauty?
Moreover, the more plentifully that almighty God bestows his blessings and
graces upon us, the more are we bound to do him homage, in referring them to
his glory, Heb. 1.16
and not make of our selves Idols, by sacrificing to our nets, and offering
incense to our yarne. The more directly that the Sun lies upon us, the
less is the shadow of our body, as at noone we may see by experience, and a
little before and after: even so the less that we arrogate and boast of our
selves, the greater gifts and graces of God are we endued withal. 1. Cor. 4.7
What have we, says Saint Paul, that we have not received? If we have
received it, why do we boast of it, as if we had not received it? Men would
laugh at a poor man, if having precious garments lent him to act the part of
some honorable personage upon a stage, when the play were at an end, he should
keep them as his own, and brag up and down in them. Yet so do they to
whom God imparteth his gifts and graces, when in liew of yielding the glory
of the same to him that is the author, they assume it to themselves.

19 Let us therefore renounce all ambition, mortify all pride, and despise the
smoke of worldly glory. What man was ever more mighty, more rich, more wise,
or raised to greater glory than Solomon? Yet does he cry out and protest,
that all is but vanity of all vanities, and that all is vanity. What will it
avail us to be glorious among men, and an obloquy in the sight of God?
Commended in the world, and abominable in the sight of Angels? O man of little
understanding, said an ancient wise man, what art thou the better for thy
vaineglorie, when thou shall be well spoken of where thou art not, and where
thou art thou shall be tormented? If we be abject and contemptible in this
life, it is but for a few days, let us then be content, and take comfort in
that we are mighty, rich, and glorious in the sight of God, through his son
Jesus Christ, as being his children, and inheritours of his everlasting
kingdom. Humility, says Chrysostom, is the foundation of Christian
philosophy. And as our humility is an exaltation in the sight of God, so has
the confession of our humility, for a remedy prepared his mercy and
goodness. We are not (says Saint Augustine) to glory in any thing, for
we have nothing, unless man having wholly put away himself, do learn
wholly to depend upon God. And as for all gifts, graces, and virtues wherewith
we may be endued, let us yield the glory to God only, the author of all
goodness, for to him only belongs all honor, glory and praise for ever and
ever.

Of sumptuousness and excess in apparel. Chap. 13.
AMbition and desire of vainglorie, before mentioned, among other things,
appears as well in the sumptuousness of apparel and ornaments of the
body, as in superfluity and excess in diet. As concerning sumptuousness in
apparel and pomp, every man in his own heart must confess, that that
corruption proceeds of a foolish desire of reputation among men. And in
deed among the rest, there be three things greatly esteemed in the world,
and therefore yield some reputation unto those that have them, Nobility,
Riches: and in women and maidens, Beauty. This do we see to be so, in that
men in marriage have especial regard to the same. In Nobility there is great
respect of disparagement, and seldom shall ye find marriage contracted
between gentry and yeomandrie. And as for Riches it is commonly the first
question, men do first enquire after it. And as an ancient Poet said, Riches
is the Queen and Lady that gives Nobility and Beauty. As for Beauty, When
the sons of God (says Moses) saw that the daughters of men were fair, Genesis
6.2
they took them wives from among them. Since then that in marriage worldly men
have especial regard to Nobility, Riches, and Beauty, we may thereby
perceive what is of most estimation in the world. And this is the cause why
every man desires to be thought rich and noble. But as for women, that which
they do greatlyest account of, is either to be, or at the least to seem
fair, as therefore ornaments and sumptuousness in apparel, do serve to
increase the appearance and reputation of Beauty, Riches, and Nobility: so is
it the principal cause why every one declineth to this corruption. And in
deed we shall find few in whom ambition and desire to be thought rich or
noble, and among women beautiful, is not the very fountain and seed of
gorgeous attire, and excessive ornaments of the body. This is it that makes
the artificer to apparel himself as the merchant, the merchant as the
gentleman, and the gentleman as the prince. To be short, every man enhaunceth
his estate, yea, and excedeth, that he may surmount other of his calling.
Such is our curiositye and sumptuousness herein, that in all things there
must be excess, either in the price of stuff, as seeking and wearing the
finest, and consequently, the dearest, either in the quality thereof, as
wearing silk in stead of wool, either in the gards, as wearing them broad,
or four or five double: either in the fashion, ever new fangled, and full of
superfluity and vanity: as in the ruffs, in the attires for the head, or in
other inventions of the world or the flesh: and of these is the mind,
especially of women, so fruitful, that they do manifestly declare that their
whole study and care, for the most part, tends to the decking up and
attiring of themselves.

2 Neither is this any new disease, for we see in the days of Esaias, how the
Jewish women were addicted thereunto, who ware ornaments of slippers, Esaias 3.18
or bells, calls, and round tires, sweet bals, bracelets, and bonnets, tires of
the head, and the sloppes, and the head-bandes, tablets, eare-rings, rings, and
mufflers, costly apparel, vailes, wimples, and crisping pinnes, glasses, and
fine linen, hoodes, and lawnes, girdles, dressing of the hair, stomachers,
claspes, rocquets, purses, garters, ribandes, chains, etc. And very like it
is that Esaie here speaks of women, maidens, and Ladies of the court: For
some in deed do think that he was uncle to Manasses, the king of Judah. And
is there not at this day as great superfluity and vanity in women and
maidens of the like calling? Nay, shall we not find some mean Gentlewomen,
yea, even merchants wives, that will imitate the same? As by experience we see
them laden with those, and other like vanities and new inventions. And as their
hearts are wholly set upon the world and the flesh, so is there no end of their
lusts and devises. And this does Esaie very fitly show by such a long
beadroule of trinkets and vain inventions of the women and maids of his time,
for even the skilfullest Taylers that of late days were able to have satisfied
the vanities of the Ladies of the Court, would now be scarce good
apprentises, and the skilfullest that now are, have much a do to content the
curiosity of Gentlewomen, yea, even of some Merchants wives.

3 Howbeit (a little by the way to touch this corruption) In some this excess
has yet farther scope: for not contenting themselves with that natural color
which God has bestowed upon them, either with the use of common water for
cleanlynesse, they daily imploie their waters wherewyth to make them seem
fairer than they are, yea, which is worse, some do even paint themselves,
daubing their faces and laying on some color, wherewyth, hyding the handie
work of God, they may seem to have more beauty than he has vouchsafed to
give unto them. This vanity was in use in the days of wicked Iezabel, and
has ever since successively continued in many others that have, and do
imitate this accursed woman, devoured by dogs, together with her painting: 2.
King. 9.30. Augustine in his Epistle to Possidonius. Tertullian of woman's
apparel. Cyprian in his 5. Sermon of the fall, and in his book of virgins
apparel. Chrysostom hom. 31 upon Matthew. Ierom against Heluidius. Jerome to
laeta of the instruction of maidens. Jerome in his Epistle to Furia.
This corruption has likewise been evermore reproved by the holy fathers.
Saint Augustine has written one express treatise thereof, wherein he at
large condemns all such paintings. Tertullian protesting that God never
created man so patcht or painted, demands whether in their resurrection from
the dead their colors will hold: and seeing it is unlike they should, he
exhorts them to desist therfro, as from things repugnant to their creation,
and resurrection, and terms such as paint themselves, the devils handmaides.
Cyprian by this similitude confirms the premises. If when a painter has
finished a piece of work, and an other coming in should thereto set his hand
and lay on other colors, it would displease him: how much rather will our
creator be offended, when a mortal man whom himself has created, shall by
such painting take upon him to correct the image and workmanship of his God?
Chrysostom resembles such as paint themselves to those that daube clay or
mire upon an Image of gold. And as Jerome terms it, what is it but a reproach
to his creator, who as he imagines, has not made him fair enough? And
having in another place reported the history of a woman visited by the hand of
God for painting her daughter, he adds that they that use it do pollute the
temple of God, and terms their paintings, firebrands to inflame youth: nurses
of fornication and tokens of vnpure hearts.

4 But to return to the corruption in pompous and sumptuous apparel. Every
man can confess that this excess is over plentiful and common among us. They
can speak of it: They can complain of it: they can say, there is no
amendment in us: but every one does give occasion of offense. They can grant
that we deserve stripes: that God will punish us, and that justly: and all
these speeches be even so many judgments registered in heaven, which in the end
we shall find to be but an execution against us, because no man amendeth, but
every one looks who shall first begin. Every man imagines that himself
may well wear such apparel, and that he may better do it then another of his
like calling. Every man condemns excess and vanity, yet will he thereby
declare himself to be more rich then an other, allowing that in himself,
which he reproves in others. We confess the objections made unto such as
flee from their own habitations for religion to be most true: namely, that
they bring their pomp and sumpteous apparel with them, into the towns that
receive them, thereby alluring the natural inhabitants, who before lived in
greater simplicity and modesty, to the like vanity and corruption. To be
short, it seems that we who unto others should be as lamps and ministers of
reformation, are grown to be auctors of infection and offense. And this may be
but too truly objected, eue^ to our great confusion, and to the slander of
the doctrine which we do profess. Remembering therefore the exhortations of
Christ and Saint John, importing that we should Amend our lives, let us lastly
resolve to leave off, forsake and detest all this excess, vanity, pomp and
sumptuousness in apparel.

5 But truly neither the Censors of Rome, who made so many good laws
concerning this matter: neither the wisest reformers of our time could ever so
bridle this ambition and excess: but that as an cele it would slide forth and
show it self transformed into some new fashion. To be short, there is not any
lawgiuer that can sound the depth of this corruption, but only one God, who
teaches us to begin reformation at the heart. And indeed as every seed
brings forth herbs or fruit according to his kind as Lettice seed,
Lettice, Thistle seed, Thistles, so if the heart be humble and modest, the
garment for the body will be even so: but if the heart be proud and
ambitious, it will show forth some kind of excess and pride, notwithstanding
whatsoever laws to the contrary.

Genesis 3.
6 The first thing thereof that the Christian which minds to root out pomp
and excess in apparel, is to note, is as well the quality of the garments
that God made for Adam and Eve after their fall: as the occasion of the same.
Their first garments were of the skins of beasts, thereby to declare that
they were become as beasts, by transgressing the commandment of God. The
occasion of the garments was shame to see themselves naked, whereinto they
sell by transgressing the said commandment of God. The first use of the
garments therefore is unto us an evident reproach of their sin, to the end to
humble us in the sight of God: as when a man wears a plaster, it is a sign
he has some wound. And therefore such as seek glory in garments, are like
unto those that build fair sepulchers for their dead corpse: For where as
their sepulcher should be a warning to them that they must dye, and thereupon
cause them to reject all ambition and pride, yet thereof they take occasion to
boast: so where as our garment should be a continual memory of sin, to
humble us, yet we, as if we would even spite God, do procure sumptuous and
gorgeous apparel to testify our ambition and pride. As a thief by law burned
in the foreheade for theft, ought so often as he looks in a glass and
perceives the scarre thereof, to think upon and detest his inclination to
that vice: so our garments being as the scarre in the foreheade of our first
fathers and our selves for their ambition: in that they sought to be like unto
God, should by the only sight of them, put us in mind to renounce all pride
and ambition. Let us therefore cover our bodies decently to hide our shame, and
not proudly, to augment it.

7 The second use of garments is to defend us from cold, from rain, from the
heat of the sun etc. What argument can we gather hereof to grow proud?
Hereby we ought to call to mind Gods wrath against sin, considering that had
it not been for sin, man should never have been annoyed with heat or
cold that do so molest him. Moreover this use of garments does testify
unto us. Gods goodness and mercy toward us, in that he ministers
wherewith to relieve our necessities, and so binds us more and more to praise
him. To make therefore our garments a pomp, and show whereby to be honored
and glorified, is the reuersing of the use of them, and manifest sacrilege
against God. Yet is this corruption so common, that there is none, no not the
little children, but will boast of gay garments. Let us therefore that have
more wit then children, even us, I say especially that are instructed in Gods
word, and know the original and use of garments: in liew of seeking glory in
the same, learn by them to humble our selves, and to render all thanks and
praises to God to whom it appertains.

8 For a third remedy, let us remember what a folly, yea what an extreme
iniquity it is to take more care for garments for the body, then for
ornaments for the soul. For as the body being of more value then the garment,
we will sell or pawn forth the garment, for to feed the body: so ought we
to leave all affecton to beautify our bodies, the better to tend to the
adorning of our souls. And hereto does Saint Peter exhort us, 1. Pet. 1, 3.
saying. Let not the woman's apparel be outward with broydered hear, or gold
put about, or in putting on of apparel, but let the hid man of the heart be
vncorrupt, with a meek and quiet spirit, which is before God, a thing much set
by. The same does S. Paul also confirm, saying Let women araie themselves in
comely apparel with shamefastness and modesty, 1. Tim. 2.9
not broidered hair, or gold, or pearl, or costly apparel, but (as
becomes women that profess the fear of God) with good works. If we dwell
in a borrowed house, looking weekly when we must depart, we will never trouble
our selves with any cost or fitting of it, as we would do, if we were sure
to remayn in it all the days of our lives. And what is the body but a house
lent unto the soul, from whence it looks daily to depart? What reason have
we then so to care for adorning the body, which shortly must rot and perish,
and so to neglect the soul which is immortal? Men commonly do care to be more
honestly appareled when they are to meet at some banquet, or marriage, or to
come before some honorable personages, than ordinarily when they converse with
inferiors: Now we, as concerning our bodies do converse with men like unto
our selves: but as concerning our soul, with God and his angels, to whom it
is lifted up, now by faith, but at death really. Is it not therefore repugnant
to all order and reason, to care more for the beautifying of the body, than
for adorning of the soul?

9 Some man will say, Why, albeit we beautify our bodies, yet do we think
upon the adorning of the soul. But this is a mere abuse, for it is an old
saying, that the great care to provide for the body, is an evident token of
the neglect and small affection to adorn the soul. Who can say that he is
loath to burn his house, when he lays burning coals hard by a stacke of
straw? Naturally we are inclined to ambition and pride, and what is all this
pomp and provision for the body, but wood and straw kindled by the fire of
our Ambition? Humility, modesty, charity, chastity and holiness, are the
chief ornaments of our souls, and is there any thing more contrary to
these virtues than Ambition, pride, cruelty, lust, and profane living, which
all do appear in these pompes and ornaments for the body? Well may we
confess, that there be some more proud in their paltrie peltes, than many in
their sumptuous apparel. When Antisthenes ware a turnde cloak, Socrates told
him that he discerned his vaineglorie and ambition through the rentes of his
cloak. Contrariwise, queen Heste rprotested before God, that she took no
more pride in her most rich apparel, The last book of Hest. 14.6
than in base and defouled clothes. But we speak of that which is common with
men, as experience shows. For in deed we shall find few in whom ambition
or desire to be thought rich, or noble, or among women, to appear fair, is
not the very original foutnaine of their sumptuous apparel, pomp and
beautifieng of the body.

10 Some will reply: did God create gold, silver, silk and such like, to no
use? We confess he created them to use, but not to abuse: of his liberality
to take occasion to praise him, but not to extol our selves. And truly it is
a great abusing of Gods creatures, when we employ them to maintain our pride
and ambition, and in liew of reserving al honor and praise to him that is the
giver of them, to minister offense to our neighbors. Again it follows not
that the use of silk and gold, permitted to Kings, Princes, and people of
like calling, should equally be permitted and commanded for every Merchant
and Artificer. Princes may without reprehension or blemish of pride wear that
which Marchaunts and Artificers cannot use without note of pride and
presumption. True it is, that the more modestly that any shall use it, the more
commendable it is? But it were but a trouble to policy and conscience without
reason or ground, to submit all person of whatsoever calling to Marchaunts
attire: as also it is not convenient to abase Marchaunts into poor Artificers
apparel.

11 Yet is there another point to be considered. God (as to another purpose is
before said) has made men not Lords, but stewards of his goods, with condition
that they shall give account of the same. And in that respect it is lawful for
men of honor and calling, honorably to cloth themselves, so long as they also
reserve means, and clothe the poor members of Christ. And indeed this
sentence which he will pronounce in the day of judgment, Depart from me ye
cursed into eternal fire: Mat. 25.
for I was naked and ye clothed me not etc. might make those to tremble whose
superfluity and excess in apparel would well suffice to cloth the poor
members of Jesus Christ. But this sparingnes is an evident sign of
incredulity, as Saint James notes, Iam. 2.15.
tearming it to be a testimony of a dead faith, when we cloth not those that
be naked. The silk ribbands and lace that cover the cloth, the edgings,
passements and purles added to stuff of it self curious enough, the ringes
enriched with precious stones, the gold, the silver and pearl wherewith the
bodies are decked up, shall in the day of judgment arise against those that
take no pity of the poor that lay upon straw, went woolward and quaking for
cold for want of garments: Let those that dispense with such sumpteousnes and
excess, examine their own consciences whether they do to others as they
would be done to if God should visit them with the like necessity. Let the^
think whether if they had but one hundred crowns they would bestow them all
upon one silk gown laid on with gold lace, and the whiles go without a
shert, hosen or shoes. The poor are their flesh, Esaias. 58.7.
says Esaias, who commands to cover them: but they contrariwise, that they
may cloth themselves sumptuously, do leave the poor naked without sherts, hose,
or shoes. Let them then think with themselves whether in the account of the
goods that God has committed unto them, the Articles of excess and
superfluity in apparel will be allowed by him who undoubtedly hears the
cries and oppositions of his poor members, complaining that they were left
naked. If a Taylour when he has made a garment a great deal too long and
large, being reproved, shall have no other excuse but that he had too much
stuff, would that be accepted? Would they not tell him, that he should
have made the garment after the measure of the body, but not according to the
quantity of the stuff? Even so they that having plenty of goods do employ
them not after the measure of their vocation, or the profession of a reformed
religion, but in superfluity and excess, do expose themselves to the skorne
and grievous reprehension in the sight of God, and his Angels. Let them
therefore cloth themselves decently, every man according to his calling, yet
so that the poor be not forsaken in their necessities. Let them put on such
cloth that the poor may at least have freeze. To be short, let them put in
practice the saying of Esaias of the conversion of the Marchaunts of Tire, Esaias.
23.18.
That their traficke and Marchaundise shall be sanctified to the Lord. It
shall not be locked up, neither hidden, but shall be unto those that dwell in
the presence of the Lord, that they may eat and be satisfied, and have
dureable clothing, for so does the word signify that he uses.

12 To conclude, we are to think that professing reformed religion, it were
meet we should give examples of reformation, yet do men see in us the
increase of pomp and excess in apparel, as well in fashion, as in stuff,
edginges, laces, quoifes and other like vanities. These, as they testify are
small reformation in heart, so do they with many call in doubt our faith,
and consequently our doctrine. Those of the Church of Rome do hereof occasion
to harden their hearts, in that in this point they see no difference between
them and us. As also the Anabaptists have almost no other argument to divert
themselves and others from our doctrine, but the pomp and excess in apparel
that they see in the professors of our religion. Behold, say they, they
savor all together of the world. They be worldly people: Be they the
children of God? Saint John says, Love not the world: 1. Ioh. 2, 15. Ioh. 4.4.
he that loves the world is an enemy to God. Yet it is true that these men
professing a greater simplicity in apparel, do even in themselves show
ambition to the world as concerning the stuff: for condemning a guard of
velvet, or a pafement lace, they yet requite the vanity, with the excellency
and price of the stuff, which cannot be too fine or too dear for them: and so
in sumptuousness do exceed both gards and lace. Yet does our duty also
require that for our parts we should take away all objections or occasion to
stumble at us. Also as they are not to condemn the doctrine for any such
outward matters, so are we to remember the protestation of Saint Paul, who
says, 1. Cor. 8.13.
Rather then I will offend my neighbor, I will eat no flesh while I live. If
he so submitted and resolved himself in a matter indifferent, how much rather
should we beware of offending the weak in these vanities, prohibited by God?
Woe, Luk, 17.1, 2.
says Jesus Christ be unto him by whom offenses come, It were better for
that man a mill stone were hanged about his neck, and that he were cast into
the sea. Shall we even obstinately through our vanities be causes of the ruin
of our brethren, Iustine in his 20 book.
for whom Jesus Christ has died? Iustine reports, that Pithagoras by his
doctrine persuaded women to lay aside their golden ornaments, and other pomp
of their garments, as instruments of vanity and impudency: and declared
unto them that the true ornaments of women did consist, not in garments, but
in chastity. What a great shame do we offer to Jesus Christ, when his
Authority and doctrine cannot work the like effect, as to make us to forsake
such vanities, which the persuasion of the Paynime brought the poor heathen
unto? If these exhortations cannot pierce deep enough into our hearts, let us
call to mind how the Prophet Sophonie threatens even the Princes, rulers and
great courtiers, saying, It shall be in the day of the Lords sacrifice
(thereby meaning the day of his vengeance) that I will visit the Princes and
the kings children, Sopho. 1.8,
and all such as are clothed with strange apparel. Thus we see how the
Princes and great Lords, making a show of their sundry suits of sumptuous
apparel, and new and strange fashions are here threatened with Gods
judgments. And therefore let such as be of meaner calling, imagine whether
such vanities and corruptions be worthy greater punishment in them or no.

13 Now in as much as our Savior Jesus Christ the Son or God, and his
forerunner John Baptist, do in their first preaching admonish us to Amend our
lives: Let us study to forsake this ambitious vanity, so that every man in
his calling, not imaginary, but such as God has called him unto, apparelling
himself modestly, may in effect declare that he fears God, and minds to
live to edification: remembering that garments are as it were a notable blemish
of sin, the occasion of garments, made as well to cover our shame, as to
defend us from other the discommodities engendered in Adams transgression: That
the use of the garments in stead of pride and puffing of us up may tend to
humility, making us to glorify God for his mercy and liberality toward
us. Moreover that we take care, not to deck up our bodies which shortly must
perish and rot, but to adorn our souls which are immortal, with holiness
and good works in the sight of God. To be short, that cutting off our
superfluities, we do therewith assist and relieve the poor members of Jesus
Christ, to the end that in the day of judgment, Mat. 25.
this blessed sentence, I was naked and ye clothed me, come therefore ye
blessed of God my father, and possess the kingdom of heaven, may pass on our
sides.

Of excess and superfluity in feasts and banquets. Chap. 24
NOw let us speak of banquets. No man can in these days make a feast without
excess, and that excess must be also reproved and represented to the host by
some one of the company, even of those that profess the religion: yet
ordinarily in such sort, as the host accompteth it as a commendation of his
magnificence and plenty. As also if he that seems to find the fault, chance
afterward to make another, it shall likewise be such, as he likewise will look
for the like censure, which he also will take to redound to the praise of his
liberality and plenty. Hereto have relation all excuses of mean
entertainment, and desire to take patience, even in a feast that sloweth with
all dainties, and are motioned only to minister occasion to the guests to say
that there is but over much, and by such a censure to get the commendation of
plenty and liberality. Thus each man reproving and accusing other of excess,
no man shows any Amendment. Yet let us not think but these petty censures,
proceeding either of worldly civility and slatterie, or of Christian
admonition, are so many sentences given by our own mouths, which shall be
laid before us in the day of judgment to our condemnation. God has ordained
meat and drink for two principal purposes. First to nourish and relieve us,
to the end that thereby recovering new strength and force (which fitly is
called refection) we may every man apply our selves to that service whereto
he has called us: But our banquets contrariwise do return us unprofitable,
as growing so dull and heavy by our long sittinges and plenty, that we are
fitter and more ready to sleep like hogs, then as Christians provided to
follow our vocations: especially to here or read Gods word, or to tend to
prayers and meditation. And thus in our banquete we take not our refection but
destruction. If a horse by eating too many Oats should grow heavy and slack
to go or draw, we would beware of giving him too much, least we should
both loose our prouender and weaken our horse: Even so in meat and drink and
long sittinges, if the plenty make us heavy and slow in our vocations, namely
in the service of God, we have just cause to cut it off, and so to take away
the abuse which is especially hurtful and to be condemned.

2 If our studies were as much applied to make our feasts, as sober and simple,
as they are plentiful and delicious, both our bodies would be better at ease,
our souls more ready to their actions, and our selves better able to relieve
the poor. And indeed even in duty we are bound to lean more to sobriety
then to superfluity and excess: to virtue then to vice: and to remember the
saying of Iustine to this purpose, Iustine lib. 20
Frugalitie is the mother and nurse to all virtue. Yet do our abundance of
dainties, our diversity of meats, and our inventions of new sauces and
wantonness declare the contrary: So that now it will ask more time to learn
to be a good cook to make the body sick, then to be a Doctor of Physic to
minister health. We reprove such women as to the end to seem more beautiful
and to allure men's fancies, do paint themselves: Yet we commend such cooks
as can make diversity of sauces to provoke appetite to meat. Do we fear
eating too little and an appetite accompanied with health? There was never man
that repented his being sober, but many their eating and drinking too much. The
best is therefore to use common and gross meat, for that is easiest gotten,
soonest and with least labor made ready, of lowest price, nothing so
hurtful, and such as we eat not much off. The Romans did eat either in
public, or with their doors open, that every man might be a witness of
their frugalitie.

3 The second purpose and use of food is, to procure us to praise and glorify
God for his goodness and liberality toward us. And therefore Saint Paul
says. Whether we eat, or wether we drink, 1. Cor. 10.31,
or whatsoever we do, let us do all to the honor and glory of God. But to
the contrary, which of us when we taste the savor of meat or drink, is in
heart moved to say with David, O Lord thou art good and gracious? Psalm. 119.68.
In how many of our feasts do we take occasion or argument to enter into the
acknowledgement or discourse, of the goodness, sweetness, or power of God,
the auctor of all goodness? Plutarck reports, that a certain nation called
Siborites, Plu. in his banquets of the 7. Sages.
did usually inuit Ladies to their feasts a year before hand, to the end that
they might have time to provide themselves to come honorably, or rather in
great pomp. But it were fitter, says he, when we are invited to a banquet, in
time to prepare to come provided of speech, and honest, profitable and
convenient communication. If this consideration could take place in a heathen
Philosopher, what a shame is it for us Christians to come into company and
feasts unprovided of such holy and virtuous talk, as might tend to Gods
glory and the edefying of the assistants? And indeed the sauce of Christian
banquets ought to consist of wise, virtuous and holy discourses. But our want
of instruction, and the starued affection of our hearts to virtue, do cause us
to consume our time at banquets either in vain talk or in urging our guests
to eat and drink. Xenophon and other Philosophers were of opinion, that it
were good and profitable to collect and note down al table talk. If
Christians, yea even our selves that profess the reformed religion, Plut. in
his Syme. lib. 1,
should put this in practice, what should we find in such registers? Words and
discourses which the next day would be found unworthy our utterance, even such
as even worldlings would be ashamed of. So long as the Chruch continued under
the cross, at every feast the table talk consisted of holy communication, and
questions of edificatio^. But now such discourses are odious and anoy us. There
is now no news but of merry se^tences, savoring sometimes too much both of the
world and ye flesh.

Plutarch in the banquet of the 7. sages.
4 The Egyptians in their banquets commonly exhibited that which they called
Scelet, in which word they signified the bones of man dried, joined and knite
together: and thereby admonished the assistants, that within some shorttime
themselves should be like to the same. This truly was a means to restrain
the^ from using their food with excess or vain speeches. At Metz in Lorraine
they have a custom, that at marriage feasts the hangman in person comes to
demand a dish of meat. And this at such feasts ministers occasion to talk of
death, and of virtuous life. To many men these customs may seem bitter and
not fit for banquets: but if we wist how ready we are to too much mirth and to
offending of God in our banquets, we would confess that our diseases do
require such Physic. Jobs children were well taught and instructed, yet no
doubt at their banquets one to another, whereto they invited their sisters,
Job, 1.
they could not bear themselves so soberly and modestly as were to be wished:
Yet their father Job, a man that feared God, sent unto them and purified them,
and rising early offered sacrifice according to their number, saying in
himself. Mat. 12.36.
It may be my sons have sinned and blasphemed God in their hearts. Thus did
Job every day. And undoubtedly we also do diversely and in sundry manners offend
God in our feasts, if it be but in a number of vain frivolous speeches, of
the which we must give account in the day of judgment.

5 We are moreover for fear of offending God in our feasts, Plu. in his
banquet of 7. Sages.
to stand upon our guard least we there meet with dissolute persons. Chylon,
one of the seven Sages of Greece had such a regard hereto that when he was
invited to any feast, he would never promise to come before he knew who should
be there. For, said he, of necessity a man must light upon such company as in
a ship, or in the wars: yet is it not the part of a wise man voluntarily at
feasts to meddle with any, whosoever. In like manner we read that Antigonus the
son of Demetrius, being invited to a banquet, at the which he knew there
should be some insolent and light women, asked the advice of the Philosopher
Menedemus, who answered only that he should remember that he was a kings son:
by that saying admonishing him to refrain and beware of all dishonest company
and occasion of evil. How much rather ought we, who are the children of the
king of heaven and earth, to remember to refrain from banquets or any other
company, where there may be cause of riot and unthriftiness.

6 Why? Will some men say, is it not lawful at feasts to have any talk but
of God, or to use any communication but of religion? There is great difference
between ever and never. Men use to water their wine for fear of drunkenness,
and put salt in their meat to season it: even so must our speeches savor of
sobriety and Christian reformation: We may rejoice together, yet in the Lord
and in all modesty, beseeming the children of God. Besides in our plenty we must
remember the poor, and the saying of Jesus Christ to this purpose, Give Alms
of those things which you have, and all things shall be clean unto you: Luke
11.41.
Thereby declaring that the meat, at our feasts and other al our goods shall
be unto us unclean, unless during such plenty we take care of the poor to
relieve their necessities, by cutting off of our superfluity to help their
misery. In the days of Assuerus, King of Persia, when Haman had obtained and
published a decree, whereby all the Jews that dwelt within the seven and
twenty provinces of the Kings dominions, should the thirteenth day of the
twelfth month have been slaughtered: God by his wonderful providence reuersed
that bloody decree upon Haman, his children and their adherentes that hated
the Jews. And such was this victory and deliverance, Ester, 9.22.
that Hester and Mardocheus ordained in remembrance of so great a benefit,
that among all other matters yeerelie the fourtenth and fiftenth of this month
should be joyful and feastiuall days, wherein they should send gifts to the
poor, that they together with the rich might all rejoice in the Lord. Among
the Romans they had one law which inuiolably they observed, namely, that no
man should make any public feast before he had provided for the poor in his
quarter. Where Jesus Christ says, Luke 14. 13.
When thou make a feast, call the poor, the naked, the blind and the lame,
and thou shall be blessed, because they cannot recompense thee: for thou shall
be recompensed at the resurrection of the just. He thereby shows, that
inuiting those that inuit us, we reap a simple reward for our pains and
expenses in our feasts: For our payment is but, I thank you, or a dinner, or a
supper: But contrariwise when we give to the poor, every dinner and supper is
a treasure in heaven. Yet are we not forbidden to inuit those that are able to
requite us: But Jesus Christ teaches us that it is a wiser way to bestow the
charges of our feast upon the relief of the poor, for where they want
wherewith to requite us, we know that Jesus Christ has promised to recompense
us in heaven.

7 To this purpose are we to remember that we are not Lords, but stewardes of
the goods which we have received, upon condition to render account to him that
sees all, and most carefully commends to us the feeding of the poor. And
therefore it is not lawful for us to spend so much as we list, but so much as
we imagine in our particular of expenses shall be allowed in the record of the
living Lord. Del^uering to thy servant three or sower bushels of salt, is it
to the end she should put the more into the pot and so by casting in of whole
handfuls over salt their pottage? Yet the reproving of her, and saying that thy
meaning was that she should take so much as was requisite sufficiently to
seasen thy meat, will redound to thy condemnation. In this point may the
heathen make us ashamed. Agasicles being demanded wherefore he lived so
sparingly, considering his plenty of goods, answered that he who is able,
must not spend according to his lusts or covetousness, but in reason, and as
need requires. The Lacedemonian feasts were so well ordered, that they were
termed schools of sobriety and abstinence: But such are the feasts of
Christians, that less then the reuersion might suffice the whole company,
which notwithstanding, we suffer the poor to starve, who might be well fed
with the superfluity thereof. Plu. in his banquets of the 7. Sages.
Plutarch writes that Perianders feast to the seven Sages was moderate, and
more sober then this ordinary diet, because he had invited wise men. Much
rather should our banquetes, whereto we inuit the children of God and
professors of reformation be sober and moderate, to the end that the company
of honest and virtuous personages (as Diocles one of the same seven even there
noted) should be no increase, but rather a deminishing of expenses.

8 Some men, to excuse their abundance in banquetes, do aledge custom. But
custom contrary to reason is a tyrant, who to get dominion reuerseth all
law. Others will demand, who shall first begin to break the custom of
excess and superfluity? But men should enquire who shall first leave
wickedness and do well, and while others continue in evil, defer to do
good? In a case of mischief or wickedness we are not so long in
deliberating: We never tarry for another to begin: We make post have to
evil. If a man speak of worldly gain, every man will be foremost, but if of
loss, last. Yet in profiting the soul, we tarry for another to begin.

9 Besides, Ephe. 5.16.
we are in these long sittings to consider the loss of time: for Saint Paul to
the contrary commands us to redeem time. But how? By forsaking the lusts
of the flesh, that we may the better and the rather employ our selves in our
vocation. If sitting at such long feasts we would enter into meditation, and
think that we sit there in the presence of God, who beholds how unprofitably
we wast time, which is so precious, glutted with delicacie when many others
starve for hunger, we would be even ashamed, and say, what do we here? Does
this life beseem the children of God? Do we thus watch for death and the day
of judgment? Likewise, albeit the soul be not fed with past three or four
Sermons in a week while the body has at the least fourteen yet will we
complain of the preacher if he stand above his hour: and never find fault
with a feast that lasts four or five: For custom and inclination breeds
content. It would be thought strange, if a man to a feast should bring his
black hour glass for a full end, as he must to a Sermon.

10 Some excuses men will aledge, yet grounded likewise upon vice. And indeed
this obstinate continuance in excessive and sumptuous banquets proceeds of
the ambition and vain glory before mentioned. Every man seeks to make show
of his riches and liberality above his companion. No man will remain endebted
to him that inuiteth him to a feast. Every one thinks that he shall be noted
of poverty or pinching, if he do not as an other man. But why should he not
rather look to be reputed sober, a reformer, a man willing to give example to
others, to change vice into virtue? Po^tius Cato Liuie. lib. 34.
A certain heathen says, Where there is a law for sobriety and modesty
which a man observes, it is not to be imputed to poverty, covetousness, or
sparing, but to obedience and observation of the law. How much rather ought we
Christians, whom God by so many precepts and decrees has commanded to
keep modesty and sobriety, constantly to reject such reproaches of the world
and the flesh, and to be content with the testimony of our own consciences,
that our modesty and sobriety proceeds from the fear of God and a feeling
of our own duties, which binds us to yield obedience to his ordinances? But
we cannot resolve so to do? Why? Because that still we will seem better then
other men, greater then we are and of more ability then we may bear. Oh
cursed ambition and pride? Which to maintain, we do reject the will of God,
we offend our neighbors and we, neglect the relief of the poor. If thou
say, thou art able: Remember that thy ability comes of God, who has not
given it thee to boast of, but that thy plenty may be an argument to relieve
those that need: and to magnify the riches of the goodness and power of God
to his glory.

11 Well do we confess that God aloweth us to feast, and thereof we have
examples in the holy Scriptures: neither do we restrain men to bread and
water, or half an hours respite: God has created meat and drink to be
used. Yet (that according to the exhortation of Jesus Christ, we may Amend our
lives) it must be in sobriety and modesty. They must be powdered with,
Christian speeches and discourses beseeming Gods children. There must be no
excess either in plenty, in delicacie, either in long sitting. We must
remember the needy and such as are in tribulation. Amos. 61
Our guestes must be such as to maintain amity and to take occasion to
praise God. To conclude, the root of ambition that lurketh therein, must be
plucked up, that contrariwise in the abundance of Gods benefits we may
confess his liberality to his glory. Let us not expect others to be
examples of our duties: but let us purchase this holy glory in the sight of
God, to be the first that through his grace shall reform our selves in
practice of the saying of David, O Lord I have made have, Psalm. 119.60.
and delayed not to keep thy commandments.

Of Voluptuousness in general. Chap. 15.
THe vanity and excess in banquetes before reproved, does here minister
occasion to speak of the lusts and pleasures of the flesh: first in general:
Then perticulerlie in some kinds, as in drunkenness, gluttony,
licorousnesse, and fornication. As concerning voluptuousness in general, we
have a number of sayings even of the heathen, whereby with common consent of
all the world, and in all ages, the same have been reproved, and condemn, as
dangerous, pernicious and not beseeming man. Architas the Tarentine said,
Cicero in his book of old age.
there is no pestilence more mortal then voluptuousness, adding, that thereof
proceed all treasons against the country, subuersions of common wealths,
secret communications with enemies, to be short, that there is not any
enterprise so wicked, but by voluptuousness a man may be wrought thereunto.
And proceeding in his argument, by many reasons he proves that nothing is more
repugnant to the excellency of man, or more detestable and pernicious then the
same: And concludes that there can be no fellowship between lust and virtue,
and therefore that in the kingdom of voluptuousnes, virtue cannot subsist. He
says farther, that about the same time that Cayus Fabritius was sent to King
Pirrhus, he heard that at Athens there was one that maintained, that every
thing that man does, ought to have relation to voluptuousness, and that when
two Roman Lords heard him talking thereof, they wished that the Samnites and
King Pirrhus (then their enemies) might be persuaded to that doctrine, that so
they might with greater facility be overcome. The like did Antistenes hearing
one command pleasures, also wish to his enemies: As also the like counsel did
Cyrus follow and put in practice against the Lydians, Iustine in his first
book,
whom he had subdued: for taking away their horse and armor, he commanded
them to follow their lusts and pleasures, to the end that thereby loosing
their accustomed valor and virtue, they might together therewith forget also
all courage to rebel.

2 This voluptuousness engendereth so many vices and villainies, that such as
compare it to a dream, the pleasure whereof at a man's waking vanishes away,
do say somewhat, yet nothing to the purpose. The Emperor Adrian goes a
little farther, when he compares it to pills outwardly fairly guilt and rouled
in Sugar, but within full of bitterness. Yet goes he farther then they all,
which says that pleasure and sorrow are twins: For pleasure is no sooner
hatched, but repentance is at hand, holding her as it were by the head ready
to supplant her. And thereupon some have said, that she resembles a smile,
which presently is turned to sorrow and tears. And indeed, pleasure flies
and slideth away, leaving rather cause of repentance, then occasion of
remembrance. Other have compared her to a painted sepulcher, fair without,
but within full of mortal infection and stench. And Plato terming it a bayte
for all mischief, thereby sufficiently shows, that such as give themselves
thereto, are taken and killed, even as the fish that takes the hook covered
with the bait. Neither were they much mistaken that compared it to venom or
strong poison tempered with hypocras or sweet milk. And indeed this
voluptuous pleasure so poysoneth man, that it depriueth him of the reason and
virtue of his soul, together with the help of his body, and makes him
unworthy to be reckoned among men. And in that respect, says Cycero, he
that is given to lust, judges all things, not by reason but by his own
sense, and so thinks that to be the best, which most delights him, and so
does easilye consent to be carried away with pleasures, which long him more
and more in calamity. Neither can we follow pleasure unless we renounce
virtue, because that pleasure respects the particular, and virtue the good of
the common. And therefore there is not so badde a Lord and master, as pleasure
and voluptuousness, whose nature is to make a man ready to all mischief, and
slow to any goodness. It weakneth the body, as Diogenes noted, when to one
given to lust and pleasure, he applied this saying of Homer, Child, thy life
is short. The same Diogenes also acknowledging that which we have said,
namely, that it is a vice unbeseeming man, does aptly declare his mind. For in
that the Athenians were much addicted to lust and pleasure, and the
Lacedaemonians to sobriety and temperancie, as himself was trauayling from
Lacedemon to Athens, being demanded whence he came and whither he would:
he answered, that he came from among men, but was going toward women. And the
same does Iustine note in Sardanapalus, who, said he, Justin is his first
book.
lived in pleasures more sit to be a woman than a man, especially one that
reigned over so many provinces. And in deed, that lustful life was the worker
of his death, Cicer. li. 2. de finibus.
through the conspiracy of some that could not like to be governed by so
voluptuous a king. And therefore did Cicero justly say, that he that gives
himself over to lust but one day, is unworthy the name of a man. And in
deed, lust is more sit and convenient for hogs, than for a man endued with
reason and understanding.

3 To conclude, what greater injury can our enemy work us, Sen. Epist. 28
says Seneca, than these lusts does unto many? for plunging them selves
therein, they get such a custom, that they become most miserable, in that they
grow into necessity of things before superfluous, because they cannot be
without them, and so do serve their lusts, which they cannot enjoy, yea, which
is the type of all calamity, they love their own mishap. And this enemy is
so much the more dangerous, because with the outward face and alluring baits
thereof, it has overcome the strongest and most valyant men in the world, as
Hanibal, who after he had ouercommen his enemies, was conquered by lust and
pleasure. It is a gulf or fire that deuoureth man's substance and wealth,
wherewith he should live and maintain himself and his family: and (which is
another misery) a path to all wicked practices, namely, to popular seditions,
wherein men may fish in troubled water, and find some pretense to get other
men's goods, to prosecute their own pleasures. Pythagoras to that purpose
said, that pleasure once entered into towns, engendered sacietie, then
violence, and lastly destruction: and contrariwise, that sobriety and
temperance are the two means to shun such inconveniences. In like sense the
Philosopher Heraclitus being required to show the original of sedition, and
how it might be restrained, in stead of some long oration to the people,
called for a little water and meal, and tempering them together, he drunk it,
and so without any more speeches departed, thereby declaring that continence
and sobriety were the means to maintain peace and concord.

4 If the heathen, who had respect only to man, and to this present life,
could say thus much a against lust, how far ought Gods children to detest it
in respect of the life to come? August in a certain Sermon
And in deed he, says Saint Augustine, who for a small pleasure gives that
for the which Christ dyed, namely, his body and soul, shows that he
esteems Jesus Christ to be but a foolish and unwise merchant, that would
redeem with such a price that which the voluptuous man esteems so little of,
and gives so cheap, when he gives over himself to destruction for so small
a pleasure, which will soon be over. When lusts and pleasures, says Saint
Ambrose, have wounded a man, they are gone, when they have brought him into
misery, they are retired, and when they have made him most wretched they have
forsaken him. Saint Barnard notes three sorts of persecutions in the Church:
the first by tyrants: the second by heretics, and the last by lusts and
pleasures, whereto he adds, that this last is the most pernicious, applying
to that purpose this sentence, which he alleges out of Esaie, In my peace
my bitterness is most bitter. Esaias 38.17
And then says, B^tter is the persecution of tyrants, more bitter of
heretics, but most bitter of all, is that of lusts and pleasures. The same
does Chrysostom confirm, saying, We incur more harm by the plesures of the
flesh, than by the most grievous torments of tormentors, for torments do beget
martyrs, but lusts do beget Epicures. Of torments we form virtues, but of
lusts we norish and increase vice. And therefore we may compare our lusts to the
apple which our first parents, transgressing Gods commandment did eat in
paradise, Gen 3.6 1. Tim. 5.6.
which being fair to the eye, was mortal to the mouth. Whereupon S. Paul
says, The widow that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives.

5 Since then that Jesus Christ admonishes us to amend, let us take heed of so
dangerous and pernicious an enemy, and to that end, let us remember all the
sentences before mentioned, by the which every man may understand, that unless
he mind to be altogether miserable and wretched, he must shun such lusts and
pleasures. And by them no doubt is the common proverb meant, For one pleasure,
a thousand sorrows: not in respect of this life only, but in respect of the
life everlasting. To this purpose do we read that Lisimachus, when the
Scithians had besieged him in a place, where for want of water he was forced to
yield, after he had drunk fresh water, said, Alas, what a great felicity have
I lost for a very short pleasure? If a Painim would so grieve for loosing a
temporal felicity, how much rather ought we that profess to believe Gods
word, and by the testimony of the same are to expect life and everlasting
felicity, both to think and say, when lusts do assalt us, Alas, wretch that I
am, shall I for inioying a brief and temporal pleasure, loose an infinite and
eternal felicity?

6 Moreover, let us eschew and shun al occasions that might induce us
hereunto, namely, such company as is addicted to the same. For, as S. Augu.
says, his prouocations are least, August. of the singularity of Clergy.
that never comes among lusts and plesures: for as the man shall hardly escape
free from blacking or meal that co^uerseth with millers or colliers, so shall he
hardly escape plesures that hanteth with those that are given to follow their
lusts and pleasures. And as green wood laid upon the fire, albeit at the first
it resists, yet in the end does burn and is consumed, so is it with him
that frequenteth those that give themselves to lusts and pleasures, albeit at
the beginning he resists the evil, and for a while falls not thereinto,
yet by continual hant, he finally falls in with them. Furthermore, let us
shun Idleness, the mother and nurse of all mischief, namely, of pleasure,
according to the saying of old Cato, that by doing nothing, men learn to do
evil: and this do we undoubtedly find to be most verified in the pleasures
of the flesh. For as still and standing waters are easily corrupted, so are
idle persons. Besides, there is nothing more repugnant to the true repentance
of Gods children, either to our grief, heaviness, and sorrowing for our
sins, than pleasure. For as it is unnatural to kindle fire with water, so is
it impossible for pleasure to breed in a penitent heart that sorroweth for
sin. The Lord of hoastes, says the Prophet Esaie, in that day did call you
to weeping and mourning, Esaias 22.12
to baldnes and girding with sackcloth, And behold, joy and gladness,
slaying of oxen and killing of sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine, and
saying, Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die. Whereunto he
adds this horrible and fearful threatening: And the Lord of hoastes has
declared unto me, Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you until
ye die.

7 The sole consideration of the affliction and calamity of our brethren,
might also suffice to make us to forsake al lusts and pleasures, 2. Cor. 12.25.
remembering what Saint Paul says, That the members have the same care one for
another, if one member suffer, all members suffer with it. They therefore that
with sorrow feel not the afflictions of their brethren, but give themselves
to pleasures and delights, do manifestly declare that they be no members of
the body, and so are to look for the curse by the Prophet Amos pronounced
against those who living at ease do give themselves to the pleasures and lusts
of the flesh, Amos 6.1
and do not mourn for the afflictions of Joseph. Likewise, when the holy
Ghost calls us to a solemn acknowledgement of the feeling of our sins,
Joel 2.12.16.
he exhorts us to fasting, weeping, and sorrow, adding, that the new married
ought to come forth of his closet, and the bride out of her marriage chamber.
They therefore that give themselves to lusts and pleasures, do sufficiently
declare that they have no feeling, sorrow or grief, either for the afflictions
of their brethren, or for their own sins, yea, which is worse, that they
stand in no fear of offending God. Plutarch reports, that when Agesilaus was
demanded what good the laws of Lycurgus had done to Sparta, Plutarch in his
Apotheg.
he answered, that they had engendered contempt of pleasures, understanding
thereby a sovereign benefit to the common wealth. If the laws of a mortal
man were of such efficacy with the people that had no knowledge of God, what a
shame and confusion may it breed with us Christians, when the laws of the great
and heavenly lawe-giuer are not of force with us to abolish and root out this
plague of lust and pleasure, out of the Christian church? The same Agesilaus
having refused a present of sundry pleasures, offered him by the Thasiens,
Plut. in his Lacon. Apo.
and lastly by their importunity being forced to take it, commanded it to be
distributed among the Helots, who were his servants, not much better than bond
men amongst the Lacedaemonians, and yielding a reason for it, said, that it
beseemed not the professors of virtue to use pleasure, how much less may it
beseem Christians, even the children of God, to give themselves thereto? Agis,
the last king of the Lacedaemonians, was in his youth given to all lusts and
pleasures, but being established ruler of the land, Erasmus in his Apotheg.
lib. 1.
he quite gave them over, and showed such an example of temperance and
sobriety, that the use of pleasures quayling among his subjects, they also
addicted themselves to sobriety: even so we Christians, albeit before the
knowledge of the truth, we wallowed in the lusts of the flesh, yet being now
raised to this honor and estate to be made kings and priests, yea even the
children of God, ought now to be the more estraunged from all lusts and
pleasures, to the end, that after our example, all others may renounce the
same, and imitate our sobriety. Romans 13.14
And to conclude, to this duty does Saint Paul's exhortation, that we should
take no care for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it, inuit us.

8 As before we have spoken of ambition, covetousness, Heb. 11
and pleasure, so that we may the rather detest these three plagues of our
souls, we are still to look upon the example of Moses, who, as the Apostle
to the Hebrews does note, by faith overcame these three mighty temptations.
First Ambition, when he refused the honor and glory to be called the son
of Pharaohs daughter: secondly Covetousness, in accounting rebuke for Christ
to be greater riches than all the tresures in Egypt: lastly pleasure, in
chosing affliction with Gods people, rather than the pleasures of sin for a
short space.

Of Drunkenness. Chap. 16
NOw will we particularly speak of the two principal kinds of
voluptuousness, namely, drunkenness and fornication. As concerning
drunkenness, it is an ancient and pe^^^tious vice, deeply rooted in some, and
in some countries almost past remedy. The Grecians in old time were noted to
be mightily given thereto, and forced each other to drink by a certain
measure, Plutarch in the banquet of the 7. sages.
as Plutarch notes, alleging to that purpose the authority of Homer, yea,
they would have no company with those that would not frame themselves
thereto, and thereof grew the proverb, which to this day in their speech
signifies, Either drink, or be gone. Pliny writes, that in his time
drunkenness bare such swaie in Italy, Plut. Simp. l. 4. 5. 6
that they would force their mares vnreasonablye to drink wine. Which is
worse, the Tartarians, Persians, and Grecians in their principal triumphs did
celebrate drunkenness, Mithridates presumed to propound a reward to him that
could drink most, and carry it away when he had overcome the rest in
drinking. These examples do show, that the older that drunkenness is, the more
have men been evermore inclined thereunto, and consequently, do admonish us
to beware thereof, yea, this excessive disorder that has taken such hold of
diverse, should teach us both to abhor and in time to resist this corruption,
least by degrees we climb to the tipe of all iniquity.

2 Neither is this drunkenness any whit diminished in these days among
sundry nations, that bear the title of Christians. Some do not think their
guests sufficiently entertained, until they have forced them to drink
themselves drunk. Of this valiancie and victory do some greatly vaunt,
boasting that they can drink much, and make their fellows drunk. In some
places so extreme is the exces, that he which is not disposed to be as drunk
as others, must shun certain companies. See we not, even among those that
profess the reformed religion (I cannot report it without shame and confusion)
that some will have their glasses without feet, to the end there be no way to
set them down until all be drunk? Others, who in stead of a foot, will
have a bell, that in ringing thereof they may testify their valiancie in
drinking off all? Others that proceed farther, and in stead of a bell have a die
closed in it, wherewith to bind either himself to drink again, or his
neighbors, according to the number of the pricks thereof. A most deuillish
invention, whereby by the hazard applied to dronkennes, to profane Gods
providence, and the use of wine, a most excellent creature. Other cursed
inventions there are, wherewith to bind men to drink before they thirst, even
to dronkennes.

3 Yet are the inconveniences that thereof do ensue so apparent and griueous,
and so noted even by the heathen, that it is wonderful that Christians should
not utterly abhor it. Xenoph. in his first book of the instit. of Cyrus.
When Astiages, father in law to Cyrus, asked him why he refused to drink a
cup of wine that was offered him, he answered: Because I took it to be
poison: for this other day at a feast that thou made to thy frinds, I saw
that every one that drunk of it soon after decayed both in body and mind,
as having lost both sense and understanding. The same did a Lacedemonian note,
who being demanded why the Lacedaemonians drunk so soberly. Plut. in his
Lacon. Apo.
To the end, said he, that others should not seek or take counsel for us, but
we rather for them: thereby showing, that excess of wine so weakneth man's
understanding, that he is unfit either to give or ask counsel. And in truth
there is no vice more repugnant to man's creation, who is endued with
understanding and reason: for as by reason he is discerned from a brute beast,
so when wine depriueth him of his understanding and reason, it depriueth man of
man, and places him in the degree of beasts: and this is well noted in the
common proverb, That there is ape drunk, hog drunk, and lion drunk. For
as experience teaches, some being drunk, do grow like apes, full of
follyes and toys, some do fall on sleep, and wallowe in their dens like
hogs: and some do fall into quarrelling, brauling, and fighting, therein
imitating the cruel nature of lions. And therefore it were but a just
judgment of God, if beasts that drink to quench their thirst, were converted
into men, and men that drink so far above their thyrst, Seneca in his 84.
Ep. to Lucil.
as to drown their reason, were turned and converted into beasts. What is
drunkenness, says Seneca, other than a voluntary madness? If thou could
lengthen the estate of a dronken man into diverse days, the world would judge
him to be a fool or a mad man: Such as loose their wits or reason by
sickness or any other inconvenience, are worthy of compassion, but the
drunkard is the more abominable, because he voluntarily depriueth himself of
his wits, and wittingly takes upon him the person of a beast and a mad man.
And to this purpose, says Plutarch, that every honest man that blusheth and is
ashamed of villainous and infamous actions, must beware of drunkenness. For, as
some say, Choler is in like degree as rage and fury, but drunkenness lodges
and dwells therewith, or rather is fury it self: less in continuance, but
more grieu^us in action, because it is voluntary, and of our selves without
compulsion we run into it.

4 This loss of reason and understanding, Plut. of babbling and in his Simpos.
Dis. 3
engendered by dronkennes, appears in many in apish behavior, as is
aforesaid, by foolish words, and other vanities. In proof hereof does
Plutarch allege this saying of Homer: Such is the strength of wine, that it
distracteth the wise man, it makes the grauest personages to sing, laugh, toy,
and dance, and to reveal the things which he should especially conceal.
Where Herodotus does say, that words swim upon wine, he means, that
wine maintains prattling, as water bears up the body that swimmeth. This
difference does Plutarch make between a pratler and a dronken man, that the
one speaks foolishly at the table, and the other in every place, yet does
not the dronken man's foolish and vain prattling last while he is only at the
table, but so long as the wine sumeth in his head: yea sometimes it is so
troublesome, importunate, and noisome, that it is an intolerable burden to
be forced to hear and to answer thereto. And the same does Plutarch very
fitly note, saying: If a dronken man come to visit a sick man, he troubles
him more than his sickness. If he be in a ship, he more anoyeth the
passengers than the salt water: Horace in his Odes.
his praise of any man is far more cumbersome than his disprayse.

5 In drunkenness rests also this other folly above mentioned, namely, the
revealing of secrets. And of this does ordinary experience give us a note in
many at all times. Horace in his Odes.
Horace says, that pleasant wine reuealeth secret counsels. The common
proverb, In wine is truth, speaks more generally, and is confirmed by this
other old proverb, That which the sober man thinks, the dronken man
speaks. And in this sense, says an ancient Philosopher, Children, Plut. of
prattling. Erasmus in his Chiliads. Cicero in the Topics. Plut. in in his
Simpos. Disp. l. 3.
fools, and dronkardes tell truth. And Cicero, among such things as tend to
procure credit when a man speaks truth without dissimulation or lying,
places childhood, dreams, impudency, folly, and drunkenness. And therefore
says an ancient wise man, there need no torment to procure confession of the
truth, for it may with greater facility and more certainty be gotten by wine.

6 There is also Lion drunk, as is aforesaid, and experience teaches, that
of drunkenness many times arise quarrelles, strife, brauling, injury,
murder, and other like inconveniences. Wine, says Selomon, Prou. 20.1 Plut.
of prattling. August. to a holy virgin. Seneca in his 84. Ep. to Lucill.
is a mocker, and strong drink is raging, and he that is wise will take no
pleasure therein. Drunkenness (says Plutarch) is a passion full of tumult,
deuoyde of sense and reason. Many (says Augustine) transported with wine, have
committed most wicked and detestable murders. The example of great Alexander
is notable, who in his drunkenness slew Clytus, one of his dearest and most
faithful servants, which when he knew, having disgested his wine, he would
have died for sorrow. Heereto may we refer that notable saying of
Pythagoras, that the vine yields three grapes, the one of pleasure, the
second of drunkenness, and the last of outrage: is also the saying of
Anacharsis, that the first draught is for thirst, the second for sustenance,
the third for pleasure, and the fourth ingendereth wrath. And (which is more)
the dronken man is a lion to himself, in that he iniureth and wastes both
his body and his goods. Bas. Ser. against Dronkards.
It is marvel, says Basil, that the bodies of dronkardes, being by nature
of earth, being so moistened, do not dissolve into claie and mortar. Plut. Sim.
dis. li. 3.4.5 August. to a holy virgin.
To such men (says he) the soul is but salt to preserve the body for a time
from rotting. Dronkardes (says Plutarch) do soon wax old, balde, and graie
before their time. As Alexander, the conqueror of so many kingdoms was
overcome by wine, Seneca in his 84. Ep. to Lucil.
so many towns long time besieged, have been taken and burned while the watch
men have been drunk and a sleep. Seneca speaks more largely, What
calamities, says he, have grown of drunkenness? By her have strong and most
warlyke people been delivered to their enemies: by it have towns, that have
long held out against the enemy, been opened and taken: by it have whole
Nations, Just. l. 1
that obstinately have rejected the yoke of dominion of others, been subdued.
To be short, such as in war have been inuinsible, have by wine been overcome.
Iustine propounds a notable example in the Scithians, of whom he says, that
they were overcome first by wine, then by wepons. Neither are we to marvel that
it comes so to pass, for the dronkard peruerteth all that he governs, he
makes his body to reele and he along, he stops and reuerseth the
principal actions of his soul, he drowneth the ship that he guides, he
overthrows the chariot that he drives, he loses the army that he
leads, but, which is the fullness of his mishap, by dronkennes, becoming
twice a child, he rejects the government of others, but chiefly the
covenant of God, and so casts himself headlong into ruin and everlasting
damnation.

7 As Jesus Christ admonishes us to amend our lives, so truly should the
consideration of the premises move us to shun this accursed drunkenness, as
a pestilence, as Aeschilus in old time called it. But especially the
remembrance of the spiritual dangers, mischiefs, and inconveniences, even of
everlasting death: the fruits of this drunkenness ought mightily to move our
hearts wholly to renounce it. First, as there is no exercise more profitable
for the children of God, for their salvation, or wherein God is greatlyer
glorified, than in prayer, thanksgiving, and praises to the Lord: so is there
nothing that sooner quenches the use of the same, than drunkenness. Also, if
ordinary sobriety, yea, even extraordinary fasting be sometimes requisite
in prayer, that we may be the better disposed thereunto: what can the
dronkardes prayers be, but either none, or mere mockeries? And how shall we
read Gods word, or hear any sermon, when our heads are fraught with wine or
strong drink? Again, if the sober do many times fall on sleep thereat, what
are we to expect of the dronkard but brutish sluggishnesse, which depriueth him
of all profit by the word of God? And is there any greater misery, than
voluntarily to deprive our selves of the fruit of prayer and Gods word? When
the Secretary or Counselor is to confer with his prince about matters of
great weight or importance, shall he make himself drunk, or come drunk into
his masters presence? If we ought daily to pray unto almighty God, and by
reading, (wherein truly consists and depends man's great felicity) hear
him speaking unto us, do not we when we are drunk, deprive our selves of
this so familiar, profitable, and most comfortable communication with God?

8 Again, how can a man that is given to dronkennes, employ him self in his
vocation? It is not for kings, O Lemuel, said his mother unto him, Prouer. 31.4
It is not for kings to drink wine, nor for princes strong drink, least he
drink and forget the decree, and change the judgment of all the children of
affliction. And in that consideration the holy Apostle Saint Paul ordayneth, 1.
Tim. 3 3.8 Tit. 1.7 Leuit. 10.9 Number. 6.3 Esaias 5.11
that Bishops, Elders and Deacons, should not be given to wine, to the end
the better to discharge their offices. Likewise in former days, the Priests in
their waiting time, and the Nazarites, might drink no wine. Esaias also speaking
more generally, declared this inconvenience, thereto adding a threatening of
Gods horrible judgment for the same. Woe be unto the^ (says he) that rise up
early to follow drunkenness, and to them that continue until night, till the
wine does inflame them. And the harp and violl, timbrell and pipe, and wine are
in their feasts, but they regard not the Lords work, neither consider the
work of his hands.

August. in his 231. sermon of shunning drunkenness.
9 But let us more particularly enter into consideration of the inconveniences
and mischiefs growing of drunkenness to those that are given thereto. First,
as a long and sore rain, says Saint Augustine, moystneth the earth, and so
conuerteth it into mire, that it cannot be tilled to bring forth fruit: even
so our bodies distempered with too much wine, cannot receive the spiritual
husbandry, neither yield any fruit beseeming the immortal soul. Chrisost.
ho. 1. upon these words, Modico vino, etc.
We are, says he farther, to beware that our bodies over moystned with wine,
grow not, as it were, into saltes or marshes, where there grows nothing but
weeds, frogs, serpents, and other like beasts. The dronkard, says
Chrysostom, is a voluntary devil, deuoid of excuse for his destruction or
obloquy with men. Drunkenness, says Saint Augustine, is the mother of all
wickedness, the argument of all offenses, the root of all transgressions,
Aug. to a holy virgin.
distemperaunce of the head, destruction of the senses, a storm of the tongue,
waves of the body, shipwreck of chastity, loss of time, voluntary
madness, infamous languishing, corruption of manners, dishonor to life,
reproach to honesty, and death of the soul. Then he adds, Drunkenness is
an amiable devil, a licorous poison, and a sweet sin. He that has it,
has not himself, and he that is drunk, does not simply sin, but is wholly
converted into sin. In a mighty storm sometime both the ship and the men
are saved by casting the goods into the sea: but the dronken man casting up the
superfluity of his wine, for the ease of his body, produces a witness, which
cries out for vengeance against both body and soul, for such excess and
profanation of Gods good creatures, as will swallowe him up in the terrible
sea of Gods heavy wrath and indignation. The dronkard, says Saint Augustine,
pouring in his wine, Aug. in his book of repentance. 1. Cor. 6.10 1. Cor. 5.11.
is swallowed up of wine, and made an abomination in the sight of God, a
contempt to the Angels, a scorn to men, deprived of virtue, and a confusion
with the devils. Neither is it in vain that the Apostle Saint Paul denounces
to dronkards, that they shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven. And to show
how far we are to detest and abhor this vice, he prohibiteth all
conversation with those, who professing the Gospel, do give themselves to
drunkenness.

10 Is it not meet, that dronkardes in the day of judgment should yield
account of Gods goods, which they have abused by drunkenness, whereby they
have made themselves unprofitable to the service of God, through the abuse and
profanation of his so good creatures, whereby they should have been induced
rather to praise God: and for destroying their bodies with wine, which should
have been to them as physic, by the sober use thereof to preserve them, as
Saint Paul exhorts Timothy, 1. Tim. 5.2^ August. in a certain sermon
to drink a little in respect of his weak stomach and usual infirmities?
But what shall we say to him that forces another to drink himself drunk?
Saint Augustine answers, that in the day of judgment he shall be guilty
both of his own sin, and of his sin whom he has made dronken. Little do
we think upon these judgments of God, yet can we confess with our lips, that
there is nothing more certain than death, nor more uncertain than the hour
thereof. Again, what is to be said of such as die in their drunkenness, as we
read of Ela king of Israel, Ammon the son of David, 2. Kin. 16.9 2. Sam. 13.
Dan. 5 Luke 21.34.
Balthazar king of Babylon, and others? Does not wine cast them, as it were,
quick into the pit of hell? Not without reason does Jesus Christ admonish us
to beware, saying, Take heed to your selves, least at any time your hearts be
oppressed with surfeting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and least that
da e come on you at unawares. Be not drunk, says S. Paul, with wine, wherein
is excess, Ephesians. 5.18
but be ye filled with the spirit. As if he should say, that as it is dangerous
to be filled with wine, so, in as much as we cannot be without filling, he
wishes us that it be, not with wine, but with the holy Ghost, to the end we
may be made perfect in all spiritual and heavenly graces.

Romans 13.13
11 The same Apostle admonishes us, not to walk in gluttony and dronkennes,
but so as we may be clothed with Jesus Christ: thereby showing, that we must
not presume of any union or conjunction with Christ, but with condition, that
we forsake these corruptions of the flesh. 1. These. 5.7
They that are drunk (says he) are drunk by night. Thereby teaching, that
nothing so evil beseems the children of God, whom he terms the children
of the day, and children of light, as darkness, which if men, even unbelievers,
were not past all shame, should not be seen in them, but by night, neither
then, but upon condition to acknowledge the truth of the words of Jesus
Christ, John 3.20 Senec. Ep. 84. to Lucill.
He that does evil hates the light. And in deed, how many things, says
Seneca, do men in their dronkennes, which when they are sober, they will be
ashamed of?

12 This sole advertisement might suffice to resolve us, to shun drunkenness,
and to practice the counsel of Pythagoras, who being demanded how a man might
avoid it, Pluta. against the Sto^kes, and in his Apoth.
answered: By considering what we have said and done when we were drunk.
But because for the most part our memory then fails us, the Lacedaemonians
in their public bankets used to bring in two or three of their Helots (a kind
or servants not much differing from slaves) dronken, to the end, that by the
insolency and filthiness of their dronkennes, their youth might learn what a
villainous and abominable vice it is.

13 Anacharsis marvelled at the Grecians, who at the beginning of their feasts
drunk in small cups, but when their thirst was over, in great ones: thereby
declaring, that it is an unnatural course, as thirst decreaseth, to increase
in drink. Yet this corruption reproved by a Heathen man, is in use among
Christians, yea and so, that some at the first sitting down will refrain from
drink, to the end, the better, as they term it, to bear the great blows,
that is, to drink the great cups that shall come in the end. Men would
never be so greedy and inclinable to this corruption, Eras. Apo. li. 3
if they would be content to drink, as Socrates said, such drink as would
not stir up a desire to drink with out thirst. Yet mean we not to allow
of the counsel of Lycurgus, who to keep men from drunkenness, commanded to
cut down the vines. Lycurgus (says Plutarch, was not so well advised, Pluta.
of hearing of Poets.
when seeing some fall to dronkennes, and so to sin, he commanded to cut
down the vines. It had been better, says he, to have dug wells near to
the vines, and so by a sober God to have bridled and corrected that frantike
God, as Plato terms him: hereby noting, that we must beware of the strength
and licorishnes of wine, and a lay and assuage it with water.

14 To conclude, let us remember the saying of Solomon, Prouer. 23.29
To whom is woe, to whom is sorrow, to whom is strife, to whom is
murmuring, to whom are wounds without cause, and to whom is the rednes of
the eyes? Even to them that tarry long at the wine, to them that go and seek
mixed wine. Look not upon the wine when it is read, or when it shows his
color in the cup, or goes down pleasantly. In the end thereof it will
bite like a serpent, and hurt like a cockatrice. Thine eyes shall look upon
strange women, and thine heart shall speak lewd things. Let us heereunto
add his Oration that defended the strength of wine: Oh ye men, how strong is
wine, 1. Esd. 3.18
it deceives all men that drink it, it makes the mind of the king and of
the fatherless all one, of the bond man, and of the free man, of the poor man
and of the rich man. It turns every thought into joy and gladness, so that
one remembers no manner of sorrow or debt. It makes every heart rich, so
that one remembers neither king nor governor, and causes to speak all things
by talents. When men are drunk, they have no mind to love their friends or
brethren, and a little after they draw out swoordes. Valerius Maximus writes,
Valor, Max, lib. 3.
that in old time the use of wine was unknown among the Roman wives, least
they should fall into any reproach. For wine is the first step to
fornication, and the woman that longs after wine, shuts her gates against
virtue, and opens them to vice. If we that profess Christianity, stood in
as great fear of offending God and incurring his wrath, or casting our selves
headlong into hell, as the Heathen women were careful and constant in
defending their honor, we would resolve never to drink any wine, rather
than to incurie the danger of drunkenness.

15 Some will reply, that albeit they drink much, yet they do never so far
exceed, as to overcome their senses. But let them remember the woe that Esaias
denounces, Esaias 5.22 1, Pet. 4.3.
not only against those that drink away their senses, but also against such
as be strong to swalow strong drink. S. Peter among our sins committed in the
time of our ignorance, for which he wishes us to be sorry, and hereafter to
beware, notes not only drunkenness, but also all unneedful drinking.
Wherein both Esaias and S. Peter do show, 1. Cor. 6.10
that where S. Paul has pronounced, Prouer, 21.20
that dronkards shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven* under the name of
dronkennes, he co^prehendeth all unnecessary drinkings. And in the same sense
does Solomon warn us to shun the company not only of dronkardes, but of all
swillers in of wine and strong drink.

16 Why, say some, Is it not lawful for one to drink to another? Truly if
men were so obliuious, as sitting at the table and being thirsty, they could
not remember to drink, it were a deed of charity and courtesy, by drinking to
them to remember them to drink: but when they remember to drink before they
thirst, it is no great alms to drink to them. True, but it is a testimony of
good will. Neither are we so severe or rigorous, as that we will simply
condemn the custom and use thereof: only we would enforce this condition,
that they should abide within the bounds of amity and sobriety, and not under
the pretense of a testimony of good will, to press men to drink more than
they need, neither to force them to that which they falsely term, doing of
reason. For is there any reason that a man should drink before he thirst, or
when he cannot brook it without his hurt? Is it a reasonable request, to urge
another to drink as much as thy self? No, no more than to urge him to eat as
much as thy self: or, having less feet, to wear as great shoes as thy
self: or, to put as much wine in a little vessel as thou can into a great.
Others are not ashamed to say, It is the custom of the Country: but do they
think, that that will be a sufficient excuse in the sight of God? A custom
repugnant to good manners, is no custom, but a corruption and a vice that is
to be rejected. Because the Heathen in old time did not account simple
fornication between two unmarried persons a sin, is it not therefore a sin
worthy death and everlasting damnation? God will not judge men after the
custom of the world and man's opinion, but according to his word.

17 Some will reply, that God created wine to rejoice man's heart: but with
Salomons mother we will answer, that it must be given to those that faint
in sorrow, Prou 31.6
whose hearts are in bitterness, not to those that are already unreasonable,
fat and merry. It must (says a certain Heathen man) be used soberly as a
medicine. It must be so used, as out of the sweetness of the lycour we may
take occasion to praise God for his goodness, not to offend him by abusing it.
To be short, this use of wine to rejoice the heart, extends not to a brutish
joy, to convert a man into an ape, an hog, or a lion, as is aforesaid, but to a
joy that strengthens both heart and body, preparing and disposing every man
to employ himself in his vocation.

Genesis 9.21 Genesis 19.
18 Finally, such as to excuse themselves do pretend the examples of Noah and
Lot, do cover themselves with a wet sack. The one was drunk once, the other
twice, both were drunk, but no drunkards. Neither is their example set down
for us to follow, no more than David's adultery, and the infirmity of S.
Peter, 2. Sam. 11. Math. 26
who denied Christ, but rather that we should take heed thereof. As when we see
a man fall, we will not fall as he does, but look better to our seet, or else
turn out of the way, least we should fall as he did. Their example is but a
representation of man's frailty, that we may thereof gather this instruction. If
men endued with such holiness and virtue did fall, what shall we do, even we
who live among dronkards, to which sin both of our selves we are inclined,
and by others forced, unless we stand well upon our guard, and do constantly
resist the allurements and temptations thereof? And therefore let us well
consider the cursed fruits of the drunkenness as well of Noah, who with his
own mouth cursed his own son Chain, and all his posterity, as of Lot, who
committed incest with his two daughters, to the end, that such as excuse
themselves by their example, may expect Gods like judgments against them. To
conclude, let us always think upon this saying of Heraclitus, That soul is
best that is driest, and least wet in wine.

Of Fornication and other whooredome. Chap. 17
THe other kind of lust whereof we are now to entreat, is Fornication. The holy
Scriptures noting man's monstrous corruption to be worse than beasts in this
respect, propounds such abominable kinds thereof, that chaste ears do even
abhor to hear them named. They be sins against nature, as in deed they be
called, and therefore shall be judged by all such as deny not nature, common
to man. As God also in his law has commanded to root out such people, Leuit.
18.20 Exodus 22 Genesis 19.
so his horrible vengeance executed against Sodom and Gomorrha, shall take from
such monsters all excuse in the day of judgment. Neither shall they whom God
has raised to authority and power, if they be slack to punish such
abomination, escape Gods vengeance, as he well declared in the person of
Philip king of Macedon, who for dissembling the manifold complaints of
Pausanias, for the injury to him done by Attalus in such abomination,
finally in his full and nuptial triumph, Just. li. 9.
marching between two Alexanders, the one his son, the other his son in law,
lost his life by the hands of the same Pausanias, whom God made the
executioner of his judgment, to punish the kings slacknesse. It shall not
need likewise to stand upon marriages within the degrees prohibited by the
Lord: Leuit. 20 Deuteronomy. 18
for to the express prohibition of them, there is also added a commandment to
root out such people. Neither may we reply, that it is a precept of the old
Testament. For in this respect the laws of Heathen Emperors do concur with
the law of Moses. And seeing that God has pronounced, that for such iniquity
the unbelievers have been punished and driven out of their countries, Leuit.
18.27 1. Cor. 5
it appears that it is the fundamental law of nature, which no man may
deny. The Apostle likewise so sharply reproving the incestuous Corinthian,
who^ he commands to be delivered to Satan, does sufficiently show, that this
law is perpetual. And in deed, it is so rooted in man's heart, Tacit. l. 12
Sue. in the life of Claudius.
that when the Emperor Claudius would have married his niece, his brothers
daughter, he durst not do it until, as it were even by force, he had wrested
a decree from the Senate of Rome, whereby it was decreed that such a marriage
should be lawful, yet durst not any after him and his example practice this
wicked toleration, but only one of his freed men, who did it to please his
Lord. Dieu in Nerua.
The Emperor Nerua freed the Senate from this reproach, by abolishing this
their permission by an express prohibition, wherein he decreed that no man
should marry his brothers daughter. Leaving therefore these unnatural
abominations, we will entreat only of two kinds of fornication, too common
even among Christians, yet most pernicious and damnable.

2 The first is adultery, wherein we understand the sin committed by those
of whom either one or both are else where tied in marriage. True it is, that
some even in our days, namely, that miserable Italian Apostata, Bernardine
Ochin, has mayntained, that a married man may without adultery marry more
wives, especially relying upon the examples of Abraham, Jacob, David,
Tremelius and Iunius.
and other holy personages of the old Testament. But we are to note, first
that some learned men of our time are of opinion, that God in his law does
expressly forbid man to have sundry wives at once. And to that sense do they
expound this place usually translated, Thou shall not take a wife with her
sister during her life: Leuit. 18.18
which they translate thus, Thou shall not take a wife adjoining her to
another, and this their translation they confirm with strong and sound
reasons. Whereof it must follow, that such as have taken sundry wives together,
have transgressed the express law of God. And albeit this corruption was not
in those days (as it should seem) expressly reproved in such as were given
thereunto, but rather by the Lord tolerated and suffered upon some reasons,
Genesis 2.18.
yet is it without doubt formally repugnant to the institution of marriage. And
indeed God says, It is not good that man should be alone, let us make him a
helper. Here he neither speaks of sundry helpers, but of one only, neither
created he for Adam sundry wives, but only one. Mat. 19, 5.
And Jesus Christ expressing the meaning of Moses, says. And two shall be one
flesh. Thus he speaks of two, not of four or sieve in one flesh. And for this
cause albeit Idolatry be a more grievous sin then Adultery, yet does
Adultery only dissolve marriage and ministers just cause of diuource, 1. Cor.
6.16.
because the party becomes a member and is made one body with her, to whom
he is adjoined by carnal copulation: and in that he can not be a member of
both be breaks the first bond. Whereof it necessarily ensues that the
married man companying, with a maid or a wife, and so becoming a member of
her and one body breaks his bond with the first, and consequently is an
Adulterer. And this is it which Jesus Christ expressly confirms, saying Who so
puts away his wife, except for whordome, Mat. 19.9.
and marries another, commits adultery. Here he evidently declares that
so long as the first bond remains in force, even so long as he has put her
away without cause, so long can he take no other wife, unless he commit
Adultery.

3 It also seems that Saint Paul ordaining that a Bishop should be the
husband but of one wife, 1. Tim. 3.2.
did in his time tolerate this corruption in others, who having already two
wives, embracing the Gospel did convert to Christian religion. Yet in that he
forbids every such, notwithstanding whatsoever excellency in gifts, not to
be called to any public office in the Church, he thereby sufficiently
declares it to be a corruption and spot of reproach: And that surely he would
never have suffered any professor of Christianity to have taken two wives. 1.
Cor. 7.2
As also he plainly shows his intent where he says: To avoid fornication
let every man have his own wife and every wife her husband. Thereto adding,
The husband has no power of his own body, but the wife, and thereby evidently
declaring, that if the husband takes another wife, and accompanies with her,
he does injury to his first, in that without her consent, he takes upon him
to dispose of that which is in her power, and seperateth himself from her, to
become one with her whom he then takes. Is not this therefore directly
repugnant to the prohibition of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 7.5.
who wills that one should not defraud another? Hereto he adds, For he
that is married cares for things of the world, how he may please his wife and
is divided. He says not, how he may please his wives. But besides, how should
he be divided, if he had many? Albeit therefore that God in old time did bear
with this corruption of having many wives, yet does it not follow that it was
lawful: But we must so resolve herein, as Jesus Christ speaks of the book
of divorce. Moses (says he) suffered it because of the hardness of your hearts,
Mat. 19.8. Instit. lib. 1. Tit. 10. de Nupt. affinitatis.
but it was not so from the beginning. Let us therefore, with the Emperor
Justinian, conclude that it never was, nor never shall be lawful to take and
have two wives at once. In correspondence whereof if the married wife
companieth with another, albeit unmarried, yet she commits adultery: as
also the man if he take an other beside his wife, albeit a single woman, and
holds her as his concubine, or takes her to wife, or howsoever else, yet
does he likewise commit adultery. Augustine of adultery in married men to
Pollent.
And indeed it were no equity, says Saint Augustine, that men should
require of their wives that faith which themselves will not perform. And
thereupon in many other places he vpholdeth that it is adultery, if a man, by
any means whatsoever, breaks that faith of marriage whereto he is adjoined.

4 This point thus resolved. Let every one, man and woman, that is tied by
marriage, abhor al carnal conjunction with any other then her to whom he is
so tied by marriage. For it is adultery and by Gods law forbidden, where he
says. Thou shall not commit adultery. Exodus ^0. Deuteronomy, 5. Mat. 10.19. Leuit.
20.10. Deuteronomy 22.22; Ioh. 8. History of Susanna. ver. 41.
And albeit this restraint made by the living God, might sufficiently move our
consciences to beware: yet knowing the hardness of many men's hearts, as also to
take from them al excuse, he commands adulterers whether man or woman, to be
put to death. And thereupon the Jews conuenting before Jesus Christ a woman
taken in adultery, acknowledged that Moses commanded to stone such offenders:
as also we see that Susanna charged with the like offense, was condemned to
die. Which is more. God from time to time has evermore even among the heathen
and unbelievers, declared that the committing of adultery deserved death. Genesis
20.11,
And indeed when Abimelech king of Gerar had taken Sara Abraham's wife, to have
enjoyed her, God presently closed the wombs of all the women of his house that
they should not conceive: and appearing to himself, in express words told,
him saying. Abimelech, thou shall die, Gen, 26.11. Deuteronomy. 22.24.
because of the woman whom thou have taken, for she has an husband. Likewise
his successor Abimilech, also king of the Philistians at Gerar, knowing that
Rebecca was Isaacks wife, decreed death to any that should touch her. Which is
more, this sentence of death, Genesis 38.24,
even by Gods decree took hold likewise of her that was only handfast: for
having consented to this iniquity, the law commands that both should be put
to death. And thereupon Judah the Patriarcke seeing that Thamar his daughter in
law (for he had promised her in marriage to his son Sella) had played the
harlot, he presently condemned her to death, even to the fire, saying, Let her
be burned.

5 Likewise adultery, even among the heathen, was always accounted
abominable. Arist. 2. polit 6. pen.
Plato esteemed it to be a great wickedness, worthy reproach: And Aristotle
says: Let the man or woman that accompanies with any other then his moytie be
esteemed among the basest and most infamous things that are. Genesis 26.10.
And in that respect Abimelech said to Isaac. One of the peopl had almost lain
by thy wife, so should thou have brought sin upon us. And by Abraham's
speeches it seems they accounted adultery to be more grievous then
manslaughter: Genesis 20.1^,
for this was the excuse that Abraham made to Abimelech. I thought surely, the
fear of God is not in this place, and they will slay me for my wives sake.
Hardly shall we find any people or nation but has decreed some notable
punishment against adultery. The Egyptians did slit the woman's nose, Diod.
Sic. li 5. Val. Max, lib, 6. of Justice.
and inflicted a thousand stripes upon the man, even almost to the death.
Zaleucus the Locrian law giver ordained that both the adulterers eyes should be
pulled out, and because the law should not be in vain, when his own son
was taken in that fault, he caused to pull out two eyes, one from his son,
and another from himself. The Germans in old time caused the adulteress to
be brought naked before her parents, where they cut off her hair, Cor. Tacit.
Procop. in the wars of the Got. lib. 1. Instit. de pub. iudic. Item. Leg.
Iulia. lib 1. c. ad leg. Iuli. de adult. Lucian.
and then leading her through all the chief streets, her husband did scourge
her with rods. The Goths, albeit a barbarous nation, did account adultery
worthy of death: as also did the Athenians in old time: as we may
certainly gather by a certain Oration of Licias, wherein he entreats of the
death of Eratostenes who suffered for adultery. The famous laws of the twelve
tables decreed death against the adulterers: as did also among the Romans the
law Iulia, established not by Julius Caesar as some suppose, but by his
successor Augustus. To be short: Saletus of Crotone published a law whereby
such as committed adultery should be burned.

6 By the Civil laws, Lib. 1. Diges^ de extraor. crim,
he that did but solicit a woman to alure her to adultery, albeit it came not
to execution, was punished. Likewise notwithstanding the great licentiousness
among soldiers in the wars: yet if a soldier chanced to be convict of
Adultery, Dig. de re milit. Ropiscus in life of Aurelian.
he was disgraded from bearing of arms, and sent home with shame. And because
this injury, if it be done against a man's host or hostess, is the more
detestable, the Emperor Aurelian finding a soldier, that had defiled his
hostess, he caused his legs to be fastened to two bows, forcibly strained
down: which being let go, rent the soldier in pieces. Thus by the premises
we perceive that Adultery evermore and among all nations, even among the
heathen and unbelievers, has been in such detestation, that as all men judge
it worthy of rigorous and exemplarie punishment, so the most part, concurring
with Gods law, agreed that such as committed it, should be put to death: But
now the remissenes and slackenes of Christians has bred such an excess in
this iniquity, that in many provinces it is the greatest praise that can be
given to Gentlemen and Ladies, to say they have been true obseruers of
plighted says in marriage, which is noted to be a rare virtue. The heathen in
this point were more religious and holy, for in many years there was not a
known adulterer among the Lacedaemonians. Plutarch in his Apotheg. Plutar. of
the excellency of marriage
Yea and Plutarch writes that among the wives and maidens of Ciana it was
never known that there chanced either adultery or deslouring of any maid, in
the space of seven years. And albeit among the heathen simple fornication was
accounted no sin, yet when there was one brought to great Alexander, not a
maiden as he hoped, Eras. in his Apothe. lib. 4.
but a married wife, he sent her away again untouched. But where shall we
find the like temperance and resolution against adultery among Christians? Yet
are the words of Jesus Christ, where he says, Amend your lives, directed unto
us.

7 That we may therefore Amend, let us remember first the sentence of death
pronounced by the Lord against adulterers, as is before showed. Let us, I say
remember that they which commit this iniquity do deserve to be delivered to
the executioner, and consequently to shameful death. And albeit the mortal
judges do not execute this commandment of God, Iud. 19. and, 20 and. 21.
yet let not adulterers think that they shall escape Gods hand, whose power
extends far enough diversely to punish them even in this world, but chiefly
in the world to come. The Levites concubine that had played the harlot incurred
horrible punishment, in that the inhabitants of Gabaa had so far oppressed her
with their abomination, that she died suddenly. Iere. 29.23.
Jeremy notes Gods horrible judgment against Zedechias and Achab, adulterers
and false Prophets, saying, All they of the Capti^i^ie of Judah that are in.
Babell shall take up this curse against them and say, the Lord make thee like
Zedechia and like Ahab whom the King of Babell burnt in the fire, because they
have committed villainy in Israel, 1. Kin. 11.
and have committed adultery with their neighbors wives, and have spoken
lying words in my name. Into how many horrible Idolatries did Solomon fall,
when transgressing Gods commandment, he was not content with one wife, but
took almost as many Concubines as there be days in the year, 1. Kin. 11.4.11.
besides seven hundred wives that he had married? His example teaches us how
fair man does exceed, when he forsakes the law of God. Besides that the
history notes, 2. Sam. 11.
that his wives alienated his heart and set it upon strange Gods, and that for
his transgression, God rent from him the ten Tribes in the days of his Son
and successor Roboam. 2. Sam. 12.10.
What caused David by the sword of the Ammonites to slay his faithful servant
Vrias, but the adultery committed with his wise? God was blasphemed, and
against him was this sentence pronounced, That the sword should never depart
from his house.

8 God also sometime suffers that he which defiles another man's wife,
receives the like measure in his own. 2. Sam. 16.22.
When David had committed adultery with Vrias wife, his son Absolon publikly
defiled his own Concubines, as God had foretold him. Job. 31.9.
And this is it that Job notes, saying. If my heart have been deceived by a
woman, or if I have laid wait at the door of my neighbor: Let my wife
grind to another man, and let other men bow down upon her. For this is a
wickedness and iniquity to be condemned. Among the three young men that had
laid their sentences under the kings pillow, 3. Ezra. 4.26.
he that had written that woman is strong, among other his reasons adds this:
Many have perished, and have erred and sinned for woman. Denis the king or
rather the tyrant of Siracusa, understanding that his son had committed
adultery, wrathfully reproving him, Plut. in his Apotheg.
demanded whether he had known the like offense in him: Whereto his son
answered that his father was not borne a Kings son as he was, but his father
replied saying. Neither shall thou, if thou continuest this wicked life, leave
a son to inherit this kingdom. Herein he showed a virtuous life, and used a
wise speech for a heathen king. And as Erasmus notes, this tyrant thought his
son worthy to be disenherited for adultery, which in our days the greatest
do make but a sport and pastime. Yet Solomon goes farther and says, that if a
man touch another man's wife, Prou. 6.27.
it will be his destruction and will bring upon him Gods horrible and inevitable
judgments. Can a man (says he) take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not
be burnt? Or can a man go upon coals and his feet not be hurt? So he that
goes into his neighbors wife shall not be innocent, whosoever touches her. A
thief that steals to satisfy his hunger, is not utterly despised, but if he
be sound, he shall restore seven fould: He shall give all that he has: but
he that commits adultery with a woman, he is destitute of understanding: He
that does it destroys his own soul: He shall find a wound and dishonor,
and his reproach shall never be put away. For Ielouzie is the rage of a
husband, who will not spare the adulterer in the day of vengeance. He cannot
bear the sight of any ransom, neither will he consent though thou augment the
gifts. And in an other place. Prou. 5.3.
The lips of a strange woman drop as a honie-combe, and her mouth is more
soft then oil: But the end of her is bitter as woormewoode, and sharp as a
two edged sword. Her feet go down to death, and her steps take hold on
hell. Keep thy way far from her, and come not near the door of her house.
Least thou give thine honor to others, and thy years to the cruel. Least a
stranger should be filled with thy strength, and thy labors be in the house
of a stranger: And thou mourn at thine end when thou have consumed thy flesh
and thy body: and say: how have I hated instruction, and my heart despised
correction? Again speaking of him that suffered himself to be overcome by
the entisementes of a wanton woman, he says: He straight ways follows her
as an Ox that goes to the slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks for
correction. Until a darte strike through his liver. As the bird hastes to
the snare, not knowing that she is in danger.

9 Notwithstanding all adulterers are not exemplarily punished in this life,
yet does it not follow that either they have not so deserved, or that Gods
threatenings are in vain: for he is righteous and true. And albeit in their
hearts they be not touched with the apprehension of such mishaps and calamities
as are incident to adulterers, even in this life: Yet at the least, let the
horrible sentence of death and everlasting dammation pronounced against them by
the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 6.10.
cause them to resolve to leave it. Adulterers says S. Paul, shall not inherit
the kingdom of God. Again, Marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed
undefiled: but whore-mongers and adulterers God will judge. Neither may we
think to escape the hand of almighty God, Heb. 13:4.
the judge of the world, who sees the hidden things. For as Solomon speaking
of adulterers, does say, The ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord,
Mala. 3.5.
and he pondreth all his paths. His own iniquities shall take the wicked
himself and he shall be holden with the cords of his own sin. Prou. 5.22.
Again, I will come near, says the Lord, to judge you: and I will be a
swift witness against sorcerers and adulterers. Numb. 5.11
And this is evidently confirmed in that in old time he ordained that the
woman suspected of adultery should drink a certain water, delivered to her
by the high priest, upon condition that having committed adultery, if she
denied it, her belly might burst and so she might perish.

10 Let us therefore abhor this abomination, Deuteronomy. ^^ ^^.
and shun al occasions that might move us thereunto. God in old time
ordained that if two men strove together, and that one of their wives should
take the other by his preuities, her hand should be cut off, without favor,
Deuteronomy. 22.1^.
albeit she did it simply to save and deliver her husband: What shall be then
done in such villainous conjunctions proceeding from lustful hearts bent to
adultery? Because the Jews ware no breeches, God commanded them to use Laces
at the four corners of their garments, least by any occasion, Deuteronomy. 22.5.
either mistaking or otherwise, that might be seen, which by the example of
our first fathers and nature it self, we are taught to hide. Which is more.
God among the Jews so bids the woman to wear the man's garment, or the man
the woman's? whereto the law adds. Who so does it, is an abomination to the
Lord. Why? Will some say: Is that such a fault? No, but he teaches that we
must prevent all danger of falling, as also that the woman thereby enboulden
not her self to forget all modesty, neither the man to enure himself in
effeminate wantonness, unworthy his nature. To be short, he teaches that
the form of modest attire, each one in his kind and calling, is a good
warrant for chastity. Many heathen have showed themselves very virtuous and
careful to shun all alurementes and occasions that might induce them to this
iniquity. We read that Great Alexander, having overcome Darius, would not
see his wife who was very fair, least he might have been allured to lust
after her. When Cains Gracchus was governor of Sardynia, he prohibited all
access of women to his house, except of such as came to crave justice. Plut.
in his Apotheg, 1. Cor. 35.33.
And Hieron of Sicill condemned the Poet Epicharmus in a great fine because in
the presence of his wife, he had used dishonest speeches. And indeed as Saint
Paul says, Evil words corrupt good manners.

11 To conclude let us consider, Plut. in his Laconic. Apotheg.
and in our hearts write the answer of Geradatas the Lacedemonian to him that
asked what punishment Licurgus had decreed against adulterers. None, says he,
for we have none such among us. But if there should, says the other? The
Lacedemonian answered, he should satisfy with such an Ox as stretching his
neck over this hill (pointing to a high hill) might drink of the river that
runs at the foot of the same: heereto when the other replied that it was
not possible to find any such Ox, neither is it possible (says the
Lacedemonian) to find any adulterer among us who have banished from among us
all riches, pleasures and excess in apparel: And contrariwise do especially
commend modesty, temperaunce, and due obedience to the Magistrate. If Gods
authority move us not to shun adultery and to detest it, likewise to
avoid all occasions and alurements to that iniquity, we surely do deserve to
be sent to the school of that heathen Lacedemonian, there to learn to flee
from every thing that may minister occasion to offend God, namely to commit
adultery: Otherwise the Lacedaemonians with whom there was found no adultery,
so long as they kept the laws to them given by a mortal man, shall be judges
against the Christians, among whom through their contempt of Gods holy
ordinances we daily see so many adulterers.

12 And thus much we may add, that man committing adultery sins more
grievously then woman, ^omb. lib. 4. did. 35. C. Christian 32. q. 5.
in that it is his part to surmount her in virtue, and by his good example to
direct her: as also her sin is the greatest by reason of the confusion and
supposition of children and thereby transferring lands and goods to those that
have no right therein. Pro. 2.17.
But in as much as in eitheir of them there is breach of faith and covenant
with God, as Solomon says: their sin is equal and they shall be equally
punished in the day of judgment.

13 As concerning the other kind of fornication committed between free
persons, such I mean as neither the one or the other are knit by marriage.
True it is that the heathen never made any great account thereof. But they be
neither our lawgiuers, nor our judges: but only our living God, who forbidding
adultery, does also forbid all carnal copulation that is not in marriage. Let
every man, says Saint Paul, possess his own vessel in holiness and honor,
and not in the lusts and concupiscence, 1. These. 4.4.
as the Gentiles which knew not God. The Apostles likewise knowing this
corruption of the Gentiles expressly condemned the same among Christians: and
that does sufficiently appear in that writing to the faithful that were
converted and lived among the Gentiles, Act. 15.20.
they expressly commanded them to beware of fornication. And as for such
profane Christians and skorners, as dare avouch that it is not prohibited in
the old testament, but in the new only they offer great injury to Gods
holiness. And indeed the only reason why, as Saint Paul teaches, God
ordained marriage, namely to avoid fornication, 1. Cor. 7.2.
does sufficiently prove that marriage being ordained even from the beginning
of the world, all carnal conjunction among those that then also were unmarried
was had in detestation. And that is it which the Apostle to the Hebrews
notes, when having said, Heb. 13.4.
That marriage is honorable among al men and the bed undefiled, he adds, but
whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. For in that manner opposing
whoredom against marriage, he plainly declares that Almighty God by
instituting marriage did intend to curse al other carnal copulation committed
out of marriage. Deuteronomy. 23.17.18.
And has he not by the mouth of Moses expressly said. There shall be no whore
of the daughters of Israel, neither shall there be a whore keeper of the sons
of Israel? Likewise to declare how greatly he does detest it, he forbids
the bringing of the hyre of a whore, for any vow into his house.

14 But we shall not need long to insist upon a matter so evident and certain.
Genesis 34.25.
Truly the sons of Jacob committed a wicked and detestable offense, when they
used circumcision as a cloak or pretense to murder the enhabitants of Sichem
for their sisters sake, who^ the kings son had destoured: Yet in that murder
does God evidently show what estimation he makes of chastity, when he does
so horribly punish the fornication of Sichem with the death of himself, his
father and all his people. 1. Cor. 10.
But especially when Saint Paul admonishing us to beware of fornication,
propounds the examples of Gods judgment executed against the Jews, of who^
for their fornication God in one day slew three and twenty thousand, he does
plainly teach us by the representation of this example taken out of the old
testament, that God even from the beginning has evermore condemned and most
terribly punished whoredom. And in as much as Jesus Christ came not to enforce
the law, but to declare the true sense and use thereof, every place of the new
testament that condemns whoredom, is a witness that God has forbidden the
same ever since the time of Moses.

15 Much rather are we Christians to abhor it, even we that have received at
Gods hand far greater benefits then the Jews, and are more plainly,
evidently, and at large instructed in the will of God, as concerning the
preserving of our bodies and souls in all pureness and chastity. This is the
will of God, says Saint Paul, 1. These. 4, ^. Colos. 3.5.
even your sanctification and that ye should abstain from fornication.
Again, Ephe. 5.3.
Mortify your members which are on the earth, fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affection, and evil concupiscence. In another place he proceeds
farther, saying. But fornication and all uncleanness, let it not be once named
among you, as it becomes Saints. If these admonitious do not sufficiently
penetrate our consciences, to resolve us to Amend our lives and to fly from
whoredom: the rather to abhor it, let us note what punishments God inflicted
upon fornicators and adulterers. We have already touched the example of his
horrible judgment in killing 23000. 1. Cor. 10.8.
Jews in one day for whoredom, which Saint Paul propounds to divert us from
the like offense for fear of the like punishment: But especially we are to
fear the sentence of death and everlasting damnation pronounced by the
Sovereign judge against whoremongers. Whoremongers, 1. Cor. 6.10. Heb. 13.4.
says Saint Paul, shall not inherit the kingdom of God. What shall then
become of them? The Apostle answers that God shall condemn them. And
because the world has never been free from scorners, who apprehending no part
of Gods judgments have endeavored likewise to divert others from fear
thereof. Ephe. 5.5.
Saint Paul having urged the consciences of the Ephesians in saying. Ye know
that no whoremonger, no unclean person has any inheritance in the kingdom of
Christ and of God, he adds, Let no man deceive you with vain words: for
for such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.
And this word Comes he does use, as if he had even pointed unto it, and
showed it discending out of heaven. Saint John describes unto us this wrath
and condemnation in a fearful manner, Apoca. 21.8.
saying, The portion of the whoremongers shall be in the lake which burns
with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. And to the end to make
them the more sensibly to feel that God has rejected them Saint Paul
commands that they should be excommunicated, and that we should forbear to
converse with them, 1. Cor. 5.9.
unless to the end to bring them to repentance.

16 To conclude, let us note the lively and pregnant reasons that Saint Paul
propounds to make us to abhor whoredom. Know you not says he that your
bodies are the members of Christ? 1. Cor. 6, 15.
Shall I then take the members of Christ and make them the members of an
harlot? First let us remember that our spiritual union with Christ concerns
not the soul only, but also the body, For we are members of his flesh and his
bones. Ephe. 5.30.
Otherwise we should have but a weak hope of the resurrection, if the
conjunction employed not the whole person composed both of the body and soul.
And this our conjunction with him is such that we are all one with him, as
being members of his body, and taking life from the same spirit, as he also
says. He that is united and conioined to the Lord, is one self spirit. But
what of all this? 1, Cor. 6.17.
Even the same that S. Paul says, He that commits fornication takes a
member from the body of Christ, and makes it a member of a harlot. And indeed
as he adds, He that coupleth himself with a harlot is one body, as it is
written. Two shall be one flesh. It must therefore of necessity follow either
that Christ must together with the member of his body, be taken and united to
the harlot (which even to imagine is most horrible) or else the member must be
plucked from the body of Christ, when it is coupled and united unto the harlot,
which also is detestable, as he shows, saying God forbid.

17. His second reason is this. Every sin that man co^miteth is without the
body: but he that commits whoredom sins against his own body. Which
some do note, as if whoredom did therein print some greater blemish of
villainy and infamy then any other sin. As also S. Paul, speaking of sin
against nature, says. Romans 1.24.
They have defiled their own bodies between themselves. Otherwise, that he
sins against his own body, in that he and the whore with whom he sins,
are one body. Besides, that being an excellent member of the body of Christ,
he sins deeply against his body in pulling it off from the body of Christ
and making it a member of a villainous whore, and thereby becoming one body
with her,

18 Saint Paul's third argument is this. Our bodies are the temples of the holy
Ghost. But the holy Ghost cannot abide in any unclean or polluted place: We do
therefore by whoredom drive away the holy ghost and make our selves an
habitatio^ for the unclean spirit, which is the Devil. To conclude, he says,
1. Cor. 6,
we are no longer our own, and why? Because God has bought us with a price.
In that he delivered his son Jesus Christ to the death for us. And therefore,
as he adds, we are to glorify God in our bodies and in our spirits, which are
his, and not to commit such villainous sacrilege as forsaking God to give to a
whore that which is not our own, but Gods.

19 What are we then to do? 1. Cor. 6.18.
Even to the end to amend our lives according as Jesus Christ admonishes and
commands us, we are to put in practice the same whereto Saint Paul exhorts
us: saying: Fly fornication, thereby declaring that it is our duty so to abhor
it, that in liew of seeking after it we fly from it, Hierome in his Epistles.
Greg. in his Moralles.
as from a most pernicious, damnable and accursed pestilence, and to the same
purpose let us remember the saying of Saint Hierome. Oh how sharp is the
fruit of whoredom? It is more bitter then Gaul, and more cruel then the
sword: and diligently let us meditate upon the saying of another Doctor: When
whoredom has once taken hold of a man's understanding, she will hardly
suffer him to think of any goodness. For the desires of man (are as it were)
glued together. Of the suggestion of the flesh comes imagination: of
imagination, conceit: of conceit affection: of affection, delectation: of
delectation, consent: of consent, action: of action, custom: of custom,
despair: of despair, excuse: of excuse, boasting: and of boasting of sin,
condemnation. If therefore through the infirmity of our flesh we feel in our
selves the first steps to this corruption, let us either break off, or
prevent the rest that follow, least we ascend to the highest, from whence the
fall is no less then certain and horrible damnation.

Of Dances. Chap. 18.
ANd hereto will we yet add two kinds of pleasure or voluptuousness. Dancing
and plays. And we will begin with dancing, as with that which many times
ministers occasion of who^dome before spoken of. As it is not meet to
condemn al recreation and pastime, so is it no reason to allow dancing, in
manner as it is now used among Christians, to our great shame and confusion,
where men and women, young men and maids, al mixed together, do dance with
many gestures of wantonness, vanity and slippery behavior, whether to the
noise of instruments or of songs for the most part dishonest, and seeming only
as bellows to kindle fornication and to minister pleasure and delight. First
such dances have always been either effects, or fruits or dependances of great
wickedness, as Idolatry, drunkenness and fornication: And used among such as
never were led, or restrained by the fear of God. Among the heathen such
feasts as employed most villainy, lewdness and dishonestie as those that were
dedicated to Bacchus, Pan, and such like, were usually celebrated for the most
part with dancing. 1. Cor. 10.7. Eod. 32.6. and 18.19.
Yea even the Jews when they had erected the golden Calse and sacrificed
thereto, sat down to eat and drink, and rise up to play, which most
interpreters do refer to dancing. As also Moses notes that coming down
the mountain, he heard the noise of singing and piping. The like is also
usual in the Church of Rome, in their cons^aries, dedications and holy days,
wherein they apply themselves to dancing. Great feasts likewise and belly
cheer are for the most part accompanied with this vanity of dancing, whereof
is grown this proverb After the paunche came the dance. And indeed dancing
is seldom used in the morninges, or whiles men be fasting. After the
Amalekites had sacked Siceleg, 1. Sam. 30.16. Basil in his Sermon. against
drunkenness
and had been merry in eating and drinking, David sound them dancing. And
Basil reproving the dances used in his time, lays the blame upon wine. If
dances therefore usually be the fruits of Idolatry and drunkenness, who
dare aduow the fruit of such trees to be good.

2 Well, let us now consider of the dance it self. The caperings, iumpes,
gambolds, turnings, windings, courtesies, paces, first forward, then backward,
wheeling about, stamping upon the ground, with other like toies, follies and
vanities, what else do they represent, but the gestures rather of a frantic or
madman, then of a sober person? Their skips and wanton friskes do better
beseem Kids or Gotes, as by the term of capraying themselves do confess: or
rather Apes as a certain heathen Poet has noted, saying: Ovid in his Metam,
Jupiter being offended with a people that gave themselves too much to dancing,
transformed them into Apes. Whereby he declares unto us that such as follow
dancing are unworthy to be reckoned among men, but rather deserve to be
transformed into Apes. Also that the heathen and their Gods were of the same
opinion. But albeit we leave them the name of men, yet are we to esteem them
but as drunken and mad men, considering their countenaunces and gestures quite
altered from the shape of sober and wisemen. And among the Romans it was an
approved sentence that none should dance but such as were either mad or
drunk. Besides if from a far off we should see some company dancing and
leaping, and hear no noise of Music or singing, we should verily take them
to be mad-drunken, or distraught of their wits.

3 And as for such as being given to dancing cannot broke to be thought drunk
or besides their wits, yet must they at the least confess that most of them
are led by some pleasures of the flesh, which will engender filthy and cursed
concupiscence, which likewise would induce them to fornication, Sueton. in
Catelin.
were it not that God by his power, and in mercy does mightily restrain them.
In this respect has a heathen man termed dances the instruments of
fornication: Others, the Devils baudery, as we shall hereafter perceive. Is
it not therefore the shameless impudency and invention of the Devil, even
among Christians to admit of the erection of public schools, to teach
dancing, that is to say, to transform youth into Apes, Ovid:
drunkerds or mad men, and to give precepts how to intise men's hearts to lust
and fornication? The time was when a heathen Emperor banished a heathen Poet,
for writing a little book of the Art of love: Yet can we Christians allow of
schools wherein to teach the practice, alurements, and occasions to draw, or
be drawn into fornication. But it were rather to be wished that these
dancers, men or women would carefully apply themselves in the school of the
holy Ghost, which is the heavenly doctrine, to study how to forget dancing, in
such manner that neither it, neither any such folly, vanity or wantonness might
henceforth be remembered among Christians.

4 Now let us see what is taught in this school for the rejecting, condemning,
and utter abolishing of such dances as we speak of, together with the
memorial of the same. 1. Pet. 43.
First, S. Peter says. It is sufficient for us that we have spent the time
past of the life, after the lusts of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts,
drunkenness, gluttony, drinkings and in abhommable Idolatries. True it is that
in express words he says not Dance not: but let the proctors for dances
answer what he means by wantonness conjoined to lusts, drunkenness and
Idolatry: Is it not any thing that is repugnant to the modesty, sobriety,
and chastity, required in the children of God? And consequently all these
sports, toys, sollies, gamboulds, and other vanities used in dances? And does
not experience teach that drunkenness is usually accompanied with such
insolency, and profane and vain songs? And fornication with such villainous
speeches and songs, toyings, gestures, and other lascivious fashions practiced
in dances? what else are dances therefore but the insolences, fruits, paths
and in a manner inseperable companions both to whoredom and drunkenness? And
consequently who sees not that dances and al dependances thereof are by the
spirit of God prohibited in that it does forbid all wantonness, fornication
and drunkenness.

5 If we should add that dances are signified in the word gluttony, our
dancers cannot well allow thereof. Yet does the word which the Apostle uses,
sometime signify feasts and meetings to be merry in wantonness and dissolute
gestures, and sometime the dances that usually do accompany such feasts. Which
is more, the God whom the heathen termed the God of good cheer, riot, and
dances, was called by the name of Comus, from whence the Grecians, as they well
know that understand the tongue, have derived a verb that signifies, to dance.
Must we not then confess that by this word whereby we have signified,
gluttony, the holy Ghost forbids dancing, meetings for belly cheer, and al
dissolutions? Ephe. 5.11. Romans 13.1^.
S. Paul writing to the Ephesians, prohibiteth al communication in the
unfruitful works of darkness, and to the Romans he exhorts us to cast the^
off, and to put on the garments of light. Who therefore dare place dancing else
where then among the works of darkness, rather then of light, especially
considering this title Unfruitful, which the Apostle joins with the works of
darkness? For the least that we can say of dances, is to call the^ unfruitful,
considering they also are in many sorts hurtful as hereafter we will declare.

6 The same Apostle in another place propounds two sorts of works or fruits,
viz. Of the flesh and of the spirit, Gal. 5.
but since we cannot without great impudency place these dances among the
fruits of the spirit, we must in reason acknowledge them to be the works of
the flesh. And indeed in dances we find the same pollution and insolency ye S.
Paul expressly mentions among the works of the flesh: but not that temperance
which he terms the fruit of the spirit. 1. Ioh. 2.15.
John says. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world, and
for example which they be, he names, Lust of the flesh, lust of the eyes, and
pride of life. Is not all this found in dances? No doubt the^, they be of the
world and not of God. And so consequently as he adds: Who so loves them, the
love of the father is not in him. If in a picture we see some eating and
drinking, some dancing and so forth, will we term this a picture of the
children of God, and not rather a representation of the world? Again to what
end is dancing, but to delight the world and the flesh? As the affections of
the flesh be enemies to god, so he that loves the world makes himself an
enemy to God. It therefore plainly appears in this prohibition of Saint John,
that we should not love the world, dancing is forbidden, and applying our
selves thereto we must needs fall at enmity with God. Ephe, 5.4. Mat. 12.36.


7 Saint Paul wills us to abstain from al folish and vain speeches, as
things not beseeming the Saints. And Jesus Christ says, that in the day of
judgment we shall give account of every Idle word. If the holy Ghost
condemns al tauntes, quippes, pleasant and idle talk, that tend only to
delight the company, and consequently beseem Apes and iesters, but are not
any way convenient among Christians and the children of God, surely the
sollies, mirth and vanity of dances, are without comparison more unseemly
among the Saints, and rather to be condemned. Ephe. 5.16.
The Apostle representing unto us the time that we have lost during our
ignorance, whiles we yet served the Devil, the world, and the flesh exhorts
us to redeem it. And how? In forsaking the pleasures of our flesh for the
price of the purchase. But do we obey his admonition, when we loose the whole
day, yea and spend the night in dancing, making our selves besides weary, and
unfit for our vocation in the morning.

8 The holy Scripture in many places exhorts us to be sober, modest, 1. Pet.
5.8. Phil. 4.5. Luke 12.35. Phil. 3.20. 1. These. 5.6. 1. Pet 5.8. Col. 3.5.
Gal. 5.24. 1. Cor. 9.27. Eccles. 7 3. Mat. 16 24. Phil. 2.11.
steadfast in all parts of our life, to have our loins girt up: that is, not to
suffer the affections of our souls to cleave to the ground in the desires and
vanities thereof: to have our conversation in heaven: to watch: to mortify our
members: to crucify our flesh: and the lusts thereof: to tame and subdue our
bodies: to go rather to the house of mourning then of mirth: that is to say,
to seek means to quench our pleasures and vanities by the representation of
death: to deny our selves: to bear our cross: to weep when the world
rejoices: To be short, to employ our selves in our vocation in fear and
trembling. But such as use dancing, do little think upon these rules and
duties of Gods children. The only remembrance of these exhortations and
admoni^ions might suffice, were they not desperate, to make them renounce such
vanity, insolenc^e, and lightness, yea even to abhor and detest them. If when
they were in the ch^efe of their dance, God should send some extraordinary
thunder or earthquake, they would straight leave off: Yea if the same should
long continue, with other tokens from heaven, then would all this mirth and
vain dancing be converted into sorrow and grief for their dancing, and so
their consciences would testify that dances are repugnant to that disposition
that should be in us to watch for the coming of the Lord.

9 Now to proceed to another consideration. By three principal points we may
judge whether our deeds and works be good. First, whether they concur with
our vocation: Secondly, whether they edify our neighbors: Lastly, whether
they tend to the glory of God. As concerning our vocation, it consists in
this: That we being freed from sin do she from it, and shun all appearance of
evil. As touching edification, the same rests in this, that our conversation
be such as may beseem the profession of the Gospel, that others may be
induced to embrace and follow the same. And for the glory of God, Saint Paul
says. Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, let all be done to the
honor and glory of God. Now we refer our eating and drinking to the glory
of God, when we use the same in soberness and thanksgiving, that we may
every of us be the better disposed to serve God in our vocations. The like is
in our sleep, and all other the recreations of our bodies or minds. But is
not dancing directly repugnant to our vocation, because that where we should
shun sin and all appearance of evil, with all occasions and allurements
thereto, it ministereth nothing but appearance and entisement to the same?
Likewise, for the edification of our neighbors. This folly and vanity is to
no other use, but to be an offense unto them, in that thereby the dancers seem
to infer, that the Gospel therein concurreth with the world and the flesh,
considering that we that profess the Gospel, and therefore ought to renounce
such vanity, are so bent and given thereunto. And as touching the glory of
God, what dancer dare be so impudent, as to mayntaine that God is glorified in
dancing, either that he danceth to the end to glorify God, or to be the
more apt to serve him in his vocation? Moreover, the rule of good works
rests not in the custom and use of the world, but in the testimony of the
will of God. Romans 1^.^.
Fashion not your selves like unto this world (says Saint Paul) but prove what
is the good will of God. As for dancing, we must therefore place it among the
wicked works, because it is repugnant to our vocation, to the edification of
our neighbors, to the glory of God, and to the rule of his will. Romans 14.23
Again, if every work that is not of says be sin, as Saint Paul
affirms, and that there can be no faith without the testimony of Gods will,
let our dancers either prove that it is Gods will that they should dance, or
else acknowledge and confess that dancing is sin.

10 Furthermore, let us consider the persons. If they be stricken in years,
dancing is an unseemly lightness, yea, even unnatural, in respect that great
years require gravity and rest. Tit. 1.2.
As also S. Paul wills, that elder men should be sober, honest, and discreet.
Whereby it appears, that Gods word forbids them to dance. And as concerning
youth, true it is that they are more nimble, yet does it not follow, 2. Tim.
1.2.
that they are allowed to abuse their actiuenesse in folly and vanity. Saint
Paul warns Timothy, that he should not follow the lusts of youth. What
else does youth then in their dancing, but contrary to this doctrine, seek
and cherish their lusts, heap towe upon the fire, kindle that which they
should quench, put a sword into a mad man's hand, hasten those into danger who
of themselves are ready to run, offer him wine to drink that is possessed
with a fever, heat that which already burns, cast those headlong into
mischief that are ready to fall? Saint Paul warns Titus; to exhort young
men to be wise. Tit. ^.^
This wisdom comprehends gravity, modesty, and temperance, which makes
youth honorable, and such as want the same do deserve to be placed among
fools and light persons.

Tit. 3 4 1. Tim. 2.9.
11 Modesty best beseems women, as says the Apostle in the same place, and
in another place he joins shamefastnes with modesty. Neither will any man
allow of, or commend bold, shameless, light, foolish, and wanton women and
maids. All which vices notwithstanding are the ornaments of dancers. A well
taught maiden, says S. Ambrose, coueteth neither to see nor to be seen: and
contrary wise, such as haunt dancing do desire both, says a certain Poet,
Ovid.
to see and to be seen. There do they boast their persons, and crave praise
for their vanity and light behavior, which every honest woman and maiden
that covet to be true Christians, and seek to be reputed modest, chaste, and
virtuous, ought especially to shun.

12 Again, we are also to consider of the mingling of men and women, young
men and maids in their dancing. But Jesus Christ says, Math. 5.28
If thou see a woman, to lust after her, thou have alredie committed adultery
with her. The eyes are as windows whereby the poison of lust do enter into the
heart. Into what danger do men and women, young men and maids adventure
themselves, when they are at liberty to look and contemplate, to approach, to
entertain, and cherish, to sport and kiss each other? Be not all these
allurementes and entisementes to kindle the fire of lust? Is it not a mere
baudrie and invention of the devil, to lead, and as it were eue^ to force men
to those things that they ought utterly to abhor? The devil knowing that there
yet abides some spark of the fear of God in man, does not at the first
coming and sight say, Commit fornication or adultery, for so he might soon
be driven away of many that detest such gross iniquities: but this is his
policy: he first allureth us from our ordinary busynesses and exercises
befitting our vocations: Then he brings us to feasts, banquets, and
pleasant company that might delyght us: Having heerewyth shaken us, and taken
some small hold, it is no hard matter to allure us from pleasure to pleasure,
and so to greater sportes, as we see in dancing, where the heart swelling in
fleshly joy, and finding obiectes and allurements correspondent to the
pleasures thereof, do more and more grow dronken in this poison, whereby to
entangle it self and slip into lusts, and (so far as it may) to proceed
and go forward in the enjoying of the same. In this sense were the pleasures
and delights of Pharaohs Court, Heb. 11.25.
termed The delights of sin. For as Apothecaries do cover their bitter
pills with some sweet substance, whereby to make them go down the easier,
so the devil, under the sport and pleasure of daunces, makes men to swallowe
lustful desires, and albeit they proceed to no greater iniquity, yet is this
a mortal wound to the soul, considering that we know that such lusts are
accursed in the sight of God.

13 Moreover, some men have compared man and woman to two earthen vessels,
wherein we learn, that when the devil brings them together in the storm
and pastime of dancing, Eccle. 9.1^
it is enough to break them both. Many (says Ecclesiasticus) wondering at the
beauty of a strange woman, have been reproved. And therefore he adds,
Banquet not with her, least thy heart incline unto her, and so through thy
desire thou fall into destruction. Into what danger then do they adventure, who
having already banqueted with them, do choose them, do take them by the
hands, do lead them a dance, do approach unto them, do kiss them, do
show them their actiuitie and nimble behavior: wherein the woman or maiden
does answer them with the same? Be not these mighty winds to kindle and
inflame the hearts that do already burn in lust? Besides all this, in their
dancing they have villainous and shameful songs, which the sound of
instruments do return to their remembrance. Is not this a pouring of oil
into fire, and an increase of danger, according to the words of the Apostle
Saint Paul, that evil words corrupt good manners? 1. Cor. 15.33.
God in his law inhibited man from wearing the woman's apparel, as also the
woman from wearing the man's, least they might peradventure pervert their ways,
the one incurring effeminate niceness, the other impudent boldness, and so
he sought to prevent the occasions and ways to wantonness. Yet is this in
manner nothing, in respect of such lyghtnesse, attouchments, and others the
manners and gestures of dancing, wholly sauouring of impudency, and serving
only for allurementes to the same. And in deed the dance is no other but the
devils dispensation and license, each to look, behold, and kiss other, to
confer of love, to use such countenance and gestures, as (were it not in the
dance) would be accounted evident tokens of want of chastity, and except in
dansing, they would be ashamed either in words or deeds to assume any such
licentious liberty. In this respect have Chrysostom and other notable
servants of God, evermore pronounced dances to be the baits, poisons, and
band^^es of satan.

14 Saint Paul forbids all vnchast-speeches, even the naming of fornication.
Ephesians. 5.3
Why? Because even the name contains some poison, and offers uncleanness
to the understanding. What shall we then say of the gestures, talk, songs,
and sound of instruments in dances, which represent this villainy to the eyes
both of the bodies and minds, of such persons as by a delight in dancing do
take pleasure therein, and be even already set on fire? Is it not a mere
consuming of them in such a slain? Touch the gunpouder with a match and it is
presently inflamed: in like reason two persons inclined to the fire of love,
approaching and coming together with the bellows of pleasure and sport in
dancing, will soon be ready to embrace. The conjunction of two heates will
soon hatch a damnable desire, and such as we are to shun all occasion of, as a
mortal plague.

15 Howbeit we will not say that all that do dance do level at fornication,
but to the contrary will confess, that they never think of any such matter,
yet do we uphold, that it is a laying together of fire, and wind that
kindles it. And it is most certain, that most dances do not end in such
chastity as they began. And therefore wheresoever we see any danger, we
are to fear and fly from it. Neither must we ever imagine, that there is no
danger, when the occasions are evident, either presume that we are strong
enough to surmount the danger whereinto voluntarily we thrust our selves: but
let us think upon this saying, He that loves danger shall fall into it, and
that it is the reward of foolish presumption. Can a man, says Solomon, take
fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? Prouer. 6 27.
Or shall a man walk upon hot coals, and not burn his feet? He that
fears the plague shunneth the infection: all come not to actual fornication:
yet is not that enough, for under these words, Thou shall not commit
adultery, are comprised all thoughts, desires, lusts, beginnings, allurements,
and appearance of fornication. And who is he that taking pleasure in dancing,
can exempt himself? To prove a disease to be contagious, it is enough to
show that many are infected, though not all. In a matter of peril we have
regard what comes often to pass, though not always.

16 Neither is it enough, that some are of constancy to avoid pollution
herein. For if such a one ministers cause to draw others into such lusts, is
not he the cause of their destruction? Does not his pleasure breed the loss of
him, for whom Jesus Christ has dyed? Rom 14 15 Luke 17 2
Had it not been better for him to have been cast into the sea, according to
the saying of Christ, with a millstone about his neck, than that his neighbor
should by him have taken occasion to offend God?

17 Now let us give care to the agreement and consent of the good fathers and
most excellent doctors of the Church, with the testimonies of Gods word, the
reasons and necessary consequences gathered of the same, as alredie they have
been alleged. With one consent they all condemn dancing, as the sweet baits,
allurements, and kindlers of lust tending to fornication. In brief, as
follies, lightness, and vanity, pernicious, scandalous, and utterly unworthy
all Christians. Great Basil complaining of the lewdness of women in his time,
says: These wanton women, Basil in a Sermon of drunkenness,
forgetting all fear of God, stand in no awe of the threats of everlasting
fire. In lien of thinking how to purge their hearts from all wicked lusts, to
wash away their former sins with tears, to provide to be ready in the
great day of the appearing of Jesus Christ, rejecting his yoke, most
villanously uncovering their heads, to spite God and his Angels, like
shameless wretches, with their hair laid open to the sight of men, in their
garments uttering all tokens of wantonness, and in this manner tripping and
mincing it with their seet, with shameless eyes, and lascivious countenances,
mad after dancing, and alluring the intemperaunce of youth after them, are
commen into holy places, nere the town walls, to follow their da^ces, and
thereby have profaned them, and made them the markets of all filthynes. They
have infected the air with their brothell songs, and polluted the earth with
their feet, leaping most lewdly, and environed with troops of young people, as
it were with a Theater. Shameless and folish women, that have forborne
novillany or folly: How can I hide these things, or what a just complaint may I
make? It is wine that has bred us the loss of so many souls. In this
discourse, among other things, this good Doctor notes, that such as give
themselves to dancing, are not greatly touched with the fear of God, with
sorrow for their sin, with remembrance of the coming of Christ, neither with
any cogitations of a better life: that in dances there is folly and weakness of
mind: that they be allurements of men's affections unto women: that with
dances and love songs the air is infected, the earth not so much worn as
polluted with feet, and that the holy places are converted into markets of all
uncleanness: that the women that frequent there, are past shame. To be short,
that dances do implie so many mischiefs, that they cannot be sufficiently
complained of. To conclude, that wine is the occasion of dances, and
consequently the destruction of many souls.

18 Prosecuting this argument in the same treatise, he says: Men and women in
their dancing and delivering their wretched souls to the devil, do pierce
and rent each other with shaftes of lust. All their actions are the actiuities
and feats of iuglers, lewd songs, and brothe like iestures, and lascivious
provoking to fornication. Behold, thou dalliest and sportest in a foolish joy,
when thou should weep and be sorry for thy misdeeds. Forgetting the psalms
and hymns that thou have learned, thou appliest thy self to profane songs,
thou mouest thy feet, and deuoid of thy senses do friske up and down. O
fool, when thou should lend thy knee to the service of God and our Lord
Jesus Christ, thou dancest. Whom shall I bewail, maidens or married women?
Does he not here again lay open great inconveniences in dancing? Does he not
affirm, that they be repugnant to all holy duties of Christians? Also, that
the inconveniences are such, as may give occasion to all good men to weep, so
often as they think thereupon.

Chriso. in his 49. hom. upon Matthew.
19 As for Chrysostom, he has written whole homelies against dancing. But for
breuities sake, we will only collect some places. Expounding the dance at
Herod's feast, he says: It was the devil that taught the damsel to please
Herod, and to deprive him of his senses, for surely the devil is ever in the
midst of these lascivious leapings and dances. God gave us our legs to
walk modestly, not to fetch such friskes and gambaldes: to stand in the
fellowship of Angels, not to hoppe up and down most villanously. If the body
so wreatheth and deformeth it self in such impudent gestures, may we not think
that the soul is made more foul and villainous? To these tunes, and in these
dances does the devil dance, and by them do the devils ministers seduce men.
Again, in these days have we like assemblyes and feasts as was Herodes, not
that Saint John is in them beheaded, but that the members of Christ are there
rent from him, and other offenses, more wicked and abominable are there
committed. For the dancers do not now crave the head of Saint John, but the
souls of the assistants. There making them the slaves of lust, and entangling
them in filthy love and delights, they pluck away, not a head, but a soul
from Christ, making the beholders, fornicators and effeminate persons. And well
I wot, that thou dare not reply that being overcome with wine, the women's
songs and dances did not much move thee, for truly thou art entised to
impudency, and in thee is this horrible sin accomplished, that of the
members of Christ, thou make the members of an harlot. True it is, that
Herodias daughter is not there, but the devil is, which at that time danced in
her, and now in that woman whom thou beholdest, and leads into captivity the
deceived souls of those that sit and look on. Again, after many like
exhortations, These things, says he, do I propound unto you, and not
without cause, Chrisost. in his last homily upon the Col. Chrisost. in his
second homily upon Genesis
but only to the end you may shun all such marriages, dances, and deuillish
pastimes. Also, expounding the histories and marriages of Isaac and Jacob, he
exhorts the people well to note, that there was no dancing. You see, says he,
with what modesty those marriages were celebrated. Note this all you that make
such account of those deuillish pompes, and even at the beginning, do pollute
the honor of marriage with such abomination. Were there then any viols? Had
they any tabers and pipes? Did they practice such deuillish dancing? Ambrose
in his 3. book of Virginity.


20 Among our Latin Doctors, Saint Ambrose also speaks of dancing. Where the
last mess of good cheer is dancing, shamefastnes has but small assurance,
and allurements are greatly to be feared. I could wish maidens to keep them
away. For as a learned man, even in wordly affairs, does say. No man
danceth, unless he be either drunk or mad. What counsels do we look for in the
Scriptures, when Saint John, the herald of righteousness, was put to death at
the request of a dancer: which is an example, that the entisement of one dance
has procured more hurt, than the rage of sacrilegious madness and fury?
Again, what can a daughter learn of her adulterous mother, but the loss of
her honor? Can any thing tend more to villainous lust, than by disordinate
motions to discover such parts of the body, as either nature has hidden, or
discipline covered? To play with the eyes, to turn the head about, to cast the
locks here and there. Not without cause have some there learned to do injury
to God. For what modesty or shamefastnes can there be where they dance, and
friske about with such noise? And speaking of the villainous Herodias, that
taught her daughter so to dance, he adds this: What say you, ye holy women?
you see what you are to teach your daughters, also what they should forget. Let
a daughter dance, but if a daughter dance, let it be the daughter of that vild
incestuous person. But as for her that is modest and chaste, let her teach her
daughters godliness, not dancing.

31 Saint Augustine complaining of the corruptions of his time, Aug against
Petil. cap. 6.
says thus: Bishops were wont to suppress foolish and lascivious dances:
but now we may find some Bishops that will be lookers on, yea, and sometimes
dance with women, so far are they from suppressing them. August upon the 32.
psalm.
Where is he which sufficiently shows, that before through the diligence of
Gods good servants, dances were suppressed and banished from among Christians,
as dissolutions utterly unworthy their profession, and therefore in another
place, he vpholdeth that it is better upon the holy day to work than to
dance.

22 As for the Doctors of our days, they also concur with the former, some
calling dances, the devils baudry, others saying, that dancing is as a circle,
Viret in his Instit. upon the 7. commandment of the law.
whereof the devil is the center, and the circumference are all his Angels.
Among the rest one thus writes, What brimstone or bellows can a man find
more sit and infernal wherewith to inflame and kindle the fyres of youth, that
do already by nature so burn, that we can hardly find water enough to
quench the same? For albeit women and maids do dance their rounds alone, yet
by their songs and lascivious motions, they entice not only themselves, but
the lookers on and hearers to lasciviousness, and are to themselves and others
as drums, musitions, trumpets, and spectacles of the devil. If they have young
men among them, so much the worse, for so is the fire nearer at hand and more
kindled. If they be at any other dances, whereof the numbers are infinite,
how many means has satan to allure to his stews both men and women, old
and young, dancers, and standers by? There shall ye have instruments, by
their lascivious tunes to serve as the devils trumpets, to provoke the hearers
to all villainy, the foulest speeches that may be, lascinious gestures,
signs, motions, and as dishonest touchings as may be found out, let such
consider hereof as have had experience. Speaking also of Herodias daughter: We
read (says he) of the daughter of a whore that daunced. Wherein he
shows, that dances are the doctrine of the school of whoores and strumpets,
not of honest women.

23 If all these authorities may not suffice, whole assemblies of Bishops
have likewise condemned dancing. In the year 364. in a council holden at
Laodicia, it was decreed by the common advice of all good men there present,
that Christians should use no dancing at marriages, only they might there
dine and sup together in all chaste conversation, as it beseems Christians.
The same was afterward confirmed in the sixth universal council of three
hundred Bishops, holden at Constantinople. Likewise in the Council of Agatha
holden about the year 430. chap. 39, all dancing, and love songs, or
lascivious behauiours, were also condemned and prohibited among all Christians
of whatsoever estate. Again, the Council of Ilerd in Spain about the year
515. forbadde all dancing and lascivious singing at Christian marriages. The
Sinodes and assemblies of the pastors of our time have evermore condemned
dancing, as an exercise pernicious and unworthy the professors of reformed
religion. To conclude, at the last Estats holden at Orleans, France by her
deputies required to take away all public dancing, and thereupon obtained a
decree that yet is extant.

24 If the authority of Gods word, the very vanity and most dangerous
corruption of daunces, the testimonies of the holy Fathers and Doctors of the
Church both old and new, the decrees of Councels and Sinodes, and of Christian
princes be no sufficient grounds to suppress dauncers, of necessity we must
put them to school among the Heathen, especially the Romans, of them to
learn even to their shame, what modesty, holiness, honesty and temperance
is to be required among Christians. Whereas among other superstitions and
corruptions brought from Greece into their commonwealth, they had taken up a
custom in their Bacchanalian feasts, that men and women should dance
together: in respect of such great inconveniences as thereby did ensue, they
bannished that fashion out of their City, and could not by any means be
well persuaded of that man that was addicted to dancing. This law was in
force in the days of the Orator Cicero, about the declining of their common
wealth: notwithstanding their manners were already much corrupt and degenerate
from the former integrity.

25 For the testimony of the truth hereof we will allege some part of his
writings. Cic. for Murena, orat. 25.
Lucius Murena was a noble man and chosen to be Consul at Rome, some enuiers
of his advancement, and his enemies, to the end to declare him unworthy that
dignity, accused him of many crimes, among the rest, that he had daunced.
Cicero who had undertaken his defense, coming to that point of the accusato^i,
says not that it was no fault to dance, and so the same was a vain objection:
but acknowledges it in deed to be a great fault, and therefore for his
clyent says, that there was no appearance to believe that Murena daunced: his
reasons: because dancing is evermore accompanied with many other vices. As
also that a man could not give himself to dancing, unless he were either
drunk or mad. That the vices that minister presumption of dancing, (as the
causes of their effects) are for the most part villainous and dissolute
banquets, drunkenness, lust, and fornication: But no man could accuse Muraena
of any such, and therefore it was not to be thought that ever he daunced.
Here we see, that among the Romans dancing was a great fault, very
ignominious, and sufficient to denounce a man incapable of preferment in the
common wealth. Also, that they were resolved, that dancing was always
accompanied with mighty and most villainous vices. To be short, that a
virtuous man would never dance. All this was thought most true among the
Romans. Otherwise, neither had Cato accused Muraena for dancing, neither had
Cicero alleged this ground for his defense.

26 Again, Deiotarus a king in Asia, being likewise accused before Caesar for
dancing at a banquet, the same Cicero in his defense for that crime, declared
that there was no such presumption in such a man: first, because he was a
king, who used not to be drunk: next, that he resembled not many other
kings, such as presuming of their liberty, applied themselves to all riot and
lustful pleasure. But that he was a modest, sober, and stay de man, one who in
his youth gave himself to more honest exercises, as ^^ding of horses, practice
of weapons, etc. Here again we see, that the Romans were fully persuaded,
that dancing and drunkenness went commonly together: that they are exercises
more fit for men drowned in pleasures, than for such as are endued with
modesty: also that all young princes well brought up, omitting all such
vanity, should give themselves to the exercises of virtue.

27 The same Cicero, after his return from exile, representing to the Senate
the life and behavior of one of his enemies, Aulus Gabimus, among other the
good qualities of a ruffian and effeminate person, entituleth him to be a
gallant dancer, and verse nimble. Having also to deal with Anthony, a man
drowned in all kind of vice, among other his reproaches of fornication and
ordinary drunkenness, he also obiecteth that he had danced. Hereto let us
add the saying of the same Orator in his third book of Offices. There he
shows, that a wise man, such a one as makes account, or professes virtue,
should never meddle with any such villainous or dishonest action,
notwithstanding whatsoever great profit might be gotten thereby. And for
example, he puts this case: If a man by Will should chance to bequeath to
one that professes virtue, two or three millions of crowns, upon condition,
that before he took possession of this legacy, he should come into the common
place, and there dance, and that he should promise so to do: he hereupon
demands, whether this man in performing his promise, and dancing in the face
of the world, should show him self either virtuous or wise: Then he
answers, that he ought not to have promised, so had he showed his gravity.
Likewise, that he ought not for any thing to do that which in the
accomplishment imported any villainy. These sentences of Cicero a hethen, may
be a reproach and just condemnation against Christians, with whom dancing is
so common, that some have erected publyke schools wherein to teach dancing.

28 All the premises tending to condemn dancing, might suffice to cut off all
replication: yet least we should omit any thing that might make with the
atturneys thereof, and dazell the eyes of the flesh inclined to this
corruption: we will answer to their usual propositions in defense thereof.
First, they object that we seek to abolish all pleasure and recreation, which
were a matter repugnant to nature, to right and reason, considering that rest
and recreation are as necessary as meat, drink, sleep, and such like, which
we use for the preservation of life. But we do confess, that both body and
mind do require recreation. Yet albeit it be permitted sometimes to take
recreation, it does not therefore follow, that they must be allowed to dance.
All recreations are not permitted, otherwise it would be lawful for men to
recreate them selves in lewd and foolish speeches, in dronkennes, fornication,
etc. But all recreation must tend to prepare us either in body or mind to our
vocation: every other recreation conjoined with appearance of evil, occasion
or entisement to wantonness, or offense to our neighbor, is by Gods mouth
accursed. To be short, every recreation repugnant to the modesty, temperance,
and holiness required in Christians, is to be condemned and rejected. Therefore
this objection is false, If it be lawful to take recreation, it is also
lawful to dance.

29 They also reply: To leap, friske, and dance, are things indifferent,
therefore to make them a sin is injury to Christian liberty. We answer:
Those things are indifferent, which with faith and for the glory of God, and
without danger of offense, a man may either do or leave, as to eat flesh or
to eat none, but dances cannot be drawn into that compass. The vanities,
lightness, and excessive sport of dances, the ordinary companions to
drunkenness, the manifest allurements to lasciviousness, and the apparent
occasions of sundry notable inconveniences do forbid them to be accounted
among things indifferent. For it were mere impudency to maintain, that such
vanity or corruption may please God, and so we may apply our selves thereto
in faith, which if we have not, all that we do is sin. Also, albeit we
should admit them (which we cannot) to be things indifferent, Romans 14.23 Rom 14
1. Cor. 8.13
yet ought we to practice the same which Saint Paul protests, That rather
than to offend our neighbor, for whom Jesus Christ has dyed, we will never
use it while we live.

30 Some do confess, that in deed there is abuse, yet the same may be taken
away, and not the whole exercise thereof simply condemned. This reformation
were good in things of themselves good as thus. We must not abolish the use of
the Sacraments, because they have been abused, but we must take away the
abuse. The body because it is sick must not be killed, but the fever taken
away: but dances considered in their original, in their form, in their ends
and natural use cannot be placed in this course: but as things in themselves
and in every their parts vicious, they are to be abolished: Even as a tree
venomous in her leaves, fruits, and body, must not be lopped, but quite cut
down by the root. But let us ask these reformers of dances what they think
good to be taken away? Some will say, all lascivious songs: others will add,
that women and maids shall not be mixed with men and young fry. This is
somewhat, yet not all. Some will go farther, and say, let him that list to
leap and dance, do it privately in his chamber, not openly. All these
reformations in deed, will cut off most part of our dances, which cannot be
performed but in company, and cause men to loose all affection and use of the
same. For take away the mixture of men and women, the lewd songs and tunes,
the publyke mirth and pastime, the speeches, communication, and gesture that
proceed of the flesh and the world, who will dance? Such a reformation will
utterly abolish all dances: so vicious, infected, and corrupt they are in
themselves. As also there is no reforming of the stews but by taking of them
away.

31 Some will say, If it be not lawful to dance, farewell all good
fellowshippe. Truly it were far more wisdom to forbear such fellowship,
than thereby to stand in danger of offending God. But if we chance thereinto,
let us practice the counsel of Saint Paul, and not participate in the
unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them, not in words only, but also
in deeds, that our constant denial to dance, may be a real reprehension and
actual reproof of such as do dance.

32 Others will reply, that if they deny to dance, Ephesians. 5.11
they shall be termed hypocrites and scrupulous persons. But it is better
wrongfully to bear such tants, than to join with the wicked, and work
wickedness with them. Also, what reason is it that he that does evil,
should have more power to draw us to do evil with him, than we by our
constancy to draw him to virtue? In this case therefore it were good to
practice the decrees of the ancient counsels, which command, that when we
have soberly and honestly eaten and dronken together, if any prepare to dance,
we should depart away from their society. But they will reply, that so we
shall minister offense to some: yet is it more tolerable so to do, than to
offend God. Besides, 1. Pet. 4.4
Saint Peter armeth us against this temptation, aduertising us that worldlings
will be grieved, if we run not with them to the same excess of riot. But
the worst they can say of us, shall be, that we would not dance, that is, that
we would do nothing unbeseeming Christians. And this constancy may
peradventure touch some, of the company, and procure them also to leave such
insolency and riot. Howsoever it be, there can be no excuse in the sight of
almighty God to do evil. And better it is, to be a light in these darknesses
and disordered companies, than to suffer our selves to be lead by the blind,
and to follow their faults and sins.

33 Some will allege diverse the profits that come of dancing. First, that
it is an exercise fit for health, but the judgments of the Physicians do say
otherwise: for all vehement exercises are dangerous after meat, and commonly
dancing follows the full belly. Besides that, their own consciences do
testify, that in dancing the bodily health is the least part of the mind:
yea, if we may believe experience, we shall find that by the violent motions
of dancing, more have incurred mortal sickness, than bodily health.
Likewise, albeit dancing might be healthful to the body, yet being so
prejudicial to the soul, as is before declared, we are to forbear the same.
The use of flesh is more requisite for the preservation of life, than dancing:
yet does Saint Paul say, that rather will he eat no flesh while he
lives, 1. Cor. 8.13
than he will offend his brother. How much sooner would he have protested of
dancing? Others do propound agilitie of the body. But as this agilitie is not
required in all, so do they not in dancing practice the getting of it, but
rather to boast of that which they have, and therein to take a pride. Withal,
there be many other exercises far exempt from such dangers of the soul as
we find in dancing.

34 But among all commodities and profits by dancing, some do allege that
they be paths to marriage, and means to attain thereto. But how? As when
Herodias daughter had pleased Herod in dancing, he offered her the one half
of his kingdom: so some noting the grace, gesture, and amorous behauiours of
some dancers, do fall into liking, and so do offer unto them their bodies and
goods, craving and taking them to their wives. But this allegation does
evidently confirm our former demonstrations, that dances are bellows to
kindle the hearts in lust. Besides, that albeit they may bring forth marriage
in some, yet surely not in the thirtith part of those that by dances are
inflamed and moved to lust. And therefore as such lusts are accursed by God,
even so are the dances that breed and inflame them. Moreover, what blessings
of God are men to attend of such marriages, practiced by such dangerous,
vicious, and offensive means, so repugnant to the modesty and holiness that
is required in the children of God. Again, marriages forced by lust, are for
the most part unequal, yet cannot be restrained, neither the lust quenched,
but by concluding the marriage, and therefore can yield no better fruits but
trouble and other inconveniences: so that it were better to root out dancing
out of the common wealth, than to minister occasion of such wretched marriages.
So many vices therefore accompaniing dancing, we ought with Cicero, to resolve
never to dance, albeit thereby we might gain a million of gold, especially
if we remember the saying of the holy Apostle Saint Paul, that we must not
do evil that good may come of it. Romans 3.8.
Such holy things as marriage must be dealte in, in holiness and lawfully.
Besides, so many vices and pernicious dangers concurring in daunces, can be no
beginning or foundation of any good work.

35 Our dauncers atturneys allege some examples out of the holy Scripture for
their allowance. Marie, say they, the sister of Moses and Aaron, daunced among
the women of Israel, after their passage over the red sea. When David had
overcome Goliath, the women of Israel daunced. When Judith returned from the
slaughter of Holophernes, the wives of Bethulia daunced. David also leaped and
daunced before the ark of the Lord. But to take some ground in these
examples: First, Exodus 15.20. 1. Sam. 18.6 Iud. 15.14 2. Sam. 6.16
in our dances it is requisite that women and maids should dance aparte,
without any company of men and batchelers. Secondlye, it were sit that our
dancing should be accompanied with such songs as tend to the honor and
glory of God, and that the same might be the purpose of our dancing, as in
old time it was. And therefore these examples are as sit to approve the dances
of our days, as the example of the conjunction of man and woman in the holy
estate of Matrimony, may be to allow their conjunction in the stews.
Moreover, how few examples can we find of women that daunced in old time?
And of men all the holy Scripture mentions only David, who daunced before
the Ark of the Lord in spiritual and holy rejoicing. For as concerning that
he says, Thou have turned my mourning into dancing. Also that Jeremy
prophesied, Thou shall be adorned with thy timbrels, O virgin Israel, Psalm.
30.11. Iere. 31.4
and shall go forth in the dance of them that be joyful. Likewise that
which the blessed Evangelist Saint Luke reports, that after the prodigal
child was returned, Luke 15.15 Math. 15.16
his elder brother heard melody and dancing. Also, that the children being
in the market place, said. We have piped to you, but ye have not danced.
These be phrases of speech in parables, which the holy Ghost does use, not to
allow dancing, but only to represent mirth and joy. As likewise the laying
of Jesus Christ of usurers, in the parable of the talents. Also of the unjust
steward commended for the wrong done to his master, do tend neither to approve
usury, neither to teach servants to rob their masters: but that every one
should faithfully imploie the gifts and graces that we have received of the
Lord, and liberally distribute to the poor of those gifts that God has given
unto us. Neither may we deny but that some abused their daunces even in those
days, Math. 25.27 Luke 16.8
as appears in the example of the daughters of Siloh, who while they danced,
were ravished by the Beniamites, and so received the reward and recompense of
their vanity. Finally, such daunces as in old time resembled ours in these
days, were never propounded as examples to be imitated and followed, Iud.
21.21.
no more than all other corruptions and abuses whatsoever, that have been ever
since the beginning of the world.

36 Others there be that do desire, that at the least we would permit and
suffer such daunces only to be used, as by example are allowed in the holy
Scriptures. Even Martine Bucer, an excellent Doctor of our time, is of
opinion, that they should be so reestablished among Christians. Bucer of the
kingdom of Christ. l. 2. c. 34
But we will answer. First, that use will soon be worn out. For dancing
would quayle, if men should not be mixed with women, either that they should
sing nothing but the praises of God. Besides, they should not be often in use,
but only upon occasion of some victory, or other extraordinary benefit from
God. Withal, we are to understand, that these holy dances were as dependances
of the Jewish ceremonies, in liew whereof Christians have in these days,
prayers, praises, and thanks giuinges, with much greater simplicity.

37 But say some, if at marriage feasts, and other great meetings men should
not dance, they would do worse. For either they would fall to drinking, or else
batchelers and maidens falling into company, would pass the time in more
liberal communication and free behavior, and so minister occasion of farther
inconveniences: all which by dancing might be prevented. Thus for the shunning
of one wickedness, they can dispense to commit another, and so cover
themselves with a wet sack. Oh word and deed unworthy a Christian! That we
should be so perverse and corrupt, that we must needs offend God in one
sort, that we may not offend him in another: That we cannot avoid sin but
by sin: That we must needs follow one beaten path to hell, that we may
escape another: Yet is this all that they do conclude, who for the avoiding of
drunkenness, uphold that men must dance. It is but an instruction how to
argue which sins are greater or smaller, and to dispense with the lesser,
that we may eschew the greater. But how shall they pass away the time, say
they? Alas, Time will away fast enough when we are disposed so to loose and
abuse it. This is fair from the practice of the Apostle Saint Paul's
commandment before mentioned, Redeem the time: considering we have but too
much time, Ephesians. 5.16
when we know not how to spend it unless we offend God. Where the holy
Apostle Saint Paul protests, Ephesians. 5.3.4
that foolish words and jesting are not comely among the Saints, but rather
giving of thanks: he teaches us, that it is sufficient that we spend the
time in praising of God. Where the same Apostle Saint Paul exhorts the
Ephesians, To fly drunkenness, Ephesians. 5.18 Col. 3.16
and other excess, he wylleth and exhorts them also to be fulfilled with the
spirit, and to rejoice, speaking together in Psalms, hymns, and spiritual
songs, singing and making melodye to the Lord in their hearts, giving
thanks to God the father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Let then their
communication tend to edification, and let them sing Psalms. Let every man
return to his home, and not pass away all the night even unto day in
banqueting. To be short, if there be any recreation, let it be modest and holy,
far from all that may minister occasion of offense to God or our neighbor.

38 Well we know that there be dances that seem grave and modest, as in many
parts of Germany. But in as much as Jesus Christ admonishes us to Amend our
lives: The faithful Magistrates shall perform the office of true Christians,
if out of their lands and jurisdictions they banish not only mere lascivious
dances, but generally all others, thereby to prevent all beginnings, motions,
apparnaces and allurements to evil, and thereby undoubtedly cut off all such as
are manifestly repugnant to the modesty, holiness and chastity, required in
the children of God. And as it is the duty of the Preacher to reprove such
insolences, so is it the part of every man to shun the same, and to
endeavor rather to draw others to their modesty, then to suffer themselves by
worldlings to be carried away to all vanity and riot. If there be any who by
the reading of this discourse is not sufficiently moved or resolved to condemn
and give over dancing, I would exhort him to read a more large treatise of
dances, printed by Frances Stephens in the year 1579. From whence I have taken
the most part of this discourse. There shall he find dances so lively
described, and with such learned, holy, evident and pregnant grounds
condemned, that of necessity he must yield and be convict: and if he be not a
very scorner and profane Atheist, acknowledge that they are not only to be
condemned and rejected, but also to be utterly abhorred and had in abomination.

Of games of Chance and Hazard, as Cards and Dice. Chap. 19.
AS concerning games in general, we are to resolve that there is none lawful,
unless it both bring profit to man and tend to the glory of God. And this is
it that Saint Paul teaches, 1. Cor. 10.31. Ephe. 5.16. Mat. 12, 36.
saying. Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, let all be to the
honor and glory of God. And indeed as he warns us to Redeem the time, So
does Jesus Christ affirm, That in the day of judgment we must render account
of every Idle word. Much more then of Idle deeds. Every one confesses that
Idleness is to be condemned: but Idleness consists not only in doing nothing,
but also in doing such works as be Idle and unprofitable. This once laid for a
foundation, we are to note that there are some pastimes which consist in the
exercise of the body, as shooting, either in the long bow or caliuer etc.
Fence, leaping and other such like: Others in dexterity of the mind, as Cheste
and Draughts. These games and pastimes, and such like are, as things
indifferent, lawful and tolerable among Christians, so long as they be
practiced for this profit, namely to recreate the mind weried with ordinary
business, to the end afterward to return more cheerfully to the same. As also
are such bodily exercises as breed dexterity and strength for the better
employment in the service of the common wealth. But here we are to respect
three points. First that we do not so exceed in them as thereby to neglect the
duty of our vocation: for so in liew of redeeming time we should both loose
and abuse it. Secondly that we refrain such exercise and play for money. For
play is no means allowed by the laws either of God or man, to get or to spend
money in, which God delivers into our hands to be faithfully disposed or
possessed in a good conscience. Lastly it is another case, when the Maiestrate
propounds some price or reward for bodily exercises, to the end thereto to
inuit his subjects, and to make them more willingly to accomodate themselves
to the service of the common wealth.

2 There be other games which depend upon Lots, chance, and hazard, as Dice and
Cards, signified by the Latin word Alea. As for such games, we say it is
meet for Christians to forbear them. First, it may be employed that they are
forbidden in the third commandment of the law. Act 1.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. For indeed the use
of lots or hazard is to refer to the wisdom, providence and power of God,
whatsoever is acted among men. As the lot whereby Matthias was chosen to be an
Apostle was a demonstration that God who knows the hearts, had chosen him, as
we may also infer by the prayer of the Apostles before the lot was call.
Prou. 16.33.
And this did wise Solomon note, saying The lot is cast in the bosom, but the
judgment is in the Lord. We may therefore lawfully use lots in matter of
consequence, wherein the will of God is extraordinarily to be sought, either to
avoid quarrels and controversies, or to prevent subornations or underminings,
as in elections of Magistrates, Prou, 18.18.
sharing of goods, and such like. And this does Solomon also mean where he
says. The lot ends strife and makes particion among the mighty. But to
apply the lot and consequently Gods providence to our vain and frivolous
pleasures, many times in matters of offense to God we may well say that so we
do abuse them and take the name of God in vain.

3 Secondly. Pastime permi ted and by God allowed among men, must have relation
to some profit either of body or of mind: otherwise it is but Idleness and
time lost for the which we must render account unto God. But these pastimes of
Cards and Dice, as all men know, do imply no exercise of the body: Neither
do they contain any recreation of the mind: For as it appears, the event of
the chance that they expect does drive either side into the like grief and
heaviness, so as for the most part therein is no farther content or recreation
of mind, then as may grow of covetousness, if a man win the money, or of an
imagination of God, favor, directing the chance in such vain and frivolous
occasions. If they be such games as together consist of chance, and industry
or agilitie of wit: yet as chance do therein especially govern: So is it
the only chance of the cast which if it be good, rejoices us, if bad, drives
us into grief and sorrow. Thus may every man understand that these games which
tend to no profit either of body or mind are both Idle and hurtful works.

4 Thirdly the occasion of these games at hazard is usually a covetous desire
by play to get into our hands other men's goods And indeed experience teaches
that all our play is for money. And hereof arises an infinite number of most
pernicious mischiefs. First the looser, thinking that his loss grows not of
the man's industry but of chance and hazard, hops for change of chance, with
recovery of his loss: and this causes him obstinately to continue the game
in hope of gain: and consequently great loss of goods, if the chance run
against him: sometime of all that himself has, or they that will lend unto
him: and hereof came the saying: Dice and Cards have beggered me: But where
exercise of the body or industry of mind without chance, do bear sway, the
game is more moderate. For either the body can bear no more labor: or the
mind finding the adverse party more skilful and ready in the game, banishing
all hope of winning, causes us to abstain from play. Who then will not
confess it to be evil done to wast all the night and day in play? To be
great cruelty, to wast and so wretchedly to consume the goods wherewith the
wife and children should be nourished and sustained? That the Article of
expense of so much goods in play will never be allowed in the accounts of the day
of judgment? That he which wineth money at play has no more right to keep it
than a thief? That if it be not lawful for the looser to loose it, it is not
lawful for the winner to retain it? And indeed no usury is so excessive and
hurtful, as the gain made by gaming, wherein without loan or labor, a man
sometime wins all his neighbors goods.

5 Moreover. As the pleasure of gain and the sorrow for loss in play are
mighty passions to move the hearts: so what a number of brauses, quarrels and
controversies do arise of play? What swearing, cursing and blaspheming of God?
Or who will not adiudge the tree that brings forth such fruit, to be naught
and worthy to be cut down or rooted up? For in this consideration have such
games bin ever more detested, even among the heathen. There is among the
Pandects a law that says. Digest. lib. 1 ^ Tit 5. lib. 1.
If a man beat him in whose house he has played at Dice or Cards, says the
Praetor, or that others have done him injury or stolen his goods, whiles any
played at Cards in his house, I will do him no justice. Likewise, him that
forces or induces another to play, I will punish according to the exigence of
the case. Asconius Pedianus upon the second book of Cicero of divination,
says, that in old time such gamesters were at Rome condemned in four times
so much as they played. And the law Roscia banished out of the land all such as
had lost more then the condition of their person and estate could bear.
Christian Emperors have also very straightly forbidden these games: Among the
rest, Justinian, Respecting, says he, the good of our subjects, Cod. lib. 3,
Tit. 43. Leg. Alearum vsus.
we do by this law forbid all men, and in all places all play, namely that
either in common houses or private, there be no gaming at Cards or Dice,
neither any looking thereupon. Which is more, in the same law he charge
Bishops and Pastors diligently to look thereto: And enioyneth them in
reformation of this inconvenience to employ the power and authority of the
judges and governors of their provinces. Yea, he ordains that no man shall be
forced to pay any thing that he has lost at play: Also that if any has so
paid, he suffers him to redemande it, and commands that it be restored,
except upon the prescription of 50. years. In the Canon these games are also
forbidden, C. Epist. did. 35. c. 42. and 43
under pain of excommunication: as likewise the same prohibition was made by
the Canons, entitled of the Apostles.

Cyprian of dycing and dicers.
6 As concerning the Doctors of the Church. Among the rest, Saint Cyprian has
written a treatise expressly to show in what detestation and abomination
Christians should hold these games of Chance and Hazard. Among other things he
says, that gaming is a snare and invention of the Devil, which he purposedly
forged to maintain Idolatry in greater use and commendation among men. And
indeed as some are of opinion that Mercury a God of the heathen invented Dice
and Cards: so S. Cyprian says, that he caused himself to be painted upon
the^, willing that at the beginning of their play they should sacrifice unto
him: And this sacrifice or homage consists in kissing the Card or the Die, or
in pouring forth of wine in honor of this painting, or in some such like
ceremony. That Christians retaining the game have only changed the Images,
and in stead of Mercury pictured a King, a Queen, and a varlet. What else is
it then to play at Cards and Dice, but to delight in the works of the Devil,
devised for our destruction, and to refresh the memory of and in part to
confirm the ancient Idolatry, which we ought to abolish out of all memory
among us? The Devil, says Cyprian, is present at our play, and lurketh to
catch us, and having taken us, to triumph over us. And indeed in these games we
find nothing but deceit, lying, folly, rage, perjury, wrath, dissension,
readiness to injury, cruel boldness, fellonious, and fretting minds, wasting
of goods, time and honor, yea sometimes stripes and murder. Thou player at
Dice and Cards, says he, that tearmest thy self a Christian, thou art none
indeed: for thou art too much addicted to worldly pleasure, and can not be a
friend to Christ, so long as thou delightest in the inventions of his enemy,
the Devil. O dangerous hand, and tormenter of his master, which can never
forbear play, either winning or loosing.

7 An other Doctor named Nicholas Lira in a small tract called Preceptorium
aledgeth nine reasons, by the which he maintains that plays are not to be
admitted among Christians, but are to be banished out of the Church of God.
Likewise Lambert Daneus a professor of deuinitie, and a learned and godly man
did lately publish a declaration concerning the games of Chance or Hazard,
where out I have taken part of this here written, wherein at large he declares
them to be unlawful. The reason therefore, before considered, the authority of
the word of God: of the Doctors of the Church: of the laws both civil and
canon, and the judgments of the very heathen, ought to make us to abhor and
detest such games, as matters unworthy of Christians, even of men created to
far better purpose. And indeed when Chylon was sent from Lacedemonia to
Corinth, to conclude aliance between the two nations, finding the governors
playing at Dice, he returned without any speech of his charge, saying: He
would not defame the Lacedaemonians, with so great a reproach as to enter
society with Dicers. How much less ought Christians then to abstain from
defiling their glory with Dicers, Cic. Phil. 2.
so far should they be from being themselves gamesters? We also read that
Cicero as one of his gretest offenses, Sueton, in the life of Augustus. c. 17.
objected unto Marc Anthony that he played at games that consisted in chance
and hazard. Suetonius writes that the only report that Augustus used such
games, redounded greatly to his reproach: and indeed he was much addicted
thereto, as himself testifies by two Epistles rehearsed by the same author:
yea this brute running of him made him to be reputed among unthrifts
notwithstanding many great virtues wherewith he was endued. Aurel. vict. in
the life of Augustus, Sueton. in the life of Claudi.
As also another author repeating his vices, among the rest says expressly
that he used much to play at Dice. Claudius Caesar, an Emperor of Rome as the
same Suetonius does note, witnessed him self to be a fool, not only in
respect of his other vices, but also because he so gave himself to Cards and
Dice, that he wrote a book of the Art of play, which bred him great obloquy.
How much rather then should we Christians account these games of chance and
hazard to be pernicious, and utterly to be abhorred.

8 If any reply that in this case we show too much rigor, we will answer
with Chrysostom: That the cutting off of superfluity in the life of the
faithful, Chrisost. in a Sermon. against the excess of time.
is no bringing of them into too much austerity of life. But these games are
not only superfluous, but also hurtful and pernicious. Likewise albeit we
might account them among things indiferent, yet should Christian liberty be
subject to such politic laws as forbid them, and without consideration
hereof, to practice the same which S. Paul protests of things indifferent,
namely Never to play at Cards and Dice, so long as we live, rather then to be
occasion of offense to our neighbors, 1. Cor. 8.13.
and by our plesures to bring destruction upon those for whom Jesus Christ has
dyed. And as to the end to represent the corrupt world as it were in a table,
we have already shadowed out men and women dancing: so by inserting thereinto
players and gamesters at Cards and Dice, we shall more lively demonstrate the
world and show that such as give themselves to gaming are indeed of the world
and not truly of the church of Christ. And as by lots the soldiers parted the
garments of Jesus Christ, so may we well say that these games at Dice and Cards
are the means to part between the world and the Devil many of those who
professing reformed religion are addicted thereunto.

9 But in as much as Jesus Christ admonishes us to Amend our lives and to
repent our former transgressions, let us steadfastly resolve hereafter to
abstain, and not to be carried away with the taunts of gamesters that scorn
our simplicity because we will not play with them. Let us remember the
answer of a heathen, Xenophanes.
who at a feast being called dasterd for that he would not play at Dice, wisely
replied: I am indeed a dasterd and fearful in all dishonest causes. Let
therefore his censure who termed these things dishonest, together with his
constancy against the taunts of gamesters, be unto us Christians an
instruction and example constantly to refrain from such games: And the better
to confirm us herein, let us also think upon the words of Saint Cyprian. Let
us, says he, be Christians, not players at Cards and Dice. Let us pour forth
our money upon the table of the Lord, where Christ sits as president, and the
Angels do see us. In hew of loosing them folishly, let us distribute our goods
to the poor. Yea let us commit them to the custody of Jesus Christ. For these
games, says he, are dangerous, worthy of death, and replenished with folly.
They contain no truth, but a quagu^yre of all falsehood and perjury. Let us
pull away our hands from such pastimes and in our hearts turn off and take away
the darkness wherewith Satan blinds us: let our hands be clean and not
defiled in doing honor to the Devil. Let us fly from the enemy that pursues
us, and spend our time in the learning of true wisdom and instruction in the
doctrine of the Gospel: Yea let us lift up pure hands to Christ: and to the
end we may please God, let us never look upon Cards or Dice. So beit. Thus
does Saint Cyprian conclude his treatise against players at Cards and Dice.

Of Envy. Chap. 20.
NOw let us speak of Envy the sister and inseparable companion of
covetousness and ambition, Wisd. 1.24. Augustine of Christ. Doctrine.
which likewise proceeds of a foolish and wicked self love. As it is written
in the book of wisdom. Through Envy of the Devil, death came into the
world. Which Saint Augustine also confirms, saying. Envy is a deuelish vice,
whereof the Devil is vnpardonably guilty in the sight of God. For in the
sentence of the Devils damnation, it is not said that he had committed
adultery or theft, but that he had enuyed the state of man, created to the
image of God. Again, Petrarck of the remedies of fortune.
whereas all other vices do breed some pleasure and contentment, albeit but
false and wretched: Only Envy engendereth nothing but sorrow: feeds upon
mischief: grieueth at others good: and in it self already has that evil
which it wishes to others. Aug. In a certain Sermon
And indeed Envy is a passion in the soul, yielding sorrow and heaviness
for such benefits as other have, that may be desirable, amiable, or
commendable, and thereof ensues a hatred of their felicity and prosperity:
If they be our betters, because we be not so good as they: If our inferiors,
least they should grow equal with us: Plut. of curiosity.
If our equals, for fear they should get before us.

2 Concerning the first. We ordinarily see, that they which are endued with the
greatest virtues, and exalted into highest prosperity, are subject to Envy,
as Aristotle says. That Envy is the enemy that assaulteth virtue and others
prosperity. Plut. of Envy and hatred.
Also as there is no shadow, where there is no sun: so where there is no
prosperity, there is no Envy. We do Envy, says Plutarch, such as prosper,
and therefore as they that are tender sighted, do find themselves grieved
with every light and bright object, so is it with the envious in every the
prosperity of others. Whereupon he compares envious persons to Cantharides, a
certain green and venomous worm, or a Fly that usually feeds upon wheat
when it waxes ripe, and roses in their pride: for so does the envious man: he
takes against those that be honest, Cicero to Heren. lib. 4.
and greeueth at the increase of other men's virtue: Cicero also says that
Envy as a companion to virtue do still pros^cute the good. And therefore
Seneca aptly says. Seneca of manners.
It is more easy for a poor man to shun contempt, then for a rich man to
avoid Envy.

3 Envy uses only one point of discretion and temperance, which is this.
That seldom or neuer^^t medleth with those, whose greatness and excellency
do take from the envious all hope of attaining to the like degree. Aristo. in
his Rhet. lib. 2.
And this does Aristotle note, saying. Envy for the most part seaseth upon
that which it may best overtake or out go: and that in this consideration, men
never Envy the dead, Plut. of Envy and hatred.
neither such as in greatness do without comparison exceed them. Father, as
Plutarch says, those that in age do far out go them. And in that sense it
is written that Envy is many times extinguished by the greatness and
excellency of other men's prosperity. And for example he adds saying. No
man envied Alexander the great or Cirus when they had attained the tipe of
their devises. For as the sun beating directly upon the crown of the head,
yields but a small shadow, so they that are in eminency far above us, do
purchase small Envy against them. And therefore he very properly compares
envy unto smoke, which so long as the fire is but small makes a great show:
but so soon as it staineth vanishes away; or at the least appears nothing
so plainly as at the first.

4 As for those that be equal in degree, it is an old-saying that the earthen
potter enuieth the potter, Eras. in his Chiliads.
whether for gain or for reputatation and honor: and this does another
proverb note saying. The neighbors eye is always an enemy and enuieth. For
surely men cannot abide that others of their own callings should be better
thought of or come to be greater then themselves. Genesis 4.
As Cain envied Abell, Genesis 30.1.
because the sacrifice of Abell was more acceptable in the sight of God then
his. Rachell envied her sister Leah, because God gave her issue, and none to
her self. Genesis 37.4.
Likewise Jacobs children envied their brother Joseph because he was their
fathers darling. This envy also extends to our inferiors as Saul was sore
wounded therewith against David, 1. Sam. 1^.
by hearing the song of the daughters of Israel. Saul has slain one
thousand, and David ten thousand.

5 But as self love is such a plague as that all the children of Adam are
therewith poisoned, so the envy that grows thereof is but over common and
too deeply rooted, even in those that profess themselves to be the children
of God. And therefore as Jesus Christ admonishes us to Amend our lives: so let
us Amend in respect of this vice, whereby especially we approach and draw near
to the malice of Devils, the enuiers and enemies of the glory of God and
salvation of mankind. And to that end let us consider that if we could truly
love our selves, we would forsake envy, which above all vice does most cruelly
and vncestantly torment those that are poisoned therewith. Plut. of Envy and
hatred. Prosper of co^templ. life. lib. 3 c. 9. Aug. To Julian, Epist. 111
Great Alexander said that the envious, are both executioners, and tortures to
themselves. And hereupon said an ancient father. Envy is a tormenting of the
mind, grounded upon the good of others. Envy, says Saint Augustine,
resembles a ship tossed with the waves of the sea. It is sti^^ ^^oubled. It is
also like to a ravening Wolf, mad without a cause: Always in misery: and
setting sure sooting, is brought to nothing. By continual raging it is made a
pertaker with Devils. Envy, Cyprian of zeal and Envy. Basil of Envy Prove.
14.13
says Cyprian, is a moth to the soul, a Canker to the thought, and a rust to
the soul. And in this sense says Basil. As rust consumes the iron, so does
envy wast the man that is possessed therewith. The same does Solomon mean,
where he says: Envy is the rotting of the bones. Moses propounds a notable
example hereof in Cayn, Genesis 4.5.
saying, His countenance fell down, yea which is more. As it is said that the
viper by devouring the womb of her damme makes her passage forth, Basil of
Envy Job. 5.2.
so envy eats and consumes the soul of that man that in his heart has
conceived her, and hereupon says Job, As anger slays the fool, so envy
kills the Idiot. And in this sense said Socrates, envy is as a fret to the
soul.

Petrarck. his remedies for both fortunes
6 It might suffice that our own calamities, which are both great and manifold,
should torment us, albeit we were not tormented by other men's felicity, and
so made our selves two fold miserable. But that will not this accursed envy,
the enemy of her hosts quiet, abide as Anacharsis very fitly declares. For
being demanded wherefore men are many times sorrowful, he says, because that
besides their own causes had troubled them, Eras. Apotheg lib. 7. Plutarch in
his Lacon. Apotheg.
they are also grieved at the felicity of others. And to this purpose, By as
beholding the sad countenance of an envious man, said unto him. Either thy
self have had some mishappe, or some other body, some good. The same also does
Agis the first King of the Lacedaemonians note: For being informed that certain
of another family enu^ed his prosperity, he answered: Then shall their
griefs be doubled, if they be grieved both at their own miseries and at the
felicity of me and mine. Hereof also follows the same which experience
teaches, Prosper of co^templ. life. li. 3. c. 5 and. c. 9 Seneca of manner. 5.
and Prosper confirms, saying: The enuyous man has as many tormentors
tormenting him, as envy has people that praise him. And therefore Seneca
says, I could with that the eyes of the envious were so opened that in every
town they might behold all that be in prosperity, whereby their torments
might be increased. For as the joys of the happy do increase, so do the
sorrows of the envious multiply. And to the same purpose in another place he
says. We can no way more vex the envious man, Seneca in his Epistle.
then by applying our selves to virtue and honor. And indeed the poison of
envy does in nature far differ from the poison of Serpents, whose poison
hurts other but not themselves: but the poison of the envious hurts
themselves but not others. The envious man, says Cyprian, conuerteth the good
of another to his own hurt: Cyprian of zeal and Envy.
He tormenteth himself at the felicity of others: The glory of others is an
heartbreaking to him: The prosperity of others is a tormenter to molest his
soul, and as it were, to rent it in pieces: He has no taste in his meat or
drink: he continually sobbeth and sigheth: Night or day, his sorrows are
never at an end: And the more that he prospers, whom he does envy, the
more does he feel the kindling of his own passions and griefs. This breeds
in him a threatening look, a crooked countenance, a pale face, trembling lips,
gna^hing of teeth, furious speeches, excessive injuries, a ready hand to
mischief and where his sword will not prevail, he slays in heart by hatred
and malice. There is some hope of Cure for visible wounds, but the wound of
envy that lurketh in the heart can have no help. Then he adds, O envious
wretch. Whose enemy art thou but thy own? The man whom thou hating do envy,
can depart from thee, but thou can not depart from thy self. Whersoeuer thou
become, thy enemy is still in thy bosom, thy adversary rests in thy heart,
thy destruction is shut up in thy self.

7 These torments of envy have the Poets lively laid open. As Virgil, Envy to
a wicked man is a putrefying poison, which dries up the marow, yet hurts not
the bone, Ovid Meta. 2.
and wastes the blood most bitterly. Another Poet to represe^t the passions of
envy, says thus.

Her lips were pale, her cheeks were wan, and all her face was swart,
Her body leave as any rake, she looked as askew,
Her teeth were furd with fylth and drosie, her gummes were watrish blew,
The working of her sestred gaul had made her stomach green, Horace.

And all be ^e^omd was her tongue, no sleep her eyes had seen, etc.
The same does another confirm by the examples of the Sicilian kings, saying.
Envy has ever been the chiefest tormentor of the lives of the Sicilian kings.

8 Which is more. Envy, not contented to grieve at the prosperity of others,
does evermore apprehend it as indeed it is: Yea she always imagines it
greater then it is, thereby to enforce her own sorrow and misery. Pentane.
And therefore as on a time there grew a question among diverse Physicians,
concerning the cheifest help to the eye, as one said Fennel, another Glass.
etc. Nay says one, It is envy: for she still causes other men's goods to
seem greater then they are: and confirmed his speech by this authority of a
Poet, saying.

The neighbors fields are evermore with corn much better sped, Ovid.

Their stocks in milk more plentiful, how ever they be fed.
9 The feeling of this sorrow, anguish, heaviness, and torment bred in the heart
by envy, might make us to loath and detest it: Yet is there farther occasion.
Romans 13.10. Col. 3.14. 1. Ioh. 4.7. Ioh. 13, 35. 1. Cor. 13.
There is nothing more repugnant to Charity, which notwithstanding is, as
Saint Paul says, The fulfilling of the law: The bond of perfectnes: The true
mark of the children of God: As Jesus Christ also says, Herein shall men know
that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another, even as I have loved you.
Love, says Saint Paul, Enuieth not: She rejoices not in unrighteousness, but
rejoices in the truth. And contrariwise. The envious man mourns and
afflictions as is aforesaid, Nazianz. in his first book of divinity.
Chrysostom on Matthew, Hom. 41.
therein resembling slies that light upon wounds, and cleuing to the same do
there at suck their sustenance: Or as the Dorre who naturally lurking in dung
takes her food thereof: so does the envious man grow fat in other men's
calamities. Can there then be any thing more repugnant to charity and this
union of the members of Christ's body, which, as Saint Paul says, Causes them
to have the same care one for another? So that if one member suffer, Cor. 12.25.
all suffer with it, if one be had in honor, all the rest rejoice with it?
And therefore it is a shame to us Christians, that we do not understand it, and
the rather because even the heathen do instruct us, Plut. of Envy and hatred.
as among others, Plutarch, who says. Hatred and Envy are directlye opposite
to love, which rejoices in other men's felicity.

10 Likewise as envy is repugnant to love, so is thee contrary to the peace
and concord that should dwell among the children of God. Iam. 3.14. and 16.
In this sense does S. James term her bitter, thereby understanding that she
is a poison of a Cankered will, converting all to bitterness, whereupon do
ensue contention and debate, and therefore he adds. For where envying and
strife is, there is sedition and all manner of evil works. Plutarch also
says. Envy and Ielouzie are passions which evermore do engender usual and
dangerous enmity. Plut. of profit to be taken of enemies.
And so it is the more pernicious, in respect, that as the same Author says,
ordynarily it follows such as deal in matters of estate, wherein contention
and envy are most hurtful. Hereupon says Antisthenes. Laertius.
It is in vain to cleanse Wheat from Chasse, and to purge an army of
unprofitable soldiers, unless we also purge the common wealth of all envious
persons and banish them from among us.

11 Moreover as envy ordinarily accompanies hatred, which Saint John places
in the degrees of murder: 1. Ioh. 3, 15.
So does it bear such sway in some that it plungeth them headlong in murder
and al horrible wickedness. Who moved the devil to urge man to eat of the
forbidden fruit, whereby to throw him down, and to draw him with himself into
everlasting death? Wisd. 2.24.
The book of Wisdom, as is aforesaid, testifies that it was envy. What
caused Cayn so cruelly to murder his brother Abell? Eunie as the holy Scripture
plainly notes. God warns him to forbear, yet he went forward. And indeed
as Chrisostom says, Genesis 4.5.
Cain envying his brother, cold not digest the hatred that he had conceived:
but the more that God warned him, 1. Sam. 18.
the more did his sorrow, anguish and hatred increase, which drive him to shed
his brothers blood. Who stirred up Saul so often and by so many devises to
attempt, and to seek to kill David? Yea when he had so often misled and with
his own mouth acknowledged his wrong, yet to pursue him so obstinately to the
death? Even that accursed envy, that was first engendered of this, Genesis 37.
that the daughters of Israel in their song, Saul has slain his thousand,
and David his ten thousand, preferred David before him, and afterward
increased by Samuels anointing him to be King. What moved the sons of Jacob
to resolve upon Joseph's death, and when they had defiled his coat with blood,
to send it to their father, whereby to vex him with most cruel and mortal
sorrow and heaviness, and lastly to sell him to the Ismaelites, to carry him
into Egypt, and so to separate him from the Church, and consequently to abandon
his body to tribulation, and his soul to destruction? The sole envy that they
had conceived against him for the private affection that Jacob bare unto him,
Mat. 21.15.
which afterward was increased through his dreams. To be short. What induced
the high Priests and Scribes, Mat. 27.18.
at the hands of Judas a traitor to his Lord and Master, to buy Jesus Christ,
to deliver him into the hands of Pilate, and so obstinately to pursue him to
the death? So evident was their envy that Pilate himself (as S. Matthew
notes) knew that for envy they had delivered him. In this sense does Paul,
Gal. 5.21.
speaking of the fruits of the flesh, join murder with envy, as the cursed
fruit thereof.

12 To conclude, Plut. of Envy and hatred.
what a villainous and abominable vice is envy says Plutarch: considering
that many can confess that they hate him whom they do not envy? Sooner will
they acknowledge themselves to be possessed with wrath, fear, hatred,
Chrysostom upon Matthew
or some other like passion and vice, then confess any envy, as testifieng
thereby that envy is the most villainous and detestable disease that can come to
the soul. Chrysostom does aptly describe the Original of this disease, saying
He that enuieth, p^rchaseth to himself reproach, and honor to him that is
envied. For as ambition is the mother and nurse of envy, so is there nothing
more contrary to ambition then the acknowledgement that a man is envious,
considering that envy is a confession that the envied is endued with greater
virtue, prosperity or some other excellency, then he that enuieth.

13 In as much therefore as envy engenders so many tormen^s and vexations in
our hearts: that nothing is more contrary to love: that it breeds hatred,
strife and debate: that it draws men to commit murder and other horrible
transgressions: To be short, that even among men it is so detestable that they
will rather color it with other vices then acknowledge it: Let us, to the end
according to the admonition of Jesus Christ to amend our lives, refrain al
self love, and consequently all envy. Let every man be content with that
estate and condition, whereto God has called him, and faithfully employ
himself therein, ever waiting the blessing of the Lord, without envying others
prosperity. Let us remember that the envious man pretends to oppose himself
against the providence and liberty of God, as grieuing at the good that God
vouchsafes to those whom he pleases, after his own wisdom and power: and
that to such envious persons belongs the saying of Jesus Christ. Is thine eye
evil because I am good, or, is it not lawful for me to do as I will with mine
own? Mat. 20.15.
Neither must we forget that the end of our lives ought to tend to serve, not
our selves, but God and our neighbor: and that it is a most monstrous sin for
us to envy that good which our selves either do or should procure and set
forward. Yea that we even make a skorne of God, when, according to our duties,
we pray unto him to enrease his mercies and blessings to our neighbors, and
in the mean time do envy, and are sorry for their weldoing, and prosperity
through the blessings of God. As also we ought in our hearts to print this
saying of Chrysostom. Chrysostom hom. 36.
As by envying of others we offend God: so by rejoicing at their prosperity
we shall be pertakers of their goods: Saint Cyprian also exhorts us to
imitate the good, Cyprian of zeal and Envy
if we can follow them: yet if we can not follow them, rejoice, says he, at
their good. In liew of enuiing, make your selves pertakers through steadfast
love: make your selves coheires of their goods by the conjunction of love and
brotherly union. Finally let us remember that there is but one commendable and
profitable kind of envy, even the same that we so bear to the virtuous, as
to imitate their virtue: As Themistocles giving a reason why he, who in his
yoouth was bent wholly to pleasures, Plut. in his Apotheg. Augustine upon 139.
Psalm.
had lastly applied his mind to virtue, says, that the victory of Miltiades
would not suffer him to sleep. As Augustine also commends that envy of the
righteous that pricketh us forward to become righteous with them.

Of backbiting, slaundering and evil speaking. Chap. 21.
ONe vice more will we here entreat of, which as it is no less common,
albeit smally accounted of, so is it most pernicious Namely when we speak
evil of our neighbors, to the prejudice of their credit, reputation and
honor, Exodus 20.16 Deuteronomy. 5.20.
and this is called backbiting, slaundering, or evil speaking. And by God is
forbidden in the ninth Commandment of his law. Thou shall not bear false
witness against thy neighbor. True it is that he does expressly name false
witness. But those words do extend very far. First they which in the presence
of the Magistrate or else where either by oath, or but by speech only do affirm
any falsehoode to the prejudice of their neighbors, are here condemned, and
they be properly termed slaunderers. Yea they may be called Deuilish. For the
word Devil signifies a slaunderer or false accuser. All slaunderers therefore
are the children or Disciples of the Devil, who was justly so called, because
he was the first Author and inuenter of that iniquity, Genesis 3
as the history of the holy Scriptures does manyfestly declare: For when the
Serpent perceived that Eve remained constant in the obedience of God: also that
she feared that he would execute his threatening, which imported that thee
should die, if she eat of the forbidden fruit of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, he wickedly slaundered God, as if upon envy, fearing least
she and her husband Adam by eating of that fruit, should become like to
himself, and know both good and evil, he had made that prohibition. This was
an impudent and detestable slander.

2 Having by this means drawn Adam and Eve to disobedience, Genesis 35.
among other vices he also poured this deuilish poison upon all their
posterity, as experience by most notable examples does teach. So did Putiphars
wise slander and falsely accuse Joseph that he would have dishonored her. So
did Chore, Numb. 16.
Dathan and Abiram falsely slander Moses and Aaron, 2 Samuel 16.3.
saying that they sought to exalt themselves over the congregation of the Lord.
So did Ziba Miphiboseths servant, slander his master in the ears of David,
Hester. 3. 8.
as if he had pretended that the house of Israel should have restored him to the
kingdom, and that thereupon he remained at Jerusalem. 1. Sam. 24.14
So did Haman falsely accuse the Jews that were in captivity under king
Assuerus, that they denied to fulfill the kings decrees. 2. Sam. 15.
So did Saules Courtiers slander David, John. 7.20.
as if he meant to take away his kingdom. So did Absalom slander his own
father David, telling the people that there was not any to hear their suites,
Mat. 11.19.
to judge of their affairs, or to do them right. With many impudent slanders
did the Jews assault Jesus Christ, Luke 23.2.
obiecting unto him that he had the Devil, that he was a drunkerd, a glutton, a
friend to Publicans, a seducer of the people, Act. 24.5.
and accused him falsely that he denied tribute to Caesar, and suborned the
people. So did Tertullus the Orator term S. Paul a seditious and pestilent
fellow.

3 Again, if the speeches g^^en forth, should in themselves be true, yet if
they be misreported or wrested to any other sense then they were done or
spoken, this is also slander and false witness: As S. Mark rehearses, Mat^.
^4.58.
that finally there came in two false witnesses against Jesus Christ, And
affirmed that they heard him say, I will destroy this temple made with hands,
and within three days I will build an other made without hands. Here was a
double slander: First in that Christ spoke it not in that sort, Ioh. 2 19.
but only said Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up
again. Secondly because that which he spoke of his body, as S. John expressly
adds, That he spoke of the temple of his body, they referred to the material
Temple bu^^^ with hands at Jerusalem.

4 It is also a deuilish and malicious slander, when men report that which is
true: but thereof to gather or persuade some wicked and reproueable action.
Psalm. 5^.2,
As when Doeg showed Saul that David had been in the house of the high priest
Achimelech in Nob: that Achimelech had asked counsel of the Lord for David: 1.
Sam. 21. Psalm. 52.5.
that he had given him bread: and that he had delivered unto him the sword of
Goliath: David obiecteth unto him, That his tongue was like a sharp razor: that
he had imagined mischief, spoken lies, and used pernitions and deceitful
words. Yet it seems that all that Doeg told Saul, was true. But herein we
are to note his intent, which was thereby to gather and to persuade Saul that
there was conspiracy between David and Achimelech: and in that consisted his
slander and false accusation. Dan. 6,
The chiefest officers in Darius Court accused Daniel that he called upon his
God, and so contrary to the Kings edict prayed to another then him. The three
Hebrew Princes were likewise accused that they would not worship the Image that
Nabuchadnezzer had erected. Dan. 3
Both accusations were true: But to what intent were they made? Even to
persuade Darius and Nabuchadnezzer, that Daniell and his companions had
deserved to die. Herein rested the falsehoode of the accusation, and slander
proceeding from ambitious, cruel and envious hearts.

5 Now as naturally we are inclined to slander our neighbors, yea many times
only upon suspicion: so the principal of the children of Ammon slaundered
David in the ears of their Lord Hanun, 2. Sam. 10, 3.
as if he had sent Ambassadors under pretense of honor and comfort over his
fathers death, to spy out the land, and to take his City and destroy it. So
did the princes of the Philistians slander the same David, as if he meant to
redeem his peace with Saul, by betraying their king Achis. But especially in
this point we are to note the devils slandring of Job. Does Job fear God for
naught says he, Have thou not made a hedge about him and about his house, Job
1
and about all that he has? Thou have blessed the work of his hands, and
his substance is increased in the land: But stretch out thy hand and touch all
that he has, and see if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face. As if he
accused Job to be an hypocrite, or a hireling that served and feared God only
for profit, which ceasing, he would blaspheme him. Thus may we understand
how readily man is inclined to this vice, wherein he truly follows the
nature of the devil. For as man has indeed many vices common to beasts, John
3,
so in lying and slaundering he participateth with the devil, the Father of
lies.

6 By the premises we be earnestly admonished carefully to beware of falling
into this iniquity and deuillish sin, yet for the amendment of our lives,
that we may the more abhor and detest, it let us briefly consider the
evils, and pernicious inconveniences thereof proceeding. Prou. 25.18 Psalm
120.^
A man that bears false witness against his neighbor (says Solomon) is like
a hammer, a sword, and a sharp arrow. And David says, The slanderous tongue,
which he calls deceitful, is like the sharp arrow of a mighty man, and as
the coals of Juniper. As if he should say, their slanders were kindled with
hot fire, and dipped in mortal poison. Prou. 6.
Solomon likewise uses a notable protestation to this purpose, saying: These
six things does the Lord hate, yea his soul abhors seven. The haughty
eyes, a lying tongue, and the hands that shed innocent blood, a heart that
imagines wicked enterprises, feet that be swift in running to mischief, a
false witness that speaks lies, and him that raises up contention among
brethren. Joining all these vices together, he sufficiently shows, that as a
taste tongue, or false witness proceeds of a proud heart that imagigineth
wicked enterprises, Genesis 3
so does it many times engender blondshed and strife among brethren. Many
likewise of the examples aforementioned, do evidently set before us, as in a
table, the pernicious effects and cursed fruits of this vice and corruption.
The impudent slander of the devil has plunged our first fathers and all
their posterity in pain, death, and everlasting damnation: The same of
Putiphars wife cast Joseph in prison: Genesis ^^ 2. Sam. 10 Ester.
The same of the sons of Ammon, procured the total destruction of themselves,
their prince, and people: The same of Haman had been the death of all the Jews
that were in captivity under Assuerus, 1. Sam. 24. 1. Sam. 22
had not God miraculously prevented it: The same of Saul's courtiers bred a long
and dangerous persecution against David: The same of Doeg, the horrible murder
by Saul committed on the persons of Abimelech and the four score and five
priests, with the utter destruction of the town of Nob, Exodus 23.27.
and all the inhabitants thereof. In this consideration does the Lord say,
Thou shall avoid all false words, and shall not slaie the innocent and
righteous. Thereby declaring, that the false witness with his tongue, slaieth
as many as the executioner with the sword.

7 Neither was it without reason that God in old time ordained that the false
witness should incur the like pain, as the offense wherewith he wrongfully
charged his neighbor might deserve. And therefore Solomon says, Deuteronomy. 19.16
Prou. ^9.5. Psalm. 109.
The false witness shall not escape punishment, and he that speaks lies
shall perish. To be short, how bytterly does David curse those that burdened
him with false accusations and slanders? These curses of David were prophesies
of the holy Ghost, foreshewing the grievous and many woes that God will pour
forth upon slanderers. As also we have before noted, Prou. 6.16
that God abhors the false tongue, and the witness that speaks lies.
Wherefore such men as have even any, though but a little conscience, will
abhor and disdain to be false witnesses and slaunderers, and consequently,
the children of the devil, who is the father of lies.

8 Yet is it not enough that we amend and refrain from this deuillish vice,
for we must also beware of all backbiting and evil speaking, which consists
in the report and rehearsal of the faults and infyrmities of our neighbors,
albeit we speak nothing but the truth. Yet is there nothing more common
among men, so sore are we inclined to report the badde, rather than the good
we know by our neighbors. And when this inclination is accompanied with
hatred, ambition, or envy, the same is like oil cast into the fire to inflame
and kindle it. We take some contentment in speaking evil of him whom we
hate, as using it for some revenge that we take of him. The ambitious man
imagines his increase of honor and reputation to be the greater by so much
as he seems to take from those whom he blames: And it is even as he that
coveting to make his own garment to seem the whiter, cast think upon his
neighbors to make it black: To the like purpose does Envy speak evil of
her neighbor, meaning that the reproof whereby thee abaseth and treads him
down, shall be to her as a footstool to climb above him. This inclination
to backbiting does Moses note, saying: Leuit. 19.16
Thou shall not walk about with tales among thy people For by this wo^de
Walk, he taxes such as gadde up and down to enquire curiously of their
neighbors faults and infyrmities, as it were by reporting them to backbite
him. And the Apostle Saint Paul more lively representing the same unto us,
says, Romans 3.13.14
that all men naturally are poisoned with these vices: I heir throat is an
open sepulcher, they have used their tongues to deceit, the poison of Aspe^ is
under their lips, their mouths are full of cursing and bitterness.

9 The ordinary communication of such as are any thing familiar, does
sufficiently testify that our usual conference is most co^monlie replenished
with discourses of the faults and infyrmities of our neighbors. Our tongues
that should be courteous and inclined to charytie and compassion, are for the
most part serpent like, and full of poison. Yet in as much as every man in his
own sight, does sufficiently perceive and know, that such rehearsalls and
discourses upon others men's escapes and imperfections, are but slanders and
backbitinges: diverse and sundry men do seek to cover them with the cloak
of zeal, love, and compassion. And this hypocrisy does Saint Bernarde very
aptlye represent unto us. Some there are, says he, Bern. on the Cant, Ser. ^
whose stomachs being glutted with the faults and infirmities of their
brethren, and neighbors, when they mean to unburden the same, do shroude
their malice and hatred under the cloak of feigned respect and show. After a
sore sigh, with great gravity, delyberation, and a heavy countenance, they
will spire forth their backbiting and slanderous speeches. And such
backbitinges and slanderous speeches, says he, are so much the more
dangerous, because the hearers are thereby occasioned to imagine and conceive,
that the same proceeds neither of envy nor evil will, but of mere sorrow
and compassion. I am sorry, says the backbiter, and the rather because I love
him, that I cannot get him to amend. Another will say, I have long known
this or that, yet would not I raise the speech, but since it is now known
abroad, I may not in any wise conceal the truth, for the matter is so and
so. Thus does Saint Barnarde most lively painte out the hypocrisy of many
evil speakers, But Moses teaches us how we should reprove it, Reprove
thy neighbor (says he) but raise no report of him: Leuit ^.^.
To reprove and admonish our neighbor, is truly a work of charity, but it is
backbiting to raise any report of him, by publishing and blowing abroad his
infyrmities. The admonition and advertisement of our neighbors faults and
imperfections must be delivered either to themselves, according to the rule of
Jesus Christ, If thy brother trespass against thee, Math. 18.^^
go and tell him between him and thee, or unto those that have right and
authority to correct and reprove. Genesis ^^^
Whereof we have an example in Joseph, who showed his father of the evil
report and doings of his brethren. But to report them to others, is
backbiting and slandering, because it tends only to defamation. This disease
of backbiting is so much the more pernicious, as that we cannot avoid it,
also that the wound thereof is dangerous. A man may better beware of such as
steal his goods, than of the backbiter that takes away his good name. As the
good name is to be much more esteemed than silver, so the wound of defamation
is almost incurable. For as when a wound is cured, there yet remains a scar:
so against a slander, howsoever a man purge and justify himself, yet will there
still remain an evil opinion, at the least in some. And this did Diogenes
signify, Plutarch in his Apotheg.
when being demanded what beast bit sorest, he answered, Among tame beasts
the flatterer, among wild, the backbiter. In as much therefore as according to
the exhortation of Jesus Christ, we are to amend our lives, let us beware.
Whenever we talk of the faults and infyrmities of our neighbors, let us
think with our selves: To what end is this speech? And in our consciences
finding that it tends only to defame him, and to take away his good name,
let us pass condemnation in the sight of God and s^y, that we are backbiters.
Psalm. 10^.^. 1. Cor. 6.10 1. Cor. 4.^
VVithall, let us then also remember the saying of David, Him that in secret
slaundereth his neighbor will I cut off. Also the sentence pronounced by Saint
Paul, who says, Backbiters and slaunderers shall not inherit the kingdom of
heaven. Likewise the admonition of the same Apostle, who wylieth us to hold
them as excommunicate persons, and to forbear eating, drinking, and all
familiar conversation with them. Let us remember, that backbiters by Saint
Paul and others are marked with a fearing iron, as men, who by the just
vengeance of God are given over into a reprobate sense. To be short, let us
remember what Saint James says, Romans 1.30 James 1.20. Genesis ^.^2.
If any man among you seems religious, and refraineth not his tongue, this
man's religion is in vain. Wherefore as Cham, the father of the Cananites,
having seen the shame of his father Noah, and in liew of covering it, having
showed it to his brethren, was accursed, both he and his posterity, by the
mouth of his own father: so they (who knowing the frailty, faults, and
infyrmities, and consequently, the shame, and reproach of their brethren, 1.
Pet. 4.8
where they ought in charity to cover the same) do nevertheless by
backbiting and evil speaking, say them open, do well deserve to be accursed
with Chain, and called Canaanites. S. Peter having exhorted us to be sober and
vigilant in prayer, adds, But above all things have fervent love, for love
covers the multitude of sins. Whereby he declares, that it is a matter of
such importance, to cover the infyrmities of our neighbors by love, that he
seems to prefer it before sobriety, and prayer unto GOD, which he had
before mentioned. Secondly, that it is not enough to show this love, by
covering two or three infirmities, but we must cover even the multitude of
them. Thirdly, that for the discharge of this duty, we must have not some
small love, but a vehement love, yea, such a love as may be able to surmount
envy, hatred, ambition, and all such other vices as naturally do provoke us to
this cursed backbiting.

11 We suppose, that so long as our backbiting and slanders do breed us no
braules or quarrelling, they be not hurtful, and so we despise all Gods
threatenings. But we do much deceive our selves, if we imagine that God, as
we, makes no account of backbiting, and so suppose that his deferring of
vengeance is a quite taking away of his threatenings. Our backbitings are
inrouled in the book of his providence, ready to be laid open before us in
the day of judgment, as David expressly teaches, saying: Thou give thy
mouth to evil, and with thy tongue thou forgest deceit. Psame 15.19
Thou sit and speak against thy brother, and slanderest thy mothers
son. These things have thou done and I held my tongue, and so thou thoughtest
that in deed I was like thee, but I will reprove thee and set them in order
before thee. O consider this, ye that forget God, least I tear you in pieces,
and there be none that can deliver you. Surely it is strange, that all such
threatenings should not make us even to cut out our longs with our own teeth,
rather than to apply them to backbiting and slandering.

12 It is likewise a hard case, that in this respect we should not fear God
more than man. It happens many times that the backbiter with great
protestation and attestation says, I tell you but I would be loath to say so
much to another, let it I pray you rest between us, speak not of it, let no
man know that I told you: Oh fool, do thou more fear the blame at a man's
hands whom thou have spoken evil of, than the eternal fire that thou
kindelest: and the curse of God, which by backbiting thou pullest upon thy
head? Dare thou not detract or speak evil of thy neighbor before his face,
albeit he has but some small means to be revenged: and yet will thou boldly
speak evil of him in the presence of almighty God, who threatens, and is
able to swallowe thee up? If the man whom thou speak evil of, chance to
come in place, thou do blush, and fallest into other talk. But when thou
backbitest him, remember that God hears thee, and blushing at thy folly,
turn to some other talk, and speak of such things as may be acceptable in
the sight of God.

13 Again, can thou like a fool, put more trust in another tongue than in
thine own? Thou could not bridle thine own tongue, and do thou request
another to bridle his? Why do thou put thy self in the mercy and
discretion of another? If he to whom thou have opened thy mouth, has no more
hold of his tongue than thou have of thine, have thou not put into his hand a
staff wherewith, by revealing thy secret, to bring thee into brabling and
strife? Why do thou reveal that to another which thou would should be
kept secret? If thou say, I trust him. So has he an other, whom he
trusts, and his friend another, etc. to whom they will reveal it. It is as
if when sundry faggots lie each by other, thou should kindle the one, and
so by degrees burn them all. In some countries upon any murder or other
heinous trespass, they ring the town bell, which when other towns or
villages do hear, they likewise do ring theyrs, and so from one to an other,
whereby all the Country is soon advertised that there is some offender to be
taken or staide: Even so thou, when the clock of thy tongue has stricken, look
that he that heard it, will likewise strike his, and his neighbor that hears
it, his, and so shall the infyrmitie of thy neighbor soon come to the ears of
many. And therefore if thou be loath it should be known, why have thou
rung the bell of thy tongue in a country, where thou know that every man
is ready likewise to ring his?

14 Let us proceed: Not only he that speaks evil of his neighbor is a
backbiter, but also he that hearkneth to the slander. And in deed, he that is
desirous to hear of the faults and frailty of another, shows himself to be
deuoid both of zeal to Gods glory, and of love to his neighbor. For seeing
God is dishonored in the transgressions and sins of men, it is our parts,
hearing of the same, to mourn and bewail the dishonor of God, and in
charity we ought to take compassion of our neighbor, who by his offense
brings Gods wrath upon his head. If in liew of sorrowing for the sins and
transgressions, even of those whom before we knew not, we delight to hear of
them, do we not strip our selves out of all love of God and charity to men?
In this sense does David say, that he that receives a false report against
his neighbor, Psalm. 15.3.
shall have no place in the house of God. And in deed, both he that hearkneth
to the backbiter, and the backbiter, do serve the devil alike, the one with
his tongue, the other with his ear. Bernard in a certain sermon
Detraction (says S. Bernard) is a sharp sword, which at one blow wounds
three: It slaieth the soul of the backbiter, and the soul of him that gives
ear unto him, and it wounds and impaireth the good name of him that is
backbitten or slandered.

15 And what does more norish and maintain backbiting than the usual vice of
harkening thereto, even with greedines? For as if there were no receiver of
theftes, there would not be so many thieves: so if none would hearken to
backbiting, Prou. 25. 23
there would not be so many backbiters. As the north wind (says Solomon)
drives away rain so does an angry countenance the slandering tongue. As
the shaft, says Hierome, shot against a stone, reboundeth, Hierom to Rusticus.
and sometime hurts him that shot it, so when a backbiter sees his
countenance that hears, or in deed that hearkneth not unto him, sad or
frouning, he holds his peace, he waxes pale, his countenance is troubled,
and his tongue stops suddenly. In this consideration he says in another
place. Beware of backbiting, Hier. in his Epist. to Nepor.
also of listening thereto. Let thine ears be as far from them as thy tongue.
For when the backbiter perceives that thou give no ear to him, he cannot
well go forward. Thou shall not, says the Lord, Exodus 23.1
receive or take up any false report. This word Receive, or take up,
evidently declares, that backbiting and slandering will soon fade away and
decaie, if it be not received or taken up, and so underpropped, and vpheld by
the consent that is given thereto. Hierome to Celantius.


16 Since therefore that the inclination to backbite, likewise to hear
backbiting, is such, that even they, who otherwise are far from many other
vices, as Hierom says, do easily fall into these snares of the devil: that
according as Christ exhorts, we may amend our lives, let us think upon the
premises, to the end we may abhor al backbiting: let us keep our tongs and
ears pure, so as the use of these vices now so common, may utterly be
abolished. To be short, let us apply our tongs to speak, and open our ears to
hear such things as may redou^d to the glory of God, and the salvation of our
neighbors.

17 Moreover, if we hear that any speak evil of us, let us so order our
lives, that as Plato in old time said, men may not believe such slanderous
reports of us. As Philip king of Macedon said, Plutarch in his Apotheg.
that the reproach and injuries of the Athenian orators caused him so to order
his words and deeds, that themselves should be proved liars. Neither let us
forget what he both said and did, when it was told him that Nicanor spoke
hardlye of him. I must bethink me, Plutarch in his Apotheg.
said he, whether I never gave him occasion so to say. Aftewarde hearing that
Nicanor was decade and grown into contempt, he sent him a present: And then
being showed that Nicanor spoke well of him, You see, says he, that it is
in us to cause men to speak well or ill of us. If the evil therefore that is
spoken of us be true, or that we have given any occasion thereof, let the
same be a cause to make us to amend our lives. If it be false, let it be a
warning to beware thereof, because we are men, and may fall. Let us in this
case remember the saying of Socrates, They speak no evil of us, when that
which they say is not in us. And in deed, it is as if a man reporting some
harm of a bad man, should call him by my name: for whatsoever he should say,
should concern not me, but him that he calls by my name.

Aug. against Petilian. 1. Pet. 2.23
18 Especially, let us remember, that as Saint Augustine says, our patience is
tried by detraction. And let us imitate our Savior Jesus Christ, who when he
was reviled, reviled not again, but prayed for those that reviled him. As in
truth, it is worse for the backbiters than for us, and consequently, we are
to take compassion of them, and to pray to GOD for them. For as one stripe of
the tongue wounds three, the backbiter, him that gives ear to the
backbiting, and the back-biten, so the two first do thereby wound their
consciences to the death, by deserving the sentence of eternal fire: but the
third is no whit damnified but in his good name, and that peradventure but for
a short space: It beseems not a christian to return injury for injury.
Neither is it good to render evil for evil, if he that wrongeth thee, says
Seneca, be weaker then thy self, forgive him, if stronger, forgive they
self. It is a vice to revenge and a virtue to forgive, and therefore when
Pittacus had caught one that had wronged him, he let him go, and said: Pardon
is better than revenge. To the end therefore to take away all replication, to
the example of Jesus Christ let us also join the example of David, that we may
follow the same. He protests that when they which had charged him with
reproaches and false accusations, Psalm 37.13.
were sick, he put on sackcloth, and vexed his soul with fasting, and his
prayer returned into his bosom, Psalm. 35.13.
so that he redoubled and reiterated the same with a sorrowful and troubled
heart. Yea, herein let us imitate the moderation and temperance of Euagrius,
whose mortification was such, Zozom. in his Ecclesiastical history. lib. 6.
cap. 38 Prou. 22.1
that no praises could lift him up, neither any injuries move him to
displeasure.

19 Not that we should utterly neglect our same and good name: For, A good name
(says Solomon) is to be chosen before great riches: and loving favor is above
silver and gold. Besides, as by our sins God is dishonored, and our
neighbors take offense: so contrariwise, by our holy conversation and good
name God is glorified and our neighbors edyfied. And this does Saint Augustine
teach, saying: He that leads an innocent life by shunning sin and
iniquity, benefiteth himself: but he who besides is not negligent in
mayntayning his good name does benefit others, and is merciful unto them. If
God therefore give us convenient means without breach of the bond of peace and
love, and without giving cause of offense, to defend our innocence and good
name, we ought to keep and preserve it in procuring honest things, not only
before the Lord, 2. Cor. 8.28 2. Cor. 6.8
but also before men. Otherwise, contenting our selves with the testimony of a
good conscience, let us with the Apostle, wade thorough honor and dishonor,
thorough evil report and good report. As being assured, that God will in the
end make manifest our innocence, and bless our patience with peace and
contentation in him. Psalm. 37.6.
Thus the duty of every Christian that longs to amend his life does consist
in this: First, that he abstain from all slander, backbiting, and evil
speech: secondly, that we give no ear to backbiters and slanderers: and
lastly, that he be not moved by their backbitinges, slanders, and hard
words, in word or deed to render evil for evil. But rather let him pray
unto God for those that seem in mind to be troubled and sick, in that they
speak evil of him. Amen.

The end of the second Book.
The third Book. Who it is that ought to Amend. Of the duties common both to
the husband and the wife.
Chapter. 1.
WE have in the former books propounded some examples of the things wherein
we ought principally to refourme our lives, and to amend. Now let us
understand who ought to amend. Any man, even without study, will answer,
that every Christian is bound thereto. And it is true, for there is no man
whosoever, but both needs and is bound to amend his life in the premises, as
also in every other the duties required in the general vocation and calling
of a Christian. Nevertheless there be also certain particular callinges,
wherein each man in his own behalf is to understand what God requires of
men in the same, that so they may reform their faults, and more virtuously
emploie themselves in their vocations, according to the will of God. But of
these we will consider only of eight. First, of the husband to the wife, and
the wife to the husband. Next, of parents to their children, and of children
to their parents. Then of the Magistrate to the subject, and of the subject to
the magistrate. Lastly, of the ministers of the word to the congregation, and
of the congregation to their ministers.

2 As concerning the duties of those that are united by marryage, Genesis 2
some there are that be common to either party, and some that particularly
do importe the husband to the wife, and other some the wife to her husband.
But first we will entreat of those that be common to both. John 2.1 Heb. 4.4
Moses writing of the institution of Marriage, does evidently declare, that it
is a holy ordinance of God. Jesus Christ also honored it both with his
presence and first miracle. And the Apostle to the Hebrews says, that
marriage is honorable. Such therefore as do aspyre thereunto, are to begin
in prayer and holiness to God: 1. Cor. 7. 2
And having attained to that estate, to use this benefit of marriage as an
holy ordynance of God, in all godliness and purity, for a remedy against the
weakness of the flesh, as the Apostle Paul teaches, and not for provocation
and lust to intemperancie. True it is, that honesty of marryage grounded upon
Gods ordinance, does cover the shame of incontinencie, yet not so, as that
we should defyle and pollute that estate by admitting all things, Ambos. li.
de Philos.
but that we should so use it, as there might be no excess in dissolution,
neither any intemperancie contrary to the holiness of marryage. And in deed
Saint Ambrose reproouing those that do abuse it in lascivious excess,
terms them fornicatours with their wives. And albeit that term seems
hard, yet let us not think or imagine that he spoke it without reason, Aug.
against Iuli. li. 2
especially considering that Saint Augustine alleging this phrase of speech
of Saint Ambrose, shows sufficiently that he allowed of his judgment.

3 Secondly, when God created the woman, he said, Genesis 2.18
It is not good that man should be alone, I will make him a help, meet for
him. But whatsoever is said of the woman, that she should be a help to the
man, must also be put in practice, 1. Cor. 7
and exercised by the husband toward the wife, according to the doctrine of
the Apostle Saint Paul, whether in avoiding fornication, whether in procuring
generation, and the education and bringing up of children, whether in
mayntaining a family, or for the service of God and salvation of souls.
Hereby it evidently appears, that the duty common both to the husband and
wife, imports, that the one should aid and help the other. 1. Cor. 7. 2
First, that they may lead their lives in chastity and holiness, as the
holy Apostle Paul notes, where he sets down the end of marryage. Next,
that to avoid fornication, every man should have his own wife, and every
woman her own husband. And thus the duty of the husband and the wife
consists in this, that they live together in all chastity and pureness: and
that they take great heed and beware of breaking the bond, and infringing
and violating the says of marriage by fornication or adultery: which sin we
have before declared to be a detestable abomination in the sight both of God
and man. If such as wanting the remedy of marryage, by committing fornication,
do incur an offense worthy everlasting damnation: What may those deserve,
who having a remedy for their infyrmitie, do nevertheless ouerflow in
adultery? Yet is it not enough only to abstain from this abomination,
unless we also forbear from every thing that may seem to tend thereunto, or
to contain any beginning, appearance, allurement, or occasion of evil: First,
because that by the law all this is prohibited, Exodus 20.14
even in these express words, Thou shall not commit adultery. For the word
Adultery, comprehends all prouocations, gestures, Math. 5.28,
speeches, yea, even unchaste looks. And therefore says Jesus Christ, He that
looks upon another man's wife, to lust after her, has already committed
adultery with her in his heart. Next, that we may prevent all argument of
jealousy, a most dangerous disease, and of great difficulty to cure. For, as
Chrysostom says, Chrisost. upon the 2. of Matthew. Julius Caesar Plutarch in
the life of Julius Caesar.
Where either the husband or the wife is tainted with jealousy, they believe
every word that they hear spoken touching their passion, albeit it bear no
appearance of truth. When a certain Roman Emperor determined to put away his
wife, he alleged this reason. An Emperors wife, said he, must so bear her
self, that the incur no suspicion of evil. How much rather ought this to
be practiced among Christian husbands and wives, as well to avoid occasion of
offense, as for fear least jealousy should convert marriage into a most
miserable and wretched estate.

4 Again, as marriage was also ordained for generation, so in that part
thereof there are some duties that particularly concern the wife, and some
that are common both to her and her husband. Of the particular duties of the
wife, we will speak hereafter. Those therefore that are common to them both,
do concern, first the instruction of their children, and that we will also
refer to be entreated of in the Chapter that handles The duties of parents
toward the children: secondly, the means to bring up their children, and to
maintain their family. For the care and burden thereof is common: yet so, as
properly the husband is to get it and to bring it in, and the wife to order and
dispose it. Howbeit the duty of the wife or of the husband does not so exempt
either of them, but that she also according to her ability and power must help
her husband to get it, and he likewise in his discretion direct her in the
dispensatio^ thereof. He that does not orderly govern his house, Prou 11.29
shall inherit the wind, says Solomon. And order consists in this, that
the husband follow his business, traffic, or calling, without any
molestation of the wife, who ought not to meddle or control him therein, but
with great discretion and gentleness: as also the husband is not to deal but
soberly and in great discretion with household affairs that are proper to the
wife. The man is jealous of his authority and reputation, and the woman
inclined to suspect her self to be despised. Wherefore as the husband cannot
well abide that his wife should show her self more skillful and wife in his
business than himself: so cannot the wife suffer that her husband should
despise and account her a fool, by meddling with her small household affairs.

5 As the duty therefore of the husband and wife consists in looking to that
which is aforesaid, to the end their marriage may be quiet, and themselves live
together in love: even so an idle and unthrifty husband, and a prodigal and
slothful wife, are two ready ways to destruction. The husband that has such
a wife, casts his labors into a bottomless sack: and the wife that is sped
of such a husband, draws a cart heavy laden, through a sandy way without a
horse. Such a husband, especially if idleness draw him to love and haunt
tauernes, is cruel to his wife and children: and such a wife confounds her
husband, and brings reproach and poverty to her whole family. The remedy for
the husband that has such a wife, is patience with some severity, discreet
admonitions, and prayer to God: as also the help for the wife that has such a
husband, is tolleration, gentle exhortation, and cheerful and loving
entertainment of her husband, whereby to induce him willingly to keep home.

6 They are also to be mutual helps each to other in matters concerning their
own salvation and the service of God. First, if one of them, as says the
Apostle be an unbeliever, the other must labor to draw his party to the
knowledge of the truth. S. Paul exhorting the husband and wife of contrary
religions, not to part, but to dwell together: adds a notable reason, saying:
1. Cor. 7.16
What know thou O man, whether thou shall save thy wife, or thou O woman,
whether thou shall save thy husband? Therein declaring, that the faithful
person in duty is to labor and endeavor to win his party to the knowledge of
the truth, and so to save her. S. Peter exhorts wives to be subject to their
husbands, albeit unbelievers, 1. Pet. 3.1
and such as do not obey the word, that so without speech, by their holy and
virtuous conversation they may win them. Secondly, if both be believers,
their duty is to confyrme each other in the time of persecution, that they
may constantly follow Jesus Christ. Solomon indeuouring to declare the fruits
of marriage, Wis. 4.10.12.
says: Two are more able to with, and temptations, and a line of three twists
is not so soon broken. They are (...) each to help up other, if either of
them happen to (...) or sin. Wis. 4.^.
Two are better (says the same Solomon (...) they have better wages for their
labor. And if they (...) will (...) up the other: but woe unto him that is
alone, for if he (...) lift him up. They ought also each to per^^^^^ (...), to
relieve the poor, diligently to frequent (...), to use prayers, and
supplications, and praise, and thankesgiuings to the Lord, to comfort each
other in the time of affliction: to be short, either to exhort other to walk
in the fear of God, (...) in all duties and exercises beseeming the children
of God. In this m^nner did that holy woman, Elizeus hottesse, exhort her
husband to prepare a chamber for the prophet to lodge in. Saint Paul also
says, 2. King. 4.1^. 1. Cor. ^4.^^
That women, desirous to learn, should question with their husbands at home.
Whereby he shows, that the husband ought to be so instructed, as he may
be ready to instruct his wife at home. And in deed, a heathen Philosopher in
this sense says very well, Plutarch in the rules of marriage.
That the husband, after the example of the Be, should every where gather
every good instruction, that he might be able to impart it to his wife, and by
having communication, acquaint her therewith. Thus, says he, may the minds
of women well taught, be won from vanity to virtue.

7 Other duties there are which be common both to the husband and the wife, as
among the rest, such as proceed of the union of marryage, whereof God in the
institution thereof said, They are one flesh. And Jesus Christ confyrmed,
saying, Two shall be one (...) And therefore in Saint Mark he adds, They
are no more two but one flesh. Gen 2.24 Math. 19. 5 Mark 10.8.
And in deed, if Eve being created of one of the ribs of Adam, was as part
of himself: then is the wife also a part of her husband, and as the one half
of himself. And of this vn^^^ and conjunction proceeds the mutual love
between man and wife. For no man, says Saint Paul, hates his own flesh but
loves and cherishes it. And speaking to husbands, he says, Husbands love
your wives. Ephesians. 5.15. Titus 2.4 Eccle. 25.1.
And writing to Titus, he commands him to exhort the elder women to teach
the younger to be modest, and to love their husbands. Three things (says
Wisdom) do rejoice thee, and with them am I beautifyed before God and men:
Unity of brethren, love of neighbors, a man and wife that agree together. But
sith the foundation of this mutual love is the unity of marriage, whereby the
husband and the wife are made one flesh, the husband as the head, the wife as
the body. It follows, that this love must be steadfast, not variable, and
that the union of marriage continue, notwithstanding whatsoever befall either
the husband or the wife. Notwithstanding whatsoever complexions, I say,
natures and infyrmities may appear, whatsoever sickness, loss of goods,
injuries, griefs, or other inconveniences that may arise, yet so long as the
foundation of love, that is, the union of marriage does continue, so long must
love and affection remain. God commands us to love our neighbors as our
selves, because they be of our flesh. Albeit therefore that he contemn, hate,
offend, or wrong us: albeit he be our enemy, and in respect of himself,
deserves not that we should love him, yet because he is of our flesh, the
foundation of love remaining, we must love him. As also our savior Jesus
Christ says, Love your enemies, bless those that curse you, Mat. 5.44.
do good to those that hate you, and pray for those that molest and persecute
you. How much rather ought they to put this in practice, who by the bond of
marryage are made one flesh? The rather, because the union between man and
wife, is without comparison more straight, and binds them each to love other,
much more than the conjunction whereby man is united unto his neighbor.

8 But this is the mischief, that in many their love is not grounded upon the
union of marriage, but upon beauty, riches, and other carnal and worldly
considerations, subject to chang, alteration and loss. This corruption that
respects beauty, is old, and noted to be among the causes of the flood.
The sons of God, says Moses, seeing the daughters of men were fair, lusted
after them, Genesis 6. 2
and took them in marriage. But in deed, it is money that makes love, and
riches engender affection, witness the experience of our days. Yet such love
resembles only a fire of straw, which is but a blaze and is soon out, unless
it be continued with great wood, or other like substance. Love growing of
beauty, riches, lust, or any other like slight, uncertain, and frail
grounds, is soon lost and vanished, unless it be maintained with the
consideration of this union of two in one flesh, and the virtues thereto
adjoined: and therefore must every man think upon this union in marriage,
that he may enjoy, nourish, and continue the love that thereof proceeds: the
rather because such love is the nurse of concord, that makes marriage happy.
As contrariwise the want of this love is the fountain of strife, quarelling,
debate, and other like afflictions that convert the paradise of marriage into a
hell. Augustine of baptism of children
Dissension between man and wife, says. S Augustine, is the trouble and
overthrow of the householde. They that will avoid such strife, must therefore
love each other: and especially they must have care hereof, when they are
first married. For as a vessel made of two pieces and glewed together, may at
the first be easily broken, but in time grows strong: so is it also with two
persons that are glewed or joined together by the bond of marriage.

9 This love, the mother of peace, will engender a care and duty each to
support other, and so to practice the same which Saint Paul requires in all
believers, Ephesians. 4.31
that is, To be gentle one to another, friendly, and each to forgive other,
even as God has forgiven us through Christ: Let the husband think that he
has married a daughter of Adam with all her infyrmities: and likewise let the
woman think that she has not married an Angel, but a child of Adam with his
corruptions. And so let them both resolve to bear that that cannot be soon
amended. Let not the body complain of the head, albeit it have but one eye,
neither the head of the body, albeit it be crooked or misshapen. Such defaultes
do never break union and love between the head and the body: neither must
the infirmities of the husband or the wife infringe the love that proceeds of
the union in marriage. If the husband be given to brauling, or the wife to
chiding, let them both beware of giving any occasion. The bell has a loud
sound, and therefore he that will not hear it, must beware how he pull the
roape and shake it. So if the one will begin to chide without a cause, let
the other be either deaf, Eras. Apotheg lib. 8
and so not hear it, or dumb, and make no answer. Heereto has the saying
of Alphonsus, king of Arragon, relation. Where the husband is deaf and the
wife blind, marriage is quiet and free from dissension. Hereby meaning, that
the wife must wink at many the infyrmities of her husband, as if she see them
not, and the husband put up many shrewde speeches of his wife, as if he heard
them not. Neither can it be any reproach to the husband and wife so
steadfastly united, to practice this duty, considering that David protests,
that he used the like patience and discretion among his enemies, Psalm 38.12
They that seek after my life lay snares, and they that go about to do me evil,
talk wicked things, and imagine deceit continually. But I as a deaf man
heard not, and am as a dumb man which opens not his mouth. Thus I am as a
man that hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproves.

10 This union between man and wife does also engender that duty which the
holy Ghost notes saying: Mat. 19.5. Ephe. 5.31.
For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and cleave to his wife:
As also the wife in the like respect is bound to the like duty toward her
husband. Not the marriage exempteth any from their due honor and obedience to
parents, but to declare that the union between man and wife is greater then
between the children and the parents. And indeed, the true love of the
husband to the wife, and of the wife to the husband, surmounteth all love of
children to their parents. The husband and the wife have their secret counsels
and communication of matters concerning their profit and commodity. The wife
is more obedient to her husband, and the husbandmore desirous to please his
wife, then their parents. Yea and at length it falls out that they depart
from their parents to keep house by themselves. And this plainly appeared in
Lea and Rachell being sisters, and the wives of Jacob. For Jacob grieved at the
wrong offered him by their father Laban, boldly made his moan to them:
Whereupon they also complaining of their father agreed with Jacob, and consented
together to leave their father, and to follow their husband Jacob. Herein
likewise consists another duty of the husband to the wife and of the wife to
the husband, namely that they show no greater secrecy or communication of
their household affairs to their parents, Genesis 26.
then mutually each to other, and this rule is especially to be put in practice
when they grows any discontent between themselves. For if the husband should
complain to his parents of his wife, or the wife of her husband, such dealing
might breed a most dangerous ielouzie, and consequently perhaps
irreconciliable dissension and strife. But if it should grow to any complaint,
it were requisite, so discreetly to prosecute the matter, as that the woman
should come to her husbands parents, and the husband to his wives. So should
all cause of iealouzie cease, and the complaint procure most assured remedy.

11 This union in marriage produces yet another duty common both to the
husband and the wife: And that is, that they never seek, neither once think
of divorce: And to that end let them remember what is written. That which God
has joined together, Matt 10.6.
let no man put asunder: Likewise that nothing but adultery may separate those
that are united by marriage. All other agreements and contracts, made by
mutual consent, may be broken and dissolved by the like consent of both
parties: but in the contract of marriage almighty God comes in as a witness:
yea he receaueth the promise of both parties, as joining them in that estate.
And this does Solomon note, Prou. 2.17.
where he obiecteth to the harlot that she has forgotten the covenant or
alliance of her God. But Ma^achie speaks more plainly, and gives a reason
why God punished such husbands as leaving their lawful wives took others:
Because, says he, Mala. 2.14.
the Lord has been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against
whom thou have transgressed, yet is she thy companion and the wife of thy
covenant. The promise therefore to God cannot be broken, but only by his
authority. In the days of Moses husbands were very easily and soon entreated
to forsake their wives, by giving them a Bill of divorce: Yet so far was this
course from being lawful, that contrariwise, Jesus Christ says that it was
tolerated only in respect of the hardness of husbands hearts, who otherwise
would have vexed their wives, and entreat them cruelly. Mat. 19. 8,
And this libell containing the cause of divorce and putting away of the woman,
Leuit. 20.10.
did justify her and condemn the man. For seeing it was never given in case
of adultery, (which was punished with death) all other causes aledged in the
libell tended to justify the woman, John. 8.5.
and to declare that she was wrongfully divorced: and so condemned the husband,
as one that contraried the first institution of marriage, whereto Jesus Christ,
condemning this corruption, Mat. 1^.1.
does return them, saying: It was not so from the beginning, and therefore
whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for whoredom, and marry
another, commits Adultery, and whosoever marries her which is divorced,
does commit Adultery with her. So straight is the bond of marriage.

12 Hereof it follows that notwithstanding whatsoever difficulties that may
arise between the husband and the wife, whether it be long, tedious and
incurable sickness of either party: whether natural and contrary humors
that breed debate, wrangling, or strife about householde affairs: Whether it
be any vice, as the husband to be a drunkerd, or the wife a slothful, Idle or
vnthrustie huswife: whether either party forsake the truth and profession of
religion, do fall into Idolatry or heresy: Yet still the bond of marriage
remains steadfast and not to be dissolved. Neither may they be separated,
even by their own mutual consent. Mat. 19.6. 2. Cor. 7.12.
For as the holy Ghost has pronounced, That which God has joined together let
not man put a sunder. And therefore S. Paul says. If any brother have a wife
that believes not, if she be content to dwell with him, let him not forsake
her. And the woman which has a husband that believes not, if he be content to
dwell with her, let her not forsake him. Also because some did suppose that the
unbelief in any of the parties might breed some pollution or disquiet in
marriage, he answers, no: his reason: For the unbelieving husband is
sanctified by his believing wife: And the unbelieving wife by her believing
husband. And this he proves by affirming that the children issuing of such a
marriage be holy, that is to say, partakers of the covenant of God, and
consequently accepted into the fellow^hippe of the Church. Only he adds this
exception, If the unbelieving man depart and forsake his believing wife, she
is not subie^t to follow him. And yet must this be understood, where such
departure arises, either upon hatred that he bears to the true religion,
that his wife professes: or upon a desire to use his polluted and false
religion: For herein cannot his wife follow him without danger of defiling, and
depriving of her self of the profession of the truth, together with the food
of her soul.

13 Likewise where S. Paul speaking of the husband and wife, 1. Cor. 7.11.
both believers, says. If the woman depart from her husband, let her remain
unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband: He therein means not that it
shall be lawful for the woman because she cannot bear the troublesome nature
of her husband, or to avoid strife and debate, to depart and live as a widow:
but only he shows, that when the husband upon such like occasions shall put
away or call off his wife, yet is not ^he at her liberty to marry another: but
must remain unmarried and labor to be reconciled. And therefore are those
women, which upon the hard dealing or troublesome dispositions of their
husbands, do forsake them, greatly to be reproved as thereby giving occasion of
great mischief and trouble: As (...) are those husbands, who upon like
occasions, do forsake their wives. For since nothing may make divorce, but
adultery, every purpose and determination to part upon any other occasion or
reason, restrained by Gods ordinance and the law of marriage. And ^^th it is
not lawful for us to continue in such separation the whole course of our
lives: Neither is it lawful so to abide at all, either so much as to enter
thereinto. If therefore upon such occasion the husband forsake his wife, or the
wife her husband, rather (...) to cont^nue the mischief begun, let them
return together ^gaine, and think that the shortest follies do least hurt.

14 If they aleage their entreatie, in their opinion, intolerable, and their
nature so contrary that they cannot live without strife, and debate: Also that
being a sunder and quiet in conscience, free from trouble, they may the better
apply themselves and employ their time in Prayer: the answer is, that such
infirmities must not dissolve the bonds of marriage, and their duties to live
together: But let them think that God has called them to the exercise of
patience, which upon hearty Prayer shall be granted them: Let them labor each
to bear with the other, that they may live in peace, and continually pray to
God to give them grace so to do. Let them remember that the Devil
transformeth himself into an Angel of light, when by propounding a duty to
live in quiet, and consequently a mean to pray unto God, for the compassing
thereof he induces them to gain say Gods prohibition, and to separate that
which God has joined together. To conclude, let them think well upon this
saying of Saint Augustine. As the conjunction comes of God, Augu. upon John
Trac. 9.
so the separation and divorce proceeds from the Devil. If they reply that
by living a sunder, so that they marry not again, they break not the bond of
marriage, let them remember that marriage being instituted for a remedy
against fornication, Justinians Instit, lib. 1. Tit. de Nuptiis August. of the
fruit of marriage. c. 3.
for the generation and bringing up of children, and for a help each to other
in mutual society and inseparable conversation of life (after the Lawiers
phrase) yet does there appear no token or effect of marriage in those that
live a sunder, albeit they marry not again. Saint Augustine says, that the
benefit of marriage consists not only in the procreation of children, but
also in the natural society of the two diverse sexes. Otherwise it could not
be said that there were any marriage between two old folks.

Plato of the precepts of marriage.
15 The union of marriage yet teaches us another duty common both to the man
and to the wife. Which is; that their goods be common between them. Happy,
says Plato, is that common wealth where they have no use of these words, Mine
and Thine: But in marriage especially they ought not to be heard. If ye wife
have brought most goods in marriage, the marriage once consumate, her part is
gone, Aug. to Edic. Epist. 199.
and they are made common: as also are the debts, whether hers or her husbands.
And therefore can neither of them say: This is mine, but this is ours. When a
woman has brought great goods, yet may she not say, I will do with mine own
what I list: For as Saint Augustine says, her self is not her own, but her
husbands. The husband as the head and chief guide of the family must have the
custody and chief government of the goods in the house: yet may he discharge
himself of the whole or of part, as him self shall think meet and
convenient. Yet let him remember that he entreat her, not as a servant, by
giving her money as it were in mistrust, or with condition to return him a
particular account. For the husbands mistrust does many times provoke the
woman: and the wives vain expense breeds mistrust in the husband: But the
faithful and discreet employment of the wife, and her husbands confidence in
her, will procure that as the goods be common to both, so each alike shall
undertake the custody and employment of the same.

16 Hereto for a conclusion will we yet add two duties common both to the
husband and the wife: The first, that they daily pray to God to give them grace
to live together in peace and love, and that each may be a help to others
salvation. Let all such as desire to enjoy such a felicity, understand that
they must daily pray to God for the obtaining thereof: And let those that live
in strife and debate, examine themselves whether they have no cause to impute
their miserable estate to their neglect of this duty. The second consists in
the practice of the same which Saint Paul teaches, saying: 1. Cor. 7.29.
Let those that be married be as if they were not married. But how? By so
enjoying the commodity and contentation of marriage, that the benefit of
their conjunction breed no divorce between God and them: Likewise that thereby
they be not hindered or made slack in any duty toward God and their neighbors:
as also that no affliction depending or proceeding of marriage withdraw them, or
force them to resolve of any thing contrary to the union of marriage, and
their profession that they be the children of God.

Of the particular duty of the wife to her husband. Chap. 2.
NOw let us come to the particular duties, and first to the duty of the wife to
her husband. As marriage was ordained besides all other matters, for
generation: so together with the duties common both to the husband and to the
wife, which thereof do depend and are before declared, the woman is also
perticularly called and subject to the bearing of children, to the travail of
child birth, and to the labor of suckling and bringing them up. This estate is
full of trouble: yet is she hereto subject by her transgression, as God
speaking to Eve, said: I will greatly increase thy sorrows and thy conceptions,
in sorrow shall thou bring forth children. But as this consideration should
cause her to walk in humility, as in all her sorrows and labor bearing the
Badge of sin: so should them the same condition and estate conceive comfort,
in that, as S. Paul testifies, 1. Tim. 2.15.
The woman shall be saved by bearing of children. In which bearing of children,
the Apostle means the heaviness, want of relish, and other the troubles
while she breeds: the sorrows and travail of child birth: and the labors in
nursing and bringing them up. And this is the wonderful wisdom and goodness
of God: that he lays a foundation of comfort for the woman in that which
otherwise does breed her sorrow and care: for these fruits of sin shall be
converted to her good and salvation. Also by obaying quietly in this vocation,
she does service to God, and so is saved, and led through this means and way
into everlasting life, in case as Saint Paul also adds, with modesty she
abide in faith, love and sanctification.

2 As by this word, generation of children, is also meant her duty in suckling
them: so is the woman to remember that God has given her two breasts, not that
she should employ them for a show or ostentation, but in the service of God,
and to be a help to her husband, in suckling the children common to them
both: Experience teaches, that God conuerteth her blood into the Milk where
with the cilde is nursed in the mothers womb: He brings it into the breasts,
furnished with Nipples convenient to minister the warm Milk vato the child,
whom he endueth with industry to draw out the Milk for his own sustenance.
The woman therefore that can suckle her child and does it not, but refuses
this office and duty of a mother, declares her self to be very
unthankful to God, and as it were forsakes and contemns the fruit of her
womb. And therefore the brute beasts lying upon the ground, and granting not
one Niple or two, but six or seven to their young ones, shall rise in
judgment against these dainty half mothers, who for fear of wrinkling of
their faces, or to avoid some small labor, do refuse this office of a mother
due to their children. They might take example by Anna the mother of Samuel,
who suckled her child till the days of weaning: By Sarah the wife of Abraham,
as Moses notes, where he attributes to her these speeches. 1. Sam. 1.23. Gen
27.1. Luke 1^.27.
Who would have said to Abraham that Sarah should have given children suck?
And for the words of the woman that said unto Jesus, Blessed is the womb that
bare thee, and the pappes that gave thee suck, As the first part of her speech
must be meant by the virgin Marie, so may we in reason refer to her also the
second, and thereof gather that she suckled her son Jesus Christ.

3 But let us go on to other the particular duties of the wife to her husband.
The husband is the head of the wife and the wife is subject to her husband. It
is the ordinance of God, grounded, 1. Tim. 2.13.
as Saint Paul notes, first upon this, that man was created first, 1. Cor.
11.8.
and afterward Eve: Secondly as the same Apostle says, in this that the man is
not from the woman, but the woman from the man: thereto adding that the man was
not created for the woman, but the woman for the man. And therefore it is meet
she should be subject to her husband. These resons do prove, that the
subjection of the wife to her husband is it not in her a curse, for it was
established by the order and end of her creation, before the transgression. But
the third reason ensued upon this: That the woman being seduced by the Serpent,
seduced her husband, 1. Tim. 2.14,
as Saint Paul also notes, saying: Adam was not deceived, Genesis 3.16.
but the woman was deceived, and was in the transgression. It was also the
sentence which God pronounced, when he reproved the woman, for that thee
believing the Serpent, had seduced her husband. Thy will, says he, shall be
subject to thy husband, and he shall have dominion over thee. 1. Pet. 3.1.
Colos. 3.18. Ephe. 5.22.
Neither is it without reason that this subjection of the woman to her husband
is so often commanded and recommended in Gods word. Let wives, says Saint
Peter, be subject to their husbands. Wives, says Saint Paul, be ye subject
to your husbands, as it is meet, in the Lord. Also writing to the Ephesians,
he says, Wives be ye subject to your husbands, as to the Lord. 1. Pet 3.5.
For the husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is the head of the Church.
Saint Peter the rather to induce them to this duty, adds. For in time past
the holy women which trusted in God, attired themselves, Genesis 18.12.
not in sumptuous apparel but in virtue, and were subject to their husbands.
And for example he aleaged Sarah the wife of Abraham, who called her husband
Lord. 1. Cor. 11.
This subjection, in the days of Saint Paul was acknowledged by the covering
of their heads. And in that consideration does he so earnestly uphold that the
woman ought to cover her head, in token that she is under power of her
husband. This did Rebecca well understand and practice: for seeing her husband
Isaac come, Genesis 24.65.
before she presented her self in his presence, she took a Veil and covered
her head, as a token of subjection and testimony of the reverence that she did
bear unto him.

4 The duties of the wife comprised in this subjection, Ephe. 5.24.
are by Saint Paul noted, who says: As the Church is subject to Christ, so
let women be subject to their husbands in all things, As the Church
therefore should depend upon the wisdom, discretion, Genesis 3.1.
and will of Christ, and not follow what it self lists: So must the wife
also rule and apply her self to the discretion and will of her husband: even
as the government and conduct of every thing rests in the head, not in the
body. Moses writes, that the Serpent was wise above all the beasts of the
field: and that did he declare in assaulting the woman, that when he had
seduced her, she might also seduce her husband. Saint Paul noting this among
other the causes of the woman's subjection, does sufficiently show that for the
avoiding of the like inconveniences, it is Gods will that she should be
subject to her husband, so that she shall have no other discretion or will, but
what may depend upon her head: As also he says: Thy desire shall be subject to
thy husband, and he shall rule over thee. Genesis 3.16.
This dominion over the wives will does manifestly appear in this, that God in
old time ordained, that if the woman had vowed any thing unto God, it should
notwithstanding rest in her husband to disaduow it: So much is the wives will
subject to her husband. Numb. 30.7.
Yet is it not meant that the wife should not employ her knowledge and
discretion which God has given her, in the help of her husband. But always
it must be with condition to submit her self to him, acknowledging him to be
her head, that finally they may so agree in one, as the conjunction of marriage
does require. Yet as when in a Lute or other musical instrument, two strings
concurring in one tune, the sound nevertheless is imputed to the strongest and
highest, so in a well ordered householde there must be a communication and
consent of counsel and will, between the husband and the wife, yet such as
the counsel and commandment may rest in the husband.

5 True it is, that some women are wiser and more discreet then their
husbands: As Abigall the wife of Nabal, and others. Whether was Solomon
deceived when he said, A wise woman builds up the house, Prou. 14. Prou. 11.
and blessed is the man that has a discreet wife: Yet still a great part of
the discretion of such women shall rest in acknowledging their husbands to be
their heads, and so using the graces that they have received of the Lord, that
their husbands may be honored, not contemned, neither of them nor of others,
which falls out contrary when the wife will seem wiser then her husband.
Plut. of the precepts of matrimony.
A certain heathen Philosopher has very well described this modesty and
duty of a wife, saying: That a woman should not speak but to her husband, or
by her husband. And as the voice of him that sounds a trumpet is not so loud
as the sound that it yields: so is the wisdom and word of a woman of
greater virtue and efficacy, when all that she knows and can do, is as if
it were said and done by her husband.

6 The obedience that the wife owes to her husband, depends upon this
subjection of her will and wisdom unto him. 1. Pet. 3.6.
As S. Peter also notes in Sarah the wife of Abraham: For having exhorted
Christian women to be subject to their husbands, he propounds the example of
Sarah, saying: As Sarah obeyed Abraham and called him Lord. And in that sense
says S. Paul, Ephe. 5.33.
Let the wife stand in awe of her husband: For fearing to displease her
husband, Ester. 1.
she will be careful to yield unto him due obedience. Upon Queen Vashties
refusal to obey her husband, King Assuerus, he took occasion to forsake her,
and to deprive her of that great estate to be Queen over many kingdoms. For
albeit she might seem in reason not to please him in that he required of her:
yet had it been better for her to have pleased him, in a matter of it self
nature not wicked, then by her refusal to provoke her husband, and give him
cause to suspect some disdain and contempt, especially considering, she might
well think that the King could not patiently bear such a refusal in so
solemn an assembly. Herein are women taught not to provoke their husbands by
disobedience, in matters that may be performed without offense to God: neither
to presume over them either in kindred or wealth: or obstinately to refuse in
matter that may trouble householde peace and quiet. Disobedience begets
contempt of the husband: Hest. 1.12.
and contempt wrath, as we may note in this history of Hester, and is many
times the cause of troubles between the man and the wife. If the obedience
imports any difficulty, she may for her excuse gently propound the same, yet
upon condition to obey in case the husband should persist in his intent, so
long as the discommoditie imports no wickedness. For it is better to
continue peace by obedience, then to break it by resistaunce. And indeed it
is natural in the members to obey the conduct and government of the head. Yet
must not this obedience so far extend as that the husband should command any
thing contrary to her honor and salvation, and in this sense we must take the
saying of Saint Paul: Wives, be subject to your husbands, Col. 3.18. Ephe. 5,
22.
as it is comely in the Lord.

7 Many women do think this subjection and obedience a cursed matter unworthy
them: 1. Tim. 2.13.
But let them remember that there was no curse or indignity in the woman that
was created with Adam after the Image of God: 1. Cor. 11.8.
Yet did the order of the creation of Adam being the first created, and Eve the
next: Likewise the taking of woman from out of man, submit Eve to Adam, and
consequently the wife to the husband, as is aforesaid. But as concerning the
third reason of this subjection, namely that when the Serpent had seduced her,
1. Tim. 2.14.
she also seduced her husband: she is in the scarre or blemish of that her
sin to acknowledge the mercy, goodness and wisdom of God. For as for the
benefit of the person, God has put the body in subjection to the head, that
thereby it may be guided and governed: So the frailty of the woman seduced by
the Serpent, together with her boldness to seduce her husband, did stand in
need of this remedy of subjection, whereby as well she should have no authority
to receive any so pernicious counsels, as also her husband should have no
excuse, in case he would be induced to wickedness by her that was subject unto
him. As therefore it were a monsterus matter, and the means to overthrow the
person, that the body should, in refusing all subjection and obedience to the
head, take upon it to guide it self and to command the head so were it for the
wife to rebel against the husband. Let her then beware of disordering and
perverting the course which God in his wisdom has established, and with all
let her understand, that going about it, she rises not so much against her
husband as against God: And that it is her good and honor to obey God in her
subjection and obedience to her husband. If in the practice of this duty she
find any difficulty or trouble, through the inconsiderate course of her
husband, or otherwise, let her remember that the same proceeds not of the
order established by the Lord, but through some sin afterward creept in,
which has mixed gale among the home of the subjection and obedience that the
woman should have enjoyed in that estate wherein together with Adam she was
created after the Image of God. And so let her humble her self in the sight of
God, and be well assured, that her subjection and obedience is acceptable unto
him. Likewise that the more that the Image of God is restored in her and her
husband through the regeneration of the holy Ghost, the less difficulty shall
she find in that subjection and obedience, as many in their marriage have
indeed tried to their great contentment and consolation.

8 Some other duties there be that particularly belong to women: As first a
certain discretion and desire required at their hands, to please the nature,
inclination and manners of their husbands, so long as the same import no
wickedness. For as the looking glass how soever fair and beautifully
adorned, is nothing worth if it show that countenance sad which is pleasant,
Eras. Apotheg lib. 3.
or the same pleasant that is sad: So the woman deserves no commendation, that
(as it were) contrarying her husband, when he is merry, shows her self sad,
or in his sadness utters her mirth. And hereto may we refer the old saying
of Socrates: Men should obey the laws of their Cities, and women the manners
of their husbands.

9 Moreover a modest and chaste woman that loves her husband, must also love
her house, as remembering that the husband that loves his wife cannot so well
like of the sight of any Tapisserie as to see his wife in his house. Tit. 2. 5.
And Saint Paul wills the ancient women to teach the younger sort among
other things, to be chaste, to love their husbands, and to keep the house.
Plut. in the precepts of marriage.
In this sense did our auncesters represent a woman by a Torteyse, who never
goes out of her shell. The woman that gaddeth from house to house to prate,
confounds her self, her husband and her family. But there are four seasons
wherein the woman is to go abroad. The first, to come to holy meetings
according to the duty of piety: The second to visit such as stand in need, as
the duty of love and charity do require: The third for employment in
household affairs committed to her charge. The last, with her husband when he
shall require her. As also Abimelech king of Gerar, reproving Sarah because she
had as it were abandoned her self, in that she confessed not that Abraham was
her husband, Genesis 20.16.
said unto her, Thy husband is the veil of thine eyes to all men.

10 The wife also is in duty to be content to please her husband, and not to
be curious or given to adorning of her body or sumptuousness in apparel:
Which vanity must of necessity proceed either of ambition and pride, or of
some disordinate desire to content others, rather then her husband. And
therefore it will better like him, and be more seemly and fit for her to use
modesty herein, especial considering that such curiosity and vanity is
accompanied with great expense, yea and in some with danger of lasciuiousnes.
And therefore Saint Paul admonishes women to array themselves in seemly and
honest apparel with shamefastnes and modesty, and not in brayded hair, gold,
pearl, 1. Tim. 2.9.
or sumptuous apparel. And the rather to correct this corruption, being too
common among women, he exhorts the^ to be adorned with good works, 1. Pet.
3.3.
which says he, do best beseem such women as profess the service of God. S
Peter also having likewise condemned the outward ornaments which do consist in
imbrayded hair, gold lace and gorgeous apparel, admonishes them to labor
that the hidden man, that is the soul, may be well furnished of virtue. And
in truth piety and virtue are excellent ornaments for a woman and of small
charge and the common proverb is true that the women which are curious in
adorning their bodies, are negligent in furnishing the wants of their souls:
An ornament (says the Philosopher Crates) is that which adorneth, and that
adorneth which ministers honor: But gold-rings and other deckings of the body,
are not the purchasers of honor, but wisdom, modesty, chastity and other
virtues. The woman that loves her husband well, must study upon all these
duties aforesaid, which, as Salomo^ says, will make her happy. Happy is the
husband that has a good wife and the reckoning of his life is double. Prou. 26.
Again, A virtuous wife rejoices her husband and causes him to live in
peace: A good wife is a good inheritance, which shall be given in recompense to
those that fear God.

11 To conclude: let the wife carefully meditate and practice the virtues which
Solomon commends in wise and virtuous women in the 31. Chapter of the
Proverbs: And the rather, because the same are represented in 22. verses
whereof the first begins at A the second at B, Prou. 31.
etc. After the order of the Hebrew Alphabet, and were in that sort set down
by Solomon for a help to memory, and consequently to show that they are
worthy to be learned by heart: And therefore we will here insert them, to the end
that wives daily using them, may study to be more and more adorned with such
virtues as make the woman commendable, and the man blessed. The virtues of a
faithful woman and a good huswife as they be described in Salomons Proverbs:
Chap. 31. Who shall find a virtuous woman, for her price is far above the
pearls. The heart of her husband trusts in her, and he shall have no need of
spoil. She will do him good and not evil, all the days of her life: She
seeks Woole and Flax, and labors cheerfully with her hands; She is like
the Merchants ships: she brings her food from a far. She rises while it is
yet night, and gives the portion to her household, and the ordinary to her
maids. She considers a field and gets it, and with the fruit of her hands
she planteth a vineyard. She girdeth her loins with strength and strengthens
her arms. She feels that her merchandise is good, her candle is not put out
by night. She puts her hands to the wheel, her hands handle the spindle.
She stretches out her hand to the poor, and puts forth her hands to the
need. She fears not the Snow for her family, for all her family is ^othed
with Scarlet. She makes her self carpets, fine linen and p^^ple is her
garment. Her husband is known in the gates, when he sits with the elders of
the land. She makes sheets and sells them, and gives girdles to the
Merchant. Strength and honor is her clothing, and in the latter day she shall
rejoice. She opens her mouth with wisdom, and the law of grace is in her
tongue. She ouerseeth the ways of her husband and eats not the bread of
Idleness. Her children rise up and call her blessed, her husband also shall
praise her, saying. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou surmountest
them all. Favor is deceitful and beauty is vanity: but a woman that fears
the Lord, she shall be praised. Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let
her own works praise her in the gates.

Of the particular duty of the husband to his wife. Chap. 3.
NOw let us proceed to the particular duty of the husband to his wife. First
he is to understand, that albeit he be ordained to be her head, yet must he
not tyrannize and torment her at his pleasure: for such husbands are monsters
in nature. The creation of man does sufficiently show that all that is in the
head, as reason, wisdom, judgment, sight, hearing, and other the gifts and
graces of God, do tend to the conduct and happy guiding of the boby: not to
torment and cast it down. This duty of a husband does S. Paul note in the
example of Jesus Christ, saying. Ephe. 5. 25.
As Jesus Christ is the head of the Church: Even so is the husband the head of
the wife. And how? He is, says he, the Savior of her body. And thereof he
takes this exhortation. Husbands love your wives: even as Jesus Christ loved
his Church, and gave himself for it: That he might sanctify and cleanse it
by the washing of water through the word. That he might make it a glorious
Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing but that it should be
holy and without blame: So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies.
He that loves his wife, loves himself: for no man ever yet hated his own
flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord does the Church. It
is therefore the duty of the husband so to love his wife, that after the
example of Jesus Christ, he labor not so heartily for any thing as to set his
wife free from trouble and calamity, and to make her partaker in all his goods
and honor. To be short, if the authority of the head be united with a love of
her that is his moytie, he will never abuse his dominion. But love will make his
authority and power to serve to the b^nefit, comfort and salvation of his wife.

2 Of this fountain of love, springs the duty of the husband to bear with
the infirmities of his wife, and not by and by to enter into bitterness and
wrath, Colos. 3.16.
as S. Paul also notes, saying, Husbands love your wives, and be not bitter
unto them. To the same end also does the admonition of S. Peter unto husbands
tend, where he says: 1. Pet 3.7.
Husbands dwell with your wives as men of knowledge, giving honor unto the
woman as to the weaker vessel, even as they which are heirs together of the
grace of life, that your prayers be not interrupted. This is a notable
exhortation of S. Peter: For by exhorting husbands to behave themselves
discreetly, and with knowledge and wisdom toward their wives, he requires
of them two things: First, that they never say nor do any thing that may
justly offend their wives: as some there be, who being prodigal, great
spenders, or Idle and slack in their business, do cause their wives and
children to languish in poverty: Others, who haunting tauernes, do consume
that which should maintain their family: Others, who coming home drunk, do
beat and vex their wives, and as it were drive them into despair. Others,
who by high and bitter speeches, by threatening and other actions, unworthy a
husband, do provoke their wives, and so stir up such strife and debate, as
do convert the felicity of marriage into an hell. Since therefore that the
husband is head, he ought in such wisdom, reason and discreation to bear
himself, that he give his wife no just occasion of offense or provocation: yea
he must remember that if the head be drunk, the whole body is in danger of
weak government, even of lying in the mire. Secondly, that albeit the wife
should minister just cause of grief and displeasure, yet that the husband
should not thereof take occasion against his wives infirmities, or enter into
bitterness, taunts or trouble: but discreetly and patiently bear with her, that
so they might quietly and lovingly live together.

3 The hurt or weakness of any one member of the body provoke not the head
to wrath or bitterness: but rather to compassion and an inclination to help it.
And indeed whereas God, having created woman the weaker vessel, as S. Peter
notes, did so join her to man, it was not to the end that he striving with so
frail a vessel should bruise and break it: But that by gentle and discreet
entreatie he should quietly enjoy the help that God has given him. Let him
therefore after the counsel of S. Peter so respect her, as one who albeit she
be weak, is nevertheless a profitable vessel for him, as God himself in the
creation of the woman has pronounced, 1. Pet. 3.7. Genesis 2.18.
saying. I will make him a helper. Moreover let him love and honor her, as one
whom notwithanding the frailty of her sex, God has so honored and Jesus Christ
so loved, that being together with man redeemed with his blood, she is together
with her husband coheyre of life everlasting. A Crystal glass is a precious
and profitable vessel, yet brittle: even so is the married woman. For albeit she
be brittle, yet is she profitable to her husband, and precious in the sight of
God, as a child of God and member of Christ. As therefore a man does more
carefully take heed of breaking such a glass, the^ some earthen or tin
vessel, the one being more base and the other more strong: so should the
husband have such regard of the frailty of his wife, that he may bear with
her, and entreat her with gentleness and discretion, that he may use her as a
precious and profitable vessel, to his comfort and joy. And in as much as
prayer is an excellent service that God requires of us, and the ready means to
purchase his blessings, let the husband discreetly bear with his wife, 1. Pet.
3.7.
least otherwise through their strife and contention their prayers, as S. Peter
says, might be let and interrupted.

4 Yet must we not say, but the husband both may, and ought to tell his wife of
her infirmities, that she may amend: But here we are to enter into
consideration of sundry points. First he is especially to prove her offenses
against God: As when Rachell said unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I die:
He reproved her of importunity, Genesis 30.1.
saying, Am I in Gods stead, who has withholden from thee the fruit of thy
womb? Also when Jobs wife said to her husband: Job. 2.^.
Do thou abide in thy integrity? Curse God and die, he wisely reproved
such a wicked speech, saying: Thou speak as an unwise woman. What? shall we
receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil? Secondly, that it be
with gentleness and testimony of good will, as Helcana dealt with his wife Anna,
when she mourned because she had no children. 1. Sam. 1.
And indeed it is meet that the husband should reprove his wife lovingly,
rather by persuasion then by force. For as in a great stormy wind a man
lappeth his cloak about him and holds it fast for fear of loosing: but when
the wind is down and the wether calm, he lets it hang easily* so when
husbands will as it were perforce wrest away their wives infirnities, many of
them will obstinately resist, yet contrariwise by sweet words and loving
exhortations they might be won voluntarily to forsake them. Thirdly, the
husband must seek diligently to remove the stone whereat his wife stumbleth and
takes occasion of grief. So when Sarah was moved against Abraham, because of
Agar, and objected unto him, albeit wrongfully, Genesis 16.
that he was the cause that she contemned her, bearing with his wife, he
removed the cause of the contention, in suffering her to turn Agar out of
doors. He must also take heed that himself be not taynted with the same vice
which he reproves in his wife, least she stop his mouth with the reproach
of the same fault: But rather by giving her example by the contrary virtue,
let her be induced to imitate him. In reproving the wife, the husband must
always use such discretion, that she be not brought into contempt: and
therefore it should never be done in the presence of more then themselves.
For as it is mere folly for a husband to praise and commend his wife in
company: so is it as dangerous to check and reprove her before witness. For
indeed thereof it comes that women, being not able to bear that disgrace,
will reply, and so provoke strife and dissension in open presence, which will
redound to great reproach and offense. And therefore does Cleobulus of Lyndie,
one of the wisemen of Greece, deliver these two precepts to the married man:
First, that he flatter not his wife: Secondly, that he reprove her not before
strangers. And Marcus Aurelius uses three, saying: A wise husband, and one
that seeks to live in quiet with his wife, must observe these three rules:
Often to admonish: Seeldome to reprove, and never to smite her: Let the husband
also remember the sayings of a heathen, who speaking of the infirmities of the
woman, very aptly says, That they must be either taken away, or borne
withal. He that can take them quite away, makes the woman far more
commodious and fit for his purpose: and he that can bear with them, makes
himself better and more virtuous.

5 The husband is also to understand, that as God created the woman, not of the
head, and so equal in authority with her husband, so also he created her not
of Adams foot, that she should be trodden down and despised, but he took
her out of the ribbe, that she might walk jointly with him under the conduct
and government of her head. And in that respect the husband is not to command
his wife in manner as the master his servant, but as the soul does the body,
as being conjoined in like affection and good will. For as the soul in
governing the body, tends to the benefit and commodity of the same, so
ought the dominion and commandment of the husband over his wife, to tend to
rejoice and content her.

6 To conclude. As God has testified his singular goodness unto man in creating
him an helper to assist him: so let him consider in how many sorts she is to
him a helper to pass over this life in blessedness. And let this daily
seeking of such a benefit, received at the hand of God, induce him to render
thanks, and to dispose himself to use it well to his own comfort and
salvation, and not to abuse it to the destruction both of himself and his wife.
But if he chances (as many do) upon troubles and afflictions in marriage,
let him remember that the same do proceed, not properly from marriage, but
from the corruptions of the parties married, and for his part let him study
to amend his infirmities and faults, by amendment of life, and withal, pray
to God to grant the like grace unto his wise: to the end, that the more they
recover the image of God, the more feeling they may have of the felicity of
marryage, which Adam and Eve had inioyed, had they continued as they were
created, in the image of God.

Of the duties of parents toward their children. Chap: 4.
SVch as be married do grow to be fathers and mothers, by bringing forth
children thorough the blessing of God. Let us therefore understand the duties
of parents to their children, and of children to their parents. And now we
will begin with parents. First, of their due care to see their children taught
to pray to God, and to rehearse the Apostles Creed, and the ten commandments.
For as by this exercise their hearts and minds shall the rather be inclined
to godliness and reverence toward God: so as they increase in age, they shall
every day better than other comprehend that which they learn, to their own
comfort and instruction to salvation. Also, as the tongue is called the glory
of man, because that, besides all other reasons, by his speech he is discerned
from the brute beasts: so is it meet, that so soon as the child can begin to
speak, his tongue should be employed to glorify God, by calling upon him,
and protesting the grounds of faith. As also in repeating the will of God in
such sort as he will that we should serve and honor him.

2 Secondly, if parents do note any vice in their little ones, as lying,
choler, envy, covetousness, contempt of parents re^dines to strife, and
other like corruptions: it is their duty diligently and in time to reprove
and correct them, as men use to pluck up weeds while they be yet young,
least growing up among the good seed, they should hinder their growth, and
choke them up. By experience we can see, that mothers swathing their little
ones, do lay their limbs right, each in his place: likewise if a child be
given to be left handed, they chide him, yea, sometimes they bind it up, or
otherwise restrain the use of it, that he may be accustomed to the right.
Also if the child has some string under his tongue, they cut it, least it
should hinder his speech: much rather then ought they to beware, that by their
inconvenience the vices of the soul do not increase: for it is the duty of
parents even in the infancy, to begin to shape and frame the soul unto
virtue.

3 It is also the duty of parents, to provide that their children may learn
to write and read, for it may be unto them a great help in the course of
this life, and a treasure of greater account than money. And therefore the
negligence of many is sharply to be reproved. Besides that, the peformance of
the duties of parents herein, does greatly bind their children unto them.
Nevertheless, the principal end thereof should not have respect to such
commodity as the children may reap thereby toward the use of this present
life, but rather that they may read the word of God to their comfort and
instruction to salvation. As also it were their parts to use them daily to
read some Chapters of the holy Scriptures, thereby to incline their affections
to the word of God: to inure them in the phrase of the holy Ghost, by little
and little to learn the heavenly doctrine, to note the examples of Gods
vengeance poured upon the wicked and disobedient: and of his blessings unto
those that walk in his fear. Athanasius to this purpose says very well, If
thou look that thy children should obey thee, Athan. upon the 6. to the
Ephe.
join and accustom them to Gods word, it will redound greatly to thy
profit. Let thy children hear and read the holy Scriptures, for in them
shall they learn, Honor thy father and thy mother. But if thou do
otherwise, thou trainest them up in the Scriptures of deuilles, whereout they
learn most wicked things. But it is not so when they are instructed in the
holy Scriptures.

4 Parents therefore are diligently to apply themselves to this which God
commands, and so often and earnestly commends unto them, namely, to
instruct their children in the knowledge and fear of God, Plut. in his Lacon
Apotheg.
and in the faith of Jesus Christ. When one asked of Agesilaus king of
Lacedemon, wherein it were best to instruct children. He answered, In those
things which they are to use in their age. This answer shows what a folly
it is to linger children in the learning of vain, trifling, and unprofitable
things, which as they grow in years they will contemn and forget. Parents can
be careful enough to bring up their children in some course, trade, or other
estate wherein to get their livings, when they come to be men: and in deed such
fathers as do neglect that, are unworthy to have children: and in that
consideration did a certain law giver in old time ordain, Solon.
that the child whom his parents had not trained up in some convenient course
whereby to get his living, should not be bound to nourish them in their old
age. But as the soul is more precious than the body, so is it the duty of
parents in youth to train up their children in the practice of those things
wherewith in age, even in this life they may glorify God and be heirs of the
Lord.

5 And to that end they are to consider, especially so many the commandments
of God, so expressly inioyning parents to instruct their children in the
heavenly doctrine. Deuteronomy. 6.6
These words which I command thee this day, says Moses, shall be in thine
heart, thou shall continually rehearse them unto thy children, and shall talk
of them when thou tarriest in thine house, as thou walk by the way, when
thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Now the word whereby, we do say,
Thou shall teach, in that language wherein Moses wrote, signifies, Thou shall
sharpen. Therein showing, that as when we should pitch some stake in a hard
ground, by making it a point, we sharpen it: so parents are to sharpen
instruction to their children. But how? By often repeating unto them the
heavenly doctrine, that it may enter even into the dullest wits. Moses having
written that excellent song, which contains so many notable aduertisements,
and is rehearsed in the two and thirteth chap. of Exodus, Deu. 32.4^
does add. Set your hearts unto all the words which I testifye against you
this day, that ye may command them unto your children, Ephesians. 6.4.
that they may observe and do all the words of this law. The Apostle Saint
Paul exhorts Christians to the like duty, commanding parents to bring up
their children in the instruction of the Lord.

6 The examples of such as have showed themselves faithful and obedient to
these commandments of God, ought to move our hearts to imitate them. This
testimony does God himself give of Abraham, Genesis 18.19. 1. King. 2.1 1. Chro.
28.9
that he knew that he would command his children, and his family after him to
keep the ways of the Lord, and to minister justice and judgment. David
before his death, gave notable and holy precepts unto Solomon, admonishing him
to keep the commandments of God, and to walk in his fear. And it is not the
duty of fathers only, but also of mothers to bring up their children, and to
instruct them in the knowledge and fear of the Lord. Prou. 31 2. Tim. 1.5 Act.
16.1
As Bethsheba, David's wife, gave notable instructions to her son Solomon, as
appears in the book of Proverbs. And as Saint Paul bears witness, that
Timothy even in his childhood was instructed in holy writ, thereby commending
the faith of his grandmother Loys, and his mother Eunice, by whom no doubt he
was taught, especially considering his father was a Gentile.

7 Saint Hierome writing to Leta, not only exhorts her to instruct her
daughter in her youth in holy writ, but also tells her, that her self must
teach her. Let her (says he) in stead of precious stones and silks, love godly
books, and in those books let her delight, not in the leaves beautifyed with
sundry colors, but in the distinct and pure doctrine according to faith.
First, let her learn the Psalter, that by such Canticles she may forsake the
world: and in Salomons Proverbs let her be taught to live virtuously. In
Ecclesiastes let her accustom her self to tread under foot and to contemn
worldly matters: and in the book of Job let her imitate his example of virtue
and patience. Let her lay hold of the Gospels, and still keep them in hand,
and with her whole heart let her learn the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles.
Thus when she has stored the closet of her heart with such treasure, let her
by heart learn the Prophets, the books of Moses, of Kings, of Chronicles,
Esdras, and Hester, and last of all let her learn Salomons song. For if she
should read that first, she might take harm, as not understanding the holy
songs of spiritual marriage under carnal words. But let her forbear all
Apocrypha: let her be still busied in the books of Cyprian, Athanasius, and
Hillarie. It may seem that Saint Hierome requires much, and more than a
christian maiden, albeit zealous, is able to perform. But let this exhortation
make the maidens of our days to blush, yea, even men and women, who are so
far from this duty, that they are not able to allege one sentence of holy
Scripture, either for their own comfort, or to resell the error of heretics,
or to instruct their neighbors.

8 Moreover, Parents are commanded to instruct their children, not only in the
word, but also in the understanding of the Sacraments, sacrifices, and other
of Gods holy ordinances. When thy child, Deuteronomy. 6.20
says Moses, shall hereafter ask thee, saying: What mean these testimonies,
ordinances, and laws, which the Lord our God has commanded you? Then shall
thou say unto thy son, We were Pha^aohs bond men in Egypt, but the Lord
brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and the Lord showed signs and
great wonders and evil upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his household^
before our eyes: And brought us out from thence, to bring us in and to give us
the land which he swear unto our fathers. Therefore the Lord has commanded
us to do all these ordinances, and to fear the Lord our God, that it may go
ever well with us, and that he may preserve us alive as at this present. Exodus
12.26
Particularly concerning the pascall lamb, Moses said: When your children ask
you what service is this you keep? Then shall ye say, It is the sacrifice of
the Lords passover, Exodus 13.14
who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote
the Egyptians and preserved our houses. He likewise ordained that they should
teach their children what was meant by the commandment, to offer unto God
every male that first opens the womb, and to redeem the first borne of
their children. When thy son shall ask thee to morrow, saying: What is
this? Thou shall then say unto him: With a mighty hand the Lord brought us
out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage: For when Pharaoh was hard hearted
against our departing, the Lord then slew all the first borne in the land of
Egypt, therefore I sacrifice unto the Lord all the males that first open the
womb, but all the first borne of my sons I redeem. Joshua 4.21.
And as Joshua commanded the people to take the twelve stones that they took
out of Jordan when thy passed over dry shood: so he enjoined the fathers to
teach their children the signification of those stones, thereby to remember
Gods wonderful works.

9 By the premises we may manifestly see the duties of Christian parents, to
teach their children: But how do they perform it? Themselves (at the least for
the most part) know not the signification of Baptism, or the supper, or
wherefore those Sacraments were instituted. How can they then put in action
these commandments of God, or instruct their children in heavenly doctrine? When
they shall ask what is signified by the water that is p^ured upon the babe, or
by the bread or wine that are delivered in the holy supper? How many be there
that can teach or tell them? What a slacknesse is this, that we profit no
better in obedience to God, in a matter so requisite and necessary, as is the
instruction of our children?

10 Neither is this all, for they are also diligently to note Gods wonderful
works, whether in the chastising of his people, in the delivery of his
Church, or in the punishing of his enemies, Deuteronomy. 4 9
and thereof to make report to their children: thereby to teach them to fear
God, and to put their trust in him. Take heed to thy self, says Moses, and
keep thy soul diligently, that thou forget not the things which thine eyes
have seen, and that they depart not out of thy heart all the days of thy life,
but teach them to thy sons, and to thy sons sons. This duty is more
amply declared in the 78. psalm, Psalm 78. 2
where the prophet says thus: I will open my mouth in a parable, I will
declare high sentences of old, which we have heard and known, and our
fathers have told us. We will not hide them from their children, but to the
generation to come we will show the praises of the Lord, his power also and
his wonderful works that he has done. How he established a testimony in
Jacob, and ordained a law in Israel, which he commanded our Fathers that they
should teach their children, etc. Ezechias king of Judah, being recovered of
a dangerous sickness, protests, that the fruit of his delivery shall be to
praise God, and to instruct his children in the like duty. The living, says
he, the living shall confess thee. Esa. 38.19
The father to the children shall declare thy truth. God having grievously
chastised his people, says by the prophet Joel, Such a thing was done in your
time, or in the time of your fathers, tell ye it to your children, and your
children to their children, and their children to another generation.

Joel 1. 3
By the premises may parents understand how far in duty they are bound to
instruct their children in the heavenly doctrine, and to rehearse unto them the
wonderful works of God, that even from their youth they may print in their
hearts true godliness, with an apprehension of life everlasting, and so lead
them into the knowledge and obedience of God. But what? Some parents are so
ignorant, that albeit they would, yet are they not able to teach their
children. As this ignorance is unbeseeming any christian, so should the
feeling thereof induce them to seek to profit in the knowledge of the word and
works of God: first, in regard of their own comfort and consolation, next,
that they may be able to instruct their children. We read of many, who even
in their old age have learned the Greek tongue or the arts. Yea, there was one
that said, that albeit one of his feet were in the grave, yet would he learn.
But our argument imports not the knowledge or the learning of the arts or
sciences that serves this present life, but the knowledge requisite for the
glorifying of God, and the attaining to life everlasting. And therefore it were
good they should begin to profit in so ne^essary a felicity rather late than
never: yet not in respect only of their own persons, but also, as is
aforesaid, that according to so many commandments, so express and so often
reiterated, they may be able to instruct their children. We read of a Grecian
Lady, who being a mother, learned the liberal arts, that she might teach her
children, and thereby purchased great praise. Euridice. Plut. in the bringing
up of children
How much rather ought parents to be careful and zealous to profit in the
heavenly doctrine, were it only to be able to instruct their children?

12 At the least, if they want knowledge, or be unwilling to take leisure to
teach them, yet let them do as much for their souls and the life to come, as
for their bodies and this present life. Parents that either cannot write and
read, or will not, or have not time to teach their children, will yet send
them to school: and such as would have them learn some art or occupation, or
tra^^ike, if them selves profess not the same wherein they like to employ their
children, they will yet put the^ to dwell with those that do profess the same,
to the end they may learn. How therefore can parents excuse themselves, when
their children remain untaught in these things that concern the glory of God
and life everlasting. But howsoever it be, if they be neither able of
themselves, nor do provide to have them taught by others, they shall be
inexcusable in the sight of God: and the ignorance of the children, ingendering
contempt of God, love of the world, and neglect of heavenly felicity, will cry
out for everlasting vengeance against their parents: so that if they account
not their children as beasts without soul, or if they love them with the due
love belonging to parents, let them declare their love, especially to the
soul, the Christian instruction whereof surmounteth all worldly treasure. An
ancient Philosopher said, that he could have bin content to have gone up into
the highest pinnacle in the town, Crates. Plut. in the bringing up of children.
thence to have cried, O fathers, what mean you that employ your whole endeavors
to get riches, why are ye so careless for the instructing of your children, to
whom ye leave the^. It is, as if parents when their child were sick to the
death, without providing for his health, should prepare him new garments. Some
say it would be a great comfort for them in heaven to know their near kindred,
and consequently their children: and this comes of natural affection. But
might it not be a greater discomfort for them, eue^ in their life time, to see
them go to hell for want of instruction? The Lacedaemonians were very careful to
bring up their children in virtue, according to the laws of Lycurgus, their
law giver: and thereby grew to this custom, that if any man committed any
trespass, it was lawful for any that saw him, freely to reprove him: and it
was a great reproach to mislike of such reprehension.

13 Some charge their children to be dulwitted, and hard to be bowed or brought
to virtue. Albeit natural inclination be a great help to profiting, yet
exercise and custom to do well, is a mighty means to bend and shape them that
way, yea, even such, that by experience we find this old proverb true, Use
overcomes nature. And this did Lycurgus, the Lacedemonian law giver very
aptly demonstrate to his people. Plut. in his Lacon. Apot^eg.
He took two whelps, the one of a hunting kind, the other of a mastiffe
that followed the kitchen. Then did he bring up the mastiffe to the game, and
the hound to the kitchen. Afterward meaning to make demonstration, and so to
persuade the people to his purpose, he caused them to be assembled, and
brought forth his two dogs, where setting down a dish of pottage, and withal
casting off a hare, the hound fell to the pottage, the mastiffe followed the
hare. Behold then (says he) what it is of doctrine and use, he that came of a
hunting kind, yet used to the kitchen, follows his pottage, and the other
come of a mastiffe, following the kitchen, being now used to the game,
follows the hare. The wheele-wright does by strength bow his timber, and
letting it he long in that bent, it abides crooked. Barren ground well tilled,
soyled and sown with good seed, grows fruitful and yields good increase:
Iron wears with handling: The water by continual dropping wears the stone:
Wild beasts may be tamed, and wild coltes by custom be brought to the
saddle, and are content to be lead by the bridle: The Greeks named Manners by
a word that signified Custom. Thereby to declare, that even the dullest
capacities may by instruction and custom be fashioned to virtue: As
contrariwise, the wit most inclined by nature to virtue, may by bad instruction
and the conversion of the wicked, be perverted and grow vicious.

14 Parents therefore are herein to respect two points. First, to begin to
frame and bend their children in their tender youth to virtue, remembering that
a seal enters deepest into softest wax. Plato warns mothers and nurses
from telling foolish tales to their children, least they infect their tender
wits with folly and astonishment. Experience shows, that children will sooner
learn any language by conversation tha^ older folks Also, that the younger the
twigge is, the sooner it is bent or made straight. Secondly, it is the parents
duty to restrain their children from haunting and conuersing with such as
be vicious and perverse. And in deed, we see that they do soon learn
villainous and unseemly speeches, and malicious and leaude actions with their
corruptions, and as the old proverb says, Halting with the lame they shall
learn to halt. A child that naturally speaks well, by conuersing with such
as corrupt their speech, shall degenerate and speak as badly. Tie a young
twigge that is crooked with a straight one that is stronger than it, and in
growing it will become straight, and so continue when it is undone. And
contrariwise, a straight one tied to that which is crooked and stronger than it
self, will grow and continue crooked. 15 The Lacedaemonians were marvelous
careful to provide, that their children should not be corrupted by evil
company. And in regard thereof, Plutarch in his Laconical^
we read that when Antipater demanded of them fifty children for hostages:
one of their chief magistrates named Etheocles, advised the^ not to condescend
thereto, least they being brought up in the society of such as were wholly
given to pleasure and vice, might peradventure grow vicious, and so bring home
afterward to their country nothing but corruption and misery: and thereupon in
lieu of fifty children, they offered the double number of men and women, and so
of aged persons already formed, and of strength and discretion to withstand
vice and corruption. Lastly, when Antipater still urged them to send their
children, and used great threats in case they should disobey: they plainly
answered, saying: Let him, if he can, require any thing more grievous than
death, for rather will we condescend thereto, than to send our children. O
wonderful constancy, and care to preserve their children from vice and
corruption! If the heathen had such regard to this virtue, importing the
training up of their children in the observation of the laws of a mortal man,
what a shame may it be unto christian parents that are so negligent in bringing
up their children in the heavenly doctrine, and forming their manners and
behauiors to piety and godlynes in the fear and obedience of God? Moreover,
by this example may parents take warning, when they mean to put forth their
children to any trade or occupation, either to learning, carefully to see and
enquire whether such as they think to place them withal be virtuous or endued
with the fear of God. In the admittance of a servant, the fear of some
temporal or carnal inconvenience, causes thee to enquire of his or her truth
or other qualities. Therefore if thou committest a child to the instruction of
a master, before thou inquire of his virtues, thou show that thou have
less care of corrupting or infecting thy child with vice, than of some small
incouenience that might happen by an unthrifty servant. When thou buyest an
earthen pot, thou soundest upon it, to see whether it be broken, least thou
should be deceived in a small piece of money, yet do thou not sound,
whether the master to whom thou committest thy child be vicious or virtuous,
albeit by putting him to one that is vicious, thou put him in danger of
loss both of body and soul.

16 Some do respect their friendship with some masters rather than their
virtue, and so do commit to them their children, least they should be angry
for putting them to another. These men do resemble him, who being daungerously
sick, uses the advice of an ignorant physician that is his kinseman or
familiar friend, for fear he should take offense if he should call another,
albeit without comparison more learned and skillful. If thou should have any
weighty matter in law, would thou rather commit thy cause to an ig^an^ and
negligent attorney, because he is thy friend, than to him that were both
diligent and learned? Making a voyage through some dangerous sea, would
thou in a tempest commit thy ship to a young pilot, unskillful, or drunk,
because he is thy friend? what a fool art thou that wilt not take the like
care of the profit, honor, and salvation of thy child?

17 Others commit their children either to him that is best cheap or by whom
they may grow into greatest advancement in the world, but never respect the
hazard of their child, so they may either spare or get worldly goods. When one
showed the Orator Lycurgus, Eras. Apo. li. 8
that he had offered great wages to a philosopher to teach his children, he
virtuously answered: If any man will assure me to restore me my children
endued with more virtue, I will give him not only that some, but even half my
goods. The virtuous and wise Emperor Marcus Aurelius writes, that in the
Annals of the Tarentine war, he found that the renowned Purlius did wear a
ring, wherein was engraven this sentence, The dominion of the whole earth is a
small reward to him that is virtuous, but to the vicious the loss of life is a
simple punishment. Hereby may fathers learn how carefully they ought to
restrain their children from vice and to inure the^ to virtue. As in deed the
fathers that instruct, or cause their children to be instructed, do far excel
such as only do beget them, for of these they receive life only, of the other
good and virtuous life.

18 Moreover, parents ought not so much to rely upon the diligence of
childrens masters, as never to care to understand how they profit and proceed
in virtue: for the regard of such diligence would make the masters more
carefully to discarge their duties. And thereof came the proverb, The masters
eye fatteth the horse: and this: The masters eye is the fruitfulnes of the
garden. Parents ought not too much to hearken or credit children, when they
complain of their masters rigor and severity. Among the Lacedaemonians, if the
children upon the reproof or chastisement of any whosoever, Plutar. in his
Lacon. Instit.
(for any man was at liberty to use correction, even to other men's children)
did complain to their parents, the same was a great reproach to them, because
themselves corrected not their children. Not that we are not in discretion to
inquire or take notice whether the master uses cruelty or inhumanitie toward
them, least through too much rigor and hard usage, they should grow desperate.

19 Howbeit such is the inclination of many, even from their youth, to
wickedness, that instruction by words, either of parents or masters, will not
suffice without the rod and correction. And this does God command, and
experience shows it to be most necessary. He that spares the rod (says
Solomon) hates the child, Prou. 13.24 Prou. 19.18 Pro. 29.15. and 17. Prou.
23.13
but he that loves him basteth to correction. Again, Correct thy child while
there is hope, and regard not his crying. Again, The rod and correction
minister wisdom, but the child left at liberty shameth his mother. Correct
thy son, and he will give thee rest and pleasure to thy soul. Withdraw not
correction from thy child, if thou smite him with the rod he shall not die.
Thou shall smite him with the rod, and deliver his soul from hell. The book
of Ecclesiasticus entreats hereof more at large, saying: He that loves his
son causes him often to feel the rod, Eccle. 30.1^ and ^.
that he may have joy of him in the end. He that chastises his son shall have
joy in him, and shall rejoice of him among his acquaintance. An untamed horse
will be stubborn, and a wanton child will be wilful. 8.9.10.11.12 13.
If thou bring up thy son delicatly, he shall make thee afraid, and if thou
play with him he shall bring thee to heaviness. Laugh not with him, least thou
be sorry with him, and least thou gnash thy teeth in the end. Give him no
liberty in his youth, and wink not at his folly. Bow down his neck while he
is young, and beat him on the sides, least he wax stubborn and be disobedient
to thee, and so bring sorrow to thy heart. Chastise thy child, and be diligent
therein, least his shame grieve thee. In this sense do we say, that many times
the rod is better for children than bread. And in deed as Physicians, surgeons,
and Apothecaries are necessary in a town for the cure of sickness and bodily
wounds, so are rods and chastisement for the correction of the corruptions of
the soul.

20 Herein is God so resolute, that in the duty of the father to chastise his
child, he wills us to learn that he does the office of a father when he
chastises us with afflictions. And as a father by correction declares a true
love to his child, with a desire of his good and salvation: Heb. 12
so is it the will of God that we should receive such afflictions as he lays
upon us, as effects of his love toward us, and as testimonies that he
accepts us as his lawful children and no bastardes. Likewise, if seeing many
children fighting together, we also see a man come and correct only one of
them, we presently think that to be his child, because he performs the
duty of a father, and so shows that he loves him better than the rest
whom he lets go without correction. Therefore as we say, that the
pitiful and gentle Surgion empaireth the wounds, so does too much gentleness
toward children, and winking at their faults, without correction, breed their
disobedience, unthriftiness, and misery. Likewise, as God is thereby greatly
dishonored, so does he not suffer the parents that are slack in their
duty to their children to escape scot free. And to this purpose have we a
notable example in Holy the high priest: for when he heard of the wickedness
and offensive dealings of his sons Ophny and Phinces, he used some verbal
reprehensions: yet because he neither reproved nor chastised the^ more sharply,
God obiecteth to him their iniquities saying: Wherefore have you kicked against
my sacrifice, and have honored thy children more than me? 1. Sam. 2
Then does he pronounce also this horrible sentence, That the priesthood
should be taken from his house, that both his sons should die in one day,
and that none of his posterity should hue to be an old man. David also used
too much lenity as well to his son Ammon, when he had defloured his sister
Thamar, as also to Absalom when he traitorously slew the said Ammon: 2. Sam.
13 1. King. 1.6.
and to his son Adomah, of whom the history says, that albeit David did
plainly see, that contrary to Gods will, he purposed to invade the realm,
yet would he not displease him. But the death of Ammon, the cursed conspiracy
of Absalom against his own father, together with the strange manner of his
death, and the death of Adomah, were the most wretched fruits of his great
lenity and conniuence to his children. The like judgment may we note in the
fathers of the children that scorned the Prophet Helizeus, and upon his curse
were devoured by Bears: For it is like that their parents had not brought them
vp^n due correction and chastisement. In the history of the Switzers, we read
of a certain tyrant, whom upon his condemnation, his own father was appointed
to execute, that so by the author of his life he might come to his end: also
that the father might be somewhat punished for neglecting the instruction of
his son. 23 Yet is it not meant, that parents upon every escape of their
child, should use extreme rigor and severity, for the same must be entermixed
with discretion and gentleness, according to the nature of the child, and the
quality of the offense. And in that sense says Saint Paul, Fathers provoke
not your children to wrath, but bring them up in instruction and information of
the Lord. Again, Ephe. 6.4. Col. 3.2^
Fathers provoke not your children to anger, least they be discouraged, Unto
children naturally inclined to virtue, praise for well doing, and chiding when
they do amiss, are more effectual than rigorous entreaty. For praise
allureth them to virtue, and chiding restrains them from vice. And therefore
such must be according to the occasions, sometimes praised, and sometimes
checked, that if they be too merry, they may by a word be humbled, or if they
be too much daunted, some commendation may revive them. And herein we are to
imitate nurses, who sometimes making their babes to cry, do immediately give
them the breast to appease them again.

22 Again, parents or others that have the bringing up of youth, are to
require no more of them than they are able to do, least they discourage them
and make them to hate their study, or any other thing whereto they would bring
them. For it is love that causes us to profit in our studies or exercises. And
therefore it is needful that children should have some time of recreation from
their labors: for our life consists and is divided into exercise and rest,
as we see, in the day labor, and in the night rest, which does still
accompany the whole course of our life. And this is it that an ancient man
says: Rest is the sauce that makes us to relish our labor. As also we use to
slack the strings of our bows and lutes, to make the^ the stiffer, and to hold
the better when we list to shoot or play. Plants reasonably watered do take
heart and grow, but too much moisture does drown and choke them: even so is
it with the minds of children: Moderate exercise and labor aduanceth them to
goodness, but oppression dulleth and spoileth them.

23 It is also the duty of parents to maintain their children in peace,
concord, and amity. For if discord and contention be dangerous and pernicious
among all men, how much rather between brethren and sisters? Likewise if it be
hard quenching of stomach and debate between those that are not conjoined in
kindred, it is far more difficult to reunite brethren, because enmity among
them is mighty and strong like iron bars to keep them asunder. Neither is
there any thing more slipperie or of greater efficacy to subvert a family,
than dissension among brethren. It is an old saying, Plutarch in his Apotheg:
By concord small things do grow, but by discord great things come to naught.
And this is soonest found among brethren. Scilurus, who had fourscore children,
to induce them to live together in peace and concord, did very aptly represent
unto them the truth of this sentence thus: He took a sheafe of many arrows,
and offered it to each of his children one after another, willing them to break
it, but they could not. Then pulling forth the arrows one by one, they brake
them all. Even thus, said their father, is it with you, for so long as you
remain united and love each other, no man can hurt or break you, but if once
ye fall at jar and strife, every man will destroy and overthrow you. This
duty of parents to keep their children in peace and loving concord, did the
Lacedaemonians well understand. For when on a time two brethren fell at strife
and contention, Plut. in his Lacon Apotheg.
they punished both the father and mother, because by good instruction they had
not prevented, or at the least, presently appeased the dissension between
their children.

24 Again, how dangerous it is for parents to show more love and affection to
one child than to another, except upon great and just cause, the example of
Jacobs children does testify. For what was the original of their envy and
cruelty executed against their brother Joseph? Moses says, that Jacob loving
Joseph better than his brethren, Genesis 37.3.
made him a party colored coat, and thereof they took occasion to hate him,
and to speak roughly unto him. Parents therefore to the end to prevent like
inconveniences, are to use equality among their children so near as may be,
whether in their ordinary usage, or in the division of their goods. For as all
men naturally are inclined but too much to the love of earthly goods, so the
unequal sharing of the same, does oftentimes breed great braules and pernicious
debate between brethren.

25 Moreover, as children grow toward the state of matrimony, it is meet that
their parents should restrain them from all company whereby they might be
allured to the sin of fornication: For besides the hainousnes of the offense
against God, the inco^ueniences thereof depending are for the most part very
pernitions. If such mischiefs ensued between Thamar and Ammon, David's
children, how much rather are they to be feared in the over familyar
conversation of those that are nothing a kin, at the lest not so near as they?
Genesis 34
Had Jacob kept in his daughter Dina, and not suffered her to run abroad to
see the daughters of Sichem, she had not been ravished and desloured; neither
had that wicked and abominable murder committed by her brethren been
perpetrated. As also if the daughters of Silo had not gone to dancing, the
Beniamites had never ravished them. Iud. 21.20.


26 Among all remedies, as Saint Paul teaches, marriage is one: and in deed
the parents that have honestly matched their daughter, they have discharged
themselves of a great care: for it is their parts to think thereof, 1, Cor. 7
and generally to provide for the marriage of their children: not to tarry,
until through their negligence, peevishness, and other difficulties in that
provision for them, the children take occasion of lewdness, or so ship
themselves without the knowledge of their parents, that afterward they be
forced to proceed to that that may redound to their great sorrow and
heartbreaking. So did Abraham think upon the marriage of his son Isaac, and
to that end committed the charge thereof to his eldest and most faithful
servant, Genesis 24.3
whom he wylled to seek a wife for his son: as in truth it is not properly
for the children, but for the parents to think upon and provide for the same.
The same does Jeremy teach, where writing to the Jewish Fathers in the
captivity of Babylon, he says, Iere. 29.6 Iud. 14.2
Take wives for your sons, and give your daughters in marriage. Hereupon
when Sampson had found a maiden to his lyking, himself did not demand her in
marriage, but coming to his parents he said, Genesis 34.3
Give me her to Wife. Likewise Sichem the son of Hemor, having bent his
heart unto Dina the daughter of Jacob, said unto his father, Give me this
maid to wife. Yet is it meet, that as the parents make the motion, so the
children give the consent. Genesis 24.57
This did Laban declare, when talking of Rebecca, whom Abraham's servant craved
in marriage for his masters son Isaac, he said, Let us call the maiden and
ask her consent: So calling her, they said unto her, Will thou go with this
man? And she answered, I will go. For of matching either son or daughter
against their wylles, there do many times arise great inconveniences and much
sorrow and grief: yea, the lawyers are of opinion, that a free will is not so
expedient in any thing as in marryage.

27 Now, 1. Cor. 7.40.
as it is the duty of parents to provide to match their children, so are they
diligently to see it be done, as Saint Paul says In the Lord: that is, not to
demand any maiden for their son, or to accept any son for their
daughter, unless the same be affected to true religion, and make profession
thereof, having a good report of piety, the fear of God, and other Christian
virtues: which qualities and gifts of God are to be preferred before wealth,
or any other worldly or carnal considerations. So when Abraham sent his man
to seek a wife for his son Isaac, Gen, 24.3
he swear him that he should not take any Daughter of Chanaan. So when
Sampson required his parents to give him a wife of the daughters of the
Philistians, they answered: Is there never a wife among the daughters of thy
brethren, Judge. 14.3
or among my people, that thou must go take a wife of the uncircumcised
Philistines? If Parents would consider of the danger of the loss of their
childrens souls, by matching them with such as are of a contrary religion, or
otherwise given more to the world than to piety and the service of God: either
what strife or contention do for the most part ensue of such marriages: how
small comfort is taken in the same: how slenderly the duty of prayer is
performed: and what a negligence or hinderance they are to the bringing up of
children in the fear of God: they would abhor even to think of any such
match, and in few speeches prefer him that were endued with godliness and
other virtues, before riches and all other carnal and worldly considerations.
They would put in practice the wise advertisement propounded by Salomons
mother, albeit but simply followed by her son, which we read in the
Proverbs, Many daughters have done virtuously, Prou. 31.29
but thou surmountest them all: Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity,
but the woman that fears the Lord shall be praised. But if the difficulty
rest in question of maintenance for the family, let parents remember, that it
is better to choose knowledge than wealth, that is, skill and industry how to
get, than goods already gotten, and in his possession that has no skill or
knowledge how to use them. Heereto may we refer the answer of
Themistocles, Plutarch in his life. Ci. in the first book of offices.
who purposing to marry his daughter, and being asked why he preferred a
virtuous man before a rich, answered: That he liked better of a man without
money, than of money without a man: or, as some do write, that he had rather
match his daughter to a head of a man, than to a head of silver. And therefore
to conclude this speech, we may well say, it is better to match our children
with Christian and virtuous heads that have little money, than with much
treasure in the possession of worldly and vicious heads.

28 Heereto will we yet add two points concerning the duties of parents to
their children: first, that in all their words and works they be unto them
continual examples and myrrors of piety and virtue: so shall their
admonitions and exhortations be still of greater efficacy, and themselves
shall have more authority to reprove, admonish, and chastise their children.
And in deed, the same that Marcus Aurelius says, that to make children
virtuous, they shall more profit by good example in one month, than by
instruction in a whole year, may be most truly applied unto parents. He that
teaches a child to write may sometime say, ye must make this letter long,
this short, this straight etc. But the chief means to make him to profit in
writing, is to set him good examples or coppies and to write before him. And so
is it in the instruction of virtue and the fear of God. For contrariwise, he
that teaches well, and lives evil, builds with one hand and pulls down
with another. And experience teaches that more may be pulled down in one
hour, then will be built up in one day. The evil example of parents, is as a
line to draw the children to follow them. And therefore the Prophet Ezechiell
reproving the people of his time for their Idolatry, and other corruptions,
declares that therein they have taken the ordinary course, that is, Ezech. 16,
42.
they have followed the example of their parents. Behold says he, all that use
proverbs, shall use this proverb against thee, saying, like mother, like
daughter: Thou art thy mothers daughter that has cast off her hushand and her
children, and thou art the sister of thy sisters, which forsook their husbands
and their children, your mother is an Hittite, and your father an Ammorite.
Here are three old proverbs, which prove that children ordinarily are ready
to imitate the bad examples of their parents. First, Like mother, like
daughter. Secondly, Thou art thy mothers daughter. Thirdly, Thy mother is an
Hittite and thy father an Ammorite. That is to say. Thy parents forsaking the
service of God have given themselves to the idolatries of the Ammorites and
Hittites, and thou have followed their example. The same did the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius (who above all men, was careful to bring up his children in
virtue) object to his wife: for speaking to her of the instruction of her
daughters, he said: What will it avail for her mistres to teach her honesty
and modesty, when our selves in our works do inuit her to wantonness?

29 Verbal instruction, without example of good deeds, is a dead doctrine:
and contrariwise, good examples are the life of instruction, to make it
profitable and effectual. If the example of parents be contrary to their
instruction: If (I say) they teach their children sobriety, modesty and
chastity, and yet themselves will follow drunkenness, foul and lascivious
speeches, gestures, and actions: it is as if with their tongues they should
say, Be virtuous, and by the hands lead them with them to al vice and
corruption. Plut. in the Educat. of children.
Wicked fathers, says a certanie heathen Philosopher, are wicked counselors
to their children. If we would take him to be a monster in nature, and
unworthy to live in a common wealth, that should counsel his child to
drunkenness and fornication: what shall we think of those, who committing
such iniquity, do by their example much more mightily put forward their
children to such abomination, then by word they are able? What account can
those fathers give unto God, who by their evil example have drawn into hell
their children whom he delivered to their charge to be guided into heaven?
Albeit such fathers pity not themselves, yet at the least let them take pity
of their children, and not carry them with them into everlasting destruction.
Plut. in the precepts of marriage.
We read that the grave personage Cato, deposed a senator out of the Senate of
Rome, only because he kissed his wife in the presence of her daughter. This
truly was extreme severity, especially if we consider the manners of our days.
But this Ethnic hereby declared how grievously such parents are to be
reproved, as shall use any lewd speeches or shameless behavior: in brief,
any worldly or carnal actions in the presence of their children, to whom
their example may be as a dispensation to give themselves to the like. As also
how can they forbid that in their children, which themselves do commit? How
can they correct them for the faults which themselves do use? Albeit children
in respect and reverence to their parents, dare not reply and say, that
themselves do those things for the which they reprove them, yet will the
neighbors or others object it, to their shame. Besides, their authority shall
be so much the less in that they declare in their works and actions, that
they allow that which they forbid in words. If parents therefore desire that
their instruction may be effectual and yield fruit, let them declare the same
in holy life and virtuous conversation. Plut. in the Education of children.
Let them says an ancient Philosopher, so order and govern themselves, that
their children seeing the same as it were in a glass, may be restrained from
dishonest speeches and wicked deeds. Let them do as guides that show the right
way and foords over rivers, by going before those whom they lead, that their
children following the steps and examples of their parents, may conform
themselves to their virtues, and so with them and by them, be led to salvation
and life everlasting.

39 Finally, let all parents diligently and fervently pray unto God, first for
themselves, that he by his holy spirit will vouchsafe to guide them in the
instruction of their children, that they may with all diligence, faithfulness
and discreation employ themselves in every part of their duty toward them.
Secondly let them daily commend their children by hearty prayers to the father
of light, who is the giver of all goodness and blessings, that he blessing
their labors about their children, may replenish them with the gifts and
graces of his holy spirit, that they may profit in all things requisite to his
glory, and their own benefit and salvation. And this dutrie let them begin
to perform, even so soon as they are in hope of generation, by praying to God
to preserve it, to give to the mother happy deliverance of her fruit, and so
to dispose, that the child may receive the seal of salvation by Baptism, and
grace to bring forth fruits to Gods glory. Let them remember that the prayer
of the whole Church for their children in their Baptism, is a warning of their
bounden duty daily to do the like for them after they be admitted into the
covenant by Baptism. Job. 1.5.
In this point let them remember the care of Job for his children that were
already grown and come to age, not only in that he daily sent unto them to
sanctify them, by admonishing them of such infirmities as they might
peradventure have committed in banqueting, albeit modestly and soberly
together: But also in that he daily rose up early and offered sacrifice for
them according to their number, saying to himself, It may be, my sons have
sinned and blasphemed God in their hearts. Wherein he gives unto parents two
notable lessons: One, that if the children do sin, the parents are to
examine whether themselves may not be guilty in the sight of God, as not
having sufficiently performed their duties in teaching, admonishing, giving
good example, and praying to God for them: The other that they ought to have
such a care of the salvation of their children, that albeit they have not
committed any notable and apparent sin, yet presupposing that according to
man's frailty, they live not without offending God, after the example of Job,
who offered sacrifice to God for his children, and that no doubt his sacrifices
were accompanied with hearty prayer for them, they must pray for their
children, that their sins may be forgiven them through the only sacrifice
of Jesus Christ.

31 To conclude. As S. Paul terms the family of Philemon, Philem. ver. 2.
Romans 16.5. Psalm. 101.
also of Aquila and Priscilla, the Church, so all parents and householders
ought so to govern their children and family, that their houses may be even
so many small Churches, whereout (according as David protested that he would
employ himself in that duty) all vice and corruption may be expelled and
banished, to the end the house of God may be holy, also that God may be
praised, worshipped, adored and called upon Evening and Morning and at meals.
For undoubtedly al families thus ordered, shall even feel the truth of Gods
promises, that he will be in the^ as in his temple, and will bless the^ with all
his graces pomised to his Church.

Of the duty of children to their parents. Chap. 5.
NOw let us come to the duties of children to their parents. And these does God
comprehend in the fifth commandment of the law, in these words: Honor thy
father and thy mother. And this commandment is the more to be noted, because
it is often repeated in the holy Scripture. Now by this word Honor, is
signified the love, reverence, duty, obedience, subjection, entertainment, and
necessary assistance that children owe to their parents. As concerning the
love, the summarie of the second Table comprehended in these words: Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self, do manifestly confirm it. For who can be a
nearer neighbor for the children to love, then the parents? Besides that, they
are not to be loved only as neighbors proceeding of Adam and Eve, but also as
fathers and mothers. And therefore what an ingratitude is it, not to love those
of whom, next after God, they have their life and being together with many
great and continual benefits toward them. Also the love that parents do
bear to their children, besides so many their labors, sorrows, troubles and
vexations, should bind them reciprocally to love them. The sun shining a
while upon the cold stones, does so heat them that they yield some warmth:
so albeit that children be as hard and cold as stones, yet the experience, and
the daily feeling of the love of their parents toward them, ought mightily to
inflame their hearts to love them again. Take away the beam from the sun,
said a good old father, and it will not shine: the springs from the river and it
will dry up: the bough from the tree, and it will wither: the member from the
body and it will rot: And so take from children their duty to their parents,
and they are no longer children, but brethren and companions with those unto
whom Jesus Christ said. Ye are the children of the Devil.

Plut. in his Agotheg. of the Grecians.
2 This love ought especially to appear in a certain care, affection and desire
to rejoice and content our parents. For as we read to this purpose, and
Epaminondas said, that of all the good and felicity that ever happened him, he
never so much delighted in any, as in his victory over the Lacedaemonians at
Leuctria, where he won the field, while his father and mother yet lived.
Such was his love to them, that his singular contentation consisted in the
pleasure that they would conceive in the victory of their son. And that this
his contentment consisted only in his love to his parents and not in couetize
of vainglory, we may gather by his commendations published by Justin, who
says, Justin. lib. 6.
that it was a hard choice to discern whether he were an honester man or a
better Captain: That in the exercise of any public office, he never sought
himself, but the good of his country: That he was not covetous either of
glory or of money. These are notable commendations in a heathen Captain: God
grant that Christians may follow him and deserve the like. His example does
declare that children ought so to love their parents, that their affection may
tend to live virtuously, even to rejoice them: and to eschew evil, least they
should grieve them. Prou. 10.1.
And this is it that Solomon admonishes, saying. A wise son makes a glad
father, but a foolish son is an heaviness to his mother. Again. A foolish
son is a grief unto his father, and an heaviness to her that bare him.
Prou. 17.25.


3 This band of love of parents should take place, not only toward such as are
gentle and loving, but also (as Saint Peter says, 1. Pet. 2.18.
of the duties of servants to their masters) even toward such as be rigorous.
For if we ought to love all the children of Adam: even those whom we know
not, or our enemies and persecutors, how much rather our parents, albeit they
should entreat us roughly and with rigor either in word or deed? And indeed
the principal cause still abides, namely that they be our father and mother.
This ought children well to note, to the end that patiently bearing their
reprehensions, reproves, and in general, whatsoever their troublesome and
sharp affections, they may still continue and declare their childe-like
affection and love. And to that purpose remember, the labor, grief, anguish,
weeping, sorrow and other troublesome cares that parents do abide for their
children.

4 This love must be accompanied with reverence and respect: And to say the
truth, Mat, 23.2.
albeit the name of father belongs properly unto God, as Jesus Christ said,
You have but one father, even him that is in heaven. Yet does he so impart it
to those that have begotten us, that they being called fathers, do bear the
title and Image of God. And this is it that binds children to respect and
honor them, and to testify the same by their outward reverence. The
Lacedaemonians did so carefully accustom their children hereto, that we read
of a good personage who had such respect to parents, Plu. in his Lacon. Apotheg.
that being demanded wherefore at Sparta the young men did rise up when their
elders came in place, he answered. To the end that by honoring age they may
learn and accustom themselves to reverence their parents. Of this reverence
we have a notable example in Solomon: 1. King. 2.19.
He understanding that his mother Bathseeba was coming to speak with him,
arose from his seat, came to meet her, bowed before her, and set her upon his
right hand. Neither could his greatness, neither his Royal estate privilege
him from this respect and honor due to his mother. To this purpose we also
read a notable history, which may serve for an exposition of this matter. As
a certain governor of Creet came with his father to the Philosopher Taurus,
finding there but one stool ready, Aul. Gellius. lib. 2. c. 2.
the father would have had his son (as a Roman Magistrate) to sit down,
but the Philosopher willed him as the father to sit down and calling for
another seat for the son, said. When the son does execute his magistracy,
or public office, he is greater then his father, and must bear himself as a
Magistrate, not as a son: But when he is out of place or execution of his
office, he must, how highly soever he be advanced, have a respect and yield
reverence to his father. But many times it falls out otherwise: For many
children when they come to honor or wealth, do so despise their parents, if
they be of meaner calling then themselves, that hardly they will acknowledge
or call them father as if they were ashamed of them. Decius the son of the
Roman Emperor Decius, Valor. Max. l. 4
most lively represented man's inclination to this vice, and sought in his own
person to prevent it. For when his father on a time said that he would inuest
his son in the Diadem Imperial, his son refused it, saying: I fear least
being Emperor, I forget that I am a son. Rather will I continue an obedient
son, then being an Emperor to neglect and forget the due honor that the
son owes to his Father. Let my father command, and let my Empire consist
in my due obedience to him. For that man puts off the affection of a child
to his father, who by the eminency of an office over him quenches the name of
a son. Solomon forgot not himself in this kind of duty, for he did not
only bow before his mother Bathseeba, as is aforesaid, but also called her
mother saying. 1. King 2.20.
Mother ask and I will not deny thee. And this do we the rather note also
upon another consideration, namely that his example condemns the custom of
these days, wherein this name of father and mother is accounted so base and
comtemptible, that the children of Kings, Princes, yea even of mean
Gentlemen, speaking to their parents must not say father, mother, but Sir, my
Lord, my Lady, Madam. etc.

5 But the due honor to parents that we here speak of, implies not only this
outward reverence, but also that we should so esteem of them as that
neither our selves should despise them, neither should we suffer others to
have them in contempt. Ioh. 8.49. Telecrus. Plut. in his Lacon. Apotheg,
And this are we to understand in the saying of Jesus Christ. I honor my father
but you dishonor me. He there defends the honor of his father against the
false opinions and slanders of the Jews. A certain Lacedemonian in old time
did truly perform this duty of a child. For when one told him that his
father spoke hardly of him, he answered, Stobeus Scr. 177.
that he would not do it if he had not good cause: Thus he choose rather to
bear the blame himself, then his father should. In this sense, when an other
was ready to accuse his father in judgment, did one Pittacus reprove him,
saying, if thou preferrest a bad cause, thou shall be condemned: Likewise if
the cause be right, thou also shall be condemned for procuring thy fathers
condemnation. This also in this case is to be noted, that among the Romans
the child was not admitted to sue the will or testament of his dead father by
action, but by petition only, wherein he should speak of him with
humility, honor and reverence, and refer his case wholly to the discretion
and consciences of the judges. Thus ought children to honor and respect their
parents. Bodin in his first book of a commonwealth. cap. ^
But some there are so unnatural and perverse, that forgetting all due
reverence and respect to their parents they will not only despise them in
their own hearts, and suffer others to speak hardly of them: but also will
themselves so far exceed, as even to lay them open to the skorne of others.
Genesis 3.22.
Cham the son of Noah seeing his father lie uncovered, called his brethren to
show them his fathers shame. But so odious was this impiety in the sight of
God, that Noah by the conduct of the holy Ghost cursed both him and all his
posterity. And therefore we well and truly may say that those children who in
liew of defending the honor of their parents, do lay them open to shame and
reproof, are come of the cursed seed of Cham.

6 But what if they proceed farther, Deuteronomy. 27.16. Exodus 21.17. Leuit. 20.9.
Exodus 21.1^
and use stubborn speeches against them, with demonstration of pride and
contempt, which the holy Scripture terms accursed? This iniquity is so
abominable in the sight of God, that he pronounces Woe unto those children
that curse their father or mother. Yea he ordains that they should be put
to death, as also all such as in action shall injury their parents by smiting
either with staff or fist etc. And to cut off all replication, as if death
were to hard and rigorous a punishment, especially in case there were no hurt
or wound, Leuit. 20.9
he confirms the former judgment with this addition: Because he has cursed
his father or mother, his blood shall be upon his own head. And indeed such
children as either in word or deed shall injury father or mother: even those
I say of whom they have taken life: who bear the Image of God, and the title
of father, proper to God: so that God is in them iniuried and condemned, are
monsters in nature. In this respect among other the causes why the children of
Israel were so hardly entreated by Nabuchadnezzer, Ezech. 22.7
and led captive into Babylon, the Prophet Ezechiel obiecteth unto them, that
they despised and contemned their parents. Besides by experience we see that
usually those children that injury their parents, are afterward as hardly
entreated by their own children: Eras Apotheg lib. 8.
And the knowledge of this just vengeance is naturally imprinted in the heart of
man: as we read of a wicked child, who being accused that he had smitten his
father, answered: And he likewise did smite his father, and this lad (pointing
to his own son) when he grows bigger, will also smite and wrong me. And
surely, Laert. lib. 1. c. 1
as Thales the Milesian said: As children do entreat their parents, so will
their children entreat them. Therefore it might beseem children to suffer
their parents rather to tread them under their feet, then so furiously to
rise against them. And to that end let them acknowledge this Image of God, and
remember what their parents have done for them, that detesting such enormities
of cursing or smiting their parents as is aforesaid, they contrariwise may
bear them reverence, respect and honor in heart and mind both in word and
deed.

7 This commandment of honoring our parents comprehends also subjection and
obedience, as Saint Paul plainly teaches, saying, Children obey your parents
in the Lord: for this is right. Ephe. 6.1
Honor thy father and mother. (Which is the first commandment with promise)
That it may be well with thee, and that thou may live long upon the earth.
Hereby it appears that subjection and obedience forced and constrained, the
Lord does not accept, but that which proceeds of honor and reverence either
to father or mother. And therefore it is the duty of children vnluntarily to
submit themselves to their parents commandments, without replying or
co^tradiction even albeit the obedience might import some trouble and
difficulty. Ionadab the son of Rechab forbad his children that they should
build no houses, plant no vines, nor drink any wine. They obeyed their father,
Iere. 35.
and that with such constancy that the Prophet Jeremy obiecteth the same
against the Jews in reproach of their disobedience against God. The obedience
of Abraham unto God, when he was ready to sacrifice unto him his only son, is
highly commended, Genesis 22.9.
and as notable was the obedience of his son Isaac, in that he suffered himself
to be bound, and was content to be slain and sacrifised unto God. But most
excellent of al was the obedience of Jesus Christ, Who as S. Paul says being
in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God: Phil. 2.6.
yet made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant,
and was made like unto man and was found in shape as a man: He humbled himself
and became obedient unto death, eue^ unto the death of the cross. And
therefore in obedience to parents, children are to lay off all greatness and
excellency whatsoever, and to submit themselves to any rebuke, yea even to the
shamefulest death, rather then by contempt or disobedience, to offend their
parents. And least any man should reply that there is great difference between
God the father and fathers according to the flesh. Luke 2.51.
S. Luke notes that Jesus Christ was subject to his mother, and to his
supposed father Joseph. What greatness then may there be in children that
should exempt them from obedience to their parents, since Jesus Christ, the
prince of glory the king of kings and Lord of Lords, because subject and
obedient to a poor man his putatiue father, and to a mother of simple and
mean calling?

8 This obedience does S. Paul commend unto us, saying, Col. 3.20. Ephe. 6.1.
Children obey your parents in all things: Adding this reason, for that is
acceptable to the Lord. And in that he says in an other place It is right He
takes from children all reply. For is there any child that will deny that he
is not bound to do that which is right, or that which is pleasing or acceptable
unto God? Moses says. Leuit. 19.3
Every of you shall stand in awe of his father and mother. And in truth he that
loves his father and his mother, fears their displeasure. As contrariwise,
he that rejects their precepts, admonitions, or reprehensions and so shakes
off the yoke of obedience and subjection, that obstinatly he may set himself to
work wickedness, shows that he despises the image of God that they bear, and
treads under foot then authority over him. Such children, or rather monsters
in nature, are to look for no other but Gods horrible judgment against the^.
Prou. 30.17.
And Solomon says, The eye that meeketh his father and despises the
instruction of his mother, the Ravens of the valley shall pick it out and the
young Eagles shall eat it. Neither would God permit that such impiety should
escape without an express decree to put to death such children. If any man
says Moses has a son that is stubborn and disobedient, Deuteronomy. 21.18.
which will not harken unto the voice of his father, and unto the voice of his
mother, and they have chastened him and he would not obey them, then shall his
father and his mother take him and bring him out unto the elders of his City,
and unto the gate of the place where he dwells, and shall say unto the
elders of his City. This our son is stubborn and disobedient, and he will
not obey our admonition: he is a riotor and a drunkerd; Then all the men of his
City shall stone him with stones unto death: so shall thou take away evil
from among you, that all Israel may here it and fear. Behold, how God by
commanding that disobedient children should be rooted out, wills that all
children should fear to disobey their parents, least they might incur the like
punishment. For surely, the disobedience of children is an assured token that
God will root them out: As we read of the sons of Hely the high priest, 1.
Sam, 2.25.
who, when their father reproved them for their iniquity, did not obey his
voice: because it is expressly set down, the Lord purposed to destroy them. The
very heathen have evermore highly commended reverence and obedience unto
parents. Among the rest: The Lacedaemonians published a law, whereby it was
lawful for parents to make whom they would, Plut. in Licur.
even strangers, their heirs: Thereby to induce children to reverence and obey
their parents.

9 Yet must this subjection and obedience be holy, and not repugnant to the
service of God: So as obedience to parents be no disobedience to God. Ephe. 6.1.
And this does S. Paul note, saying: Children obey your parents in the Lord,
that is to say, according to the Lord, or for the Lords sake, and therefore if
parents command any thing contrary to Gods glory, or the salvation of the soul,
the children are in duty to practice the instruction of the Apostles, Act. 4.19.
who said. Is it right in the sight of God that we obey you rather then him?
The law is comprehended in two Tables, the summarie whereof does import, that we
love God and our neighbor. But the love of God goes before, and Jesus Christ
calls it the first and gretest commandment. And therefore says, Mat. 22.38,
Mat, 10.37.
He that loves father or mother more then me is not worthy of me. Gods
commandment of obedience to parents, does not abolish all difference between
good and evil, neither binds children to disobey God: the parents authority
cannot privilege their children to commit sin. The well ordered child will
always agree with the law to abstain from whatsoever is therein prohibited,
neither will he obey such commandments of his earthly father, as are contrary
to his heavenly father. Yet are children in duty to love, honor and obey their
parents whatsoever, even Idolaters and wicked. For as the love of nature is not
abolished by the wickedness of men, for they still abide men, so wicked and
Idolatrous parents, remaining parents, do retain the right of parents,
Prosper sentences out of Augustine
and such are to be honored, yea even to command and be obeyed, so long as
they command nothing prohibited by the heavenly father. We must, says S.
August. so love men that we love not their vices. For to love that which they
are, is one thing, and to hate that which they do, is another.

10 Yet does this word Honor comprehend an other duty of children to their
parents. That is to comfort them in their adversities, to relieve their want,
and to help and serve them in whatsoever they need at their childre^s hands,
neither shall they herein perform any more the^ the payment of part of their
debts, whereto they are bound in consideration of the benefits that they first
received from their parents. This is the duty whereto S. Paul expressly exhorts
them saying, If any widow have children, or children of her children, let the^
learn first to show godliness toward their own house, Tim. 54.
and to recompense their kindred: for that is an honest thing and acceptable
before God. Herein did Joseph perform the duty of a child to his father and
brethren: Genesis 45.9.
To whom when he grieved himself, he said, make have, and get ye up to my
father and say unto him, thus says thy son Joseph, God has made me Lord
over all Egypt, come therefore unto me, and make no tarying, and thou shall
inhabit the land of Gosham, and shall the near unto me Thou and thy children,
and the children of thy children, and I will relieve thee least thou should
perish for hunger, thou and thy household, and all that is thine, Being advanced
to such honor, he forgot not, neither despised his poor father: besides that
albeit his brethren had so wickedly entreated him: yet he forgot that injury,
and undertook to feed them. Hereto had relation Christ's commending of his
mother, when he said behold thy mother, and he accordingly performed the duty
of a child to her, and took her home unto him. John 19, 27.
We also read that when a certain father was condemned to be famished in
prison, his daughter came daily to visit him, and because she was narowly
serched least she should bring him any food, having no other means to help
him, she suckled him with her breasts: Valerius Max.
wheervpon because her father lived longer then was expected: she was watched,
and being known how she had relieved him, they gave him to his daughters
piety, and delivered him out of prison.

11 This duty did the Grecians name, by a name derived from the Storckes, who
feed and nourish their dammes, when they are impotent through age, and so are
unto us as misterisses, to teach us to acknowledge the good that we have
received from them that brought us into this world and bred us up. Such
therefore as being able, do refuse to supply and relieve the necessities of
their parents, and so show themselves deuoide of natural affection, must be
sent to school among the Storckes, that of them they may learn to yield due
reverence to their parents. And of these is the number at this day too great:
yea and such that it is grown to a common speech, that one father or mother
can be content to relieve a dozen children, but a dosen children will not
feed one father or mother: But if of necessity they be put to do it, it is
with great difficulty and such strife, as may justly minister occasion of grief
and sorrow unto both father and mother. A certain Cinical Philosopher writing
to his wife about his newborn son, promises so to teach him, Crates.
that he will return him unto her, not a dog alter the name of their sect,
but a Storcke that should relieve her in her age. But the children of our days
are more hard to receive this instruction, the rather considering the
inhumanity that appears in many, notwithstanding they be taught their duties
in the school, not of a Cynicall philosopher, but of God himself in his
Church.

12 But as in many children covetousness choaketh all feeling of this duty
toward parents: So Satan transforming himself into an Angel of light, even
long since induced the Jews to defeat their parents of this relief and
assistance under the color of the service and honor of God. Mark. 7.9.
In this respect does Jesus Christ object unto the^ that they taught that every
gift by the children offered unto God should profit the parents: but he
bitterly reproves the^ for it, protesting that it is the tradition of men that
reuearseth the commandment of God. And herein he declares first that this
commandment, Honor thy father and mother, comprehends also the duty to
relieve and help them in their necessities: Secondly that refusing to relieve
the want of their parents, eue^ under color of offering unto God that which
they ought to give unto them, they do quite abolish this commandment: Thirdly,
by conferring Gods ordinance to put to death all those that shall curse either
father or mother, with this commandment to honor them in relieuing their
necessities, he shows that despising of parents in their necessity and not
relieuing them, is as a cursing of them, and consequently a transgression that
deserves death.

13 To conclude: to the end to inuit children to honor their parents, as is
before showed, God adds this promise: Ephe. 6, 2.
That thy dais may be long in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. And
Saint Paul does note, that it is the first commandment with promise. For
albeit there be a promise added to the second, yet is the same common unto the
whole law: But this is peculiar and especial to all such children as honor
their parents, for herein has God declared how highly he commends the
obedience and honor that children yield to them. And the same have the
Heathen also noted, as among others Menander, an ancient Poet, who says. Of
honor unto parents due, the hope of happy life ensue. But the Lord spoke to the
Israelities properly of the land that he had promised them for an inheritance,
which should be unto them as a testimony and seal of his goodness and love
toward them. It is therefore as if he should have said. To the end, that living
upon the earth, thou may long enjoy the earnest penye of my goodness and
grace toward thee. But now seeing the whole earth is blessed to the faithful,
the promise of long life upon the earth, is unto us also a blessing of God.
First, because we can not live long without participating in many and great
benefits of God, even in respect of the preservation of this present life:
Secondly, because the faithful may the longer employ themselves to serve and
glorify God: In consideration whereof we see what the Church in old time
said, Psalm. 115.17.
The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into the place of
silence. But we will praise the Lord from hence forth and for ever. The same
does Ezechia, king of Judah also note in his cantikle, Esaias. 38.19.
The living, the living, he shall confess thee, as I do this day. The father
to the children shall declare thy truth.

14 In as much therefore as long life is promised as a blessing, God does
continue it to obedient children so long as it is a blessing unto them. And
hereupon does Saint Paul join together these two sentences, That it may go
well with thee, Ephe. 6.3.
and that thou may live long upon the earth. As also when God takes away
such obedient children before they be old, yea before they come unto man's
state, whether it be, least malice should corrupt their hearts, or to prevent
some great calamities wherein they might paraduenture be entangled, or upon
whatsoever other considerations to receive them into a better life, he does
faithfully perform his promise unto such children, because he deals better
then promise with them. But as contrariwise this promise threatens such
children as will not honor their parents, with short life: So do experience
declare, that many such children are of short and wretched life. But if
contrariwise such disobedient children do chance to live long, so far is such
long life from being unto them a blessing, that to the contrary it is an
enforcement and increase of woe; because they enlarge their just condemnation,
so as they had been better to have dyed in their youth. But how ever it be,
God so disposes hereof, that by the effects we may perceive that they which
honor their parents are blessed, and the others accursed.

15 Finally that according to the exhortation of Jesus Christ, we may Amend our
lives, besides all that is before spoken, let us add the counsels,
Ecclesiatheus. 3.2.
admonitions and exhortations of Ecclesiasticus, delivered unto children,
concerning their due obedience to their parents. Here your fathers judgment,
children says he, and do thereafter, that ye may be safe: For the Lord will have
the father honored of the children, and has confirmed the authority of the
mother over the children: Who so honoreth his father, his sins shall be
forgiven him, and he shall abstain from them, and he shall have his daily
desire: And he that honoreth his mother is like one that gathers treasure.
Who so honoreth his father shall have joy of his own children, and when he
makes his prayer, he shall be heard: He that honoreth his father shall have a
long life, and he that is obedient to the Lord, shall comfort his mother. He
that fears the Lord, honoreth his parents, and does service unto his parents
as unto Lords. Honor thy father and mother in deed and word, that thou may
have Gods blessing, and that it may abide with thee unto the end. For the
blessing of the father establishes the houses of the children, and the mothers
curse rooteth out the foundations. Rejoice not at the dishonor of thy father,
for it is not honor unto thee, but shame: Seeing that man's glory comes by
his fathers honor, and the reproach of the mother is dishonor to the children.
My son, help thy father in his age, and grieve him not as long as he
lives. And if his understanding fail, have patience with him, and despise him
not when thou art in thy full strength. For the good entreatie of thy father
shall not be forgotten, but it shall be a fortress to thee against sins. In
the day of trouble thou shall be remembered, and thy sins shall melt away as
the Ice in fair wether. He that forsakes his father shall come to shame, and
he that angreth his mother is cursed of God. These admonitions and exhortations
are as a summary of the duties of children to their parents. And therefore it
rests that they understanding them, do pray unto God to give them grace to
put them in practice to his glory, and their good and salvation. Lastly, let
them remember the saying of Plato, that God is not more inclined to hear any
prayers, then such as parents do pour forth for their children. As they are
therefore to fear their curse for offending them, so must they by honoring and
pleasing them seek to be blessed in their prayers, Genesis 27, and. 28
which are bessings ratefied unto them in heaven, as the blessings of Isaac to
his son Jacob do manifestly declare.

Of the duties of magistrates to their subjects. Chap. 6.
NOw let us come to the duties of Kings, Romans 13.
Princes and other Magistrates, or as S. Paul terms them, superior powers,
over their subjects. The first point that the magistrates, to the end duly to
discharge their office, are to consider, is this: That God has advanced them
to that authority, not for their private commodity or honor, but to do
service unto God in serving to the benefit and salvation of their subjects.
And this does the Apostle note, saying: The magistrate is the minister of God
for the wealth of the people. Which he also confirms, in a more particular
declaration, Romans 13.
importing that the end of their vocation and office is, that we may live a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Even the heathen in
sundry notable sentences did teach that Magistrates are ordained to live and to
serve, not themselves, but their subjects. 1. Tim. 2.2.
First one of the^ says: Princes are the servants of God, ordained to take
care for men, and to provide for their preservation, Plutarch. in a book of
the doctrine required in a Prince.

Cicero in his co^monwelth. lib. 5.

Xenophon in his rememb. of Socrates. lib. 3.

Arist. Polit. lib. 8. c. 10. Cic. Offic. l. ^


whether by ministering to them of their goods, that he has bestowed upon
them: or by defending them. Cicero also writes, that the end of governors
should aim at the prosperous life of their subjects: because, as another
says, they be chosen, not to live at ease, and daintily, but that they which
have chosen them may by their industry live quietly and happily. And therefore
says the Prince of Philosophers. Herein rests a difference between a King
and a tyrant That the tyrant seeks his own profit, the King or Magistrate
the profit and commodity of his subjects. Such (says Cicero) as are to
govern the common wealth, ought diligently to observe these two instructions
of Plato: First, that they so maintain the commodity of the people, that every
their action, without respect of their own private profit may have respect
thereto: Secondly, that they tend to the preservation of the whole body of
their people, and that they seek not so to maintain one part, that they
forsake the other.

2 Thus may the magistrate easily learn, that the greatness of government is
but a greatness of care: also that, as Seneca says, he is in duty to warant the
sleep of his subjects by his own wakfulnes their peace by his labor: Justin.
lib. 6. Epaminondas Plutarch in his Apotheg.
their ease by his industry: and their leisure by his business. And in that
sense do we read of a great personage who never accepted government or
public office for his own sake, but for the common wealth of his country: so
that on a time when the people were feasting and very merry, being asked why
himself walked sadly up and down the town, he answered: That you may make
merry and rejoice. Thus when the magistrate is called the sheepeheard, the
father, and head of the people, he is to remember that the shepherd being
more excellent then the sheep: the father then the children: and the head then
the body: the shepherd, the father and the head, are established in this
pre-eminence, The one to lead and feed the flock: the other to nourish and
bring up his children, and the other happily to govern the body. It is
therefore the magistrates duty so to govern his subjects, Seneca of clemency.
that by the effects they may know that he is ordained not only to be over
them, but also for them.

3 For the better understanding and practice hereof, let us more perticularly
lay down the duty of their function, by three principal ends thereof before
mentioned: Namely, that we may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty. Now godliness comprehends the religion and service
of God: Peace and quietness proceeds of the administration of justice and
judgment: and by honesty is meant sobriety, chastity, and other the virtues
required for an honest life, as by day and in the sight of God. Concerning
godliness and religion. As God is above all men: the soul more excellent then
the body: and the kingdom of heaven more precious then earthly treasures: so
does the chief and principal end of the magistrates charge and office consist
in the establishing and maintaining of the purity of Doctrine, the holy
administration of the Sacraments, the invocation of Gods name, 1. Cron. 15.
the order of Ecclesiastical Discipline. In brief, in the holy ministry and
service of God. How careful was David to bring the Ark of God into his City?
How joyfully with praises and blessings of the Lord did he conduct it? He
commanded the priests and Leuits to sanctify themselves, and to provide to
carry it: He ordained them to appoint of their brethren to sing and play upon
instruments before it: And how zelously did he establish an order for the
service of God? How affectionate did he show himself to build an house to
God? 2. Cron. 19. 2. Sam. 7. 1. Cron. 22.
And understanding that God would not that it should be built by him, but by
his son Solomon; What sums of gold and silver did he leave toward the
building thereof.

4 Asa king of Judah, touched with the like zeal, put down the strange alters,
the high places, and other idolatries. 2. Chro. 14
He comanded Judah to pray to the Lord, the God of their fathers, and to
fulfill the law and the commandments. And God for the same blessed him
mightily, and gave him victory over Zara the Ethiopian, 2. Chro. 15
and rest from his enemies. Yea, many other kindreds, namely of Ephraim,
Manasses, and Simeon, perceiving that the Lord his God was with him, came to
him as to a refuge, and made a covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers,
with all their hearts, and with all their souls, 2. Chro. 14.2
yea, that they should slaie all such as would not seek the God of Israel. And
of him it is said, that he did that which was good in the sight of the Lord his
God.

5 Iehosaphat his son likewise gave himself courageously to re-establish the
service of God, namely, in the third year of his reign, 2. Chro. 17
when he sent men of authority to cause it to be taught throughout all the
towns of Judah: yea, he sent with them Levites and Priests, to teach the
inhabitants of Judah, who carried with them the books of the law of the Lord,
and went thoroughout all the towns of Judah to instruct the people. And God so
blessed him in this good zeal, that the fear of the Lord fell upon all the
nations and kingdoms round about Judah, and they durst not make any war
against Iehosaphat. He also in Jerusalem ordained the Levites and priests,
with the princes of the kindreds of Israel, for the judgment of the Lord, and
for controversies, that they might judge according to the law of God, and
appointed Amarias the high priest to have the oversight over them.

6 As for king Ezechias, the holy Scripture greatly testifyeth his godlynes and
fervent affection to the service of God. He gathering together the Priests and
Levites, gave unto them this admonition and exhortation: Hear me ye Levites,
sanctify now your selves, 2. Chro. 29.
and sanctify the house of the Lord God of your fathers: Our fathers have
trespassed, and done evil in the eyes of the Lord our God, and therefore his
wrath has been upon Judah and Jerusalem: But now I purpose to make a covenant
with the Lord God of Israel, that he may turn away his fierce wrath from us.
Now my sons, be ye not deceived, for the Lord has chosen you to stand before
him, to serve him. And when the priests and Levites had cleansed and sanctified
the temple of the Lord, king Ezechias rose early and gathered the princes of
the city, and went up to the house of the Lord, and the priests and Leuits
offered sin offerings, for the kingdom, for the sanctuary, and for Judah.
And when they had made an end of the burnt offering, the king and all that were
with him bowed them selves and worshipped. The king and the princes commanded
the Levites to praise the Lord with the words of David, and of Asaph the seer:
so they praised with joy, and they bowed themselves and worshipped. Neither did
this good king take care for the tribe of Judah only, over the which himself
reigned, but also when he was to celebrate the passover, 2. Chro. 30
he sent poastes throughout the other tribes of Israel, to inuit them to come
up, and to celebrate the feast, and to serve God. And to that end, by his
messengers he made to them an excellent exhortation and admonition: whereupon
albeit some did laugh them to scorn, 2. Chro. 31
yet nevertheless diverse of Assure, of Zabulon, and of Manasses, submitted
themselves and came to Jerusalem. He afterward also renewed the service of God,
according to the order established by David, and made a decree whereby the king
should be charged with a contribution taken of his treasury, for the morning
and evening sacrifices, for the saboths, the new moons, and the solemn
feasts, according as it is written in the law of the Lord.

^. Chr. 34. and 35
7 The like zeal and duty to the service of God, is also set down in Josias
king of Judah. But the premises may suffice to declare unto kings, princes, and
other Christian magistrates, with what affection and zeal they are bound to
purge their dominions of Idolatry and superstition: to establish among their
subjects the pure and holy service of God, with the holy ministry of his
word, and to employ their authority and means in the maintenance thereof. To
be short, in their own persons to give example of all godliness. Sundry
kings, even of the Heathen, have somewhat understood and put it in practice:
as Nabuchadnezzer, when he beheld the wonderful work of God, in preserving
the three Hebrew princes in the fiery furnace, and thereby conceived some
spark of the knowledge of the true God, did immediately make a decree in honor
of the true God, in these words, Therefore I make a decree, that every
people, nation, or language, that speak any blasphemy against the God of
Shaa^ach^, Dan. 3, 24
Masach, and Abednego shall be drawn in pieces, and then houses shall be made
a takes for there is no God that can deliver after this sort. David's likewise
beholding the miraculous delivery of Daniel from the lions, immediately writ
forth his Letters to this effect. Unto all people, Pro. 25.
nations, and languages, that dwell in all the world, peace be multiplied to
you. I make a decree, that in all the dominions of my kingdom men tremble and
fear before the God of Daniel, for he is the living God and remains for
ever, and his kingdom shall not perish, and his dominion shall be for
everlasting. He rescueth and delivers, and he works signs and wonders in
heaven and in earth: who has delivered Daniel from the power of the lions.
These are excellent praises of God, delivered by a Heathen king, and do most
lively teach all Christians to fear God, to serve him, to put their trust in
him, and to set forth his glory.

8 As for Cyrus, Esaias. 44.28, and 45.1.
as God a hundredth years before the captivity had chosen him, and by the
Prophet Esaie named him to be his minister in the deliue ie of his people: so
he, after he had attained to the monarchy of the Chaldees, did declare a
commendable zeal to the service of God, in licensing his people to return to
Judea, and in restoring unto them the golden and silver vessels of the temple,
which he suffered them to reedifie, in commanding his subjects to relieve
with gold, silver, goods, and horse, all such as were not able to furnish
their journey. True it is, that as those Heathen kings were possessed with
great ignorance, so their zeal to the service of God was of small continuance:
yet shall they in the day of judgment rise against our Christian kings and
magistrates, unless more amply and constantly than they, they employ
themselves in the establishment and maintenance of the pure service of God, and
in effect declare the same to be the scope and principal end of their vocation
and office. Psalm. 2.10.
Also that David speaks to them, where he says, Be wise now therefore ye
Kings, be learned ye Judges of the earth: Serve ye the Lord in fear, and
rejoice in trembling: Kiss the Son, that is to say, Do homage to the
son: For it is not the meaning of the holy Ghost that only in the title of
private persons, they should do homadge to Jesus Christ? But also as
magistrates, in maintaining and establishing the pure service of God. And in
the same sense are we to understand the promise of Esaye, saying. Kings shall
be the Nursing fathers, Esaias. 49.23.
and Queens shall be the nurses of the Church. And indeed it is one thing
to be the suckling or nursed child of the Church, as are all the faithful,
and another to be the nursing fathers or nurses that do employ themselves to
nurse up the Church. Augustine to Boniface, Ep^. 50,
As also Saint Augustine says: A King does service after one sort as he is
a man, and after an other, as he is a King. As he is a man, he serves God
in leading a faithful and Christian life: But as he is a King, he serves
him in making laws pertinentlie, with authority commanding that which is
just, and prohibiting things contrary.

9 Christian Emperors in old time did well understand and declare the same to
be the end and duty of their vocation, namely, to establish the pure service
of God, and to maintain the truth of the heavenly doctrine. Socrates in his
Eccle. hist. li. 1. cap. 9.
Among others, great Constantine in an Epistle written to the Churches, says:
Because that by the prosperity of the public estate, I do in deed perceive
the greatness of the heavenly grace and power: I have thought it requisite
before all things, that I should bend my whole endeavor to this, even among the
blessed of the Catholic church, to maintain one faith, one true charity and
love, and one universal devotion toward God almighty. Theod. in his Eccl.
hi. l. 5. c. 6
When the Emperor Theodosius accepted the government of the Empire, his first
care tended to establish concord and unity in the purity of doctrine
throughout the whole Church. And thereupon he assembled sundry Bishops to
confute and suppress the error of Arrius. For as in all times there have been
heretics that have assalted the truth of the heavenly doctrine, Ruffin in his
Ecc. hi. l. 1. c. 2 The Tripartit hist. li. 1 c. 8 Socrat. hist. Eccl. li. 1
ca. 9 Gracian, Valent. and Theo. li. 2. cap. de Summa Trin. and fide Cath.
Eusebius. in the life of Constan. li. 4
so have christian Magistrates opposed against them the remedies of general
counsels. As the afornamed Emperor Constantine the great, in the year 333.
summoned the famous Counsel of Nice, whether he brought three hundred and
eighteen Bishops, to maintain the truth of the divinity of Christ against
Arrius: So they did moreover publish decrees concerning heretical books and
writings, importing their abolishment. As great Constantine commanded the
writings of Arrius to be burned: So other Emperors likewise having commanded
to maintain the truth, have also expreslye forbidden both the doctrine of
heretics and their assemblyes: and have made notable decrees for the
abolishing of Idolatry and superstition: as the same Emperor Constantine the
great by many laws and decrees prohibited all sacrificing to Idols, all
inquiry of Sorcerers and Charmers, all erection of Images, and all secret
sacrifices.

Theod. Eccle. hist. li 5. ca. 2
10 But above all things, they took care to establish good Bishops and
Pastors. And in deed Gratian, the son of the Emperor Valentine,
consecrating, as Theodoret writes, the first fruits of his Empire to God,
made a law for the restoring of good pastors that had been banished, to their
Churches, and commanded that such as preached the blasphemies of Arrius,
should as beasts be put from their Churches, Socrat. hist. Eccle. li. 6. c. 2
and the same to be restored to the heavenly flocks and faithful shepherds.
We also read of the Emperor Arcadius, that by the common petition of the
Clergy and people of Constantinople, he called home John, and to the end to
reestablish him in the Bishopric, with lawful authority, he summoned sundry
Bishops, and so he was chosen to be Bishop of Constantinople. To this
purpose is the exhortation of the Emperor Valentinian very notable. Theodor.
his Eccl. hist. l c. 5
After the death of Auxentius the Arrian, Bishop of Millaine, having
assembled sundry Bishops he said: Your selves having been brought up in
heavenly doctrine, cannot be ignorant what manner of man he ought to be, to
whom the dignity of a Bishop should be committed. Likewise how he ought
to instruct the people, not only by doctrine, but also by good example of
manners, and to be unto them a myrrour of all honesty, to the end that the
exercise of such his duty, may bear witness of his doctrine: and therefore
establish in the Bishops sea, him to whom we governors of the Empire, may
sincerely submit our heads: and from whom (in that being men, we be all
subject to sin) we may be content to receive reprehension and admonition
as healthsome physic for our souls.

11 Which is more, Eus hist. Eccl. li. 10. ca. 7 Socrat. Eccl. hist. l. 1. c. 9.
such was their care that Bishops and pastors should not be withdrawn by
politic functions, from the exercise of their vocation, that Constantine the
great writing to Anilin, ordained that they that gave themselves to the
exercise of divine matters, whom he called the Clergy, should be free and
exempt from all public charge. The building and repairing of Churches was also
commended to them, as the same Constantine declares, writing to Eusebius. See
that in all Churches, says he, under thy charge, as also in those that be
under other Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, ye be diligent to restore such as
be decayed, likewise to build new in places convenient: And thy self and all
other in thy name shall call to the governors and magistrates of provinces for
all things necessary for the reparations or building of the same: for I have
commanded them with all speed to provide whatsoever your holiness shall call for.
Likewise, as it is requisite that there should be some prescript form of
Christian faith, and Ecclesiastical order and government, so have they also
extended their care in that duty, as we read of the Emperor Iouinian, of
whom Ruffin writes, that the business of the Church was not the least part
of his care: also that calling Athanasius, Ruffin (...) Eccl hist. ^. c. ^^
from him received he a form of faith and order for the erecting and
government of the Churches.

12 But to the end that magistrates may be instructed and moved to the due
practice of the matters aforesaid, and so to cause their subjects to live in
the fear of God: It is also their duty to procure the diligent reading of
Gods word, and profiting in the same. And some there have been that have
showed great zeal in that behalf. Socr. l. 7. c. 22
Among others, we read that the Emperor Theodosius would confer of the
holy Scriptures with the Bishops, as if himself had been a Bishop. In this
respect did God in old time command, that the king that should be chosen over
Israel, so soon as he should be placed in the throne of his kingdom, should
for himself write out a copy of the law in a book, Deuteronomy. 17.18
which he should take in the presence of the priests, that it might remain with
him, and that he should read therein all the days of his life: to the end to
learn to fear God, and to keep all the words of his law and his
ordinances, to do them. The like commandment did he give unto Joshua,
saying: Let not this book of the law depart out of thy mouth, Joshua 1.8
but meditate therein day and night, that thou mauest observe and do
according to all that is written therein, for then shall thou make thy way
prosperous, and then shall thou have good success. The hundredth and nineteenth
Psalm declares how necessary this duty is: also how diligently David
employed himself therein, thereby showing himself to be a true pattern or
myrror of piety to all kings, princes, and magistrates.

Eusebius in the life of Constantine. l. 4
13 They are moreover diligently to pray unto God, also to cause others to pray
for them, that they may duly discharge their duties. Heereto it seems that
Constantine the great was much addicted. For, as Eusebius reports of him, he
knowing very well that the prayers of such as feared God might greatly profit
him in the due government of all, sought after such as might pray for him, and
besides his own prayers, required also the prayers of the governors of the
congregations for him. In pieces also of gold that he caused to be coined,
himself was portrayed with his hands lyfted up to heaven, as it were praying
unto God: yea which is more, he took order that his souldyers should learn
to pray to God. Pulcheria, the daughter of the Emperor Arcadius, Sozom. his
Eccle. hist. li. 9. cap. 1.
upon her fathers death, at the age of fifteen years taking upon her the
government of the Empire, caused her brother Theodosius, the heir thereunto,
to be brought up in godliness, and accustomed to much prayer: and he
thorough such bringing up, being much given to this godly exercise, afterward
in a matter of great importance, found the fruit of his prayer, for having on
a time received from diverse Bishops diverse several doctrines and
confessions concerning the divinity of Christ, Socrat. hist. Eccl. l, 5. c. 10
he went into a secret place, where he fervently prayed unto God to give him
grace to make choice of the same, which contained the truth of that doctrine:
Then reading over all their confessions, he allowed and kept the same which
taught that Christ was of the same essence with his father, and defaced the
rest, as repugnant to the holy Trinity. Likewise being to go to war, after
the example of David, he had recourse to prayers, as knowing that it was in
God only to dispose of wars: and as the same author adds, he executed
his wars by prayer and supplications. Socrat. hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 22 etc. 23.
And after his victories over his enemies, he so acknowledged them to be from
God, that on a time as he was looking upon certain triumphs and public
pastimes, hearing of the death and overthrow of a certine tyrant that was risen
against him, immediatlye crying out to the people, he said: Leaving these
carnal pleasures, let us go to Church to give thanks and praises unto God:
And at the same very instant, leaving the pastimes, and being come into the
Church, they spent there the rest of the day in praising and blessing the
Lord.

14 Some also there have been that so ordered their houses in the exercise of
Christian religion, Eusebius. in the life of Constan. li. 4
that their Courts resembled Churches, as Eusebius reports of great
Constantine, that he had consecrated his whole house to the service of God the
only king of kings, that the domestical multitude of his Court, was even a
Church of God: yea, he retained about him sundry ministers of God, that
ordinarily prayed for him. Likewise the Emperor Valerian in the beginning of
his Empire so greatly favored the Christians, that his Court being
replenished with great store of all sorts of people that feared God, Eusebius
terms it The Church of God. Eus hist. Eccl. li. 7. ca. 10
They likewise very well understood and perceived, that even the prosperity
of their persons and estate, depended upon piety, and the establishment of
the service of God, according as the holy Apostle Saint Paul very well
notes, where he says, Godliness has promise of the life present, and of
that that is to come. 1. Tim. 4.8
As also God speaking unto the Prophet Samuel, said, I will honor those that
honor me. Among others, 1. Sam. 2.30
Constantine the great writing unto Anilin, confesses and acknowledges, that
by diverse and sundry experiences he knew, that if Relygion (wherein we are
to observe with great zeal a singular reverence of holiness and godliness)
be any whit neglected or diminished, such neglect will prove in time very
dangerous and hurtefull unto the Common wealth: And contrarywyse, that being
vpholden and maintained, it breeds great felicity and prosperity to all men,
Zozom. hist. Eccl, l. 9. c. 1
thorough the grace and blessing of God. Hereupon Zozomenes rehearsing the
wonderful prosperity that God granted to the Emperor Thedosius, and wythall
noting that this blessing proceeded of the doctrine, wherein by his sister
Pulcheria he was trained up, namely, the fear of God, and the establishing of
his service, gathers that the only piety of Kings and Emperors is
sufficient for the happy preservation of the people. Also, that without the
same, all armies, all strength of the empire, and all other provision
whatsoever is in vain. The same author reporting, that many and mighty
enemies of the Emperor Honorius were overthrown, Sosom. Eccl. hist. l. 9. c.
16
adds, that God brought it to pass to show, that the true honor and fear
of God in an Emperor, as it was, says he, in Honorius, is sufficient to
preserve any Empire.

16 This does Lactantius also confirm, saying: that in case there arise any
question of the happy maintaining of the society of men, Lact. of wrath c. 2.
etc. 8
even in respect of this life, religion, and the fear of God, is the only and
true means to decide it: as also in the same book he makes this
protestation. Take away (says he) this bond, and man's life will be
replenished with folly, cruelty, and wickedness. And this is confirmed by the
testimony of the greatest heathen Philosophers, Pl^t. l. 4 of his comonwelth.
Arist. Eth. l. 5
who say, that the chief foundation, the strongest sinew, and the only saftie
of the establishment of a common wealth, consists first in religion, and then
in justice. And Cicero, a Heathen also, to this purpose says: Cicero in his
nature of Gods. l. 1
Take away devotion to the Gods, and ye take away all holiness and religion,
which being once vanished from among men, there follows perturbation in life
and all confusion. Neither do I know, says he, whether upon the taking away
of devotion to the Gods, faith also, and society among men, together with
Justice (a most excellent virtue) can remain. And in this consideration when
Romulus had erected his new Roman common wealth in matter of arms, Tit. Liui.
Malicai l. 2 Va. Ma. l, 1 c. 3
his successor Numa Pompilius, for the establishment and assuring of his
estate, erected the religion and service of the Gods. It must needs therefore
be a great shame and reproach to Christian Magistrates, endued with the
knowledge of the true and only God, and such as have his holy word in
continual view, August. to Volus. Ep. 3. toward the end.
not to believe that the establishment and preservation of religion, is the
steadfast foundation and happy pillar of their estate. Saint Augustine gives
a very lit and notable reason for the premises, saying: The holy Scripture
(says he) is the commendable safegarde of the common wealth. For no man can
build and uphold a city in prosperity without the foundation and bond of
fidelity and steadfast concord: Joshua 1.8
which is brought to pass by loving the common good, which is the sovereign
and true God. Also, when men do sincerely love one another in him, and for his
sake, that can sufficiently discern with what affection they love together.
And therefore, to conclude this purpose, God speaking to Joshua, declares that
the same wisdom which is the mother and nurse of prosperity, proceeds of
the reading and meditation in the word of God.

17 The premises do manifestly declare, how mightily the christian Emperors
in old time were addicted to holiness, and how zealous they were in
maintenance of the heavenly doctrine, and establishment of the pure service of
God, how careful to cut off the course of heresies, how affectionate to the
reading of the holy Scriptures, how fervent in prayers and supplications. To
be short, how ready and resolute in any thing that might import the
advancement of the glory of God and the Church of Jesus Christ. And therefore
may be most excellent myrrors and patterns to all kings, princes, and
magistrates of our days, to imitate and follow.

18 Especially, because the truth of the doctrine is as the soul of our
souls, and that in consideration thereof, the principal point requisite for
the establishment and preservation of true religion and the pure service of
God, consists in this, that there may be good and faithful ministers of the
word: and for the due provision hereof, it imports all faithful magistrates
diligently to advise. As also in public and free Churches, it is convenient
that such as are to be employed in the holy ministry, being chosen in the
consistories and synods, should be presented to the Magistrates, protectors,
and favorers of true religion, that if they be meet and such as they can like
of, they may have their admission and authorization: But if they prove
otherwise, then that others be nominated, who being by them allowed, may by
their said authority be established in their charge, with the approbation of
the church. For since the conservation and advancement of the Church is unto
them commended by the Lord, as the chief and principal end of their vocation,
reason wills, that they also have knowledge of those persons that are to be as
instruments and helps to them in the discharge of their office, which
consists in the maintenance of their subjects in true religion and the pure
service of God.

19 Moreover, when themselves do allow their ministers, and by their authority
establish them in their vocation, it is also their duty to maintain their
ministry, the doctrine by them taught, and whatsoever may thereupon depend.
But especially inasmuch as the rule, order, and ecclesiastical discipline is
justly termed, the mistres of virtue, the guardian of faith, the hedge to stop
out vice, the whetstone to sharpen reprehension, and the rudder or sinnewes of
the Church: it is requisite, yea even very necessary, that there should be
some prescript form in such manner set down, that the Ministers, Elders, and
Deacons, might not intrude or usurp upon any matter of politic government,
as also that the Magistrate should leave to them the exercise of Ecclesiastical
government, so far as it may depend upon their charge, and the authority of
Gods word. Likewise that this formularie be such, as being authorized and
maintained by the superior powers, Ierem. 7.11 1. Tim. 3.15
it may in the execution thereof be effectual to the purposes before mentioned
in the titles thereto attributed, namely, that so near as may be, the Church
be no longer a den of thieves, as Jeremy terms it, and a receptacle of
riotous and dissolute livers, but a holy house of God, and a pillar and
supporter of the truth.

20 It is therefore the magistrates duty to maintain the right and authority
of the church in all matters that concern the holy ministry, and the
exercise thereof, namely, against the disturbers of the peace of the same, as
heretics; profane persons, and all contemners of Ecclesiastical orders. And
particularly, inasmuch as the use of consistories and synodes is requisite for
the blessed government of Christ's Church, it is the office of the magistrates
to take order that it be maintained in certain seasons, according to the state
and necessity of the Churches, yea, and to summon the same extraordinarily
according to the extraordinary occasions that may fall out, and after the
ancient practice and use of all Christian Emperors.

21 Moreover, the care of the salvation of the souls of their subjects does
sufficiently admonish them, not to permit any assembly of heretics, that teach
any thing contrary to the truth: also to prohibit the print and sale of books:
especially not to admit or tolerate any heretics in the instructing of youth,
or in any public charge of teaching, in respect of the danger of infecting or
casting away of the souls that are redeemed by the blood of Christ. As also in
duty they are to provide for the building and reparation of Churches: likewise,
for the convenient maintenance of such as do service in the church of Christ,
and not to permit that want should drive any to the use of means and practices
dishonorable to their ministry, or to withdraw them from their studies and the
exercise of their vocation. Withal, to take heed least any parents, otherwise
reasonably inclined to the bringing up of their children in study, whereby to
serve in the ministry, be not drawn to mislike, or induced to take them from
study by the apprehension of the poverty, necessity, and contempt of diverse
ministers, whom they see for want of means to maintain their families, pining
away, and at their decease unable to leave any thing for their wives and
children to live upon.

22 Likewise, inasmuch as daily experience testifies such a dislike in
parents, it is necessary that the magistrates should maintain such young men as
may hereafter serve in the holy ministry. And in truth it is the duty of all
men, especially of such as have both ability and authority, to labor that the
heavenly truth and doctrine may be maintained, not only among us during our
lives, but also among our posterity, so that, as S. Paul says, the Lords
death may be preched even until he come. To be short, 1. Cor. 11.26
let all magistrates understand, that whatsoever may serve to the aduanceme^t
of the church and the good ordring of the same, is to them commanded and
commended by the Lord, to the end that their subjects may serve God according
to his word: and to this end let them behold the zeal and devotion of the
kings of Judah and the Christian Emperors before mentioned, that following their
steps, themselves may also be found to be true nurses and protectors of the
church of Christ: also, that their families and courts may be so guided,
according to Gods word in his fear, and in all godly exercises, that they may
be as holy churches consecrated to the Lord.

23 This one point will I also add, that besides all public and domestical
exercises of piety and service of God, which no man should neglect, it is
requisite that all men, especially kings and magistrates, should daily go
aside into some secret place, and there make their private prayers unto God,
and read some chapters of the holy scriptures, whereby to feed themselves in
true godliness, to guide their subjects in all happiness, and to purchase Gods
blessings to themselves, their government, and people. To conclude, it were
meet they should practice the counsel of Demetrius Phalerius, Eras. Apot. l. 7
who exhorted king Ptolome diligently to read all that was written concerning
the manner of good government, to the end there to find such instructions, as
his friends durst not declare or make show of. And to this duty let them also
adioine the prayer of Solomon, that God would give them wisdom whereby they may
happily govern their subjects. 1. King. 3.2


24 The second principal point of the duty of Magistrates to their subjects,
consists in the maintaining of them in a peaceable and quiet life, Romans 3.14.
1. Chro. 18.14
in such sort, that none may sustain injury in his person, name, or goods. And
because that want of love and charity, and contrariwise, abundance of malice
and frowardness among men, makes them to be wolves and foxes each to other,
whereby as their mouths are full of cursings and bitterness, so destruction and
misery so crosses their paths, that they know not the way of peace:
Magistrates are ordained after the example of David, to minister justice, in
maintaining the good and punishing the wicked. Now that they may well execute
this part of their charge, it behooves them to have fit and convenient laws,
whereby to maintain their subjects in peace and tranquillity with right and
equity. And this did God manifestly declare, in delivering by the hands of
Moses those laws, whereby he willed that his people Israel should be directed
and governed. The heathen also have evermore had most excellent personages to
prescribe unto them their laws: as Solon to the Athenians, and Lycurgus to the
Lacedaemonians. The Romans hearing of Solons laws, Tit. Liui. l. 3 Feneste. of
the Roman magistrates. c. 14. Pom. Laetus of Romans Mag. Tit. of the Decemuirat.
sent three honorable personages to Athens for a copy of them: as also to take
information of the laws and customs of sundry other provinces: And at their
return to Rome, which was three years after their departure, with the laws
that they had gathered, they chose forth ten notable personages, to reduce and
draw the same into ten tables: which done, they were read unto the people, and
so allowed. Afterward, there were also added to them yet two more. And thus
were the so famous laws entitled Of the twelve Tables, Lampridius in his life.
first collected. Alexander Seuerus, an Emperor of Rome, showed such care
hereof, that being to establish a certain law for the government of his
subjects, he called twenty of the skilfullest and most learned Lawyers of his
Empire, to have their opinions, which he demanded of each of them: and that
not simply, but so, as that he would also hear their reasons: neither would
he accept of any present answer, but gave them time to consider thereof,
least in a matter of so great importance, they might happily deliver some rash
or vnpremeditated resolution. Such laws therefore are very profitable, and
even necessary. For inasmuch as men are inclined to error, and subject to
their passions: laws are to magistrates as well counselors and discreet guides,
as bridles to keep themselves in the right course contained in the same. Thus
should all towns, common wealths, provinces and kingdoms have their assured
laws, whereof the Magistrates are gardians, as the prince of Philosophers
terms them, Aristotle.
in the virtuous execution of their charge, according to the tenure of the
same. Hereupon says David to his son Solomon, 1. King. 2.3.
Take heed to the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways and keep
his statutes, commandments, judgments, and testimonies, as it is written in
the law of Moses, that thou may prosper in all thou do, and in every
thing whereto thou turnest thee. Astuerus also, a Heathen king, Ester 1.15
heartely grieuing at the disobedience of his wife, and demanding of his
counselors what he should adiudge her unto, expressly adds, according to the
law. When Simonides the poet, Eras. Apot. l. 5
desired Themistocles to pronounce a certain unjust sentence in his favor: he
answered virtuously, As making verses contrary to the rules of poetry, thou
can be no good poet: so can I be no good prince, if I give sentence
contrary to the law: Pomp. Laet. of laws.
And this is it that Pomponius Laetus admonishes, saying: The magistrate has
the pre-eminence over the people, and the law over the magistrate: and to this
purpose he adds this notable sentence of Cicero, The Magistrate is the
speaking Law.

25 This likewise ought resolutely to be grounded in the hearts of all
magistrates, that if the superior magistrate or soueraign should command his
substitute or inferior officer to judge contrary to law, he should therein
obey him, but God who commands to minister judgment and justice according
to the law. Plutarch in his Apotheg.
And hereupon did Antigonus the third thus write to Magistrates throughout the
towns of his kingdom: If I command any thing contrary to the laws, obey
not, but think that I was abused by ignorance. The Egyptian kings proceeded
farther, for they observed this law and custom: They took an oath of their
Judges, that they should not obey them, in case they should command them to
pass any unjust or wrongful sentence. Which is more: The Emperor Traian
delivering a sword of justice to his Constable, commanded him to use it to his
behoof in whatsoever his lawful commandementes, but against him in case he
required any matter of injustice. Such men therefore are utterly deuoide of
excuse, as under pretense of the precepts or plackards of their kings or
princes, do contrary to their own consciences condemn those men to die,
whom they know not to have so deserved. Mat 27.
And in this point did Pilat greatly ouershoot himself, for he full well knew
that Christ was delivered to him upon envy, yea, himself pronounced him to
be innocent: yet when he heard some say, that if he did condemn him, he could
not be Caesar's friend, he delivered Jesus Christ to the Jews to be crucified.

26 Howbeit as inferior magistrates ought not to shrink from equity and
justice, notwithstanding the commandment of their superiors: Dan. 6
so is it as great an oversight in the superior, for fear of displeasing his
inferior, to make any wrongful or unlawful decree. As Darius seeing
himself surprised by the edict that himself had made at the instigation of his
princes that envied Daniel, albeit it grieved him much, and that he wished even
heartily to have saved Daniel, yet finally he suffered himself to be so
overcome by the said princes, that he caused Daniel to be put among the lions.
In like manner Zedechias, king of Judah, when his princes demanded Jeremy,
Iere. 38.5
to punish him as a seditious person, was so saint hearted, that he delivered
him unto them, saying: Behold, he is in your hands, for the king cannot say
you naie in any thing. This was a cowardlynes and iniquity unworthy any
sovereign Judge.

27 Neither must the pleasure of the people, or the fear of their murmures or
exclamations induce the prince to do any unjust action. As Pilat when he
said of Jesus Christ, What evil has he done? Seeing the people cry out the
more, Crucify him, and willing to please the people he delivered unto them
Barrabas, Eusebius his Eccle. hist. li. 4. cap. 9.
and delivered Jesus into their hands to be crucified. The Emperor Adrian
purposing to prevent such inconveniences, very wisely wrote to Fundanus, that
from thence forth the Christians should not be condemned at the exclamations or
slanders of the people, but that they should be heard, and being found guilty,
be punished, otherwise to absolve and dismiss them.

28 In this decree of Adrian, we also learn that the magistrate in duty is
not to give sentence rashly, but first to enquire out the truth of the matter,
Deuteronomy. 17.4.
least he hap to condemn the innocent. This commandment does God deliver by
Moses saying: When it is told thee, Job. 29.16
and thou have heard it, then shall thou enquire diligently, and if it be
true, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought in Israel,
Plutarch in the life of Romulus.
then shall thou put him to death. Job protests that he performed this
duty, saying: When I knew not the cause, I sought it out diligently. Remus
being brought prisoner before Nunator, said unto him, Thou in my mind
seem more worthy to be a king, than thy brother A^ulius: for thou do
enquire and hear, before thou condemned, but he contrariwise, condemns
before he hear the parties. Heereto must we have great respect, 1. Sam. 19.29.
for the wisest are sometime overtaken, as David when upon the accusation of
Siba he condemned Miphiboseth unheard, and without information of the truth.
They are therefore in duty, before they judge, thoroughly to sift out and take
information either of the truth, or of the right. And in that respect, when
queen Vashti denied the king her husband, Ester, 1.
and would not come to make show of her beauty in the banquet of the princes,
it was no reason that she should notwithstanding be condemned and deposed from
her estate royal unheard. Good therefore was the instruction that great
Alexander gave to all magistrates and Judges, namely, to stop one ear when
they heard one party, to the end, to reserve the other wholly to the other
party. But above all men, Aristides, surnamed the just, has in an action
correspondent to his name, declared how wary and resolute magistrates should
be in this duties for on a time having brought his accusation against an
offender, seeing the magistrates by his allegations ready to condemn the
offender unheard, he fell upon his knees with the offender, and besought the
magistrate to hear him before he gave sentence of conde^natio^

29 Magistrates also ought to be affable, ready to grant access to every
one that comes to crave audience: yet to the contrary, the kings of Persia
kept themselves so close, that no man might lawfully come unto them into the
porch uncalled. For they had one law which imported, that whosoever man or
woman came in, unless the king extended his golden rod to him, he died. And
herein they resembled wild and cruel beasts, whom no man might come near for
fear of death. Philip king of Macedon and father to great Alexander, was not
so wild, Ester 4.11.
yet in this which is reported of him, to be reproved, That when a poor old
woman craved audience in her cause, he answered that he was not at leisure:
whereupon she also taking heart, said: Then be not king. Therein declaring it to
be a duty conioined with the roial dignity, to be affable and easily
entreated to hear the complaints of the oppressed. As indeed Philip wondering
at her speech, and in heart touched, gave audience not only to her but from
thenceforth to all men. Artaxerxes Mnemon followed not the austeritie and
cruel majesty of his predecessors, kings of Persia: for he was not only ready
to hear all comers, but also opened and showed himself in his chariot, that
all might see, and such as hill to speak to him might draw near. We also read
that the Emperor Traian being on horseback, ready to go to the battle,
alighted to hear the complaint of a poor woman. Jews the ninth of France,
termed S. Jews, may in this virtue be a mirror to all Magistrates of our
time, and therefore consider here what the Lord of Ionuille, who lived in his
time, has written. He, (says he) used to send us the Lords of Nesse, of
Soissons, Ionuille in his hist ca. 94 cited by H^toman in his French Gaul.
and my self to the pleas of the gate: and then would enquire of us the state
of all matters, and ask whether there were any such as could not be
determined without his presence: And many times upon our report, he would send
for the parties, and content them by ministering reason and justice. Otherwhiles
he would walk for recreation in the park at Boys de Vincennes, and there sit
down at the root of an oak even upon the grass, and cause us to sit with
him, there would he give free audience to every one that stood in need of
him, yea, and many times aloud he would take whether there were any man that
were in strife or suit: Then if any stepped in, he would presently hear him,
and give sentence according to right and equity. Otherwhiles he would charge
Peter Fountain and Geoffrey Vilette to hear the parties, and to determine the
cause: yea, I have sometimes seen this good king walking in a garden in the
suburbs of Paris, very simply apparelled, and there calling suitors, command
them to open their griefs, and presently minister justice to them.

30 Thus this king was not only affable and ready to hear such as had to do
with him, but also ended their causes, and determined their suits without any
long delays: And in truth that is one great point which the magistrates ought
mightily to regard, namely, the speedy ministration of justice to every man,
without admitting any long suits or delays, which many times overthrow good
causes, for want of means to prosecute. In this respect does the Prophet
Esaie commend David, Esaias 16.5
whom he terms a seeker of judgment, and one that would hasten justice.
The Emperor Marcus Aurelius a little before his death, exhorting his son to
minister speedy justice to the fatherless and widow, says thus: I commend
unto thee Drusia, a Roman widdowe, who is in great suit with the Senate, In a
book entitled a golden book of M. Aurelius.
because in the former commotions her husband was banished. I take great
compassion of her, for she exhibited her petition three months since, but in
respect of my great wars I had no time to do her justice. Then to stir him
up to his example, he adds: Thou shall in truth find, my son, that in five
and twenty years (for so long have I governed Rome) there was never widow
that followed suit or other business before me above eight days. Let therefore
all Christian magistrates continually fix the mirror of this heathen Emperor
before their eyes, that they may follow his example, and so purchase the title
attributed to David, that he was a magistrate that would minister speedy justice.

31 Herein is justice by name spoken of, which as Cicero says, is a constant
and perpetual will to every man reason. Cicero offic. lib. 2

Hierom. to Demetrius


For above all things, it is the duty of magistrates, to yeald to every man his
due, and so to minister justice. Al virtue (says S. Hiero^) is comprehended
under the only name of Justice. And Aristotle terms it the general virtue.
And indeed the heathen have noted that the first cause of the establishme^t of
kings and magistrates, was to administer right and justice: without the which no
estate can subsist. For without justice, says S. Augustine, Aug. of the City
of God lib. 4.

Plato in his fourth book of the common wealth


what are kingdoms but thieueries? And therefore has Plato written that the
most excellent gift that ever God gave to man (considering what miseries he is
subject unto) was a government by justice, which brideleth and reshameth the
presumption of the furious, preserves and mayntayneth the inocent in their
honesty, and yealdeth equally to every man his due. And in this sense says
Solon. The safety of the common wealth consists in these two points: That
rewards be distributed after the desert of virtue, and punishments after the
quality of the offense: And this does Plato confirm, saying, Cicero in his
book entitled Brutus Arist. Polit. lib. 5. cap. 10
that publik concord shall hereby be maintained. And therefore have some justly
termed the magistrates Guardians of justice, in respect that in duty they are
to provide that the Poor wrong not the superiors or rich men, also that the
rich oppress not, neither tread the poor under foot. To be short justice
in gouerments is as the Sun, mercy as the moon, and other virtues as the
stars. Psalm. 82. Exodus 18.
And to these ends are they to think that in their functions they present God:
as also that in that sense the holy ghost terms them Gods. And Moses says,
that he that comes to them, seeks God, that is to say, the judgment of
God. And this shall be to them a most lively argument so to move their hearts
that they shall not administer wrongful judgment, unworthy the majesty of
God. This did Iehosaphat declare to the magistrates of his time saying. 2.
Chron. 19
Take heed what ye do: for ye do not admimister the judgment of men, but of
God: and he will be with you in the cause of Judgment: Wherefore let the fear
of the Lord be upon you: Take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with
the Lord our God, neither respect of persons, Psalm. 82.2.
neither receiving of reward. In this respect does the holy ghost so sharply
reprove those that polute this so honorable title of God, by wrongful
judgments: How long says he, will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons
of the wicked? Do right to the poor and fatherless: Do right to the poor
and needy: Deliver the poor and the needy, save them from the hands of the
wicked? Also because many do the rather presume to wrong the widow, the
fatherless and others in like tribulations, for that they never think to give
account to God for their wickedness, he adds: I have said ye are Gods, and
ye all are children of the most high: Here you see that ye are exalted into
high estate and honor: But ye shall die as a man, and ye princes shall fall
like others. Thus does he summon even the greatest to judgment: Col. 4.1.
and in this sense does Saint Paul speak to the masters of bondmen, saying,
Ye masters do unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that
ye also have a master in heaven.

32 Howbeit, there is nothing that more induces Magistrates to do injury or
wrong, then the acceptance of persons, which is acted two ways: First and
most usually, in favoring the rich against the poor, the kinsma^ against the
stranger, the acquaintance against the unknown person, the mighty against the
weak: (as are widows and Orphants) to be short, al such as we dare not
offend because it is in them, to help or to hurt us, against such as have no
means to revenge, or to reward. Secondly, in taking such compassion of the
widows and fatherless, the poor and others in tribulation, that contrary to
right and equity we wrongfully favor them in judgment. Leuit. 19.15.
Ye shall not do unjustly in judgment, says the Lord, neither shall ye
favor the person of the poor, nor honor the mighty: but ye shall judge your
neighbors justly. In this consideration did they in old time paint justice
blind: to the end to show that judges ought not to respect the appearance of
any persons.

33 Let magistrates therefore, to the end to be the more constant and resolute
in this duty, think upon the admonition of Iosaphat King of Judah to those of
his time: There is no iniquity in God, says he, ^. Chro. 19 7.
neither acceptance of any person: Thereby declaring, that the accepting of
persons engenders iniquity: Also as both are far from God the Sovereign
judge, so al magistrates that in their office do bear the imadge of God,
ought to abhor as well the one as the other, and not to respect the appearance
of persons, least they should commit iniquity: For they must think that
representing God in their office and calling, they can not trespass in this
point without polluting the judicial seat of God. And this does Moses note,
saying. Ye shall have no respect of persons in judgment: But shall hear the
small as well as the great. Ye shall not fear the face of man, for the
judgment is from God. Let them therefore remember that they are as Gods
lieutenants, sitting upon his seat to judge uprightly: To the end that closing
their eyes against al respect of persons, their ears may be open to hear and
understand the equity of the cause, that so they may judge uprightly. If needs
they must favor any friend or kinsman, let them do it with their own goods,
not with the hurt and prejudice of others. To this purpose do we read of
Artaxerxes a heathen king: he when one of his favorites required him in an
unjust cause, to the end to finger a good sum of money, caused his treasorer to
deliver unto him the like sum as he supposed that he should get by his suit,
and said unto him, by giving thee this money I am never the poorer: But by
granting thy demand, Plut. in his Apotheg.
I shall be the worse iusticer. And as a judge must not wrong one for another
sake: So must he not unjustly favor one, because an other has displeased
him. Hereof did Aristides in his example, leave us a notable lesson. For he
sitting as judge between two persons, when the one charged his adversary with
great wrongs done to Aristides, he said unto him: Friend, tell me only
what he has done to thee. For I sit here to do right to thee, not to my
self.

34 Above all things let not magistrates covet rewards, neither accept them
when they are offered. For nothing does more infect the heart and incline it
to injustice, consydering that, accordding to the proverb, He that takes any
thing sells himself: Deuteronomy. 16.19,
and is bound to recompense the reward that he has received. Thou shall not,
says the Lord, take any reward: The reward puts out the eye of the wise,
and peruerteth the words of the righteous. Exodus 23..8
If this happen to the wise and the righteous, who can boast of receiving
rewards without corruption? yea, experience does so ordinarily teach us this,
that rewards are now termed Corruptions. And this does the holy Ghost
confyrme, in that he usually adioyneth rewards, with corrupting and
perverting of justice. Psalm. 26.10
David speaking of such men, says, In their hands is wickedness, and their
right hand is full of bribes. The wicked, says Solomon, takes the reward out
of his bosom that he may pervert the path of judgment. I knew, Prou. 17.23.
says the Prophet Amos, your manifold transgressions and your mighty sins,
Amos. 5, 12.
ye afflict the just, ye take rewards, and ye pervert the cause of the poor.
And so strong is this poison, that even for a piece of bread will man commit
iniquity, says Solomon. But what iniquity? Prou. 28.21. Deuteronomy. 27.25.
He will condemn the innocent, as Moses notes, saying: Cursed be he that
takes rewards, to condemn the innocent to death. And in this sense did the
Egyptians, who were great obseruers of justice, paint Judges without hands.
And in deed Solomon says, The King maintains the land by judgment, Prou
29.4.
but he that is addicted to rewards will destroy it.

35 This corruption has evermore reigned in many, even of those that should
have been mirrors of integrity: as we read of the children of Samuel, 1. Sam.
8.3
who turning after dishonest game, took rewards and perverted justice. Thy
Princes (says Esaias) are rebellious, and companions of thieves: Esaias 1.2^.
every one loves gifts and follows after rewards: Mich. 13.10.
They judge not the fatherless, neither does the widows cause come before
them. The like complaint does Micheas set down, saying, Syon is built with
blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity: The princes do judge for gifts, and the
priests do teach for hyre: and the Prophets do prophecy for silver: Let not
any man therefore dispense with himself to take rewards, as thinking that he
may be more constant or virtuous then others. For as in a balance that scale
that bears most we glit, wayeth down the other: so he that gives the
greatest reward wayeth down him that receives it even into hell, by
corrupting him, and carries away his cause, wrongfully gotten, to his own
damnation. Samuel in this matter, bare himself uprightly, 1 Samuel 12.3.
refranying from all bribes, and doing any injury, even the least, to others,
as himself protests, saying, Behold here I am: bear record of me before the
Lord, and before his anointed. Whose Ox have I taken? Or to whom have I done
wrong? whom have I hurt? of whose hand have J received any bribe, to blind
mine eyes therewith, and I will restore it you? Then they said: Thou have done
us no wrong, nor have hurt us: neither have thou taken ought at any man's hand.

36 Let all magistrates here take an example, and let this be a mirror before
their eyes, to follow it. And to that end let them remember, first, that by
taking gifts, they are bound, and cannot satisfy both the giver and a good
conscience in the sight of God: as a heathen has well noted, Al^^amenes the
son of Telecres. Plut. in his Apotheg Job 15 34. Deuteronomy. 27.25.
saying: If I should receive the gifts that are offered, I cannot be at peace
with the laws. Secondly, let the^ not think that God will suffer such
corruption and profaning of the seat and throne of his majesty, according to
the saying of Job. The fire shall devour the tabernacles that are built with
presents: which also concurreth with the sentence of almighty God before
aledged, Lamp. in the life of Sever. Valor Max. lib. 6. cap. 3
Cursed be he that takes rewards to condemn the innocent. And this sentence
have the hethen also confirmed by severe executions, as we read of the Emperor
Alexander Seuerus, who caused his secretary to be empaled, because he had been
with money corrupted, and induced to do some wrong. And as he caused him to be
executed: so would he have the body left in the high way, whereby his servants
and officers had their usual passage that he might so be an example unto
them. Cambises King of Persia, causing a judge to be slain quick, because he
had suffered himself to be corrupted with money, Valerius Max. lib. 6. c. 3
willed his skin also to be hanged up in the judgment seat thereby to warn
all other judges that should succeed to beware of that iniquity. On the other
side, let the^ ponder the saying of Solomon. He that hates rewards, shall live,
even (which is the principal) for ever. Which also David confirms, Pro. 15.27.
saying: He that takes not rewards against the innocent, shall not be moved:
but shall abide in the tabernacle of God, Psalm, 15.
and shall inhabit in the hill of his holiness. And Esaias also says. He that
shakes his hands from taking of gifts shall dwell on high, his defense shall
be the munitions of rocks. Esaias. 33.15
Bread shall be given him, and his waters shall be sure: yea his eyes shall
see the king in his glory.

37 But as avarice engenders covetousness after gifts, and consequently the
perverting of justice: so out of the same spring flows another most
pernicious corruption: Plato in his common wealth, lib. 4. Cicero offic. lib. 2.

Plutarch in his politics


Namely the sale and purchase of public offices and functions. And indeed,
what is to be looked of such purchasers, but that he that has bought his
office by whole sale, will afterward sell justice by retayle, and do wrong to
reembourse and enritch himself? And therefore the Philosophers, even the
heathen, are of this opinion, that nothing can be more pernicious in a common
wealth, then the traficke and sale of offices: For the sellers of them do sell
the most sacred thing in the world, even justice. They sell the common wealth:
the blood of the subjects and the laws. They take away the reward of honor,
Lamprid. in his life.
learning, godliness and religion. They open the gates to the every, spoil,
injustice, even to all vice and corruption. In this respect would not the
Emperor Alexander Seuerus tolerate the sale of any office or dignity. His
reason: For the buyer must of necessity sell again. victorin. in his life.
Since in a heathen and a young Prince this holy resolution could take such
root, what shame is it that Christian Kings and Magistrates should take
another course? The Emperor Septianus Seuerus, being endued with the like
virtue, would never suffer the sale of any office or estate. This duty have
many Christian Kings and Princes also acknowledged, Aemilius and Gaguin. lib 7
who have made sundry express decrees in prohibition of purchase of offices,
especially of judgment. Among the rest, King Jews the ninth of France, most
straightly prohibited the sale of offices and dignities, which he wills
should be given to virtuous and capable persons. But experience has often
taught that such decrees have been but simply observed: also that there was
never seller, but found a purchaser, neither purchaser but found one that would
sell. But as such as thrust themselves into public offices, or purchase the
same with quoyne, do thereby reveal their avarice and ambition, the mothers
and nurses of great and heinous corruptions: So they that make sale of the
same, are the causes of injustice and wrong thereof ensuing, and thereof shall
give account in the sight of God.

38 Now let us proceed to another duty requisite for the maintaining of
subjects in peace and tranquillity. That is, to execute justice against
transgressions and trespasses. Deuteronomy. 13.17.11.
Hereof besides the commandment of God so often and so expressly propounded
in his word, the holy Scripture also exhibiteth two notable reasons. The one,
to appease Gods wrath: The other, that others may fear to commit the like
iniquity. As concerning the first, This is one resolute point, albeit few do
consider of it: that upon the committing of a trespass, manslaughter,
fornication or such like, God is highly displeased, not only with him that
has committed it, but also with the whole nation, as if all the people had
committed it. And to this purpose has almighty God set down a notable
decree, saying: If one be found slain in the land, and it is not known who
has slain him, then shall the elders of the next town to him that is slain,
Deuteronomy. 21.1.
take a Heyfer that has not been put to labor, and bring her into a valley
that is untilled. There shall they smite off her head, and wash their hands
over the Heyfer that is beheadded, and say. Our bands have not shed this blood,
neither have our eyes seen it: O Lord be merciful to thy people Israel whom
thou have redeemed, and lay no innocent blood to the charge of thy people
Israel: And the blood shall be forgiven them: So shall thou take away the cry
of innocent blood from thee. This does evidently declare, that albeit the
murder was committed in the field, and no man knows who committed it, yet is
the people of the next town polluted therewith and holden so guilty in the
sight of God, that they must have recourse to his mercy by prayer, that he
execute not his wrath against the people.

39 This same does the history of Acan also represent unto us: for when Acan
had taken of the forbidden things, God was wroth against all Israel: And that
did he testify in causing the soldiers whom Joshua had sent, Joshua. 7.
to fly before the enhabitants of Hay. But Joshua disquieted with their flight,
complains to God, who makes him answer, saying, Jsrael has sinned, and
they have transgressed my covenant which I commanded them: For they have even
taken of the excommunicated thing and have also stolen, and have dissembled
also, and have put it even with their own stuff. Therefore the children of
Israel cannot stand before their enemies: Because they be execrable. And then
he adds. I will not be with you any more except ye destroy the excommunicate
from among you. Here do we see (which also is manifestly noted in the beginning
of the history) that albeit Acan only took of the thing excommunicate, yet
was his offense imputed to all the people and the wrath of God was kindled, not
against Acan only, but also against all Israel, and to conclude; that the
punishment and execution of Acan was the only means to appease that wrath, as
it is expressly set down, Iosu. 5.25.
that after Acan was put to death, The Lord turned from his fierce wrath.

40 Another excellent mirror and example of this doctrine, we have in the
history of Jonas. He only offended God in seeking to fly from the presence of
the Lord to Tarsus: and to the end shipped himself: But God raised a tempest,
a testimony of his wrath, Jonas.
not against him only, but against all that were in the ship, who al were in
danger of drowning. They sought to save themselves by casting their goods into
the sea: But it was in vain. Then finding Jonas guilty and the motive of this
tempest, they made toward the shore to preserve both him and themselves: but
God withstood the^. Lastly the only means to save their ship and themselves,
was by casting Jonas into the sea. Which being done, the tempest suddenly
ceased.

41 If upon the committing of some manslaughter or some other notorious crime
in some Town or City, the Lord by sending an Earthquake, should threaten to
subvert the same, until the offender were punished, men would take better
heed. And therefore this first reason ought earnestly to touch the hearts of
Magistrates, and to make them to punish the offenses and transgressions of
their subjects: considering that otherwise they maintain the wrath of God
kindled against their whole nation. There shall not be, says the Lord by the
mouth of Moses, any reco^pe^ce for the blud that has bin shed, but by the blud
of him that has shed it. And therefore he does expressly forbid the judges
not to take any reward for the life of the murderer, who is wicked and
deserves death, but commands that he be put also to death. Numb. 35.33.
For (says he) Blood defiles the land, and cannot be cleansed but by the
death of the murderer. And therefore, as when fire has taken a house, men use
to pull it down and to cast it to the earth, least it should fire also the
neighbors houses: So must the magistrate pluck down and punish the
trensgressor, least the heat of Gods wrath be kindled, and consume all the
people. The transgression and offense of one subject, is as a ca^cre or
gangrene to the whole body of man, for if the disease which has infected but
one member be not taken away, it consumes the whole body: negligence therefore
and dissimulatio^ or bearing with vice and transgressions is no mercy or
clemency, but cruelty and fellonie against the subjects, because it kindles
the wrath of God against them.

42 The other reason propounded by the Lord, imports that by the punishment
of sin and transgression, the subjects shall fear to commit like iniquities.
And in that consideration is the punishment of transgressors usually in all
countries public, to the end that others may understand, and in themselves
find, that upon their committing of the like wickedness, they shall in like
manner be punished, and therefore may fear to offend. And is not this also the
meaning of Gods judgments and punishments executed upon transgressors in this
life, even that others should fear, and shun sin, least they also should fall
into the like punishment? The Apostle Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 10.6,
speaking of the sundry punishments inflicted upon the children of Israel in
the wilderness, expressly says. These are examples unto us to the intent
that we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted: That we
should not commit fornication, as some of them committed fornication, and fell
in one day three and twenty thousand. That we should not tempt Christ, as some
of them tempted him and were destroyed of Serpents: Neither murmr, as some of
them murmured and were destroyed of the destroyer. Now all these things came
unto them as ensamples, and were written to admonish us upon whom the ends of
the world are come: Wherefore let him that thinks he stands take heed
least he fall.

43 This also is the fruit and purpose of Ecclesiastical censures, which are
performed in excommunication, 1. Cor. 5.
as Saint Paul shows, saying. The incestuous person excommunicate, least as a
little Leaven sowreth the whole lump, so the tollerating of the incestuous
person should by his ensample, corrupt the whole Church. And therefore in
conclusion of this purpose he says. Put away from among you that wicked man.
Deuteronomy. 135, and 17, 7.10. and 21 21.
And this sentence and commandment is also many times directed to the
magistrate, namely that he put away the sin or the sinner from among the
people, by punishing him according to his offense. It is therefore the
magistrates duty to punish the transgressions of men, to the end that others
may fear to commit the like iniquitie^ And indeed what will become of that
Town or province, Esaias, 11.
wherein sin and wickedness is not punished? If as Esaias says, men be each
to other as Tigers, Lions, Bears, Wolves and Serpents, what peace or
tranquillity can there be among the people? if men be not restrained from
wickedness by the exemplarie punishment of transgressors? And indeed as Saint
Augustine says, Aug. against Petilian. lib. 2. cap. 23.
Albeit the fear of punishment breeds not the comfort of a good conscience,
yet does it at the least restrain the wicked desires enclosed in the secrets
of the thought. And as it is the better part that is induced to this duty by
love, so is it the greater part that came to it by fear.

44 Yet is there another consideration. Saint Paul exhorting us not to requite
evil with evil, but to give place unto wrath, Romans 12.19.
adds this reason, Vengeance is Gods, and he will repaie it. Romans 13.
And in the next Chapter he declares, that God has ordained the superior
powers and magistrates, as his vicars and lieutenants, delivering to them the
sword to execute vengeance in his name. If the magistrate therefore does not
employ his sword and power to the punishing of the wicked, he wrongeth those
that keep themselves within the compass of Gods commandment, and do depend
upon his promise, that he will revenge the injuries that they do bear: and
withal, so far as in him lies, he does bring upon the majesty of God a
great reproach, as if he were not either true or almighty to fulfill his
promise, or to take revenge of those that wrong others. To conclude, he gives
occasion to such as be injured to defend themselves, to render evil for evil,
and so to usurp upon the authority of God, to whom only vengeance does
belong.

45 By the premises it evidently appears, that it is a mere and most
dangerous corruption, in showing favor to offenders, to let them escape
unpunished, yet this was a custom among the Jews after the Romans had
subdued them, that at the feast of the passover they would have such a prisoner
let loose unto them, as them selves would demand, to the end to exempt him of
his deserved punishment: and thereupon was Barrabas, a seditious person and a
murderer, by them preferred before the righteous Jesus Christ: and by Pilat at
their request delivered to go free without punishment. But greater corruption
than this may we find among Christians. First, in that at the first entry of
kings and princes into their towns, Math. 27.
also in some places upon the day that is termed Good friday, many
transgressors are delivered out of prison. This is a perverse affectation of
mercy in princes, and a wicked imitation of the grace and mercy of God. As
also it it is a pernicious privilege pretended by those that name themselves
Ecclesiastical persons, and repugnant to the duty and authority of
magistrates, to exempt from punishment by death such manstaiers as have taken
the first tonsure or crown, as they term it. And therefore it is the office
of the faithful magistrate to abolish such corruption.

46 What then? Is it not lawful for the Prince to pardon an offender? In
answer hereto, we say that he ought to distinguish between sins and
transgressions prepetrated contrary to the law of God, which he commands to
punish: and such offenses as are committed against the laws and statutes of
magistrates in matters either of war, or policy only. As concerning the
first, true it is that Christan magistrates are not bound to inflict the same
punishment, which God in his law has decreed: Yet are they bound to observe
this rule, namely that they punish all transgressions, each according to the
gravity thereof^ For that does Gods Justice require. Secondly that the
gravity as well of the offense, as of the punishment for the same be
estimated, not after the license and tolleration now in use even among
Christians, but after the rule of Gods wisdom revealed in his word. Wherein
we are to consider first the kinds of sin, as that murder is more heinous
then theft, because man's life is more precious then his goods. And therefore
has God decreed one punishment against the murderer, and another against the
thief. Moreover in one kind of sin there are sundry circumstaunces to be
considered, which make the sin, and consequently do enforce or mitigate the
punishment. As manslaughter upon ignorance, or at unawares, is not so heinous,
neither so severely to be punished as when it is done upon hatred and
wilfully. And in that consideration did the Lord in old time grant towns
of sanctuary for the safety of such as unwittingly chanced to kill any man:
Deuteronomy. 14. 4.
Number. 35,
As contrariwise he commanded the execution of such as wilfully and upon
malice slew any man, to be performed without remission or exception. So
likewise does God by Moses decree diverse sorts of punishments for theft,
according to the diverse circumstaunces thereof: Exodus 22.1.
And therefore according to such considerations, noted in Gods word, as the
sin is more heinous or easy, even so must the punishment be executed without
respect of persons, whether kinsfolk or strangers: Deuteronomy. 13.
friends or unknown persons: rich or poor: and so consequently. For as it is
great rigor to condemn to death the man that by mischaunce kills one: So is
it a mercy condemned by the Lord himself, to pardon him that wilfully
commits murder. Neither can it be denied, but that such negligence as we
daily see among Christians in not punishing blasphemy against Gods Majesty,
fornication, and especially whoredom, haunting of Tauernes and ordinary
drunkenness, cries for vengeance against those Magistrates that suffer such
abomination to bear sway and have free passage, without exemplarie punishment
requisite for the appeasing of Gods wrath: for the terryfiyng of others: and
for the maintenance of their subjects in peace and tranquillity. But as for
transgressions against the politic laws and Statutes of Magistrates,
themselves have power and authority upon sundry and diverse reasons, to
mittigate or wholly to remit the punishment. As when Saul following the
Philistians, 1. Sam. 14.
decreed death against any that should taste any food before night, and
thereupon determining the death of his son Jonathan for tasting the honey: It
rested in the people to free him from death in respect of the great victory by
him obtained against the Philistians.

47 But in as much as there be sundry Christian Magistrates, that be
negligent in this duty of punishing the trespasses and offenses of their
Subjects, in hope of amendment: Let such remember the horrible vengeance
executed upon the enhabitants of Gibeah, and almost the whole tribe of
Benjamin, Judges. 21. and. 21.
who were in manner utterly rooted out, because that when the said
enhabitantes of Gibeah had committed great abomination against a Levites
concubine, the said tribe of Benjamin refused either to punish them, or to
deliver them into the hands of the children of Israel to be punished. Let them
consider what became of the Lacedaemonians, when they cared not to punish two of
their Subjects that had deflowred and murdered and thrown into a well the
two daughters of Scedasus, an enhabitant of Leuctres. This Scedasus, upon
notice of this odious fact, complained to the Magistrates, termed the Ephores,
and craved justice: But in vain. Then he went to the King: but might not be
heard. Plut. in the life of Pelopidas.
Thence to the people, weeping and crying out upon such an outrage: but no man
took heed? Shortly after in a battle between the Lacedaemonians and the
Thebans, the Lacedaemonians were utterly overthrown and lost the dominion that
they had holden for six or seven hundred years. This history does Plutarch,
a heathen man, report, (which thus aptly fitteth our purpose) to be fought
near to Leuctres, the same ground where the two daughters of Scedasus were
buried: Yea he adds, that as Pelopidas, one of the Theban Captains stood
in some doubt before the battle, Scedasus appeared unto him in a mighty
vision, and exhorted him to march against the Lacedaemonians, assuring him (as
it also came to pass) that they should there make satisfaction for the wrong
and outrage unto him and his two daughters done by two of their subjects, and
their neglect and contempt of punishing that iniquity. Let also the sentence
pronounced to Achab by a prophet, concerning Benhadad king of Syria, 1. King.
20.42
found in their cares, Because thou have let go out of thy hands, a man
whom I appointed to die, thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for
his people. Psalm. 101 Psalm. 75
Neither let them forget that David puts among his royal verses, the
support of the good, and the punishment and destruction of the wicked. Also
that Solomon to the same purpose says, Pro. 20.26
A wise king scatters the wicked, and causes the wheel to turn over them.

48 But as there is great difference between justice and cruelty, so this
representation of the duty of magistrates to punish vice and sin, according
as justice requires, tends not to induce them to cruelty, but to the
execution of the just judgment and vengeance of God, according to his holy
laws and commandments. For as for cruelty, it is so much the more
detestable, as that there is nothing more against the nature of God, Seneca of
cleme^cy to Nero
and the conjunction that he has constituted among men. It is, as Seneca
says, a vice not of man, but of a wild beast: and therefore it is to be
abhorred and detested, but especially by such as are not only men, but also
the lieutenants and vicars of God, least by cruelty they should pollute and
profane the seat of his holy majesty. And they also who upon ambition,
covetousness, wrath, or any other passion, are moved and induced to this
cruelty, cannot but expect judgment without mercy, and consequently, horrible
and fearful: besides the hatred and fear of men, and so lead a most
miserable and wretched life both in this world and in the world to come, as by
the examples of many tyrants from time to time we may evidently perceive. And
Aristotle in his Politikes notes, that tyranny can never hold out in one
family to the fourth generation: for in deed, cruelty can have no
continuance, and he that is feared and dreaded of many, does also stand in
fear and dread of many. It breeds rather fear in government, than power to
govern: the rather, because that continual severity takes away authority:
besides, it is most certain and undoubtedly true as Julius Caesar says,
that the remembrance of a passed cruelty is meruaylous and exceeding grievous
to old age. Seneca of Clemency.


49 This cruelty may be considered three wais: first, when by death or
otherwise he is wronged that has not deserved it. As when Saul, wrongfully
charging Abimelech, the priest of Nob, 1. Sam. 2^
of conspiring with David against him, caused him together with four score and
five priests that wore the Ephod, to be murdered: yea, and which is more,
stroke with the edge of the sword all the inhabitants of the town, men and
women, young and old, and all their cattle. This was monstrous cruelty. The
like crueltye is set down of Herod, Math. 2.16
who seeking to slaie him whom the wise men reported to be borne king of the
Jews, put to death all the children that were in Bethleem, and in all the
borders round about, from two years old and under. The second kind of cruelty
consists in punishing transgressions excessiuely, and with greater rigor
than they deserve. I call those men cruel, says Seneca, that having just
cause to punish, do observe no measure in punishing. Hereupon did God
ordain: that if a wicked man had deserved stripes, the Judge should in his
presence cause him to be beaten according to the hainousnes of the offense,
Deuteronomy. 25.^
to a certain number of stripes, but not above forty. The third rests in
this, that some do receive pleasure and contentation in the evil and
torments that others do endure. This does Adonibezecke confess of him self,
saying: Judge. 1.7 Joseph. in his Antiquit. l. 17 c. 9
Seventy kings having the thumbes of their hands and of their feet cut off,
gathered bread under my table. As also Herod, seeing himself at the point of
death, and knowing that the Jews would rejoice, because of his cruelties
exercised against them, called the chiefest among them, and shutting them up in
a great room, commanded that immediately upon his decease, before there were
any noise thereof, they should all be slain, to the end the Jews might weep
and mourn at his death. And among all tyrants, Lucian. Erasm. in his Chiliads.
in this point the cruelty of Phaleris is to be noted, who caused fire to be
put under a brazen bull, so arteficially made, that the party there enclosed,
dying with heat, and thorough angu^^h crying out, yielded not the voice of a
man, but the roaring of a Bull.

50 Contrariwise, Magistrates in punishing the trespasses and offenses of their
subjects, ought in themselves to apprehende the nature of parents chastising
their children, for so far are they from rejoicing therein, that they do it
with grief, and such compassion, that were it not in respect of Gods
commandment, together with experience, which teaches that correction is even
profitable and necessary for children, they would never do it. This may we
note in Joshua, who seeing that Acan was taken by lot as guilty and culpable of
Gods wrath against the people, Ios. 7.14.
did nevertheless call him, My son, thereby showing a fatherly affection to
him, and yet disobeyed not God, but condemned him to death.

51 This was a kind of mercy, which being generally considered, Salust to
Caesar.
enclineth the heart to gentleness and clemency, but with judgment and
discretion. And this virtue is specially required in Magistrates, for it
engendereth love, and love safety. And by experience we have evermore found,
that such as have used gentleness and clemency, have always prospered, and
have found their very enemies more righteous in their behalf, Pliny Epistle
Lib. 8. Liuy. Lib. 8. Seneca.
than Citizens have been to those that have exercised cruelty over them. And
in deed, of greater force is the peoples love of the magistrate, for the
obtaining of any thing, than their fear: and no dominion is more sure, than
the same that the subjects like of. Neither can that long endure, Plut. in the
banquet of the 7. Sag.
which the people do hate. We read that the seven Sages of Greece sitting
all at a banquet, being demanded what might make a king happy and purchase
him glory, did all answer diuersely. Solon said, by changing the dominion
of one into a popular government. By as, If himself be the first in obeying
his country laws. Thales, If by the course of nature he die an old man.
Anacharsis, If himself only be wise. Cleobulus, If he repose not himself
upon his familiars. Chilon, If his mind run not upon worldly matters, but
upon immortality. If, says Pittacu^, he teach and accustom his subjects to
live in fear, not of him but for him. But nothing does sooner engender fear,
not of the magistrate, but for the magistrate, than good will and clemency:
for as too much cruelty and severity of a prince does make his subjects to
fear him with hate, so does general good will and gentleness make them to
love him, and to fear lea^^ h^e should be taken from them, or incur any
mishappe. To c^nclude this purpose, let all magistrates remember the answer
of a Lacedemonian, Agasicles. Plut. in his Lacon Apoth. Eusebius. in his hist. and
the life of Constant. lib. 1.
who being demanded ^^owe a king might reign in safety without any guarde
of souldyers, very aptly answered. By reigning over his subjects, as the
Father does over the children. And it is a great comfort and felicity to a
Magistrate, to see his subjects love him. As we read of great Constantine,
who rejoiced in the affection and good will that his subie^^es declared
toward him: also that they lived so content under him: but especially he
conceived great content in the appearance of the joy and comfort of the Church
under his government.

52 Hereto will we yet add two points necessary for the maintaining of
subjects in peace and prosperity. The first, that magistrates observe their
vowed faith both to their neighbors and unto their subjects. He that
confyrmeth any promise or accord by oath, takes God to witness, that he
which swears, means inuiolably to observe his oath, upon condition, that
doing otherwise, he submits himself to such vengeance as almighty God
the lover of truth, will pour forth upon falsehood and perjury. And
therefore as God in his holy law protests, He will not hold him guiltless
that takes his name in vain. Exodus 20.
For it is indeed the polluting and profaning of the name of God, as himself
declares, saying: Leuit. 10.1^.
Ye shall not swear by my name falsely, neither shall thou defile the name of
thy God, J am the Lord. The very Heathen did understand that God was angry
and wroth with falsefyers, and punished them in his wrath and heavy
displeasure. As we read of Agesilaus, Plut. in his Apotheg.
king of the Lacedaemonians, who hearing that his enemy Tyssaphernes had
infringed and broken the agreement and oath made between them, said that he
greatly thanked Tissaphernes, because thorough his falsehoode and perjury he
had provoked both the Gods (speaking as a Heathen) and men against him, Arist.
Rhet. to Alex, cap. 18,
and contrariwise made them favorable in his behalf. The same does the
prince of Philosophers, even Aristotle himself note, saying: Magistrates must
take great heed and beware of breaking their oath, as well for fear of the
punishment of God, as of the reproach and infamy which they incur among men.
This feeling and resolution has evermore and at all times been printed in the
hearts of men, to the end, that the fear of provoking God by false swearing,
together with the apprehension of his just revenge, might retain them in their
duties: And therefore even the Heathen have been very careful obseruers and
diligent keepers of their oaths, as the prince of Orators does make report.
Our ancestors, said he, never craved stronger bond to bind their faith than
an oath: Cic, ost, lib, 3
witness hereof the twelve tables, the sacrifices or sacred services, the
agreementes or confederacies, wherein they bound their faith even to their
enemies. To be short, the correction of the Censors, who never more carefully
judged of any thing than of oaths.

53 But the subjects are many times also snared in the vengeance that God
powers forth upon the perjury of the Magistrates. As among the causers of the
destruction of Jerusalem and the captivity of the people in Babylon, 2. Cron,
36.13
the perjury of Zedechias, King of Judah whom Nabuchadnezzer had made to swear
by the living God, is noted to be one: 2. Sa^m. 2^
For he rebelled against him. When Saul upon an inconsiderate zeal had put
to death certain Gibeonites, notwithstanding the oath of Joshua and the Princes
of Israel above two hundred years before, who swear that they should live, God
being wroth sent a famine in the days of David, for the space of three years,
wherein he also expressly declared that this murder contrary to the oath of
Joshua was the cause of this calamity: And therefore when David had delivered
to the Gibionites, at their request, the seven sons of Saul and they had
crucified them, the famine ceased. As therefore Magistrates in duty ought not
to swear rashly, much less with any intent to abuse their subjects, or
neighbors: So must they diligently observe the oath once taken, least they
should break the band of human society: least they should incur the
reproach of men: but espescially, least they should draw the wrath of God upon
them and their subjects. In consideration of the premises: As touching
agreements confirmed by oath for the establishme^t or maintenance of peace
among either subjects or neighbors of diverse religion: The party that finds
himself the stranger, must beware of taking occasion to disturb the state, by
infringing his oath, under the pretense of keeping no faith to heretics or
Idolaters. For besides the profaning of the name of God, and the Scandal
ministered to those that are troubled, he shall also loose all reputation of
truth: He shall break the sacred bond of human society: He shall give
occasion of new troubles: and he shall extinguish all means of appeasing
them. And indeed, when men can not repose themselves upon a man's word or his
oath, they must of necessity assure them selves by weapons and force, as the
examples of our time do most manifestly declare. And thus we see that perjury
does many times entangle whole nations in wars, is the mother and nurse of
great calamities, when by keeping of the faith sworn, they might live in peace
and tranquillity.

54 The other duty of the magistrate imports that he employ his forces in
maintaining the persons, goods, and liberties of his subjects, against such as
seek to wrong them by violence, whether by defending them against their
endeavors, or in recovery of that which wrongfully has been taken or
usurped upon them. But inasmuch as within these two or three years I
publyshed a small treatise, wherein among other matters, I have declared, that
God has delivered the sword to the magistrate, to defend the good and to
punish the wicked: That war is lawful, and that Christians may ^ith a safe
conscience bear arms, and that they whom God has authorized to levy war,
both may and ought when necessity requires, to do it in defense of his
service and true religion, I shall now be content only to note some
aduertisements requisite for the obtaining of a good conscience in making
war, and in hope of happy success.

55 First, let all princes and magistrates take heed of giving just cause to
make war upon them, 2. Sam. 10.
and to that purpose remember Hanon the son of Naas, who causing half the
beardes of those whom David sent unto him, to comfort him upon the death of
his father, to be shaven, and their garments to be cut close often by the
buttockes, gave David cause to raise war against him, and to destroy him and
his people. Let them beware of leuying war without a just ground and reason,
2. Chro. 13
as did Jeroboam against Abiah king of Judah: for he rejecting the admonition of
the said Abiah, was overthrown with a great wound, and there remained dead in
the battle five hundred thousand choice men of Israel. Moreover, as there be
two means (says Cicero) to decide controversies, Cic. Off. l. 1
the one by words and law, the other by force: also, that the first is proper
to man, the other to beasts, so ought we never to proceed to force, but in case
it cannot be otherwise decided. And in deed it is not lawful to levy war
against him that is ready to determine the controversy by law, and to make
satisfaction: yea, Thucid. l. 1
as it is better to loose some part of a man's right, than to go to law, so
ought we to bear much before we resolve upon war. For as the Surgion
does never proceed to cauterising or cutting off of the member, unless the
whole body be in danger to be lost, so are we never to enter into war but
upon the necessary good and safety of the people, and their preservation
from destruction.

56 Let Magistrates also remember, Salust in Iugurth. Thucid. l. 1 Cicero for
the law Mamlia.
that the enterie into war is easy, but the return most difficult, in that
the end rests not in the power of man, as does the beginning: and therefore
before the war begin, we are to think what may follow. For not the
war only, but even the very fear thereof breeds great calamities.
Augustine of the city of God lib 19. Augustine against Faustus lib. ^2 c 74.
Neither can we enter into war, albeit most just, but with horror, yea, even
the name whereby the Hebrews do signify war, sufficiently declares, that it
is as a consuming of all, namely, of godlynes and good manners, of goods, and
of the lives of a number of men. Let them withal remember what Saint Augustine
writes, that a desire to hurt, a cruelty in revenge, difficulty to be
appeased, covetousness of dominion, the brutish passion of rebellion, and all
other like affections, are justly to be reprehended in wars. As in deed,
all wars arising of ambition and covetousness are unjust, and as an ancient
historiographer says, do breed great inconveniences: Tacitus lib 4. Euripides
as also the Greek Poet notes, who says: He that wars unjustly crave,
Happy issue shall never have.


But those wars (says Saint Austen) are lawful, that are followed, August
of the of the word of the Lord. Cic. offic. lib 1 Liuy lib 9.
not upon covetousness or cruelty, but for the purchasing of peace, the
suppressing of the wicked, and the releeuing of the good. The end of war, says
Cicero, is to get peace: and that war is just says Liuie, that is
necessary, and the weapons lawful where there is no hope but in weapons.
Augustus Caesar was accounted happy and great, Suetonius in the life of August.
c. 20. Liui. li. 5
because he never prosecuted any wars but with just and necessary cause.
For wars are to be followed with no less justice than courage, neither should
a prince, notwithstanding whatsoever confidence in his power and strength,
hazard an estate certain for an uncertain.

57 Moreover, as princes and magistrates have their laws, statutes, and
ordinances, wherewith to contain their subjects in their duties, in the time of
peace, so should they take order for good government in the wars, to the end
their just wars may justly and holyly be prosecuted. So did God in old time by
the hands of Moses deliver laws to his people, Deuter. 20
whereby they should be guided in the wars. But especially a prince is to
provide, that warlike discipline well devised, be strictly observed: likewise
that his soldiers may be restrained from blaspheming, from forcing of women
and maidens, from dronkennes, and as S. John Baptist taught them, from doing
wrong or injury to any. But that by paying them their hire faithfullye, Luke
3, 14
he may give them cause of contentment, as Saint John commanded them, and
withal, may have authority and just reason to punish transgressors.

58 To conclude, Magistrates are to remember, that in old time God commanded
that the sons of Aaron the priest should sound the trumpets wheresoever there
was any question of wars. Numb. 10.9 Deuteronomy. 20.1
Also that the priest should then speak to the people, to exhort them not to
fear or doubt, and to assure them that God marched with them to fight for them
against their enemies. For herein princes and magistrates are admonished and
taught, first not to levy any war but that which is just, approved by God,
and as it were summoned thereto by Gods trumpet: secondly, so to behave
themselves as in his presence and under his conduct: thirdly, not to trust to
their own strength, neither to fear the strength of their enemies, but to
repose themselves upon God, the captain and conducter of the war: so that
albeit their enemies be more in number, yet they may be assured through Gods
assistance to overcome them. Thus will he give them grace either to prevent the
tribulations of war, or else to undertake and lead happy and blessed wars,
whereby ouercomming their enemies, they may keep their subjects in peace and
prosperity.

59 We have already declared how far the duty of the magistrate does extend,
namely, so to employ his authority, that his subjects may live religiously in
all godlynes, and peaceably in tranquillity. There yet remains the third
point, namely, that they also lead their lives in all honesty. Now this
honesty consists principally in two things: first, that among subjects there
be found no pollution in fornication, lust and other villainies: secondly, that
al dronkennes, gluttony, and such like excess and riot be suppressed,
bannished, and driven away. As concerning the first point, God in his word
does sufficiently testify, and by the examples of diverse his vengeances,
declare that he detesteth all fornication: and the magistrate is the servant of
God, it is therefore his duty to conform his will to the will of his God* by
making convenient decrees to restrain all whordome and fornication, by
abolishing all occasions, Exodus 20.19 Leuit. ^0.11.13.15. etc.
and by punishing such as give themselves thereto. Neither is God satisfied
with the simple prohibition of fornication, but he also adds politic
decrees, which he commands the magistrates to put in execution, for the
punishing of such as shall transgress his laws and prohibitions aforesaid.
Deuteronomy. 22.22.24, etc.
First therefore he commands them to put to death all such, male and female,
as do abandon themselves to any unnatural carnal conjunction. Also all
incestuous persons, that is, all that by carnal copulation join in any degree
prohibited in his law: and all adulterers, men or women: and this takes place
in him that co^panieth with a woman unmarried or betrothed to another.

60 This sin of adultery has evermore bin accounted so worthy of
punishment, that we shall scarce find any people or nation in the world,
that has not from time to time exemplarily and notably punished the same, as
before we have more at large declared. In the second book, c. 17. of
Adultery and all fornication.
Princes therefore and Christian magistrates that inflict no punishment for
adultery, are inexcusable in the sight both of God and men. And they must
think, that as such iniquity does provoke Gods wrath, not against the
adulterers only, but also against the whole nation where it is tolerated: so
by not punishing it, themselves do maintain the wrath of God, as a fire
kindled to consume both them and their subjects. To whom by such slacknesse and
conniuence, they also give head to commit it without all fear. The Emperor
Justinian in a decree whereby he ordayneth death to baudes, that make sale of
women or maidens for fornication, In the Novel Constitutions Rub. of Bauds
Genesis 38.24.
does add this, We believe that thorough this our care to maintain chastity,
our common wealth will take great increase, and that God will grant us all
prosperity. We read that the Patriarch Judah, when he saw that his daughter
in law Thamar, whom he had promised in marriage to his son Sella, had
played the harlot, he condemned her to die, even to be burned. Wherein the
Magistrates of our time are to note three points, that may induce them to do
their duties. First, that albeit the persons be not yet married, but betrothed
only, yet as is aforesaid, this adultery deserves death. Secondly, that
adultery was punished with death, namely, by fire, even before the law given
by Moses. Thirdly, that no kindred or friendship should withholde the
Magistrate from punishing adulterers: And hereof we have an instance in
Zaleucus the Locryan Lawyer: Val. Max, ca. 5 Aelian. l 1^
he having ordained that both the eyes of an adulterer should be pulled out:
when his own son was taken with that fault, would needs have two eyes lost,
and so caused one of his own and another of his said sons to be plucked
forth.

61 It is therefore a great reproach and slacknesse in Christians, so to
mitigate the punishment of this sin, that they have showed themselves in
manner never touched with the abomination of such iniquity. In the days of
the Emperor Justinian, adulterers were put only to some fine of money, which
might in deed somewhat restrain the poor: but the rich thereby took occasion
to commit it the more, as thinking themselves quit for a small sum of money.
True it is that by virtue of some decrees of the said Justinian, the women
taken in adultery were thrust into some monastery. But what else was this,
but formally to oppugn the saying of Saint Paul, who commands that the
woman who cannot contain, should marry? In the Council of Tibur it was
decreed, that if the woman that had committed adultery, Counsel of Tibu^
holden the year 895. cap. 46. Counsel of Orleance cap. 1. Causaid constitui
mus. 17. q. 4.
could retire and save her self in the Church, she should not be redeliuered
into the hands either of her husband or of the Judge. The like was also
decreed in the first Council at Orleance, where it was moreover ordained, that
if her husband or the Judge did redemaund her, she should be redeliuered, but
with an oath, that they should do her no hurt, upon pain of excommunication.
And thus did the Clergy in those days draw unto them the notice and
judgment of adultery, whether to purchase thereby the fines for their own
profit, or for any more vilanous or detestable purpose. But as by that means
they were wylling to save and preserve the bodies of the adultresses, so have
they strained the souls, to the end to cast them headlong into everlasting
death. The Counsel of Elibertin cap 18.
In deed in a Council holden in Spain, it was decreed that if a Bishop, a
priest, or a Deacon, were taken in adultery, he should never again be
received into the peace and reconcilement of the Church, no not in the hour of
death. Also, that this rule should be in force against all other persons upon
their second offense. And therefore says Saint Cyprian, in his days some
Bishops would not receive adulterers to the peace of the Church. But he was
of opinion, to use some moderation, least sinners should fall into desperation,
and that desperation should draw them on headlong into all wickedness. And
therefore, says he, The Council of Ancyra Cap. 20.
it were good they should try their repentance without limitation of time:
which notwithstanding by one Council was appointed to be seven years.

62 Thus may we see whereinto those men do fall, that will be wiser and show
more mercy than God. But mortal man, notwithstanding whatsoever authority
he pretends, must not alter the decrees of the living Lord. And the Lord
has commanded that adulterers should be punished with death. Neither is there
in manner any nation in the world, but agrees to this judgment of God, as
we have before declared. If therefore we would obey God in punishing
adultery with death, his wrath would be turned from us, and we should be
freed from thousands of questions and difficulties that grow upon the sparing
of their lives, and men standing in more fear of God, would not so soon
abandon them selves thereto. In old time thieves were not by any law either
of God or man punished with death, but adulterers were: but now contrariwise,
thieves must die for it, and adulterers must escape in manner scotfree. Is not
this a token that Christians are more fervently bent to the preservation of
their goods, than of the chastity or honor of their wives? They allege the
example of Christ, who dismissed the woman that was taken in adultery, with
out condemnation. John 8.
But as Christ came not to execute the office of a Judge, neither would vsurp
it: so when he had asked her whether the sentence of the Judges had condemned
her, and understood no: before he dismissed her, he sufficiently declared,
that if sentence had been passed, he would not have hindered the execution. 1.
Cor. 10.8.
And therefore by the premises let all Christian Magistrates understand that it
is their duty to punish such iniquity, and with all remember, that whatsoever
slacknesse or negligence shall be found in them, shall not remain unpunished.
And so let them in holiness resolve straightly to forbid this abomination of
adultry, to stop the course of it, and to take away all allurements and
entisements thereto: and that with such punishment, that all other may fear to
commit the like iniquity. Let them also diligently see to other fornication,
that it escape not unpunished, as remembering the vengeance that the Lord did
take of the like, when for the same in one day he slew twenty and three
thousand.

63 Namely, let them not suffer among their subjects any stews, tauernes, or
other receptacles of adultery for hire, which serve as baits, allurements,
and means to defile and destroy both bodies and souls for ever, also to
provoke Gods wrath against their subjects. Autenticalls in the title of Baudes.
Especially let them rigorously punish and banish out of their dominions all
baudes and ruffians (the cursed instruments of satan, to allure and put forth
women and maidens to fornication) who live upon so abominable iniquity. The
Emperor Justinian does expressly command all baudes to be punished with death,
as is aforesaid. Withal decreeing, that whatsoever has been given to women or
maidens for the prostituting of their bodies, they shall not be bound to
restore.

August. in his book of orderings.
64 But some to the contrary will allege a sentence of Saint Augustine,
saying: Take away the stews, and ye shall replenish the whole town with
fornication. But when he wrote that he was but a nouice, and meanly instructed
in religion: and therefore him self in another place confesses, that in sin
there is no tolleration, that a man of two evils should choose the lesser.
Neither must we (as Saint Paul says) do evil that good may come of it: Romans
3.8
or allow one mischife for the eschuing of another. But we must obey God, who
forbids us all wickedness, and remit the issue and success into his hands
who cannot allow that the wisdom of the flesh should dispense with the
offending God in one sort, for fear of offending him in another. Basil
expounding these words, Psalm 1.
And has not sit in the seat of the scornful, says, that adultery never
stays is one man, but infecteth the whole City. First one will come alone to
the strumpet, then he will take a companion, and that companion another
companion: whereby as fire once kindled, if the wind be high, does sometimes
inflame a whole city, so this wickedness once kindled, spreads all over.
Ambrose proceeds f^rther, for he expounding this sentence of Solomon, Who can
carry fire in his bosom and not be burned? says, Proverb. 6.
Who does think that tollerating whoores in a town, young men will not resort
unto them? wherein we gather this sentence, which utterly repugneth the former
of Augustine: Tolerate whores in a town, and ye replenish the whole town
with whoredom: as God undoubtedly for the avoiding thereof did in old time
command that there should not be any whore in Israel. And therefore we will
conclude this argument with this saying of Tertullian, Deuteronomy. 23, 17*
That stews are abominable in the sight of God. Let the Popes therefore
advise with them selves what answer they will make to God for this, Tertul. of
the Soul.
that in Rome they do not only publicly tolerate their whoores and bauds,
but also that they take tribute of them, therein showing themselves likewise to
be baudes, in that in lieu of punishing, expelling, and banishing of them, as
plagues in a Christian common wealth, they participate with them in their
cursed gain.

65 As concerning the other point touching tippling and dronkennes. Seeing that
God curses all bibbers and dronkards by his prophet Esaias: also that S. Paul
protests that they shall not inherit the kingdom of God: the magistrates do
sufficiently understand, Esaias ^.11.12 1. Cor. 6.10.
that they in duty, so much as in them lies, are to stop the course of all
such excess. The inconveniences of quarrels and strife thereof arising, and the
troubles in household: as when the husband or the wife do come drunk home, the
extreme misery whereinto many do bring their wives and children, in suffering
the^ almost to starve for need, whilst themselves haunt tauerns. The abuse and
profaning of Gods good creatures, with other inconveniences that daily arise
of dronkennes, do cry for vengeance in the sight of God, and do call the
magistrates, and set before them their duties, wherein they are bound to
remedy the same. For with what conscience can they suffer such corruption
among their subjects, when they may remedy it, by prohibiting, not lodging for
strangers, but tauernes from their inhabitants, or by punishing of tiplerrs,
dronkards, and those tauerners that maintain them in such excess and riot?

66 Having before declared how Magistrates ought to imploie themselves, to
bring their subjects to lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty, we are now to entreat them to believe and think that their
authority shall take great increase and efficacy, when their greatness and
power shall be accompanied with the excellency of virtue above their subjects,
and when themselves shall be examples unto them, in all things beseeming the
children and servants of God: wherein also they are to have such respect, that
they admit not in themselves even that which may be somewhat tolerable among
their subjects, so far are they from power to dispense with that in
themselves which should not be permitted to men of meaner calling. And in deed
we may in many notable examples note that God has grievously punished in great
personages those faults which in appearance seem small, Nomb. 20. 2. Sam. 24.
Esaias. 39.
as that of Moses at the waters of strife, that of David when he numbered the
people, that of Ezechias, when he showed his treasures to the Ambassadors of
the king of Babylon, and so in others. In all which God does teach us, that the
authority of princes to dispense with themselves to work wickedness, is so
small, that contrariwise, he will punish such transgressions in them, as many
times he will bear with in their subjects. Deuteronomy. 17.
And this instruction does he confyrme, in that in old time he declared that
the king that should be chosen over his people Israel, should have the book of
the law, that he might read therein all the days of his life, and that he
might rule himself according to the will of God, that he should not have
many wives, yet was that tolerable among his subjects. The younger Scipio
knew and put in practice his duty in this respect, for when he had by force
taken the city of Carthage, Plut. in his Apoth. Plut. in his Lacon. Apoth.
Plut. in his Apoth.
and some of his souldyers brought unto him a most beautiful maiden, Truly,
said he, I could find in my heart to take her, were I not in office or a
magistrate, but a private man. To this purpose did Agesilaus very wisely say,
That the Prince must outgo his subjects, not in pleasure and lust, but in
temperance and magnanimity. And thereupon said Cyrus, He is not worthy to
govern, that is no better, neither more virtuous than they over whom he is
to command.

67 Reason likewise would, that princes and magistrates should give good
examples to their subjects, leading the way to all virtuous and commendable
actions that they require of them. As Iustine writes of Lycurgus, Justin. lib.
3.
that he set down no law for any thing whereof himself had not showed an
example and practice in his own person. Plutarch says, that Agesilaus would
be the first dooer of that thing that he commanded those to do, Plutarch in
his Lacon. Apotheg.
over whom he bare dominion. And in deed, as a great branch cut from a tree
brings down a number of small ones with it: and as when a great prince
comes forth of his palace, a multitude do follow him: even so do the
subjects ordinarily follow the example of their prince and magistrate,
whether good or badde. Quintilian in his fourth declamation.
As also what so ever the prince does, it seems that he commands it: yea,
the affection to please princes and to imitate their actions, is of more force
than the laws and punishments ordained in the same. If the prince take a
pleasure, whether in virtue or in vice, so will his subjects. Cicero very
aptly says, that the magistrates in matter of wickedness or vice, do not only
conceive it, Tacitus. Annal. 3
but also do spread it, and as it were, water their subjects therewith,
hurting more by their example, than by the sin it self. It is a common
saying taken of Plato, Such as the prince or magistrate of a city is, such are
his subjects. And this does a poet note, saying: What ever the king in example
does leave, Seneca.

His subjects thereto full fast will cleave.


And in this sense says one, Will thou have thy subjects good? Cic. his book
of laws. 3.
be thou good. For the prince by well doing teaches his subjects to do well.
The same author says, that the examples of princes do never rest where they
first begin, Cic. in his Ep. to Claudian. Vellerus Paterculus. l. 2 Seneca of
clemency.
but do break forth and scatter far and near. And in deed, as Seneca
says, The world notes the words and deeds of princes and magistrates,
neither can they lie hidden no more than the Sun beams. And therefore as he
adds: the magistrate is diligently to take heed to his reputation and fame,
which is of great efficacy whether it be good or bad.

68 Now let us come to examples: Zozom. Eccl. hist l. 8. c. 1
When the kings of Judah professed either the fear of God, or the service of
Idols, the people inclined accordingly either to good or to evil, to serve
God according to his law, or to pollute themselves in the service of Idols.
Zozomenes reports of the Emperors, Arcadius and Honorius, the sons of
Theodosius, that they following the example of their father, made profession of
the truth of the heavenly doctrine, and that their subjects regarding their
example, were therewith so touched, that the heathen were easily converted to
Christianity: the heretics returned to the catholic church: and that the
Arrians and Eunomenians daily decreased, and many of them joined with those
that followed the doctrine which their Emperors maintained. Agis, the last king
of Lacedemon, was in his youth addicted to his pleasures: but after he was
called to the government, he utterly gave them over, and was so inclined to
virtue, that by his so notable change he purged the town of Sparta, Eras.
Apot. l. 1 Aurel. Victor in his life.
of all the corruptions wherewith the barbarous nations had infected it, and by
his example reduced the inhabitants to their ancient frugalitie and sobriety.
Likewise the Emperor Vespasian suppressed many vices by good laws, but more
by example of life, (which in deed is of greater efficacy, as the same
author reports:) as contrariwise, when Ptolome king of Egypt, Justin, l. 30
Vellciu^ Paterculus. l. 2
says Iustine, was given to pleasure and wantonness, all his subjects
presently imitated his manners. The same* also exte^deth eue^ into buildings, as
we read that after the destinction of Carthage, the Romans gave themselves to
pleasures, falling from virtue to vice, not by degrees, but as it were by a
headlong downfall. And when Scipio Nasica, Metellus, and C^^eius Octauus, all
principal Lords in Rome, began to build porches and gorgeous galeries, the
magnificence of these public persons, says the author, was immediately
seconded by the excessive superfluity of the people.

69 But as it is the duty of magistrates to seal their good and holy decrees
with good and holy examples: so is it not enough that they begin only, unless
they also constantly persevere in their said duty: their estate is slipperie,
and as the trees that grow upon high places are most moved and beaten with
winds, and consequently, in greatest danger of overthrow: so kings, princes,
and other magistrates, being exalted above the people, are more mightily
assalted, whether by the devil, who knows the consequence and importance of
the^^ fall, whether by flatterers or evil counselors for their particular
profit whether by the notice of their greatness, together with the corruptions
and vices common to others, which do many times incli^e them to excessive
licentiousnes. Solomon a man endued with many the graces of God, for a long
time b^re himself so wisely and virtuously, that he atchiued marvelous
reputation: but afterward, especially toward his old age, having taken an
incredible number of wives and concubines, 1. King. 11.
even strangers, contrary to Gods commandment, he grew into extreme outrage,
and miserably diuerted from the service of God, and gave himself to all kinds
of superstition and idolatry. And hereof grew that great calamity, even the
division of the realm in his successor Roboam, when the ten Tribes revolted,
and were plunged in all Idolatry under Jeroboam and his successors, and many
times were at war with the two other tribes, in whom only the kingdom of
Solomon did remain. Ioas king of Judah, 2. Chron. 24
had a good and religious beginning in his government, which continued all the
days of Iehoida the high priest: but after his death, leaving the temple and
service of God, he gave himself to Idolatry, and so drew his subjects
thereto, that albeit God sent them prophets to reclaim the^, yet would they
give no ear: Aurelius. Victor in his life. Bab. Ignatius in his life.
whereupon the wrath of the Lord was kindled against Judah and Jerusalem. The
Emperor Nero, during the first five years of his Empire, lived so virtuously,
that Traia^ would usually say, that al princes were far behind the five first
years of Nero, yet he afterward grew a mo^ster in all lust and extreme cruelty.
Likewise the Emperor Caligula was in the beginning a very good prince, but
afterward very wicked, so that it is written of him, that he was in the
beginning the best, and in the end the worst Emperor that ever lived.

70 To the end therefore that having well begun, they may be the better
instructed to persevere in their duties: besides the prejuises we will also for
a conclusion, add some admonitions, sentences, and notable aduertisements,
which it were good they should understand, meditate, and have in continual
sight, to the end to put them in practice. First, let them know, that there is
nothing more difficult than to reign and govern well. Whereupon also
acknowledging the weight of their charge, they ought daily with Salomo^ to
crave wisdom at the hands of God, 1. King. 3.9.
to the end they may well and prosperously guide their subjects, together with
all other virtues requisite, and perseverance in their duties: also, James 8.17
the blessing of the father of light, from whom come all good gifts, and who
only is able to give success and happy issue to all their labors. Secondly,
that they put in practice the commandment of God to Joshua, Iosu. 1.8.
saying: Let not this book of the law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate
therein day and night, that thou may take heed to do all that is written in
the same: for in so doing, let them be assured that they shall prosper, as the
Lord adds, saying: For then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then
shall thou have good success. And in that sense let the^ expect the
performance of the same which God said to Samuel, 1. Sam. 2.30.
I will honor those that honor me, and they that despise me shall be set at naught

71 Let them remember that two things are required in a prince or magistrate,
namely, holiness in time of peace, and magnanimity in wars: and in both
discretion: Aurel. Vict. in his life. Polibius.
whereof the Emperor Tra^an showed him self as a pattern, for he was endued
with both these virtues: That two things maintain the commonwealth: Force and
magnanimity against enemies, and concord among subjects: That the
preservation of the Princes estate consists, first in the integrity of
religion. Secondly, in the love of the subjects: That they which are in office
of magistrates, must, as says great Cato, use soberlie their power and
authority, Plutarch in his Apoth. Plato in his comonwelth.
that they may still use it: That that com-wealth is happy, wherein every man
obeys the prince, and the prince obeys the law: That the magistrate, as
the same Cato says, must not tarry for exhortation to govern justly, neither
by exhortation be moved to bear himself unjustly: That it is a calling both
steadfast and to be desired, Polib l. 6
when every one in private does live in peace and holiness, and that justice
and mercy do abide in public persons: That the prince must make his subjects
to love him, and his enemies to fear him: and as well to remember that he is a
man, Tacitus. Annal. 11 Pliny in his Panegiricks. Curtius l. 7.
as that he is established over men: That there is nothing so firm and strong,
but is subject to inconvenience and danger, even by the feeble and weak. And
to this purpose let them call to mind that great trees are long in growing,
but cut down in an hour. Let them not forget that they bear the image of God
in regard of their office, and are called Gods, to the end they should neither
speak nor do any thing unworthy the majesty of God. Tacitus.
Let them beware of abating their authority, either by too much lenity, or
the peoples love by like severity. Let them not prefer the advice of young
Counselors before the judgment of the ancient, and to that purpose make use
of the example of Roboam, 2, Chro. 10
who by the contrary alienated the ten Tribes of Israel, and lost his dominion
over them. Let them never pronounce sentence in wrath, neither undertake any
thing in displeasure, but remember the saying of Saint James, Wrath in man
fulfilleth not the justice of God. Let this saying of Saint Augustine be
printed in their hearts: James 1, 20 Augustine in the 13. a-abuses of degrees.
Degree 6.
Three things are requisite in a governor, Calling, fear of him, and love
toward him, Calling is requisite, to the end he may bear himself in a good
conscience cheerfully, yet if he be not both loved and feared, he cannot
subsist in his calling. Let him therefore advise himself to procure love by
benefits and aff^bilitie: and ^eare, by punishing wrong done, not against
himself, but against the law.

72 Let him consider of the titles that Julius Pollux, who was governor of the
Emperor Comodus in his youth, attributes to the prince, whom he calls
father of the people, gentle, loving, merciful, wise, just, courteous,
courageous, despising money, not subject to passion, but commanding over
himself, ouercomming lust, using reason, quick of conceit, sober, religious,
careful for his subjects, constant, no deceiuer, adorned with authority,
ready in his affairs, provided to do well, slow to revenge, affable,
gracious in speech, open hearted, a lover of the virtuous, desirous of peace,
valiant in war, an example of good manners to his subjects, a maker of good
laws, and an obseruer of the same. Let him remember these words of Jews the
ninth, left by his last will to his eldest son and successor Philip, and
are recorded in the chamber of accounts. Be devout in the service of God, be
in heart pitiful, and charitable to the poor, and comfort them with thy good
deeds, keep the good laws of thy realm, take no subsidies or releef of thy
subjects, but upon urgent necessity, and for the profit of thy common wealth,
upon just cause, and voluntarily.

73 Let them continually look upon the table of Ptolome Arsacides, which the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius found at Thebes, an ancient town of Egypt, and was
always laid at the kings beds head, when he was chosen, and by the said
Marcus Aurelius at his death given as a singular treasure to his son Comodus.
This Table was written in Greek Characters, and contained the protestations
and sentences following: I never exalted the proud rich man, neither hated the
poor man that was just: I never denied justice to the poor for his poverty,
neither pardoned the wealthy for his riches: I never benefited or gave reward
for affection, neither punished upon passion only: I never suffered evil to
escape unpunished, neither goodness unrewarded: I never committed the
execution of manifest justice to another, neither determined that which was
difficult by my self alone: I never denied justice to him that asked it,
neither mercy to him that deserved it: I never punished in anger, neither
promised benefit in mirth: I was never careless in prosperity, neither faint
hearted in adversity: I never did evil upon malice, neither committed
villainy for couetize: I never opened my gate to the flatterer, neither gave
ear to the backbiter: I alwais sought to be loved of the good, and feared of
the wicked: lastly, I always favored the poor that was able to do little,
and God, who was able to do much, favored me.

74 To conclude, we will add these short and excellent sayings of Saint
Augustine, Augustine of the degrees of abuse. Degree 9.
wherein he represents unto us the duties of princes and magistrates. The
justice of the king, says he, is, that he do not wrongfully oppress any man
by his power, that he judge without acceptance of persons between man and man,
that he be a defense to the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, that
he suppress theft, punish adultery, exalt not the wicked, maintain no
quarrellers or lascivious persons, root out the perverse, permit no murderers
or perjured persons to live, that he uphold the Church, feed the poor,
establish just men in public offices, retain ancient, wise, and discreet
counselors, that in any wise he apply not himself to the superstitions of
deuiners, magitians, and pythonicall spirits, that he defer his displeasure,
and defend his Country from his enemies with magnanimity and justice, that he
repose his whole confidence in God, that he be not puffed up in prosperity,
and with patience bear adversity, that he maintain the Catholic faith, and
suffer not any wickedness in his children, that he allot certain hours to
prayer unto God, and eat not but in due season: for woe be to the earth, where
the governors do arise early to eat. These things (says Saint Augustine) do
minister prosperity in this life, and do lead the king to a better dominion,
even to the celestial and eternal kingdom. Seeing therefore that our Lord
Jesus Christ exhorts us to amend our lives, let all magistrates, examining
themselves by that which has bin before spoken concerning their duties,
determine and advise themselves to amend such faults as may be in them, that
they may employ themselves to govern their subjects more and more in virtue,
wisdom, and holiness, to the glory of God and the benefit and salvation of
themselves and their said subjects.

Of the duty of Subjects to their Magistrates. Chap. 7.
NOw let us proceed to the duty of subjects to their Magistrates. As in the
fifth commandment of the Law, the word Father, signifies all superiors that
have charge, conduct, and government of others, and consequently all
Magistrates: so the word Honor, includes all duties and offices wherein the
subjects are bound to the superior powers. And this does Saint Peter confirm,
1, Pet. 2.17
saying: Honor the king. Where this word Honor does especially import love,
reverence, subjection, obedience, assistance, and to conclude prayers and
supplications for them. As touching the first point, that is, to love them, God
commands it in his law: for the sum of the second Table thereof
imports, that we love our neighbor as our selves. And if all men be our
neighbors how much rather the Magistrates, who in the fiftth commandment are
signified by the word Father, the rather to admonish us, that we ought to love
them as our fathers: and in deed they be many times termed fathers of the
people. Moreover, if the image of God that rests upon all the children of
Adam, does bind us to love them, how much rather are we to love those, who
besides the image common to all the rest of Adams brood, have yet one
particular and most excellent portion thereof, in that they are as it were Gods
lieutenants to govern his people, and of the same do bear the title of God.
I have said ye are Gods, and the children of the highest, says the prophet
David. Psalm 82.6
Again, God sits in the assembly of Gods, he judges in the midst of the
Gods.

2 This consideration binds us to love them, albeit they discharge not their
duties to their subjects. For their fault takes not away the Image or
privilege of God. The king, says Saint Augustine, bears the image of God,
and must therefore be honored and loved. If not in respect of his person, yet
for his calling and office: how much rather then should the people love their
magistrates, when they show themselves to be the servants of God, for our good,
and as their office requires, to draw us to live a quiet and peaceable life in
all godlynes and honesty, and so to make us happy? For were it not a
monstrous and unnatural matter, not to love those, by whose hands, care,
wisdom, power, and authority God vouchsafes to establish and preserve us in
a blessed estate both of body and soul?

3 This image and title of God, which they do bear, does also admonish us to
reverence and regard them both in heart and mind, in word and work. For
surely he that despises them, despises God in them. And that is one cause why
he forbyddeth backbiting of them, saying: Thou shall not speak evil of the
Judge, neither shall thou curse the prince of thy people. Exodus 22.28
And because many do presume to murmr and backbite them, as imagining that
they shall never know of it, Solomon warns us not to deceive our selves in
that point, saying: Curse not the king, no not in thy thought, for the fowls
of heaven shall carry the voice. Besides, Preach. 10.20
albeit the same be kept secret from man, yet God that hears it, will
revenge the wrong done to his majesty. Saint Peter and Saint Jude do declare,
2. Pet. 2.10. Jude. 8.
that even in their time there were some that contemned the superior powers
and dominions, proud persons, given over to their own sense, even such as did
not abhor to reprove and control authority. And some there be in these our
days that show themselves to have been their scholars, for they maintain
that a faithful man, the child of God, cannot exercise the office of a
magistrate, especially as concerning the use of the swoorde against
transgressors: Do not such men tread this holy ordinance of God under foot,
when they affirm that superior power beseems none but the wicked and
unbelievers.

4 Besides the love and reverence due unto Magistrates, we are also to yield
unto them subjection and obedience, as Saint Paul admonishes us, saying: Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13.1.
for there is no power but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God.
Whereupon he also infers, and that justly, that whosoever resists the
magistrate, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall bring
upon themselves judgment. The same Apostle writing to Titus, Titus 3.1.
says, Put them in remembrance, that they be subject to principalities and
powers, and that they obey their governors. And surely, since God has printed
in the person of the Magistrate, the characters of his image and majesty, we
have great reason to beware of offending him. And this we read of the people
of Israel in the behalf of Joshua. That the Lord did magnify him in the sight
of all Israel, and they feared him as they had done Moses, all the days of his
life. Joshua 4.14.
This fear of offending the magistrate is grounded upon two reasons: first,
upon the authority and power that God gives him to punish such as are
rebellious, as the Apostle says: If thou do evil, fear the magistrate,
for he bears not the swoorde for naught, Romans 13. 4.
but is the minister of God to take vengeance on him that does evil. Secondly,
because albeit he were not armed with this power, yet we ought to fear God
who commands us to be obedient to the Magistrate, and to be subject unto
him. And this does Saint Peter note, saying: Submit your selves unto all manner
ordinance of man, 1. Pet. 2.3 Romans 13. 5.
for the Lords sake. As also Paul says, Obey the magistrate for conscience
sake. As if he said, that albeit we could escape the punishment of the
magistrate, yet our conscience condemning us in the sight of God, should
restrain us from offending those whom he has appointed to be over us. It
went hard with Abraham's servants to be circumcised, especially in that they
were well stricken in years: yet did they obey him without reply or
gaynsaying. And not they only who were instructed in true religion* but also
the inhabitants of Sichem, poor idolaters, in like obedience to their king,
Genesis 17.23. Genesis 34.
suffered themselves also to be circumcised.

5 Which is more, as Saint Peter admonishes servants to be subject to their
masters, albeit froward and peevish: So are subjects bound to obey their
magistrate, albeit an infidel, a wicked man or an Idolater, as were they that
bare rule in the days of Saint Paul and S. Peter, to whom nevertheless they
commanded to yield obedience and subjection. For as Christian religion does
not subvert the order of policy: so the wickedness and impiety of the
magistrate does not deprive him of his right to command, neither does it exempt
the subjects from their duty to obey. And surely so long as in them remains
the image and ordinance of God: even so long continues the bond to yield
obedience to them, not as to man, but as to God. And in this case we are to
consider and diligently to note, that albeit every thing that happens, is by
the providence of God: Yet does the holy Scripture represent unto us this
divine providence and conduct, as it were most expressly and usually in the
vocation and establishment of Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, even heathen,
Idolaters, tyrants, and such as are given to all wickedness and iniquity.
What tyranny did Pharao exercise against the children of Israel? Exodus 9.16.
Yet God himself says that he had exalted him into that estate. What a
robber, a reauar and a tyrant was Nabuchadnezzer? Yet Daniel speaking unto him,
Romans 9.17.
says, Thou king art a king of kings: For the God of heaven has given thee a
kingdom, power, strength and glory. Dan. 2.37.
How tyrannously and unjustly did Saul govern, as in that he commanded to
slaie all the priests and enhabitants of Nob, 1. Sam. 21.
and so diversely persecuted David to the death? Yet had Samuel, by the express
commandment of God, anointed him king over Israel. 1 Samuel, 10.1.
As good Princes therefore are given by the Lord in his mercy, to do good to
their subjects: so does he give wicked Princes to correct some, and to punish
others: and thus the princes whether good or bad, (albeit of themselves not
knowing so much) do service unto God: Ierem. 35.9.
And in that sense does the Lord call that great tyrant Nabuchadnezzer his
servant: Ezech. 29.18.
He gives him Egypt in recompense for his service making his army to serve
against Tyrus: Jeremy. 26.7.
He commands all nations to be subject unto him and to obey him: yea which is
more: He commands the poor Jews that were in his captivity, Jeremy. 29.7.
to pray to God for the peace of his City, promising that in his peace they
shall have prosperity. And therefore notwithstandin^ we hate their tyranny,
yet ought we to love their parsons in respect of the image of God that they
do bear, Prosper in his sentences out of S. August.
and also for their vocation which proceeds of the will of the Lord. For
says Saint Augustine. It is one thing to hate that which they do: And an
other to love that which they are.

6 We are therefore to yield unto them subjection and obedience, without
murmuring or strife against them. When the people of Israel asked a King,
Samuel at Gods commandment warned them how they should be entreated, 1. Sam.
8.11.
saying: This shall be the manner, that is to say, the ordinary and customable
entreaty (for the word sometime signifies custom) of the king that shall
reign over you. He will take your sons and apoint them to his Chariots, and
to be his horsemen, and some shall run before his chariot. He will also make
them his captains over thousands, and captains over fifties, and to ear his
ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and the
things that serve for his chariots. He will also take your daughters and make
them apothecaries, and cooks, and Bakers. He will take your fields, your
vineyards, and your best Olyue trees, and give them to his servants. And he
will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give it to his
Eunuchs and to his servants. He will take your menseruantes, and your maid
servants, etc. Heereto he adds, that when they find themselves thus
tirannized, they will cry out to the Lord, because of their King whom they
have chosen, and the Lord will not hear them. Whereby he shows, first that
such as find themselves so oppressed, must have recourse to God by prayers.
Secondly, that albeit God does not deliver them, yet they must continue and
with patience bear their estate, and not rebel or raise mutiny: much less
therefore is it lawful for them to attempt against the life of the Prince,
albeit a tyrant: and hereof we have a notable example in David, who
notwithstanding he was anointed to reign after Saul, yet when Saul
tyrannously pursued him, would not nevertheless attempt any thing against his
person, but ever restrained others that would have slain him. Slay him not,
said he to Abisay, 1. Sam. 26.9.
for who can lay his hand on the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? then he
adds, As the Lord lives, either the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall
come to dye, or he shall descend into battle and perish. The Lord forbid that
I should lay my hand upon the Lords anointed.

7 Nevertheless, albeit God thus defends their right and authority, yet it
is not meant that we should forsake him, or dispense with our selves by obeying
man to disobey him: for since man has no power, as Jesus Christ says, but what
is given him from above: it is not meet that man should be obeyed, John 19.11.
when he commands any thing repugnant to the will of him, without whose
authority he has no power to command: 1. Pet. 4.13.
Also, in as much as it is for the love of God (as S. Peter says) that we must
yield to be subject and obey them: this love of God binds us to refuse to
obey them in any thing that they command contrary to the love that we owe unto
God, and this they ought themselves to acknowledge and confess, as the
Apostles showed to the governors of the Jews, Acts 4.19.
saying: Whether it be right in the sight of God, to obey you rather then God,
judge ye. We must therefore as they did add, obey God rather then man: and
this does S. Augustine confirm saying: Aug. upon the word according to Mat.
Scr. ^.
Every soul is subject to the superior powers, for there is no power but from
God, and the powers that are, are ordained by God, and therefore he that
resists the powers, resists God: but says he, what if the power
commands you that which God forbids? truly then must you not obey the
power, but in fearing the powers, consider the degrees of humain things, if the
tutor commands must thou not obey? but if the Proconsul commands the
contrary, thou do not contemn thy tutor, but thou obeyest a greater power:
neither ought the lesser to be displeased. Again, if the Proconsul commands
any thing, and the Emperor commands the contrary, thou must undoubtedly
obey the Emperor: but what if the Emperor commands a thing and God
commands the contrary? what will ye say the^? Pay tribute, will the Emperor
say obey me, and good reason: but not to serve Idols: Who forbids thee? God,
a greater power: bear with me therefore O Emperor, thou threatnest
imprisonment, and God thretneth hell. Heerupon must thy says rest, that thou
may quench the fiery darts of satan: Yea, but the Emperor pitcheth a snare
for thee, what snare? he whetteth his razor, that is but to shave thee, not to
cut of thy head. This does S. Aug. write: But not only they that upon
obedience to the Magistrates commandment do participate in idolatry, but also
they that abstain from the profession of true religion, because man does
prohibit it, are deceived, albeit they pretend absolution in the sight of God,
who commands. Dan. 3.
And therefore as the three Hebrew Princes are to be commended because they did
not obey King Nabuchadnezzer, who commanded them to bow to the golden image: so
is the constancy of Daniel highly to be praised, in that contrary to the
commandment of Darius, he prayed to God thrice a day, Dan. 6.
and here we are well to note, what he said to the king, that in disobeying him,
justice was found in him in the sight of God, and to the King he had done no
hurt.

8 Moreover, Subjects are bound to assist the necessities of their Magistrates,
both with bodies and goods. Concerning their bodies, the same does appear in
the watches that Burgesses do keep at the commandment of their superiors.
Whereupon it also follows, that in case of necessity they are at their
magistrates authority and commandment, bound to take arms. Neither is this
a bond of mercenarie soldiers, that without necessity do voluntarily bind
themselves: But it is a bond in nature, and consequently necessary. For as God
armeth the magistrate with the sword for the preservation of his subjects
against the violence of their enemies, and to enforce rebels to yield
obedience to their lawful decrees: So when alone, or with his sargeants he is
not able to perform this duty, he may and ought to command his subjects to
help him to execute his office: and they are bound at his commandment to take
arms and to employ themselves. Subjects do resemble a body guided by a head
which is the magistrate: As therefore by natural affection the hands and other
the members of the body, do stand bound to employ themselves for the safety
of the body, but especially of the head against all violence and injury: So
ought all subjects, to think upon this natural bond and affection, and in
duty under the conduct of their head to preserve the body of the communaltie,
but especially the person and authority of their Prince and Magistrate,
against the violence and endeavors of their enemies. In this consideration,
when Saul understood of the injury of Naas the Ammonite, who would not receive
the inhabitants of Iabes in Gilead, to mercy, but upon condition that he might
put out every man's right eye, he commanded the people to take arms: yea and
proclaimed that he would punish every one that would not obey. 1. Sam. 11.
Hereupon also did Debora commend all those that with a voluntary mind came to
help Barac. And contrariwise adds, Curse ye Meros, says the Angel of the
Lord: Yea cursed be the inhabitants thereof, Judges. 5.9
for they came not to help the Lord among the mighty. In this respect also
were all the enhabitants of Iabes Gilead put to the edge of the sword, because
none of them came to the field with the rest of Israel to fight against the
tribe of Beniamine, in punishment of the infamous adultery committed by the
enhabitants of Gibeah.

9 As for the relief by goods due unto the magistrate: Is it not reason that
he employing his time and labor in the public good, should receive some reward
or recompense? Must he not also find means to reward many officers that
attend upon the magistrate in their charge, Judges. 21.
and to pay such as are in wages for the preservation and defense of his town
or country? Is it not requisite that the subjects should defraye the building
and reparations of public places. In brief, that they should bear all other
expenses and charges necessary for the maintenance and preservation of the
estate? In this consideration as the magistrate is by God authorized to leauye
toules, taxes, tributes, and many other subsidies of the people, so are the
subjects bound to furnish and pay them. And this does S. Paul teach, saying to
this effect. Romans 13.6.
For this cause ye pay also tribute, for they are Gods ministers, applying
themselves for the good of the people. And then he adds, saying: Give to all
men therefore their duty, tribute to whom tribute belongs, custom to whom
custom appertains. The same does Jesus Christ likewise command, where being
asked whether it were lawful to pay tribute to Caesar, he answered, Give
unto Caesar that is due unto Caesar, Mat. 22.21.
and to God that is due unto God, and this commandment did he confirm by
his own example, in that he commanded Peter to pay tribute for him and
himself. True it is, that being the son of God, he might have exempted
himself, Mat. 17.27.
but he would show no evil or offensive example, as expressly he says to S.
Peter. The Children are free, nevertheless least we should offend them, go to
the Sea and cast in an angle, and take the first Fish that comes up, and
when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece of twenty pence, that
take, Exodus 30.
and give it unto them for me and for thee. Behold, albeit it were a matter
unworthy the children of Israel, to pay unto the Emperor in those days a
heathen and tirant, the tribute which before they paid to God for an homage
and acknowledgment of his redemption, and for a testimony that God was their
Lord, and they his subjects: yet in as much as they were subject to the
Emperor, Jesus Christ himself taking upon him the form of a servant, was
content to pay tribute as other men. Luke 2.
We also find that Joseph and Mary in discharge of their duty in this point,
departed from Nazareth, and came to Bethleem to be enrouled. True it is that
Kings and Princes ought nevertheless to be as moderate and stayed in these
matters as their estates may bear, and remember this saying, that taxes and
tributes are as the blood of the people, also in case they have no measure, but
tyrannously do oppress their subie^^s heerin, the States of the Country are
to put up their complaints, in defense of the right and liberty of those whom
God has delivered into their charge, and so much as in them lies, oppose
themselves, as also in all other tyrannous oppressions of the people. But as
for private persons, it is not lawful for them so much as to murmr or to
allege that the taxes or tributes are excessive, either that the Magistrates
do abuse them, but they must think that sometimes they complain wrongfully
and without cause, in that they know not either the greatness of the Magistrates
charges, neither wherein he imploreth that which is gathered of the people. Also
that albeit there were some exces or abuse, yet that it is not properly for the
people to take account thereof, but for God, who misliking with the oppression
of his people, and the corruption of the Magistrate, can and will take
vengeance of the same: and therefore let those likewise who under like pretense
do privilege themselves to defraude the Magistrate of his right, think and
consider what account they may give unto God, and to this purpose may we
refer that which S. Paul says of the subjection and obedience due to the
superior powers: namly, that we must yield i^, not because of wrath and
punishment only, but also for conscience sake: Romans 13. 5.
thereby declaring, that albeit the fraud be not reuea^ed to man and so
punished, yet that God does see and will punish it: also that our conscience
knowing it, accuses and condemns us for it in the sight of God.

10 Some there have been, neither are our days free from them, that have
believed and vpholden, that the faithful and children of God are called to
such liberty, that they ought not to be subject to superior powers, neither to
pay taxes, tributes, or other like charges. S. Augustine in his fourth
exposition of the propose to the Romans trop. 72.
But S. Augustine very fitlye answers such persons, saying that by this
sentence of S. Paul. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, we are
admonished that no man by his conversion to Christianity is so called to
liberty by the Lord, that therefore he should grow proud thereof, or think
him self in the course of this life freed from his obedience due to the
superior powers, to whom the Lord has delivered the government in temporal
affairs: for albeit we be called to this heavenly kingdom, wherein there
shall be no principalities or powers, yet so long as we traua^^e upon this way
which leads us to the possession thereof, wherein al powers shall be abolished,
we must be ordered according to the conduct of human affairs, and yield all
obedience, not so much to man as to God who has so commanded us. Mat. 21.21.
Likewise, where Christ says, Give unto Caesar that is Caesar's, and to God
that that belongs to God: he does sufficiently declare, that there is a good
harmony and co^currence between the spiritual kingdom of God, and the
po^^tiquegouernme^t of man, 1. Pet. 2 13. Romans 13.^.
and that the one subuerteth not the other, but each helps other to perform
the will of God. For as the obedience yielded to the Magistrate is of no value
in the sight of God, unless it proceed, as S. Peter says, of our love toward
God, or that as Saint Paul wills, 1. Tim. 2. 2.
it be conjoined with a good conscience: so in respect of man's infirmitye the
office of a Magistrate does greatly conduce to this, that the Church be
maintained in peace, justice and godliness, as the same Apostle does teach,
whereupon this rule is to be observed, that all faithful (for here we treat
only of their duties) ought to yield all duty and obedience to all
Magistrates, even to the unbelievers: (how much rather when they believe) in
every thing that is not repugnant to the will and pleasure of almighty God, 1.
Pet. 2.13.
and the salvation of the soul? Did not the Apostle Saint Peter speak to the
believing Jews, when he commanded them to be subject to all ordinances of man
even for Gods sake: whether to the King as the superior, or to the governors
as sent by him? Titus 3.1.
The holy Apostle S. Paul writes to Tytus to exhort the congregation to be
subject to principalities and powers, and in another place he speaks more
generally, saying? Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. Romans 13^ 1.
The Romish clergy exempteth themselves: but Saint Paul in saying Let every
soul, exempteth none from this subjection, no, were he even an Apostle. And
this does our Savior Jesus Christ himself also most plainly declare, Mat.
17.27.
where he commands the Apostle Saint Peter (as is aforesaid) to pay tribute
for them both: neither was that which he did any new matter, as the answer of
Saint Peter to the Customer did declare, namelye, that Christ did vsuallye pay
it. And therefore they that did rise in Germany in the year of our Lord God
1525. pretending to free themselves from taxes, tributs, and other subjection
due to their superiors, were greatly deceived and seduced, for were they in
wo^ser estate then were the believing bondmen, whom the Apostle Saint Paul
commanded to be subject to their masters, and to yield unto them al
obedience, serving them in fear and trembling, in simpl^^^tye of heart as unto
Christ? even albeit as the Apostle Saint Peter says, they were bitter unto
them? Ephesians. 6.5.
And where the Apostle (...) this duetye saying, Least the name of God and the
g^spell should be blasphemed: he does very euidentlye and pla^^^lye d^clare,
Col. 3.22.
t^^t they which teach this exemption from the subjection due v^^o the
Magistrate, do teach men to give occasion to bl^^pheme and dishonor the name
of God, and to speak evil of the Gospel, as if the pure word and sincere
doctrine of Jesus Christ did ^^buc^^e and overthrow all public order and
civil government with disobedience: 1. Pet. 2.18. 1, Tim. ^, 1.
and taught no other thing but the liberty of the flesh and vain lusts
thereof.

1. Tim. 2.1.
11 The fourth duty of subjects to the Magistrates, is the same which S. Paul
teaches, when he says: I exhort therefore that first of all, supplications,
prayers, intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men, for Kings,
and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life
in all godlynes and honesty. This end and purpose of their charge, does already
teach us how far we are bound to this duty, to pray unto God for them: For
since from them we cannot expect this sovereign felicity, namely, to live in
peace, in honesty and piety, unless they also be guided or strengthened by the
spirit of God in their charge: our desire and necessity to enjoy it, do
sufficiently admonish us fervently to pray unto God for them. And whereas
Kings were in those days idolaters, he adds this farther reason: that God
desiring the salvation of all men, that is to say, men of all callinges, and
that they should be brought to the knowledge of the truth, we might by our
prayers obtain that the idolatrous and perverse Magistrates might be converted
and saved, as well in respect of themselves, as for the happy conduct and
government of their subjects.

12 Now if we be bound to pray for idolatrous and perverse Magistrates, how
much rather for those whom God has already in mercy vouchsafed to illuminate
or adopt for his children, and to constitute to be protectors and nurses in his
Church? Pro. 11.14.
Both reason and experience do show what a benefit it is to have such. Judge.
2.19. and 8.33. 1. Sam. 7, 13,
Where the Governor is unwise, says Solomon, the people are scattered. And it
is with them as with a ship that wants a Pylot or guide. We read, that when
the judge or governor of Israel was dead, the people returned to their
wickedness. And it is noted in this historye, that all the time of Samuel the
hand of God was heavy against the Philistines, and it is truly a great favor
and grace of God, when he gives us good Magistrates: as Hyran King of Tire
said unto Solomon: 2. Chro. 2, 11. Job. 34.30. Esaias. 3.3.
Because God loved his people, he made thee to reign over them: and
contrariwise, he makes an hypocrite, says Job, to reign for the sins of the
people. And in the same sense does God threaten to send children to be Princes,
and effeminate persons to bear dominion. Since then it is so great a benefit
of God to have good, holy, and virtuous Magistrates, is it not our parts
fervently and continually to pray to God still to send us such, to preserve
them, to guide them by his holy spirit, and to bless their counsails and
labors to his glory, and to the good and salvation of his people?

13 It also has been the continual custom of all Christian Churches to make
public supplications for Kings, Princes, and Magistrates: and thereof we
have a formularye written by that good Father and Doctor Tertullian. And the
reformed Churches of our days do also reco^mend and ordinarely use the same
duty: for in truth there is no service that the Magistrates ought more to
desire and require of their subjects, then that they should pray for them. And
in this respect David a King after Gods own heart, and endewed with such
excellent graces, knowing nevertheless how highly he stood in necessity of
the prayers of his people, framed them that excellent prayer for their
prosperity, which we do read of in the twentieth Psalm. Eusebius reports
that the Emperor Constantius, Eusebius. in the life of Constable. lib. 1. and lib. 4.
Eusebius. in his Ec. hist. lib. 10 and cap. 8. and lib. 1. of the life of Constable.
the Father of great Constantine, protected his house by the prayers of such as
feared God. Also that his Son Constantine the great imitated his pietye: For
knowing as the said Eusebius writes, that the prayers of good men and those
that feared God did greatly conduce to his preservation, he instantly required
them to pray for him, and commanded the Bishops by name to employ themselves
in this duetye, and contrariwise he reproved the Emperor Licinius for
banishing the Christians out of his Court, alleging this reason, that he
deprived himself of the fruit of their prayers.

14 Seeing the fruit of prayer for the Magistrate is such, how unthankful are
those subjects that will not fervently employe themselves therein: especially
considering the good and prosperity that themselves are to reap thereof? we
may truly say, that the usual negligence of the people in employing
themselves in this duetye, does many times procure God to give us Kings and
Magistrates in his wrath, to chastise our ingratitude and slackenesse in matter
of such importance. That we may therefore amend our lives according to the
exhortation of Jesus Christ, let us diligently employe our selves in this so
profitable and necessary a duty, whereby we may always have good, holy, and
virtuous Magistrates, that under their conduct and government we may live
happily, and bear to them all love and reverence: yielding unto them
voluntarilye all subjection and obedience, and employing our bodies and goods
in their service and assistance, with assurance that in so doing, and in
praying unto God for them as is aforesaid, the Lord will bless them, and us
with them, and by them.

Of the duty of the Pastor and Minister of Gods word, to his congregation.
Chap. 8.
IT now remains that we speak of the duties of the Pastors and Ministers of
Gods word to their Congregations, and of their congregations unto them, As
concerning the Pastors duty, the same may be referred to the principal end of
their vocation, together with whatsoever is requisite thereunto. This end is
the salvation of the souls, redeemed with the blood of Jesus Christ, as the
Apostle writing to Timothy does note, saying: Take heed unto thy self and unto
learning, 1. Tim. 4.16.
continue therein, for in doing thus thou shall save both thy self and them
that hear thee. This is their principal end, even to save souls: and indeed
S. Paul applies to his Ministry this sentence of Esaias, spoken in the person
of the Lord: I have ordained thee to be a light to the Gentiles, Esaias. 49.62.
Acts 13.47. 1. Cor. 3.1. Acts 13.26, Romans 1.16. 2. Cor, 5.18.
that thou may be a salvation to all the ends of the earth. True it is that
God only is the Savior, also that he can save without the ministry of men,
but it pleases him so to use their service, that S. Paul therefore calls the
Ministers of the word coadiutors and workmen with God: therefore the doctrine
that they preach is termed the word of salvation, and the power of God to
save all that believe: likewise where the holy ministry is called the
ministry and word of reconciliation with God, the same is only to teach us,
that where we be by nature the children of wrath, and consequently in death:
the end of the holy ministry is to withdraw and save us, by reconciling us to
God, and making us acceptable to him in his well-beloved son.

2 Heerto must we also refer the saying of S. Paul, that Jesus Christ gave
some to be Apostles, Ephesians. 4.11.
some to be Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers, for the
gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the
edification of the body of Christ. For sin, by seperating us from God, did
engender this cursed dissipation, wherein every one being a pray unto Satan,
runs and casts himself headlong into death and everlasting destruction.
But the end of the ministry tends to assemble from this dissipation the
elect in Jesus Christ, to make them pertakers of that salvation that is in him.
And this does the other similitude of the building of the body of Christ
confirm: for as they which are separate from Christ our life, are in death: so
the means to revive and save them rests in this, that we be builte and
engraffed into the body of Christ, that we may be saved in him, and thereupon
does S. Luke say that by the preaching of the Apostles God did daily add to
his Church such as should be saved: In this sense also are Ministers called
Fathers, Acts 2.42.
engendring children to God, because he vouchsafes so to use their ministry,
1. Cor. 4.15.
that they who by nature are the children of the devil, do become the
children of God, and heirs of everlasting salvation. The principal end
therefore of the holy ministry is to withdraw men from death and destruction,
Cipri. in his Ser. of fall.
and to make them partakers of salvation and life everlasting. And therefore as
S. Ciprian says, The shepherd can receive no greater hurt, then in the hurt
of his flock: and this does S. Paul sufficiently show in his own person,
saying: I fear least when I come, 2. Cor. 12.20.
I shall not find you such as I would, and least my God abase me among you,
and I shall bewail many of them which have sinned already, and have not
repented of the uncleanness, and fornication, and wantonness which they have
committed.

3 And indeed as they which shall be saved by their ministry, shall be, as S.
Paul calls them, their crown, Phil. 4.1.
glory and joy in the day of the Lord, and they that shall win most to
righteousness shall shine as the Stars for ever: so contrariwise, Dan. 13. 3.
the blood of such as shall perish through their own negligence shall be
required at their hands, as the Lord does protest by the Prophet Ezechiell,
saying: Son of man, I have established thee to be a scoute over the house of
Israel, thou shall give ear to the word of my mouth, Ezech. 3.17.
and shall warn them from me. When I shall say to the wicked, thou shall
surely dye, and thou give not him warning, neither do admonish him to
depart from his wicked way, that he may live: the same wicked man shall dye in
his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hands. Heb. 13.17. Prosper
of Contemplative life. li. 1.
God also establishes Pastors over his flock, as the Apostle says, upon
condition to be accomptable unto him for them in the day of judgment. If he,
says a good old father, to whom the dispensation of the word is committed, be
afraid or ashamed to reprove offenders, albeit for himself he lead a holy
life, yet shall he perish through his silence. And so what shall it avail
him not to be punished for his own sin, when he shall be punished f r the
sins of others.

4 Now, to satisfy this end of the salvation of men by the ministry, the
first and principal duty consists in preaching the word of God, Romans 1.16.
which S. Paul therefore calls the power of God to salvation to all that
believe, and this is it that he teaches in the sentence before alleged,
saying: Take heed unto thy self and unto learning, for in doing thus thou
shall save both thy self and those that hear thee. The same may we also
note in the other sentence, 1. Tim. 4. 16.
where the Lord says, I have ordained thee a light to the Gentiles, that thou
may be a salvation to the ends of the earth. Acts 13.47.
And truly how are the ministers the light of men to save them, but by
preaching Christ: also if it be so that we be saved by faith, and that faith
comes by hearing the word of God: likewise that we cannot hear without a
preacher: It follows the duty of the minister is to preach, and so to save.
Romans 10. Marc. 16.15.
In this sense does Christ command his Apostles to go and preach throughout
the world: adding this, that he that believes and shall be baptized, shall be
saved: for this cause does S. Peter command them to feed the flock of Christ
committed unto the^. 1. Pet. 5.2.
And S. Paul so earnestly commends this duty to Timothy, and in his person to
al Ministers. 2. Tim. 4.2.
Preach the word, says he, be instant in season and out of season, improve,
rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine, yea, he adiureth him in
the name of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge both the quick
and the dead in his apparition and kingdom, 2. Tim. 4.1.
to employe himself in this duty: whereby he declares that they cannot
neglect this duty, but they must hainouslye offend God, and feel the
vengeance of the sovereign Shepherd of the sheep, when he shall appear in
judgment, as S. Paul also says: Woe be to me if I preach not. The same
Apostle says, If any man desires to be a Bishop, 1. Cor. 9.6. 1. Tim. 3.1.
he desires an excellent work. But all titles and professions be known by
the works proper unto them, as he is known to be a tailor that cutteth out
and sows garments, he a shoemaker that makes shoes, he a physician that
imploieth himself in curing of sicknesses, and so of others. And so likewise
is a Bishop, a Pastor, and a Minister known, in that he preaches and teaches
the word of God.

5 Howbeit, as the Physician who ordeineth a potio^, which in liew of health
procures death, is not a Physician, but a murderer: so is it with the Pastors
that do preach lies in stead of truth, and the inventions and traditions of
men in stead of Gods word: and therefore did Jesus Christ enjoin his Apostles
to teach men to observe all that he had commanded them, Mal. 28.20.
and the same does Jeremy note, Ier. 1.6,
saying: The Lord stretched forth his hand and touched my lips and said unto
me, Behold I have put my words in thy mouth. The same does the Lord also teach
to Ezechiel, saying: Son of man, I have made thee a watchman over the house
of Israel: Ezech. 3.17. and 33.7.
Thou shall hearken to the word of my mouth, and shall warn them from me.
This duty is very plainly and expresselye by the Lord commended unto al
Prophets and Ministers, in that speaking to Moses, he says: Deuteronomy. 18.18.
I will raise them up a Prophet like unto thee from among their brethren, and I
will put my words into his mouth, and he shall say unto them all that I
shall command him. 1. Cor. 11.23.
It is therefore their duty to propound nothing to the Church either in
doctrine, or for the service of God, but what they have received from the Lord,
according to the rule that S. Saul prescribes to himself and protests,
Iere. 3.15.
saying: What I have received from the Lord I do deliver to you, Mark 7.9.
and heereto must we refer that favorable promise that God made to his
people, saying: I will give you shepherds after mine own heart, that shall
feed you in knowledge and understanding: Ezech. 22.28
and indeed the only word of God is the knowledge and understanding of man,
and therefore Christ condemns the Scribes and Pharisees, who in steed of Gods
commandments taught the traditions of men: as also by Ezechiel he reproves
such false Doctors, saying: Her Prophets have daubed them with untempered
mortar, seeing vanytyes and divining lies unto them, saying, thus says the
Lord God, when the Lord had not spoken.

6 As they are therefore to reject the doctrine of men, and to teach the pure
word of God, so must they behave themselves therein in all reverence and
pietye, as if God spoke by them, without mixing any profane matters: 1. Pet.
4.11.
and applying every thing to his right end, that is to edify: and the same
does S. Peter note, saying: If any man speak, let him speak according to the
word of God.

7 Moreover the minister being such a one as S: Paul requires, namely, fit to
teach, must so preach, that cutting out directlye and skilfully the bread of
Gods word, 1. Tim. 3.2.
as the householder cutteth out bread to his children, the Church may therewith
be nourished and edified. In correspondence whereof, it is his duty not only to
teach, but also to comfort the afflicted hearts, to exhort such as are slack,
to strengthen such as are weak and fainte, and to help up those that are
fallen: yea, he must accommodate himself to the weakness of his auditorye, and
after the example of the Apostle, Gregory
minister milk to such as are not capable of stronger meat: also as says a
good father, beware of teaching high mysteries to young hearers, least preaching
without fruit, he minister occasion to think that he preaches rather for
ostentation of his knowledge, then to seek the edification of the Church: and
therefore it is also the ministers duty to insist especially upon arguments
and matters necessary and profitable to the Church, even as the myners, who
when they find a vain of gold or silver, will not willingly leave it, but
continue and follow it to an end.

8 Moreover, as all scripture is given by inspiration from God, and is
profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct to righteousness:
2. Tim. 3.16.
so ought the Pastors to be instructed and strengthened, that they may be able
not only to teach, but also as S. Paul says, Tit. 1.9,
to convince those that withstand the same doctrine, and to reduce such as are
gone astray, into the way of salvation. For as the office of the Physician
consists in 2. points: first, to prescribe things meet for the health, and to
prevent diseases: and secondly, to cure such as fall into any sickness: so it
is the office of the Pastor in such sort to accomodate his doctrine, that it
may serve to prevent the snares and stumbling blocks of sin, also to
reprove, redress, and comfort such as are fallen: and as the curing of the
plague requires more forcible and violent medicines, then the preventing
thereof: also as it is necessary to have more help to pull a man out of the
water when he is fallen in, then to hold him from falling in: even so must the
Pastor use more sharp and vehement admonitions in the raising up of such as
are fallen into sin, then in preventing the fall: neither is he to employ
himself in his function slightly, and as it were for a fashion, but as S. Paul
protests of himself, where he says: Remember that in three years space,
Acts 20.31.
night and day, I never ceased to warn every one with tears: so must he be
careful, diligent, and constant to teach and admoinsh.

9 And albeit many times the Pastor do perceive no great fruit of his labors,
yet must he not faint. Physicians, albeit when they have tried many receipts
for recovery of a sick person, they perceive no amendment, yet do they not
desist from visiting him, and continuing the employme^t of their art, so long
as there is any hope of life: the like custom are the Pastors to use for the
soul, as the Physician does for the body, and still to persevere in due
admonitions, exhortations, and consolations, in hope that finallye God will
bless their constancy in this duty. When a man takes upon him to fell a
great Oak, with 40. or 30. of the first blows, it may seem that he loses
his labor, because the tree will not stir, but stand stiffely without
stooping: yet in continuance it comes at length down, and so shows the
effect of the first blows conjoined with the last. Jesus Christ, as
Chrysostom very aplty notes, Chrisost. upon John.
chose Fishermen to be his Apostles, for as Fishermen do often cast their
nets into the Sea and take nothing, yet are not discouraged, but cast so long
until they light upon some fish: so are the fishers of men patientlye and
constantlye to proceed in their duties, in hope that it will be with the^ as it
was with S. Peter, who, when he had taken nothing all the night, John, 21.
yet notwithstanding so much labor lost, did again cast forth his nets at the
commandment of Jesus Christ, and took a great multitude of fishes.

10 And albeit the incredulity and obstinacy of man should make their
constancye and labor utterly unprofitable in their behalfs, yet should they
not lose their labors with God, for first as S. Paul protests of himself,
they are free from the blood of those that perish: as God also said to
Ezechiel. Acts 20.26. Ezech. 33.9.
When thou shall admonish the unbeliever to turn from his ways, if he return
not from his ways, he shall dye in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy
soul. Besides, our zeal and obedience in this respect is a sacrifice of
sweet savor before God, as S, Paul also says, that they which preach the
Gospel are a sweet savor in Christ, even in those that perish: 2. Cor. 2.15.
because thereby they are made the more in excusable in the judgment of God.
Esaias 49.4.
And therefore albeit we think that we have labored for nothing, and wasted
our strength in vain and for nothing, as Esaias says, yet let us be content
with this, that as he adds, our judgment is with the Lord, and our work in
the sight of God. The husbandmen when they are disapointed of their expected
harvest, have not any to recompense their loss but all is gone, both seed
and labor: but notwithstanding the labor of the Minister does not profit
with men, in respect of their incredulity, yet has he his reward in heaven.
And indeed as the false Prophet, that having endeavored to seduce and divert
the faithful from the truth, but through their constancye cannot compass his
purpose, is notwithstanding worthy to be punished: so the true Pastors when
they have constantly employed themselves to reduce those that be straied, into
the way of salvation, albeit in respect of this constancy they cannot profit,
yet are they worthy their hire and recompense in the sight of God. As
therefore the springs do not cease from giving forth their waters, or the
rivers their streams, albeit no man come to take up any, or to sail upon
them: so must not the Minister cease from preaching, admonishing and reproving,
albeit in manner no man make profit of his doctrine and admonitions.

11 Moreover, albeit many times it fall out that the Pastors by preaching,
admonishing, reproving, and threatening with Gods judgments, do incur the
displeasure of some, yet must they not therefore faint, but remember what God
commands to Esaias, saying: Cry out with open throat, spare not, lift up thy
voice as a trumpet, signifye to my people their offenses, Esaias 58.1.
and to the house of Jacob their sins. As also they are to this purpose to
mark what the Lord said to the Prophet Jeremy: Gird up thy loins and arise,
that thou may tell them all the things that I command thee, fear them
not, least peradventure I tread thee down in their sight. Iere. 1.17.
It is very dangerous says Hierome, to desist from preaching the word of God
for any of these three things, for fear, sloth, or slatterye: yet do we not
say that they must cry out like mad men, and seek glory in bold
reprehensions. When the Apostles said unto Jesus Christ, Luke 9.54.
Lord will thou that we command that fire come down from heaven and consume
these Samaritans, that deny thee l^dging as Elias did, he answered, 2. King.
10. 12
ye wot not of what spirit ye are: even so there are some that think to
imitate the Prophets, in bitter and sharp reprehensions, but they are not led
by the like spirit: For they do it either to purchase a reputation of zeal,
and to be thought such as will spare none, 2. Tim. 1.7.
or for some other perverse passion. God says S. Paul, has not given to us
the spirit of fear, but of power, of love, and of a sound mind: thereby
showing, that Pastors truly must not fear the appearance of persons to
dissemble their sins and offenses, but must be strengthened by the spirit of
Christ, to discover and open their wounds that they may be healed: But to this
power and boldness let them join on the one side, discretion and soundnes of
mind, whereby to be able to yield a reason of their power and boldenes: and on
the other side such love and charity, that their reprehensions and threatenings
may proceed from a heart not provoked, bitter, or flowing with revenge: but as
having compassion on such as do amiss, and seeking by love to reclaim and
reduce them into the way of salvation. Being thus disposed, let them sound
forth Gods judgments, Esaias. 50.7.
with all holy boldness, saying with Esaye, The Lord God is my helper, and
therefore I shall not be confounded: for I have hardened my countenance as a
stone, and I know that I shall not be confounded: yea, let them remember the
protestation of Micheas, saying: Mich. 3.8.
I am full of power by the spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of
strength to declare unto Jacob his transgressions, and to Israel his sin.

12 This holy constancy must remain in the servants of God, to the end that
in the defense of the truth against such as would oppress it, they may
overcome all slanders and reproaches wherewith the Devil seeks to quail
their hearts or otherwise to hinder the truth of their faith and zeal. Thus
when the Apostles had told Jesus Christ that the Scribes and Pharisees were
offended, and murmured because he said: Mat. 15.12.
It is not that which enters at the mouth that defiles the man, he proceeded
and showed the^, that they must not for that desist from teaching and defending
the truth and pureness of doctrine. So S. Paul declares, that when Peter came
to Antioch, Gal. 2.11.
he resisted him to his face, for he deserved to be reproved in that by his
example he enduced the Gentiles to play the Jews. And by his writings we
may perceive how earnestly he opposed himself against those false Apostles
that sought to mix the necessity of the ceremonies of the law with the
doctrine of the Gospel. Theodo. Eccl. hist l. 2. c. 16 and 17.
Wonderful also was the constancy of Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, in
defending the Godhead of Christ against the Arrians, whose furious persecution
and most impudent slanders he overcame, and was therefore justly termed, The
bulwark of the truth. Him did Liberius Bishop of Rome most virtuously second
in this constancy: for being most sharply urged both by the reproaches and
threatenings both of the Emperor Constantius, of Eusebius the Eunuch, and of
Epicterus the Bishop, to subscribe to the condemnation of Athanasius: after
many courageous answers to the instances of the Emperor, he chose rather to
be banished, than not to defend the just cause of Athanasius. And this his
constancy (thus much by the way) did the Roman women follow, who when they
had procured the Emperor to call him home again, understanding that he
should be joined in the ministry with Felix, who had bin advanced to his
place, did with one consent cry out, One God, one Christ, one Bishop: and
thereupon Felix withdrew himself from Rome.

13 Basil the great, whom Theodoret terms, Theod. Eccle. hist. l. 4. c. 19
The light of the world, showed the like virtue. For when the Emperor Valens,
an Arrian, had expelled the faithful pastors out of all the Churches, and was
come to Cesarea in Cappadocia, where Basil was Bishop, the governor of the
town sent for him, and having honorably received him, he spoke lovingly
unto him, and exhorted him to frame himself to the time, and not to bring so
many Churches into danger for some small difference in doctrine, promising him
in the Emperors name, all friendship, and great benefits. But he stoutly
answered, that such persuasions were fit for young men that took pleasure in such
things, but that such as are brought up in holy learning, cannot endure that
one title of the truth should be endangered: yea, that they use not to refuse
any kind of death in defense of the truth. And hereupon did Denis Bis^oppe of
Alexandria justly condemn both the deed of Nouatus, who joined with those
that denied that there was any place for repentance or salvation for sinners,
and his excuse, when he alleged that he was enforced and compelled thereto.
And to this purpose is the Epistle that he wrote unto him very notable. Denis
wishes health to his brother Nouatus, If thou were, as thou say, Eusc. Ecc.
hist. l. 6. c. 45
forced against thy will, thou may now show it, in returning with thy will.
It had been better to have endured all things, rather than to have brought a
schism into the church. Martyrdom for preserving the Church from division, is
no less glorious than the same that is suffered for not communicating in
Idolatry: yea, in my opinion, it is worthy greater glory, because it is a
greater matter to suffer for the preservation of the universal Church, than
for the saving of one soul. Now therefore, if thou perswadest the brethren,
and even compellest them to reunite themselves with the Church, that notable
action will be accounted greater than the former fault: yea, as the fault shall
not be imputed, so the duty and power to reduce them to concord shall be
commended. Yet if it shall happen that they rest so obstinate, that thou can
not induce or persuade them, at the least have a care to save thy own soul,
by retiring from them.

14 It is another case, when the question concerns things indifferent in
Gods Church. For therein we must much relent, and rather accomodate our selves
than trouble the Churches, or bring in any schism. Eusebius. Eccle. hist. l. 5.
c. 26.
And therefore when Victor Bishop of Rome had excommunicated all the Churches
in Asia, because they celebrated the feast of Easter upon the fourteenth day
of the Moon, contrary to the custom used in the Latin churches, where it
was holden, as it yet is, upon the day of the resurrection. Irenaeus Bishop of
Lions (albeit himself also allowed the celebration upon the day of the
resurrection) did justly reprove him, and wrote to him a notable Epistle,
wherein he alleged the example of his predecessor Anicetus, and of Polycarpus,
S. John's disciple, who when he came to Rome, and could not by Anicetus be
induced to alter the custom received from Saint John in the Churches of Asia:
neither could induce Anicetus to receive his custom, they notwithstanding
remained united, and sealed their agreement with the holy communion.

15 If the pastor for the faithful discharge of his duty in defense of the
truth be wronged or slaundered, even of some of his own flock, the rather
must he bear it, and seek to cure and reduce them to amendment of life. And
in deed, albeit a sick body, troubled in mind, should spit in the physicians
face, yet would he not be so displeased, as to forsake and give him over for
it: Likewise albeit the nipples of a woman's breast should be so sore, that she
could not suffer her child without great pain to take them, yet would she
endure all to suckle her child: even so must pastors deal with their flocks,
and have patience, as S. Paul requires them. For he exhorts Timothy to
preach the word, to reprove, 2. Tim. 2.24 2. Tim. 4.2 2. Cor. 6.4
and to chide with all patience. And in another place he says, In all things
let us approve our selves as the ministers of Christ, in much patience.

16 Again, when the Physician has prescribed some potion or other receipt for
the cure of the sick man, returning the next day, he enquireth of the
operation thereof, and feels his pulses, that he may learn his disposition,
and thereafter order himself: so it is not enough that the pastor preach,
reprove, exhort, and comfort the Church, but he must also seek to understand
how every member thereof is disposed, and what his preaching has wrought in
them. In this sense are they termed Bishops, which is as much to say, as
overseers or watchmen, to have their eyes upon those whom the Lord has
committed to their charge. And this is it that God notes, saying to Ezechiel,
I have made thee a watchma^ over the house of Israel. Ezech. 3.14 Heb. 13.17
Acts 20.
Hereby are they warned to watch over the flock which the Lord has committed
unto them: as the Apostle says, that they watch over the souls, as men that
are to give account unto God. As also Saint Paul says, Look to your selves,
and to the whole flock that the Lord committed to you.

17 In this consideration, they ought after the example of Jesus Christ, to
know their sheep, Ioh. 10.14 and 27
and chiefly to mark whether they hear their voice in diligent frequenting of
their sermons, and communicating in the holy supper of the Lord. For as at a
feast, when one that sits at the table eate^h nothing, we use to demand
whether he be well or no: so if any of those that are committed to the pastors
charge, do not eat of the spiritual food unto him offered, it is to be
feared least he be crased, or not well at his ease, and therefore without
delaie, the pastor is to hearken out the cause, and diligently to see to his
cure, and to procure him an appetite. Secondly, as Jesus Christ requires that
his sheep should not only hear his voice, but also follow him: so is it the
pastors duty to learn, whether his auditors do follow the doctrine
preached unto them: and to that end he is to visit his sheep, Ioh 10.27
to see whether they be instructed in the knowledge of the principal points
of doctrine required to salvation, whether they persevere in the truth, whether
they profit in pureness of life and holy conversation: yea, and to that
effect he is to take example in the care and diligence of some parents
toward their children that go to school, whom they cause to say their
lessons, or look upon their writing, and by such examination try and see
whether they profit or no: But finding them to be neglygent and faulty, they
reprove, admonish, and exhort them to their duty. For so must the good and
faithful pastors deal with their sheep: following the example of Saint Paul,
who visited the churches, and thereby enquired of their estate. As also he
wrote to the Thessalonians, saying: Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily
and justly, and unblameably we behaved our selves among you that believe. As
you know how that we exhorted you, Acts 15 36 1, These, 2, 10
and comforted, and besought every one of you, as a father his children, that
ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you to his kingdom and glory.
And this does he also protest to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, saying:
I have kept from you nothing that was profitable, Acts 20, 20
but have taught you openly and throughout your houses, witnessing the
repentance toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. Heereto also
should we be moved by the threatenings of the Lord against the pastors of
Israel, where he says* Iere, 23.2
Because ye have not visited my sheep, behold I will visit upon you the
maliciousnes of your actions. And as a good shepherd seeks his lost sheep, a
surgeon binds up the wounds, a physician tries all medicines for the cure of
the sick, and a father seeks all means to reclaim his unthrifty son into
the right way: even so are the ministers of the word bound to al these and the
like duties toward the members of their Church And in case they be negligent
herein, they shall surely feel the just reproof and vengeance of God, as we
read of the pastors of Israel, to whom by the Prophet Ezechiel he obiecteth,
saying: The weak have ye not strengthened, the sick have ye not healed,
neither have ye bound up the broken, nor brought again that which was driven
away, neither have ye sought that which was lost. Ezech, 34, 4


18 Again, as it is the pastors duty not only to preach the word, but also
to administer the Sacraments: so are they carefully and faithfully to bear
themselves in the use and administration of the same, to the glory of God, and
the edification of the Church. First, as concerning the outward form of
administration as well of Baptism as of the holy Supper of the Lord, they are
to follow the ordinance of Jesus Christ himself: that always they may with a
good conscience protest with Saint Paul, where he speaks of the holy
supper, and say, that they have delivered to the Church the same that they
received from God. And as for those whom they should admit to the Sacrament:
concerning Baptism, they ought to baptize the children of the Christians, 1,
Cor. 11, 23
as in old time the children of the Jews were circumcised by the express
commandment of God. But if any who being grown in years, have not been
baptized, but crave Baptism: him ought they first to catechize and instruct:
and herein in old time they were greatly exercised, when the Church was to be
gathered from among the Gentiles: as we read of Origin, that he used
extreme diligence in catechizing: so that considering the great number that
came to him to be instructed, whereby he had scarce leisure to breath, (for
from morning till evening, one after another, Eus lib. 1. c. 15
they came to be catechized) that he might the better perform this duty
with some ease, he chose Heraclas to catechize the nouices, while himself
instructed such as were somewhat entered into the knowledge of the doctrine.

19 Saint Augustine has written a whole Tract of the manner how to catechize
the first beginners in Christian religion: Augustine of Catechizing the
ignorant c. 7.19. and. 26. Idem. ca. 8. and 9. Idem cap. 1 and. 15.
And the same should all ministers of the word diligently read, to the end to
learn what they are chiefly to teach in catechizing. Also how to teach each
one according to his calling, that is, the learned after one manner, and the
ignorant and simple after another. The same which he writes of the duty of
Catechizing, which was in use in his days, might at this day make us to blush
for shame, considering the small instruction now practiced among Christians,
even by those of the reformed Churches. And this I speak not in respect of the
administration of Baptism (for it is given to babes) but because that
afterward there is such neglect of the instruction in the heavenly doctrine,
whereby they might make profit of their baptism, and be prepared to the
participation in the holy supper of the Lord. And in deed, as in old time
they instructed the new conuerts to Christianity, so long that they were able
to make confession of their faith before the Bishop and the people, that they
might be baptized: so they that were baptized in their infancy, when they
came to the age of discretion, were by their parents presented to the Bishop
to be examined, according to the form of the Catechism then in use, and to
make like confession of their Christianity, as did the Heathen conuerts at
their baptism. And when these children had thus made profession of their
faith, the Bishop laid his hands upon them, and prayed to God to give them
his holy spirit, and so dismissed them.

20 It were to be wished, that the like order were perfectly re-established,
and better observed in the reformed Churches, that thereby youth might be
instructed, and consequently better prepared to receive the holy communion. As
also for those, who having professed another doctrine and religion, do desire
to join with the reformed Church, and to be admitted to the communion: It is
meet the minister should have some knowledge of their instruction and manners,
to the end he might receive such as are capable, catechize those that need
instruction, and admonish others who by their offensive conversation do show
themselves unworthy to be admitted to the holy supper of the Lord. But as for
such as are already admitted as members of the Church, and communicants in the
holy supper, they are to be exhorted according to the doctrine of S. 1, Cor.
11, 28
Paul, to prove themselves, and so to be still received, unless by some
scandalous behauior, showing themselves rebellious against admonition, and
giving small likelihood of amendment, they manifestly do declare, that they
do unworthily eat and drink of the Lo^des cup to their own condemnation.

21 To allege that by offering themselves to the Lords table, they testify
that they will allow the doctrine and live like Christians: as the only
example of Judas cries out to the contrary, so will experience declare that
there may be abuse. Luke 22.21 1. Cor. 11.29 Heb. 13
And therefore seeing that they which communicate unworthily, do eat and drink
their judgment, the ministers that are to render account to God for the souls
to them committed, must not, so near as they may, admit any to communicate
unworthily to his damnation: for otherwise themselves also should be guilty
of their blood before God, Chrisost. upon Mat. hom. 3.
and of the profaning of the holy supper of the Lord. And therefore was S. John
Chrisostom bitterly offended with such priests and pastors, as for fear of the
mighty and rich, durst not put back any that came. Their blood (says he)
shall be required at your hands, if you fear mortal man, he will despise you:
if you fear God, man will honor you. Let us not be therefore terrefied with
scepters, diadems, or purple, for here have we a greater power. For my part, I
will rather offer my body to the death, and suffer my blood to be shed, than I
will be partaker in such pollution. Saint Ambrose showed himself very
constant and resolute in this duty, Zozom. Eccle. hist. l. 7. c. 24 Zozom.
Eccle. hist. l. 6. c. 34
when he put the Emperor Theodosius from the communion: yea, even thrust him
out of the Church, because of the innocent blood that at his commandment was
shed at Thessalonica. As also we read of the Emperor Philip, the successor of
Gordian, who being a christian, and purposing to join with others, at the
last watch of Easter, was by the Bishop commanded to join with the penitents,
because of many evils which he had committed, whereto he readily obeyed,
confirming his devotion by action, as Eusebius says.

22 As therefore the modesty and piety which these men (albeit Emperors) did
show, in taking this censure and repulse in good part, should be an example to
all princes and magistrates, not to infringe under color of their greatness,
the orders of the Church: but rather to submit themselves for the defense of
the same: so is it the duty of the pastors to be discreet and moderate, and
not rashly, or without a sure ground to any use such liberty and authority.
And as in the mean time they must not for fear or faint heart omit any thing
that God requires at the hands of a faithful pastor in the fulfilling of
his charge: so must they still remember the saying of Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 10.8
and 13, 10
confyrmed by his own example: That the power which they have received from
the Lord, must tend and serve to edification, not to destruction.

23 In correspondence hereof Saint Augustine gives this counsel, that if the
pastors cannot purge and amend all faults among their flock, as themselves
could desire: Augu. against Parm. l. 2. c. 1. and l. 3. c. 1. and. 2
yet must not they therefore give over their calling, or trouble the Church with
desperate rigor. For whosoever, as he adds, does correct so much as he may
by reproouing, or that which he cannot correct, he excludes without breaking
the unity, or that which cannot be excluded without dissension, he
reprooueth, yet bears with all: The same is exempt from the curse, and is not
guilty of the sin. And the reason he delivers in another place, saying:
That the order and course to maintain good government in the Church, must
always have regard to the unity of the spirit by the bond of peace. Thus,
says he, does the Apostle command us to do, and doing otherwise, our
remedy by correction is not only superfluous, but also pernicious, and
consequently, loses the nature of a remedy. And going on, he says He that
shall carefully consider these things, will nevertheless use severity: yet
so as to preserve union, and not to infringe the bond of peace or concord, by
using intemperaunce in his correction. Well does he confess, that those
Pastors which are neglygent to admonish, reprove, and correct the badde, Ephe.
4.3.
are guilty in the sight of God. And wythall he adds, that he which is a
publyke officer, and may excommunicate the wicked, but does it not, sins to
his own condemnation: As also he wills, that all be done with discretion.
And lastly he concludes with Saint Cyprian, whom he alleges, saying: let
man therefore correct what he may with mercy: That which he cannot, let him
patiently bear, and mourn for it in love. He also gives this counsel, that
if a whole nation be infected with one sin, the severity must be moderated
with mercy: for, says he, to make a separation, is but badde and pernicious
counsel, and commonly has evil success. Yea, it rather troubles the good
that are weak, than amendeth the bad that are obstinate in their sin.

24 The pastor is also in duty to take care for the afflicted sheep, whether
in visiting, to comfort and strengthen their patience and faith: or in
providing that they may be relieved and succored in their want and necessity.
First, as concerning the visitation of the sick, If every faithful man be
therein to imploie himself, as Jesus Christ teaches, saying: I was sick and
ye visited me, how much rather ought they to exercise themselves therein, to
whom the sovereign pastor Jesus Christ has commended the health of souls?
For as men ordinarily at such times, feeling the anguish of their sickness, and
having some apprehension of death, are most troubled with impatience, mistrust,
and other temptations and dangerous assaults, wherein the devil practices
his uttermost endeavors: so have they at that time especial need of the
presence of their pastors. And therefore as the midwife hastes to a woman in
travel, to help her forth with her child, and the more that her pains
increase, the more she helps and imployeth her self to procure the happy
delivery of her fruit: even so ought the pastors to hasten to the sick of
their fold, to comfort and strengthen them. In brief, to help them to deliver
up their souls to God in the faith of Jesus Christ. And in deed, if they that
are sick in body, have need of the physician for their bodies, much more do
they stand in necessity of their pastors for the health of their souls. And
therefore such as are negligent in this duty, do purchase to themselves the
curse that almighty God has pronounced against the wicked shepherds of his
people, saying: Woe unto the pastors of Israel that feed themselves, but feed
not their flock, the weak ye have not strengthened, Ezech. 34. 2
the sick ye have not healed, neither have ye bound up the broken. Esaias
hearing that Ezechias king of Judah was sick, 2. King. 20 Ruffin Eccle. hist l.
1. c. 4.
did visit him: and it seems that Paphnutius employed himself herein, for
Ruffin writes of him, that by praying to God for them, he healed many that
were sick.

25 As it is the duty of pastors to visit the sick, so must they be careful
to help the want and necessity of the poor. And this Saint Paul says,
Gal. 1.10 2. Cor. 8. and 9
was by the Apostles especially commended to him, namely, to have care of the
poor: As also he protests that he was diligent herein, and that does the
Epistle that he wrote to the Corinthians manifestly confirm. It is the glory
of the Bishop, says Saint Hierome, to provide for the necessity of the poor.
And writing to Nepotian, when he has reproved the superfluity used in his
time in adorning their Churches, Hierom in his Epistles.
he commends Exuperius, Bishop of Toulouse who then lived, in that he
administered the Sacrament of the body of Jesus Christ in a small wicker
basket, and the Sacrament of his blood in a glass: but withal, taking order
that no poor man should starve. Like zeal and charity did Cyril, Bishop of
Jerusalem also practice: For when in a time of famine he was not able
otherwise to relieve the necessity of the poor, he sold all the ornaments and
vessels of the Church to distribute in alms. Saint Ambrose seeing himself
blamed by the Arrians for breaking the sacred vessels, The Tripartite hist. l.
5 Ambr. in his book of duties. l. 2. c, 28
to pay the ransom of prisoners taken by the Infidels, makes his excuse, or
rather by an exhortation worth the memory, approves his action, saying: He
that sent the Apostles without gold, assembled also the Churches without
gold. The Church has gold, not to hoord up, but to distribute and help in
time of need. To what end should we keep that which is to no use? Know we
not how much silver and gold the Assyrians took out of the temple of the
Lord? Is it not more meet that the pastor should make money of it to help the
poor, than that a Church-robber or thief should carry it away? Will not
God say? Why have thou suffered so many poor to starve, when thou had
gold wherewith to buy them food: Why have thou suffered so many poor people
to be lead into captivity, and have not redeemed them? Why have thou killed
some: It had been better to have preserved the vessels of living creatures,
then of dead metals. What answer may we make to all this? For, if we say, I
feared the Church should have wanted ornaments: God will answer, The Sacraments
crave no gold: and as they are not bought with gold, so do they not agree
with gold. The redemption of prisoners is the ornament of the Sacraments.

26 Socrates writes of Atticus the Bishop, that he was so affectionate and
careful to the poor, Socrat. Eccle. hist, l, 7, c, 25
that he provided not only for the poor of his own parishes, but also sent
money to the Towns round about, to relieve the want of their poor. This
Bishop writing to Calliopius, and sending to him three hundred pieces of
gold to distribute to the poor, exhorted him to distribute it to those that
were ashamed to beg, but not unto such as for fylling their paunches, gave
themselves wholly to beggerie. Whereto he also adds, that in the distribution
of this money, he should not tie himself to those only that professed
Christianity: but that he should likewise have a care to feed the hungry,
and not to neglect such as hitherto had not consented to Christian religion.
And as it seems, he herein taught us to practice the commandment of Saint
Paul, namely, to do good unto all, but especially to the householde of faith.
Gal. 6.10 Tripart. hist. l. 11. c. 16 Socrates Eccl. hist. l. 7. c. 21
Yet did Acace, Bishop of Amyde go farther, for he seeing a number of
Persian prisoners among the Romans in great necessity, called together his
Clergy, and when he had made unto them an excellent exhortation, wherein he
declared, that God needed neither dishes nor cups, because he neither eats
nor drinks, he made money of all, wherewyth he paid their raunsomes and
furnished them of all their necessities for their return to their king: who so
wondered at such a benefit, that he entreated and obtained of the Emperor
Theodosius, that he might be sent to see him. And in deed, this was a
testimony of great charity, thus to relieve even the enemies. Cyprian Epist.
36. of the new edition.
Cyprian also declared a marvelous zeal, care and charity in this point, as
we may perceive in many of his Epistles. But among the rest, writing to the
Clergy of his Diocese, he says, Be very careful for the widows, the
sick, and the poor: yea, if there be any stranger among you, relieve him
with my portion, which I have left with Rogatian our companion in Priesthood.
Epist. 5
Again, as concerning the relief as well of those, who having freely
confessed the truth, are in prison, as also of such who being afflicted with
need and poverty, do nevertheless persevere in the truth: I beseech you let
them not want any thing. Epist. 6
Again, Be even as careful as ye may of the poor, who abiding steadfast
and constant in the faith, have not forsaken the flock of Christ: that by
your dilygence they may be provided of all their necessities, least the same
which the tempest of persecution could not work in them, be brought to pass
by the necessity that may enforce them. And as he says in another place,
Least there should be any want as concerning care for those that want
nothing belonging to glory, in that they have constantly confessed Jesus
Christ. Epist. 57
Thus we see therefore how careful pastors ought to be of the widows, the
sick, the needy, and such as are prisoners for the faith.

27 But because no man is able to discharge all duties required in pastors:
Moreover, that their labor, lyberalitie, and favor is in vain without Gods
blessing, they are specially to imploye themselves in fervent and continual
prayer, wherein they are chiefly to crave his holy spirit, together with all
the gifts and graces thereof requisite for the due discharge of their
ministry, whether for the preaching of the word, or for any other part of
their office and duty. And in deed, if no man can call Jesus Christ Lord,
but by the holy Ghost, who, I pray you, is able to open his lips to preach
forth the mysteries of the heavenly doctrine, without the assistance of the
same holy Ghost? Who can be in constancy, wisdom, zeal, and charity
sufficient to guide the house of God, and to maintain orders in the same, but
he in whom the Lord works most mightily? At the very same instant, says
Augustine, that the pastor goes to preach, before he open his lips to give
his tongue liberty to speak, let him lift up his thirsty soul unto God,
Aug. of Christian doctrine l. 4. c. 15
and so water the people with the same which himself has drunk, and pour
forth upon his flock that that he is full of: for albeit a man may say
much of all things appertaining to faith and charity, and after diverse
manners: yet what man is he that knows what is fit and necessary for the
time present, either for us to speak, or for others to hear from us, but
only he who sees and knows the hearts of all? Or who is it that makes us
to speak that which we should, and in manner as we ought, but only he in
whose hands both our words and our selves do remain? And therefore as it is
true, that he that would both know and teach, ought carefully to learn what
he is to teach, and to study how to utter it well, as beseems a preacher:
so nevertheless, he must think even at the very instant when he is to
preach, that it best beseems a minister to remember the same which our
Savior Jesus Christ has spoken, namely, that we should not take care how
or what to speak, for it shall be given us even when we are to speak: Also,
that it is not we, but the spirit of the Father that speaks in us. If
therefore the holy spirit speaks in those that suffer tribulation and
persecution, and are delivered for Jesus Christ his sake: why not also in those
that do teach them that learn Jesus Christ. And in another place the same
Augustine also says: That he that is to preach, Aug. of Christian doctrine
l. 4. c. 30 Hester 14.13.
ought to pray unto God to put good words into his mouth: For if Queen
Hester, when she was to speak to king Assuerus for the bodily health of her
Nation, prayed unto God to give her convenient words: how much rather ought
the Preacher to pray unto God to give him grace to speak well, when he is to
preach the word and doctrine of the everlasting salvation of the people?

28 Saint Paul an Apostle and chosen vessel, endued with excellent gifts, did
very well know that himself stood in need of Gods assistance, whereby
virtuously and faithfully to imploye himself in his calling: and therefore
rested not upon his own prayers only, but also heartely did commend himself
to the prayers of the faithful. For writing to the Ephesians he says, Pray
for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly
to publish the secrets of the Gospel, Ephe. 6.19
whereof I am the Ambassador in bonds, that therein I may speak bold^ye as
I ought to speak. Howbeit this also is not yet sufficient, unless wythall he
pray unto God to bless those gifts and graces which he imparteth to his
servants: for otherwise he labors in vain. I have planted (says Saint
Paul) Apollo has watered, 1. Cor. 1.6
but it is God that gives the increase: He that planteth is nothing, neither
he that waters, but God who gives the increase. The Pastor must therefore
pray unto God, first that he vouchsafe to give him grace that he may duly
preach his word, and virtuously bear himself in all things appertaining to
his ministry. Secondly, by his holy spirit to bless the works of his
servants, fructifying them to his glory, Aug. of Christian doctrine l. 4. c.
16 Acts 6.4
and to the edification of his Church. And heereuppon does Saint Augustine
say, that as he that is to preach, must seek to be heard willingly, and
with understanding, and obedience: so must he weet, that he shall the sooner
attain hereto by prayers unto God for means to speak well: and that
therefore he is to pray both for himself and for his hearers. In this
consideration did the Apostles discharge themselves from serving the tables,
saying: As for us, we will give our selves to prayer, and to the ministration
of the word. Here do they join prayer with the ministration of the word,
yet not only that God may give them grace to preach well, but also that he
vouchsafe to bless their labors, and to give them increase, and generally
that he preserve the whole Church under his protection, and to multiply his
graces to the same.

29 To this prosperity of the Church was Saint Paul very zealous and
affectionate, when in his prayers he so fervently and often did commend them
to the Lord. As almost in all his Epistles, next unto thanks unto God for his
graces poured upon those to whom he writes, he adds his hearty prayers to
God for them. And Jesus Christ the great shepherd, did many times pray unto
God his Father for his Church: yea, he spent even whole nights in prayer. The
ministers of the word therefore, whenever they perceive any tokens of Gods
wrath against the Church, are especially, as it were, to oppose themselves, and
to turn the same away by fervent prayer. Thus did Moses in old time oppose
himself, when the almighty God protested that he would root out his
people, because of the golden Calfe that they had made and worshipped. Of such
efficacy were his prayers, Exodus 32.11.
that God in saying, Suffer me and I will root out this rebellious people,
gave to understand, that he was by the prayers of Moses, as it were, even
stopped from executing his wrath against the people. And this does David note,
commending Moses for such a duty. For God said that he would destroy them:
But Moses his chosen, Psalm 106.23
stood in the gappe to turn away his wrath, least he should have made an
end of them. Here he shows that the sins of the Church are as a breach
in the wall of a City, ready to be taken by the enemy and destroyed: Also,
that the fervent prayers of the Pastors are the true means to repair the
breach, and keep faith with the enemy.

30 The Prophet Amos was not weary of this duty: Amos 7. 2
For when God by vision did twice show him the calamities that he would
inflict upon his people for their sins, he ran to the breach by prayer,
saying: O Lord God, spare I beseech thee, for who shall raise up Jacob, for
he is small. And then he adds, that the Lord repented his threatening, and
said: It shall not be so. This is the fruit of prayer. And in this respect
does the Lord by his Prophet Ezechiel, reprove the pastors of Israel, and
object unto them that he looked for some one of them to stop up the gappe,
or to stand in the breach against him for the land, that he should not
destroy it, but he found none. Ezech, 22.30
The Prophet Elizeus calls Elias, the Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen
thereof. Thereby signifying, that he was the strength of Israel, and by his
zeal and fervent prayers to God, was he to them as their Chariots and
horsemen. This is delivered unto us as in a table: 2. King. 2.121
Whereas Joshua fought against Amelech, so long as the hands of Moses were
lyfted up unto the Lord, Joshua had the better, and overcame his enemies: and
contrariwise, when his hands were down, Amelech prevailed. Woe be therefore
to all neglygent and slothful pastors in this duty: for it is a great sin
in them not to turn away the wrath of God from the people, when by their
prayer they may. And this does the Prophet Samuel acknowledge: for when the
people of Israel confessed, that to their other sins, they had also added
this trespass, that they had craved a king, and therefore besought Samuel to
pray for them, that God should not slay them in his wrath: 1. Sam. 12.19 and
23.
God forbid, says he, that I should sin against the Lord, or cease to
make intercession for you. Seeing then that the prayers of the pastors are so
necessary and profitable, as well for the discharge of their duties and
purchasing the blessing of God to their labors, as also to turn away the
wrath of God from their flock, and to keep the same in prosperity: they are
not in any thing more diligently and fervently to employ themselves, then in
prayer and supplication, which also is the principal means to nourish and
increase them in godliness, good conscience, zeal, diligence, and fidelity.

31 By the premises it plainly appears, that the office of the ministry is
sufficient to employment, albeit the pastors intrude not into polytick
affairs, and other matters that may any whyt withdraw them from their
vocation. And to this purpose is the protestation of the Apostles very
notable. They were fulfilled with the holy Ghost: Acts 6.2
yet do they protest that it is not meet that they should be drawn from
their charge, by ministering at the tables of the poor, and therefore they
appointed seven notable men to employe themselves in that duty: wythall
adding, that for their parts, they would give themselves unto prayer, and to
the ministration of the word. And in deed, as the husband man's mind and
care is ever upon tillage, sowing, and reapyng, and the mariners upon their
ships, winds and havens, so must the thoughts, minds, and affections of
the ministers of the word, run only upon the instructing, comforting,
exhorting, edefying: and to be short, upon the saving of the sheep of their
fold. And heereto must we refer the saying of Saint Paul, No man that
warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, 2. Tim. 2.4
because he would please him that has chosen him to be his soldier. For if
he that is enrouled to serve in the wars, so soon as he hears the
Drum, must forsake wife and children, house, shop, and all other affairs,
that nothing may hinder or wythdraw him from the service of his Captain: much
rather ought they whom the sovereign king has inrouled for the spiritual
warfare, and the holy ministry of the word, keep themselves from all
politic affairs, and such as belong not to their vocation, to the end wholly
to serve and please Jesus Christ.

32 Yet many times it falls out otherwise, and the way is very slipperie.
Some Ministers do think that unless they set their hands to politic
affairs, even to the wars, that the Church cannot stand: Even as in old
time Vzzah imagined that the Ark of God must needs have fallen, 2. Sam. 6.6.
had not he stretched forth his hand to hold it up. But as God was wroth with
him, for going beyond his vocation, and slew him: so let the ministers of the
word fear, and that justly, least God confound them in their Ministry, for
undertaking above their calling: and employing themselves faithfully in their
charge, let them commend the preservation of the Church to the chief and
sovereign protector thereof, and never think to keep it upright by passing
the bounds of their vocation: besides, it is a common proue^be, He that
gripeth too much, catches nothing. Again, The mind that many things intend,
To each apart the less both bend.


A brook sufficient to drive a mill or carry a boat, being cut into many
ditches, will not be able to do either: even so the pastor that medleth with
many occupations, is unprofitable for any: and therefore the fruit of such
presumption must finally turn to ruin and confusion.

33 The Ministers of Gods word are also in duty so to bear themselves in
their charge, that they may be regarded and loved of their congregations, to
the end their doctrines, admonitions, exhortations, and all other parts of
their ministry, may have the more credit, and be received with greater
affection. Learn, says Saint Bernard, to be mothers, not Lords over the
sheep of your fold: Study rather to be loved than feared: And when ye must
use severity, let it be fatherlyke, not tyrannous: Suppress bitter speeches,
and prefer your pappes in offering the sweet milcke of the same. A Bishop,
says an ancient Father, must beware that he grow not into contempt, through
too much mirth and facilytie, neither into hatred, by excessive and
unreasonable severity. Saint Paul grew into such favor with the Galathians,
that him self bears them witness, Gal. 4.15. 1. These. 2.7 Theodor^t Ec.
hist l 4. c. 14
that if they could, they would even have pulled forth their eyes to give him.
And he protests, that toward the Thessalonians he was as tender as the
nourse that tenderlye nour^eth her children. Eusebius Bishop of Samo^ate was
so beloved of his Church, that when he entered into the river of Euphrates, in
obedience to fulfill the banishment whereto the Emperor Valence enjoined him,
almost the whole Town by boats followed him, and finding him, did with tears
instantly entreat him to return. But when they could not prevail, they
offered him money, garments, and all other things necessary and convenient
for his voyage. And after their return home to the town there was not any
one, of whatsoever calling, that would come to the preaching of the Arrian
Bishop, subrogated into his place, so that seeing himself alone in the
Church without any auditor, he departed thence confounded.

34 This love and affection of the Church toward her pastor, is ingendered
and especially increased, when he seals and confirms his doctrine by his
conversation and life conformable to the same, showing himself in action to
be the portraiture of a good and faithful pastor: for as virtue is always
loved, so is it loved of those for whose good and eternal salvation the same
is employed. And therefore the pastor is not so much to study and labor for
any thing, except the truth of the doctrine, as in his life and conversation
to be a good example to his flock. And heereto does the Apostle Saint Paul
exhort Timo^hie, saying: Be to the believers an example in word, 1. Tim.
4.12. Titus 2.7
in conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith, and in pureness. Yea, the
same exhortation does he also use to Titus, saying: In all things show thy
self an example of good works, 1. Pet. 5.3 Math. 5.4
with vncorrupt doctrine, with gravity, integrity, and with the wholesome
word which cannot be reproved, that he which withstandeth may be ashamed,
having nothing co^cerni^g us to speak evil of. And even the very same does
the holy Apostle Saint Peter also in one word require, where he wills the
pastors to be examples to their flock: yea, even this does our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ teach, where he says: You are the light of the world.
Let your l ght so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven: For as in a dark evening one goes
before with a torch or lantern for others to follow, so the life and
conversation of the Pastors ought to be as a burning torch to guide others in
the way of salvation and life everlasting.

35 True it is (says Augustine) that Pastors may somewhat profit by saying,
albeit they do not that which they say, Augustine of Christ. doct. lib. 4.
cap. 27.
but they should profit much more, if themselves would do as they teach
others: for such as do seek excuses for their wicked lives, do find enough in
their Pastors which live not as they teach, and say, if not with mouth, yet in
heart: why do thou command that which thy self wilt not do? and this is the
cause that men hearing them will not obey them, even because themselves do not
obey the word that they preach, and therefore the people does contemn both the
Preacher and his doctrine: to be short, where the Apostle says to Timothy,
Let no man despise thy path, he adds the means how to avoid contempt,
saying: Be unto unbelievers an example in conversation and love. And truly as
S. Augustine says, Aug. of Christ doct. l. 4. c. 27, and cap. 29.
The life of the teacher is of more weight to procure obedience to the
doctrine, then is his facility of speaking and utterance. And again, let him
that has not the gift of eloquence in utterance, so converse, that the example
and pattern of his good life, may stand in stead of utterance. What we are in
profession says S. Ambrose, Ambrose of the dignity of Priesthood Cap. 3.
let us show rather by work then by name, to the end the name may agree with
the action, and the action with the name: and so the name be honorable even
when the action is horrible. Neither let an abominable life be conjoined with
an honorable calling, let us not make a show of doouish words, and serpentine
deeds: let not us, who in profession are Pastors, be possessed with woluish
cruelty: rather let this be the full scope of our meaning, even to speak as
we think, and to think as we speak, that so there may be good concord and
harmony between the word and the life. To this does S. Hierom also exhort,
saying: Let not thy works confound thy words, least when thou speak to the
flock some one should in heart reply, Hierom. in epist to Nepotian.
Why do not thou that which thou teach? let there be, says he, a good
accord between the mouth, the heart, and the hands of the Preacher.

36 The Ecclesiastical historye does testify of John Chrysostom, that he
being in life of a heavenly conversation, Zozom. in Eccle. Hi. l. 8. c. 2. and
l. 6. c. 3.
did insinuate the zeal of his virtue to his hearers: for his words being
adorned with good works, seemed worthy to be believed, which without them
would have been ridiculous: and surely the wicked life of the teacher does make
his own word to accuse him, and therefore says S. Augustine, Prosper in his
sentences out of Aug. Theodoret Ec. hist. l. 4. c. 5.
to say well and to live evil, is no more but with his own tung to condemn
the speaker. To this purpose is the oration of the Emperor Valentinian in the
Synod after the death of Auxe^tius the Arrian, very notable. You that are
brought up in the holy scriptures, says he, can not be ignorant what manner of
man he ought to be that is to be established in the dignitye of a Bishop: also
that in duty he is to instruct the people, not by his doctrine only, Decretals
did 63. cap. Sac^o.
but also by his good manners and holy conversation, whereby he may be an
example of all honesty and virtue, and so the exercise of his charge may be a
testimony and seal to his doctrine. In this sense have the Emperors Charles
and Jews, speaking of the election of Bishops, decreed, that without accepting
of persons, they shall elect such as they shall find to be endued with
knowledge and holiness of life, to the end they may profit their flock as well
by example of life, as by doctrine.

37 And indeed the first degree of abuse, says S. Augustine, is this: A
skillful Preacher deuoid of good works, even one that cares not for
perfourming that in action, Aug. of the 1^. degrees of Abuse. degrees. 1.
which he teaches with his lips: for they that hear his doctrine, do soon
contemn his words when they see that his works agree not with his doctrine.
Neither shall the Preacher have any effectual authority, until the efficacy
of his works do print it in the hearts of his hearers. Let the Pastors
therefore remember, that as faith without works is dead, so is their doctrine
of no force, where it is not accompanied with holiness of life. And such Pastors
are like unto the man that with one hand does pull up that which the other has
planted: or that with one hand plucketh down that which the other has built.
If the Pastor be learned, Bernard upon the Cantic.
says S. Barnard, yet a bad man, it is to be feared that his barre^ life
hurts as many as his profitable doctrine does help: And the bad life of the
Pastor is the calling of the doctrine into question, Rom, 2.14.
scorn and contempt, and consequently gives occasion to blaspheme the name of
God, as S. Paul admonishes us.

38 True it is, that Jesus Christ exhorts us to observe and do the things
which the Scribes and Pharisees that sit upon Moses chair, Mat. 23.
that is, that teach the doctrine of Moses, do say unto us: but not to do
their works, Galat. 2.11.
when they do not as they say. But such is man's infirmity, that evil examples
do more stir us to do evil, then good doctrine to do well. And to this
purpose we are to note the phrase that S. Paul uses, where he reproves S.
Peter, because that before the coming of the Jews he did eat with the
Gentiles, and at their coming he withdrew himself. If thou being a Jew live
as the Gentiles, why constrainest thou the Gentiles to do like the Jews? He
there shows that the example of S. Peter was of such efficacy, that thereby he
enforced the Gentiles to follow his dissimulation: and he also notes, that
even Barnabas was induced thereto. If then the example of the Pastors be so
mighty both in good and evil, let them diligently labor that their
conversation may be conformable to their doctrine, and so they may be of double
edification to the Church of Christ. Let them says S. Hierom, Hierom. upon
this, if any desire to be a Bishop.
conceive the truth in their minds, and sound it forthwith their lips, and
in all their conversation, to the end that whatsoever they say or do, may be a
doctrine or instruction to the people: let the Pastors therefore take heed that
their life and conversation be not contrary to their doctrine, least they make
their ministerye unprofitable, and hurt more by their bad lives, then they
profit by their good doctrine, by drawing the people after their example to
imitate their evil works: finally bring the heavenly doctrine into contempt,
and give occasion to blaspheme the name of God. And withal let the^ remember
what Christ says: Mat. 5.19.
He that shall teach and observe the commandments of God, shall be called great
in the kingdom of heaven: but that contrariwise he will say to those that have
preached his gospel and wrought miracles, but have not sealed their doctrine
with good works: Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Mat. 12.23.


39 Among other the vices which the Pastors for avoiding of evil example, are
to shun, is covetousness, the root of al mischief in all men, but chiefly in
the Pastors and Ministers of Gods word: and therefore does S. Paul expressly
say, A Bishop must not covet after dishonest gain. And S. 1. Tim. 3.3. 1. Pet.
5.2.
Peter exhorts the Pastors to feed their sheep, not in hope of dishonest
gain, but with a willing mind. This advertisement is the more necessary,
because it is a common vice, as Esaias obiecteth to the Pastors of his time,
saying: Esaias 56.11.
The Pastors have no understanding, they are all gone astray, every one
follows after covetousness. S. Tit. 1.11. 2. Pet. 2.3.
Paul likewise complains of some that for dishonest gain did subvert whole
families. And S. Peter foretells, that there shall be some that for
covetousness shall make merchandise of such as are redeemed with the blood of
Christ. As therefore this vice is utterly unworthy the servant of God: so that
it might be the rather abhorred, he has punished it in some, in most fearful
manner. Judas an Apostle being covetous, became a sacriledgious person, and
having sold, betrayed, and delivered his master Jesus Christ, John 12.6. Act.
8.
did to his eternal damnation hang himself. Simon Magus seeking to make
profit of the gift of the holy Ghost, and to that end offering to buy the
grace of God, was accursed by God and so blasted, that the purchase and sale of
spiritual graces and promotions, 1. Sam. 12.15. Acts. 20.25. 1. These. 2.5.
is now by his name termed Symony. Contrariwise, Samuel both by protestation
and by the testimony of the people, shows how free he was from covetousness,
As also S. Paul protests to the Ephesians, that he never coueted the silver
or gold of any man, and in his Epistle to the Thessalonians he takes God to
witness, 1. King. 17.4.6. Mat. 10.42.
that he was not moved by any covetousness to employ himself in his vocation.
Let all Pastors therefore, renouncing this vice, repose themselves upon the
sovereign Pastor, that set them on work, and be assured that he will carefully
provide for their maintenance, even albeit he should therein employ Elias
raven. And Jesus Christ who has promised mightily and everlastingly to reward
him, that shall have given but a glass of cold water in the name of a
Disciple, does sufficiently declare what care he takes of those that employ
themselves in his service.

Aug upon John. hom. 57 2. Cor. 12.7.
40 But as covetousness is most dangerous, and utterly unworthy the Pastors
and Ministers of Gods word, so there is no other vice more slippery and
pernicious to this estate then ambition. It is safer, says S. Augustine, to
hear the word, then to preach it, for he that hears it, learneth to humble
himself: but he that preaches it, is in danger of exalting himself. S. Paul,
albeit an excellent vessel, Luke 12.24.
does confess that himself was in danger of being exalted above measure
through the abundance of revelations that he had. And the Apostles did question
and strive who should be chief among them. And indeed as worms do usually
breed in satte Cheese, so they that in most plenty have received the graces of
God, are most subject to this cursed ambition. And sometimes, such is the force
of this fire, that it consumes all the virtues that are in man, casting him
headlong through ambition, to maintain al false doctrine, to raise up scismes
in the Church of Christ: to move strife and debate, to enterprise to expel
good and faithful Pastors, yea to the end to attain to his wicked intent. to
join even with those whose lives and doctrine he does not approve: And of such
iniquity or rather impiety we have but over many examples in the
Ecclesiastical histories, Ruffin in his Ec. hist. l. 1. c. 1.
yet shall it be enough to allege the only example of Arrius, who as Ruffin
writes, extremely coveting after glory, praise and novelties, began to
propound his wicked opinions concerning the passion of Jesus Christ, whereof
ensued great persecution against the faithful Pastors, and a scisme no less
pernicious, then general and of long continuance among Christians. For the
reforming therefore of so common and dangerous a vice, let all Pastors remember
what S. Paul says: What brings thee into reputation? What have thou that
thou have not received? 1. Cor. 4.^.
If thou have received it, why do thou boast as if thou had not received
it? yea let them know that God imparteth to them his grace, not that they
should be exalted and pulled up with pride, but that himself might by them be
exalted and glorified: neither let them forget what Jesus Christ has
protested, saying: Mat. 23.12.
He that exalts himself shall be brought low. But let them imitate the
modesty and humility of S. Paul, who says: We have not sought praise of men,
1. These. 2.6.
neither of you nor of others. And throughout the whole course of their
ministry, let them level only at this, to advance the glory of God, the
kingdom of Christ, and the salvation of men: and so to content themselves with
the incorruptible crown of glory, which as S. 1. Pet. 5.4.
Peter says, they shall receive in heaven, when the sovereign Pastor shall
appear.

42 The example of concord and love among the Pastors, is also of great fruit
and edification to the Church, and their conjunction indeed maintains the
Elders and Deacons in union: and the union of those that have the conduct of
the Church, do continue the members thereof in peace: where contrariwise
dissension among the Pastors engenders strife among those that do assist them
in the government of the Church, besides that from their divisions do
ordinarily proceed scismes among the members thereof. For when the heads are
at jar, they have their partakers. The prosperity and peace of the Church
do sometimes breed like inconveniences: Ruffin in his Ec. hist. lib. 1. cap.
1. and 2.
as we read that in the time of Constantine the great, the Bishops assembled
in the counsel of Nice to condemn the error of Arrius, were more bitter in
preferring complaints one against another, then careful to unite themselves to
beat down the error of Arrius and to defend the truth: but the Emperor
perceiving it, called for all their libels of accusations and complaints, and
without reading them, cast them all into the fire. So to cease all quarrels,
that all occasion of strife being as it were quenched, they all in liew of
fighting one against another, might join together to defend the truth of the
Godhead of Christ. Eusebius. in the life of Constant. lib. 2. and lib. 1.
Eusebius speaking of the same time, does more largely declare, that the
Bishops being at great strife, their Churches were also divided among
themselves. The Emperor Licinius very well understood how necessary the
coniunctio^ and union of the pastors is for the peace and prosperity of the
Church. For he taking upon him to subvert the christian faith, could find no
readier way but to stop the good union and agreement of the Bishops and
Pastors, straigthly prohibiting all communication between them, and all
ecclesiastical and Synodall assemblies.

43 Inasmuch therefore as their union and concord is of such importance for the
good of the Church: let them shun all dissension, and so maintain peace and
sincere love among themselves, that as when one of our eyes turns aside, the
other turns the same way: so all their consultations, affections and deeds
may ioyntlye and in a holy harmony, tend to one self end, even to the glory
of God and the edification of his Church. And to this end let them employ
themselves in the affairs of the Church even with one self shoulder, as the
Prophet Sophony speaks: who by that similitude shows, Sophany. 3.9.
that as they that jointly do bear the mass of a Ship, or any other great
piece of timber upon their shoulders, do employe themselves in a joint labor,
and all tend to one self thing: so the Pastors ought to be joined and united
in the affairs of the Church of Christ, that happily they may advance and
finish their work, to his glory.

44 For the maintaining therefore of this so necessary peace and concord, among
the Pastors: among other things, it is requisite that they bear one with
another, and be not soddenly provoked: but be ready to pardon and to be
reconciled, in case the kingdom of Christ may thereby be advanced. S. Paul
hearing that some preached Christ upon contention and not sincerely, Phil. ^.1^.
as weening to add affliction to his bonds, rejoiced, because thereby Christ
was preached. We read of great enmity between Seuerian and Chrysostom both
Bishops, Socrates in his Eccles. Hist. lib. 6. cap 11.
which was augmented by a wicked slander of Serapion, for he taking part with
Chrisostom, would not salute Seuerian as a Bishop. Whereupon Seuerian in
displeasure said, If Serapion dye a Christian, Christ was not made man: Hereof
did Serapion accuse Seuerian to Chrysostom, as if he had said only, Christ
was not made man: whereupon Chrysostom drive him out of the town, but he was
called again by Eudoxia the Emperors wife, who labored diligently to
reconcile the^: this when she could not obtain at the hands of Chrisostom she
finally so followed the matter, that her son Theodosius falling at his feet,
with many exhortations, prayers and adiurations, obtained that he received
Seuerian to reconciliation. Now had there been no enmity between them,
Serapion would have saluted Seuerian as a Bishop: Had Seuerian been moderate,
he had not used such words: Had Serapion borne with him, he had not used such
a wicked slander against him: and had not Chrisostom been falsely incensed and
provoked, he would not have driven him away before he had known the truth, nor
yet would not have been so hardly entreated to be reconciled.

45 For this time we will be content with this brief deduction of the
principal duties of the Ministers of the word, exhorting them to employ
themselves faithfully and in holiness: as also we do with them, besides the
premises, to remember that the holy Apostle Saint Paul making as it were a
summary or abstract of all that is to be required of a Bishop or a Pastor, 1.
Tim 13.2
does ordeine that he should be unreprovable, as a guide in the house of
God: the husband of one wife: not selfewilled, watchful, sober, modest,
harborous to strangers, apt to teach, not given to wine, no striker, not given
to filthy lucre, but gentle, no fighter, not covetous, one that loves goodness,
wise, righteous, Tit. 1.8.
holy, temperate, holding fast the faithful word, according to doctrine, that
he may be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and improve them that say
against it: one that can rule his own house honestlye, 1. Tim. 3.4.
having children under obedience with all reverence, for if any cannot rule his
own house, how shall he care for the Church of God? True it is, that the
Apostle here teaches what qualities do beseem him that is called unto the
ministerye, yet withal he teaches all Pastors what virtues should be in
them, and what vices they ought to shun, for their happy employment in the
Lords work. Let them therefore to that purpose remember what in another place
the same Apostle Saint Paul writes to Timothy, saying: 2. Tim 4.5. 1. Tim.
1.18. 1. Tim. 6.4.
Watch thou in all things, suffer adversity, do the work of an Evangelist,
make thy work fully known Again, Do the duty of a good soldier with faith
and a good conscience. Again, Shun questions and strife in words, whereof
comes envy strife, raylings, and surmises, vain disputations of men of
corrupt minds, and destitute of truth: 2. Tim. 1.12. 2. Tim. ^.15.
and account Godlynes a great gain: from such separate thy self, and follow
after Godlynes, righteousness, faith, love, patience and meekness, fight the
good fight of faith, lay hold of eternal life: And again. Keep the true
pattern of the wholesome words which thou have heard of me, in faith and
love, which is in Christ Jesus. Again, Study to show thy self approved
unto God, a woorkeman that needs not to be ashamed, dividing the word of
truth aright. Let such also as desire to employ themselves vertuouslye, in
holiness and prosperously in this vocation, read and continually meditate the
exhortation of S. Act 20.
Paul to the Elders, that is, to the Bishops and Pastors of Ephesus, and
generally all his Epistles, but especially, as S. Augustine of Christ. doct.
lib. 4. cap. 16.
Augustine does expressly exhort, the three written to Timothy and Titus,
whereout we have taken the aduertisements before mentioned. So shall they find
as well in his person as in his writings, a most lively and excellent pattern
of all that is requisite for a true and faithful Pastor. To conclude, that
they may the more courageously and constantly bear themselves, let them also
think upon the promise of S. 1. Cor. 3. 8.
Paul, who says: Every man shall be rewarded according to his labor, and they,
as Daniel says, that win most to righteousness, Dan. 12.3.
shall shine as stars for ever and ever. Neither let them forget what S.
Peter promises, saying: When the sovereign shepherd shall appear, they
shall receive the incorruptible crown of glory. Now let us go on to the
duties of the Church to her Pastors.

Of the duties of the Church to her Pastors and Ministers of the word of God.
Chap. 9.
IN as much as the word Father, mentioned in the fifth commandment of the law,
does also include the Pastors and Ministers of Gods word, it follows that the
word honor must comprehend the duties of the Church toward them: and seeing the
said word honor, signifies the love, reverence, subjection, and obedience,
with assistance in time of need: it thereby appears that the members of the
Church are bound to do these duties to their Pastors. First to love and bear
them affection: as also the duty of this honoring is comprised in the summary
of the second table of the law, which contains the love to our neighbor. And
indeed, if we ought to love al men, even our enemies, how much rather those
whom God uses for to beget us to the Lord, that we may be the children and
heirs of his heavenly and everlasting kingdom? Surely since the soul is so
excellent, and the holy and everlasting life so much to be desired, we cannot
in truth sufficiently love those good and faithful Pastors, John 6, 27.
Fathers and nources of our souls that do instruct us in holiness, and lead
us to life everlasting. If we ought to labor, not for the meat which
perishes, but for that which endures unto everlasting life: then truly the
Pastors that feed our souls with spiritual and eternal food, are more to
be loved, then they which give us bodily bread. Alexander the great did highly
reverence and affect his scholemaster Aristotle, and said that he was no less
bound to him, then to his Father: Eras. Apotheg. lib. 4.
for as from his Father he received the beginning of his life, so from his
scholemaister he took the beginning living well: How much rather should we
affect and love our faithful ministers, from whom we receive our beginning to
live well according to God, whereby to attain to life everlasting? Galat. 4.14.
The Galathians showed a marvelous love and affection to Saint Paul, as he
himself witnesses, saying: that they received him as an Angel of God, yea,
even as Christ himself: testifiyng also that if possible they could, they
would even have pulled out their eyes to have given them to him.

2 Of this affection and love is engendered a certain respect and reverence
toward them, 1. Cor. 4.1. Tit. 1.7. 2. Cor. 5.20. 1. Cor. 3.9. 2. Cor. 3.6.
the rather in consideration of their charge, whereto God has called them, in
that they are the Stewards of the secrets and misteryes of carnal salvation:
Gods Ambassadors for Christ, bringing the message of our atonement with God:
coadiutors or laborers with God in the salvation of men: Ministers of the new
covenant, not of the letter, but of the spirit. These so honorable tytles
and most excellent offices in the sight of God, do sufficiently and plainly
declare what respect and reverence the Church ought to bear unto them. Also,
Luke 10.16.
that who so despises them, despises Christ in them, as himself protests,
and are unthankful for the benefits and blessings that God offers by them:
but especially they are to be loved and regarded when they do faithfully and
diligently behave themselves in their charge, according as their tytles do
admonish and bind them. And in this respect does the holy Apostle Saint Paul
so earnestly exhort the Thessalonians to this duetye, saying: Brethren, 1.
These. 5.12.
we beseech you that ye know, (that is to say, that ye love and reverence)
those which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you:
that ye have them in singular love for their works sake. The same does he
also signify in his Epistle written to the Philippians. For having touched the
virtues of Epaphroditus, Phil. 2.29.
he exhorts them to receive him in the Lord with all joy, and to esteem of
all that are such. Besides that in so doing the Pastors will be the better
affected to their flock, taking the greater care for their good and salvation,
and employ themselves thereto the more cheerefullye, as the Apostle Saint Paul
writing to the Corinthians, says of Titus, namely, that when he remembered
their obedience, 2. Cor. 7. 15.
and that they had received him with fear and trembling, his affection was the
more increased toward them.

3 The second principal point of the duty of the church to her pastors,
consists in subjection and obedience unto them. The Apostle writing to the
believing Hebrews, commands the^ to obey their Pastors, Heb. 13.17.
and to submit themseues to them: his reason: For they watch for your souls,
as they that must give accounts, that they may do it with joy and not with
grief, for that is unprofitable for you. This subjection and obedience
consists especially in three points: First, in diligent hearing of Sermons,
communicating in the holy sacraments, and assisting at public prayers.
Secondly, in bringing forth fruit, and showing the effects of these sacred
exercises. Thirdly, in receiving the admonitions, reprehensions and
exhortations of the word in all humility and modesty. In the second book.
cap. 3.4.5. and 8.
But seeing we have sufficiently before treated of these points, especially of
the two first, we will not any more insist upon them in this place, only we
will add this brief advertisement, that as they that sit at a table do eat,
chewe, and digest their food, so they that hear the word of God ought to
listen unto it, meditate upon it, and print it in their hearts, that so they
may receive the nourishment signified by the word and duty to feed,
commended to the Shepherds of Christ's flock. And as in meat we are not so much
to seek lickorousnes as health, so must it be in the preaching of the word:
for Ecclesiastical assemblies be not like to common plays whereto men resort
for pleasure: but in sermons we are to look for that which is helthsome for the
soul: and as in a banquet, if any dishe chance to be ouersaulted, or
otherwise it is not well dressed, the same does not so offend us that therefore
we can eat but little of the rest that is well seasoned: so if in sermons we
hear any sentence or word, not so fitly applied as it were to be wished, we
must not for that leave to make our profit of the rest that is well and
devoutly spoken. S. Paul confesses that himself has no eloquence, neither
alluring speeches in his preachings, and thereof adds one notable reason,
saying: That your faith may not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of
God. 1. Cor. 2.3.
And indeed when a man fills out but a little wine into an excellent wrought
and graven cup, men regard more the cup the^ the wine: when contrariwise, if
most excellent wine be brought in a simple cup, they consider and commend the
wine rather then the cup: even so is it with the treasure of the Gospel
presented in a cup either of earth or of gold, as S. Paul says, because man's
curiosity has more respect to the pot, 2. Cor. 4.7.
the mouth, or the eloquence, then to the treasure.

4 Such as have no taste of the sermon that is not stuffed with human
eloquence, do show that they have no appetite, and consequently that they are
inwardly out of frame, and this breeds great grief and heaviness to many
faithful Ministers: as contrariwise, such as show themselves desirous to
hear the word of their Pastors, are a great encouragement to them to proceed
the more cheerfully, and do even as it were bring words into their mouths:
as we see by experience, that the sucking of the child brings in milk into
the mothers breast. Moreuer, as it is in vain to call the Physician and to
hear his counsel, when we list not to take the medicine that he does
prescribe: so they that hear the sermons and do not put the words in
practice, in stead of reaping profit, shall incur the greater damnation:
for as he that having been two or three years at school and has not
profited, is worthy to be taken away: so they that have been many years in
the school of Christ and heard his word, yet do not amend, neither increase
in faith and love, do worthily deserve to be deprived of such a benefit of
God, and according to the threatening of Amos, to endure such a famine, not of
bread, but of the word, Amos 8.11.
that the strongest and most lusty, seeking after it but not finding it, may
perish.

5 Now it rests that we speak of the third part, signified in the word
Honor, which is the assistaunce of the Pastor, and this is to be practiced
especially in two sorts: First, the Church is in duty to provide that her
Ministers may have convenient mainteynance, least they should be withdrawn
from their charge by laboring for the sustenance of their family. True it is,
that S. Act. 20.34.
Paul did sometimes labor with his hands for his living: but it was when the
Churches had no means to provide for him, by reason of persecution: or else
when he perceived that by receiving his maintenance from the Church, there was
some backsliding in the preaching of the Gospel: as at Corinth. For when some
false Apostles preached there without reward, Saint Paul would be no president
for them to receive maintenance from the Church, as himself writes unto them,
saying: We have not used this power, 1. Cor. 9.12.
namely, to take hyer of the Church, but suffer all things, that we should not
hinder the Gospel of Christ: 2, Cor. 11.9.
but otherwise he usually took of the Churches wherewith to live, as himself
says, that he even robbed them and took wages, to do the Corinthians
service.

6 Likewise, albeit himself took nothing of them, yet does he at large tell
them their duties to their Pastors. Who says he, 1. Cor. 9.7.
does go a warfare any time at his own cost? Who planteth a vineyard, and
eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock and eats not of the
milk of the flock? does not the l^we say the same? For it is written in the
law of Moses, thou shall not mussell up the mouth of the Ox, that treads out
the corn, does God care for Oxen? or says he it not for our sakes? For our
sakes no doubt it is written, that he which eareth should ear in hope, Gal.
6, 6.
and that he which thrasheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope And
hereof he adds a notable reason. If we have sown unto you spiritual
things, is it a great thing if we reap your carnal things? Know ye not that
they which minister about the holy things, eat of the things of the Temple,
and they which wait at the altar, are partakers with the altar? So also has
the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel. It seems that among the Galathians some had small care of this
duty, for where S. Paul says: Let him that is taught, make him that teaches
him partaker in all his goods: he adds, Be ye not deceived, God is not
mocked, for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. Here the Apostle
shows, that as the Church is bound to provide for the maintenance of her
Pastors, so by such employment of her goods, she receives not only this
incomprehensible benefit of instruction to salvation: but also a reward in the
life to come: and they which make no account of this duty and of Gods
promises, shall, as contemners of him, feel his vengeance. Likewise, as the
Church is the house of God and the kingdom of Christ, so they that bestow
their goods upon the maintenance of the holy ministerye, without the which this
house and kingdom cannot subsist, do offer a sacrifice of a most excellent
sweet savor in the presence of the Lord. Provision therefore for the Pastors,
whether by the magistrate, or by the contribution of the flock, is a most
necessary and profitable duty of the church.

7 The second and principal assistance that the Church owes to the Pastors,
is earnestly and continuallye to pray to God for them: for as Christ
commands us to pray to the Lord of the h^uest to send workmen into his
harvest, Mat. 9.^8.
so is it our duty when he has given us faithful Pastors, to pray unto him:
first to prese^ue them in health and long life, for the good and edification
his Church: secondly, by his holy spirit to guide them, that they may
faithfully and with fruit employ themselves in their ministerye. The rather is
the Church bound to this duty, because it cannot otherwise expect any great
fruit from man. And indeed Saint Paul an Apostle, endued with most excellent
gifts, does neuerthe^esse desire the Churches incessantly to make
supplications for him: namely, writing to the Ephesians, he requires the^ to
pray to God for him, that he may open his mouth boldly, to publishe the
secrets of the Gospel, that therein he may speak boldly as he ought to
speak. The same does he also require of the Colossians, praying also for us,
Colos 4.^.
that God may open unto us the door of utterance, to speak the mystery of
Christ: wherefore I am also in bonds, that I may utter it as it becomes me to
speak Writing also to the Thessalonians, he says: Brethren, 2. These. 3.1.
pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free passage, and be
glorified, even as with you: Romans 15.30.
and that we may be delivered from unreasonable and evil men: for all men
have not faith: Writing to the Romans he proceeds further, saying: Brethren,
I beseech you for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the spirit,
that ye would strive with me by prayers to God for me. That I may be delivered
from them which are disobedient in Judea, and that my service which I have to
do at Jerusalem, may be accepted of the Saints. If so excellent an Apostle
does plainly confess that he cannot open his mouth to preach the word: that
he cannot avoid the crosses and assaults of the wicked: or that he can do
nothing that may be acceptable to the Saints without the assistance and
blessing of God: If he acknowledge that to obtain these graces, he stands in
need of the prayers of the Church, and if in so many places and so instanly he
desires her employment heerin: what good may we expect in the ministry of our
Pastors, even of those that be most apt and faithful, unless fervently and
continually we do pray unto God for them? Most men have small mind of the
duty and importance of these prayers, yet is this negligence and ingratitude
many times punished, in the most dangerous faults of the Pastors, which turn to
the great prejudice of the Church: besides, that God also in his just
judgment, taking to himself the faithful Ministers, or transporting them
elsewhere, does either give us hyrelinges, or wholye depriueth the Church of
the holy ministry. To the end therefore that according to the exhortation of
Jesus Christ we may amend, let us acknowledge how precious the spiritual,
heavenly, and eternal gifts that we receive, by the ministry of our Pastors,
are. And what an excellent charge God has given them over us, that thereupon we
may heartily love them, respect them, obey them, be careful for them, and
especially employ our selves diligently in fervent prayers to God, that he may
vouchsafe to preserve the good and faithful Pastors, and that he would
replenishe the^ with the gifts of the holy spirit, that they may faithfully
employ themselves in their charge, and that he will mightily bless their
labors, to his glory, and the salvation of his Church.

8 Having now declared the duties as well common to the Husband and the wife,
as perticularly of the husband to the wife, and of the wife to the husband: of
parents to their children, and of children to their parents: of Magistrates to
their subjects, and of subjects to their Magistrates: lastly, of Pastors and
Ministers of the word to the Church, and of the Church to them: every one that
desires to amend his life according to the exhortation of Jesus Christ, is to
examine himself. First because he is a Christian, by the law of God, that he
may thereby know his sins and wickedness, and so amend: Next every one in his
vocation, as the husband, the wife, the father, the mother, the child, the
Magistrate, the subject, the Pastor, and the Church: each in his several
calling is likewise to enter into examination of himself by that which has
been above spoken in this third Book, touching their duties: to the end that
knowing and feeling in how many sorts and ways we do fail in that which God
requires of every one in his particular calling, we may advise our selves how
to amend our lives. And that we may be the more earnestly stirred and moved
hereunto, we will in the next book lay down the principal causes and reasons
whereby all Christians in general, and every one perticularly in his vocation
ought and may in their hearts be touched, and feel themselves bound and
affectionate to amendment, according as Jesus Christ does exhort.

The fourth Book. Of the causes of Amendment of Life.
The first cause why we should Amend, is taken of the authority of Jesus
Christ to command us. Chapter. 1.
THe only and sole commandment of Jesus Christ the Son of God, who says,
Amend your lives, Mat. 4.17.
ought to induce us to yeald unto him all ready and voluntarye obedience: For
that he is of authority to command us, his very names and tytles do
sufficiently declare. As therefore Kings, Princes, and other Magistrates, do
set down their names and tytles in the beginnings of their Proclamations, as
well to authorize them, as to bind their subjects to obey them: so before we
enter into the reason which Jesus Christ, to induce us to this amendment of
life, namely, because the kingdom of heaven is at hand, does allege: we will
lay down some of the names and tytles of him that commands us to amend,
Exodus 20.2.
whereby we may the better understand as well his authority to command, as
our duty to obey.

2 First, he is the son of God: who in the preface of the law, executing even
then the office of a Prophet, a King, Exodus 3.14.
and a leader of his people, speaking says: I am the Lord thy God which
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Act. 17.28.
These titles in the beginning of the law do declare that he has double
authority to command us, and that we likewise are double bound to yealde to
him our obedience. First he calls himself The Lord, and uses this word
Iehoua, which signifies Essence, or him that is, Col. 1.16.17.
wherein he teaches, that it is in him and by him (as S. Paul also affirms)
that we are, that we live, and that we have our moving. And therefore in another
place speaking of Jesus Christ, he says: All things were created by him and
for him, and in him all things consist. What a monstrous matter were it, if we
should not consecrate our whole life to the service and obedience of him,
without whole power we can neither live, neither be, neither subsist one only
hour: But this name Iehoua is to be drawn yet further, Exodus 6. 3.
namely to the effect of his promises: because it is he who gives as it were
essence unto them, and by his fulfilling, a new being to his creatures.
Himself has taught us, saying: I appeared to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in my
name Schaddei, that is to say, God Almighty: yet did they not know me by my
name Iehoua, Exodus 20. 2.
for by this name Iehoua he means his Essence, whereby he has with efficacy
and effect made the truth of his promises long since promised to the Fathers,
to be: giving as it were a new being to their children, at the bringing of the^
forth of Egypt: and therefore he adds, Thy God, thereby to signify that it
was his people, whom he had redeemed and so dedicated and consecrated to
himself. Then does he remember them of the deliuerye out of the bondage of
Egypt, which was to them as a resurrection and reestablishment unto life. He
then that gave the law, being the same God that commanded us to amend, by
living according to the rule of the same, has declared by his titles and
names, set down in this preface, that he has duble right and authority to
command us, and therefore that it is a twofold, and monstrous ingratitude,
not to obey him, Exodus 13.2.
who commanding us by the right both of our creation and of our redemption,
does sufficiently declare that we cannot subsist in life either of body or
soul, without his power and grace.

Exodus 13.2. Exodus 12.29.
3 God in old time ordained that every male that opened the womb, should be
consecrated to the Lord: for at such time as for the bringing forth of his
people, he slew all the first borne of Egypt, he willed that the first born of
the Jews should be given and dedicated to him, as being his own: And the more
euidentlye to declare unto them this duty to be consecrated unto him, he took
the Levites in stead of the first borne of all the other tribes, Number. 3.44.
to employ them wholly in his service: yet did he also ordein that all that were
above twentye years old, Exodus 30.12.
should pay every man half a shekle, to be employed in the service of the
tabernacle of the congregation, to be a memorial before the Lord of the
redemption of their persons, and that being freede from the yoke of Pharaoh,
and made a nation subject unto God, who had redeemed and delivered them, they
might give themselves wholly to serve and obey him, and altogether to live to
him. The fulfilling of these figures and ordenances we have in Jesus Christ,
who besides that he is our creator, as is aforesaid, has also revealed
himself in the flesh to be our redeemer and savior: he it is that has saved
and brought us forth, not of the bondage of Pharaoh, but from the tirannye of
the devil: Col. 1.15.
neither by smiting the first borne of Egypt, but by giving himself, even the
first borne of every creature, to death for us. It were therefore a two-folde
rebellion, not to amend our lives, and so to obey him, who being as S. Paul
says, the savior of all men, 1. Tim. 4.10.
as concerning the bodily life, but especially of the faithful, in respect of
eternal salvation, has a two-folde right and authority to command us. And
the premises does S. Augustine confirm by an excellent confession and prayer
that he makes to God, saying: I know, Aug. in his Medita. c. 39.
O Lord, that I owe to thee my self, because thou have created me: yea more
then my self, because that being made man for me, thou have redeemed me, even
so much the rather, as thou (...) greater then he, for whom thou have given thy
self. But in as much as I have nothing more then my self, also that I cannot
give to thee that which I have, without thy self: take me and draw me unto
thee, that I may be thine in following and loving thee, as I am thine in being
created and redeemed by thee.

4 Moreover, in tha^ in our belief we do confess that we do believe in
Jesus Christ our Lord, we do also by that title acknowledge in him a
two-folde authority to command us, and consequently, in our selves a twofolde
obligation to obey him: For as being both God and man: in respect of his
divinity he is Lord over all creatures: so having redeemed us by his death,
he is our Lord, and we that do believe in him are his peculyar people and
servants. And therefore it were a double disobedience in us, if we, as his
creatures, should not obey the Lord of all, and as his peculyar people and
proper purchase, be wholly subject to him that is more particularly Lord over
us. Jesus Christ is also called King of Kings, and consequently, king of the
whole world, yet is he also particularly king over his Church. And in deed, 1.
Tim. 6.15 Psalm 2
as we read that the iron scepter is given to him to reign and rule over all
nations and kingdoms of the earth, so is he particularly established king
over (...) here a twofolde authority in Christ, which does doubly bind us to
amend by obeying of him, who being Lord of the whole world, is particularly
and more excellently king over the Burgeses of Sion, and the members of his
Church.

5 All th^se names and titles, Iehoua, Creator, Redeemer, Savior, Lord, and
king, attributed to him that commands to amend, being well considered, as is
before showed, does teach us what authority he has to command us, and how
deeply we are bound to obey him, as his creatures, children, subjects, and
servants, and wholly to consecrate unto him all, whatsoever we are, have,
know, or can do, in his service, without whom we: neither have, neither are,
neither do or know any thing. Let us therefore acknowledge that we are not
in our own power, to live at our own pleasures, but do appertain unto Jesus
Christ, and must practice the same which the Apostle Saint Paul says of
himself, I live, yet not I, but Jesus Christ lives in me. Galat. 2, 20 1.
Cor. 6.19
Let us remember what the same Apostle says, You are not your own, for ye
are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your bodies, and in your
spirits, for they are Gods. We are therefore bound, as our savior Jesus
Christ admoniseth us, to deny our selves, that is to say, our own sense and
wisdom, and to follow his: also our own will, Math 16.24 Luke 9.23 Romans 12.2
that we may will that which he wills. And heereto also does Saint Paul
exhort us, saying: Be ye changed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may
prove what is the good will of God, and acceptable and perfect.

6 There be two sorts of servants and bondmen: the one borne at their masters
houses, the others purchased by their masters. Neither of these may live after
his own will, sense, or understanding, but as it shall please their master and
Lord. Now are we borne the servants of Christ, for he created us all, and
besides, he has also redeemed and purchased us, that we may belong more
particularly to him. As the master therefore of those servants that are borne
in his house, or whom he purchases, do pretend that they do him wrong, when
they spend any time either to their own particular profit, or in the service
of others: so may Jesus Christ, and much more justly complain of us, that are
his two fold servants, namely, by birth and by purchase, if we employ even
never so little of our lives to serve and please our selves, the world, or the
devil, our enemies: and this must needs redounde to a double sacrilege and
twofolde profanation of that which by double reason ought to be dedicated and
consecrated to him, who with double authority does command us to amend.

The second cause of Amendment, drawn from the name Holy, attributed to Jesus
Christ: wherein is handled Election, Reprobation, and Gods providence. Chap. 2.
THE Prophet Esaie rehearses, that he saw the Lord sitting upon his throane,
Isay 6.3.
and the Seraphims above him, crying one to another, Holy, holy, is the Lord of
hoasts. Here did they speak of Jesus Christ, John 12.41
as Saint John in his Gospel does affirm, who also reporting another vision
which himself saw, says: There were four beasts which cried night and day
without ceasing, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God almighty. Apoc. 4.8.
This title Holy, thus thrice repeated, among other things does teach us that
he is souerainly good, righteous, merciful, wise, mighty and true: even so
excellently and perfectly, that in these and other like divine properties, he
is most holy, and in them holds nothing in common with other creatures. And
in deed, if in man there be any goodness, righteousness, wisdom, or
truth, he has them not of himself, but from God. Neither has he thereof
any more but small drops or sparks, and the same are but graces happened
and accidents, or qualities, as they say in schools, so that even without
them he is nevertheless a man. But as concerning God, he has all these
properties of himself, they be in him perfect and infinite: yea, they are in
such sort his essence, that to deny his righteousness, wisdom, power,
mercy, and goodness, is to deny God. Mark therefore how rightly he is
called Holy, holy, holy.

2 It is no marvel that this, and all that proceeds herefro, does pass man's
understanding, for it exceeds even the capacity of the Angels. And this does
Esaie in this vision testify, saying: The Seraphims covered their faces with
two wings, Esaias 6.^
as not able to abide the brightness of this holiness. But the more
incomprehensible that it is, the more does it admonish us diuersely and in many
sorts to amend. And indeed, among the most dangerous and pernicious
corruptions of men, which especially we ought to amend, there is none greater
than a bold and presumptuous rashness, whereby men dare control the holy
doctrine of God, which they do not understand: yea, even to deny or pervert
the evident testimonies that he delivers in his word: or accuse God (O
intolerable blasphemy) of unrighteousness, iniquity, and cruelty, and reduce
him to such bondage, that he may do nothing but that whereof every blind man
is able to comprehend the reason, wisdom, and justice. And heerof we will
propound one example, which is but too common and most pernicious.

3 The holy Scripture in many places testifyeth, Math. 20.16 Mark 13.20 Ephesians.
1.4. Romans 9.11, and 11.5 Phil. 4.3. Romans 11.5 and 9.15.20 Phil. 4 3 Apoc. 3.5
Jude verse 4 Romans 9 23. John 10.28 Romans 9. 22 Romans 9.18 1. Sam. 2.6 Amos 3.6
Ier. l. ^. 3. 38 Job 38. and 39. Read Sect. 18. Acts 4.28 1. King. 22.20 Job
1.12 2. These. 2.9 Romans 9.17 2. Sam. 15 2. Chro. 36
that among the children of Adam, God has chosen some to salvation and life
eternal, leaving the rest without any portion in such felicity, that this
election was founded upon his only goodness and mercy, that he had power and
authority to choose whom he pleased, and to leave the rest, that the names
of the elect have from all eternity been written in the book of life, and the
rest recorded to just destruction, that God so prepared the elect to glory,
that they cannot perish, and that the vessels of wrath, as the Apostle terms
them, are in such wise prepared to destruction, that being by the decree of
almighty God, given over to themselves according to their own corruption,
they cannot but sin, and so be justly condemned, that God shows mercy to
whom he will show mercy, and hardneth whom he will harden, that nothing
comes to pass without the will and providence of God, that God did so
foresee the transgression of Adam, and that it was not without his decree and
ordinance, that all that was done as concerning Jesus Christ, by Judas, Pilat,
the Gentiles and the Jews, was done by the definite counsel and eternal
decree of God, directing the wicked work of men, that by them he might
accomplish his excellent work of our redemption, that many times he imploieth
both the devil and the wicked, as a father to correct by their wicked works,
the sins of his elect, and as a just judge, to punish the iniquity of the
others.

4 Now albeit there is no doctrine that may stand us in greater stead than
this to engender humility in man, neither to produce any sitter argument to
praise God, or to minister consolation, peace and content, to such as feel
themselves to be the children of God: or that may be a more mighty or sharp
spur to prick us forward to amend our lives, as we will hereafter show: yet
are there some, who not being able to comprehend this doctrine, do thereof take
occasion to seek so to bury it up, that it may not be preached in the Church
of Christ. Others, that gather consequences of blasphemy, to pervert or reject
it. As concerning the first, The apprehension and fear which they conceive in
the blasphemies that the perverse do gather out of this doctrine, is
commendable: but the means that they take to prevent them, are not to be
received. Neither may we look to be more wise than Christ, who nevertheless
desisted not from preaching, publishing and recording it by his Apostles. And
surely albeit Saint Paul notes some blasphemous replications against this
doctrine, yet does he not leave too teach and maintain it. Christ says, He
that has ears to hear, let him hear. It must therefore be preached to those
to whom he gives ears to hear, Romans 9.14.19 Math. 11.15 and 13.9.43 John
10.27
that they may hear, and not be buried because of those to whom he has not
given ears to hear. Christ the sovereign shepherd, requires no less of
his sheep to hear him, then he forbids them to hear the voice of
strangers. It is a learned ignorance, not to know that which God would have
us to be ignorant of, but it is a pernicious ingratitude not to be willing to
know that which God would teach us. The soul deuoide of the doctrine of
truth, is prepared to receive lies. It is no Christian simplicity or
sobriety, to reject, as hurtful, the knowledge of that which the son
seeks to teach us. True wisdom and modesty in the children of God,
consists in opening their ears to learn, when Christ opens his mouth to
teach: also not to desire to learn that which he is unwilling to reveal
unto us. The holy Scripture is the school of the holy Ghost, wherein as there
is nothing omitted that is necessary to salvation, so is there nothing taught,
but what is requisite for us to know. And thus it is great injury against the
holy ghost, that he has taught or revealed unto us any thing meet to have
been suppressed. Let us therefore conclude this purpose with the advertisement
of Moses, saying: The secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the
things revealed belong to us, and to our children for ever, Deuteronomy. 19.29
that we may do all the words of this law. Behold how for the amending of
our lives, according to the exhortation of Jesus Christ, we are to correct
this ingratitude, pernicious counsel, and presumptuous rashness, which urges
us to suppress that which it pleases God to reveal unto us, and serves
especially to the magnifying of his glory, to the begetting of humility in
his elect, to strengthen their faith, and mightily to induce them to amend
their lives.

5 Others there are that proceed farther, for not being able to understand,
and yet desiring to comprehend the causes and reasons of the points of the
doctrine before mentioned, do take occasion to condemn and reject the evident
testimonies by God delivered in his word, by consequences falsely gathered,
which accuse God of cruelty and unrighteousness, and maintain that he is the
author of the sin and iniquity of men. But how do they herein swallow
themselves up? It is as if they should accuse the sun of darkness, because that
seeking to look into the brightness thereof, their eyes be dazeled. Many
artificers in their tratles, do work many things whereof we can conceive no
reason, yet do we not condemn them, because we presuppose that they are not don
without reason. How then? Shall we be so rash as to condemn the great builder
and governor of this world, because we cannot comprehend the wisdom contained
in his works? Shall the scholar say that his master is ignorant, because he
cannot understand the profound knowledge that is in him? That we may therefore
correct this rashness, and so according to the exhortation of Christ, amend our
lives, let us remember that when he is called Holy, holy, holy, we are thereby
admonished that in him there ^esteth a wisdom, goodness, mercy, righteousness,
power, and truth, both perfect and infinite: yea, that his whole essence is no
other but wisdom, goodness, and justice, which do infinitely surmount the
capacity of man. Likewise that our true humilitye, simplicity, wisdom, and
discretion consists in this, that albeit we do not comprehend it, we do
nevertheless believe that his will is the rule of all righteousness: that he that
demands any other reason or cause thereof than is declared in his word,
enters into a bottomless gulf, wherein he shall be swalowed up: that God is
goodness it self, and can neither will nor do any thing but what is good: that
his power to dispose of all creatures as he pleases, cannot be separate from
his wisdom and justice, and therefore that he cannot do any thing unjustly
or unwisely: that it is too great abaseme^t to God, not to acknowledge in him a
more profound wisdom than man is able to comprehend: or not to confess any
other righteousness in God, than such as man shall find to be just: and to
maintain that he is not able to do any thing, whereof man is not able to
comprehend the reason.

6 If proud and curious minds should object unto us, that we propound these
allegations, because we are not able to answer to their replications,
objections, and blasphemies, yet let us not be so carried away, or ready to
minister contentment to their rashness and curiosity, but rather let us clean
to the simplicity and most assured principles of Christian religion. Herein
rests the true sanctification of the name of God: As contrariwise, it is a
most dangerous presumption, to seek to give account of the works of God, in
the wisdom whereof he wylleth that man, feeling his own ignorance, should
humble himself: or to minister unto men any access to the inaccessible light
of God, wherinto no man is able to penetrate, 2. Cor. 12.2
but he shall be swallowed up: or in brief, to seek to nourish the
presumption and rashness of men which God, to the end to engender humility in
them, will kill. Saint Paul taken up into the third heaven, and there hearing
words unspeakable, such as it was not lawful to utter, knew well enough how
far he might wade in revealing the mysteries of Gods wisdom and
providence. And our selves may perceive how moderate he was in this respect:
Likewise how resolute and constant he showed him self, in opposing the only
will, wisdom, power, and glory of God against all replications, reproves,
and blasphemies of men. And in deed, speaking of Jacob the elected, and Esau
the rejected, he says: Romans 9.11.
Before the children were borne, and when they had yet done neither good nor
evil, (that the purpose of God might remain according to election, not by
works, but by him that calls) it was said unto Rebecca, The elder shall
serve the younger, as it is written, I have loved Jacob and have hated Esau.
Here does he plainly declare, that Jacob was elected and Esau rejected, not
for either of their works, either good or bad, but according to the
determination of God grounded upon his election. And hereupon the Apostle
demanding whether there were any unrighteousness in God, answers first, God
forbid. And that kind of phrase he ordinarily uses, whenever he goes
about to reject any question as abominable, and unworthy of answer: and
hereby admonishes us, when men use the like replications, to abhor them,
and to say, God forbid, as thereby maintaining, that it is a matter that
cannot come to pass.

7 Secondly, for a manifest explanation, that there is no iniquity in God, he
adds: For God said to Moses, Exodus 33.19.
I will have mercy on him to whom I will show mercy, and will have
compassion on him on whom I will have compassion. Herein does he first
confyrme that which we have already touched, namely, that election is
grounded upon the only mercy and free grace of God, without any consideration
of our works. Secondly, he alleges no other reason of this mercy to some,
and not to other some, but the only will of God, saying: He will show mercy
to whom he will show mercy. Thus does the Apostle teach us, that if man
thinks it no reason that God should choose some, and reject other some, only
upon his goodness and mercy, without any consideration of their works: our
most pertinent reason to justify God, is with the Apostle to say, It was his
will. Thus when our Lord Jesus Christ said, Math. 11.25
I give thee thanks O father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid
these things from the wise, and men of understanding, and have opened them to
babes. He adds only this reason, It is so, O father, because thy good
pleasure was such. So far therefore must we be from having any thing to
reply against whatsoever Gods will, that even in this so strange a work, in
the judgment of flesh: proceeding of the good will and pleasure of our
heavenly father, he shows, that we have an argument to praise him, and with
Jesus Christ to give him thanks. And Saint Paul followed these steps of his
master: Ephesians. 1.3.4.5 11.
for first he praises God because he has elected us in Jesus Christ, and then
he adds, that it was done according to the good pleasure of the will of God.
So often therefore as we read and see that God shows mercy to some, whom
he will save in his kingdom and glory, and leaves and forsakes other some:
It is enough that we allege, that it is according to the pleasure and
counsel of the will of God. Thus much to cut off all replications and
objections.

8 Earthly kings in the ends of their edictes and proclamations, do ordinarily
in stead of a reason add this, For such is our pleasure. And thereby do
prohibit their subjects from any farther inquiry and examination of the
reasons of their ordinances. And shall not God be in as good credit as
mortal man, to make us to receive and aduow whatsoever he wills and
decrees, only adding, For such is his will, and such is his pleasure? Men
may many times be deceived in that which pleases them, but God forbid that
God should will any thing that were not righteous or good. Let us therefore so
learn to sanctify the name of God, that so soon as in his word he
declares that such was or is his will, we reject all replications, and
uphold, that seeing he wills it, it is just, good, and holy, albeit we
cannot comprehend the reason of it. This is the doctrine that the Apostle by
his example does deliver. And it is our duty not to covet to be wiser than
the holy Ghost, who spoke by him, either to demand, or to render any reason of
the will of God, which cannot be but most just and holy.

9 Saint Paul proceeding in his purpose, speaks of the hardening of Pharaohs
heart, saying: For this purpose have I stirred thee up, that I might show my
power in thee, Romans 9.17,
and that my name might be declared thoroughout all the earth. But because it
may seem strange, that God should so harden the heart of Pharaoh, that
resisting his will and commandment, to suffer the people to depart, he should
be swallowed up in the sea, and the people of God be so delivered: What does
Saint Paul allege in justification of God? Even again, his will, saying that
in this horrible judgment executed against Pharaoh, and in the
incomprehensible grace showed to the people of Israel, God showed mercy to whom
he would, and hardened whom he would. If any man therefore should demand
whereof it comes, that God vouchsafes to save these men, by causing the
Gospel to be preached unto them, converting them by his holy spirit, giving
them faith, and showing mercy unto them, either wherefore he causes not the
gospel to be preached to others, or gives them not says, but rather hardneth
them. Saint Paul admonishes us to answer, Such is Gods will, he shows
mercy to whom he will, and hardneth whom he will. And therefore let it
content us, to understand that it is his will, as also he wills nothing but
in justice and wisdom. And this only reason ought more to satisfy and
content us, than all the expositions and reasons that the most subtle heads
and spirits in the world are able to invent. And in deed, the reasons of the
holy Ghost are stronger than the reasons of men: and whatsoever their knowledge
is, yet must they not presume to have more knowledge than the holy Ghost, and
this must we allege in defense of the justice and glory of God.

10 This does the Apostle also represent unto us in that he adds. For having
propounded this objection and replication, Why does he yet complain? Romans 9.19
For who can resist his will? he labors not to propound the discourse of
man in the justification of God: but stays upon three points. First, he
shows that the only remembrance that we are men, ought to restrain us from
arguing with God. Secondly, that God with his creatures may do what he will.
And thirdly, that the manifestation of his glory must swallowe up all
replications and murmuring. For first he answers, O man, who art thou which
speak against God? Thereby signifying, that where men dare reply, and thus
accuse God of unrighteousness, because they understand not his reasons? the same
does proceed of this, that they remember not that themselves are men, either
what man is in regard of God. If a child of eight or ten years old,
hearing a philosopher discourse of the greatness and course of the Sun,
should argue against him, and maintain that the same were no greater than a
platter, neither of any swifter pace than a snaile, would the philosopher stand
upon the delivery of the reason of his discourse unto him? No, for the child
could not be capable to conceive it. But he would tell him, Thou art yet a
child: Even so is man in comparison of God, infinitely less in knowledge than
is a child, in comparison of the most excellent philosopher in the world. We
must therefore with Saint Paul marvel how man dares strive or dispute with
God, and in reason to stop his mouth, we may say unto him, O man, Job 9.3, 32.
who art thou that speak against God? If man would dispute with God (says
Job) he could not answer him unto one thing of a thousand. And therefore he
after adds, saying: God is not a man as I am, that I should answer him, if
we come together to judgment, neither is there any vmpier that might take
notice of our cause, or lay his hand upon us both. The same does God also
note, where he speaks to Job in a whirlewinde, and says: Who is this that
darkneth the counsel, by words without knowledge? Gird up now thy loins like
a man, I will demand of thee, Job. 38.2.
and declare thou unto me. When therefore we hear these replications,
wherefore does God complain of us, that we are so hardened, either that being
hardened, we do offend him more and more? Seeing it is his will to harden us,
we cannot stand against him. Let us answer with Saint Paul, O man, who art
thou? Shall man that knows himself so to be, take upon him to dispute with
God?

11 As for the second point, the Apostle confirms the same that he had
before spoken, namely, that God has mercy upon whom he will, and hardneth
whom he will: declaring by the similitude of a potter, that he has power
and authority so to do: And in deed, Has not the potter power of the claie,
Romans 9.21.
to make of the same lump one vessel to honor and another to dishonor? Yes
even so much, that the earthen vessel cannot say to the potter, Why have thou
made me thus? What iniquity is it then, to suppose that God has not as much
power over his claie, namely, over man his creature, as man has over the
earth, which the creator has given unto him: Men with this reason, I will do
with mine own what I please, do stop the mouths of their equals: How much
rather then may God so do, whose will is ever conjoined with wisdom and
justice whereby he cannot do any thing but in wisdom and justice? If any
man list to reply, that there is great difference between the earthen vessel
to dishonor and the reprobate, because the vessel feels no evil, but the
reprobate shall feel most horrible and eternal torments: We answer that the
Apostle well enough knew that, and yet judged the similitude to be very fit
and sufficient to justify God, as in deed it is great reason that he should
employ his creatures as he will, for the manifesting of his glory in them.

12 And it is the third point which the Apostle touches, where he says, What
if God would to show his wrath and to make his power known, Romans 9.22
suffer with long patience the vessels of wrath, prepared to destruction, and
that he might declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy,
which he has prepared unto glory? He here does declare first, that God
does so hate and detest sin, that immediately and without delaie he would
swallowe up sinners, were it not that in patience he suffers and bears
with them, yea, and endueth them with many bodily goods: but they upon
obstinacy and with unpenitent hearts abusing this patience, do heap up for
themselves wrath in the day of wrath, Romans 2. 5
and of the declaration of the just judgment of God. Secondly, that God does
thus in patience tolerate the vessels of wrath prepared to perdition, that
he may afterward show his wrath against sin, in the horrible and eternal
punishment thereof: as also his power and authority to dispose of his
creatures as he will, as it is showed in the similitude of the potter.
Likewise he declares, that the purpose of election tends to let men know the
riches of his glory, in the vessels of mercy which he has prepared to
glory. To be short, he teaches us that the declaration of his wrath against
sin, and consequently of his holiness and justice in punishing the same:
also of his power and authority to dispose of his creatures as he will: and
lastly, of his great mercy to the elect, do all serve to the manifesting of
the glory of God. As nothing therefore does better beseem God than the
manifesting of his glory, so for the justifying of God, and the shutting of
the passage against all such blasphemies, it suffices with the Apostle Saint
Paul, to maintain that his glory shines in his mercy to the elect: in his
justice against the vessels of wrath, prepared to perdition: and in his power
and authority to dispose of his creatures, as he will. For such as are not
content with this reason, do show themselves to be enemies to the glory of
God. Besides, that this phrase of speech which he here uses, when he
says, Who is it, does show, that in whatsoever God does for the manifesting
of his glory, man is not to murmr or reply, especially considering that it
was and is the purpose of all Gods works. Prou. 16.4
For he has made all things for himself, says Solomon, even the wicked for
the day of his calamity.

15 The same Apostle in another place very notably confirms the premises,
saying, God has shut up all in unbelief, Romans 11.32
that he might have mercy on all. The purpose of Saint Paul in this place
is, to show that the Gentiles were unbelievers, even until the resurrection of
Jesus Christ, and the Jews after it, to the end that the Gentiles being
converted by the preaching of the Gospel, might confess, that having so long
remained in unbelief, plunged in idolatry, and given over to all wickedness,
Ephe. 2.1^
even as Saint Paul says, without Christ, without God, and without hope, It
was undoubtedly a work of mere and wonderful mercy of God, to receive and
graft, them into the Church by preaching of the Gospel. Likewise that the
Jews, after their incredulity, which has now continued above fifteen
hundred years, receiving the Gospel whenever it shall please God to call
them thereto, may also confess that their salvation proceeds neither from
the worthiness of their ancestors, neither from the merits of their works, but
from the sovereign and mere mercy of God. Behold here a number both Jews
and Gentiles, reprobates, vessels of wrath, whom God has shut up in
rebellion and unbelief, in whose just perdition Gods mercy shall the more
shine upon a small number of his elect. If any man list heereat to take
occasion to murmr, in that he cannot comprehend Gods judgments, let him
with David, remember that they are wonderful deep. And in lieu of laboring
and seeking to find out the reason of them, let him in maintenance of Gods
justice, with Saint Paul cry out and say, O the deepnes of the riches, Psalm.
36.7
both of the knowledge and of the wisdom of God! How unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out? For who has known the mind of
the Lord, or who was his Counselor? Or who has given unto him first, Romans
11.33
and he shall be recompensed? For of him, and thorough him, and for him are
all things, to him be glory for ever, Amen.

Here we see how the Apostle by the tenor of this exclamation, beating down
the pride and rash presumption of man, teaches us to contain our selves in
all sobriety, modesty, and humility in the sight of God, to reverence his
judgments, which he has said to be incomprehensible. In our selves to feel
that there is in God a depth of wisdom, which swalloweth up man's
understanding, to confess that he is not bound to his creature, to acknowledge
that it is not possible for us to comprehend his ways: and finally, that in
this wonderful work we must glorify God for ever. How horrible therefore are
the blasphemies of those that dare accuse God of iniquity and injustice,
because he opens not unto them the treasures of this heavenly wisdom,
whereby they may understand the reasons of his incomprehensible judgments,
works, and ways, which cannot possibly be found out?

14 The prophet Esaie rehearses, that he received from God this commandment,
Go and say unto this people, ye shall hear in deed, but ye shall not
understand, Esaias. 6.9.
ye shall plainly see and not perceive. Make the heart of this people fat, make
their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, least they see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert, and he
heal the^. This is a commandment that seems very strange, for it does not
only foreshew the hardening of the heart of the Jews, and consequently, their
destruction, but also that preaching shall be the occasion to blind them and to
harden their hearts. Shall we therefore say that God is the author of their
hardness, blindness, sin and destruction that proceed thereof? God forbid. And
therefore note what S. Paul said to the unbelieving Jews, It was necessary
the word of God should first have been spoken to you: Acts 13.46
but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles. Moreover, wherefore has God wrought in the
hearts of some by his holy spirit, and given over others to hardness of heart,
and blindness? True it is, that as a just judge, he has punished the
wickedness of unbelievers, in hardening them: yet must we ascend to the eternal
decree of God, who has elected those whom he would, to convert them, and given
over the others to be hardened. Now albeit thou can not understand why he has
chosen those rather than the other, why he causes the doctrine of salvation to
be preached to some, with such efficacy of his holy spirit, that thereby they
do convert and believe: but unto others without any efficacy of his spirit,
whereby they harden themselves, and so increase their conde^natio^: also, how
God hardneth, and yet is no author of the hardness of heart, either of ye sins
that thereof do proceed: yet see thou reverence the incomprehensible
judgments of God, and consider what went before this commandment given unto
Esaie, Esaias 6.
He says that he saw the Lord sitting upon an high throane, and lifted up,
and the lower parts thereof filled the temple: The Seraphims stood over it,
covering their faces with two wings, and crying one to another, Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God of hoasts, the whole world is full of his glory. This teaches
us to humble our selves before this holy, most holy one, and to reverence the
judgments of this king that sits upon the throne, John 12. 42
as most holy and most righteous, and in the execution whereof shines his
glory. Whereupon Saint John having alleged this sentence of Esaie, touching
the blinding and hardening of the Jews, expressly does note, that the Prophet
spoke this when he beheld the glory of Jesus Christ.

15 According to the purpose of the premises we say, that whereas God has
chosen some, even whom he would, and not other some: and in all that God in
his providence has ordained, and done for the execution thereof, there rests
such wisdom, goodness, mercy, and justice, that for the approving of that
which in the wisdom of man's flesh seems strange and unjust, it suffices to
show, that the same was so ordained and decreed in the eternal and determinate
counsel of God. And indeed, if any man ask why the gospel is preached rather
to some than to other some: also, why among those to whom it is preached, some
do believe, and some do rest unbelievers: it is reason sufficient to answer,
that some are chosen, and other some are not. So many, says Saint Luke, did
believe as were ordained to life everlasting. You believe not, says Jesus
Christ, because ye are not my sheep. Acts 13.42 John 10.26
My sheep hear my voice and follow me. When the Apostles asked Jesus Christ
why he taught the people by parables, wherein they had no understanding, and
which afterward he opened to them alone, he lifted them up into this
consideration, that they were chosen and the other not. To you, says he, it is
given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, Mark 13.10
but it is not given to them. And therefore when we read that some, even in
lieu of converting and believing, have bin hardened and become more wicked,
whereby the preaching of the Gospel has bin unto them a savor of death unto
death: It suffices that we answer, that this befalls not the elect, but as
Saint Paul says, 2. Cor. 2.15
those that perish, and are vessels of wrath, prepared to perdition. And
therefore the preaching of the Gospel, whereby some are hardened, is
nevertheless of a sweet savor before God, as he does expressly affirm.

16 Let us therefore conclude, that all that God has willed in the election of
some, and not of other some, and in his providence, and the execution of the
same, is good, righteous, holy, and commendable. And albeit we cannot
comprehend it, yet let us beware that of our ignorance we take no occasion to
blaspheme God, but rather let us acknowledge that it is because we do not yet
know any thing of the incomprehensible holiness of Jesus Christ: namely, that
he has an infinite power to dispose of his creatures as he will, an
incomprehensible wisdom to ordeine most wisely: mercy and justice, which in
him are but one essence, whereby he can do nothing but in mercy and justice.
This if thou do not understand, I say to thee again, accuse thine own
ignorance, and reverence this holiness, which passes thy understanding.
Believe so much as in his word he testifies unto thee, and permit this infinite
power and wisdom to do, and to know even that which thou can not
comprehend. Remember that he dwells in an inaccessible light which thou must
reverence, but not enter into. Beware thou be not an advocate for so wicked
a cause, 1. Tim, 6, 16 Romans 3.4 Psalm 51, 6
as is the cause of the reprobate, to justify it in the sight of God. For
howsoever thou think it to be, he will always, as David says, overcome
when he is judged.

17 In the mean time, for the better understanding of our intent, and knowledge
in this doctrine, we say, that if we stand upon the consideration of man's
creation to the image of God, both he and all that are descended of him were
created to life, for in man created to the image of God, there was no matter or
argument of death: But if we speak of the predestination hidden in the
eternal counsel of God, the same is a profound deapth, that should even
ravish us into admiration. And whereas Saint Paul calls those that are not
elect, vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, he has regard to their first
original and nature of men, Romans 9. 22 Heb. 7.10 Romans 5.12.
according as all, being yet in the loins of Adam when he transgressed Gods
commandment, did all sin in him, and are all guilty of death, and infected
with mortal corruption. Not that there was not in God a former counsel which
went before, whereby he had decreed and disposed of his creatures upon certain
causes to us unknown: but for that from the transgression of Adam proceeded
the curse and death of mankind. Saint Paul says that God prepared vessels of
mercy for his glory, because that all that the elect have to guide them to
life everlasting, proceeds of the grace of God: Romans 9.13
but others are prepared to perdition, because they are given over to
themselves, so that following their own corruptions, they go according to the
eternal decree of God, to destruction. And hereof do we gather that albeit
God had just cause, to us unknown, thus to dispose of his creatures, by
choosing some, and rejecting other some, yet did he not hate or condemn any
thing but sin and corruption. It is not therefore fit that we should seek
the cause of the destruction of the reprobate in heaven, when we see that it
rests in earth: neither that we should impute that unto God which is in man
himself: neither should the reprobate also murmr at the mercy of God poured
upon the elect, considering that God may do good to whom he will, either at
their own destruction, whereof there rests a twofold occasion in themselves,
namely, original sin, and the iniquities that do thereof daily proceed.

18 Moreover, as concerning the transgression of Adam and Eve, 1. Sam. 2.6.
Amos 3.6 Iere. La. 3.38. Job. 30.39. Psalm 104. and 105. and 106 and 107. and
136 Math. 10.29
it is certain that the same never came to pass without the decree and
ordinance of God. And in deed, the holy Scripture in infinite places does
testify, that all things depend upon his providence and decree. If a sparow
falls not to the ground without the will of God, shall man, so excellent a
creature, created after the image of God, take so horrible a fall without his
providence and decree? A man may give a little child some small stripe with a
rod, without the parents appointment, which notwithstanding they would
peradventure dissemble and wink at: but none dare undertake to cut him of the
stone, or to cut off any lim, without his fathers good will and authority: Even
so, the greater that the importance of Adams transgression was, in that it
tended to destroy and overthrow so excellent a work of God, namely, man,
created to his image: the more are we to believe, that it was never done
without his counsel or decree. Moreover, if in his providence he has
ordained what he will have done with all other creatures, has he not, think
you, ordained what shall be done with the principal and most excellent, for
which he created all the others? Again, if God creating all the world, and man
to his own image, purposed that the principal end of his work should be the
manifestation of his glory: did he not also ordain means to attain thereto?
But the fall of man was as it were, a preamble and a preparation, to declare
his love in his redemption through Christ, and to make manifest his mercy to
his elect, and his justice to the reprobate. And in this especially does the
glory of God appear. If there were sin in the fall of Adam, so was there in
the pursuit against Jesus Christ: And yet lo, the Apostles speaking unto
Almighty God does say: Doubtless against thy holy son Jesus whom thou
have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilat, Acts. 4.27
with the Gentiles and the people of Israel gathered together, to do
whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel had before determined to be done. Again,
speaking to the Jews in express words, they object unto them, that by the
hands of the wicked, they took Jesus Christ and crucified and slew him, Acts.
2.23
being to them delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God.
Albeit they cannot comprehend that Adams transgression wherein there was sin,
came not to pass without the providence and decree of God, and yet that God is
not the author of sin. Must they therefore deny his providence, and those
places of holy Scripture, wherein the holy Ghost does so often and so evidently
testify the same? Or contrary to so many testimonies of his word will they
make God the author of sin? They do not murmr, blaspheme, or reply against
us, but against the holy Ghost? Must they, because they cannot comprehend how
it should be possible that God should prohibit Adam that thing, which
nevertheless came not to pass without his decree, will, and eternal
counsel, deny those testimonies which himself delivers in his word, or
maliciously gather, that in God there should be two contrerie wills? Let us
believe so much as he testifies in his word, and reverence so much as we do
not understand. If we should conioyne the redemption wrought by Jesus Christ
with the fall of Adam, we should soon confess, that as well the one as the
other came to pass by the providence of God.

19 Yet if it were requisite to consider some reasons, the same which Saint
Augustine does note might well content us. We safely do confess, Augustine of
reproving and grace. c. 10
says he, that we do well believe that God, the Lord of all, who created all
things good, and who both did foresee that from good they should digress to
bad, or knew that it did better beseem his almighty goodness to make of evil
good, than not to suffer the evil, has so determined the lives of Angels and
men, that in the same he would manifest, first what free will was able to do:
next, what his grace, with the judgment of his justice, were able to bring to
pass. First Saint Augustine says, in that he calls God the Lord of all, he
does show that he had power and authority to dispose of his creatures as he
would. Secondly, in that he says, that God created all things good, he notes
that God is the author of the goodness that has bin in all his creatures,
namely, in man, created to his image, but not of the sin afterward committed.
Thirdly, in that he knew, that from good they should degenerate to evil, and
yet that voluntarily he permitted it, he propounds this reason: that it
better beseemed him to show his almightye goodness, in making of evil good,
then in permitting the evil: And then he shows the good that God gathered
out of the fall of Adam. First, that it served to show what freewill was able
to do, thereby signifiyng that there is no steadfastness but in God: and yet
that Adam was inexcusable in his fall. For having created man with free will,
his sin was not upon compulsion, but voluntarily: and indeed he did eat of
the forbidden fruit, not to the end to obey the decree of God, whereof he was
yet ignorant: but at the instigation of Satan, and upon a lust to be like unto
God. And therefore, when God reproved him, he complained not of Gods decree but
of his wife Eve, and his wife of the Serpent: Gen 3.6. and 3.12.13.14.
and God in his sentence pronounced against them, denounces them all to be
guilty and worthy of punishment.

20 For the second fruit gathered in the fall of Adam, he says: that it
served to declare the benefit of the grace of God to the elect: and
consequently to cause us to confess that our salvation is indeed free, and
grounded upon the only love and mercy of God. Also that this we ought not to
misdoubt, because hereby we are pulled out of the gulf of death and damnation,
whereinto by Adams transgression we were plunged: likewise that he has elected
us, to the end to make us pertakers of so great a benefit: and left and
abandoned so many others of like condition as ours, in the deapth of
everlasting woe: and to save us, has delivered his only begotten son Jesus
Christ to the death. Finally, in that he says that he vouchsafed to show the
judgment of his justice, namely, upon the reprobate, he thereby represents
unto us, that they have no cause to murmr or contend: and indeed as already
we have showed, that Adam was in his fall inexcusable, so are they who being in
Adam, did with him fall into death and corruption: for the sin and corruption
is in them, and proceeds from Adam, not from God. And albeit that which they
do is not without the providence and determinate counsel of God, yet not
knowing, neither having any regard thereof, but voluntarily abandoning
themselves to sin, and executing, as S. Paul says, the l^stes of their
flesh, Ephesians. 2.3.
they cannot impute the cause of their damnation to God, considering it is in
themselves: neither the r corruption, seeing they take it from Adam. In this
sense Judas seeing that he was condemned, grounded not his excuse upon the
determinate counsel of God: but accused and condemned hi^^elfe, saying: Mat.
27.3.
I have sinned in betraying the righteous blood: and overcome with the just
judgment of God, he hanged himself.

21 By the premises it appears, that the true wisdom, humility and sobriety
of Christians consists in this, that when God opens his mouth to teach us,
we likewise open our ears to learn: and when he shuts his mouth, we covet
not to know. Let us in our selves find that in God there is a wisdom and
justice, which we must not search into, but reverence: and believe all that
Gods word does teach us, concerning the election of some, and the reprobation
of other some: as also of the providence of God, notwithstanding we comprehend
not the justice or reason thereof: for the glory of God must even swallow up
all our replycations and murmurings, because it is a true sanctification of
Gods name to believe that he neither does, neither wills any other thing, but
in wisdom and justice. Likewise it is to his glory, to have a justice,
wisdom, and bounty, that shall infinitelye surmounte man's capacity. And
therefore let us abhor all replications, murmurings, and blasphemies, used by
those, who laboring to comprehend that which is to man incomprehensible, dare
presume either to corrupt or to deny the holy doctrine of predestination and
Gods providence, and accusing him of injustice and crueltye against mankind,
dare maintain that he is the author of sin.

22 Herein are such men worse then the very devils, and indeed they having been
created Angels, just, holy, and good, did reuolte, But came that to pass
without Gods providence? 1. Tim. 5.21.
In that the Apostle Saint Paul makes mention of elect Angels, he thereby does
note that the rest were given over to themselves, and so rejected. Besides,
ever since the beginning of the world, they have still sinned more and more:
neither can they but sin, in respect of their wicked malice and corruption,
and thereby augment their horrible torments for the day of judgment. These I
say, are in all extremity malicious, slaunderers and liars, yet do we not read
that any devils did ever accuse God of injustice against them, either object
that he were the author of their sin, either maintain that necessarily
sinning, they are to be excused. But contrariwise, they feel in themselves
that they are iustlye condemned, and believing that there is a God, do
tremble: neither do we read that they ever complained that Jesus Christ came
to torment them unjustly, James. 2 19.
but before their time, and that in respect that already seeing their judge,
they did apprehend the horrible torments, wherinto they should be by him cast
headlong in the day of judgment, which they perceived to be nearer at hand then
they could have wi^hed. In what degree shall we then place those men that seek
either to abolish Gods providence, or to accuse him of injustice, or to
maintain that he is the author of sin?

23 If any troublesome spirit, which cannot be satisfied with the premises,
will still in questions and replications be skirmishing heer-against: let us not
be ashamed with S. Aug. to say, Consider what God is, and what thy self art,
that he is God and thou man. If thou think to speak justly, shall the
fountain of all justice be dry? Aug. upon the words of the Apostle. Sermon. 20.
O man, do, thou expect an answer from me? I also am a man, and therefore
let us both give care to him that says unto us. O man, what art thou? Surely a
faithful ignorance is better the^ a rash knowledge: Do thou look for merits?
thou shall find nothing but punishment. Oh the depth! Peter denies Christ,
the thief believes in him. Oh the depth! Sekest thou a reason for those
things? I am amazed at the depth of them. I cannot attain to any bottom. Paul
found where to rest, by growing into admiration, he says that Gods judgments
do surmount all knowledge, and come thou to search into them? he says that
his ways cannot be followed, yet thou will tread his steps: hereto also do the
same tend which in an other place he speaks very brief. Will thou argue
against me? rather marvel with me, and cry out, Oh depth! Aug. upon the words
of the Apostle. Sermon. 11.
let us both agree in fear, least we perish together in error. And indeed,
what can the most learnedest wits of these days propound, which the Apostle
knew not, in answer to the objections of those that seek to reuerse this
doctrine: yet he by holding his peace, does by his example teach that against
al replications, we are to oppose only the wisdom, justice, goodness, power
and glory of God. And such as cannot be content with these answers, which
contain the true sanctification of the name of God, and proceed from the holy
Ghost, can never be stayed by any that proceed from the wisdom of men.

24 As this name holy attributed to Jesus Christ, does teach us as is
aforesaid, that his goodness, power, truth, wisdom, mercy and justice, is
infinite and incomprehensible, so to the end we may amend, let us beware that
we undertake not to sight against the simplicity and truth of this holy
doctrine: let pretty, charity, and zeal to the edification and peace of the
Church of Christ, mortify in us all curiosity, presumption, and ambition. Let
us beware that we seek not to sound the depth of Gods wisdom, which is
infinite, least justly we be therein snared and swallowed up. And in case any,
to the end obstinatelye to reject this doctrine which is confirmed with so
many and such evident testimonies of the word of God, Rom 3.7,
do yet persist in the use of replication repugnant to the nature of God, let
us with the Apostle say, that their condemnation is just. Behold therefore in
what sort we are, for the amending of our lives, to learn to renounce the
accursed wisdom of the flesh, and all devilish rashenesse, which will presume
to condemn the thing which we do not understand: and contrariwise, to
reverence the secrets of God, which do pass our capacities, and his works,
which we are not able to comprehend: that so depending in all humility and
faith, upon so much as it shall please him to reveal unto us, we may
constantly sanctify the name of holy, most holy, with this holy resolution,
that whatsoever he ordeineth, does, or commands, cannot be but holy and
commendable, as proceeding from his perfect and infinite holiness.

The third cause of amendment, derived from the predestination and providence
of God, entreated of in the former Chapter. Chap. 3.
SVch as cavil against this doctrine of predestination and Gods providence, do
among other matters allege this false inconvenience, which is an enemy to the
amendment of life, and that in two sorts, and say, if we be predestinate to be
of the number of the reprobate, it is in vain for us to endeavor to live well
and uprightly, for albeit we should amend, yet of necessity we must be damned.
Others say, if we be elect, we cannot perish, albeit we do evil and never
amend our lives. But let us consider the absurdity of their speeches, and then
we will declare in how many sorts, and how earnestly the doctrine of Gods
predestination and providence should move us to amend. First, it is a great
presumption to reject the evident testimonies of Gods word, upon an absurdity
forged in man's brain, as in old time did the Saduces, who denied the
resurrection: Mat. 22.23. Mat 20, 16. Mar. 13 20. Ephesians. 1.4. Romans 9.11. and
11.5. Phil. 4.3. Iud. verse 4.
Gods word in many places, and very plainly does testify, that God has
elected some to salvation, and rejected other some, that being given over to
themselves, they might be reproved. Those men therefore do grow to great
rashness, that dare allege that it is in vain to amend, in case they be
reprobates: that by this absurditye forged in their own brains, they may cauil
and reject this doctrine of predestination, and consequently deny the word of
God: let them rather acknowledge their ignorance, and confess that they ought
to believe and do that which God says, albeit they cannot comprehend the
reason thereof, and not complain in their false conceits, and so reject the
evident testimonies of the holy scripture. Secondly, in as much as God, who
knows both the elect and the reprobate, commands all to amend, 2. Tim.
2.19. John 13.8.
with what conscience can they which know not whether they be of the number of
the reprobates, think to exempt themselves from their due obedience, or
allege that it were in vain, in case they were reprobates: for they cannot
deny but that all men are bound to obey God, under pain of damnation, even
albeit they could not comprehend whereto this obedience should serve, yea or
that of their obedience they should not look to reap any benefit or profit.

2 Thirdly, such as God has forsaken, and so are reprobates, can never amend,
and therefore it is a false presupposion, to say that it were in vain for them
to amend, in case they should be of the number of the reprobate, considering
that it cannot be that the reprobate should amend: as if a man should say,
seeing that he that sins against the holy Ghost, shall never obtain
remission of his sin, it is in vain for him to amend: this speech
presupposes false, namely that he can amend: so likewise that it is in vain
for a reprobate to amend is a false imagination, because no reprobate can
amend. Again, the same which those men do confess, must be done for the
bodily life, Mat. 12.31.
because they know not how God has ordained thereof, does condemn them in that
which they allege concerning the soul: for not knowing how God has ordained
of their bodily life or death, they can confess that they must eat and drink
to preserve life, and never allege that it is in vain, in case God has
decreed that they should dye the next day. In matter therefore of the soul
they are likewise to confess, that they ought to amend, and never to allege
that it is in vain, in case their place be among the reprobate: otherwise,
that which they eat and drink for the preserving of their transitory lives,
will bear witness against them, that the allegation of this ab^urditye by
themselves forged, does in matter of the soul proceed either of gross
ignorance or of malice and peevishness.

3 Moreover, as the effect of Predestination shows it self either by the
obedience or disobedience to Gods word: so they which say that if they be not
of the number of the elect, it is in vain for them to amend, do teach men to
take the mark and way of the reprobate, which is, not to amend: rather should
the horrible punishment of the reprobate induce them to amend, in hope that by
amendment, they may grow into the number of the eiect. Marc. 1.15.
To conclude, where God preaching his Gospel, declares that it is his will
that thou should believe, and amend, and be saved, Mat. 4.17.
Why do thou reject his revealed will, under a pretense that thou wottest not
what he has determined of thee in his secret counsel? Why do thou not
rather give credit to his protestation, Ezech. 33.11.
who says? I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should convert
and live. Convert therefore and live, and forsaking that wicked suggestion of
the devil, who says: Peradventure it is in vain for thee to convert, for if
thou be none of the elect, thou shall not live: do God that honor to
believe that he is true and the devil a liar: for in that doubt, whether
thou be elect or no, know thou that conversion and amendment, is a token and
fruit of thy election: and contrariwise, obstinacy and proceeding in
wickedness, is a manifest sign of reprobation.

4 Let us now come to the other proposition. If we be elect, say they, we
cannot perish, and therefore need not to amend. First, this is the speech of a
hyreling, who properly fears not to offend God, but to be punished by God,
for that he would not amend but for fear of damnation. Secondly, in as much as
by the amendment of our lives, God is greatly glorified, and our neighbors
edified, Confess, that either thou make no account of the glory of God, or
the salvation of thy neighbors, or else that thy speech is perverse, when
thou say, Being elected I cannot perish, and therefore need not to amend:
for albeit amendment should stand thee in no stead, yet is it requisite and
meet that thou should amend, were it but to glorify God, Mat. 22.37.
and to help to the salvation of thy neighbor: and heereto art thou bound,
because God commands thee to love him with all thy heart, and thy neighbor
as thy self. Thirdly, thou do plainly beat down this purpose of election
which S. Paul does propound, Ephesians. 1.4.
when he says: God has elected us that we might be holy and unreprovable. As
if a Soldier says, I am enrowled, and therefore I need not to fight: will not
every man say that he does but mock, for he is not enrowled for any other
end: even so do we mock with God, if we say that being elected, we need not
to live virtuously, considering that contrariwise we are elected only to this
end, to be holy.

5 Again, election to salvation does not abolish, but establish the second
causes and the means by God ordained for the attayning thereto. And indeed, God
for the saving of his elect, has ordained that they should believe in Jesus
Christ: that to procure belief they should hear the Gospel: that they should
pray to God to give them his holy spirit: that they should amend and walk in
his fear: and that they should be exhorted to these duties, God, I say, has
in his wisdom ordained all these means, whereby to bring his elect to
eternal salvation. What rashenesse is it therefore in man, to uphold that the
elect need not believe in Jesus Christ, hear the holy Gospel, or amend
their lives? To be short, that they need not the means ordained by God for
the bringing of them unto life everlasting? Is not this to seek to be wiser
then God, to strive against his wisdom, to reuerse his will, and to abolish
the means whereby he has ordained to bring the elect to salvation? When
therefore to the end to bring the doctrine of predestination into hatred, thou
say, that thereof it does necessarily follow that the elect need not to
hear the Gospel, to believe in Jesus Christ, to amend their lives, to pray
to God, or to be exhorted to these duties: thou see that it is all false, and
that contrariwise, God will save his elect by these means, which in his
wisdom he has ordained. Necessarilye therefore, the elect must be saved:
yet by such means as God has ordained for the bringing of them to salvation.
God has limited to every man the term of his life, but withal he has
ordained and appointed that for the preserving thereof, he shall both eat and
drink. If thou say that thou shall of necessity live thy course that God
has prescribed, and therefore that for the preservation of thy life thou
need not to eat or drink: thou do the^in directly fight and strive
against the will and pleasure of God: and this is temptation: neither do thou
notwithstanding God has decreed the time of thy life, forbear to eat or
drink. Why then do thou not the like for thy soul? as he therefore that
should abstain from food, and say that he need it not to live by, should
draw to this end: so they that say, that being elect they need not believe
the Gospel, nor amend their lives, for the atteyning to the kingdom of
heaven, do teach men to tempt God, and reuersing his providence, striving
against his will, and so far as in them lies, abolishing the means and way
to life and salvation, do draw on to death and eternal damnation. Which is
more, if any man ask the cause why some do believe and amend their lives, and
others do not, the holy Ghost does answer, That it is election that makes
this difference: so far therefore are the elect from no need of this holy
life, is they do pretend, that contrariwise, holiness and amendment of life
is the token and fruit of their election. Again, wherefore do they say that
if there be election, the elect shall not need to live in holiness? they do
this, as is aforesaid, only by such an absurdity to prove that there is no
election, notwithstanding there be so many and evident testimonies thereof in
the word of God, John 10.27. Romans 8.29. Act 13.48. and 28.24. Apoc 2.27. Mat.
20.16. Marc. 13.20. Ephesians. 1.4. Romans 9.11. and 11.5. Phil 4 3.
they do therefore upon an imaginary absurdity, which indeed is none, reject the
express word of God, notwithstanding the same does very well agree that both
there are elect persons, and that they cannot perish, yet must live
nevertheless in holiness, that is to say, walk in the way that leads to
salvation, which is ordained for them from before the beginning of the world.
And indeeed S. Paul affirms both the one and the other, saying: that God has
elected us, to the end we might be holy.

6 Having thus discovered either the gross ignorance, or the malice and bad
consciences of those that use these allegations for the rejecting of the
doctrine of Predestination: we will now prove that there is nothing of greater
efficacy to move and enslame our hearts to the amendment of life, then the
knowledge and feeling of our election. First, if we be elected to life
eternal, we are also elected to have faith, and consequently to amend our
lives: for those be the stayres* and passage from election to glorification, as
S. Paul teaches. Romans 8.
The knowledge therefore of election to salvation, binds us to amend our
lives: that is to say, to walk in that path whereby God vouchsafes to lead
the elect to the enjoying of everlasting life. Ephesians. 1.4.
God says S. Paul, has elected us in Jesus Christ, before the foundation of
the world, that we might be holy and unreprovable before him in love. Ephesians.
2.16.
Again, We are the work of Gods hands, created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which God has ordained, that we should walk^ in them. Col. 3.12.
Hereof also does the same Apostle take occasion to exhort the Colossians to
amendment, saying. Now therefore as the elect of God, and beloved, put on
tender kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, for bearing
one another, and forgiving one another The like ground takes S. Peter, 1. Pet.
2.9.
saying: Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a
peculier people, that ye should show forth the virtues of him that has called
you out of darkness, into his merueilous light.

7 What poor maiden is there, who hearing that some king had among all other,
chosen her to be his sons wife, and withal ordained that to that end
forsaking her parents and kinsfolks, she shall come to him on foot in the
midst of Winter, would not willingly and readily leave all, and even in Winter
and on foot, come to the King to finishe this great marriage? as we read of
David, who hearing that Saul had chosen him to be his son in law, by giving
him his daughter in marriage, in case he could bring him an hundred
fore-skinnes of the Philistines, ventured his life, to the end by satisfying
the Kings desire, to be his son in law. Even so we, understanding and having
witness that God has chosen us to be the spouse of his son Jesus Christ,
and coheires of his kingdom: also that it is his will that forsaking the
world and the flesh, we should walk through the path of good works, in
amendment of life, to come to heaven, there to accomplish this happy marriage:
how fervently should we renounce the world, the flesh, and every thing that
contrarieth his will, that we may the more speedily and cheerfully proceed in
amendment of life, and so perform this blessed marriage?

8 Moreover, he that knows that there is an eternal felicity, replenished
with all glory, for the elect and horrible condemnation with most fearful
torments, prepared for the reprobate: how happy would he think him self, if
God should send him an angel to assure him that he is of the number of the
elect, whose names are written in the book of life? But amendment of life is
unto us as a message, witness and seal of our election, for as election is
the cause and fountain of amendment, so does amendment lead us to our
election, as the effect to the cause, the fruit to the tree or root, the
brook to the spring, and the light to the Sun. How earnestly therefore ought
we to labor to amend our lives, and to increase in sanctification, to the end
more and more to be assured of our election by the fruits of the same, as also
S. Peter after he has exhorted us to amendment of life and good works, 2. Pet.
1.10.
does admonish us to study by the same, to make sure our election.

9 But above all let us consider the fountain of our election, and that is, the
free love, goodness, and mercy of God toward us. As S. Paul alleging the
authority of Malachy, does declare. Malach. 1.2.
For to show that Jacob was chosen and Esaw rejected, in the person of God he
says, I have loved Jacob and hated Esaw. Romans 9.15.
As also in the same consideration, he alleges this sentence, written by
Moses, Exodus 33.^9.
I will show mercy to whom I will show mercy. And in the same sense are the
elect termed the vessels of mercy, but indeed, Romans 9.23.
in as much as God has chosen us from among so many others like unto us, even
before the foundation of the world, to an incomprehensible and eternal glory
and felicity: Ephesians. 1.5.
what might be the orignall and foundation that his free love, Ephesians. 1.5.
his mercy, his incomprehensible goodness, and the only good pleasure of his
will, (as S. Paul also says) That even God himself has chosen us, and
predestined to adopt us to himself through Jesus Christ, according to the
good pleasure of his will. If therefore we would diligently meditate and ponder
that the cause that we are preserved from the horrible condemnation of the
reprobate, which daily by our sins we do deserve, and assured of the
possession of life and everlasting glory, without any our desert, proceeds of
the only election of God, grounded upon his goodness, love, grace, mercy, and
good pleasure: how should it possibly be, but that the remembrance of our
election should induce us, first to humble our selves in the sight of God, Ephesians.
2. 3.
and acknowledge that by nature we were the children of wrath as well as
others, as also that in us there was neither worthiness or merit that might
move God to elect us, but that only of his mere goodness, mercy and love, he
elected us to life everlasting? Secondly, this feeling of his love and mercy
toward us, shining in our election, ought to kindle our hearts and souls in the
love of God, that they might even burn in fervent love toward him: We love
God, says S. John, because he first loved us. 1. John 4.19.
If the Sun in his force shining upon a stone, can so heat the said stone
that a man shall not be able to touch it with his hand: how much rather shall we,
if we meditate upon this love toward us in our election, albeit we were as
cold as marble, be warmed and kindled to love him with all our hearts, with all
our strength, and with all our minds, as himself has also commanded us.

Bernard in a tract of the love of God.
10 The cause, says S, Bernard, why we should love him, is God himself, and
the measure, is to love him beyond measure: he declares that the divinity in
it self considered, is worthy that we should love it beyond measure: how much
then must we love God when he communicates to us his love, goodness and mercy,
in electing us to life everlasting? but if we love God in such manner as our
election, that leads us to his love toward us, does bind and admonish us,
we ought to study to amend our lives, in keeping his commandments, as Jesus
Christ requires at our hands, saying: If ye love me, Luke 14.15.
keep my commandments. As also it is our duty to love that which he loves,
and wills us to love: and to hate that which he hates, and wills us to
hate: and this is the root of our bond, to love our neighbor for the love of
God, and contrariwise, not to love the world, James 4.4.
because as the Apostle says, The love of the world is enmity with God. And
for this cause must we also deny our selves and the flesh, Romans 8.7.
because the affections thereof are repugnant to God: yea even for this, must
we be ready to forsake, father, mother, Luke 14 26.
goods, and life it self, for the love of God: for otherwise we are not worthy
to be his.

11 As in this love to God and in all that we have showed to depend thereof,
the true amendment of life does consist: so does it sufficiently appear, that
there is not any more lively or vehement argument to induce us to amendment,
then the meditation and remembrance of our election, and consequentlye of the
love of God toward us, which shines in the same: and this does the Apostle
Saint Paul writing to the Romans expressly confirm: for in the 9.10. and 11.
Chapters, having at large entreated upon predestination, he thereof does in
the beginning of the twelfth gather this vehement exhortation to amendment of
life. Romans 12.1.
I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that ye give up your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your reasonable serving of
God. And fashion not your selves like unto this world: but be ye changed by
the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good will of God,
acceptable and perfect. He here raises them up to the consideration of the
great mercies of God, shining in their election to salvation, thereby to give
them to understand how deepelye it binds and should induce them to amendment
of life. So often therefore as we find our selves slack in the service of
God, or attempted to offend him, let us think upon our election, and the love
and mercy of God, the spring and original of the same, that so we may be
moved to love God, and to show forth this love by a careful and continual
amendment of our lives.

12 Moreover, the remembrance of our election ought to stir us up incessantly
to praise God: First, for the incomprehensible riches of the life and glory
whereto we are elected: Secondly, by the apprehension of the horrible and
eternal damnation of the reprobate, wherefro election only has saved and
preserved us. The remembrance therefore of so great, so wonderful and mere
incomprehensible a benefit, thus doubly considered, ought to ravish our
souls, and open our mouths, night and day infinitely and incessantly to praise
God. Besides, if we consider the cursed state of the reprobate, and meditate
upon the fire always burning: the woorme perpetually gnawing: the darkness that
shall be without end, to be short, the lamentations and gnashing of teeth
proceeding of their anguish, that shall be the woeful fruit of their sins, and
the just reward of their iniquities: who can but detest the offending of God?
Men use openly to execute the guiltye, to the end that others by the
apprehension of their punishment, may fear to commit the like transgressions:
let then the representation of the so woeful estate of the vessels of wrath
burning in hell fire, make us to fear to commit any thing whereby to deserve
like punishment.

13 Again the knowledge of our election ought in us to engender a steadfast
assurance that we cannot perish. My sheep, says Jesus Christ, John 10.27.
hear my voice and follow me, and I give unto them life uerlasting. None shall
take them from me. My father who has given them unto me, is greater then them
all, and none is able to take them out of my Fathers hand. John 6.37.
I and my Father are one. Again, All that the father gives me shall come unto
me, and him that comes to me I cast not away. And this assurance is grounded,
first upon the foreknowledge of God, for he cannot be deceived in the
foreknowledge of that that is to come. As indeed, all is present in his sight,
yea even more assuredly then are to us those things that we still look upon.
Secondly upon the eternal decree and unchangeable will of God, whereof the
Prophet Esaias makes mention, saying in the person of God: My Counsel shall
hold, Esaias 46.10.
and I will accomplish my pleasure. Thirdly, because he that has elected us to
salvation and life, has withal ordained and prepared most certain and
requisite means, undoubtedly to lead us to the enjoying of the same. S. Paul
in a short sentence, notes these three foundations of the assurance of the
elect to attain to life everlasting. Romans 8.29.
Those, says he, which God knew before, he also predestined to be made like
to the image of his son, that he might be the first borne among many
brethren. And whom he predestined, them he also called: and whom he called,
them also he justified: and whom he justified, 2. Tim. 2.19.
them he also glorified. First he says, that God did know before, that is,
from all eternity, those whom he would save. Could he be deceived? God (says
the Apostle in another place) knows those that be his. Secondly, he says
that he had predestined them to make them like to the image of his son. His
will and decree is it not unchangeable? Thirdly, he shows that he has
ordained for them, all that is requisite to lead them to salvation, saying
that he has called and justified them. And this is so certainly fulfilled in
the elect, that he speaks of it as if it were already done, and they already
lifted up into glory: for he says not, that he will call, he will justify,
or he will glorify his elect: but that he has called, he has justified
and has glorified them. And least our infirmitye should shake us, he opposes
the power of God against all the enemies of the elect, saying: If God be with
us, who shall be against us? As also to show that they can want nothing, he
adds. He, who spared not his own son, but gave him for us all to death,
how shall he not with him give us all things also? and withal he proceeds
saying: If any man shall lay any thing to our charge, God himself shall
justify us, for that he finds in us no cause of condemnation, because that
Christ died and rose again for us. And in that he loves his elect, to show
that this love, the fountain of all goodness, Ephesians. 1.4.
is steadfast and immutable, concluding his speech, he says: that whatsoever
befall us, we may be certain that we shall be more then conquerers, through
him that has loved us, and who will love us constantly in Jesus Christ the
son of his love, the true pattern, pillar, and accomplishment of our
election, and in whom we are elected, and not in our selves. The elect therefore
cannot possibly perish, as Jesus Christ himself notes, Mat. 24.24.
saying: There shall be such assaults and temptations, that even the very elect,
if it were possible, should be seduced: therein manifestly declaring, that it is
impossible that they should be seduced or drawn to destruction. The engendring
therefore of an assured certaintye in us, 1. Cor. 9.26.
that nothing can let us, but that finally we shall come to heaven, is a most
excellent fruit of this doctrine: for as we can have no greater consolation, 1.
Tim. 6.12.
so is it an especial encoragement unto us in all our assaults and combats,
knowing that we sight, not as beating the air, or doubtfully, but the good
fight of faith, and that undoubtedly obtaining the victory, we shall be crowned
with eternal glory. 1. Cor. 15.18.
And this is it which should also augmente in us a zeal and affection to
suffer for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to enlarge our goods to the
poor, Apoc. 14 13.
fervently to employ our selves in all things that may tend to the glory of
God, and so to amend our lives, as knowing assuredly, that being elect, our
labors and works shall not be in vain in the sight of the Lord, but shall, as
S. John says, follow us, and be unto us a blessed increase of joy and glory
in his everlasting kingdom.

14 There is yet another notable fruit, which some do beat down, by
maintaining that God offers to all men salvation and life everlasting, and
according as himself did foresee that some should accept it, and believe and
live well, so he did elect them, to increase in them his graces and to save
them. And as for the others, that should reject the salvation offered, and live
amiss, he has predestined them to take from the^ those graces that they
had, and so to reject and damn them. These men are possessed with two errors,
repugnant to the glory of God, and the salvation of man. Concerning the first
which is the universal calling of all men, if thereby they understand the
creation and government of the world. God does indeed inuit man to love,
fear, and praise him: but as he offers unto them neither Jesus Christ, nor
remission of sins, so can it not be termed a calling to salvation and life
everlasting: and thus the creation of the world, is not a calling that may
make man to be saved, Ephesians. 2.12.
and consequently elect: and therefore all that have had no other calling, have
been (as Saint Paul says of the Ephesians, before the gospel was preached
unto them) Strangers from the covenant of the promise, out of Christ, without
hope, and without God in this world. Secondly, if by the universal calling,
they mean the preaching of the Gospel, experience shows, Act. 19.6.7.
and the holy scripture sufficiently testifies, that there were and yet are
many nations in the world, to whom God has not vouchsafed to direct his
word, to call them: as we also read that God forbad Paul that he should not
preach in Asia, neither suffered him to go to Bithinia, and therefore it
cannot be truly said that this vocation was universal and common to all men.
2. Tim. 1.9.
Thirdly, there is a holy calling, as S. Paul terms it, proceeding from the
holy Ghost, which is proper and peculier to the elect, and not universal. Of
the second, Jesus Christ speaks, saying: Many are called, but few are chosen,
Mat. 20.16. Romans 8.29.
and S. Paul of the third, says: Those whom God knew before and predestined,
has he also called. And whereas these men do allege the saying of the
Apostle, that he will save all, because he adds, and they shall come to the
knowledge of the truth: it does appear that he there speaks not of these
nations, 1. Tim. 2.4.
to whom he would not have his word, which contains all truth, preached.
Secondly, the following of the text does manifestly declare, that S. Paul there
m^^^eth not to speak of every man, but of all sorts of men, as Magistrates and
subjects, rich and poor, wisemen and fools: because it is the will of God to
save of all callings. The calling therefore that offers salvation, cannot be
spoken of all men in the world.

15 By the rejecting of this error, the elect may understand, that having been
called: First, by the preaching of the Gospel: Secondly, by the power of the
holy Ghost: there are in them as it were two elections. The one in that God
almighty leaving so many others to whom he has not at all addressed the
doctrine of his Gospel, has elected them, to deliver it unto them: the other,
in that rejecting so many others, to whom he has sent the preaching of his
Gospel, and yet nevertheless calls them not by his holy spirit: he has
elected them, that they might be called by the light and power thereof, to the
end he might save them in his kingdom and glory. And this consideration is
unto them as a twofold obligation wherein they are doubly bound as well
incessantly to praise God, as also to love him, and consequentlye to amend
their lives. And indeed, if they that had the first grace, namely the
preaching of the Gospel, and do not believe and amend, shall be more hardly
entreated in the day of judgment the^ the enhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah:
what do they deserve that are partakers also of the second grace, Mat. 10.15.
and have the Gospel preached unto them, with the power and efficacy of the
holy ghost, whereby they believe and are made the children of God: in case the
feeling of such a benefit truly incomprehensible, and proceeding as it were
from the bowels of Gods mercy and love toward them, should not kindle their
hearts with a holy affection and zeal to amend their lives?

16 As concerning the other error: that the election of some and not of other
some, came of this, that God did foresee that the men should do either well or
evil, as the Pelagians did in old time teach: one only place of Saint Paul
will be sufficient to condemn it. Blessed be God, says he, Ephesians. 1. 3
which has blessed us with all spiritual blessing in heavenly places in
Christ, as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that
we should be holy and without blame before him in love. Who has predestined
us to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he
has made us accepted in his beloved. Throughout all this whole sentence there
is not any word but may ^^fise to condemn this error. First, where the
Apostle says that God has blessed us, he shows that the spiritual
blessings, whereof he speaks, are the gifts of the Father of light, and come
not of ourselves. Secondly, adding that he has blessed us in Christ? he
declares that those blessings are imparted unto us, not for our own sakes,
but for Christ's sake. Thirdly, in this, according as he had chosen us, and
that in Christ, he notes that our election comes of God, and is grounded
upon Christ, and not upon us. Fourthly, adding that he had chosen us, before
the foundation of the world, and so before that man was, he would that we
should acknowledge our election to proceed from the eternal will and counsel
of God, and not from our works, or our acceptance of his grace unto us
offered. Fifthly, he has euidentlye declared this in that he says that we
were chosen, not in respect of any holiness that he foresaw in us: but to the
end that we might be holy and unreprovable in his sight. And therefore it is
not the acceptance of Gods graces and the faithful use of the same, foreseen
in us, that makes us to be chosen: but even the election it self, which
brings forth this acceptance of grace, and consequently faith and good
works. Sixthly he adds, according to the good pleasure of his will to show
that our election depends upon the only goodness and will of God, and not of
men. Seventhly, he confirms it, adding to the praise, and glory of the grace
of God: for if election had proceeded from the freewill and works of men, the
praise and glory thereof, as Saint Paul many times notes, would have
redounded to themselves, and not to God? Romans 4.2.
and so God should not have elected the^, but they should have elected
themselves. Lastly, in adding, that of his grace he has made us acceptable in
his well beloved, he euidentlye does show, that it is not our acceptance of his
grace that has made us acceptable, whereby we should be elected: but only his
grace and the love that he bears to Jesus Christ.

17 Moreover. if the election of some and not of other some, should have been
wrought according to the good or evil works foreseen, Romans 9.
it were in vain for S. Paul to persuade us to acknowledge the power and
authority of God, in showing mercy to whom he will, and hardening whom he
will: and to make the good will and pleasure of God, the foundation of the
election of some, and not of other some: for in maintenance of Gods justice, he
might have answered in one word, that he had chosen some, and not other some,
according to the merits of their works, which he foresawe. In vain also had
it been for him to cry out, O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and
knowledge of God, Romans 11.33.
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? for could
there be any thing more easilye comprehended, or any answer more ready and
plain, then to say that the election of some and not of other some, was made
according to the merits foreseen in every one? But the Apostle in not
propounding this for the maintaining of Gods justice, does sufficiently show
that we must not use it: and that it is a vain and false allegation. And
indeed in another place for the foundation of our election and salvation,
opposing against the works of justice, not those which our selves shall do,
but the mercy of God, he plainly shows that our election is not wrought by
the works foreseen, either done or to do: but by the only mercy of God.

18 Heereto will we also add one notable place of Saint Augustine. Augustine
of predestination c. 12. and of t e benefit of perseverance. cap. 10.
If the children of the faithful (says he) do die in their infancy, we
nevertheless believe that according to the teno, of the covenant, they shall
be saved. It must needs then follow, that they are elect and predestinate, yet
not by their works foreseen, for they never did any. But where the Pelagians
replied, that God elected them for the good works that he foresawe that they
might have done if they had lived: He answers, that no man is punished or
rewarded for the works that he has not done, nor never shall, or that he
never had, neither could have any conceit or will to do. Whereupon it is
written, 2. Cor. 5.10
that every man shall receive, according as in his body he has done good or
evil. And for proof hereof, he alleges the examples of the Tiryans and
Sydonians, of whom Jesus Christ says, If his virtues and miracles had been
done among them, Math. 11.21
they would have converted and amended their lives. And therefore God should
have chosen them, that they might not have been damned. And contrariwise, the
saying in the book of Wisdom, that Enoch was taken away by death, least
malice should have corrupted his heart, does show, Wisdo. 4.10 Genesis 5.24
that he should have be^^ reproved and condemned for the malice foreseen,
wherewith he might have been corrupted, if he had lived. And thereof it must
also follow, that God had been deceived, in foreseeing the thing that should
never have come to pass.

19 As this error therefore, which allotteth unto man for the foundation of his
election, himself, his free will, and his works, does diuerte him from the
feeling and acknowledgement of the love, goodness, grace, good will, and power
of God, and puffs him up in false and most pernicious opinion of his own
virtue and merits, to his overthrow and destruction: and withal, does deprive
God of his glory: so contrariwise, the doctrine of election understood and
believed in manner as we have before declared, does teach and admonish us, to
attribute the whole glory of our salvation to one only God, incessantly to
praise him, to reverence his power and infinite goodness: wholly to depend
upon him, and to walk in all humility, confessing that in us there is
neither beginning nor preparation, whereby God should be bound to choose and do
well by us: and therefore that all good, namely our election, is the pure gift
and free grace of the goodness of God unto us. And to conclude, This doctrine
ingendereth in us an assured certainty of our salvation, infusing comfort and
joy into our hearts, with a zealous affection to consecrate our selves to the
service of God with our whole hearts all the days of our lives.

20 As for Gods providence, the only remembrance that nothing befalls us
but by the eternal will of him that has elected us in his son Jesus Christ,
ought to bring forth in us many notable fruits. First, this doctrine teaches
us to banish the profane opinion of the heathen, that imagined that all things
came by fortune, attributing to an idol forged in their brains, that thing
which appertained only to one God, namely, the event of all that was done. But
as this is an intolerable idolatry and sacrilege, so representing their
Goddess fortune blind, they took away all fear of offending God, and all
desire to live well. And in deed, if all calamities and prosperities should
befall man, not by any conduct of providence, judgment, or reason, but by
adventure, who would fear to do evil for fear of correction and punishment?
Who would desire to live well, when he should stand in doubt whether in well
doing he should be blessed? But when we do believe, that all comes by
the providence of God, who sees all things, and loves righteousness, and
hates iniquity: The only remembrance that it is God that sends both good
and evil, will move our hearts to fear correction and punishment for doing
evil, and to hope for prosperity and blessing in living in righteousness and
holiness. Thus will the knowledge of Gods providence stand us in great stead to
induce us to amend our lives.

21 The second fruit that grows hereof, is a true sanctification of the name
of God. For believing all things to come of the will and providence of God,
all-wise, all-righteous, all-good, and almighty, even every affliction and
calamity that befalls us: First, the remembrance that he is righteous will
breed humility, as knowing that it is in justice that he afflicts us for our
sins. So Mana^les king of Judah, 2. Chro. 33
being grievously afflicted in prison, was by this doctrine moved to
acknowledge his sins, and consequentlye to humble himself before God. Dan. 9
So Daniel speaking of the captivity of the Jews in Babylon, confessing the
sins both of the people and of himself, among other things says: To us O
Lord, belongs confusion, but thou art righteous. In this sense does Jeremy
reprove the children of Israel, Iere. 8.6
for that in their affliction no man said, What have I done? Not that God
always takes occasion of our sins to punish us, but because he never
afflicts us wrongfully, or before we have deserved it. And therefore should
the knowledge, that it is he that afflicts us, humble us, and make us
confess that he is righteous. Thus also shall we beware of murmuring against
God, and say with the Prophet David, O Lord, I held my peace, and opened not
my mouth, for it is thou that haste done it.

22 Which is more, this doctrine will teach us to sanctify his name, that we
shall praise him, even in our afflictions. And in deed believing that this God
that punishes us, is good and a well dooer: also, that loving us in Jesus
Christ without comparison better than a carnal father can love his children.
Secondly, that undoubtedly he wills the thing that is to our health and
profit: believing moreover, that he is almighty, and so can do what he
will. Thirdly, that being infinitely wiser than we, he better than our selves
does know wherein our good and salvation does consist. This feeling, I say,
of his goodness, love, power, and wisdom, will force us to conclude, that
all the affliction that he says upon us, is to our profit and good, albeit
in the judgment of the flesh we think otherwise. This is a true
sanctification of the name of God, and induces us to love him, when we are
thus assured by the goodness, love, power, and wisdom of him that afflicts
us, that the same affliction is good and profitable for us: and renouncing the
contrary judgment of our flesh, we do praise and bless God in the same:
when our spirit shall find that to be good which our flesh thinks to be bad,
and that our spirit shall make us to praise God for that which makes our
flesh to weep. To this purpose is the example of Job very notable. For he,
Job, 1
when he lost all his goods and children, said, The Lord has given, and the
Lord has taken away, blessed be his name. Afterward being extremly tormented
in body, he said: Job. 2.1
If we have received good from the hand of God, shall we not receive evil?
First, he acknowledged all his affliction to proceed from the will and
providence of God. Next, he felt that God, by whose providence he was
afflicted, is, as is aforesaid, all good, all wise, and almighty. And
therefore in this sanctification of Gods name, he concluded that affliction was
good and profitable. And this was the cause and reason that he blessed God in
his affliction: 1. These. 5.18.
as also S. Paul admonishes us to yield thanks unto God in all things.

23 Again, this doctrine teaches us, not to regard man that afflicts us,
but God who uses him for our affliction. In this sort did God use satan and
the Chaldees, in taking from Job his goods, his children, and his wealth: yet
does Job attribute it to God, saying: God has taken all away, as it pleased
him, so is it come to pass. Job 1 ^
This regard of Gods providence will mortify us in all hatred, malice,
bitterness, desire of revenge, injury, and wrong, whereto we give our selves,
when we regard the man that iniureth, wrongeth, and afflicts us. 2. Sam. 16.6
Thus when Semei wronged and did curse David, he contained himself, and held
back Abisay, that would have slain him, acknowledging that it was by the will
of God that Semei did thus injury him. Genesis 50.15.
Thus did Joseph give over all hatred and desire to be revenged of his
brethren, acknowledging that God had used them to afflict him, and out of his
affliction to produce so great a good. But we do ordinarily the contrary,
wherein we resemble dogs, who usually do run firceely at the stone that is
cast at them, when in deed they ought rather to deal with him that cast it.
Let us therefore acknowledge this providence of God, who uses the service of
men to afflict us, that we may in humbling our selves in the sight of God, and
praising him: also in renouncing all hatred, bitterness, and desire of revenge
against man, amend our lives.

24 Now if this doctrine admonishes us to praise God, even in our afflictions,
how much rather in his graces and blessings? We are therefore to amend two
great corruptions that rest herein: Some, as hogs that eat acornes under an
oak, do never so much as look up whence they come: Thus do many swallowe up
the gifts of God, as the dronkards that drink beer and wine, and never taste
the relish thereof, that with David they may say, O Lord thou art good and
gracious. They never think that these benefits do proceed from the
providence, goodness, and power of God, that so they may take occasion to
praise him. The meditation therefore of this doctrine, which teaches that it
is God that gives them meat and drink, air to breath, strength,
understanding, and industry to labou:r To be brief, that gives them both
soul and body, and all things necessary for the life and maintenance both
of the one and the other. This meditation, I say, would cause, that these
goods leading us to the spring head, would open both our hearts and mouths
to praise God incessantly. And this duty does David teach us, almost
throughout the whole book of Psalms, which is for that cause by the Hebrews
termed, The book of thanksgiving. The other corruption that we are also to
amend, is yet more dangerous, namely, when men attribute to their own
industry, force, counsel, and labor: to be short, to themselves the
blessings that proceed from God. This sacrificing to their net, and burning of
incense to their yarne, is but too common. Habac. 1.16
And is it not a villainous ingratitude, to take to our selves that glory which
we ought to give to God for his benefits unto us: But if we could remember
that it is in God that we are, that we live, that we have our moving, Psalm
9. 3.
and that all goods both spiritual and bodily that we enjoy, do come of his
providence: the knowledge of this spring would turn us from our selves, and
make us to look upon God: to rejoice in him, not in our selves: to sing
praises to his name, and not to ours: and to bless him only, Acts 17.28
who by his providence does impart unto us all those goods that we have.

25 This doctrine of Gods providence, has also respect to the time to come,
that we may amend our lives. First, such as do attribute the event of every
thing that they undertake, either to fortune, or to their own industry,
wisdom, power, or to the help of man, do still rest in trouble of mind, in
fear, and in doubtful and variable discourse. And when the success is bad,
they think themselves wretched and miserable: and contrariwise, if they
prosper, they attribute it to themselves, they be proud of it, and become
stout undertakers. Thus leaning upon broken reeds, 2. Chr. 25.19. Iere. 17. 5
they finallye receive the reward of their pride, and fall into confusion and
ruin, and bring upon themselves the woe pronounced by Jeremy against those
that trust in the arm of flesh. But such as know that it is God that by his
eternal providence guides all things, do not stand upon their own
wisdom or strength, Iere. 10.23 Prou. 20.24
but with Jeremy do say, O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in
himself, and that the man that walks cannot direct his steps. They also
remember this sentence of Solomon, Esaias 28.16
The steps of man are ruled by the Lord, how can man then understand his own
way? They do therefore lift up their eyes to God and do call upon him. They
labor not in their discourse, and as Esaie says, He that believes will make
no have. They stay and depend upon God, and will repose their whole
confidence in him. If their success seems bad to the flesh, they will humble
themselves, as knowing that he afflicts them not without cause: yea, they
will take comfort therein, Iud. 20. 25.26. Romans 8.27 Iere. 17.7
as being assured that God will turn all to their good and salvation,
according to his promise, that he will bless all those that trust and depend
upon him. And contrariwise, if their success be to their minds, they do
praise and bless him whom they called upon, whom they depended upon, and whom
they acknowledge to be the author of all goodness.

26 Also, as they know that God by his providence guides every creature, and
disposes of them as he will, so are they assured that the most wicked and
mightiest in the world, no not the devil him self can hurt them, or take one
hair from their head, without the providence and will of God, who loves them
in Jesus Christ. And not only so, but likewise that God will make both the
devils and the wicked to serve to his glory, and to the benefit and salvation
of his children. And in deed, as the holy Ghost does testify, it was the
providence and definite counsel of God, that the Jews and Gentiles should
persecute Jesus Christ to the death. And that Satan should move the heart of
Judas to betraie Jesus Christ. Act. 2.23. and 4. 27 John 13.2.
And in this manner did God fulfill our redemption to his glory, and the
salvation of his elect. Behold therefore how this doctrine ministereth
wonderful quiet and contentment to the children of God in all assaults, even
when they find themselves at deaths door. For respecting this providence of
God, they do hope in him, as Abraham did, beyond all hope, assuring
themselves, as David says, that God is our God, to save us, and that the gates
of death are in the hands of the Lord our God. Thus they do assure them selves
that God in his providence and power will assist the^, Romans 4.18 Psalm. 68.21
either by means ordinary, as are the same, which daily and continually he
bestows upon us, or extraordinary, as when for the space of forty years
he fed his children of Israel in the wilderness, daily sending unto them
Manna from heaven, either without any means at all, Deuteronomy. 8.3 Exodus 34.28 1.
King 19. 8 Dan 3 Dan. 6
as when he fed Moses and Elias forty days without meat or drink: yea, or
even contrary to natural means, as when he restrained the force of the fire
for the preservation of the three Hebrew princes in the burning furnace, and
stopped the hungry lions mouths, for the keeping of Daniel, that they might
not devour him.

27 This doctrine will also greatly avail us, to restrain us from many
iniquities, as from seeking means condemned by the word of God, to save our
selves from affliction and calamity threatened unto us: likewise to bridle us
from using any fraud or deceit in our affairs, or any badde conscience for
the attaining of prosperity. For in as much as it is almighty God, that by
his providence guides and governs all things, and man is not to hope for
any blessing or prosperity but from his favor and good will: it were extreme
folly, even very madness, to think to prosper by offending and provoking him
to anger and wrath. As contrariwise, we are not to doubt, but he guiding all
things by his providence, will bless those, who walking plainly, simply, and
in a good conscience, shall depend upon him. This may be unto us a mighty
buckler, to overcome the dangerous temptations wherewith otherwise we may be
easily drawn to follow the sins and iniquities of those that seem to
prosper in wickedness. For knowing that it is from Satan, whom in their
wickedness they do serve, that they receive their imaginary prosperity (yet
by Gods susterance) we must believe that it is to them rather a curse than a
blessing, considering that the only grace and good will of God is the mother
and nurse of all peace and prosperity. Thus do we see how this doctrine of
Gods providence will in respect of the time to come, assure us that he will
provide for all our necessities, either corporal or spiritual: that it will
minister unto us a holy resolution to walk constantlye in his obedience, and
to surmount the apprehensions of all inconveniences that might by any means
befall us: that it will cause us to forbear all fraud and iniquity, and to
walk in all playnnesse and equity, and thereby to expect the blessing of God:
that it will comfort us in all our afflictions and tribulations that he shall
either send or lay upon us, and induce us to magnify him in all his works,
namely, in those benefits and graces which we do receive thorough his great
providence and good favor.

28 To conclude, when we shall see reuolts in religion, heresy in doctrine,
schisms and troubles in the Church: that they which should be shepheardes
become Wolves: That by the preaching of the Gospel some are blinded and
hardened: That troubles and wars do ensue the preaching of Jesus Christ, the
prince of peace: That the wicked do oppress the children of God, and account
them as the offscumme of the world, with many other like matters strange to
the world: when (I say) we see all these things come to pass, and do
remember that it was all foreshewed and so ordained in Gods almighty
providence, we shall take no offense thereat, neither murmr against God, or
be faint hearted: but rather reuerencing the works of God, we shall abide
and continue steadfast in the faith and our due obedience, as knowing that since
such is the will and pleasure of God, it cannot be but good and expedient for
his glory and the salvation of his elect. And therefore it appears that they
which reject the doctrine of predestination and Gods providence, are enemies to
his glory, and to the comfort, edification, and salvation of the faithful: so
there is no doctrine that may or can more forcibly move us, as is before showed,
to amend our lives, in praising God incessantly, in loving him fervently, in
walking humbly in his sight, in obeying him constantly, in reposing our whole
confidence in him, in bearing our afflictions patiently, and in surmounting all
assaults virtuously. To be short, in sanctifying the name of God in his
incomprehensible works, that so we may finally attain to the possession of
life everlasting.

The fourth cause of Amendment, grounded upon the title and name Emanuel,
attributed to Jesus Christ. Chap. 4.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, this holy, most holy, before mentioned, is also called
Emanuel, Esaias 7.14 Math. 1.23
first by Esaie, after by S. Matthew, in rehearsing what was forespoken by him,
Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a son, and thou shall call
his name Emanuel, which is as much to say, as God with us. True it is, that the
holy scripture does usually use this manner of speech, that God is with us,
whenever it goes about to signify unto us that he is gracious, and that he
is willing to assist and defend us: But in this place it signifies and
expresses unto us the manner and means whereby God imparteth him self unto
us, not only by receiving us into favor, but also by grafting us into
himself in Jesus Christ, and uniting us with him, as himself prays to God
his father, saying: I pray not for these alone, John 17.20
but for them also that shall believe through their word, that they all may
be one, as thou father art in me, and I in thee, even that they may be also
one in us. This title therefore and name Emanuel, attributed to Jesus Christ,
which commands us to amend our lives, does admonish us of two points that
should earnestly move us to this amendment.

2 First, is there is nothing more repugnant to the holiness of Jesus Christ,
whom we before learned to be by Esaie called Holy, holy, holy, than
idolatry, injustice, malice, envy, ambition, whoredom, dronkennes,
covetousness, lying, cruelty, with other like vices and corruptions: so is
there nothing that ought more mightily to stir us up to correct these vices,
and so to amend, Leuit. 11 44 and 19.2. and 20.7.
than the remembrance of Emanuel, that is to say, of God with us, who being
conjoined and united unto us, does so often cry out, Be ye holy, for I am
holy. And in deed this is as if a man should say, you cannot say Emanuel,
God with us, unless you purge your selves of all filthiness and corruption, as
things that can have no fellowship with my holiness. In this respect does
Saint Paul earnestly exhort us to abstain from such things, 2. Cor. 6.14
to the end we may keep him with us, saying: Be not yoked with Infidels, for
what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? What communion has
light with darkness? What concord has Christ with Belial? Or what part has the
believer with the Infidel? And what agreement has the temple of God with
Idols? for ye are the temple of the living God, as God has said: I will
dwell among them and walk there, and I will be their God, and they shall be
my people. Wherefore come out from among them and separate your selves, says
the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you, and I will be a
father unto you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord
almighty. And in the next Chapter following he adds: Now therefore beloved,
seeing we have these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of the flesh and spirit, and grow up unto full holiness in the fear of God.

3 The temple of Jerusalem was called holy, because it was not a lodging for
men, but the house of God, wholye dedicated and consecrated to his service: as
were also the vessels belonging thereto in the same respect called holy. Now
if Baltasar king of Babylon, by using them in a banquet, and drinking in them
with his princes and concubines, did profane them, and was for the same soon
after rewarded, (for the same night he lost both his kingdom and life) surely
they that shall abandon, not the vessels, but the temple it self, and not a
temple of stone and of wood, but even their bodies and souls, that are made
the lively temples of the living God, to the profane and filthy uses of the
world and the flesh: in lieu of dedicating the whole to the holy service of
God, who is with them, do most filthily profane the Temple of God, and can
expect no other than a most horrible vengeance and punishment, as the holy
Apostle Saint Paul protests, saying: He that destroieth the temple of God,
God will destroy him, 1. Cor. 3.17
for the temple of God is holy, which you are. When a king makes his entry
into a Town or City, he finds those streets where he is to pass, made
clean, and his palace hanged: how much rather ought we, whom God chooses
to be his temple, and to make his entry into us, to be with us and to dwell
with us, to purify and cleanse from all filthynesse and uncleanness, and to
adorn the place of his habitation with all virtue and holiness?

1. Pet. 1, 13
4 Heereunto does Saint Peter exhort us, saying: Gird up the loins of your
mind be sober, and trust perfectly on the grace that is brought unto you by
the revelation of Jesus Christ, as obedient children: not fashioning your
selves unto the former lusts of your ignorance: But as he that has called you
is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation, because it is
written, Leuit. 11.44 and 19. 2
Be ye holy, for I am holy. Where he says, that the loins of our minds must
be girt, he shows that as they that wear long garments, when they come in
foul ways, do tucke and girte them up, least they should load them with mire
by dragging them through the same, so we, whose minds and affections do so
bend to the earth, that they do even traile thereupon, walking thorough this
world full of mire and corruption, must tucke them up toward heaven, least they
should touch such dangerous and damnable mire, from the which we ought wholly
to retire and separate our selves, that we may be made holy to the Lord. If
any man, 2. Tim. 2.21
says Saint Paul, purge himself from these filthinesses and corruptions, he
shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for the Lord, and prepared
unto every good work.

5 Jesus Christ prays unto his father to sanctify us: but how? Even by
withdrawing us from the corruptions of this world, John 17.17
and guiding us by his spirit to be consecrated and dedicated unto him. If
therefore we grow not in sanctification, we do make vain the prayer of Jesus
Christ so far as it concerns our selves. In the same prayer he adds this
protestation: For their sakes I sanctify my self, John 17.19.
that they also may be sanctified thorough the truth. If our savior Jesus
Christ sanctified and consecrated himself to God his father, to the end his
holiness might stretch unto us, and so in him and by him we might be
sanctified unto God: we do falsely boast that he is Emanuel, God with us,
conjoined and united unto us, and that we are members of his body, unless
that separating our selves from the corruptions of the world and the flesh, 1.
Cor. 1.30
we be sanctified in him and unto him. And in deed if Christ were of God
made unto us not only righteousness, but also sanctification, it is in vain
for us to boast of justification without sanctification: for God being with us
and united unto us, this union must of necessity engender not only our
justification in him, but also our sanctification by him.

6 It is the holy Ghost dwelling in us, that has conjoined us with Jesus
Christ, that he may be E anuel, God with us: For he (says the Apostle Saint
Paul) that has not the spirit of Christ is not his. And as there can be no
fire without warmth or light, so cannot God be by his spirit in us or with
us, but he will also sanctify and purify us from all vice and corruption,
Romans 8.9
that he may consecrate us unto God. We believe the holy Catholic Church:
Holy I say, because God is with it, causing it to participate in his
holiness, We are not therefore members of this holy Church, unless we also
be holy. As likewise we add, that we believe the communion of Saints,
that is, of the faithful and children of God. But falsely and in vain shall
we bear the name of Saints, or pretend our selves to be the faithful and
children of God, unless that denying the filthynesse and corruptions of the
world and the flesh, we be fully dedicated in all pureness and holynsse to
the service of God. And in deed when the holy Apostle says, Ensue peace and
holiness, Heb. 12.14
without the which no man comes to the Lord: He aduertiseth us, that
holiness is as it were the bond between God and us: also, that without the
same we cannot behold the face of the Lord.

7 This is the will of God, says Saint Paul, even your sanctification, 1,
These. 4.3
that is, that we abstain from whooredome, that every one of you should know
how to possess his vessel in holiness and honor, not in the lust of
covetousness, even as the Gentiles which know not God. That no man oppress or
defrande his brother in any matter, for the Lord is auenger of all such
things, as we also have told ye before time and testified: for God has not
called us to uncleanness but unto holiness.

8 Whereas Emanuel commands us to sanctify the sabbath day, he therein
shows us how much his holiness does bind us to amend our lives. The first
reason of this commandment tended by the ceasing from manual labor, to
figure unto us the spiritual rest, namely; the mortification and ceasing from
all desires, wills, works, and words of the flesh, Esa. 58.13.
as the Prophet Esaias also declares, saying: If thou refrainest upon the
sabbath from doing thy will upon my holy day, and do consecrate it to be
a holy and pleasing Sabbath to the Lord of glory, and that thou glorify
him, in not doing thy own works, and that thy own will be not found
therein, thou shall prosper in God. Besides, this figure has farther relation,
even unto Jesus Christ, as to the truth thereof, because it was he, who dying
for us, purchased unto us the grace so to mortify the old man, that being
dead unto sin, Col. 2.16.
we might sanctify this Sabbath in resting from our works and labors. And
to that purpose we read in Exodus, Observe my Sabbath, for it is a sign that
I am the God that sanctifyeth you. Exodus 31.13. Ezech. 20.12
Now how necessary this amendment and sanctification of life is, it does
appear in this, that God never required any thing more strictly, than
obedience to this commandment of the Sabbath. Ezech. 20.13. and 22.8. and 23
38. Iere. 17.21.27
For wheresoever he will note that all religion is subverted, he complains
that his Sabbath is defiled and violated.

9 Where God also commands that he that had gathered a few sticks upon the
saboath day, should be put to death, he plainly shows, that the least will,
word, or work of our sleth, deserves everlasting death. And in deed this
Emanuel perfectly and infinitely holy, cannot endure any filthynes and sin in
that which is joined and united unto him. As we do also read that when the
so^s of Aaron Nadab and Abiu, offered strange fire before the Lord, the fire
proceeded from the presence of the Lord and devoured them, Leuit. 10. 1
and they died before the Lord: whereupon Moses said unto Aaron, This is it
that the Lord pronounced, saying: I will be sanctified in those that come near
unto me, and I will be glorified in the presence of all the people. Thereby
showing, that the nearer that Emanuel comes unto men, or draws men unto
him, the less will he bear with their corruptions, and the sooner will he
punish the^: as does appear in a lump of wax, which the nearer that it is
laid to the fire, the more does the fire show his heat in melting it. And in
this respect, when God appearing out of the burning bush to Moses, commanded
him to put of his shoes of his feet, he adds this reason, For the ground
whereon thou stand is holy: not by nature more than any other, Exodus 3.5
but in regard of the presence of God.

10 In old time God dwelt in the midst of the people of Israel, and the Arc
and the Temple were testimonies of his presence, which presence tended to
assure them, either of his savor to bless those that yielded due obedience, by
amendment of life, o^ of his wrath, to punish those most grievously, who
contemning this grace should rebel against him. And this did Joshua most
liuelye represent to the people of Israel. For when they had protested that
they would serve God, and no Idols, he said unto them: You cannot serve the
Lord, for he is a holy and jealous God, and will not pardon your sins and
transgressions, so that if you forsake him, he will roughly entreat you. Ios,
24.19
When God named his son Jesus Christ Emanuel, he thereby declared unto us,
that he is in the midst among us, and with us, after a more excellent
fashion, as being united and conjoined in our flesh, and consequentlye unto
us. And therefore we are also the more bound in duty to live in holiness,
by amendment of life, as being assured, that as he is come nearer unto us,
and more excellently into us thorough his son Emanuel, so will he show
himself more severe and jealous in punishing us, when we turn from him, and
serve his enemies, the world and the flesh. So often therefore as we shall
hear or read this name Emanuel attributed to Jesus Christ, let us remember
that the same is a summon to us to amend our lives, that separating our selves
from all filthiness and corruption, we may be consecrated and wholly
dedicated to the service of God, who is with us, in praying him fully to
sanctify us both in body, in soul, and in mind, that we may be preserved
without reproach unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, He (says Saint
Paul) that has called us to this sanctification, joining us unto Jesus Christ,
1. These. 5.23
is faithful and will do it.

11 Secondly, this name Emanuel teaches us that God is with us, wheresoever
we be, and consequently, that he sees and knows all our thoughts, wills,
words, and works. For, as we have before said, his divinity is in all
places, and consequently by us, with us, and in us. Not that we should rest
upon the bare contemplation of this divine essence, to us incomprehensible, but
that we should refer all to his providence, by believing that it is he that
sees, knows, guides, and governs all that is done in heaven and in earth:
neither that he should need to stand near us to look upon our affections and
works. And in deed, mark how he reproves hypocrites, Iere. 23.23
that thought that they had to do with a God of a short or a dim sight. Weenest
thou (says he) that I am a God near at hand, and not a God a far off? Can
any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him, says the Lord?
Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord? Hypocrites did imagine such a
God in heaven, that withal they represented him to themselves, to be like a
man: yea, even short sighted, such a one as could not see far: and so
persuaded themselves that God did not see their wicked thoughts and works.
But he reproved them, saying, that he is not a God at hand only, that is to
say, such a one as is like unto men, that had need to stand by when they will
see any thing, but that he sees a far of. As David also represents him
unto us, saying: Psalm 33. 13 Hebr. 4.13
The Lord looks from the heavens, he beholds all the sons of men, and
from his dwelling he sees all the inhabitants of the earth. And the Apostle
plainly declares, that no creature can be hidden from him, but all things lie
open and bare to his sight that we have to do withal. In the mean time,
because that men, according to their nature, do more easily believe, that such
as are near them do see them: let them think that in whatsoever place they
be, God is near them, as this name Emanuel does admonish, which signifies,
that God is with us: yea, even in us, as having joined and united us to
himself, and therefore that he is not a God a far off only, as is
aforesaid, but also a God near at hand. As likewise how often is it noted by
the Evangelists, Math 9.4 Luke 5.22 Math. 12.25 Luke 6.8.
that he did both see and know the thoughts of those that went about to tempt
him, or that hatched any other conspiracy, or that had any bad opinion of him.

12 David in his own person does very aptly represent unto us this providence
of God, seeing all things, and being in all places, saying: O Lord, thou have
tried me, and known me, thou know my sitting and my rising, Psalm 139.1
thou understand my thought a far of, thou compassest my paths and my
lying down, and art accustomed to all my ways. For there is not a word in my
tongue, but lo, thou know it wholly, O Lord: Thou hold me straight
behind and before, and laiest thy hand upon me: Thy knowledge is too wonder
full for me, it is so high that I cannot attain unto it (namely, in all and by
all to comprehend it.) Whether shall I go from thy spirit, or whether shall I
fly from thy presence? If I ascend into heaven, thou art there, if I lie down
in hell, thou art there: let me take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the
uttermost part of the sea, yet thither shall thy hand lead me, and thy right
hand hold me up. If I say, yet the darkness shall hide me, even the night
shall be a light about me, yea, the darkness hides not from thee, but the
night shines as the day, the darkness and the light are both alike. For thou
have possessed my raines, thou have covered me in my mothers womb: Thine eyes
did see me when I was without form, for in thy book were all things written,
which in continuance were fashioned, when there was none of them before.
Behold here an excellent description of Gods providence, which declares unto
us the efficacy of this title Emanuel, given to Jesus Christ, and consequently
teaches us, that he sees and knows all that we think, say, or do, for
all is open in his sight, for he is with us and in us wheresoever we become.

13 The knowledge and feeling of this truth may be to great purpose, to
induce and resolve us to amend our lives. For what I pray you, is the spring
of such abundaunce of iniquity as we see at this day among men? Even this
false persuasion, or rather astonishment, to imagine that God is blind, and
sees not the works and thoughts of men. Psalm 59.8
They prate with their tongues, says King David speaking of his enemies, and
swords are in their lips. For, say they, who hears us? Hereof have we a
notable example in the ninety four Psalm. O Lord, says David, how long,
Psalm 94.
how long shall the wicked triumph? They prate and speak fiercely? all the
workers of iniquity vaunt themselves, They smite down thy people, O Lord,
and trouble thy heritage: They slaie the widdowe and the stranger, and murder
the fatherless, yet they say, The Lord shall not see, neither will the God
of Iaacob regard it. But let us now see how he reprooueth the blindness and
pride of these wicked ones: Understand ye unwise among the people, and ye
fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the ear, shall he not hear?
And he that formed the eye, shall he not see? Or he that chastises the
nations, shall he not correct, even he that teaches man knowledge? The Lord
knows the thoughts of man that they are vanity. As David also having
rehearsed the wicked and cruel enterprises of his enemy, obiecteth unto him,
that in his heart he says, God has forgotten him, he has hidden his face,
Psalm 10.11
and will not see him. What moved Caine to bring his brother into the fields,
and to be so bold as to kill him? Even this false opinion, that God did not
see him. And this did he very manifestly declare, in that when God asked him
where his brother was, he answered: I know not: Have I the keeping of my
brother? Genesis 4.8
As if he would have said, that God had not any reason to put that question
to him, considering that he was not appointed to keep him, and therefore
without blame he might be ignorant where he was.

14 But what shall we say of David, (a man that did so greatly fear God)
when he committed adultery with the wife of Vrias, made him drunk, and
afterward slew him by the hands of his enemies, thereby thinking to hide his
iniquity from men? Must it not needs be that at that time he was much
ouerseene, when he would imagine that God did not see him? Yet is this the
ordinary persuasion of those that give over themselves to wickedness, and
consequently, the fountain of an infinite number of sins and iniquities that
they commit, upon an imagination that God sees them not. Otherwise what an
impudency were it in man to commit adultery, to be dronken, to deceive his
neighbor, to backbite, etc. if he could think within himself, God is with
me, I am in his fight, he hears me, he sees me commit this wickedness?
And yet how often do men commit all these iniquities, even whoredom,
drunkenness, deceit, and backbiting in the presence of God, from which they
will very diligently forbear in the sight of men?

15 That we may the rather therefore amend our lives, let us remember Emanuel,
that is, that God is with us, even in us, joined and united unto us. And
withal, let us well think that he sees and knows all our thoughts, words,
and works, as is before declared: yea, let it be a strong bridle to withholde
us from wickedness, as Solomon teaches us, saying: Why should thou, my
son, Prou. 5.21
delight in a strange woman, or embrace the bosom of a stranger? Seeing the
ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his
paths? Prou. 15.3
And in another place, The eyes of the Lord are in all places, to behold both
the good and badde. Ribby one of the wise men of the Jews, in old time to
this purpose did very aptlye say, Grave these three things in thy mind, and
thou shall never sin: Drus. Apoth. of ye Hebrews and Arabians. l. 1.
namely, that there is an eye that sees thee, an ear that hears thee, and a
book wherein all thy words and deeds are written. Neither let us think,
when we neglect our duties in releeuing the poor, that God knows it not,
albeit we allege that we know nothing of their want, or had not wherewith
to help them: If thou forbearest (says Solomon) to deliver those that are
led to be slain, and such as are at deaths door, by thinking that thou will say, I knew not of it: he that pondereth the hearts, does he not
understand it? And he that keeps thy soul, knows he it not? Or will not
he recompense every man according to his works? God knows what means we
have to help the needy: and let us not think to blind his eyes with any
excuse, or by diminishing our fault. Let us not lie to men in his sight that
sees our dissimulation, and threatens to punish it, as we have a horrible
example in Ananias and his wife Saphira, who both fell down dead for lying in
the sight of God, when they spoke but to men. O Lord (says the Prophet
Jeremy) thou art mighty in counsel, Acts 9. Iere. 32.4
and plentiful in thy actions: Thy eyes are open upon the whole course of the
children of men, to give to every one after his course, and after the fruit of
his works. Behold again what the same Prophet says in the person of God, Iere.
16.19.
I will send out many fishers, and they shall fish them: and after I will send
out many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from
every hill, and out of the caves of the rocks. For mine eyes are upon all
their ways: They are not hid from my face, neither is their iniquity hid from
my eyes.

16 Let us continue steadfast in this resolution, that God is with us and in
us, and sees all our thoughts and works: That all things lie open and naked
in his sight: that the very holes and darkness, that we seek out wherein to
work our wickedness, are as light before him: that we can not go into any
place, but he will be present with us and in us. To be short, that we cannot
think, say, or do any thing but still it will be in his sight: and hereupon let
us imagine with our selves what an impudency it will be in us, to presume, to
think, say, or to do, in his sight, any thing that we would be ashamed of in
the sight of men: and withal remember that he is not only holy, hating
iniquity, and detesting such contempt of his majesty: but also righteous,
punishing most grievously as well the iniquity it self, as the blasphemy to
think that God is blind, and sees not the thoughts and words of men: also,
how horrible this impudency is, to presume to commit such filthiness and
iniquity in the sight of God, as we would be ashamed to commit before men.
Rather therefore, seeing this name Emanuel admonishes us that God is with us
and in us, let all our thoughts, words and works be holy, as he is holy: to
the end, that in liew of making a separation between God and us through our
sins, we may persevere in this sovereign good, to have God with us,
according as the name Emanuell given to our Lord Jesus Christ, does teach.

The fifth cause of amendment, drawn from these tytles, wonderful, a
Counsailor, the strong and mighty God, the Prince of peace, the Father of
eternity, attributed to Jesus Christ. Chap. 5.
THere be three especial things that procure the subjects to love their
Prince, and loving him, voluntarely to yield unto him all obedience and
fidelity: First, if he be wise to govern the^ with wisdom and discretion:
Secondly, if he seek their prosperity: Thirdly, if he be able to defend them
against the endeavors of their enemies, and to effect whatsoever may be
requisite for the safety and good of his subjects. These three points and
many more, shall we find in these titles, attributed by the Prophet Esaias to
our Lord Jesus Christ: for in calling him Counsailor, Esaias 9.
the Prophet declares that he is replenished with all wisdom, wherewith to
give assured counsel in all trouble and perplexity: but chiefly in matter
concerning the acceptable service of God and the hope of our salvation.
Secondly, he calls him the strong and mighty God, thereby to assure us that
he is of infinite strength and power to execute and fulfill his will, whether
in defending us against the endeavors of our enemies, in punishing such as
disobey him, or in making those that are subject and obedient to him, partakers
of his graces and benefits. Thirdly, he names him the Prince of peace,
because he is the author and fountain of all prosperity and felicity both
bodily and ghostly, signified by the word Peace: he does moueouer term him
also wonderful, to the end to give us to understand, that from Jesus Christ we
are to expect things more high and excellent then any that we can discern in
the ordinary course of the world: also that in him are hidden the inestimable
treasures of wonderful things surpassing man's expectation and capacity:
whether to the bliss of such as fear and obey him, or to the punishment of
unbelievers and disobedient persons. To conclude, the Prophet also does entytle
him the father of eternity, therein teaching us that Jesus Christ is the
author and ground work of the eternity of the Church, preserving it upon the
earth with a continual protection, and guiding it to heaven, there to remain
eternally in the possession of perdurable joy and glory for ever.

2 Behold therefore who and what manner of one he is that commands us to
amend, by loving him, and fearing to offend him: and by our willing obedience
unto him. And indeed, is not such a King or Prince most worthy the love, honor,
fear and obedience of his subjects? First, if he be Gods counsailor, he is of
necessity replenished with the spirit of wisdom and understanding, as Esaias
more at large does declare, saying: The spirit of the Lord shall rest upon
him, Esaias 11. 2.
the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and
strength, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord: yet S. Paul
goes further, Col. 2.3.
saying: All the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden in him. This
Counsailor being thus replenished with all wisdom, knowledge, and
understanding: are not we to believe that whatsoever he commands us is holy,
good, righteous and necessary for the serving of him according to his will?
must we not in our selves find that it is mere folly to seek after the
counsel of man in matter concerning the service of God, and the hope or path
to salvation, and to listen unto the wisdom of our own flesh, that seeks
to turn us from the wisdom of that great counsailor? or to think it any
wisdom to reject his counsel or documents? To be short, as all the members
of the body do suffer themselves to be led by the sense and understanding
that is in the head: even so the members of the Church must follow no other
sense, the^ such as is in their head Jesus Christ: neither hearken to any other
counsailers but him, and this also does our heavenly father command us,
saying: Mat. 17.5.
This is my well beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. So often
therefore as the world, the flesh, or the devil shall solicit us to love, or
to do any thing condemned by this counsailor Jesus Christ, let this title
given to Jesus Christ waken us, and cause us immediately to resolve to deny
them, and not to admit any other counsel the^ the same of Jesus Christ, who by
the ordinance of God does bear the name cou^sailor.

3 Let us also beware of seeking after witches, forcerers, or coniurers, and
other like ministers of Satan, for any revelation or counsel, and to that
purpose remember the prohibition of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18.9.
saying: When thou art come into the land that the Lord thy God shall give
thee, thou shall not learn to do according to the abominations of those
nations. There shall not be among you any witch that uses witchcraft, any
obseruer of times, any prognosticator of seasons, any sorcerer, or enchanter,
or that counsaileth with spirits, or soothsayer, or that asks counsel of the
dead. For all that do such things are abomination unto the Lord, and because of
those abominations the Lord thy God does cast them forth before thee. And
least the people should reply and say, Why shall we be in worse estate then
these nations? Shall we have no means to ask counsel? The Lord answers,
The Lord thy God shall raise thee up a Prophet from among thy brethren, like
unto me: him shall ye hear. The Prophet here promised is this counselor Jesus
Christ, as S. Peter affirms, saying: as Moses had foreshewed, that whosoever
hears him not, shall be rooted out. Acts 3.22.
If any man replyeth, saying: True, but Jesus Christ is not now upon the earth,
to be fought unto, as he was in the time of the Apostles: neither are we in the
days of Abraham, David, Moses, and others, to whom God made answer when they
craved his counsel: but our answer is, he has in his word recorded in the
old and new testament, sufficiently declared his counsel, as well
concerning that which we are to do in obeying his will, as also in regard of
all that we are to believe for our salvation. And to this purpose does Esaias
the Prophet very well say, when they say unto you, Enquire at them that have
a spirit of divination, and at the soothsayers, which whisper and murmr,
answer thus. Esaias. 8.19.
Should not a people enquire at their God? from the living to the dead? To the
law and to the testimony? If they speak not according to his word, it is
because there is no light in them: that is to say, no prosperity for the^,
likewise when the rich man prayed Abraham to send Lazarus to exhort his
brethren to amendme^t, least they should sal into the torments that he felt:
Abraham answered, They have Moses and the prophets, let the^ hear the^. And
upon his reply, that if any should come from the dead, they would amend: he
said again, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16.27.
neither will they believe though one should come from the dead.

5 Likewise, as Jesus Christ protests that he has delivered to his Apostles,
John 15.4.
even all that he had from his father, and has appointed them to be witnesses
and ambassadors: so have they faithfully discharged their offices. Acts 20.27.
First in their own persons, as S. Paul protests of his person, that to the
Ephesians that came to Milet he had preached the whole counsel of God: next
they have so laid it down in writing, that now we need not to seek after any
counsel, or look for any revelation from else where: but even from this
counsailor, who answers us in the holy scriptures, in case we list to pray
him by his spirit to open our wits, that we may understand him, Luke 24.45.
as he did for the Apostles. If therefore we desire to know the will and
counsel of God, we must have recourse to his word, recorded by the Prophets
and Apostles, and so ask at the mouth of the Lord, and carefullye practice
the same that David that so excellent Prophet speaks of himself, Psalm.
119.24.
saying: Thy testimonies, O Lord, are my delight, and counselors. And if it
come to pass that in time of trouble and sorrow, and in such affairs as
breed perplexity, we know not how to resolve of our duties: let this title,
Counsailor, be unto us an advertisement, by prayer and supplications to require
at the mouth of the Lord, with full assurance, that he will give us to
understand his will and wise counsel, to his glory, and our salvation.

6 In the title of Strong and mighty God attributed to Jesus Christ, we are to
consider of two points: First, what his strength and power is: Secondly, what
be the fruits and arguments of amendment of life that do thereof proceed.
For the first, we are to acknowledge and apprehend in him such a strength and
power, that as at his only word he created heaven and earth, and all this
beautiful frame of the world: so by his only will did he work all that he
willed: John 11.43. Luke 4 39. Psalm. 14^.8. Psalm 115.3.
considering that his word is no other but a declaration of his will. And this
did plainly appear in this, that when he directed his words to dead Lazarus
that heard not, and to the fever of S. Peter's mother in law, that understood
him not, with other insensible and unreasonable creatures: yet was all that he
said or commanded, done. Our God, says David, is in heaven: he does what he
please: howbeit to the end the better to represent this power of Jesus Christ,
the holy Ghost does many times call him the God of hoastes, thereby to signify
unto us, not only that he has the leading of the armies of men, and gives
the victory where he will: but especially that he has mighty armies both in
heaven and in earth, ready to obey him. First David says, That his Angels
mighty in power, do fulfill his commandment and obey the voice of his word.
Of them there are great numbers, as Daniel also says, that a thousand millions
do minister unto him, Psalm. 103.20.
and ten thousand millions do stand in his presence. They be mighty armies, as
S. Luke calls them, saying: Dan. 7.10. Luke 2.13.
When the Angel had declared the nativity of Jesus Christ to the Shepherds,
there was a multitude of heavenly armies praising God. And David speaking of
the Angels says: Psalm. 68.17.
The charets of God are twenty thousand thousand angels. And Jesus Christ,
saying that at his request he should have 12 legions of angels ready to defend
him, does show that all these so mighty armies of Angels, Mat. 26. 53.
by thousands of millions are at his commandment ready to obey him. If one
Angel in one night slew all the first borne of Egypt, and in the Camp of
Senacherib one hundred fourscore and five thousand men in one night, what
exploytes may this strong and mighty God Jesus Christ perform, Exodus 12.29.
Esaias 27.36. 2. King. 19.25 2. King. 6.17.
who has at his commandment whole armies of Angels by thousands of millions?
we see them not no more then did the servant of Elizeus, but we should see them
if it might please God but to open our eyes, as he opened the eyes of the
said servant at the prayer of his Prophet, whereby he saw a whole mountain of
horses and fiery chariots round about him.

7 Moreover, he has the heavens and all that is in them, the air, Deuteronomy. 28.
Leuit 26.
the clouds, the winds, the sea, the earth, the beasts and all other
cretures, which are even so many mighty armies, ready to obey him, either to
favor such as amend their lives, or to punish the rebellious and obstinate:
^xod 7. 8.9:10.
has he not still in his power the like armies as he employed in old time
against Pharaoh? can he not convert, not rivers only, but even all the waters
in the world into blood? and make them to bring, forth such abundance of
bring, that they shall cover all the face of the earth: to convert all the ^ust
in the world into Fleas? to send a medly of beails able to (...) and houses?
to stay both men and beasts with pestinence? to torment them with botches and
bl^nes? to waste the fruits of the earth with hayle and Grasshoppers? to change
the light into pa^pable and continual darkness? with other like strange and
de^dly armies? If this mighty God Jesus Christ, John 18.6. Psalm. 2.5.
speaking meekly to those that came to apprehend him, oue^threw them, what
shall he d^e when he shall come to speak in his wrath, holding in his hand
an iron rod to bruise his enemies as a potters vessel.

8 Now let us proceed to the fruits and arguments of amendment of life, which
come of the apprehension of the strength and might of Jesus Christ, of these
there be two especial. First, fear to offend him: Secondly, assurance against
all our enemies that seek to diuerte us from our obedience toward him.
Concerning the first, if we apprehend this incomprehensible power and strength
of Jesus Christ, who commands us to amend, how should not we be resolved and
encouraged to yield unto him due obedience? how should we not fear to
displease him that has such armies at his commandment, ready to root out
those that disobey him? how day we tread upon the earth that is ready to open
and to swallow us up, Number. 16.31. Psalm. 106.17.
as in old time it did Chorah, Dathan, and Abiron? how can we without fear
think upon the Sea, which at his commandment is ready to break forth to drown
us, as in old time it drowned all the rebellious and disobedient world? Deuteronomy.
11 6. Gen 7.
how dare we draw breath which he can infect to slay us with pestilence and
other diseases? how day we go into the fields, Leuit. 26.22
when we remember that there be even armies of wild beasts ready to devour
us, according to his threatninges in his law, or as he sent Bears to devour
the children that mocked his Prophet Elizeus? 2. King. 1^ 4.
how dare we dispense with our selves to despise his commandment to amend,
considering he has al Kings and nations in the world ready to obey when be
commands them to destroy us, as in old time he but whistled for the army of
Nabuchadnezzer, Es^ ^ 26. and ^^.
and it came against his people ^^^el? how can we but fear by our sins to
provoke to wrath the mighty God, that threatens to turn the heaven into
brass, and the earth into iron, and to command the clouds that they shall not
same, Leu^t. 26. D^^t 28. Gen ^.
who also can send scarcity of seven years, as he did into Egypt: yea even to
deprive us of all sustenance, that we may perish for want of food? how day we
disobey him in whom we are, we live, we move: who suddenly can send a palsy
into all our members, take away our lives, and utterly root us out? but
especially, how is it that we take no heed of displeasing him, that has ready
whole armies of devils, so mighty and terrible enemies, that wait not for his
commandment, but even for leave to destroy us, as the history of Job does
evidently declare? naturally we fear to displease him that has most power to
be revenged and to punish us, Job. 1.
and in that sense we are more affeard to offend a King, then a subject: a man,
the^ a child. We ought therefore greatly to fear to offend God, that has such
power to punish those that will not amend their lives: Luke 12.4.
to which purpose Jesus Christ also says: Fear him who when he has killed
the body, can also cast the soul into hell fire. Behold therefore how the
apprehension of the power of Jesus Christ should move us to fear to displease
him, and consequently, to amend our lives.

9 As touching the second fruit, which concerns our assurance against the
assaults of our enemies, we are to note two points: First, that we are subject
to many and grievous afflictions and assaults: Secondly, that the assurance of
the power and strength of Jesus Christ should confirm our constancy in that
obedience which we owe unto him: for the first, S. Paul says, 2. Tim. 3.12.
that such as will live faithfully in the fear of God in Jesus Christ, are
subject to persecutions: also that the more we labor to put of the world and
sin, the more sharply we are assailed by the world and sinners. John 13.19.
If ye were of the world, says Jesus Christ, the world would love her own, but
now because you have forsaken the world, the world hates you. This does S.
Augustine very aptly note saying: The world must necessarily hate us: because we
hate the things that the world loves. Likewise, Aug. Sent. by Prosper. 35. 3.
because Jesus Christ has freed us from the tyranny of Satan, he being an
enemy to the glory of God and the salvation of man, does labor the more to
overthrow and destroy us: as also S. John says, that the great dragon, the old
serpent called the devil, seeing himself cast forth with his angels, Apoc. 12.
being moved because he could not swallow up either the whole body or the head
of the Church, levied war against the rest that keep the commandments of God,
and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

10 Now to come to the second point: If we fear God, and seek to amend our
lives, we shall not need to fear man, nor devils, nor any other enemies that
labor to turn us from our duties, but may persevere constantly, with assurance
that this strong and mighty God will keep us, and in the end destroy them, and
convert all their endeavors to our good and salvation: and to this purpose let
us remember how Balak king of Moab enterprised to destroy the people of God, by
procuring Balaam to curse them, and how God opposed himself, and converted his
wicked desire to curse them into blessings: Balaam declares what Balak had
commanded him, saying: Come and curse Jacob for my sake, come I say and curse
Israel. But the Lord compelled him to say, How can I curse them? Number. 23.
The mighty God has not cursed them: or how shall I detest them? The Lord
has not detested them. Again, The mighty God cannot lie, neither is he as the
son of man, to repent: He has spoken, and shall he not perform? he has
said, and shall he not confirm it? Behold I have received his word to
ble^se, and seeing he has blessed them, I may not revoke it. This is the
foundation of this safeguard and protection. He perceived no iniquity in Jacob,
neither did he see any frowardnes in Israel: the Lord his ^^des with him and
the Kings triumph in him. To conclude, of the peo^^e of God, he says: He that
blesses thee shall be blessed, and he that curs^th thee shall be cursed. This
assurance have they that seek to amend their lives under the protection of
this strong and mighty God.

11 And indeed, albeit when we walk in simplicity, plainnes and truth, and so
labor to amend our lives, if the whole world should life against us to molest
and destroy us, yet has this strong and mighty God even whole armies of Angels
to keep us, as in old time he had for Elizeus: he has Seas to swallow up the
Pharaohs of our time, 2. King. 6.3. Dan. 6.
and all that persecute the children of God. If we be constant in the service
of God, he is yet able to stop the throat, and to tie up the paws of the
hungry Lions, that we shall not be rent or devoured, as in old time he
preserved Daniel that was cast into the Lions den. If in purpose to amend we
will not fall down before idols, albeit men take upon them to burn us quick
yet let us say with the three Hebrew Princes, Our God is able to deliver us,
and with them protest that we will worship no Idols: and remember that God is
able to deliver us out of the siery furnace, yea even to preserve every hair
of our heads from burning, Dan. 3.
as he preserved those three Hebrew Princes. To be short, that all creatures
are even so many mighty armies at the commandment of the creator, ready to be
employed to our good and salvation, either to preserve us from the assaults of
our enemies, so long as we persevere in well doing, either to chastise us and
so to bring us to amendment, either to punish the disobedient and obstinate.
Let us therefore apprehend this sovereign power of this mighty God Jesus
Christ, that fearing to offend him, and so amending our lives, we need not to
fear the endeavors of our enemies: let us undoubtedly believe that as he is
almighty, and has so many and such strong armies at his commandment, so he
has power to preserve those that shall amend their lives, and to destroy and
root out all such as shall rebel against him, or seek to hurt his faithful
and obedient subjects and servants. Luke 2 14. John 14.27. Ephesians. 2.17.


12 Jesus Christ is also called the Prince of peace, to represent unto us that
it is he that is the author and giver thereof: This is witnessed, in that at his
birth even millions of Angels sung this song, Glory be to God on high, and in
earth peace: as also himself said to his Apostles, I give you my peace, and
the same did he cause them to publish throughout the world in his name. As
also S. Paul says, that at his coming he preached the gospel of peace to all
that were near hand or a far off: this peace may be considered in two sorts:
First, it signifies peace and tranquillity of conscience, whereof S. Paul
speaks, saying: that being justified by faith, we have peace toward God
through Jesus Christ. Secondly, this peace contains all blessings both of
body and soul. And as this Prince of peace, who commands us to amend, is
author both of the one and the other peace, so this title Prince of peace given
to Jesus Christ, should be unto us a mighty argument, and a quick spur to
move us to amendment of life. Lastly, being by nature the children of wrath,
and al our affections Gods enemies, Ephesians. 2. 3. Romans 8.7
and even so many soldiers in the devils pay to fight against God, and to
incense him against us: this Prince of peace Jesus Christ, vouchsafed to dye
for us, to the end to make satisfaction for all our sins, and so to appease
Gods wrath, and to take away the cause of this so mortal and woeful war
between him and us. Romans 5.1. Phil. 4.7.


13 This is the groundworke of this so blessed a peace which the children of
God do enjoy: for being justified by faith in Jesus Christ, we have rest and
peace of conscience: as knowing that God is our father, that he aduoweth us to
be his children, and loves us in his well-beloved son. And this peace passes
all understanding, as S. Paul says, because there is nothing so contrary to
the sense of man, as in our selves to feel this grace, that being sinners,
worthy Gods wrath, we should nevertheless be assured that we are righteous and
well-beloved of God, whereby to hope well in the midst of despair, to see
great riches of heavenly and eternal goods in the gulf of our poverty, and
in this our weakness and infirmity, even indignity wherewith we are possessed,
to be at quiet and in full assurance against the devil, death, sin, hell,
and all other our enemies. Now to show that this peace is mighty and of force
to make us to amend our lives, he adds, that it will keep our senses and
thoughts in Jesus Christ, together with all our affections and desires,
signified by the heart: but from what? even from diuerting from God, and from
the obedience and duetye that we owe unto him: for finely if we could feel
what a comfort, peace, and consolation there is in this peace of our souls
before God, we would be loath to loose such a sovereign felicitye by
displeasing him, and so in liewe of this peace, to bring upon our consciences
trouble, terror and fear, through the apprehension and feeling of Gods wrath.

14 And indeed there is no such hell or anguish in this life, as a bad
conscience: it is a cruel and intolerable tormentor, if we have a child that
by crying is grievous unto us, we seek to appease him either by threats or
promises, by gifts or stripes, but if he will not be so stilled, either we can
send him away from us, or our selves go from him, that we may not be troubled
with his crying: it is not so with a troubled mind deuoide of this blessed
peace. The conscience once feeling or apprehending the wrath of God even but a
little, will never suffer us to be quiet, promise, threaten, give, strike, what
ever you do, still it cries louder and louder, and still it tormenteth: yea
when you seek to send it away, it sticks closer unto you, neither can you
depart from it, for being in you, it is always at hand. How diligently
therefore ought we to amend our lives? that so we may retain in us this
treasure of peace, whereof David speaks, Psalm. 16.11.
saying: Thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. Again, By lifting up the light of thy countenance upon
me, Psalm. 4.7.
thou have given me more joy of heart, the^ they had when their wine and their
wheat did abound. And in this sense did S. Paul say, that the kingdom of God
consists in this peace that proceeds of the righteousness of faith, and
begets in us joy through the holy ghost: the miserable estate of those who by
offending God, do deprive themselves of this peace, ought to make us to
resolve constantly in the fear of God: and the rather, because this peace cost
so dear unto the prince of peace, who purchased it, Romans 14.17.
not with gold or silver, or any other worldly precious thing, but by the
shedding of his precious blood, even by suffering trouble, fear, terror, and
incomprehensible astonishment, which our selves have deserved, and daily do
deserve, to the end to deliver us from the same, and to give unto us that
blessed peace and quietness. May it then possibly come to pass, that we
meditating upon such a price of this peace, should suffer our selves to be
drawn to sin, and to offend God, and thereby to loose so excellent a
treasure, purchased so dearly! Truly so shall we seem to think Jesus Christ
to be a very inconsiderate and unadvised merchant, that would give so
excellent and incomparable a price for a benefit whereof we make so small
account, and which we are so ready to leave by offending God, whereby we may
please the world and the flesh, our enemies.

15 Moreover, Jesus Christ being the Prince of peace, is the author of all
blessings both spiritual and carnal, assured unto those that obeying his
commandment, do amend their lives. 1. Tim. 4.8.
Godliness, says Saint Paul, has a promise both of this life, and of the
life to come. As contrariwise, they whose hearts cannot repent and amend, do
heap together the treasures of Gods wrath, the fountain of all wretchedness.
And indeed, Romans 2. Leuit. 26.
how many notable promises, even in respect of this present life, does the Lord
make unto those that walk in the fear and obedience of his commandments?
and contrariwise, how many horrible and terrible threats does he use against
such as will not amend? Deuteronomy. 28.
having threatened the wicked and disobedient with great wounds, he many times
says, that if by the first they will not amend, but remain hardened, he will
enforce them seven times more, according unto the multitude of their sins,
Leuit. 26.
and shall he not do it justly? for seeing that by offending this Prince of
peace and author of all blessings, we provoke him to wrath: what can we
attend, but in stead of his blessings a whole burden of curses? If a master
has promised his man great goods, in case he serve him in all reverence,
obedience and fidelitye, can he hope for those goods at his masters hand, if
forgetting and contemning this duetye, he apply himself to wrong him and do
him iniurye?

16 We read that Hanun King of the Amonites, when he had iniuried and
provoked David by wronging his servants, 2. Sam. 10.
whom he sent to comfort him upon the death of his father, looked for war,
and prepared to wage Soldiers, and according to his expectation, David came
upon him and destroyed him. What then are we to look for, when we offend this
Prince of peace, and do even leauye war against him by such thoughts,
wills, words, and works, as proceed from our flesh? what I say, are we
to expect, either in liewe of peace, prosperitye, and blessings, to have such a
war as will redound to our eternal destruction and confusion? Contrariwise,
if we endeavor according to his commaundment, to amend, let us be assured,
that he will bless us, who is the fountain and author of all blessing: for
as there is no creature that can debar the sun from shining, and the
clouds from dropping, at the creators will, so is there no creature that can
divert the blessing whereof this Prince of peace is author, so long as by
amendment of life, we do cleave unto him. And indeed the holy Apostle S. Paul
saluting the Churches that he writes unto, does usually pray unto God to
multiplye his grace and peace upon them through Jesus Christ: by this
conioyning of grace and peace, showing that it is in vain to look for peace
and prosperitye at the hands of Jesus Christ, unless we also have his grace:
but having his favor and grace, which rests upon such as amend their lives,
we cannot doubt but he will pour forth his blessings upon us,

17 We are also to think that this Prince of peace dying for us, has with
himself crucified our old man, that is to say, the corruptions and vices of
our souls, to the end our thoughts and affections which naturally are enemies
unto God, should no longer war against him: but remaining dead in his death,
our selves might serve God in heart and mind, walking in newnes of life, and so
ame^ding our lives according to his commandment. What madness and
ingratitude is it in us, to suffer this body to revive in sin, that again we
may leauy war against this Prince of peace, and provoke him to wrath against
us? do we not hereby not only voluntarily deprive our selves of all the
blessings whereof this Prince of peace is the fountain and author, but also
purchase unto us his curses, by provoking his wrath and indignation against us?
let therefore this title of Prince of peace, bind and enforce us to hearty
ame^dment, to the end that retaining this peace and quiet of conscience in the
sight of God (which is an inestimable treasure) we may also keep this spring of
all blessings always open unto us, that so we may be blessed in this life,
but especially in the life to come.

18 Lastly, let us acknowledge and apprehend these two titles, wonderful, and
Father of eternitye, that so we may assure our selves, First, that in his
wisdom, power and goodness, he will so surmount whatsoever wisdom, force,
or blessing, that man can comprehend, that he will always show himself, as
the Prophet Esaias says, Esaias. 28.29.
Wonderful in counsel and magnificent in works: And this is to teach us
truly to sanctify his name, and to assure us as the Apostle Saint Paul says:
Ephesians. 3.10.
that he is able more aboundantlye to pour his gifts upon us, then we can
ask or think: also to make us to hope in him beyond all hope, as knowing that
if it were requisite to alter the course of nature, and to work miracles for
our preservation against our enemies, and to make us to feel the fruits of
his promises, he would show himself wonderful to his glory and to our
comfort and salvation. And hereof we have examples and assured pledges in his
delivery of his people, Exodus 14.
whom he led dry foot through the sea, Dan. 3. Dan. 6.
in the three Hebrew Princes in the burning furnace, and in Daniel in the Lions
den.

19 Finally he is called the Father of eternity, thereby to teach us, that it
is he that pours forth his blessings upon us all the days of our lives, and
will continue unto us the fruition of the same with wonderful increase,
eternally and infinitely in his kingdom and glory: and hereof to assure us,
Mat. 28.20. 1. These. 4.16.
he has promised to be with us even unto the end of the world. And S. Paul
says, that he will then lift us up into heaven into the house of God his
father, there to abide with Jesus Christ, the immortal King, 2. Tim. 1.10.
who through his Gospel has brought us to light, life and immortality. This
eternitye of joy and glory should bind us greatly to love Jesus Christ, to
obey him, and to put our whole confidence in him, considering that it is he by
whom we are, by whom we shall continue to be, and be for ever blessed. Let
therefore these tytles, wonderful, Counsailor, strong and mighty God, Prince
of peace, Father of eternity, be always in our sight, and in our minds, to
the end that as Jesus Christ, to whom they be given, does command us to
amend, so we diligently ame^ding our lives, may finally by a happy path,
replenished with all blessings proceeding from the wisdom, power, and goodness
of Jesus Christ, attain to the fruition of the wonderful and perpetually
perdurable felicity, which this wonderful and father of eternity shall give us
to enjoy, continually and without end.

The sixth cause of amendment, derived of these two names, Jesus, Christ. Chap.
6.
THe angel of God being sent unto Joseph when the virgin was conceived, Mat.
1.21.
declared unto him that she should bring forth a son, and commanded him to
name him Jesus, and for a reason of this name, added, That he should save his
people from their sins, according whereto, as also to show that he is our
Savior, the angel that declared his nativity to the Shepherds, said unto
them: Luke 2.11.
This day is borne the Savior, which is Christ. As therefore it is this Christ
that commands us to amend, so the consideration of these two names may stand
us in great stead to move us to yield unto him al obedience, and so to amend
our lives. First, this name Jesus, signifying a Savior, admonishes us, that
by nature we are lost, and that there is no other salvation for us, but in him
only, as it is written, Act. 4.12.
that There is no other name under heaven given unto man, whereby we must be
saved. This only title therefore of Savior, does already bind us to
acknowledge that we are not our own, but his that has saved us from
everlasting destruction: and that in that consideration we are bound to deny
our selves that we may live, 1. Cor. 19.
not to our selves, neither after our discretion and will, but according to the
good pleasure of our Savior, so that not living to our selves, but he living
in us, we may amend our lives.

2 But let us moreover consider what manner of destruction this is wherefro he
has saved us: it is from the fire of hell, from the curse and wrath of God,
from darkness, from the woorme that will ever be gnawing, and from the
sorrows that engender eternal weeping and gnashing of teeth: this is a
merueilous enforcement of our duetye to amend. And indeed, if thou fallest
into a deep river, in apparent danger of drowning, if any man should cast thee
a rope, or himself leap into the water to save thy life, thou can not
sufficientlye confess and acknowledge thy self his debtor, to do him
pleasure and service all the days of thy life. But we were not only in danger
of falling into hell, but were already fallen, even from our infancy, and daily
through our sins fell deeper and deeper: yet Christ cast us not in a rope to
pull us up and save us, but threw himself into our sea of woe, into our hell,
to be short, into horrible death, wherein we were drowned, to pluck us
forth: with what affection then ought we to say unto him: Lord we are more
then bound to love, honor, serve, please and obey thee in all that we may with
our whole hearts, all the days of our life? Jonas being in the bottom of the
sea in the Whales belly, protested that being delivered, he would sacrifice
to the Lord a Song of thanksgiving, Jonas 2.10.
that he would pay unto him his vows, namely besides his praises, that he
would no more disobey God, but readyly and willingly would obey him, as in
effect he well showed, when being again commanded to go to Niniuie, he went
boldly, and spoke freelye in the name of God. Now if we could feel according
as we ought, that our sins do daily cast us, into the bottom not of the
sea, but of hell: and that by them not a fish, but the devil does swallow us
up: what protestations would we make to Jesus Christ, to hold our lives and
saluations of him in case he would vouchsafe to pluck us out of this pit and
gulf of death? how fervently would we vow to praise him, and to renounce all
rebellion and disobedience, and to amend our lives? Being therefore by such a
Savior drawn out of such a gulf of death, are we not bound to perform such
vows and by amendment of life to correct our passed disobedience with Jonas,
and to become ready and willing to do whatsoever he shall command us? If thou
be upon a scaffold ready to be beheaded for thy drunkenness or adulterye,
and thereupon have a pardon and thy life saved, upon condition, thou fallest no
more thereinto: how heartily will thou promise, with thy hand subscribe, and
with thy tung swear, that thou will never more commit adultery or drunkenness:
that thou will abhor all tauerns, and drunkards, all whores and bauds, and to
be short, amend thy life? Now Jesus Christ has saved thee, not from an
apparent danger of death, but even from death it self: and not from the death
of body, but from everlasting death. And what does he require of thee? he
commands thee to amend thy life: art thou not bound so to do? shuldst thou
not feel thy heart even open to promise and swear to amend, and to shun al
occasions that might procure thee to displease and offend him?

3. How often does the Lord represent to his people of Israel their delivery
out of Egypt, thereby to make them to understand how much they are bound to
love him and to keep his commandments? as a preface at the publishing of his
law he makes this protestation: I am the Lord thy God, that has brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. And in another place,
Exodus 20
I am the Lord thy God, that has brought thee out of the land of Egypt, keep
my statutes and my laws, and do them. Again, Leuit. 19.36.
Profane not the name of my holiness, for I will be sanstified among the
children of Israel, I am the Lord that do sanctify you, Leuit. 22.32.
and that have brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God. Moreover,
he commands all parents to show their children of this bond wherein they
stand bound to obey his commandments, saying: When thy son shall hereafter
ask thee, saying: What mean these testimonies, and ordinances and laws,
Deuteronomy. 6.20.
which the Lord our God has commanded you, thou shall say unto thy son, We
were Pharaohs bondmen in Egypt, but the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a
mighty hand: And the Lord showed signs and wonders, great and evil upon
Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his householde before our eyes: And brought
us out from thence, to bring us in, and to give us the land which he swear unto
our fathers. Therefore the Lord has commanded us to do all these ordinances,
and to fear the Lord our God, that it may go ever well with us, and that he
may preserve us alive, as at this present. Michens 6.1.
And whereas their children in the days of Micheas did not walk according to
this bond to obey Gods commandments he sharply reproves their ingratitude
saying: My people, what have I done to thee, or wherein have I grieved thee?
Answer me: for I have caused thee to return out of the land of Egypt, etc.

And this does he allege, to show that he had just cause as the prophet
declares, to take the mountains and the foundations of the earth to witness and
judge of his just complaint and accusation against the ingratitude and
disobedience of his people.

4 If the delivery from the bondage of Egypt were justly objected to the people
of Israel to remember them of their duetye, to love God and to walk in his
holy ordinances: how much rather ought this name Jesus, by aduertizing us of
our deliuerye from the bondage and cursed tyranny of the devil, and out of the
furnace of everlasting fire, make us bond and affectionate to the love of
Jesus, and loving him with our whole hearts, to amend our lives according to his
commandment? Zachary the Father of S. John Baptist, says in his song, that
this was the oath that he swear to their father Abraham, Luke 1.73.
that he would give to his people: That being delivered out of the hands of
their enemies, they should serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness
before him, all the days of their lives. Here does he speak of the delivery
which Jesus has purchased for us, in saving us from the power of the devil,
of hell, and of all our other enemies. What an ingratitude were it then in us,
that the remembrance of this name Savior, putting us in mind of this happy
deliverance from the power of the devil, and other our enemies, should not so
kindle our hearts, as wholly to dedicate them to his service, and to think our
selves blessed, if we could please and obey him in amending our lives.

5 But this obligation will the more plainly appear, if we consider the
reason of this name added by the Angel, saying: For he shall save his people
from their sins. First, he shows that sin is the way to destruction and
death everlasting, Rom: 6.23.
as the Apostle Saint Paul says: The reward of sin is death: Now in as much
as God is righteous, it was expedient for our salvation, that this Savior, the
righteous, should by dying for us satisfy for our sins: Romans 6.6. Rom 6.
Col. 2.11.
and as there is in us besides the sins that daily we have and do commit,
the old man, that is to say, the vice and corruption, the fountain of the
same: so this Jesus crucified with him this old man and corruption, which
Saint Paul so often terms sin, and the body of sin, to the end to
mortify him in us, and so to deliver us from him, that through our
transgressions we should no more fall into the pit of hell. S. Paul writing to
the Romans, does at large represent unto us these two benefits of Jesus: the
first tending to justify us in the sight of God: the other to testify our
justification to the glory of Jesus. And therefore the same Apostle makes, as
it were, an inseparable conjunction of those two benefits, saying, Jesus
Christ is made unto us wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.30
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

6 The consideration of the first benefit, That he has satisfied for our
sins, should most lively kindle our hearts to love him fervently, and so in
following his commandment, to amend our lives. If I should owe a man some
notable sum of money, and not having wherewith to pay, he in compassion
should acquit me: the greater the debt were, the greater cause should I have,
and the more should I be bound to love and please him, as Jesus Christ himself
said unto Simon. Luke 7.40.
But who is able to comprehend the greatness of the debt of our sins, which
this Savior has paid for us, that they might not be imputed unto us, but
be quite discharged and blotted out? How great therefore should our love be
toward him. as also our care and fervent affection to obey him, when he
commands us to amend? or how much ought we to abhor the displeasing of him,
whereby we again bind our selves to everlasting death?

7 As concerning the other benefit: Inasmuch as he has with himself
crucified our old man, and so put to death our vice and corruption. What a
madness were it in us to revive, nourish, and maintain these our Saviors
enemies, and mortal poisons of our souls, even the soldiers of that
infernal Pharaoh, which labor again to plunge us in the furnace of eternal
fire. If we see a mad dog, every man laboreth to kill him, and therefore
what should we think of him that should seek to preserve him, or after he
were dead, to revive him again, if he might? Would not men think him to be
an enemy to mankind? yea, even worthy to be rooted out? and is not this
sin and corruption in man, even as badde as a mad dog? Are not the
bitinges thereof deadly? This mad dog has Jesus Christ slain, in
crucifying him with himself, that so he might die in us. Are not we therefore
very miserable wretches, that will hearken to the world and the flesh, and so
revive, nourish, and maintain sin in us, as delighting in the damnable
bitings thereof, which breed unto us everlasting death? Our old man (says
Saint Paul) was crucified with Jesus Christ, to the end the body of sin
might be extinguished, Romans 6.61 and 6. 8.
that we might no more serve unto sin. Again, Being delivered from sin,
ye are made the servants of righteousness. What else have we therefore to do,
but still to have this name Jesus, whereby we be advertised that he has
saved us from our sins, and consequently, from eternal death, before the
eyes of our understanding, that we remembering that he has withdrawn us out
of hell, from eternal fire, darkness, weeping, and gnashing of teeth, may in
heart be fervently inflamed in his love? And that the remembrance that he has
paid so many deadly debts, to discharge us, may more and more enforce his
love? Finally, let the representation of the death of our old man, crucified
with this Savior, make us so to abhor sin and corruption, that we suffer
it not to live in us to our own death. Thus shall the name Jesus beget in us a
fervent desire to love him, to please him, and to obey his commandment,
wherein he wills us to amend our lives.

Acts 10.38 Luke 4.18. Esaias 61.1 John 1.16 1. Ioh. 2.27
8 Now let us come to the title Christ. This name in Greek, as also the name
Messiah in Hebrew, does signify as much as if we should say Anointed. And
by this anointing is meant, the fullness of the holy Ghost which he has
received, as Saint Luke notes, and himself does acknowledge, where he
applies to himself this saying of Esaie, The spirit of the Lord God is upon
me, for he has anointed me. He was fulfilled, to the end we might be
partakers of his fullness, as Saint John says, who also speaks of the holy
Ghost, saying: The anointing that you have received from him, abides in you,
1. Cor. 3.16
and you need not to be taught, but as the same anointing teaches you all
things, and it is true, and is not lying, and as it taught you, ye shall
abide in him. Saint Paul calling us the temples of God, adds this reason,
Romans 8, 9.
that the holy Ghost dwells in us. This name Christian, derived from Christ,
and proper to his disciples, confirms the same: For likewise, as the same
Apostle says, They that have not the spirit of Christ are not his. But as
there is no true or natural fire but yields heat or light, so the holy
Ghost cannot be in us without the feeling and showing forth of effects
beseeming his holiness. And therefore this: name Christ aduertising us that
we are partakers of the anointing of his holy spirit, should be unto us a
mighty and lively argument to amend our lives. And this shall we the better
understand, by considering the names attributed to this spirit, to represent
unto us the effects of the same. 1. Pet. 5.2
First, he is called Holy, because that of himself and in him self being
holy, even in all perfection, it is he that sanctifies us by separating us from
the common degree of other the children of Adam, to the end we may be dedicated
and consecrated to God? Whereupon Saint Peter says, that we are elect through
the providence of God in the sanctification of the spirit, to obey and be
sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ. And that as being made the children
of God through faith, we must be wholly renewed, Saint Paul teaches us, that
this comes of the holy Ghost. He, says he, that has raised Jesus Christ
from the dead, Romans 8.11. 1. Cor. 15.45
shall quicken your mortal bodies with his spirit dwelling in you. In this
sense is he named the second Adam, that proceeded from heaven in a quickening
spirit. For the Apostle compares the spiritual life that Christ by his
spirit imparteth to the believers, with the sensual life that men receive from
the first Adam. And therefore we do in vain boast of Christianity and the
spirit of Christ, so long as we are not so renewed, as to have nothing in common
with the unbelievers that dwell under the tirannie of the unclean spirit,
which infecteth with all corruptions and defilings, all those that have not the
spirit of Christ.

9 Particularly he is named the earnest penny of our inheritance. As when a
man does purchase an inheritance, he first gives earnest, that is, some part
of the money promised, Ephe. 1.14
that serves as a beginning to the payment of the total sum: so God having
redeemed us by the blood of Jesus Christ, gives the earnest penie of his holy
spirit, that is to say, a beginning of knowledge of the true God, of
sanctification, of love to God, of righteousness, and of peace and joy in the
holy spirit, attending until he finish in us the communication of that light,
joy, holiness, and glory, that we shall have perfectly in heaven. Whereby it
appears, that we wrongfully boast our selves to be christians, anointed
with the spirit of Christ, so long as we be not endued at the least with some
beginning of this heavenly light, sanctification, love of God, spiritual peace
and joy, which are the earnest of the spirit: and do not endeavor daily to
increse in these spiritual gifts and graces. He is also called Water: Esaias
55.1. and 44.3.
for of the holy Ghost does Esaie speak, saying: Come unto the waters all ye
that thirst. Again, I will pour my spirit upon the thirsty, and my rivers
upon the dry. Then to expound the same, he says, I will pour forth my
spirit upon thy seed. Hereby does he show us, that as rain with the
moisture thereof fatteth the earth to make it fruitful, so does the holy
spirit with his invisible grace make us fruitful, to produce the fruits of
righteousness, as Jesus Christ also declares, saying: He that believes in me,
John 7.38.
out of his belly shall flow rivers of the water of life. This, says S. John,
he spoke of the spirit that all they should receive that believed in him. As
therefore if herbs watered do still continue dry, we justly say they are
dead, so can we not aduow our selves to be Christians, watered with the spirit
of Christ so long as in sted of bearing fruit, by amendment of life, and
giving our selves to good works, we continue dry and withered.

10 Sometimes he is also called Water, to signify his power to purge and
cleanse our filth and corruption, as Ezechiel says: I will pour upon you
clean waters and ye shall be cleansed, Ezech. 36. 25
I will cleanse you from all your filthiness, and from your Gods of doung. And
will give unto you a new heart, and will put into you a new spirit, and I will
take your stony heart out of your flesh, and will give you a heart of flesh,
and I will put my spirit into you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and
to keep my ordinances, and you shall do them. But if we in lieu of amending
our lives, do abide in our filthiness and corruption, with stony hearts, and
keep not the ordinances of the Lord, it is in vain for us to entitle our
selves Christians, watered with the holy waters of his spirit. And because
that by watering us with the liquors of his graces, he makes us strong and
cheerful in the service of God, 1. Ioh. 2.20.27
of the effect hereof is the name of oil and ointment given unto him. How
then can we say, that we are anointed with the spirit of Christ, so long as
we do not amend our slacknesse in the service of God, growing forward in
strength and disposition to employ our selves cheerfully therein.

Luke 3.16
11 To conclude, he is called Fire, for two considerations: First because it is
he that refineth, burns, and consumes our vicious lusts, which are as the
superfluities and excrementes of our souls: and on the other side, it is he
that kindles our hearts in the love of God, and fervent desire to serve and
honor him. But if we perceive no effects of this fire of the holy Ghost in us
^ourning and consuming our vice and corruption, that by amending our lives, we
may grow in pureness and holiness: With what conscience can we say, that the
spirit of Christ is in us? As this spirit cannot be dead, neither can it bring
forth vicious or corrupt fruit. Likewise if we increase not in zeal and love
to God, this want of the operation of the holy Ghost, is an assured testimony
of that he is not in us, Exodus 8.19. and 21.18 Luke 11.20 Luke 1.66
because we feel not his fire heating us in the love of God. Finally, the
holy Ghost is called the finger and hand of God, because that by him he
exercises his virtue, and that by his inspiration we are regenerate into
heavenly life, that we may no more be driven or lead by our selves, but be
governed by his motion and operation. If therefore we deny not our own
wisdom, and the affections of our flesh, and so suffer our selves to be
guided and lead by the hand of the holy spirit, we do wrongfully challenge
the name of Christians, and boast of the spirit of Christ dwelling in us. Thus
this name Christ, aduertising us that he has received the holy spirit, to
make us partakers thereof, according to the measure to every one ordained,
ought to be unto us a mighty inducement and sharp spur, to move us to
amendment of life.

12 This unction of the holy spirit did our Lord Jesus Christ receive, to the
end to exercise three offices requisite to our salvation: namely, to be our
king, our Priest, and our Prophet. And this also to represent unto us, how
deeply this name Christ binds us to amend our lives. First for the office of
king: John 18.36
If his kingdom be not of this world, as himself confessed before Pilat, but
spiritual, we are to correct our false imaginations that lead us to seek the
world in his kingdom, as looking that he should give to his servants great
riches, honorable offices, and other carnal commodities. For it is the part of
the princes of this world, to present earthly kingdoms to those that reverence
them: Math. 4.9.
but as for our king Jesus Christ, he wills us to seek all the felicity
that he promises in heaven. And therefore when we are persecuted, or
otherwise afflicted, we must correct this false opinion, of thinking our
selves miserable, or that our king has no care of us: For contrariwise,
afflictions should make us to lift up our hearts to heaven, the dwelling of
our king, where he has laid up the treasures, joys, and glory of his
kingdom. Secondly, since he is our king, that he may reign in us, we are
warned to forsake the world, sin, and the devil his enemies, so that he
only reigning in us, mortifying sin, may make us to deny the world, and
strengthen us against Satan. Let not sin, says Saint Paul, reign in you,
Romans 6.13 John 16.33 Romans 16.20 Luke 1, 74
to obey the lusts thereof. And Jesus Christ says; Be of good cheer for I
have overcome the world. And the Apostle promises us that God will tread down
satan under our feet. Thus this king having delivered us out of the hands of
our enemies, binds us, as Zachary says, Without fear to serve him in
righteousness and holiness all the days of our life: and so to amend. Let us
also remember that the scepter of a good pastor is delivered unto him blessedly
to guide his sheep that shall hear his voice, Psalm 2.
and by amendment follow him. As also he has an iron rod to bruise as a
potters vessel, all such as shall rebel against him. Let us therefore amend,
and renounce every thing whereat this king may be displeased, that we may be
happily governed by the sheepehooke of our good shepherd, and not bruised with
the iron rod of this just king, that breaks those that without amendment
of life do continue in unbelief, and obstinate in their sin. The kingdom
of Satan, from which Christ has redeemed us, does consist in darkness,
infidelity, and bad conscience, and all vice, silthynesse, and corruption.
Contrariwise, the kingdom of Jesus Christ consists in light, in knowledge of
the true God and his son Jesus Christ, in faith, love, holiness, patience, and
other like virtues. These are the true effects of the spiritual kingdom of
Jesus Christ. We must therefore effectually show that we are transported from
the kingdom of Satan to the kingdom of Jesus Christ. But how? By amending
our lives, and growing more and more in faith, love, patience, and holiness:
to be short, in all good works and virtues required in the subjects of this
spiritual king, Jesus Christ.

13 The second office of Christ, is to be our high Priest, who offered himself
a sacrifice unto God, that by his death he might satisfy his justice, and so
reconcile us to him. Who is there then among us, that representing to himself,
that it is the well-beloved son of God, and the prince of glory, that gives
himself, not to a common death, but even to the shameful and cursed death of
the cross, together with the apprehension and feeling of the wrath and
terrible indignation of God, ingendering in his body horrible terror and
mortal anguish in his soul: And all this for his enemies, by nature the
children of wrath, poor sinners, and the bond men of Satan: What man is
there, I say, that meditating upon these things, shall not be even ravished
in admiration of his incomprehensible love toward us? which love Saint Paul
does at large and very often make mention of. Is it possible that this name
Christ, Romans 5 Ephesians. 2
representing unto us this priest, thus offering himself in such a sacrifice
for us poor and abominable sinners, and consequently the apprehension of his
incomprehensible love toward us, should not ravish and force our very souls
to love him with all our hearts, our minds, and our strength, and through
fervent love to obey his commandment of amendment, and to abhor to think,
say, or do any thing that may displease this Christ, our high Priest? 1.
Cor. 16. 22
If any man (says the Apostle Saint Paul) love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let
him be had in execration, yea, maranatha, or excommunicate to death. That is
to say, let him be cut off from the Church, as the reprobate shall be at the
coming of Christ, whereof they are warned in this word Maran-atha, which
signifies, The Lord comes. Yet is there more. This Priest dying for us,
has killed sin and corruption in his own body, as is before declared: And
to the end that sin might die in us, and that we might practice this saying
of the holy Apostle Saint Peter, Inasmuch as Christ has suffered for us in the
flesh, 1 Pet. 4.1
that is to say, in his humanity, let us arm our selves with the same mind,
which is, that we having suffered and being dead with him, as concerning the
corruption of the flesh, should desist from sin, to the end, that hence
forward we should live (as much time as remains in the flesh) not after
the lusts of men, but after the will of God. And this is the amendment that
Jesus does command. Saint John says, that Christ has made us kings and
Priests unto God: This is another reason to move us the more seruently to
amend, in respect as well of the one office as of the other. First, Apoc. 1.6.
seeing we are raised to this honor to be kings, shall we be so miserable
and senseless, as to make our selves the vile and wretched bond men of
Satan, and the servants of sin and the world. If a king redeeming a poor
bond man, whom his master diuersely tormented, should besides so far
favor and honor him, as to adopt him for his child, Were it not a frantike or
senseless part in him to forsake such honor and preferment, and to return
to live under the tyranny and thraldom of his old master? Yet this do they,
who being delivered from the tyranny and cruelty of Satan, and made kings
in Jesus Christ, do give themselves to the lusts and pleasures of the flesh,
and the allurementes of the world, thereby returning themselves into the
wretched bondage of the devil, to abide eternally under his tyrannous
dominion. Let therefore this title King, advertise and admonish us so to amend
our lives, that forsaking and utterly renouncing the dominion and tyranny of
Satan, and the corruptions of the flesh, we may effectually show our selves
to be spiritual Kings, and that the kingdom of Jesus Christ is in us.
Moreover, in as much as we are also made Priests, let us remember, that if
we will amend our lives, we must with the kingly Prophet David offer
contrite and broken hearts, pulled down and humbled with the feeling of our
sins, with condition that we will hereafter beware and take heed of the
same. Let us also call to mind, that we must offer our bodies a lively, holy,
and acceptable sacrifice unto God, which is our reasonable service, and not to
form our selves after this world, Psalm. 51.19
but be transformed by the renewing of our minds, to the end we may prove
what is the good, perfect, and acceptable will of God. Neither let us forget
always to offer unto God thorough Jesus Christ the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, which is the fruit of our lips, confessing and acknowledging
his name. Romans 12.1
To conclude, let us remember his benefits and communication with us, for God
is delighted with such sacrifices.

Behold therefore how this honor which we receive of Jesus Christ, Heb, 13,
16
even to be kings and priests to our God, may be a mighty inducement unto us
to amend our lives.

14 There does yet remain the office of a Prophet, which also does admonish us
to amend, because he has revealed unto us all that he has known of his
father, John 15.15
and declared as well what we must do in obeying him, as what we are to
believe to our salvation. And this is an incomprehensible benefit, as we may
euydently consider by the miserable and wretched estate of those to whom the
word of God comprised in the Law and the Gospel, is not preached. And this
does Saint Paul in few words represent unto us, saying: They are not in Christ,
neither have any portion in the commonwealth of Israel, but are strangers to
the covenant of the promise, Ephesians, 2, 12
without hope, and are without God in the world. And in deed, if Gods word
be, as David calls it, a light to our steps, those men to whom the word is
not directed, Psa. 119.105
are poor and blind, and cannot choose in all their words and deeds but
stumble and fall. All that they do is sin, because they do it without
faith, whereof the word is the foundation. Much less also have they any
knowledge of the remission and satisfaction of their sins in the blood of
Christ: Romans 14. 25 and 10.17.
and therefore all their sins do remain and shall be imputed unto them to
be in the day of judgment most horribly and eternally punished. If they then
that never heard this prophet shall be justly punished in eternal fire, what
judgment and vengeance are they to expect for their ingratitude and rebellion,
that hear this Prophet, and by him, either by reading or hearing his word,
do understand the will of God, and yet do make no care of amendment of life
by obeying the will of God unto them revealed, Luke 12.47
and by them known? The servant, says Jesus Christ, that has known his
masters will, and has not done it, shall be punished much more grievously than
he that never knew it. And surely the sins committed by those that know the
will of God, are not only transgression against the law, but also contempt and
misprision against the majesty of God. And in that regard does Jesus Christ
denounce against many towns wherein the Gospel was preached, a more horrible
and terrible judgment, than against Sodom, Gomorrha and other towns that
heard the word of the Lord. Seeing therefore that this word, Math. 10.15
to us addressed by this prophet Jesus Christ, does tend to illuminate and to
exhort us to amendment of life. Let this office and name of Prophet,
attributed to Jesus Christ, make us to remember our bond and duty, whereby
we are bound to amend, and to yield obedience unto all that our Prophet Christ
does teach, ordain, and command, as being assured that as they that will not
hear this Prophet to obey him, shall be rooted out: so contrariwise, they
that shall hear and obey him, shall by the path of good works, proceeding of
faith, apprehending the justice of Christ, attain to the fruition of life
everlasting. In this sort must these two names and titles, Jesus and Christ,
serve to make us to feel our bond and duty, and to inflame our affections to
amend all the days of our life.

The seventh cause of Amendment gathered of the signification of this word
Amend. Chap. 7.
IN the first Chapter of the first book, we have declared that the holy Ghost
commanding us to amend, does ordinarily use two words, whereof the one does
signify, Be ye better advised, or learn to know your ignorance or fault, and
the other as much as if we should say, Return and convert. By the first the
holy Ghost teaches, that it is a great folly to offend God, considering that
God exhorting us to amend, commands us to be wise and advised. And the other
confirms it to be in truth a great folly: For when God says, Convert and
return to me, namely, by amendment: he gives us to understand, that by
transgressing his law, we go to the devil, and by amending we turn back and
go from the devil to the living God. And in deed, if any man list to demand
what way the idolaters, fornicators, whoremongers, dronkardes, covetous
persons, dreamers, blasphemers: and to be short, all they that give themselves
to the world, and to the lusts of the flesh, do take: the answer is certain
and ready, even they that take the way that leads to hell, that forsaking
life they go to death, and running from God, they draw near to the devil.
Saint Paul making a catalogue of these people, does resolutely pronounce, 1.
Cor. 6.10 Romans 6.23 Deuteronomy. 27.26
that they shall not inherit the kingdom of God: also, that the reward of
sin is death: and cursed is he that keeps not the commandments of the law.
And because there are few that take care to obey God, and to amend their lives,
Math. 7.13
our Lord Jesus Christ pronounces, that broad is the gate and path that
leads to destruction. As therefore if a man departing from Paris, takes his
way into Spain, and yet gives out that he will take his way through
Flanders or Holand, every man will scorn him as a fool, or take pity of
him as if he were a senseless person, that goes far amiss: even so is it
with him, who taking no course to amend, but continuing in offending of God,
does nevertheless say and uphold that he will go to heaven: for every man may
judge him to be senseless and greatly out of the way, because he takes the
contrary course which leads to hell.

2 Now if there be no greater madness or pernicious folly, than by offending
God, to take the way to hell and everlasting fire, Jesus Christ in commanding
us to amend, does justly say: Be ye wise and better advised, and convert and
return to me. And in deed if God should ask the sinner, Will thou amend? Will thou go to hell fire, into weeping and gnashing of teeth with the devils? There
is no man so desperate but that he will answer, No Lord, God forbid: yet has
not God good cause to reply? Why? thou take the way thither, thy works do
lead to hell and everlasting destruction, and therefore amend: But how Lord?
be better advised: As now thou turnest thy back to me, and thy face to the
devil: so turn and convert thou to me. Where thou go from heaven, and
drawest near unto hell, turn back, leave the world, the flesh, and all the
corruptions of the same, and walking in my commandments amend thy life. Thus
turning thy back to the devil, and thy face unto me, going from hell, thou
shall come to me the fountain of life everlasting. And in deed says S.
Augustine, we draw near unto God, who is every where, Prosper in his sentences
out of Augustine Se. 91. Sc. 195
not by removing from place to place, but by alteration of manners. For as
dissimilitude separateth us from him, so does resemblance and imitation
conioyne us with him. And what a woe is this, says he, by displeasing God to
abandon this sovereign felicity which is in all places? Let this commandment
therefore Amend, that is to say, Be ye better advised, and convert unto me,
waken and inflame our hearts to amend our lives, and to be wise and advised to
convert unto God. If a merchant seems willing to trust another that is ready
to be banquerout with all his goods, one warning will be enough to reclaim
him, ye shall not need to pray him to beware, or to allege many reasons to
withhold him. The only fear and apprehe^sion of the loss of all his goods will
be reason and exhortation sufficient. What shall we then do, when Jesus
Christ says, Be ye better advised, that is, Amend: and note that by offending
God, and so taking the way to hell, we endanger our selves, yea, we do even
assure our selves to loose both bodies and souls for ever? Is it not mere
madness and ungrateful rage, to continue and not to be wiser and better advised,
that we may convert to God, and by amendment preserve our bodies and souls
unto life everlasting?

The eight cause of Amendment, taken of the reason added by Jesus Christ,
where he says, For the kingdom of heaven or of God is at hand. Chap. 8.
NOw let us especially consider the reason added by Jesus Christ, For the
kingdom of heaven, or of God, is at hand. And for the better understanding
thereof, let us note three significations of the kingdom of heaven. First, by
this kingdom is signified the blessed estate and incomprehensible felicity
that we shall inioye after the resurrection, is when Jesus Christ says, Math.
8.11
Many shall come from the East and from the West, and shall sit at the table in
the kingdom of heaven, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Again; Math. 7.21
Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven,
but he that does the will of my father shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Again, Suffer little children to come unto me, Math. 19.14
for unto such belongs the kingdom of heaven. And so in many other passages.
Secondly, by the kingdom of heaven is signified the estate of the regenerate
man, which consists in the true knowledge of God, in faith, in mortification
of the old man, and in newness of life. As when Jesus Christ says, The
kingdom of God is in you. Luke. 17.21
Also in this saying of Saint Paul, The kingdom of God is not meat or drink,
but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Thirdly, Romans 14.17.
the kingdom of heaven many times signifies the ministry and preaching of
the Gospel: As when Saint Paul speaking of certain faithful servants of
Jesus Christ, said: Col. 4.11 Math. 11.11
These only are my companions in the work of the kingdom of God. Again, as
where Jesus Christ says, He that is best in the kingdom of heaven is greater
than John the Baptist. Whereto we also refeere this saying of Jesus Christ,
Math. 13.3. and 13.44.45
The kingdom of heaven is like unto seed that fell in diverse grounds.
Thereby signifying, that the holy ministry brings not fruit in all men.
Likewise, where he compares the kingdom of heaven to a treasure hidden in the
earth, and to a merchant that sought for good pearls, thereby to show how
highly we are to esteem of the holy ministry.

2 All these significations of the kingdom of heaven, ought mightily to move
us to amendment. First, when by the kingdom of heaven is signified the
blessed estate and incomprehensible felycitie that we shall enjoy in heaven:
therein are we taught that our estate is far different from the estate of
brute beasts, who by their death are reduced to naught: For as for men, when
they die, all is not death with them, but they that believing in Jesus Christ
have amended, their lives shall depart into a life replenished with all glory,
joy, and incomprehensible and eternal felicity, here signified by the
kingdom of heaven: as contrariwise, they that remain hardened in their evil
doings, shall for ever be tormented with the fire of Gods wrath. Dan. 12.
Many, says Daniel, that sleep in the dust, shall awake, some to life
eternal, and others to eternal reproach and infamy. John 5.28
This sentence does Jesus Christ confirm, saying. The hour shall come that
all that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the son of man, and shall
come forth, even they that have done good, to the resurrection of life, and
they that have done evil, to the resurrection of condemnation. And to this end
shall Jesus Christ come to judge the world, that the children of God that have
amended their lives, may be exalted into the fruition of the kingdom of
heaven, and contrariwise, the disobedient swallowed up with the devil and his
Angels in hell. That we may the better feel the efficacy of this reason, For
the kingdom of heaven is at hand, we are undoubtedly to believe, (and it is in
deed an article of our faith) that Jesus Christ shall come to judge the quick
and the dead. And in this respect S. Paul writing to Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.4
says: I summon thee before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, who in his
appearance and kingdom shall judge the quick and the dead. Acts. 17.31
As also the same Apostle in another place says, God has ordained a day when
he shall judge all the world in righteousness. This was an old resolute point of
the Jews religion, as it appears by these sentences of Jesus Christ. The men
of Niniue shall rise in the day of judgment to condemn this generation, Math.
12.41 Math. 10.15
Again, If it shall be more easy for Sodom in the day of judgment than for
those towns that would not receive the Gospel. These threatenings would have
bin of small weight with the Jews, had they not bin persuaded that there was a
day of judgment, wherein the children of God should be received in to the
kingdom of heaven, and the unbelievers and obdurate in wickedness cast into
everlasting death.

3 To the end the rather to confirm us in the expectation of this day of
judgment so much to be desired, and so blessed for those that do amend their
lives, but so terrible to the rebellious and obstinate. Math. 25.31
S. Matthew represents unto us the form thereof, saying: When the son of man
shall come in his glory, and all the angels with him, then shall he sit upon
the throne of his glory, and he shall separate the sheep from the goats, and he
shall set the sheep on his right hand and the goats on his left, and to the^ on
his right hand he shall say, Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world. And to them on the left hand
he shall say, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the devil and his Angels, and they shall go into everlasting
pains, and the righteous into everlasting life. Let us therefore be fully
resolved, that the day will come that such as have amended their lives,
increasing in faith, working in love, and fructifying in good works, shall be
gathered into the fruition of the kingdom of heaven, and the others into
everlasting fire. And in deed, since it is so, says Saint Augustine, that all
things before prophesied in the holy Scriptures, August. in his Epist. 42. to
Mandarens.
have come to pass and been fulfilled in their season, as the flood, the
bondage of the seed of Abraham in Egypt, and their delivery, the captivity
of Babylon, and the return from the same, the coming of Christ in the flesh,
and all that concerned his passion, his resurrection, and ascension into
heaven, his promise to send the holy Ghost to the Apostles, the calling of the
Gentiles, and other like matters: what reason have we to doubt of this day of
judgment, which has bin foreshewed in so many passages of the holy Scripture?

4 Neither can we any way doubt thereof, if we have any reason or
understanding. For if we believe that there is a God (which all nations in the
world do confess) we must also believe that he is righteous: if he be
righteous, he will reward the righteous that amend their lives, and punish the
disobedient that are given to wickedness. But this reward or punishment is not
performed in this life but in part, and that very seldom, as both the Prophet
manifestly declares in the 71. psalm, and experience does daily teach. It
follows therefore that after this life there is another, wherein the righteous
have their reward, even the fruition of the kingdom of heaven, and the
disobedient shall be punished with everlasting torments. This discourse does S.
Paul confirm in express words: for he seeing the persecutions of the
faithful, 2. These. 1.5
and their grievous afflictions, least they should be shaken with some opinion
that there were no providence or justice in God, he vpholdeth, and to the
contrary does show, that the persecutions and afflictions that they suffered,
were a manifest demonstration of the just judgment of God, To the end, says
he, that ye may be accounted worthy the kingdom of God, for the which ye do
also suffer. For it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you, and to you that are troubled, rest with us. But when
shall that be? Even when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his
mighty Angels, In flaming fire, rendering vengeance to the^ that do not know
God, and which obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be
punished with everlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and
to be made marvelous in all them that believe. If then it be a righteous
thing with him to recompense tribulation, as is aforesaid, to those that
trouble us, even us I say, that are pore upon earth, how much more righteous
will it be with him, most horribly and eternally to punish those that have
persecuted even the person of Jesus Christ, the well-beloved son of God? In
this sense is this day called the day of the restoration of al things,
because the disorder and confusion that seems now to be in the government of
the world, Act. 3 21.
shall be then reformed, and the goodness, wisdom, and wonderful justice
of God be revealed.

5 True it is, as Saint Peter says, that in the later times there shall come
scorners, that shall walk after their own lusts, and say, Where is the
promise of his coming? 2. Pet 3.3
For since the fathers died all things continue alike from the beginning of the
creation. And in deed, we now see but too many that are not touched with the
apprehension either of the kingdom of heaven, or of the torments of hell, but
are possessed with profane and deuilish spirits, that take al to be but fables
that is spoken as well of the kingdom of heaven, promised to the faithful, as
of the torments of hell prepared for the wicked. And this is a pernicious
policy of Satan, wherewith he discourageth the faithful from walking in the
fear of God, from amending their lives, Psalm, 73, 13.
from cleansing their hearts, and as the Prophet says, from washing their hands
in innocence. But to the contrary hereof, let us stand steadfast, and be well
assured, that there is a kingdom of heaven prepared for the children of God,
and a hell for the disobedient, and therefore let us labor to grow in faith, to
fructisie in good works, 2. Cor. 15, 58
and so to amend our lives, as knowing that as S. Paul says, our labor shall
not be in vain in the sight of the Lord.

6 This is the foundation whereupon the Apostle lays hold to persuade men to
repentance and amendment of life. God, says he, Act. 17.30.
nothing regarding this time of ignorance, now admonishes all men every where
to repent, because he has appointed a day in the which he will judge the
world in righteousness. But how in righteousness? Every man shall, as else
where it is said, receive the things that are done in his body, 2 Cor. 5 10
according as he has done, whether it be good or evil, and God will render
to every man according to his works. That is, to them which by continuance in
well doing seek glory, honor, and immortality, Romans 2.6
eternal life: but unto them that are contentious, and disobey the truth, and
obey unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath.

7 Albet we see not this kingdom of heaven, Romans 8. Heb. 11.
yet let us remember that the goods and salvation of Gods children consists
in faith and hope, and that as well the one as the other does appertain to
things to come, which we see not, so that not to believe or hope for more than
we see, is to be short, the abolishment of faith and hope, and so consequently,
the subuerting of the assured foundation of our salvation. Let therefore this
faith the mother of hope, and hope her mothers nurse, cause us patiently to
attend the fruition of this kingdom of heaven, and our assured attendance for
the same make us to amend our lives, Apoc 19.9. Tit 2.11.
that we may cloth our selves in garments beseeming those that purpose to
come unto the marriage, and to have a seat at the banquet of the lamb Jesus
Christ. The grace of God, says S. Paul, that brings salvation to al men,
has appeared, and teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and that we should live righteously, soberly, and godly in this present
world, looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of God, which
is our savior Jesus Christ. The same Apostle gave thanks to God for the
Colossians, when he heard of their faith and love, for the hopes sake which was
laid up for them in heaven. Col. 1.4 1. John. 3
And in this sense says Saint John. Well-beloved, we are now the children of
God, but yet it does not appear what we shall be, and we know that when Jesus
Christ shall appear, we shall be like him for we shall see him as he is. And
every man that has this hope in him, purges himself even as he is pure.

8 But to the end the more earnestly to encourage us to amend our lives, in
hope of the kingdom of heaven, we are moreover to apprehend the
incomprehensible excellency of the glory and joy that we shall enjoy in this
kingdom, when our bodies being risen again incorruptible and immortal, like
unto the image of the glorious body of Christ, reunited to their sanctified
souls, shall be lifted up into the house of God our father above all heavens,
where we shall see the face of God, as the Sun in his brightness. and shall enjoy
the fruit of the prayers of Jesus Christ, when he said, John 17.24
Father I will that they which thou have given me, be with me where I am, 1
Cor 15.28
that they may see my glory which thou have given me. When Jesus Christ has
rendered the kingdom to God his father, then shall God the father, the son and
the holy Ghost, be unto us all in all: yea, even such a fulness of good and
felicity, that as sundry vessels cast into the sea are so filled with water
that they can desire or hold no more, so this sea of divinity being in us all
in all, we shall be replenished and satisfied with life, glory, and joy, so as
we shall not be able to desire or have any more. Apoc. 21.18
Even when we shall be truly burgeses of the heavenly and holy City that
shall be of fine gold, like unto pure Crystal, the foundations of the walls
set with precious stones, the twelve gates made of twelve pearls, which shall
need neither Sun nor Moon to shine therein, for the light of God shall
illuminate it, and the lamb himself shall be the candle. To be short, when we
shall be in the fellowship of the Angels, shining as the Sun in his pride,
and ravished with joy that shall never be taken from us. A joy, I say, not
only for our own felicity, but also for the felicity of all the elect, for
we shall love them all as our selves, and so shall rejoice as much for their
felicity as for our own. And this joy shall be infinitely corroborated by the
contemplation as well of the glory of Jesus Christ, whom justly we shall love
better than our selves, as also of the glorious majesty of God, whom we shall
love with our hearts, our strength, and our minds.

9 If the representation and remembrance of this kingdom of heaven, does not
kindle our hearts with a fervent desire to attain thereto, and by desiring
the same, to amend our lives, that we may take the path that leads to such
felicity, the same is an assured testimony that we account of our selves as
of beasts, that look for no goodness after death. And on the other side, if
the apprehension of the fire that never shall be quenched, of the worms that
shall be always gnawing, of the terrible darkness, of the weeping and gnashing
of teeth through the feeling of the heavy wrath of the living God, does not
move our hearts to fear to offend him, and in offending him, to cast our selves
into the gulf and bottomless pit of this eternal woe: The same is an evident
token that we are either Atheists or Saduces, that believe neither the
resurrection of the body, nor the immortality of the soul. To be short;
neither heaven nor hell.

10 When therefore we hear that Christ, to the end to induce us to amendment,
alleges this reason, For the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Let us
steadfastly believe that there is a kingdom of heaven replenished with glory
and immortal joy, and let the apprehension of such a felicity inflame our
hearts with a fervent and resolute desire to deny our selves, the world, and
the flesh, and so to amend our lives, that loving God and our neighbors, and
endeavoring to yield unto him all obedience, we may conform our actions to his
holy and good will, as in heart to seek nothing so much as to please him, and
to abhor nothing more than the offending of him. Let us always think with
our selves that we are no beasts, who after death have no feeling of good or
evil: but contrariwise, let us consider that at the separation, either of the
body or of the soul, the soul must go either to heaven or to hell, also that
the body must follow after: yea night and day let us think and meditate upon
the difference that shall be between those that shall go into the kingdom of
heaven, and the others that shall depart into hell.

11 Let us remember that not for a thousand years, but even for ever and
infinitely we shall be either in sovereign bliss, or in extreme misery. Can we
then possibly apprehend the glory and felicity of this kingdom of heaven, Mat.
7.13.21. Luke. 13.2^.
without unspeakable joy and fervent desire to attain thereto: either
consider of the cursed estate of the reprobate, without trembling and fear?
let us therefore think upon the saying of Christ, Labor to enter in at the
narow gate, least when you shall say Lord open unto us the gate of the kingdom
of heaven, that we may come in, he answers: I know ye not: depart from me ye
workers of iniquity. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when he shall
see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, and
your selves shut out at doors. Let us behold the difference between the two
thieves that were hanged on either side of Jesus Christ, of whom the one
departed into hell, Luke. 23.39.
and the other ascended into the kingdom of heaven, as Jesus Christ said unto
him: This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Let us look upon the soul of
Lazarus, by the Angels carried into Abraham's bosom, where it rested in joy, as
he testified, Luke. 16.19.
and the soul of the cursed rich man cast into torments, as S. Luke
witnesses, and himself confesses, saying: I am tormeneted in this flame.
When he prays to be refreshed with a little water, but was denied: To be
short, let us behold the great multitude of the blessed that stood before the
throne and in the presence of the Lamb, clothed in long white garments, with
branches of palms of victory in their hands, serving God day and night,
governed by the Lamb, and by him leadde to the lively springes of water: Apoc.
7. 9.
and withal let us look upon the others speaking to the rocks and mountains,
saying: Fall upon us and hyde us from before the face of him that sits upon
the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: Let us I say behold them cast
into the lake of fire and brimstone to be tormented day and night for ever.
Apoc. 6.16 Apoc. 19.20. and 20.15.
For who is it that will not be earnestly touched in heart, hastily to depart
and retire out of the way into hell, and diligently and constantly to walk by
amendment of life into the kingdom of heaven? Can it be possible, if we
should not think upon them? or can God think upon them and not amend? either
can we amend and not feel our selves blessed by being gotten into the way of
such a felicity, Apoc. 6.16.
that we may constantly persevere, until that God fulfilling his work in us,
do receive us into the fruition of this kingdom of heaven, to enjoy the same
for ever and ever.

The ninth cause of amendment, taken hereof, that the kingdom of God which we
look for in heaven, does admonish us that we are strangers pilgrims, and
trauelers in this life. Chap. 9.
THe holy scripture does many times term us strangers, pilgrims and
travelers: neither is it only as it was with Abraham, Genesis 23.4.
when he spoke to the Cananites, saying: I am a stranger and a forrener amongst
you, and as it is daily with those who flying from persecution, and forsaking
the land of their nativity, do go to dwell in another province and kingdom
wherein they are strangers: but we are so termed in respect of the kingdom of
heaven, our true and eternal country, And indeed if we be Burgesses of
heaven, Ephesians. 2.10. Prosper. in his sentences out of August. Sent 17.
as S. Paul teaches, we are strangers to the earth, according to the saying of
S. Augustine also: All they that belong to the heavenly City, are pilgrims
and strangers in this world, and so long as this their te^porary life does
continue, they do live in an others country. And that we may the better
understand this, we call that land our country wherein we were borne and
brought up, wherein our parents and ancestors successively have made their
abode, and wherein we have our principal goods, possessions and inheritances.
Now whence do we take our spiritual birth, but from our father which is in
heaven? Phil 3.20.
where do we receive the soul of our spiritual birth, but in the Church,
which is the kingdom of God? or where is the house of our father, but in
heaven, and there dwells our eldest brother Jesus Christ and al other our
brothers and sisters in him. 1. Pet. 1.4.
Moreover, our treasure and immortal inheritance, undefiled and incorruptible,
are reserved in heaven, as says S. Peter, for us that believe in Jesus Christ,
heaven is then our true country, and in respect thereof are we here called
strangers, pilgrims, and travelers on the earth.

2 This does the Apostle writing to the Hebrews evidently declare, Heb. 11.13.
where speaking of the ancient fathers, he says: All these died in the faith,
and received not the promises; but saw them a far of and believed them, and
received them thankefullye, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims
on the earth: For they that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a
country. And if they had been mindful of that country from whence they
came out, Genesis 12.1.
they had leisure to have returned. But now they desire a better, that is an
heavenly. Wherefore God is not ashamed of them to be called their God: for he
has prepared for them a City. Here the Apostle shows, that Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob were strangers in the land of Canaan, in respect of Vr in
Chaldea, from whence they came, when Abraham at Gods commandment, left his
country, his kindred, and the house of his father. But in that they were called
forreiners and strangers, it was not in that respect, but in respect of heaven,
where God had prepared a City for them: and therefore albeit they had time to
return to Vr, their native country, yet sought they a better, namely the
heavenly and in that regard, conuersing upon earth, they are called strangers.

3 Now the remembrance that we are strangers, pilgrims and travelers, ought to
induce us to lift up and settle our thoghts, minds and cogitations upon our
heavenly country: that in the co^templation of God, of the glory of Christ, and
of the excellency of our inheritance, we might rejoice with the angels and
souls of the saints that are already gathered thither, and incessa^tly sing
praises unto God with them. And indeed as the Apostle says: Heb. 12.22.
We that believe in Christ, are come to the hill of Syon, and to the cittye of
the living God, to the heavenly Jerusalem, to millions of angels, to the church
of the first born, that are written in the heavens, to God who is the judge of
all, to the souls of the righteous that are sanctified, and to Jesus the
mediator of the new covenant. Being ascended so high, and having our
conversation in heaven, as Burgesses thereof, if from thence we look upon the
earth, and cast our view upon the kingdoms, riches, dignities, men, and the
most excellent things in the world, all will seem in our eyes so small, that
we will be even ashamed to esteem of them, yea even so much as to think upon
them: so far will we be from setting our affections thereupon: and truly go up
unto a high steeple, and look from the top thereof, look upon men that go in
the streets, and they will seem to you not to be men, but children, and their
houses even cabbins: for if it were possible to climb five or six leagues
higher, ye should see no men: yea, the greatest towns would seem but as one
house, and the Sea a poole. Moreover, if possibly ye could ascend to the heaven
of the moon, which is the lowest, the greatness of the whole world would seem
nothing it would not show so much as a good pinnes head hanging in the midst
of a great Church. What would it be, in case he were in the highest heaven
among the stars? or above the heavens in the house of our father, and in the
heavenly city whereof we are burgesses? Much rather, in those days will the
universal world be unto us nothing at all.

4 To this purpose do we read of a great Romain personage, who in a dream or
conceit being ascended into the region of heaven among the Stars, Cicero in
Scipios dream.
and beholding their greatness and brightness, thence casting down his eyes
upon the earth, it seemed that the whole world was so little, that he was
ashamed of the Romain empire, which nevertheless extended into so many
realms. Now as this Ethnic could in his discourse clymbe no higher: so if we
that are burgesses of heaven do ascend above al heavens, and there conuersing
in spirit, do behold the glory of God, and his palace of light, of an
incomprehensible extent, and afterward shall look down to the earth: we will
be ashamed of the smalnesse thereof, and of all the kingdoms therein, which
thence will not show so great as a grain of sand, but even nothing at all.
The three Apostles when they had seen some part of the glory of Christ in
his transfiguration upon mount Thabor, were so moved, that they said: Mat.
17.4.
Lord, it is good for us to be here, let us build three tabernacles. What
then would we do if we should converse in heaven, and there behold the
majesty of God, and the glory of Jesus Christ? would not even the apprehension
thereof allure us to wish to dwell there, and to forget and despise the earth?
or then remembering and looking toward the same, would we not reprove our
selves, as that Romain was reproved by his father, who said unto him, why do
thou yet cast down thine eyes upon the earth?

5 Among other the vanities that men do seek and so fervently desire, is
glory, and the reputation of virtue, valor, riches, power, wisdom, and such
other like: but this Romain Ethnic being in a dream, rapt above the stars,
is by his father admonished in the smalenesse of all the world, to contemplate
the vanity of this ambition, men will talk says he, of thee and thy virtues,
but where? be it throughout the Romain Empire: yet shall not thy fame pass such
and such mountains: there will no man once speak of thee. What a folly is it
therefore so to delight in the reputation of great wealth, ornaments of body,
excess in banquets, goodly houses, honorable functions, even wisdom and
human discretion, since all this fame and glory shall be shut up in so small a
corner of the world, that when thou art ascended into the City whereof thy
self art a Burgess, thou shall not be able to see it: most men labor to have
fair houses, gardens of pleasure, lordshippes, and to heap up possession upon
possession, as if themselves should dwell alone upon the earth, as Esaias says:
Esaias 5.8.
and yet when they have purchased whole towns and kingdoms, if they should
from heaven, look upon them, they would disdain and contemn the smalnes and
baseness of them. And indeed, let a man look upon a town platted in four
leaves of paper, he shall somewhat discern the order of the streets and
houses thereof, but afterward lay down in the like quantity of paper the
whole province wherein that city stands, and the same will not show so
great as a man's nail: And lastly, let him represent the whole world in as much
paper, and he shall see neither house nor town, yea scarsely the whole
province, perhaps he may find the names of the realms, and see their extent
in the breadth of two or three nails: and looking from heaven the whole world
will not seem so much. What a folly then, or rather a madness is it for those
that are strangers upon earth, and burgesses of heaven, diversely and by sundry
means to offend God, Genesis 25 34. Heb. 12.16.
for the getting of so small a portion of earth, which is as nothing, wherein
they resemble Esau, who for a piece of bread and a mess of pottage, sold his
birthright?

6 Again, such as are strangers in a foreign country, and have parents and
great wealth in their native soil, being hardlye entreated where they
soiourne, and upon the point to return home into their country, are
undoubtedly very glad thereof: even already they seem to see their houses,
lands and possessions, and in their concei^s, do talk with their parents, and
feel a fervent desire to be soon there: even so we, if we remember that in
heaven we have treasures of eternal riches, an undefiled inheritance,
immortal and incorruptible, which is reserved for us: a heavenly father that
loves us in his well-beloved son, our elder brother Jesus Christ in glory, the
angels and holy spirits in joy, and that we their fellow burgesses, have our
portion in all these goods, and are even upon the point to be really in heaven
with them: why should we not be ravished with a fervent desire to be lifted up
thither? and with S. Paul to say: I covet to be dissolved and to be with
Christ: Phil. 1.23.
what lets us when we feel how hardly we are entreated, and what mortal
wounds our souls do daily receive, by offending God through their
corruptions, to say with S. Paul: Romans 7.24.
O wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us from this body of death?
Shall not the very feeling of so grievous and so many bodily afflictions,
whereto we are subject in this strange land, cause us seruently to pray to be
delivered from the same: 2. Cor. 5. 1.
especially, considering that we know (as S. Paul says) that when the earthly
habitation of this lodge is destroyed, we have a building in God, even an
everlasting house in the heavens, which is not made with man's hand. And in this
respect, we that abide in these earthly dwellinges, do groan under our
burdens, for we desire to be clothed with our habitation which is in heaven,
as knowing that remaining upon earth, we are absent from the Lord (for we do
walk in says and not by sight) albeit we trust and love rather to be
estranged from this body, and to dwell with the Lord.

7 Howbeit attending until we may be really there both in body and soul, let
us be there in spirit, let us be conversant in heaven, and begin to feel the
felicity, whereof we shall hereafter have full and perfect fruition: in this
conversation with God, with the angels, and with the holy spirits, let us more
and more learn the language and manners of heaven, to the end we may resemble
the angels and saints there dwelling. When Moses had conuersed with God forty
days upon the mountain, Exodus 34.29.
at his coming down his face shined and glistered with the heavenly glory:
so will it be with us, by then we have for twenty or thirty years been
conversant in heaven, we shall become heavenly and spiritual both in word
and deed: even as by experience we see that when a countryman has dwelled
some twenty or thirty years in the Court, he forgets his country speech and
course of life, and grows to be as good a courtier as if he were borne in the
Court. Our earthly talk and communication, our worldly course of life, and the
corruptions of the flesh, that bear but too much swaye in us, do but over
manifestlye show, how little we are conversant in heaven, and consequently do
testify, that we account our selves Burgesses of earth and not of heaven. That
we may therefore amend, let us continually think that heaven is our true
country, that we are Burgesses thereof, that there we have our parents and
blessed brethren, the treasures of joy and glory, an immortal and
incorruptible enheritance: and that we are at the very point of going thither,
to take possession, as in truth we do every hour look for the time of our
departure: let this holy meditation make us to converse in heaven, and to live
as heavenly people, setting our hearts upon our treasure: let it even make us to
forsake the speech, habit, fashions and manners of those among whom we are
for a short time strangers, that we may enure our selves to the language and
holy life of the burgesses of heaven, and angels with whom we shall live for
ever. Let it withdraw our affections from all that we must leave at our
departure out of this foreign country, least otherwise we lose the
incomprehensible goods that are prepared for us in our heavenly and eternal
country: let it cause us to renounce all that might detain us in this country,
replenished with misery and calamity, that cheerfully we may aspire to our
country which abounds in joy, glory and al felicity. Let it enforce us to say
with David: Woe is me that I remain in Mesech, Psalm. 120.5.
and dwell in the tents of Keder. That is to say, among barbarous nations,
that love not the Burgesses of heaven: let the hard usage of the prince of this
world in this strange country, make us to covet to live among the blessed
Citizens of the kingdom of heaven: let all our thoughts, words and
communication testify, that in spirit we are already there, yea let all our
works be preparatiues and paths to lead us therinto: and to these ends, let us
overcome all that might break of or hinder our so happy journey from earth to
heaven.

8 We must moreover remember, that we are pilgrims and travelers, and
therefore for the attaining to the place whereto we are traveling, we must
beware of three points. First, of turning back again: Secondly, of turning
either to the right hand, or to the left: Thirdly, of standing still. The
offending of God and transgressing his commandments, is a going back
again, for as in walking after his word and in his fear, we go to God, to
heaven, and to everlasting life: so by sinning, in liewe of going forward, we
slip back and draw toward death, as we have before more at large declared.
We cannot therefore turn back, that is to say, offend God, but with this
condition, that we shall fall into ruin and everlasting perdition: much like
unto him, who flying from his enemies that pursue him, in liewe of saving
himself in some town, turns back toward them, and so puts himself
into their hands: neither are we without many and mighty enemies that pursue
us, and labor to make us to turn back by offending God, and these must we
fight against: Dearly beloved, says the Apostle Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 2.11.
I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which
fight against the soul. Let us diligently note that he here says, not
against our goods, to rob us of them, neither against our bodies, to murder us:
but against our souls, to induce the^ to offend God, and so to draw them into
everlasting damnation. And hereof have we a notable example in the person of
Job: Job. 1.
he was a just man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil, and so walked in
the way to heaven: but Satan would withstand him, and therefore commenced
war against his soul: but how? true it is he seemed as if he would have
fought against his goods, in causing them to be taken away, against his
children, in procuring their death, and against his body, in vexing it most
cruelly: yet was it properly the soul that he assaulted, as himself
declares, where he says: Does Job fear God for naught? Have thou not made a
hedge about him and about his house, and about all that he has on every side.
Thou have blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the
land. But stretch out now thy hand and touch all that he has, to see if he
will not blaspheme thee to thy face. He therefore fought against the soul,
seeking by out ward tribulation to induce the same, by blaspheming to offend
God.

9 This is a strange war, for any other may have an end, either by making peace
with the enemy, by flying far from him, or by over coming him in fight: but
in this spiritual war, we can not lawfully make any peace or agreement with
our enemies the devil, the world, and the flesh: God does forbid it, and it
would be our overthrow and destruction: for they be even so many traitors and
i^ reconciliable murderers, yea it would be worse for us, then for the sheep
to make peace with the woolse: neither can we fly and so get from these
enemies: for the devil will follow us into al places, who has a whole army of
Soldiers within us, even our affections and covetous lusts that we bear
about us. Likewise whersoeuer we become, we shall still find the world an
enemy: it rests therefore that only we sight and overcome in battle. Thus
does this war somewhat resemble the same that the Children of Israel
prosecuted against the Kings of the land that was promised unto them when they
went to take possession and inheritance thereof: Deuteronomy. 27. and 20.16.
for in respect that God had commanded them to destroy them, they might not
make peace with them, or make them tributaries: as also forbidding his people
to fear them, he would not suffer them to retire or to return into Egypt:
they were therefore of necessity to fight and overcome them. True it is that
if we consider our own weakness to withstand such mighty enemies, Ios. 1.
it may breed some cause of fear: but as God in old time commanded Joshua
that he should not fear the Cananites, and assured him that he would be with
him, and that by ouercomming them, he would bring his people into the land of
promise: so likewise let us give ear unto God that calls us to this battle,
with assurance that he will stand with us, for us and in us: to the end that
courageously fighting under his banner against our enemies, that labor to
turn us back and to recoile, we may finally by his grace and power obtain
full and perfect victory: and so ending this blessed voyadge, attain to the
fruition of the heavenly City, and our true country, that we may live with
him in glory for ever.

10 As we must therefore beware of turning back by offending of God, so is it
our duty to take heed that in this blessed journey we turn neither to the
right hand nor to the left. By those that turn to the right hand, we
understand such as do indeed fulfill Gods commandment, yet not to glorify
him, but either to glorify themselves, or to merit, Mat. 6.
and by those that turn to the left, such as following the traditions of men,
do forsake the straight and assured path of Gods word. Prayer to God, alms,
fasting, and other like works are commendable and ordained by God, to the end
by them to walk toward heaven: 1. Cor. 13.
but such as do them that they may be seen and praised of men, do turn to
the right hand, and deprive themselves of all reward in heaven, because they
receive it upon earth, as our Savior Jesus does teach. It is also a straying
to the right hand, when having received the gifts of speaking the tongues, even
of the Angels, of prophesying, of knowing all secrets and misteryes, of having
faith to remove mountains, of destributing to the poor, and of abandoning the
body to the fire: when I say all these gifts and graces are not accompanied
with love. Such likewise as in the old time among the Jews did observe the
laws and ordinances of God, to the end to merit, did also stray to the right
hand, and turned out of the way of salvation, as S. Paul testified of them,
that they had zeal of God, but not according to knowledge, Romans 10.2. Romans
11.9.
and this sentence does he pronounce of them, They strayed out of the right
way: Their table shall be made a snare and a stumbling block: On the other side,
such do turn to the left hand as do think to come to heaven by the path of
men's traditions and services, or voluntary devotions not commanded by God, as
S. Paul terms them: Col. 2.21-
as likewise Jesus Christ objected to the Scribes and Pharisees, that in their
ordinances they over went Gods commandment, whereto he adds: This people
draws near me with their mouth, Mat. 15.38. Esaias. 29.1.3
and honors me with their lips, but their hand is far of from me: But in
vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines, men's precepts. In as much
therefore as God has so far favored us, as to teach us the way wherein we
should walk to heaven: let us beware that we turn not either to the right
hand or to the left: but rejecting men's traditions, let us walk in that path
which God in his word has showed, yet not to seek any praise or commendation
to our selves, but to the end to glorify our God.

11 Thirdly, by this name Travelers, we are taught that we must not stand
still in the way, but still go forward, that we may fructisie more and more in
good works, and by amendment approach and enter into heaven: and indeed such
is the way to heaven, that he that goes not forward, slydeth backward: we
nursse up little children to the end they may grow great and wax strong, and
it were a wonder to see a child continue as little and weak as at the birth:
even so, if we, who being members of the Church of Christ, and consequently
entered into the path that leads to the kingdom of heaven, and daily do
receive the food of Gods word and sacraments, should not increase in faith,
working in love and ame^dment of life, it were a great ingratitude and
inexcusable obstinacy, which should not escape unpunished, to stand still in
the way, and not to go forward; for having put a child to school, if at the
end of four or five years he can neither read nor write any better then the
first day that he went, there is then good cause to take him away, whereby he
shall forget even that little which he had at the first. Nevertheless, of how
many even of our selves may we make the like complaint, as did the Apostle of
the Hebrews, to whom he writ, saying: When, as concerning the time, we ought to
be teachers, Heb. 5.12.
yet have ye need again that we teach you the first principles of the word of
God, and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. Thus
we see how this word Pilgrims or Travelers, does warn us not to stand
still, but to march on and walk forward in that blessed path that leads to
the kingdom of heaven.

12 As they therefore that be upon their iournies do not abide in those
hostryes o^ Innes where they are well used, lodged or entertained, and where
they find pleasant gardens, walks, or such other inticements: but after their
ba^t or in the morning do pass on their way. Even so we, albeit God in this
life give us goods, honors, houses, and other carnal commodities: yet let us
remember that we are travelers, and must not stay, but go forward on our
journey toward heaven: yea, and in case we be afflicted with sickness,
poverty, or any other calamity, yet must we still think that we are upon our
journey, and therefore taking comfort, say: Peradventure we shall be better to
morrow, but howsoever it be, our way lies forward, that we may soon be at
heaven: this does S. Paul teach us, where he says: Because the time is short,
heareafter, 1. Cor. 7.29.
that both they which have wine, be as though they had none: and they that
weep, as though they wept not: and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced
not: and they that buy, as though they possessed not: and they that use this
world, as though they used it not: for the fashion of the world goes away.
And I would have you without care. Thus we see that there ought to be nothing
that should let us from proceeding and going forward on our way, and that we
should not stop at any disturbance or alurement, either of the world or of the
slesh.

13 It now therefore remains, that as they who are to depart from a foreign
land toward their own country, do prepare things necessary for their journey:
so that we likewise provide that which is expedient for the happy perfourmance
of our journey toward our heavenly country: let us therefore make ready the
chariots of good consciences, the horses of fervent prayer to God, the oil of
holiness in our lamps, the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6.16.
which is the word of God, and the buckler of says: that resisting all our
enemies that war against us, Genesis 19.26. Luke 17.32.
we may constantly proceed in our journey: let us not as Lots wife, look
behind us, but without any sorrow for leaving the world and the flesh, let us
cheerfully go forward in this blessed voyadge. To conclude, as they that
return into their country, do leave none of their goods in those places where
they have been strangers, but do either send them before them, or carry them
with them: even so let us look that we leave not our goods upon earth, but
send and transporte them into heaven, by enlarging them plentifully to the
poor, who shall be our horses and moses to carry them: and withal let us
think that all that we leave upon earth at our departure, is even so much lost:
also that we shall neither keep nor find any thing in our heavenly country,
more then we have given, Apoc. 14.13.
neither carry thither any thing but the good that we have done: as S. John
says, of those that do dye in the Lord, that their works do follow them.

14 Thus may we see how the continual meditation of this, that in this life we
be strangers, pilgrims and travelers, will stand us in great stead for the
amendment of life, that denying the world, we may prepare our selves by all
good works, by faith, hope, prayer, patience, meditation upon Gods word, and
desire to be in fruition of our inheritance in heaven, whereof we are burgesses,
and finally, taking possession thereof, we may rejoice in joy and eternal glory.

The tenth cause of amendment, drawn from the kingdom of heaven which is in
us. Chap. 10.
HOw the kingdom of heaven which after the resurrection we shall enjoy, ought
to induce us to amendment of life, we have already showed: now, as secondly by
the kingdom of heaven, is signified the estate whereinto the Children of God,
even in this life, Luke. 17. 21. Romans 14.17.
are reestablished through says in Jesus Christ: so let us behold how
mightily this kingdom which Jesus Christ has said to be in our selves, ought
to inflame our hearts to amend. It consists, says S. Paul, in righteousness,
peace and joy in the holy ghost: by righteousness, he understands that
singular benefit comprised in this, that Jesus Christ having by his death
satisfied Gods justice for all our sins, and so paid all our debtes, has
also given and imputed unto us his perfect obedience, to the end that by this
his righteousness we may be justified in the judgment of God. This benefit
is the assured foundation of our salvation, and therefore both in greatness and
excellencye inco^prehensible: and indeed being by nature the children of wrath,
pore sinners, such as hourly by our iniquities do deserve death and eternal
damnation: what greater benefit can God bestow upon us, then in his judgment
to be absolved and so justified, that we may be the children of God, and
inheritours of life everlasting. The remembrance therefore of such a benefit,
ought to induce us to amend our lives, and diligently to beware of offending
God? and surely if only one sin may make us in his judgment guilty and
worthy of damnation, can we be so unthankful to God, and such enemies to our
souls, as by pleasing our flesh and the world, to tread under foot such a
benefit, and so happy and blessed an estate? shall we that can appear before
God justified by the righteousness of Christ, to be absolved in his just
judgment, go and make our selves guilty and worthy of sentence of eternal
death, by offending of God? shall we, who by this righteousness are aduowed to
be the children of God, be such wretches, as by giving over our selves to
sin, make our selves the children of the devil? when this righteousness
has freed us from the power of Satan, shall we by offending God, reduce our
selves again under his tirannie? when Christ by paying our debtes has so
purchased this righteousness for us, that the devil can pretend nothing
against us: shall we by our sins bind our selves anew to eternal death?

2 Since one only sin is a handwriting given unto Satan, by virtue whereof
he may detain us in the prison of hell, there to dwell for ever, unless we
be delivered by the payment of Jesus Christ, in dying for us: is it not a
monstrous and horrible case that being brought forth of hell, and by this
righteousness lifted up into heaven, we should by our sins so cast our
selves again into hell, that we should abide swallowed up therein: either that
our sins should procure Jesus Christ again to descend into our hell to fetch
us forth? By the shedding of Christ's blood, all the spots of our souls are
washed away, whereby we may appear clean, holy, and righteous before God: and
shall we return to plunge our selves again, in the cursed and damnable
filthiness of our corruption and vice? I have washed my feet, says Christ's
spouse, Cant. 5.3.
how shall I soil them again? We must either remain filthy and infected in
the sight of God, or else we must be washed again in the blood of Jesus
Christ: do we not then make too good a penyworth, either of our souls, or of
the shedding of Christ's blood? let us therefore to this purpose think upon
the earnest exhortation of the Apostle, saying: He that despises Moses law,
dies without mercy under two or three witnesses: Heb. 10.28.
Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye he shall be worthy, which treads under
foot the son of God, and counts the blood of the testament an unholy
thing wherewith he was sanctified, and does despite the spirit of grace? For we
know him that has said: vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense: And
again, the Lord shall judge his people.

3 The second benefit of this kingdom, is peace, even this peace with God and
in our consciences, whereof S. Paul speaks, saying: Being justified by faith,
we are at peace with God through Jesus Christ. Romans 5.1. In the fourth book
cap. 5.
As we have at large before declared, let us here remember: First, what it
cost Jesus Christ: it was requisite that in his soul he should feel the
fearful terrors of Gods wrath and indignation, when he bowed his face to the
earth, that he might lift up ours to God, that we might find his so
favorably inclined toward us, when he through anguish and fear sweat water
and blood, thereby to minister rest and quietness to our souls: to be short,
when he sought against the powers of hell, to reconcile us to God: yet does
even one sin disturb this peace, and kindles Gods wrath and indignation
against us: and we must either abide plunged and swallowed up in terrible
anguishe and fear, or else we must be freed therfro by the sufferings of
Jesus Christ. If after a long and woeful war, peace be once concluded, how
fearful are men of breaking of it, least they should fall again into like
afflictions? And shall we be so unthankful to Jesus Christ, and such enemies to
our own good, that for a little fleshly pleasure, for obeying our covetous
affections, our ambition, lusts, and other corruptions, we should offend God
and break this blessed peace, kindling his terrible wrath against our souls,
and so bringing them into cruel and perpetual torments? truly we do but too
evidently declare that either we are one desperate, or that we make small
acccompt of those terrible fears that Jesus Christ endured for us, yet is
there no such tormentor as a conscience burdened with sin.

4 The third fruit of this kingdom is the joy, not the joy of the world, and
of the flesh, accursed in the sight of God, but as Saint Paul adds, John.
16.21.24. John 15.11. Mat. 24.51.
Joy of the holy ghost, which Jesus Christ has promised us, saying: your joy
shall be full, and shall never be taken from you. Here is a singular benefit:
for as the incomprehensible torments of hell, are in the holy scriptures
signified by the weeping and gnashing of teeth that shall be among the reprobate:
so is the felicitye of the elect signified by this joy: as Jesus Christ notes,
where he gives us to understand, that in the day of judgment God will say to
all the faithful, Mat. 25.21. Mat. 26.37.38 Heb. 5. 7.
Enter into your masters joy. This joy did Jesus Christ purchase with many
sorrows and tears, as the history of the Gospel does note that himself
said: Now is my soul heavy even to the death. And the same does the Apostle
writing to the Hebrews affirm, saying: In the days of his flesh he offered up
prayers and supplications with strong crying, to him that was able to save him
from death, and he was also heard in that which he feared. Were it not
therefore mere madness and folly to convert this sovereign felicity of joy, so
dearly purchased for us by Christ, into damnable sorrows and tears, yea even
into weeping and gnashing of teeth, by giving our selves to sin, and so
drawing unto us the effect of this common and true sentence, For one pleasure a
thousand sorrows.

5 It is a common saying, that men should not open or read any letters that come
when they are ready to sit down to meat, for fear of troubling the benefit
of meat or drink, by some bad news therein peradventure contained: how
miserable then are we who even already tasting this joy of the kingdom of
heaven, do voluntarily disturb and convert it into tears by offending God,
for in truth we might find matter enough of sorrow, if we could but apprehend
what a woe it is to depart forth of the kingdom of God, to become bondmen to
the devil our capital enemy: this woe being indeed the just reward of sin.
If at a marriage feast there should chance some such debate, that some one of
the company should perhaps hurt or kill the Bride, the wh^le feast and all the
triumphs thereof would be dashed and converted into weeping and mourning. And
what do we, when being in this in the kingdom of heaven, we commit any
iniquity, but kill both soul and body even with everlasting death: true it is,
that having offended God, we do not so soon seele this sorrow and trouble of
mind, and this comme^h of our own dullness, not because we deserve it not,
but because God bears with us: otherwise undoubtedly the only feeling of one
only sin, would drown us in sorrow and fear of Gods wrath, let therefore
the remembrance of this kingdom which consists in righteousness, peace, and
joy of the holy ghost, cause us to abhor all iniquity, to the end that
amending our lives, we may retain this blessed kingdom of heaven, and never
change this righteosnes into iniquity, this peace into war and trouble of
conscience, and this joy into weeping and gnashing of teeth.

6 And that we may the more earnestly be stirred up hereunto, let us consider
the difference between the kingdom of heaven, and of satan: if the kingdom of
heaven consists in righteousness, peace and joy of the holy ghost, the
kingdom of satan contrariwise must needs consist in wickedness, trouble of
conscience, sorrow and heaviness: let us therefore imagine a man whose sins being
imputed to himself, he must appear before God, clothed in wickedness and sin,
to receive sentence of eternal death, and in him let us consider the fear and
terror arising of his apprehension and feeling of Gods wrath and displeasure:
let us mark his gnashing of his teeth, his howling and lamentations, yea even
himself dissolved into weeping and tears: Genesis 4.13. Mat. 25.5. Act. 1.28.
Gen, 27.18. Heb. 12.16. Apoc. 6 16. Luke 13.30. Apoc. 9. 6.
Let us look upon Cain, exclaiming that his pain is greater the^ he is able to
bear: upon Judas, who feeling his condemnation, for the avoiding of the
apprehension of death, killed himself: upon Esau, having sold his birthright
for a mess of red pottage, wept because he see no remedy for his mithap, upon
those who apprehe^ding the coming of Christ to be their judge, do cry to the
rocks and mountains, saying: Fall upon us and hide us from the wrath of the
lamb. In brief upon al those that seeking after death, death shall fly from
them, to the end that dying they may live, and living they may always dye. On
the other side, let us behold a faithful man, the child of God, in his soul
possessed of this kingdom of heaven, assured that the righteousness of Christ
shall be imputed unto him, whereby he shall undoubtedly be justified in the sight
of God, feeling peace and quietness in conscience, and replenished with
spiritual joy: is there any man that is not utterly desperate or besides
himself, that will not account such a one to be blessed, and the other
accursed? let us therefore have always the state of this kingdom of heaven in
our view, that abhorring our vice and corruption, we may tremble at all motions
to offend God, and so constantly resisting the world, the flesh, and the devil,
we may endeavor more and more to amend, that in our souls we may retain
this blessed kingdom, which consists in righteousness, peace and joy of the
holy Ghost.

The eleventh cause of amendment, taken of the kingdom of heaven, signifying
the Ministry. Chap. 11.
WE have before declared that by the kingdom of heaven, is signified also the
holy Ministry: this kingdom of heaven and holy ministry do represent unto us
many notable reasons that do bind us and ought to make us affectionate to
amendment: First, the same which Jesus Christ himself says to his Apostles,
Luke 20.16.
is spoken and meant by all faithful Pastors: He that hears you, hears me,
and he that despises you, despises me: and in this same sense does S. Paul
testify of the Thessalonians. When ye received of us the word of the preaching
of God, ye received it not as the word of men, 1. These. 2.13.
but (as it is indeed) the word of God.

2 When we go to hear a Sermon, we are to think with our selves that we are
going to hear God speak unto us by the mouth of a man: and therefore let us in
all humility reverence and faith, hearken unto him, and let us believe that he
declares unto us these things which we ought to believe to be saved, and which
we ought to do in obedience to the will of God, and for the amendme^t of our
lives: let us be desirous to know it, attentive to hear it, ready to believe
it, and to yield to God all obedience: let us think that we cannot despise
that which in the Sermon is preached unto us, but we must also thereby declare
that we do not believe either that it is God that speaks, or that the
doctrine is true: and as it were a great impiety, Mat. 10.14. Mark. 6.11.
and horrible incredulity, even to think it: so the judgment that he will
execute against the contemners of his word shall be most fearful. Whosoever
(says Jesus Christ) will not receive and hear your words, Genesis 19.
when you depart his house, or the town, shake of the dust of your feet, for a
witness against them, whereby I say unto you, it shall be easier for Sodom and
Gomorra in the day of judgment, then for that town. Let us represent to our
view this fire falling from heaven, burning and consuming the town of Sodom,
Gomorrha, and others there about, with all the men, women, and children, Mela.
Chron. lib. 2 Egesippus. l. 4 c. 18
young and old, and all then cattle, even the very towns, and converting the
Cities thereof into a stinking and polluted lake, for the compass of eight
Dutch leagues, with other notable testimonies of Gods wrath. And let the
contemplation hereof make all such to quake for fear, as despise and contemn
God, when he speaks to them by the mouths of his servants the ministers.

3 When our Lord Jesus Christ by breathing upon them had inspired the Apostles
with the holy Ghost, John 20.22 Acts 13.46
he also gave unto them and to all faithful pastors, power by preaching of
the word to bind the unbelievers, and to unbind such as converting
themselves should truly believe in Jesus Christ. Whereupon Saint Paul beholding
the stubbornnes of the Jews, who obstinatly rejected the doctrine of the
Gospel, he bound them, with protestation that he was free from their blood,
and that forsaking them in the bonds of their incredulity, under the power of
Satan, he went to preach to the Gentiles. Now if we see an offender bound,
fettred, brought before this Judge, and thence carried to the fire, who will not
take compassion and horror thereat? How then are men so senseless and dull,
as in their incredulity and obstinacy in evil doing, not to apprehend the
bonds of their sins, whereof Satan has taken hold, to pull them into
eternal fire?

4 Moreover, if the simple, ignorant, and such nations as never heard the
preaching of Gods word, by offending God do make themselves worthy of death
and eternal damnation? What excuse may they pretend in the judgment of God,
to whom he has revealed his will by the preaching of holy doctrine, in case in
sted of amendment, they remain obstinate in evil doing? Luke 12.47
The servant (says Jesus Christ) that knows his masters will and does it
not, shall be more grievously punished than he that knew it not. For, as we
have before declared, so it is not simple transgression, but even contempt and
misprision against the majesty of God. If being upon thy journey thou
know not the right way, and some man coming by, shows it unto thee, art
thou not well worthy to go astraie and loose thy self, if voluntarily and
wittingly thou take another clean contrary? But what do the ministers of
the word in their sermons? Do they not show the way to heaven, to the end
that men may take and follow the same? Or do they not declare in how many
sorts men by straying amiss, do take the path to hell, with the remedies how
to retire and turn back therefro?

5 But do the ministers of the word think it enough to say, Behold yonder is
heaven, or the ware to heaven, walk therein? Do they not also show what
benefits we have received of the Lord, for the which we are bound to love,
serve, and worship him, and withal to amend? How often does Moses and other of
the Prophets propound the great benefit of the peoples deliverance out of
Egypt, thereby to induce them to obedience? But especially how many earnest
exhortations to amendment do the Apostles gather in propounding the
incomprehensible benefit of our redemption, wrought by Jesus Christ? Is it not
then an intolerable ingratitude, to deny to obey him that has already done
us so much good both in body and soul? Not without cause therefore does God
so sharply complain of those that rent and tread under foot such vehement
bonds, whereby they are summoned to their duty in amendment: as we have many
notable examples in the writings both of the Prophets and Apostles. Gods
benefits are the cords of humanity, Osc. 11.4.
as Oseas terms them, whereby he seeks to pluck us from the way of
perdition, and by amendment of life to lead us to salvation. Does not the
devil, think you, hold us fall fettered in mighty and strong chains, since
we cannot be drawn by these cords of mercy and humanity to the service of
our God?

6 Yet is there thus much more. The ministers do propound not only the
benefits received, out also the promises of other most excellent and
plentiful blessings and benefits both bodily and ghostly, to those that by
amending their lives shall labor to obey God. And this it were to be wished,
that every man would note in the reading of the old and new Testament, to
the end they might both the better understand them, and be by them the more
earnestly moved, when they are in the sermons represented unto us. For how
wonderful is the goodness of God, who vouchsaseth to promise us so many
benefits if we amend our lives, that is to say, if we perform the thing
whereto we are already bound? If I owe upon a very formal bill a hundred
crowns, will my creditor to the end to induce me to pay the same, faithfully
promise to give me ten times as many more? Yet thus does God deal with us.
For what is al our obedience and amendment of life, in respect of the
benefits that God promises to obey him, whereto we are already bound? If he
that is free, binds himself to serve another, then is it reason that his
master should promise him some wages and reward for his service: but we are not
free, but already bound to serve our God, yet does he promise us great
benefits, if we employ our selves faithfully in his service by amending our
lives. Are not we then very stubborn against God, and enemies to our selves,
that thus contemn the promises of his rewards and benefits toward us? If a
Prince should promise a tailor or shoemaker son thousand crowns for one
years service, would any man refuse it? Would not he to whom it were offered
or promised be ready to leave his house, his wise, his children, and all
other things, to go to service to such a Lord for one year? How unthankful
or senseless are we therefore that will not be otherwise won and induced to
serve God, who by so many, so excellent, and so assured promises does daily
inuit us thereto?

7 Besides the representation of benefits already received, and of promises
of more to come, do they not also propounde in the name of the almighty,
righteous, and true God, most grievous and manifold threatenings, to the end
that if we will not by courteous and fatherly gentleness be induced to amend,
Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28 Leuit. 26.
we may be, as it were, forced by the threatninges of a severe and rigorous
Judge? What a scroule of woes does the Lord by his servant Moses propound
against such as will not amend? Wherein we are also well to note, that he
denounces if the first stripes can breed no amendment, he will add seven
times as many more. Also if we will not yet amend our lives, he will yet
double them seven times more. And in deed, as he afflicts and punishes us
to the end to make us to convert and turn to him, and consequently to induce
us to amendment of life, so does he by his so often redoubling of his
threats, show that we must either humble and bow our selves by obedience,
or else break them, to our everlasting and eternal destruction. Is it not
then a horrible obstinacy and monstrous m^re dulitie not to fear and tremble
at such threatenings of the living God? Are not the same which he heretofore
has executed and daily does execute against the impenitent, even so many
seals and myrrours representing unto us the very truth of his great and
terrible threatenings, thereby to induce and persuade us steadfastly and
undoubtedly to believe that our selves, unless we amend, shall also feel the
execution of his vengeance against us, as himself says in Saint Luke, Luke
13, 3 1. Cor. 10.7
If ye will not amend, you shall perish likewise. In like manner also Saint
Paul noting some punishments and vengeances inflicted in the wilderness
upon Idolaters, fornicators, tempters of Christ, and such as murthured against
him, thereby to warn the Corinthians to beware of the like iniquities, in
conclusion does add, that all these things were done for example sake, and are
written for our learning, as those upon whom the ends of the world are come.
Wherefore, says he, let him that stands, take heed that he do not fall.
And in deed, wherefore are offenders publicly executed, but for example to
those that look upon them, that they may beware of committing the like
offenses, least themselves do also incur the like punishment? When he that
has committed some wicked murder, sees another murderer executed, will he
not say in his heart, If the Judge wist what I have done, he would likewise
condemn me to die? But God sees all, he is just and will not be corrupted
with rewards. When therefore the minister of the word does lay before us the
horrible punishments executed against those that will not amend, does he it
not to the end that they which hear of such judgments of God, should
immediately resolve to amend, and say in themselves, If we will amend this fault
which we so grievously punished in such and such, we also shall undoubtedly
perish in like sort.

8 Neither may we harden our hearts in wickedness, because there is no
lykelyhoode of occasion to fear any calamity or affliction: but
contrariwise, let us remember the Ninevites: What lykelyhood was there that
they should fear, that within forty days Niniuie should be destroyed?
Jonas 3 Math. 12.41
It was a flourishing town, the chief city of a mighty realm, yet at the
preaching of Jonas, a man to them unknown, they also heathen, deuoid of all
knowledge of the true God, or of his, holy doctrine, did convert to God in
fasting and sackcloth. And shall not they be judges against such, as daily
hearing Gods threatenings at the mouths of those whom they know to be his
servants, do notwithstanding continue obstinate without amendment? And albeit
it seem that God slackneth the execution of his vengeance against many
unpenitent persons, yet there is a time of their punishment ordained, and it
shall be executed upon many in this life, but in the later day of judgment
upon all those that make no account to amend.

9 Hereof let us well note the examples propounded by Saint Peter and Saint
Jude: If God (says he) spared not the Angels that had sinned, but cast them
down into hell, 2. Pet. 2.4
and delivered them into the chains of darkness, to be kept unto judgment:
Neither spared the old world, but saved Noah the eight person, a preacher of
righteousness, and brought in the flood upon the world of the ungodly. And
turned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes, condemned them, ouerthrewe
them, and made them an example unto them that afterward should live ungodly,
and delivered the just Loath? The Lord knows to deliver the godly that honor
him, out of temptation, and to reserve the ungodly unto the day of judgment
to be punished. Saint Jude in stead of the example of the flood, propounds
the vengeance of God poured upon the unbelieving Israelites in the wilderness.
Also, Jude verse. 5
making mention of the horrible punishment fallen upon Sodom and Gomorrha,
says that they were set forth for an example, and suffered the vengeance of
eternal fire. When therefore we hear the threatenings of the living God by
the mouth of his servants, let us make have to convert to the Lord in
amendment of life, lest by our obstinacy, as Saint Paul says, and our hearts
not knowing how to repent, we heap up wrath for the day of wrath, Romans 2.5
and of the manifestation of the just judgment of God, who shall render to
every man according to his works.

10 Inasmuch therefore as through our infirmity, albeit we be taught the
way to heaven, and that we be put in mind to walk in the same, by
representation of benefits received, of promises, of blessings to come, yea,
even of threatninges with the examples of vengeance, we nevertheless cannot
desist from offending of God, and so from turning out of the way of salvation
and life everlasting. The ministers of the word do moreover use reprehensions,
reproving our sins and offenses, thereby to reduce us into the right way,
and in respect of our slownesse to do good and to amend our lives, they also
use vehement exhortations, yea, they do even pray, adjure, and entreat us in
the name of God to amend, and to walk in the fear of God. And where we have
many no^some hindrances that trouble us, and quail our courages, 2. These. 2.11
they do likewise propound unto us mighty consolations in the word of God,
to the end we may cheerfully and constantly proceed in the way of
salvation. What man therefore inioying the holy ministry, can excuse himself
in the sight of God, in case he do not constantly resolve to amend his life,
and daily to put the same in practice? How horrible a judgment shall he
deserve, that is so hardened in wickedness, and so tied in the chains of
Satan, that there is no light before his eyes, no path to the way of
salvation, no feeling of Gods benefits, no remembrance of his promises, no
fear of his threatninges, no apprehension of the examples of his vengeance, no
reprehension, no exhortation, no consolation that can be of strength and
sufficient to move his heart to amend? Be not these men then that remain thus
obstinate without amendment, even monsters in nature?

11 Now, as the administration of the Sacraments is one part of the holy
ministry, let us first see how forcibly our Baptism should move us to amend
our lives. Baptism is the seal of the covenant of God, comprehending
especially two graces, namely, remission of sins, and our regeneration, or
spiritual renewing. When the children of Christians therefore are baptized, the
same is as if God speaking by the mouths of his ministers, should say: O my
people, acknowledge my great mercy and goodness toward these little babes,
they are conceived in sin, borne in iniquity, by nature the children of
wrath, yet do I aduow them for mine: their sin a d corruption is washed
away in the blood of Jesus Christ, I do^^nite and join them unto him, to the
end that being grafted into his death and resurrection, they may be
regenerated, their old man be mortified, and themselves become new creatures
in my sight. In them do I seal these graces, whilst they be yet babes before
they know me, even before they have done any good, that so they may be
acknowledged to be merely free, to my glory. Is not this a great bond unto
children to bind them as they come to age, to love God, who loved them before
they knew him, and to do the duty of children, because he aduowed them to be
his children, even before they had done any good? Surely love should beget
love, and love fear to offend, and fear to offend, amendment of life. If by
Baptism we be regenerate and made the children of God, are we not bound to
live as the children of God, and as it may beseem the holiness of such a father?
The kings children do not apply their minds to handle crafts, but to works
fitting their greatness: much less then should the children of God apply
themselves to the works of the dark. Such as by Baptism are recalled from
death, should do no deadly works: and they that by Baptism are incorporated
into Jesus Christ, ought so to be guided by his spirit, that as it is the soul
that works all the works of the body, so the spirit of Christ, as it were
the soul of this new man Jesus Christ, being considered as united with his
body, there should be no motion, thought, word, or work, but such as should
proceed from the spirit of Jesus Christ, in all fullness dwelling in him and
in us his members, according to the measure limited to every one of us.

12 Moreover, if by Baptism we be grafted into Jesus Christ, we must bring
forth fruit worthy of Jesus Christ, John 15, 5.
He that dwells in me, says he, and I in him, bears much fruit. If we
speak of trees, experience teaches us, that the sign that is thereinto
grafted, does in such wise draw away the sap and force thereof, that it
brings forth fruit according to it self kind, not after the kind of the
tree whereinto it is grafted: but with Jesus Christ it is contrary, for they
that are grafted in him, do in deed gather strength from him, yet so that
they alter their nature, and bring forth fruit, not after the kind of Adams
children, but of Jesus Christ, into whom they are grafted. And therefore as it
were a monstrous matter, to see an apple tree, whereupon nothing had been
grafted, bear acornes: so is it as strange and repugnaunt to reason, that
they who by Baptism are ingrafted into Jesus Christ, should not bring forth
the fruits of righteousness according to his kind. Likewise, if Baptism be
a pledge of our regeneration, of necessity the works and affections of our
first generation, according to the which we are full of corruption and
wickedness, must cease and be mortified, and now we must show forth the fruits
and effects of our regeneration, in newnes of life, since by our baptism our
old man was crucified with Jesus Christ, we must not now raise him again,
but leave him dead. And as a dead man is no longer possessed of the motions,
thoughts, affections and works of a living man: so we by our Baptism being
dead into Jesus Christ, must no longer have any motions, affections, words,
or works of our old man.

13 There yet rests this consideration, that by Baptism we do put on Christ.
But Christ, whom we have put on, is holy, and of a sweet savor before God:
Gal. 3.27
And shall we be so slothful as to trail this sacred garment through the mire
and silthines of this world? Or putting it off, to put on the villainous and
stinking garment of flesh, by walking in the affections thereof? Let us walk,
says Saint Paul, honestly as in the day, not in gluttony or drunkenness,
Romans 13.13
neither in chambering and wantonness, in strife, and envying. But let us put
on Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof. Thus does our Baptism diuersely and in sundry wise bind us to
amend our lives. But because in Baptismes names are given as in old time in
the circumcision, so often as we hear our names, let the same be an
advertisement unto us of our Baptism, putting us in mind of our duties to
amend.

14 Upon the holy ministry depends also the communion in the holy supper of
the Lord. Many are the reasons for the which Christ did ordain it, all which
do also bind us to amend. Of these we will now consider sour principal.
The first, by the use of the holy supper our faith is strengthened, and our
souls are spiritually fed in the hope of life everlasting. And therefore as the
child when he comes to age, is bound to honor his parents, not only for his
begetting and bringing into this life, but also because they have fed and
brought him up, and still do continue the same duties unto him: even so should
it be with us whom God has, as it were begotten into his Church through our
Baptism, and to whom he has since in his holy Supper ministered the food of
our souls in the communion of the body and blood of Jesus Christ: For not
only our spiritual new birth by Baptism, but also the spiritual food which
this good father ^^eth unto us in his holy supper, do bind us to honor him,
yea, and should thereto mightily induce us, considering that for food to our
souls he has delivered his only son Jesus Christ to be crucified for us.
If any man had a child so sick, that nothing could serve for his food and
recovery but pearls confected or preserved, how much should such a child be
bound to love and honor his parents, that for his relief had not grudged at
their expense? Truly it were a most bitter ingratitude not to care to please or
obey them: Even so what reproof should we deserve of our heavenly father, who
seedeth us in his holy supper, not with pearls, but with the very flesh and
blood of his son Jesus Christ, in case we should make no account to please him
by amendment of life: withal considering, that as there is no comparison
between pearls and the body and blood of Jesus Christ, so the spiritual life
of our souls is without comparison much more excellent than the life of our
bodies

15 Moreover, as meat and drink ministered unto the body, do maintain the
life, motions, and senses of the body, so from the communion in the body and
blood of Jesus Christ, which is the food of the soul, must proceed the
spiritual and heavenly life, cogitations, affections, words and deeds. And
therefore as it were a strange case, if the body by eating and drinking
should gather no sustenance, and consequently want all motions, sense, and
bodyly operation: so were it a monstrous matter, that the soul communicating
in the body and blood of Jesus Christ, should gather no spiritual food, that
might bring forth newness of life and holiness in words and deeds.

16 Besides, as the holy supper is the table of Gods children, the faithful
and members of the Church of Jesus Christ: so the communicating thereat is a
solemn protestation that we are the children of God: true belieuers, and
members of the church of Christ: and that so we separate our selves from the
profane worldly and vicious people, and do purpose to live holily, righteously
and religiously, as it beseems the children of God and faithful members of
the Church. Such therefore as communicating in the holy supper, do not
nevertheless amend their lives: but walking after the world and the flesh,
are given to whoredom, drunkenness, gluttony, covetousness, deceit, fraud,
ambition, pride, envy, hatred, backbiting, with other like vices and
corruptions, do show themselves counterfects and hipocrites: do ear and
drink their own damnation, and do horribly scandalize or offend the Church
whereof they should be members together with the doctrine that they do
profess. First what an impudency is it solemnly to protest by taking the
bread and wine that thou think thy self to be the child of God, and yet
in thy self do find that thou do not so think: that thou art a member of
Christ, and yet do not believe him: that thou renouncest the world and the
flesh, and yet art in love with them: that thou will live in holiness, and yet
have no will thereto: that thou seek life in Jesus Christ, when voluntarily
thou do cast thy self into death: that thou will amend thy life, yet have
no intent to forsake thy vice and corruptions: to be short thus to abuse this
holy communion to the end to make men believe that which God sees to be false
and contrary to thy protestation. 1. Cor. 11.27.
Do thou not believe the protestation of S. Paul, who says, that Whosoever
shall eat this bread, and drink of this cup unworthily, does eat and drink
his own damnation, because he discerns not the Lords body; namely from
bodily and carnal food, which the mouth of the wicked and abominable do
receive as well as the mouth of the righteous man and one that fears God.

17 Again, do thou not apprehende the offense that thou do commit, in
that thou openest the mouth of the adversary to religion, to condemn the
doctrine of truth, to reiecte the Church of Christ, to blame the children of
God, and to blaspheme God himself? think thou not that thou do harden
them in their errors, and in the way of destruction and damnation, do thou
not consider that thou do arm and encourage them to seduce such as are
members of the Church, and redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ, by declaring
unto them that men so given over to the world and the flesh cannot be of the
true Church: that the doctrine of truth can bring forth no such fruits: and
that the Church is no house for drunkerds, adulterers, covetous persons,
deceivers, quarelers, envious people and men possessed with other like vices:
should thou not remember what Jesus Christ pronounced. That it had been
better for thee that a millstone had been hanged about thy neck, Luke, 17. 2.
and thou had been cast into the sea, then to have offended even the least
of these. Thus do we see how mightily the communion in the holy Supper of the
Lord should move our hearts to deny every thing that beseems not the
children of God and members of the Church of Christ, and more and more to
endeavor to amend our lives.

Luke ^^.19. 1. Cor. 11.26.
18 This holy Supper is also instituted, to the end to celebrate it in the
remembrance of Jesus Christ: or as S. Paul says, to show forth his death. That
is, not only to report and put men in mind that Christ is dead, but also to
represent unto us, that he that dyed is the son of God, and prince of glory.
Secondly that he has suffered, not a simple death: but even such a death as
was accursed in the law and conioined with the terrible wrath of God. Thirdly
that he dyed, not for the righteous and his friends: but for sinners and his
enemies: as our selves are all of us by nature the Children of wrath. Ephesians.
2.3.
Can we then thus show forth the death of Jesus Christ and with our mouths
praise his great goodness, mercy and love toward us, which shines therein,
and yet in our works profane, deny and as it were even spite him, by living
as men for whom Christ has not dyed, and so in effect show that sin lives and
reigns in us, which by the death of Christ whom we preach, should be
mortified. Let us rather in eating the bread and drinking the wine, which lead
us to the death of Jesus Christ, so relish and taste therein his goodness and
love, that our hearts may open our mouths to declare this his death, and that
our hands and feet, that is to say, our works may agree herewith, to the end in
a holy harm onie to testify by amendment of life the feeling of this in
comprehensible benefit of his death, whereof he makes us pertakers in his
holy supper, to his praise and glory.

1 Cor. 10.17
19 Finally as love is the fulfilling of the law and the mark of Gods children:
so is there nothing that can more mightily induce us thereto then the use of
this holy supper. And in deed as Saint Paul says. We that are many, are but
one bread and one body. for we are all partakers of one bread* The bread made
of many kernels, is but one bread: so we that communicate in the bread of the
holy supper are but one body, under one head Jesus Christ. There must
therefore be among us such an union in thoughts, minds, and works: such a
feeling of the benefit of joy and of the tribulation in sorrow: such relief
and support: such equity and right: such peace and love: such help and
succor, as if there were but one living soul among us all. 1. Cor. 12.12
And this is it whereto S. Paul exhorts us, saying. As the body is one and
has many members, and all the members of the body, which is one, though they
be many, yet are but one body: so is Christ, that is to say, the Church united
unto the head Jesus Christ. Neither is there, as he says in the same Chapter,
any division in a body: but all the members have like care one for another, in
so much that if one of the members do suffer all the rest of the members do
suffer with it: and if one of the members be honored, all the rest do rejoice
with it. and then he adds, Ye are the body of Christ and the members thereof,
each for your parts. This seal therefore of our union, should make us to
remember that which before was touched in the Chapter of charity or love, even
that we should not do that to others which we would not should be done to
our selves: also that we should so do to others as we would be done unto. And
as a great part of our amendment consists in the practice of the^e two
rules: so, so often as we do eat of the bread of the holy Supper, let us
remember that that seal of our union does bind us to amend in any thing that
depends upon love, wherein consists the fulfillinge of the law, as is
aforesaid.

20 Common prayers are also one part of the ministry: And in the same ought
every one with heart and mind to accompany the mouth of the minister, as if the
whole congregation spoke unto God in him. And what do we require in them? Is
it not that he would vouchsafe to work in us, all that he requires of us,
that we may obey and please him? Hereof then it follows, that the small
amendment that appears in us is a manifest testimony that we suffer the
minister to speak alone to God, and in our hearts have no feeling of any
desite or fervent affection to obtain those graces that he craves of God for
us: and consequently, that we are overtaken with hypocrisy, and profanation
of the holy prayers. Let us therefore remember that we do speak to God by the
mouth of the minister, and that we do especially desire that he would give us
grace to amend, that as our petition admonishes us of our obligation, so
being heard, we may show the fruit of our prayers in the amendment of our
lives.

21 To conclude, the exercise of ecclesiastical discipline is also a
dependence of the holy ministry. And the principal end thereof tends that
every member of the Church should walk in the fear of God, and that if any one
go astray, he should be brought back into the way of salvation. This does
even already show us that we are most desperately wicked, if besides the
documents, exhortations, reprehensions and public admonitions, we also
despise and reject such as perticularly may be made unto us by those persons to
whom God has committed the care of our salvation, by laying that burden upon
them. When a man goes astray in some forest is it not a comfort to him to be
told of his error and taught the right way? And when a man falls into a
ditch ready to be drowned, is he not to thank him that pulls him forth and
saves his life? Surely this is the end, and as it were the whole sum of this
ecclesiastical discipline. And because there be some so hardened in wickedness,
that they despise all admonitions and exhortations, Jesus Christ has given the
Church authority to bind them: denouncinge them to be heathen and publicans,
that is, men that have no communion in the Church of Christ, And this is it
that he teaches, Mat. 18. 15.
saying. If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault
between him and thee alone: If he hear thee, thou have wonre thy brother:
But if he hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two, that by the mouth of
two or three witnesses, every word may be confirmed. And if he will not
vouchsafe to hear them, tell it unto the Church, and if he refuse to hear
the Church also, let him be unto thee as the heathen and publicans. Verily I
say unto you, whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever ye loose upon earth, shall be loosed in heaven. This sentence and
threatening ought so nearly to touch our hearts that we should not despise the
exhortations and admonitions that tend to amendment. For if the impenitent be
detained in the bonds of Satan, until by amendment they be unbound. As their
estate is truly wretched and miserable, so is there nothing that we should
have in greater regard, then by amending our lives to be dissolved and unbound.
Thus may we see how the holy ministry, signified by the kingdom of heaven,
and considered in all the principal parts thereof, ought to bind us in all
affectionate desire to amend.

The twelfth cause of Amendment, taken of this, That by the kingdom of heaven
is signified, the most blessed felicity of the children of God in heaven: The
kingdom of God in us: and the holy ministry in the Church. Chap. 12.
THis is one thing worthy the noting, that by the kingdom of heaven or of God,
is signified the felicity of Gods children in heaven, the kingdom of God in
us, and the holy ministry or the Church. This title, The kingdom of heaven,
common to these three several estates, does sufficiently show, that albeit
there be a great binding and conjunction between the^, yea, even such, that as
being in the kingdom of heaven, that is, in the Church, and using the holy
ministry, we are in the way to heaven: so the kingdom of heaven proceeding
there hence, being in us, we are assured to enter into the kingdom of God
which is in heaven. And in deed these are as it were two steps to climb up,
and two gates which we must pass through to get in. And therefore who so
desires to be resolved whether he be of the number of the elect, and heirs
of the kingdom of God, let him seek the certainty and knowledge thereof in
himself. For if he be a member of the Church, and enjoy the holy ministry,
men may have some ground, and are even bound to account him a child of God
belonging to his kingdom: but if he be gotten up the second step, and seeleth
the kingdom of God in his heart, let him be assured that God accounts him
his child, and that he shall enter into his kingdom of eternal glory. Now
as there is no greater felicity than to enjoy the kingdom of God in heaven,
so is there nothing to be more desired, than to enter thorough both the first
and second gate of this kingdom of heaven. This is one sharp spur to induce
us to practice this commandment of Jesus Christ, First seek the kingdom of
God, Math. 6.36
and the righteousness thereof, and consequently let us amend our lives. For if
the apprehension of the kingdom of glory that is in heaven, ought even to
ravish us into a fervent desire to attain theurnto. Likewise that we cannot
attain thereto, unless the kingdom of heaven be also in us, that is to say,
if we have not faith, fructifying in good works, and amendment of life.
Furthermore, that we cannot have this kingdom of heaven in us, unless we also
be members of the Church, and use the holy ministry. It follows that there
is nothing that we should so fervently desire, and so earnestly seek for^ as
the kingdom of heaven, that is, to enjoy the holy ministry in the Church,
and by the use thereof to establish the kingdom of heaven in us, and thereby
finally to enter into the fruition of the kingdom of God in heaven.

2 But ordinarily we do the contrary. We seek first the things that
concern this present life, and as for those that belong to the kingdom of
heaven, we seek after them but seldom, slightly, and as it were for a
fashion. Our reason: Because we do naturally love the body more than the
soul, and the goods and commodities of this temporal life, more than the
treasures of spiritual riches. We resemble little children, that esteem more
of an apple or morsel of Sugar, than of an assurance of rents. Neither need
we to open our eyes very wide, or to use any spectacles, to see this
corruption in men, experience does but too plainly show it. And for our more
manifest conviction hereof, let us consider five proofs, which we may note
upon all the fingers of one of our hands, that we may the better remember
them, and so take some care to correct them. First, whereupon we do first think,
when we wake, that is, what is nearest to our hands, for sometimes even the
care of some matter does waken us. If thou find that thy first cogitations,
when thou do awake, are such as concern the body and this present life,
and do nothing concern the kingdom of heaven, the duty, salvation, and
comfort of thy soul, this is one pin upon the sleeue, and a prick in one
finger, to make thee to remember that thou carest more for earth than for
heaven, for the body than for the soul.

3 Secondly, Jesus Christ says, that of the abundaunce of the heart the tongue
speaks. Mat. 12.34,
When therefore thou go to bed, think what speech and communication thou
have had all that day, so shall thou be forced to confess, that peradventure
thou have spoken little of the kingdom of heaven, or of the salvation of thy
soul: but rather, or at the leastwise, that the greatest part, without
comparison, has concerned the body and this present life. The third point
concerns the care and affection that in many does appear to be greater for
the getting of goods and other the appurtenaunces of this life, than for the
obtaining of the kingdom of God and his righteousness. And in deed, most men,
and the wisest in the world, do not so much as understand the meaning of the
kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof, so far are they from seeking
it, rather than the riches and commodities of the flesh, wherewith they be
better acquainted, and which naturally they do more desire. The fourth rests
in the care, which without comparison, is greater for the preservation of the
body and this life present, than for the keeping of the soul, or any thing
that concerns the kingdom of heaven. And indeed al men do take more care to
nourish the body than the soul: also to prevent the diseases or wounds of the
body rather than of the soul. The fifth consists in this, that according as
our love or inclination to any thing is great or small, so is our sorrow for
the loss thereof more or less. If through dronkennes, falling into the fire,
we chance to burn our face, it troubles us more than when by dronkennes we
lose the image of God, and cast our souls into hell fire. The loosing of our
body, life, or earthly goods for any offense committed by us, does without
comparison, more daunt and quail us, than the desert of everlasting death and
the loss of the kingdom of heaven.

4 Let us therefore plainly confess the truth, that naturally we love the
body better than the soul, and the goods and commodities of this temporal
life better than the tresures of eternity. And consequently, that in lieu of
seeking first the kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof, and
thereupon expecting that all other things shall be given us according to the
promise of Christ, we contrariwise, setting the ca^t before the horse, do
first and much more seek that which concerns the body and this present
life, than any thing that touches the soul and the kingdom of heaven. And
yet he that knows not that the body is more than the soul, has no soul,
neither has any understanding or reason, and is no man but a beast. And he
that confesses not the kingdom of heaven to be infinitely better than all the
kingdoms of the world, shows himself to be most perverse and malicious.

5 That we may therefore correct these corruptions, and so amend our lives,
Math. 13.44 and 45.
let us remember that Jesus Christ likeneth the kingdom of heaven to a
treasure hid in the field, which when a man has sound, he hides it, and for
joy thereof departs and sells all that he has, and buieth that field. Also
to a pearl of great value, for the purchase whereof the merchant sells all that he has. But what was this so excellent treasure, or pearl of so great
price? even the Church or holy ministry. The kingdom of God in us, and the
kingdom of glory in heaven. This kingdom of heaven therefore must we first
and especially seek after, and after the example of those merchants, sell all
we have, that is to say, forsake all that we account to be precious
concerning this life, that we may enjoy this kingdom of heaven.

6 And in deed, first they that being members of the Church, do use the holy
ministry, are accounted to be the children of God and members of Jesus
Christ, who also imployeth this holy ministry to drive from them the
kingdom of Satan, and to establish his. And so are they gotten on to the
first step, and entered in at the first gate. In the mean time because there
be also hypocrites that do enter and abide there for a time, in show keeping
the place of Gods children, it is requisite moreover that the kingdom of heaven
be in us. For as all they that are possessed with righteousness, Romans 14.17
peace, and the joy of the holy Ghost, which Saint Paul calls the kingdom
of God, are certain to enrer into heaven: so is it in vain to pretend to
enter into the kingdom of God, which is in heaven, unless the kingdom of
heaven, which is the gate, be first in us, that is to say, if we have not the
true knowledge of God and of his son Jesus Christ, a lively faith, a fervent
charity, unless we increase in sanctification of body, of soul, and of
mind: unless in our selves we do feel a good conscience conjoined with peace
and joy in the holy Ghost, and unless we be regenerate in newness of life.
As also Jesus Christ himself does plainly say, That unless we be borne
again, we cannot see the kingdom of God. And in deed it is written, John
3.3 1. Cor. 6.9.
That neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor
thieves, nor covetous men, nor dronkardes, nor evil speakers, nor rauishers,
shall inherit the kingdom of God. Yet before he pronounces this sentence,
he wakeneth us, saying: Deceive not your selves, to the end that casting off
all illusions and sweet baits of the world, the flesh, and the devil, we may
be assured that by amendment, and correcting of these vices and other like
corruptions, we shall inherit the kingdom of God. Wherefore as where there
be two gates to a town, it is not enough that we enter the first, unless
we also pass through the second: so is it not enough that we being members
of the Church, using the holy ministry, which we have said to be as the
first gate to the kingdom of heaven, unless we thence proceed to the
second, in living as true and lively members of the Church, declaring the
effects of the holy ministry by the testimonies of our faith, mortification
of the old man, newness of life: in brief, by daily amendment. For albeit
we have preached the word of God, yea, and wrought miracles, yet shall we
not therefore enter into the kingdom of heaven, unless we also amend our
lives, as Jesus Christ also said. Not every one that says Lord, Lord, Mat.
7.21.
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he which does the will of my
father which is in heaven. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord,
have we not by thy name prophesied, and by thy name cast out devils, and by thy
name done many great works? Then will I profess unto them, I never knew ye:
Depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

7 The parable of the seed sown in sundry sorts of ground, does evidently
declare, that for the establishing of the kingdom of heaven in us: Mat. 13.
also that we may assuredly enter into the kingdom of God, which is in heaven,
we are to amend in three points: First, as the seed that fell by the way side,
and so was devoured by the souls of the air: so must we beware that our hearts
be not so hard and impenitent, that the word heard, when it cannot enter into
the^, vanish away and be as it were even violently caught away by satan.
Secondly, we must be so firmly resolved to bear in patience the loss of
parents, brethren, sisters, goods, dignities, yea, even of life, that being
possessed with this good humor of patience, a good conscience, and faith, the
sunny heat of persecution may not make this sacred seed unfruitful or
unprofitable, or cause us to forsake the Church which is the kingdom of
heaven, and so fall again under the tyranny of Satan, as a dog to his
vomit, or a washed sow to her mire. Thirdlye, 2. Pet. 2.12.
as the seed that fell among thorns comes at the last to be choked up and
stiffeled: so must we beware that the cares of worldly affairs, and the
earnest desire of the commodities of this transitory life, do not choke up the
good seed of the heavenly doctrine. These three pernicious inconuemences must
we au^id and amend, in case we desire to enter into the kingdom of God that is
in heaven.

8 Now where it is said in this parable, that only the fourth part of the seed
did bring forth fruit: we are thereof togather for the inducing of us to
ame^dme^t of life, that the number of those that shall be saved in the kingdom
of God which is in heaven, sha^be small: and this does our Lord Jesus Christ
confirm, saying: Luke. 12.32.
Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers pleasure to give you the
kingdom of heaven. And in another place: Wide is the gate, and broad is the
way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: Mat. 7
13. Luke. 13.23.
and contrariwise, Straight is the gate, and the way narrow that leads to
life, and few there be that find it. This does he speak as S. Luke notes, in
an answer to one that had asked him, saying: Lord, are there few that shall be
saved? Those men therefore are not the disciples of Jesus Christ, but rather
most pernicious instruments of Satan, that affirm that the gospel is no
joyful tidings, because many do perish for want of especial grace, that all
men shall be saved by a certain kind of faith, which they have by nature of God
the creator of heaven and earth, even they that never heard the Gospel, or
believed in Jesus Christ, alwais excepting such as even in this life, by their
own malice and perpetual ingratitude, have purchased eternal pains: for
they do maintain merits, they forge a faith to salvation without Gospel and
without Christ, they promise eternal life to hypocrites, and to such as think
themselves either to be no sinners, or to be saved with their sins, or to
have remission of their sins without Jesus Christ: to be short, they give
assurance of salvation to all idolaters and sinners in the world, in case by
their works they obstinatly make not, neither show themselves abominable:
truly they belie Jesus Christ: for so should the gate of heaven be very large
and wide, and not only many should enter in thereat, but even the most part of
the world, as these men do verily infer, albeit contrary to the express
protestation of Jesus Christ.

9 This is a policy of the devil, whereby he seeks to rock men on sleep in
their sins, and to lead them to death, under color of saving them: Ephesians. 2.12.
First, where S. Paul speaking to the Gentiles says: Before ye believed, ye
were without Christ, and were aliants from the common wealth of Israel, and
were strangers from the covenants of promise, and had no hope, and were without
God in the world. Does he not evidently show that all heathen that knew not
Christ, to believe in him, and so not they only that were more wicked then the
rest, are out of Christ, the only savior of the world, are deprived of the
promise of the covenant, and are without hope and without God? Phil. 2.16.
Acts. 5.20. Ephesians. 6.15. Act 14.3. and 20 32. and 13.26.
what reason or ground can they then lay hold of, whereby to the contrary, to
maintain that such men can have any hope of salvation, or that they shall be
saved in the kingdom of Christ? Moreover as the gospel is called the word of
life, of peace, of grace, and salvation: so can there be no other faith that
shall bring forth peace, life, and salvation, but that which is grounded upon
the Gospel. Faith therefore in God the creator, unknown as a redeemer in Jesus
Christ, can bring no salvation or life everlasting, does not this error
likewise abolish the holy ministry, that is to say, preaching and the use of
the sacraments, since men may be saved without the^? Is it not also a
dispensation to all the corruptions and vices of the soul, even to an infinite
number of sins, considering that only those men shall be damned, that of their
particular malice shall have declared a perpetual ingratitude against God the
creator, or that having heard the gospel, have publicly rejected it: and so
what a folly is it or may it be, to suffer for the name of Jesus Christ? for
let a man be an idolater, let him never come at Sermon, let him never
co^municat the sacraments, let him make profession of no religion, let him
burn in covetousness and ambition, yea let him foster up hatred, malice and
envy, yet if otherwise he live honestly after the manner of the world, it is
enough in their doctrine for his salvation.

10 These are such monstrous opinions, that the very show of the^ may suffice
to confound them. Now let us return to our purpose, and with Jesus Christ
conclude to the contrary: namely, that the number of those that shall be saved is
very small: for if unto men there be given no other name whereby we may be
saved, Act. 4.12.
but only the name of Jesus Christ: such as boast that they believe in God and
obey not Christ, who commands that we should also believe in him, can be no
pertakers of the salvation that is in him. Likewise, if unto those that know
not Christ, we do adioyne all those that albeit he be preached unto them,
John 14.1.
do not believe in him, neither live as the members of Christ, every one may
easilye understand the truth of his sentence who is the self truth, namely,
that few shall be saved, and that in respect of the others, it is a small flock
that shall be partakers of the eternal kingdom. And herein do we gather two
points that should mightily induce us to amend our lives. First, that we must
practice the exhortation that Christ himself gathers thereof, when he says:
Labor to enter at the narrow gate: but how? by putting of the old man, by
denying our selves and the world: in brief, by daily amendment. Luke 13.24.
Let us therefore beware of the broad way, and consequentlye of these cursed
dispensations to offend God: when we are attempted hereto, let us remember,
that as sin leads unto death, so must we separate our selves from the
multitude that walks in the broad way that leads to destruction
everlasting, neither must we hearken to those that say, all the world does
thus, most men do live thus, we cannot make a world apart: if thou followest
this world, and take the broad way, thou shall with the world go into
destruction.

11 Secondly, the more steadfastly that we understand and believe that there
shall be few saved, the more earnestly let us praise God, who has chosen us to
be of that small number, and has called us to bring us in at the narrow gate,
to be of his everlasting kingdom: let us behold the multitude that go by the
broad gate to destruction, and let the horror of their woe kindle our hearts,
that we may praise God for his great mercy toward us, and walk cheerfully in
the straight way that leads to heaven, let us courageously reject all desires
of the flesh, allurements of the world, and all other temptations, to the end
that by daily amendment of life, we may finally enter at the narrow gate that
leads to the kingdom of eternal glory. Thus we see how the consideration of
this title of the kingdom of heaven, attributed to the Church and to the holy
ministerye, to the restoration of man, consisting in righteousness, peac,e and
joy in the holy ghost, and to the felicity of the Children of God in heaven,
does admonish and teach us that we must first enter into the Church and use
the holy ministry: secondly, thereby increase in faith and amendment of life,
and so attain to the fruition of the incomprehensible felicity and glory,
prepared in heaven for the children of God.

The thirteenth cause of amendment, derived of this saying of Jesus Christ. The
kingdom of heaven is at hand. Chap. 13.
THis saying of Jesus Christ, The kingdom of heaven is at hand. may be
referred: first, to the kingdom of glory, which we wait for in heaven:
Secondly, to the renewing and restoration of man: and thirdly, to the
preaching of the gospel. And indeed, the kingdom of heaven considered in these
three points, Genesis 3. 23.
did truly at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, come very near unto man.
As concerning the kingdom of glory that is in heaven, we know that our first
parents Adam and live, when they had transgressed the commandment of God,
were driven out of the garden of Eden, also that God placed the Cherubins on
the east side of the garden, with a flaming sword continually moving, to keep
the way to the tree of life. Then God, thereby having showed that man was put
forth and banished out of heaven and life everlasting, by the building of the
tabernacle, and afterward of the temple in Jerusalem, gave unto his people
some figure of a passage into heaven, through the Messiah that was to come. For
in that the people remained in the porch, and might have no access into the
holy sanctuarye, Exodus 28.9.
the figure of heaven, God gave them to understand that they were unworthy to
come in: but in that the high priest once in the year, did enter with the
twelve names of the twelve tribes, upon his shoulders and his breast: God
thereby signified, that when Jesus Christ, figured in this high priest, should
come, he by his death should open unto them the gate of heaven, and should
enter thereat, not for himself only: but as it were carrying his people in
with him. And thereupon at the death of Christ, the veil of the Temple that
separated, and did hide the holy Sanctuary, did cleave and rent to the bottom,
Mat. 27.51. Heb. 9.8.
thereby to show that the way of heaven was now open to the members of Jesus
Christ, which was not before revealed: as the Apostle says to the Hebrews.
Thus did the kingedome of heaven begin to be at hand.

2 Yet drew it nearer when Jesus Christ rising from death, ascended into
heaven. For as the high Priest, entering into the holy Sanctuary, upon his
shoulders and breast, carried the twelve names of the twelve tribes of Israel:
So Jesus Christ entered not alone into heaven, but we also with him, as says
Saint Paul, Ephesians. 2.5.
That God quickened us together with Christ, and raises us up together, and
made us sit together in the heavenly places in Jesus Christ. And in an other
place the same Apostle says. If we be children, we are also heirs, even the
heirs of God, and coheyres with Jesus Christ. And this he says, to assure
us, Romans 3.17.
that Jesus Christ has so taken possession of heaven, that it is not only for
himself, but also for us his coheyres. As if upon the confiscation of an
inheritance common to many brethren, when the prince afterward makes a
release, the eldest brother takes the possession, for assurance that himself
and his brethren are restored to their goods and the same is an assurance to
the coheires with the eldest, that in the person of their eldest brother
themselves are put in possession of the inheritance common to them all. Thus
did the kingedome of heaven draw near at the coming of Jesus Christ: and this
is it that he first wishes us to note for our amendment, when he says, Amend
your lives, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

3 The ancient fathers could never discern this kingdom but a far off and
very obscurely. God promised to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the land of Canaan:
Not that they should settle their minds upon the fat of the earth, but that it
might be to the^ as an image of this kingdom of heaven, whereto they should
aspire. Heb. 11.13.
But says the Apostle, They are all dead, and received not the promises, but
saw them a far off, and believed them, and received them thankfully. And this
he means, not simply by the land of Canaan, but principally by the opening of
heaven and approaching of this kingdom of heaven, fulfilled at the coming of
Jesus Christ. How near then is this kingedome of heaven commen unto us, by
the coming of Jesus Christ, in respect of them? since he took possession both
for himself and us: whom also we cannot behold in the fruition of this
heavenly kingdom, but we must withal behold our selves with him, because he
is our head, and keeps his members united to himself, and our spouse, who
communicates with us all his goods? in which sense Saint Paul also calls us
Burgesses of heaven. Does not Jesus Christ therefore, when he says Amend your
lives, justly allege this reason, For the kingdom of heaven is at hand?
Ephesians. 2.19.
And in deed, If Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the Prophets, John 8.56.
and the rest of the faithful before the coming of the son of God in the
flesh, whilst the kingdom of heaven was yet so far from them and from their
view: did notwithstanding rejoice, as it is written of Abraham, and accounted
themselves Pilgrims and strangers in this world, and lived devoutly,
righteously and religiously: to be short, did amend their lives, as aspiring to
this kingdom of heaven: How much more earnestly ought we to feel in our
selves that we are strangers and pilgrims upon the earth, whereto his kingdom
is come so near that we do therein behold Jesus Christ and our selves with
him? How much rather (I say) should we be even ravished to asp re to this
kingdom, which we see open, by denying the world and the flesh: and all that
might keep us back: that by amending our lives we might increase in faith,
love, holiness, and in every good thing that might be unto us as a path, a
Chariot and horse to transport us really into heaven? When winter is over, the
nearer that the Sun draws unto us, the more does the earth, being warmed by
the heat thereof, fructify. And the longer that the days are, the more work
may we do. Even so the nearer that the kingdom of heaven does draw unto us by
the coming of Jesus Christ, especially by his ascension into heaven, the more
should we be heat in the love of God and charity to our neighbors, to bring
forth the more fruit of holiness, and be the more adicted to al good works.

4 Secondly, we are to consider the drawing near of the kingdom of heaven in
the restauratio^ and renewing of man. When Christ died for our sins, Romans 4.25.
Romans 6. Heb. 2.14.
and rose again for our justification when by dying he mortified our old man,
and by rising again, raised us up into newnes of life: when by his death he
destroyed him that had the empire of death: did he not by destroying this
kingdom of Satan, bring the kingdom of heaven nearer unto us? And in deed this
kingdom of heaven was never so near our fathers, and other the believing Jews
in old time. Well had they the promise that the seed of the woman should bruise
the serpents head: but we do see the performance thereof in Jesus Christ, who
by his death has ouercomen the devil and the power of Hell. Well had they the
pascall lamb to figure unto them that for the avoiding of eternal death, they
must be washed in the blood of Christ: But as John the Baptist even with his
finger pointed to this Lamb Jesus Christ, saying Behold the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world: John 1.2^.
so this lamb did afterward really shed his blood for the remission of our
sins, to free us from eternal death. Well did they stay and ofter innocent
beasts in sacrifice, as it were laying their sins upon them: that by their
death signifying the death of Jesus Christ to come, they might have as it were
an assured pledge of the remission of their sins, and consequently, hope of
life. But there was not as yet any payment or satisfaction for sins: And
therefore these sacrifices were as it were bonds with sureties, wherein man,
the principal debtor, Coloss. 2.14.
acknowledges the debt, and Jesus Christ undertook as a pledge and surety.

5 In this sense did Jesus Christ in his death, make full payment for the sins
of all the elect, and consequently also of those that lived under the first
testament, as the Apostle says: which also S. Paul under the same
consideration, terms the former sins: Coloss. 2.14. Heb. 9.15. Romans 3.24.
not that they were not pardoned to the believing Jews: But because until that
day there was no price laid down for the satisfaction of Gods Justice. And in
that sense does the same Apostle say that he nailed those obligations to his
cross, as having then satisfied and discharged the same. And therefore were
the expiatorie sacrifices, circumcision, with other like ordenances of the law
abolished at his death. Neither could they have been kept as necessary, but
that they would still have been witnesses that Christ stood yet bound. Besides
not content to have by this abolition (as it were) canceled these obligations,
he has also ordained Baptism and his holy supper to be unto us as it were
authentical acquittances and witnesses of payment made.

6 It is likewise the benefit for the which he commands us to amend, adding
this reason: For the kingdom of heaven is at hand. For it is as if he had
said. Behold this is the time that I will break the serpents head, and destroy
him that has the empire of death: and banish the prince of the world. Now do I
go to make payment for all the sins of the elect: to crucify the old man, that
he may no longer reign in them: to purchase for them newness of life: To be
short, to reestablish them in state requisite and convenient for the children of
God. Is not the kingedome of heaven then very near at hand? Amend therefore:
for it is time that you feeling your justification and atonement to be made
with God, should be at peace in your consciences: should renounce the devil, the
flesh, the world, and your selves: mortify the old man who is crucified with
me, and become new creatures by virtue of my resurrection. But if contrariwise
you remain hardened in your sins, and will not give over and mortify the
ambition, pride, covetousness, fraud, whore dome, insolency, dronkennes, riot,
hatred, envy, malice, and other corruptions, and do not amend by growing in all
good works: shall you not so much as in you lies, quench the kingdom of
heaven that is in you, and with most villainous ingratitude tre^d under foot
this incomprehensible benefit here offered. The heathen that never heard
speaking hereof, for their continued impenitency, shall be justly condemned:
The Jews, who had some knowledge, albeit obscure and a far off, shall be more
grievously punished, because, they did not amend: But you to whom this kingdom
of heaven is near at hand, unless ye amend, shall incur a condemnation
without comparison more horrible and fearful. And the believing Jews, who
never saw this kingdom of heaven but from far off and obscurely, and yet as
the Apostle says to the Hebrews did believe it and rejoiced, and walking in
the fear of God did amend: Ephesians. 3.9.
shall be your judges, to your confusion.

7 We are furthermore to consider the preaching of the Gospel, signified also
by this kingdom of heaven. Jesus Christ says. Verily I say unto you, among
them that are begotten of women, arose not a greater then John Baptist, Heb. 11.
notwithstanding he that is the least in the kingdom of heaven, is greater
then he. He does not here mean that the least in the christian Church shall
either in piety, or in glory in the kingdom of heaven, excel John Baptist: but
that they shall be greater Prophets then he: that is to say, that they shall be
able more amply, perticulerly, and evidently to speak of every thing that
concerns our redemption and salvation in Jesus Christ. And indeed, what
evident and assured knowledge has there been revealed to the Christian Church,
concerning the person of Jesus Christ that he was conceived by the holy Ghost:
borne of the virgin Mary: very God and very man: likewise of his offices: that
he has received the anointing of the holy Ghost to be our Priest, king and
Prophet. Consequently, of his sufferings, death, resurrection, and ascentio^
into heaven: of the certitude of our justification, and salvation not by
works, but by grace, and by the merits of his death. Moreover how the Gospel
of salvation was directed to the Gentiles, whereby there was revealed to the
world a mystery and secret, Mat. 11.11.
which as S. Paul says, has from the beginning, been hidden in God,
co^teining a wonderful wisdom, then revealed to the Angels. And albeit the
ancient fathers we^e never destitute of the spirit of God: Yet had they it not
ever without comparison so plentifully as it has been communicated by the
preaching of the Gospel. 2. Cor. 3.8.
And therefore does S. Paul call it in excellency, the ministry of the
spirit: And Jesus Christ terms it regeneration, Mat. 19.28.
as when he says to his Apostles, ye that have followed me in regeneration,
shall sit upon twelve thrones. Truly therefore in regard of the preaching of
the Gospel Jesus Christ did say, that the kingdom of heaven was at, hand,
and that therefore we must amend. As indeed, Mat. 19.28.
what excuse may we pretend, if having such a son of light before our eyes,
we be nevertheless given to the works of darkness? What an ingratitude will
it be in us, who by nature are Gentiles, if when the kingdom of heaven is thus
come upon us, by the preaching of the Gospel, we make no account thereof,
neither have any care to amend our lives according to the commandment of Jesus
Christ? how mightily will the devil possess us, unless by the ministerye of
the holy ghost he be expelled, to the end to make room for the kingdom of
heaven in us?

8 Jesus Christ says, The men of Niniue shall rise in judgment with this
generation, and condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonas, and
behold a greater then Jonas is here. Again, Mat. 12.41.42.
The Queen of the south shall rise in judgment with this generation, and
shall condemn it: For she came from the utmost parts of the earth to hear
the wisdom of Solomon: and behold a greater then Solomon is here. Woe the^
be unto us, if hearing the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13.12.
we do not obey his commandment and amend. It is now time that we should
arise from sleep, says S. Paul, for now is our salvation nearer then when we
believed, by the preaching of the gospel, and were before unbelievers. The
night is past and the day is come, let us therefore cast away the works of
darkness, and put on the armor of light, so as we walk honestly as in the day,
not in gluttony and drunkenness: etc.

9 This kingdom of heaven is at hand, and daily gathers upon us in two
manners, which for a conclusion we will here add. First, all faithful
believers do know and are assured, that at the separation of the soul and the
body, the soul shall be exalted into heaven with Christ. Now as daily this
separation does by death draw nearer and nearer to the faithful, so does the
kingdom of heaven also come upon them: how careful therefore should we be to
amend our lives, and to prepare our selves to make our entry into heaven? the
holy Ghost protests, that there shall enter no unclean thing, Apoc. 21.27.
neither any that works abomination or lies. We must therefore put of all
the works of the flesh, which are, as S. Paul notes, adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry, Gal. 5.19.
witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulation, wrath, contention, sedition, heresy,
envy, murder, dronkennes, gluttony, and such like. And afterward protests,
that they which commit these things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God.
Let us then beware of delaying of this amendment, least in a matter of such
importance we be surprised: we have not two souls, that we may hazard one.
If the day of death finds us a sleep in our sins, woe be unto us: let us
remember the saying of S. Peter: The end of all things draws near: 1. Pet 4.
Be ye therefore sober and watchful in prayer. Every of us shall in our death
find this end of all things: and indeed let us look upon a rich man carried
dead out at doors, and we shall see that all is at an end with him, neither
has his body any more then his length of ground.

10 Let us therefore remember to be sober, not in works of piety, for in them
we cannot be too plentiful, neither in sin, for we must utterly abstain
therefro: wherein then? even in things appertaining to this present life, 1.
Cor. 7.29.
by practicing this admonition of S. Paul. And this I say brethren, because the
time is short, hereafter that both they which have wines, be as though they
had none: And they that weep, as though they wept not: And they that rejoice,
as though they rejoiced not: And they that buy, as though they possessed not:
And they that use this world, as though they used it not: for the fashion of
this world goes away. And I would have you without care. Here does he show
that the sobriety whereto S. Peter exhorts us, does admonish us that there is
drunkenness, not only of the body, but also of the spirit. And indeed where
Jesus Christ says: See to your selves, Luke 21.34.
that your hearts be not overcome with gluttony and drunkenness, neither with
the cares of this life: He does sufficiently declare, that there is another
kind of drunkenness, then either with beer or wine: And that is, when the
care for the things of this life, whether of war, or merchandise, or of
lands and possessions, of wives, or of children, do so feaze upon and
entangle our minds and affections, that we are diuerted and let from that
which is required for the service of God and the salvation of our souls: if a
man rise in the morning and go to the Tavern, and tarry there all day, and at
night comes home drunk, and so again the next day, and the next, and all
the week long, and never thinks upon his famely, but lets his wife and
his children sit staruing at home, will we not say that he is a drunkard? and in
case he continue this course a month or two, will we not report of him as of
a perfect and desperate drunkard? What shall we then say of those that do so
set their hearts and minds upon the affairs of this life, that so soon as
they are up in the morning, they are presently at the Tauern of those cares,
wherein they delight, and whereto they so give themselves, that they care
neither for the kingdom of heaven, the service of God, nor the salvation of
their own souls: which is more during this repast at home, their minds are in
their tauernes: yea, and which is worse, whether they speak to God in their
prayers, or that God talks to them by sermons, their minds are so wandering,
that immediately they are in this tavern of worldly cares and affairs, and
that so deeply, that they neither hear God speaking to them, neither wot what
themselves do say to him: for there is no more but the body that speaks or
hears, even a body as it were without a soul: for their mind is in their
Tavern. If they then follow this course, not one month, or six, or ten,
neither one year, but ten, twenty, thirty, yea even to the death: may we not
well call them perfect drunkards? Likewise, as to that tavern that bears the
name to have the best drink or wine, the drunkards will soonest resort, as
seeking occasions to be drunk: so these spiritual drunkards do seek after
towns and places of most practice, where there is great dooinges, which breed
increase of cares, that likewise they may be the more drunken in them.

11 This is an excessive and most pernicious drunkenness, yet over common
among christians, and therefore let every man examine him self, that knowing
it, he may amend. And indede, since the kingdom of heaven does daily approach to
the faithful by death, we are in duty to beware, according to Christ's
admonition, that our hearts be not overcome with this drunkenness of cares,
least that day overtake us in that drunkenness, vnreadye and unprepared to
expect this kingdom of heaven, in assurance and joy. Let us take heed that we
do not wittingly abuse our selves, saying: When I have attained to such
wealth, or to such dignity, I will take my ease, and come forth of this tavern
to serve God: First, it is an ordinary course, that the more beer or wine that
a man drinks, the more he may, and the more the drunken man drinks, the
more drunk he will be. Even so the more wealth and dignity that thou have,
the more shall thou find thy cares to increase: and the more they increase, the
more drunken in them thou will be. Secondly, we must take great heed, that when
God calls us to repentance and amendme^t, we appoint him no time. Prosper in
his Sent. out of Aug. Sent. 71.
He, says S. Augustine, that has promised forgiveness to him that repents,
has not promised another day to him that deferreth his amendment. ^^^sius in
(...) Hebrew and ^^^bian apo^^^. lib. 1.
Among the sentences of the wise men that lived among the Jews after their
return from the captivity of Babylon, we read of one Eleazar, the son of
Hircanus, who being demanded when it would be time to repent and amend:
answered, One day before death. And when the other replied that no man knew
the day of his death, he said: Begin then even to day for fear of failing.

12 Inasmuch then as daily we expect not only death, but also the day of
judgment, and that in that respect the kingdom of heaven comes two sold
upon us, that we may the more earnestly be moved to our duty to amend, let us
remember this saying of Jesus Christ. Mat. 24.43.
If the good man of the house knew at what watch the thief would come, he
would surely watch, and not suffer his house to be broken. Therefore be ye also
ready, for in the hour that ye think not, will the son of man surely come.
And therefore he adds, Blessed is that servant whom his master when he
comes shall find doing his duty. And this is also represented unto us in the
parable of the virgins, For the foolish ones that took no oil in their lamps
were shut from coming in to the marriage, Mat. 25.
but the wise that had made their provision, came in. Since therefore that the
kingdom of heaven is at hand, let us amend our lives, and make good provision
of holy oil, increasing in the knowledge of God, in faith, love, holiness, and
all other good works: let us in time put on our wedding garments, that when the
bridegroom comes, if it be so dainly, as himself has warned us, we may be
ready and prepared to enter into the marriage with him. Neither let us forget,
that as Jesus Christ does advertise us, Apoc. 22.20.
It shall as a snare come on all them that dwell on the face of the earth. And
as he adds, Let us watch and pray continually, that we may be accounted
worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, Luke 21.34.
and that we may stand before the son of man. Your selves do know perfestly,
says S. Paul, that the day of the Lord shall come even as a thief in the
night. 1. These. 5. 2.
For when they shall say, Peace and safety, then shall come upon them sudden
destruction, as the travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not
escape. And then to comfort the faithful he says, But ye brethren are not in
darkness, that that day should come upon you, as a thief, ye are all the
children of light, and the children of the day. And thereupon he also takes
occasion to exhort them to their duties, saying: Therefore let us not sleep as
do other, but let us watch and be sober, putting on the breast plate of faith
and love, and the hope of salvation for an helmet. Let us beware that we follow
not the evil servant, who seeing that his master was long in coming, said in
himself that he would not come, and thereupon gave himself to work wickedness.
Mat. 24.48.
But as Jesus Christ adds, His master coming at an hour when he looked not
for him, cut him off and punished his iniquity and incredulity.

13 Saint Peter warns us. that in the later days there will come like
people, who^ he terms mockers, which will walk after their lusts, and say,
Where is the promise of his coming? For since the fathers slept, 2. Pet. 3.3.
all things continue alike from the beginning of the creation. But by a notable
example he shows, that they do wittingly and willingly deceive themselves in
such discourses. For when Noah foreshewed the flood, and built the arc for his
own safety, the like mockers rise against him, who seeing no appearance of the
flould for above a hundred years, thereof concluded, that the world continuing
in that estate, should not perish, but were surprised and swallowed up in the
flood. Inasmuch therefore as Jesus Christ commanding us to amend, does affirm
that his kingdom is at hand, lest seeming to be long in coming, we should
therefore falsely conclude that it will not come, let us diligently note what S.
Peter adds, Derely beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that a
thousand years is with the Lord as one day, and one day as a thousand years.
The Lord is not slack as concerning his promise, as some men account slacknes,
God is patient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but would all men to
come to repentance. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the
night, in the which the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the
elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works therein shall be
burnt up. Then does he thereof gather this earnest exhortation to repentance
and amendment of life. Seeing therefore that all these things must be
dissolved; what manner of persons ought ye to be in holy conversation and
godlynes? Looking for and hastening unto the coming of the day of God, wherein
the heavens being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with
heat. But we look for new heavens, and new earth, according to his promise,
wherein dwells righteousness, etc.

14 Albeit therefore it seem to our flesh, that this kingdom is long in coming
yet let us not slack our amendment, Joel. 2.12.
but let us even this day convert and think upon the saying of the prophet
Joel, Even this day convert unto me, says the Lord. Wherein he shows that
he yet gives us this day to repent, but assures us not of to morrow. Let the
remembrance therefore of the drawing near of the kingdom of heaven induce us
to amend, 2. Tim. 4.8.
to the end that in amending we may gather argument to long after the coming
of Christ, as it is the duty and desire of all the children of God. Luke 21.28.
And when we shall see the signs of his coming more and more fulfilled, let
us lift up our heads and rejoice, because our deliverance is at hand, and that
shortly we shallbe gathered and brought into the fruition of his kingdom and
eternal glory.

FINIS.

