The Householders Philosophy. Wherein is perfectly and profitably described,
the true Oeconomia and form of Housekeeping. With a Table added thereunto of
all the notable things therein contained. First written in Italian by that
excellent Orator and Poet Signior Torquato Tasso, and now translated by T. K.
Whereunto is anexed a dairie Book for all good huswiues.

AT LONDON Printed by J. C. for Thomas Hacket, and are to be sold at his shop
in Lomberd-streete, under the sign of the Popes head. M. D. LXXXVIII.

To the worshipful and virtuous Gentleman Master Thomas Read Esquier, health
and all happiness.
WOrth more then this digested thus in haste,
Yet truly set according to the sense,
Plain and unpolished for making waste,
Of that which Tassos pen so highly gracde,
This work I dedicat to your defense.
Let others carpe, it is your discretion
That must relieve mine imperfection.
Your worships most affectionate T. K.
A Catalogue or Index of those things worth the memory contained in this
Book.
A
AChilles is not to be imitated of a noble man. Folio. 13 Aid amongst
Servant for the help and ease of one another necessary. 17 Action
distinguished. eodem Art of weauing honorable. fol. 21 Artificers defined.
fol. 17 Autumn more copious offruites then the springtime. fol. 6 Autumn
wherefore judged the best of other seasons. 7 Age in marriage to be looked unto.
10 Apparel for Women. 11 Arteficiall riches what. fol. 19
B
Beauty more regarded in a Woman then a Man. fol. 11 Beauty forced by painting
insupportable in a woman. cod. Beef at feasts, more used for fashion then
food. fol. 5 Beef sought for and desired by Ulysses Servant in their
travail. eodem Bo^e wedded to the soul. folio. 9
C
Catullus why he called Wine bitter. fol. 6 Color of Wine and what (...)
ought to be. fol. 5 Circes given to weauing. 7 Commodities of the spring and of
Autumn. 6 Complexion of servant, and what it should be. 16 Conditions in
Servant 17 Consideration in conditions of possessions. 19 Clerks or
Secretaries who and what they ought to be. 17 Conjunction of man and wife like
that of the body and the soul. 9 Conservation of things how it should be
used by a good huswife. 18. 20 Customs in bringing up of Children. 13 Care of
housekeeping of diverse sorts, and whether they vary in form only or in
gettings. 20 Care of Children how it is to be divided twixt Father and the
Mother. 12 Care of the Huswife concerning things that are brought into the
house. 20 Cares necessary for a housekeeper desirous to preserve his wealth. 18
Care of household is divided into two parts. 8 Care of housekeeping as great to
the Fathers and Masters thereof as is the care of a Kingdom to a King. eodem
Clenlines in housekeeping. 16 Care of servant in their sickness. 17
Chastisement toward servant what. 13 Country provision unbought serving for
the Table. 3 Conserues necessary in houses. 20 C^ll wars begun by
Servant. 15
D
Desire of riches and how far it does concern a housekeeper. Fol. 24
Difference betwixt Exchange and Usury. 25 Difference of Servant and
sovereign or Master, founded first by Nature. fol. 14 Delights of the Spring
and of Autumn. fol. 6 Division of land Quadrupartite. 3 Difference betwixt
the instruction of Servants and of Beasts. fol. 15 Discomodities of Summer
and Winter. 6 Disobedience of Wives whence it rises. 10 Distinction of
nobility betwixt man and wife how great. 9. Difference in merchandise. eodem.
E
Earth universal nurse of all things. Fol. 23 Education of Children as well
appertains to the Mother as the Father. fol. 12 Education of Children, and
what it ought to be. 13 Exercise of Housekeepers for health. 10 Equallitie in
marriage to be respected. Fol. 9. Equallitie in marriage wherein it does
consist. eodem Exercise a Husbandmans physic fol. 10
F
Families or housholdes of what sort of Servant to be made. fol. 16 Factors
and surueighors and overseers. eodem. Feasts not forbidden to Women. 21 Fortune
makes many men servile. 15 Fruits preserved in Vinegar. 20 Fruits of the
earth are natural gains. 19 Fear not commendable in a man. 10 Form of
getting what. 23.
G
Gain in ware natural 23 Gain unnatural how it is distinguished 25 Gain
purchased with sweat or sweet. eodem Gain honestly made by the Mistress of
the house. 23 Grapes gathered out of season. fol. 5 Grapes growing in Greece,
of what color and what wine is made of them eodem Grapes gathered in Autumn.
6
H
Homer why he called Wine sweet, and why bitter. fol. 6 Homer what properties
he gave to Wine. 5 Huswifry consisting much in spinning. 20 Hair a great
ornament of nature. 11 Hair cut from Wemens heads and why. eodem Honest
recreation not to be withheld from Women. 12 Hearts not bredde in Afric. fol.
5
I
Idleness and ease make some servant evil. Fol. 16 Instruments of household
to be kept cleene. eodem Imitation of Nature. eodem
L
Love figured without a bearde. Folio. 11 Lovers wanton embracings different
from those of married folk. eodem Love of Children. 12 Lynen and woollen
weauing necessary in housekeeping. 20
M
Money why and how found out and used. Fol. ^9 Matrimony makes equal many
differences. 10 Marriage at what years to be solemnized 4 Meat wanting upon
sudden entertainment of guests, how to be supplied. 12 Mothers ought to give
their own Children suck. eodem Mothers ought not to be too tender to their
children. 13
N
Nature changed by Nurses Milk. Fol. 12 Nurses commonly ordinary persons.
eodem Natural gain how to be raised. eodem Natural riches what. 10
O
Offices how and when to be distinguished. Fol. 16 Oxen placed by Hesiodus in
steed of servant. 15 Opinions of some concerning the soul. 9 Orders in
household business. 16 Orders of Publicans. 24
P
Practices of mind and body how to be used. Fol. 13 People regard aparances.
14 Petrarchs opinion of the people. eodem
Q
Quallitie of substance what. 19 Quality of servant what. eodem
R
Revenues. Fol. 18 Rents. eodem Regard of householders. 19 Reason necessary in
Servant. eod. Riches how to be considered. 20
S
Servant working. Fol. 17 Servant care in maintayning of their working
tools. 16. 17 Salary or wages fit for Servant. 14 Shamfastnes not improper
to a married man. 9 Situation of lands. eodem Servant a defense to their
Master. 15 Servant different from slaves. 14 Servant what and who they be:
17 Servant how to be used. eodem
T
Thales one of the seven wise men of Greece, how he became rich. Fol. 19
Times of the year to be considered of a householder and good Husbands. eodem
V
Virtues proper to men what. 9 Virtues proper to Women. eodem Usury how
pernicious a thing it is. 25
W
Wealth how to be used 18 Weauing how first found out. 20 Women how to be
chosen in wedlock. 11 Women married rather young then old. 10
FINIS.
The Householders Philosophy.
IT was then about that time of the year that the Grape-gatherers were went to
press their Wines, and that the Trees were seen (in some place) dispoiled of
their fruit, when I (in the habitte of an unknown Pilgrim) rode betwixt
Nouara and Vercellis, where seeing the air were black, and environed on every
side with clouds ready to rain: I began to set spurs to my Horse, but the
whilst I heard a confused cry of dogs, and turning me about, I beheld a little
Kidde surchargd, pursued, and anon euertaken by two swift Greyhounds, in so
much as it there died at my feet. The vnerpected pleasure of which game,
stayed me til a youth of eighteen or twenty years of age, tall of stature, of
a good aspect, well proportioned, tough line wed, and of a strong constitution,
beating and crying out upon the dogs took the poor ^dde fro forth their
mouths, and gave it to a pesaunt attending on him, that laid it on his
shoulders, and at a beck of the youth gat him swiftly on before. Whereupon the
young man turning toward me said. Tell me sir of courtesy* whither is your
journey? I would to Vercellis (quoth I) this evening if the time would give
me leave. You might happily get thither (quod he) were it not that the River
that runs before the City, and that deuideth the confines of Piemount from
those of Millan, is so overflowed that you can hardly pass it, so that I
would advise you, if it please you, to lodge with me this evening: for not far
hence near that River, I have a little Cottage, where you may repose your
self with less disease then in any other place nigh thereabouts. Whilst he
thus spoke I steadfastly beheld him, and me thought I perceived in his very
countenance a kind of gentilitie and grace, so that (judging him to be of no
base or mean condition) seeing him a foot, giving my Horse to a hyreling that
came with me, I dismounted. Thereupon (quoth he) you shall advise your self
yonder on the Ryuerside, whether you were better to pass on or stay: and
thither will I go before, not to arrogat any superiority, but as your guide,
because perhaps you are not well acquainted with the way. Fortune (quoth I)
does favor me with too noble a conduct. God grant in other things she show
her self as prosperous. Here I became silent, and I followed him, but he
regarded often, and often ouerlooked, and looked on me as if he were desirous it
seemd to understand of whence I was: so that I prevented his desire, and in
some sort to satis-fie him, said I was never till now in this Country, but
heretofore going into France I past by Pyemount, how beit I repent me not that
I came this way, for the Country is very pleasant, and inhabited of people
passing courteous. Here perceiving that I ministered occasion of speech, he
could no longer hide what he desired, but said.

Tell me I pray you, what are you, what Countreyman, and what good fortune
led you into these parts? I was borne (quoth I) in Naples, a famous City of
Italy, my mother a Neapolitan, my father of Bergamo, a Cittye situate in
Lombardy, my name and surname I conceal, for they are so obscure, as if I
should report them, yet you could not be the more informed of my state. The
wrath of Fortune and of mighty me^ I shun, howbeit I am eftsoons shrouded
under the the estate of Sauoy. Under a magnanimous, just, and gracious Prince
you soiourne then (quoth he.) But modestly remembering that I desired to
conceal some part of mine estate, he enquired no further of me. We had now
walked little more then half a mile, but we arrived on the side of the River,
swifter then which, never ran arrowe fro forth the strongest bow of Parthia:
and it was swollen so high, as it far surpast the wonted limmits, neither
could it be contained in the compass whereunto it was accustomed. And it was
told me by ye Countrymen commorants there, that the Passador would not put
off from the other side, but yt (upon what occasion they knew not) he had
refused to waft over some French Gentlemen, that would have given more then
ordinary for their passage. Whereupon, turning to the youth that was my guide,
I said. That necessity now bound me to accept his courtesy, which
notwithstanding I had not yet determined to refuse: albeit I had rather
acknowledge this fauaur proceeding from your own disposition then from
Fortune. It pleases me notwithstanding that she has wrought it in such sort
as we shall have no need to doubt of your abode.

Thus more and more he confirmed mine opinion, that he was neither of ignoble
birth nor mean capacity, whereupon content to be consorted with so well
accomplished an Host: (quod I) the sooner you shall please that I receive the
favor to be lodged, the more shall I accept of it, and therewithal he led
me to his house that was not far situate from the Riuerside, and it was as
high as on the outside we might easily perceive it comprehended diverse rooms
and stories one above another. Before the house there was a little Court
environed with Trees, and there they ascended by double stairs which were
without the Gate, either of them containing five and twenty large and most
commodious steps. On the top of the stairs we entered into a fair Hall, four
square and of convenient greatness, for it had two porthals on the right, and
two on the left side, and as many in the upper end. Directly against the Gate
whereby we entered, was there another Gate, and thereby we descended by as
many other steps into a little Court, about the which were pretty lodgings
for servant, and houses for Corn, and thence we past into a Garden large
enough, and filled with fruitful Trees, very orderly and artificially
disposed. The Hall was furnished with hangings and every other ornament
beseeming the lodging of a Gentleman. In the midst thereof was the Table
covered, and the Cupboorde charged with curious plates of Candie, furnished
with all sorts of dainty fruits. Fair and passing well placed (quoth I) is
this goodly house, and it can not be possessed but of some noble Gentleman, who
though amongst the woods and in a Country Town, lets not yet to imitate the
delica^y and neatenes of the City, but are you the Lord thereof? Not I (quoth
he) my Father is, whom God grant a long life, neither deny I him to be a
Gentleman of the City, or unexperienced in Court or on the worlds
conditions, albeit he has spent the greater part of his time in the Country,
having a Brother that has long been a Courtier in Rome, and that yet abides
there, highly favored of the good Cardinal Vercellis, whose valor and
authority in these quarters highly are accounted of. And in what part of
Europe and of Italy, (quoth I) is that good Cardinal known and not accounted
of.

Thus as we were reasoning, there met us another youth of less years, but
no less gentle spirit, that brought word of his Fathers coming, who
eftsoons was returned from surueighing his possessions. And anon there came
the Father on horseback attended with a footeman, and an other seruitor that
rode before, who dismounted, immediately came up the stairs. He was a man of
middle age, yet nearer threescore then fifty: of countenance very pleasant,
myxed with comely gravity, and by the whitnes of his hair and beard (that
only made him seem old) his dignity was much augmented. I framing my passage
toward the good man and master of the house, saluted him with that reverence
which I thought fitting both his years and such as he should seem. And he
turning to his elder Son with a pleasant countenance, asked him whence I
was, for I have never seen him hereabouts or else where (quoth he) to my
remembrance. To whom his Son made answer thus. He comes from Nouara, and
trauails toward Turyno, but making nearer to his Father, he whispred to him in
such sort that he would enquire no further of my state, but said, whence
soever he be, he is welcome here a shore, for he is happened on a place,
where to our power, honor and service always has been used to strangers. I
thanking him for his courtesy, praid that as I willingly received this favor
of him, so in other things I might show my self mindful and regardant.

These things thus discoursed, the servant had provided water for our hands,
and (having washed) we sat, as it pleased the good old Gentleman, who desired
to do me honor being a stranger. Forthwith was the Table furnished with
fruits, as Mellons, Cytrons, and such like, which at the end of Supper were at
a wincke of his reserved and set up, and then he began thus. The good old man
Coricius, the Gardener of whom I remember I have read in Virgill. Nocte domum
dapibus mensas onerabat inemptis.
Hyed home at night and filled his board with delicats unbought


And in imitation whereof Petrarch speaks, reasoning of his Plowman. Epoi la
mensa ingombra,
Di pouere viuande,
Simili a quelle ghiande
Le quai fuggendo tutto'l mondo honora.
And then he decks his board about
With meats of mean esteem,
Like to those Iayes whose flight contents
The world, cause fair they seem.


So that you need not marvel if I after their fashion, fill your Table with
unbought viands, which though they be not such as you are used to taste
elsewhere, remember you are in a Country Town, and lodged in the house of a
poor Host. I hold it (quoth I) a happy thing to have no need to send for
necessaries to the City for the supply of good manners, I mean not of good
meat, for thereof sir me seems here wants no store. It lightly happens
not (quoth he) that I send to yt City for any thing necessary or fit for
the life of a poor Gentleman, for (God be praised) I have abundance of every
thing ministered unto me upon mine own ground, yt which I have divided into
four parts or forms, call them what you will. The first and greatest part I
plow and sow with wheat and all kind of grain. The second part I leave for
Trees and plants, which are also necessary either for fire, the use of
Architecture, and other instruments of household, as also in those places that
are sown are many rewes of Trees, whereupon the Uines after the manner of our
petit Countries are laid and fastened. The third is Medowe ground whereon the
Herds and little flocks I have are wont to graze. The fourth I have reserved
for herbs, flowers and roots, where also are some store of hyues for Bees,
because beyond this Orchard wherein you see that I have gryft so many fruitful
Plants, and which you see is somewhat seperat from my possessions, there is an
other Garden full of all sorts of sallet herbs and other roots.

You have well divided your lands (quoth I) and it is well seen that you are
studious of Varro not of Virgil only. But these Mellons here that are so
sweet, are they also growing upon your own ground? Yea (quoth he) and if
they please you, eat of them and tarry not for me. For if I have eaten but a
little, it has not been for sparing them, but because I deem them scarce
wholesome: for albeit they be sweet of savor and pleasant to the fast:
nevertheless, hanging always on the earth and not discovered on al sides to
the Sun, it must needs be, that there they soke up the superfluous humors of
the earth, which most commonly (being impossible to be well or equally ripened
by the virtue of the Sun, which cannot enter into every part) it hap peneth
that there are few good Mellons to be found, but that many of them taste like
Goords and Cowgo^ers, which also hang upon the earth vnripened.

Here he became silent, and I to show that I allowed of that he spoke, said
little: knowing that old men, or they yt grow in years, were ever more
desirous of reasoning and talk, then any other thing, for we can not please
them better, then to harken to their speeches with attention. But he then
almost at a stay, said because his wife was wanting. Sir, my wife being
withdrawn from your presence, happily looks to be invited, therefore if it
please you I will cause her to be called. For albeit I know that modest
strangers are more abasht with the company of women then of men, yet not only
the Town but the custom of our Country, carries a certain privilege,
whereof it will be well that you begin to advise your self.

The Wife being called, came and sat her down at the upper end of the Table,
in that place that was purposelie left empty for her, and the good man of the
house began again. Now have you seen (quod he) all my dearest things, for
heaven has not granted me a maiden Child, for which I were to thank the^
much, were it not but that my wife lamenteth often for want of one to bear her
company, for my Sons are for the most part absent and employed otherwise,
wherefore I thought good to have married mine eldest Son had he not much
disliked and entreated to the contrary. I cannot (quoth I) in any sort
commend this custom of marrying young me^ so soon. For it stands not with
reason that they should first be getting Children, before themselves were come
unto their grows, whereunto me thinks your Son here has attained: besides,
the fathers ought to exceed their children always eight and twenty or thirty
years at the least, for otherwise they are in ye vigor of their years when
the youth of their sons begin to flourish, insomuch as their desires are yet
unaccomplished, which if by none other means, yet by example of their Children
they might moderate, and often it is the cause, that such regard is scarcely had
or used to them by their Children as is due to Parents, for many times they are
companions and brothers in their conversation, nay now and then (which is most
abheminable) they are ryualls and competitors in love, where if they exceeded
more in years, their Fathers could not match them in their young desires, but
(being decrepit) should solely expect and approve that aid and comfort at
their hands, which is their due, and nature binds Children unto. And herein I
remember that apt form of speech used by Lucretius. Natis munire senectam. For
by nature Children are the fortress and defenses of their Parents, neither
could they be such, were they not of able and sufficient years, when their
Parents are arrived and come unto their age. Whereunto your self being
eftsoons nigh, me thinks you ought to hold your self no less satis-fied of
the help you have, the^ of the good conditions of your Son, who though he
cannot yet find in his heart to be married, shall happily conform him self
thereunto ten or twelve years hence, and time enough. Whilst I spoke thus, I
remembered that my argument was more acceptable to the Son then the father,
and he according to my remembrance, said. I hunted not all in vain to day,
for I have not only killed, but more then I looked for, I have happened on an
honest aduocat to plead my cause: and thereupon he carved me of the daintiest
morsels of the Kid, and laid it on my trenchour, whereof some was roste, some
was backed after the manner of myneed meat. With the Kidde was served (in
several dyshes) some part of a wild Boar, dressed after our Country fashion
with Larde, and in two other dyshes, two pair of Pygeons, the one roasted, the
other boiled This wild Boar, (quoth the good man) was taken by a Gentleman a
friend and neighbor of ours, who often time participates the profit of his
sports with my Son, the Pigeons, them I have from my own Douehouse, and with
these few have we furnished a poor Supper, as for Beef and such like, I hold
it rather a trouble to the stomach and the Table, then a necessary meat for
this contagious weather. It suffiseth me (quoth I if it be not more then
needs) to eat of two kinds of wild flesh: and me thinks I have supped with
noble men to night, in whose time we read there was none other flesh eaten
then Beef, Porke, and Uenizon and such like, for the banquets of Agamemnon as
we read in Homer, although (by the opinion of Lucian,) they might deserve to
have old Nestor at the almost as a Parasite, were not furnished with other
viands And ye compani ons of Ulysses, bare not so many mishaps and heates of
the Sun for the desire of Feisants or Partrich, but to feed up pon Beef.
Virgil likewise inducith Aeneas, that in Afric slaw seven Hearts, where,
after ye judgment of some, it should have been some other thing, for in Afric
are no Hearts bred, but in having regard to the conueniencie and custom of
Noblemens diet, he feigned or forgot that which properly is used and eaten in
that province.

And wherefore (quoth the old man) did the Poets faigne that Noble m^n of
their time, did eat such kind of flesh. Because (quoth I) they are of great
nourishment, and they (as those that exercised themselves with much labor) had
need of great nourishment, which Birds cannot yield that are so easily
digested: but the flesh of wild Beasts, although they be of great nourishment,
yet are they wholesome because they be much exercised and stirring, and their
fat is far more natural then that of Swine, or other Beasts that fatneth
by the hand, for it is not so soon puffed up and fatned, as those Beasts that
commonly are stald and foddered, therefore it was aptly said of Virgil,
speaking of Aeneas soldiers. Implentur veteris bacchi pinguisque ferina.
And they are filled every one
With old wine and fat venison.


For they fed thereof at will, without any noisome or superfluous fulness.
Heerewithall I held my peace, and the old man began thus. The discourse that
you have made of Wine, and of the ancient times of Noble men, makes me
remember that which I have heard observed of Homer, who evermore in praising
Wine, called it Nigrum et dulce, which two conditions, me thinks are not very
commendable, and so much the more it seems strange unto me that he should
give Wine commendations of that sort, the more Wines of the Eastern parts.
I have observed, that ye wines of Leuant, which are brought over here to us,
are white of color, as are the Malmeseys, and the Roman wine which I have
tasted of in Venice, without that, the wines which in the kingdom of Naples
are called Grecian Wines, because they were made of the Grapes that grow in
Greece, be white or rather gold-colloured, as that above all the rest is
whereof we have spoken. And those wines are more properly white that are of the
Rheyne of Germany, and those others that grow in cold Countries, where the
Sun has not so much force as it can rypen Grapes before ye time of
Grape-gathering, albeit happily the manner of their making, may also be the
cause of their whitnes.

Here I answered, that the Wines were termed sweet of Homer, with that kind
of Metaphor wherewith al things, either pleasing to the senses, or acceptable to
the mind, are required to be sweet. Howbeit, I deny not that perhaps he
loved sweet Wines himself, which also most contenteth me, neither is this
sweetness of Wine unpleasant or hurtful but at some seasons: and the Malmesey,
Greek and Romain Wines whereof we have made mention, all of them have some
kind of sweetness, which is nevertheless lost the older the Wine is: whereupon
we read. Inger mi calices amariores.
Pray fill with bitter Wine
These challices of mine.


This was not because the Poet desired bitter Wine (for there is none to whom
bitterness is not unpleasant) but because old Wine loosing the sweetness,
yields that sharp and heddie taste, which he calls bitter, and I would so
wish you to understand that it is called sweet of Homer, as it was called
bitter by Catullus: afterward Homer calls it black, having reference to some
particular Wine that was then in price, as is now our Lachrima, which though
it be Which we call red Wine.
pressed from one self same Grape as the Wine of Greece is, has yet a
vermillion couller. Having answered thus, I tasted of a cup of delicat white
Wine with my Mellons, and afterward, being begun to by him, I pledged him of a
cup of neat Claret Wine, and upon interposition of some words, we ended our
merry Supper. For the meat taken away, there was set on the Table all sorts
of fruit in great abundance, whereof when the old man had only tasted, he
began thus to reason.

I have many times heard much questoning of the noblesse and variety of
seasons, and I have seen two Letters that are extant to be read, of Mutius
the one, and the other of Tasso, wherein they contend of the woorthines
betwixt Winter and Summer, but me thinks no time may be compared to Autumn. For
the Summer with extreme heat, and the Winter with extreme cold, are
otherwhile so intolerable, as we can neither temperate the one with fruits nor
the other with pastimes: and they are not only a hynderaunce to the Mariner,
who in the Winter is enforced to keep the Haven. To the trauailer, Soldier
and huntsman, who in Summer are constrained to retire them from the heat,
raynes and tempests, under the shade of a Tree, or shroude of a Church, whether
they first find: but to ye housekeeper also, who without many inconveniences
cannot have the time so much as to surueigh his grounds. The one season then is
full of labor and of sweat, neither enjoys it the third part of the fruit it
brings forth, for spoil of weather, worms and winds. The other slothful
and sleepie, betwixt idleness and eating, unjustly consumes that which the
labor of another time has yielded. Which injustice, is indifferently to be
noted by the difference betwixt the day and night. For in Winter, the day
which is most worthy, yields to the night, whereof it is vnreasenable yt it
should be overcome: and being short, cold, and cloudie, it gives not men
convenient time to work or to contemplate. So that our operations and
contemplations are enclozed with darkness and reserved to the night, a time
nothing necessary for the one nor other. For the senses that are ministers of
understanding, cannot so entirely exercise their office in the night. In the
Summer, the day becomes vi^or and reigns not like a Lord, but like an
extreme Tirant, that (...) more then needs, leaving the night not so much ^me
as that therein we may sufficiently restore our bodies resolved with exceeding
heat and contagions of the day, of whose shortness not only ye Lovers (that
would have if long) were wont to lament, but the goodwife of the house also,
who even then that she would nes^le in the a^mes of her Husband, is by him
forsaken and awaked, and the^ withal he laughed so hart^e looking upon his
wife, that she blushing held down her head, and he proceeded. These if I be
not beguiled, are the inconuentences and discomodities of ye Winter and Summer,
whereof the Spring and Autumn are not to be touched, for they are fraught with
millions of delights, and in their times, the Sun (like a most indifferent
Governor) formith the day and night of such equality, as the one has little
cause to complain of the other. But if we will compare Autumn and the Spring
together, we shall soon find the spring so far inferior to Autumn, as hope
is to effects, and flowers to fruits, whereof Autumn m^st abounds of all
other seasons. Besides that, whatsoever fruit Summer has brought forth,
endures even until then, and many other has Autumn only proper to his
season, whereof as one especial, is Grapegathering for the wine press, which
is, or ought to be one of the cheifest cares the Housekeeper should have, for
if he be deceived by his Servant in gathering of his Corn, he thereof only
feels some loss and discommoditie, but if in making of his Wines they
practice never so little falsehood, he does not only suffer the loss, but
shame, when it happens that having honorable guests, he cannot commend his
Supper with good Wines, without which, Non solum frigesci^ Uenus, but all his
meats are mard that might be dressed by the most excellent Cook the Duke has.
Therefore I conclude that Autumn is the most noble and best season of the
year, and that which is indeed most acceptable to the Housekeeper: and I
remember I have heard my Father say, who (if the troth reported of him may
but be believed) was for natural Moral Philosophy and eloquent devise, more
then meanly learned, that in this season the world began, as indeed we may
assuredly believe it did.

That (quoth I) has been the opinion of some Doctors of the Hebrews, and
Christians of great account, which notwithstanding being no Article of our
belief, every manne may credit as he list, I for my part am one of them yt
hold the contrary, and it seems to me more likely, that the (world
beginning as it is supposed) it the^ began about the Spring, which I will thus
constrain my self to prove.

You shall understand that Heaven is round, and has all his parts so uniform,
as in it there can be perceived neither beginning nor end, right nor left,
under nor over, before nor behind, which are the six positions of place,
unless it happily be in respect only of the motion, because that is the
right side whereof the motion has his beginning, but because the motion of the
Sun goes against the Primum mobile, it may be doubted whither these six
differences of place, ought chiefly to be taken according to the motion of the
Primum mobile, or according to the motion of the Sun. Nevertheless, forasmuch
as all things contained in this our variable and corruptible world, chiefly
depend upon the motion of the Sun, which is the cause of generation and of
corruption, and is indeed the father of all living things, it is requisite
that the motion of the Sun determine the differences of the place. According
therefore to the motions of the Sun, our Pole is the higher, which according to
the motion of the Primum mobile should be the lower. This being thus, if we
will seek in what season it is like the world began, we shall see it is most
reasonable, that it then began when ye Snn removing foregoes not, but aprocheth
us. Besides, it begins with generation not with corruption, for according to
ye custom of nature, things are first engendered, and afterward corrupted: but
ye Sun removing out of Aries it approaches unto us, and there gives beginning
to the generation and engendering of things. It is likelye then, that when the
world began the Sun was in Aries, which without doubt he shall see is so,
that dilligently considers what was said in Platos Tymeus of God the Father
to those inferior Gods. True it is, that who so takes the positions of place
from the motion of the Primum mobile, it must follow that the Pole Antartick
is the higher by Nature, and that the world began in that season wherein the
Sun removing approaches nearer unto our Antipodes, and begins generation
in those parts of ye other world that are opposite to these: which who so
grants, it would seem more likely that the world began in the Autumnal
aequinoctial, when the Sun was in Libra, and yet it would follow that it
began in the Spring, because this that is Autumn to us, is their springtime, in
respect whereof, the beginning of ye motion should be taken. But the first
opinion, as by natural reason it is most likely, so also may it be most
commodiously consorted with persuasions. For our world was dignified with the
presence of the true Son o^ GOD, who made choice to die in Jerusalem, which
according to the Cosmographicall dyscription of some, is in the midst of our
Hemysphere. Moreover, it was his will so dye in the Spring, of purpose to
redeem our human generation in that time wherein at first he had created it.
And here I ceased, when the old man moved with my speeches, began
earnestly to look upon me, and said.

I have entertained a greater guest then I expected, and you, (quoth he) are
peradventure one of those of whom the cry is come into our Country, who
upon some common fault are fallen into misfortunes, whereof you are as
worthy to be pardoned (considering your offense) as to be praised and admired
for your speeches. Report (quoth I) that could not happily blazon mine
estimation or sufficiency, whereof you are too courteous a commender, is now
derived from my misfortunes. But what or whoseuer I may be, I am one that
speak more for truth sake then of hatred, dispraise of others, or superfluous
conceit of mine opinions. If you be such an one (quoth he) for I will not
search or pry into your state, you cannot but be an indifferent and fit Judge
of a matter, which my Father (laden both with age and with experience)
participated unto me a few years before his death, giving up the government
of his house and care of his family to me. And whilst he thus spoke, the
Servants took away, and the ancient Gentlewoman giving thanks arose, and was
attended by her Sons, who after a while returning, I began. Sir, it shall
be very acceptable unto me, to hear the dyscourse your Father made unto you,
as you were in purpose to have told me, but because it would be grievous
unto me to harken thereunto, with the disease of those that are about us, I
beseech you command your Sons to sit, who obeying the gentle commands of
their father, the good old man began thus.

About that time that Charles the fifth deposed his Monarchy, and withdrew
himself from the world, as from a tempest to contemplation and a quiet life,
my good Father, being then threescore and ten years old, my self somewhat
more then thirty, called me to him, and began to reason with me thus. The
deeds of greatest Kings, that turn the eyes of all the world upon their
actions, albeit that for their greatness and magnificence, it seems they can
have no preportion of comparison with private men, nevertheless they move us
now and than with the authority of their examples, to imitate them in such
sort, as we behold the pro uidence of our almighty God followed by Nature: not
only in man, a reasonable creature, whose dignity does come so near the
Angels, but also in the industry of other little creatures, whereby it should
not seem so strange to us: if now that Charles the fifth, that thrice renowned
Emperor, has thus deposed and discharged him of the weight of his so famous
Monarchy, I also think by his example to disgrade me of this petit government
of household: which to my private person, is no less then is his Empire to his
Majesty. But first, before I shall surrender this, that rather appertains to
thee then to thy Brother, as well in that thou art his elder as also more
enclind to husbandry (a thing most needful and appropriate to housekeeping) I
will so instruct thee, touching things belonging to good government, as I was
taught not long since of my Father, who sprung of simple parentage, and heir
of a small patrimony, with industry, sparing, and good husbandry, did much
augment it, which has not been deteriora^ed since by me: but twice as much
increased since my father left it. Howbeit if I have not looked to my husbandry
with so great care, nor lived so sparingly as he prescribed: nevertheless (let
me boldly say thus much to thee my Son) the knowledge that I had touching the
nature of things, and fellowship of the world more then he, has been the
cause that I with little more expense have easily accomplished what he (being
vnlettared and not experimented in the world) did hardly (...) with much
sparing, and with exceeding toil even of his own person.

Now to begin, I say thus. That the care of a good householder is divided into
two things, that is, his body and his goods. In his person he is to exercise
three offices, viz. of a Father, a Husband, and a Master. In his goods two
purposes are proposed, Conservation, and Increase, touching every of which, I
will particularly reason: and first of his body rather then his goods, because
the care of reasonable things is more worth then that of things unreasonable.

The good Housekeeper then, ought principally to have care in choosing of his
Wife, with whom he must sustain the person of a Husband, which happily is
termed by a title more effectual, Consort: for the Husband and ye wife ought
indeed to be companions and consorts of one sesfe fortune, all the good and all
the evil incident to life, ought by them to be common and indifferently
sustained. In such sort as the soul communicats her operations with the body,
and the body with the soul, so that when any part of the body grieueth us,
the mind can hardly be content, and upon the malcontentment of the mind
follows the infirmity or weakness of the body: so should the Husband lament
the sorrows of the Wife, and the Wife the troubles of the Husband And the like
community should be in all offices and all operations And so much is that
conjunction that the man has with the Wife, like to that which the body has
with the soul, as not without reason ye name of Consort or Fellow is to be
attributed to the Husband and the Wife, as to the soul it has been
heretofore attributed. Forasmuch as Petrarch reasoning of the soul, says.
"Lerrante mia Consorte
"My wandering Companion.


In imitation perhaps of Dante, who in his Canzonet of Noblesse said, that the
soul was espoused to ye body. Albeit for some other respect, it ought rather
to be resembled to the Husband then the wife, and even as after that the band
that ties the body and the soul together is disseuered, it seems not that
the soul can be conioynd with any other body. (Wherefore foolish is that
opinion of some, that imagined the soul did pass from one unto another, as
does the Pylgrim passing from one lodging to another) so should it seem
convenient that that woman or man, that have been divorced by death from that
first band of Matrimony, ought not to be knit unto a second: nor without great
admiration should Dydo have continued her unwillingness of having a second
husband, who speaks thus in the book of Virgils Aeneidos. Sed mihi vel
tellus optem prius ima dehiscens
Uel pater omnipotens adigat me fulmine ad vmbras,
Ante pudor quam te violem, aut tua iura resoluem
Ille meos primus qui me sibi iunxit Amores
Abstulit: ille habeat secum seruetque sepulchro.
First would I that the parched earth did riue and raught me in,
Or that the almighty would with lightning drive me to the
Ere I to lose or violate my chastity begin, (deep:
He has my love that first had me (interd) he his shall keep.


Notwithstanding, forasmuch as custom and the Laws dyspence with them in
this, the woman as well as the man may without shame undertake the second
Marriage, especially if they do it for desire of succession (a desire most
natural in all reasonable creatures) but happier are they that have but once
in all their life been tied with that band.

How much the greater then and straighter the conjunction is of the husband
and the Wife, so much the more ought every one provide to be indifferently
matched, and truly this equallity of marriage is in two special things to be
considered: Estate and Age. For as two Palfreys or two Oxen of unequal stature
cannot be coupled under one self yoke, so a noble woman matching with a man
of base estate, or contrarily, a Gentleman with a Beggar, cannot be consorted
well under the bands of wedlock. But when it happens yet that by some
accident of Fortune, a man man rieth a woman of so high a birth, he ought (not
forgetting that he is her Husband) more honor and esteem of her then of his
equal or of one of meaner parentage, and not only to account her his
companion in love and in his life, but (in diverse actions of public aparance)
hold her his superior. Which honor is not yet accompanied with reverence as is
that which for manner sake we are wont to do to others. And she ought to
consider that no distinction of nobility can be so great, but that the league
which Nature has ordained betwixt men and women far exceeds it, for by
Nature woman was made man's subject. But if a man shall take to wife an inferior
or mean woman, he also ought to weygh, that Matrimony makes equal many
differences: and further, that he has not taken her for a slave or servant,
but for a fellow and companion of his life. And thus touching the estate of man
and wife, let this suffice.

Now passing to the age, I say that the Husband should provide to choose his
wife rather young then old, not only because a woman is more apt to
childbearing in youth, the^ otherwise, but because, (according to the
testimony of Hesiodus) she can better receive, and retain all forms of
customs and conditions, wherewith it shall content her Husband to commend her.
And for this (that the life of a woman is conscribd and ordinarily concluded in
lesser time then Man's, and sooner waxes old, as one in whom natural heat is
not aportioned unto superfluous moisture) the man ought to exceed the woman so
many years, as the beginging of the ones age match not with the others, so
that one of them before the other become unable and unfit for generation. Now
if it happen that the Husband take a wife with these conditions, he shall
furthermore easily exercise in her that superiority that has been granted
unto man by Nature, where otherwise it often comes to pass that he shall find
her so exceeding waiward, crabbed and disobedient, that where he thought he
made his choice of a companion that should help to lighten and exonerat that
ponderous and heavy load which our humanity affords, he finds he is now
matched and fallen into the hands of a perpetual enemy, who evermore none
otherwise impugneth and resists him then our immoderate desires, that in our
minds so much oppose themselves to reason: for such is woman in respect of
man, as is desire in comparison of understanding: and even as desire, (which of
it self is unreasonable) is by obeying to understanding, formed and beautified
with many fair and necessary virtues: so a woman that conformes her self unto
her Husband is adorned with those virtues, whereof by being obstinat she
continucth unfurnished. It is then a virtue in a woman, to know how to honor
and obey her Husband, not as a Servant does his Master, or the body the mind,
but ciuilly and in such sort, as we see the Citizens in well governed Cities
obey the Laws, and reuercnce their Magistrates, or so as in our souls,
wherein as well the well dysposed powers as the orders of the Citizens within
their Cities, compel affections to be subject unto reason: and herein it
has been conveniently ordained of Nature. For being needful that in the
fellowship of man and wife, the offices and duties should be diverse, and the
operations of the one, varrying from the others, it is convenient also that
their virtues should be diverse.

The virtues proper to man, are Wisdom, Fortitude, and Liberality. To woman,
Modesty and Chastity, wherewith both the one and the other of them, may very
well perform those operations that are requisite: but albeit Chastity or
Shamefastnes be not properly the virtues of a man, yet ought a good Husband to
offend the league of Matrimony as little as he possibly may, and not to be so
incontinent, as (being absent for a season from his wife) he cannot abstain
from pleasures of the flesh, for if he himself do not first violate the
bands by so defiling of the marriage bed, he shall doubtless much confirm
the woman's chastity, who by nature libidinous, ^d no less inclined to venerie
then man, only by shame, love and fear, may not be withdrawn from breaking of
her faith unto her Husband. Amongst which three affections, Fear is as worthy
of praise as blame, where the other two are indeed most commendable. And
therefore not without great reason was it said of Aristotle, that Shamefastnes
which merits no praise in a man, is most praise worthy in a woman: and his
Daughter very excellently approues. That no color better graceth or adornes a
woman's cheeks, then yt which shamefastnes depainteth, which increases and
draws as earnest love and desire of others to them, as happily those other
artificial Oils and dawbings which they use, decreaseth and withdraws from
them, being in deed fitter for vizards, pageants and poppets, Ovid de med:
faciei Certus ^mor moru^ est, formam populabitur aetas.
then wholesome, handsome or toothsome. And truly as a woman of discretion
will in no wise mar her natural complexion, to recover it with stone or
artificial coullered trash, so ought the husband in no sort to be consenting
to such follies. But because it behooves the rule and authority of the Husband
to be moderate in those things, chiefly which appertain to women, which for
that they are received and kept of custom, can not be condemnd as arguments
of much unshamefastness: He can practice no way better to dyswade her from such
muddy making fair her face, then with show ing himself a hater, contemner,
and careless of those that are fair with that filthy spunging, proigning,
painting and pollishing themselves. As for women desirous to seem fair I
cannot say to please others, but of honest women desirous to content their
Husbands, I may boldly speak, that at such time as they shall see their
tricking up their selves with Lie and such like filth, pleases not their
husbands eyes, they I know of modesty and love, will suddenly forbear it.
Much more easy to be entreated should the husband be in granting her those
things, whereof her body with convenient ornaments should be sufficiently
apparelled, for albeit superfluous pomp be fitter for a stage or Theater then
the person of an honest Matron: notwithstanding, herein much may be attributed
to use, neither should a woman's fantasy so sharply be offended, considering
that by nature she is so desirous to adorn and beautify her body. For
albeit we see that Nature in other creatures has effected, that the bodies of
the Male be more adorned then the Females, as the Heart with his fair and
bushie braunched horns, the princely Lion with his proud and feltred locks,
which the Females never have, and has embroidered the Peacocks tail with more
variety of colors the^ those of their Hens. Nevertheless, we may perceive
that in the shape of man, she has had more regard to the beauty of the Female
then the Male. For the flesh of women, as it is more soft and dainty, so are
they ordinarily more desired to be gazed on, neither are their faces shadowed
with beardes, which albeit they become men, being proper unto us, yet can we
not deny but that the countenaunces of youths upon whose faces hair never
came, are fayrer and far more lovely then those of bearded men. And Love by
the judicial figures of antiquity has been portraied like a Boy, so
Bacchus, so Apollo, who of all the other Gods were most fair, were deciphered
without beards, but with long curled locks trussed up in tresses, whereupon the
Poets call him Phoebus with these Epythetons almost continually. Non tosato o
comato but Unkempt.
hair (which is a great orname^t of Nature) grows not so hastily upon a
man, nor so soft and fine as upon women, who delight in their hair as Trees
do in their leaves, and therefore at the death of their husbands spoiling and
dysrobing themselves of all their other ornaments, they use yet in some place
of Italy, to cut away their hair which also was an ancient custom, as we
read of Hellen in Euripides. How much the more regard then Nature has had to
the beauty of women, so much the more convenient it is, that they account of
it, and maintain the same with comely ornaments.

Wherefore when thou shall take a wife, such an one as I desire thou may
have, fair, young, equal in estate with thee, modest, discreet, courteous, and
brought up in good dyscipline, under the education of a grave Matron and wise
mother: how much the more she shall content thee, so much the more thou
should contend not to discontent her. Wherein thou ought not only give
consent, that she may go apparelled as others of her calling do, not
restraining her from going to feasts and other public shows, where other
honest women and those of credit do assemble: nor on the otherside to give her
the bridle of liberty so much, that she be forward with the first at all
dauncings, Comedies, and other such assemblies: but also not to forbid her
those honest r^re ations and desires, which are as incident to youth, as flowrs
to the Spring time, least she hate or fear thee with ye dread wherewith base
slaves or servant are kept under by their Masters, nor yet to be so easily
induced, to watch or follow her, as she thereby become so bold and hardy, that
she lay aside honest shame, (a decent thing in honest women) which al so is a
kind of fear distinguished from servile base fear, and is as easily
accompanied with love, as servile fear with hate, and of this fear which more
properly is termed shamefastnes or reverence, spoke Homer, saying: O my
beloved father in law whom I have hourly feared.


Neither should he only cause or procure shamefastnes in all her actions and
business of her life, but also in her entertainment and embracings, for the
Husband comes not with those profane and superstitious cleppings as the
delicate and wanton Lover does, which makes me the less to marvel that the
kysses of Bell'ingannus Paramour, seemed sweeter to her then her husbands:
albeit I believe that there was never greater sweet in love, then that which
moderatly springs of honest Matrimony. And I could compare the embracings of
the Husband and the Wife to the temperate suppers of well dieted men, wherein
they taste no less commodity of the meats, then the most incontinent and
surfeiting companion: but hapely so much ye more by how much more their senses
(ruld by reason) are upright Judges of their opposites and indigested
contraries. Neither will I yet desist in this mine enterprise. For when Homer
saigned that Juno taking away Venus garter, went to seek her Husband on the
Mount of Ida, and having enticed him with love and lovely terms and amorons
games, Lay down with him upon the grass al covered with a cloud


He meant none otherwise but this, that she taking upon her the person of a
Lover, and deposing the habit of a Wife, went to seek Jupiter. For the fair
words, pleasing fashyons, and dainty whispering speech that she had taken
with the garter from Veuus, were things more beseeming a Lover then a Wife:
wherefore it was convenient, that being ashamed of her self, a Cloud should
be sent to hide her. And where he says Jove had not the^ so much desire
toward her as before when he first took her to his Wife, it gives us to
understand, that married women are not forbid for a little while to represent
the person of young Lovers, which notwithstanding she must speedily reform,
because it is most unseemly in them that (as a Father or Mother, Master or
Maistres of a house) desire to rule their family with honest and
enterchaungable love, which ought to be twixt man and wife, who are also to
live under the laws of Matrimony. For if a man having an vicious or unchaste
wife, should presently kill her, or in some other sort but punish her according
to the Laws, he may be happily employed better in some other action, which to
eschew (taking a wife of our deciphering) he shall never need to be advertised
by us.

Now proceeding to the education of Children, the care of them should be
divided so between the Father and the Mother, as she may nurse and he may
teach them: for the mother ought not to deny her milk to her own Children,
unless she be prevented or forbidden by infirmity. Forasmuch as that first
and tender age of infancy, apt to be molded of any fashion, oftentimes with
the milk sucketh the conditions of the Nursse: besides, if the milk altered
not the bodies and consequently the manners of young sucklings, the Nurses
should not be so narrowly forbid the often use of wynes: but the Nurses
being ordinary base persons, it follows that the first nourishment which the
little ones receive of them, cannot be so gentle or so delicate as the Mothers,
so that who so denies the nursing of her child, in some sort denies to be the
mother of it, because ye Mother is chiefly known and commended by the
bringing of her children up.

But that first age past over, that is nourished with milk, the little ones do
yet continue in their Mothers custody, who are used to be so kind and tender
over them, as oftentimes they bring them up too delicatly. For which the Father
is commanded to provide this reamedy, that forasmuch as that first age
abounds in natural heat, he accustom Antiperistasis, where heat expel^
cold, or cold expulseth heat, it is applied to well water, which is therefore
cold in win ter, because the high parts of the air being cold, the heat
withdraws to the lower parts.
them to cold for restraining the natural heat within, and causing that which
the Philosophers call Antiperistasis, the complexion of the child becomes
strong and lusty. And it was the manner of some nations, and especially those
of Aquitan and thereabouts, as we read in Aristotle, to wash their new borne
Children in the Rivers, to indurat and harden them against the cold, which
custom is by Virgil attributed to the Latins as it is to be noted in these
verses. Durum a stripe genus natos ad stumina primum,
Deferimus saeuoque gelu duramus, et vndis,
Uenatu inuigilant pueri, syluamque fatigant
Flectere ludis equos and spicula tendere cornu.
A painful people by our birth, for first our babes we bring,
Like us to be inurd to cold, and plundge them in the spring:
But bigger grown they tend the chase, and tire the woods to
Their horses fit for service, and their archery for aim. (frame


Which custom as I commend not, because to us that have not used it it seems
exstreame, so yet I think good to advise thee, that if it shall please God to
give thee Children, thou do not bring them up under so soft and easy
discipline, as they become such milk sops as were those Phrygians, of whom the
same Poet in that same book of his Aeneidos makes mention. Uobis, picta croco
and fulgenti murice vestis
Et tunica manicas, and habent redimicula mitrae
O vere Phrygiae, (neque enim Phryges) ite per alta
Dyndima, vbi assuetis biforem dat tibia cantum,
Tympana vos buxusque vocat Berecynthia matris
Idcae, sinite arma viris, and cedite ferro.
Your robes are dyed with Saffron and with glistring purple budds,
Your cote has mittins, and your high Priests hats are made like hoods
O Phrygia in deed (nor Phrygians yet) scale you high Ida hyl,
Where ^rompets echo clang's to those that of the custom skyll,
Cebiles Berecyntian pypes and Tymberils you see
Do call you thence, leave armor then to such as Soldiers be.


Whom (me thinks at this day) they of some Cities in Lombardy are like, for if
any there be valiant, many of the Phrygians also were courageous. Nor would I
yet that thou sholdest bring them up so hardly or severely as the Lacedaemonians
were accustomed, or as Achylles of Chyro was. I would not (I say) that you
should bring the^ up so fiercely, for such an education makes the^ rather
wild and sauadge, which though the Lacedaemonians reputed fitting for a noble
man, yet was not Achilles such an one in his conditions, as others (of our time
need) to propose him or his behavior for their example.

Thy private estate requires that so thou teach and bring up thy Children, as
they may become good members of the City where thy self inhabitest, or they
shall dwell, good seruitors and subjects to their Prince, which in their trades
if they be Merchaunts, in good letters if they be learned, and in wares if
they be able, they may show themselves. Neither shall thy Children be
unfurnished of all, or one of these professions, if thou see that they become
not werish and of a womanish effeminate complexion, but of a strong and man lie
constitution, and that they exercise themselves in practice of the mind and
body, al alike or both together. But because all this part of education and
bringing up of Children, is or ought to be in a manner, the care of a Father
and good Housekeeper, because it is wholly pollitique, that should pre scribe
an order to the Father, how he is to educate and bring up his Children, to the
end that the Cities discipline may conform and be agreeable therewith.

I will lay a part this argument, or at least dysioyne it from the rest which I
will speak of housekeeping, and it shall suffice me soly to advise and
counsel, that thou bring them up in the fear and love of God, honor of their
Parents, and in their Princes service and obedience, and that they be
continually exercised in those most commendable practices of mind and body, as
become them, and may better their estate with praise and honesty.

We have now spoken so much as has been convenient for thee to do in the
person of a Husband and a Father, eftsoons it remains that we come to the
consideration of the third person: I mean that of a Governor or Master,
term it as you list, which soly has relation to the servant. And if we shall
give credit to antiquities written of housekeeping and government of families.
The Master ought to hold them satis-fied with labor, victual and
chastisement, and to keep them exercised in obedience. But forasmuch as their
Servant in old time were slaves taken in wars, and afterward called
servant a seruando (for yt they were preserud from death, and are at this day
for the most part manumitted and enfranchized) me thinks this latter part of
chastisment might well be left, as nothing requisite for our times or customs
(except percase in those parts where slaves yet serve) and in steed thereof,
the Master to give them admonition, which should not be such neither, as is
used by the father to the son, but complete and uttered with more austeritie
and signiorzing terms, and if that will not serve, to suffer the disobedient
stifnecked and unprofitable servant to depart, and to provide himself of one
that better may content him. And yet one thing has been forgotten of those
men of elder times, which was not conuement for slaves, but not only fitting,
but most needful for freemen, and this is ^llarie or wages. With wages, meat,
work and admonition, then the Housekeeper shall so govern his family, as they
shall rest content of him, and he be satis-fied of their labor. But because
(albeit the Laws and vsages of men are variable and diverse, as we see
perticulerly in this of sernaunts, who for she greater number are at this day
freeman: yet for as much as the Laws and dyfferences of Nature are not
changed either by alteration of time, or variety of customs.) Whatsoever
others say, thou art thus to understand, that this distinction of Sovereign,
Ruler, Governor, or Master, is first founded upon Nature: for some are
naturally borne to commannde, and others to obey: and he that is borne to
obey, were he of the Kings blood, is nevertheless a servant, though he be
not so reputed: because the people that only have regard to exterior things,
judge none otherwise of the conditions of men, then they do in Tragedies of
him they call the King, who apparrelled in Purple and glistering all in Gold
and precious stones, represents the person of Agamemnon, Atreus or Etheocles,
where if he chance to fail in action, co^lines, or vtteraunce, they do not
yet derrogat from his old title, but they say, The King has not playde his
part well. Likewise he that represents the person of a noble man, or Gentleman,
that in this life (which is a Theater of the world) has been deposed or
bereft his dignity, he shall nevertheless be called the Noble or ye Gentleman
still, though he be happily Dauus Syrus or Geta. But when it happens yt some
one is found, not only servile in condition and of fortune, but base of mind,
gross of understanding, and as Petrarch says. Nudo di iudicio e pouero
d'argomento. Naked of judgment, and poor of argument. as the greater number
are, he may be properly termed a Servant, and of him and such like, the good
Housekeeper (that would have such persons serve him as he might command with
reason) may well furnish his house, seeking no further virtue in them then that
they may be capable of his commandments, and execute them willingly, wherein
they differ from Horses, Mules, and other Beasts, whom Nature has also
framed apt to learn, and to be ruled tamed and guided by man, for they in the
absence of their Masters record the things commanded, which these no longer
know then they are learned, or scarce perform even when they are commanded:
so that a servant may be called Animal rationale, a Reasonable Creature, by
participation, even as the Moon and the Stars receive light by participation
with the Sun, or as men's appetitcs by participation with the light of
understanding become reasonable: for as our appetites receive within themselves
the form of that virtue which reason has imprinted in them, so does the
servant reserve ye form of those impressions whatsoever, commanded or
required in him by his Master, and of them and of their Master sometimes may
be said, as Petrarch speaking of himself and Laura reasons. Si che son
fatto huomo ligio,
Di lei ch' alto vestigio,
Mimpresse al core, e fecel suo simile.
So that I see I am become her liege man and her thrall,
That made impressions in my heart, and printed hyrs withal.


And because the authority of Hesiodus that ancient Poet shall not beguile
thee, who reckoning up the properties of housekeeping, placed the Ore in steed
of yt servant, I will thou understand more properly, yt the manner wherewith
servant are governed, differs much from ye wherewith we govern Beasts. For
that enstruction or kind of teaching Beasts, is not discipline, but an use
and custom, dissonant and segregat from reason: not unlike as the right hand
holds and disposes any sort of weapon, better then the left, albeit there is
no more reason in it then in ye other, but the mind also of Servants is
accompanied with reason, and may become discipline, as is that of Children,
wherefore they speak without sense and coniccture vnreasonablie, that rob and
reaue their Servant of the use of reason: considering it is no less
needful for them then Children but more peradventure, (they having already
so much temperaunce and strength, as not only serves to defend themselves, but
to rescue many times and asist their Masters in the peril of some civil
broyle or other troubles, that may oftentimes betide them.) And therefore was
it well said of that Thoscan Poet. Ch'inanzi a buon signior, fa seruo forte.
Before his master whom he likes,
The sturdy servant stoutly strikes.


And not without cause were Mylos servant commended so by Cicero in his
Dration pro Milone, and all those others of whom we read some memorable
matters in Valerius Maximus, with many more, whose examples if I should but
practice to recount, I should soon forget my purpose. That Servant are
properly those that are borne to obey: who therefore are not capable of any
office within the City because they want virtue: whereof they fast but
barely so much as only makes them apt and ready to obey. But if thou have
perused Histories, and redd of that most perilous conflict amongst the
Romans which they called Cyuill war, (because it was begun and stirred up
by servant) and likewise in our time of the Armies which the Soldane gathered
of slaves, and at this day of those fearful Hosts which the great Turk
mustercth, and for the most part makes of the like: thou shall then record and
bring to mind our plain distinction, that absolutely will resolve thee, and
discharge the greatest doubt thou can imagine. Many are servant by Fortune
that are free by Nature. And it is not to be meruailed at, that many cruel
conflicts and dangerous wars are caused and continued by such as these.
Howbeit, it is a great argument of baseness, that servile fortune can engender
servile evils in a gentle mind. And yet for instance I remember an example of
ye Scythians worth while the noting: who having assembled an Army of me^
against their servants yt had then rebelled, knowing none other mean or policy
to pacify or put the^ down, they aduisde to carry with them to ye field
(besides their weapons) many whips and bastonadoes which (making them remember
the strypes and strokes that in their servitude they had received) put them
presently to flight.

But returning to those Servant whereof a house or family in deed should be
composed or furnished, I cannot commend those that are neither fit for war,
in mind nor body, but such as are of streng complexion, fit for labor, country
business, and household exercise. These would I divide into two forms, the one
under the other, as the one of superindents, surueighors, or work-maisters: the
other of workmen. The first shall be the Steward, to whom by the Master of
the house, should the household care be commended. The next, to whom the
business of the stable and of Horses should be given, as in great houses it has
been accustomed. The third, the Baylieffe to whom the Town affairs belong and
are committed. The others shall be such inferiors as shall be con^rold, and
at commandment of those higher officers.

But for as much as our fortune has not given us that wealth whereby we should
expect to have our houses so dystinguished and multiplied with officers, it
shall susfise thee to provide one for all, that may be Steward, Horsekeeper,
and Baileffe, and (him) command the rest that are thy Hyndes and meauer
servant to obey: gyuing every one his sallary or day wages, more or less as
in their labors they deserve: ordeyning victual for them, so as they may
rather have too much then want. Howbeit, yet thou art to feed thy Servant
with some other meat, then such as shall be set upon thine own boorde: where
dyfdayne not now and than to see such gross or homely kind of fare, as
according to the season shall be happilye purueighed or provided for thy
servant, to the end that they seeing thy self sometimes bouchsafe to taste
thereof, may the more willingly be satis-fied therwe: amongst which, those
relicts and fragme^ts of that finer fare that shall be taken from thy Table,
may be served, still having some respect to the estate and desert of every one.
But because a family well fed and truly paid, may with idleness and ease
become pestilent, breeding evil thoughts, and bringing forth worse works: not
unlike those Pooles and standing waters, which (having no recourse) putrify
the good, and engender naughty Fish.

Thy chief care, and the duty of thy Steward, shall be this, to keep every
one perticulerlie exercised in his particular office, and generally all, in
such business as thou can not severally set them to. For every thing that
belongs to keeping of a house, cannot necessarily be done by him that has
another charge: the Steward, he must purueigh thy meats: the Chamberlain,
make the bedds and brush: the Horsekeeper, rub the horses and cleanse the
stable: and consequently every other, otherwise be occupied. The careful
Steward or surueighor of the house, should therefore (with dyscretion) dispose
the works, that are or cannot be divided or distributed, now to one, now to
another, but above the rest, to have a special care, that in the house,
Coats, Tables or Coffers, be no uncleanness, filth or Rubbishe, but that the
very walls and pauements, lofts and sellers, Harnes and implements of
household, may be pollished and kept so clean, that (as we term it) it may
shine like Silver, or look as bright as Crystal. For cleanlines is not
only pleasing or delightful to behold, but adioyneth worth, and bettereth
things by Nature base and filthy, as continually beastlines and filth,
corrupt, disgrace and spoil, things otherwise of value and account: besides,
Cleanlines increases and preserves the health, as much as sluttishnes
annoyeth and impay^eth it. Nay what more is, every servant should perticulerlie
have such care of scowring and keeping clean those tools and instruments he
works withal, and that belong unto his office, as the Soldier has to see
his weapons to be bright, for such are, is, or should be, every tool to him
that has the exercise thereof, as are the weapons which the Soldier uses:
whereupon Petrarch speaking of the Ploughman, writes thus. L'auaro Zappatore
l'armi reprende.
The Ploughman takes his weapons once again.
After the imitation of Virgil, who before he had called those instruments
weapons, which the Countrymen did use, wrote thus. Dicendum and quae sint
duris agrestibus arma.
And tell the weapons wherwithal the sturdy clownes ca^ work


And where also he terms the Bakers instruments weapons. Tum Cererem corruptam
vndis, cerealiaque arma
Expediunt fessirerum: Aeneid. Lib. 2.

Then run the weary forth to fetch the watrie rotten Corn,
And baking weapons etc.


But because it sometime happens, that one is too much charged with labor,
and another has more day then work, one should so help another, as we see by
use in our own bodies, when the one leg is weary we can rest it one yt other,
or when the right hand is over labored, we can ease it with the left, and when
intercourse of love and courtesy entreats not thus amongst them, then should
the Master himself command the negligent and unprofitable Servant, to help
and ease the weary and the well employed.

But above all, me thinks the Charity of Masters, and love of Servants to
their fellows in their sickness, is especially to be vsd and shown, at which
time, the sick are to be severally lodged from the whole, and nourished with
more choice and dainty meat: nor should the Master of ye house dysdaine, or
show himself so scornful or unkind, as not to visit them: for if brute
beasts rejoice to see their Masters cheerish them, as we may daily see in
dogs, how much more may we believe that men and reasonable creatures are com
forted therewith? Whereupon it comes to pass, that good servants liking and
affecting of their Masters, understand the^ at a beck, and obey them at a
winck of the eye, or bent of the brow, not as a water-spaniel, but as the hand
is sturred to obey the mind, so prompt and ready is the servant to obey his
Master. For as the hand is said to be The instrument of instruments, being it
(indeed) that serves to feed, apparel, and keep clean the rest of the
lims, which are also called instruments, so is the Servant said to be an
instrument of instruments: because he keeps all the instruments of household
occupied, not only to live, but to live well, wherein he differs from all the
other instruments. For where they are Inanima, things without soul, he is
Animatus, and diuinelie is enriched with a soul, and herein differs from
the hand, for that the hand is fastened and united to the body, but he separate
and disoyned from his Master, and is also different from Artificers, for
Artificers are Instruments of those things which properly they call
workmanship: but the Servant is Instrument of the actiom, which also is
distinguished from workmanship. So yt the servant, if you will rightly
understand him, is, Animatum actionis, and Instrumentum seperabile. A lively
and several instrument of action. But forasmuch as of actions, some are placed
in care of families and household business, some stretch further, and extend to
civil administration, there are some Gentlemen (amongst who^ I wish thee to be
numbered) that use to keep a youth, who in their civil government, does serve
to write and mannedge, some of their affairs, and him they call their Clerk,
but these do far differ from the other, considering that for the most part
they are, or ought to be, not of servile or material wit, but capable of
fashions, or apt to study or contemplat, and betwixt them and their Masters,
can be properly no servitude or signiory, but rather that kind of friendship,
which by Aristotle is applied in the highest. Albeit in those good worlds of
the Roman Common wealth, these were taken from that number of other servants,
and such an one was Terence, the writer of Comedies, who was so familiar with
Lelius and Scipio, as it is thought there is somewhat of their doings in his
works. The like was Tyro, of (whom are many Letters extant that were written by
Tullie) who being an excellent Gramarian, was also a most dilligent obseruer
of some little things, whereof Cicero was rather a dysprayser then ignorant.
But because that use of service as we talked of, is (at this day) utterly
extinguished betwixt ye Masters and their Servants of such singularity: those
laws of friendship ought to be observed and maintained in more high degree.
And hereupon was that Treatise of under Officers (especially) written by
Signior Giouanni della casa, which (for that thou art desirous to peruse his
works) I know must many times be redd and redd again by thee, I will
therefore perticularize none, but refer thee to the book.

And now because we have sufficiently spoken, (though not so much as you
desire) touching the regard of the person, for that our speech has reference
as well to Maidens as men Servant, and because there has been nothing left
out that belongs to a Husband, a Master, or a Housekeeper: I think it
requisite to come to that, which we devised and divided for the second part of
our discourse: that is, of Wealth or substance, wherein we will effectually make
mention of the duty of a Huswife, and of women's business. The care of wealth
or substance, as we said before, is employed to Conservation and Increase, and
is divided betwixt the Master and Mistress, because the increase is as proper
to the Master, as the keeping to the Mistress, howbeit to him (that
perticulerly considers the care of the increase) it is proper to the Master,
and the other common, whatsoever others heertofore have spoken to this purpose.
But forasmuch as nothing can be increased that is not first, and wholly kept
together: the Housekeeper that is desirous to preserve his wealth, should
perticulerly know the quallitie, and quantity of his revenues and expenses,
wherewith he is to keep his house, and to maintain his family with credit,
and (measuring the manner of his revenues, with the issue of his charges) so
to live, as his expense may prove the least, making that proportion with his
comings in, as four to eight, or six at least, for he that spends as much, as
he receives of his possessions, cannot recover those losses, which by chance
or Fortune may betide him: as by fires, tempests, inundations, and other such,
nor supply the necessity of some expense, which (being accidental) cannot be
provided for. Furthermore, (to be certified of his substance, and the value of
his riches) it be hooues that he himself have seen, and measured his
possessions, even with those compasses, which gave beginning to Geometry in
Egypt; which though they be diverse according to the variety of Countries, is
(notwithstanding) no occasion of substantial difference; it also behooves
that he know, that what he reapes be aunswerable unto that he sowed, and with
what proportion, the earth restores that which it receives: and as requisite
it is, that he take ye like notice of all whatsoever else belongs, to
husbandry or grazing, and no less to harken after the prices, that are set
by public Magistrates, or by consent of Marketfolks within the Country where
he dwells, then to be informed how they buy or sell in Turyno, Myllan, Lions,
or Venice, whereof (being well advertised and instructed) he cannot be deceived
by his Bailiesfe, being a Husbandman, or abused by his Factor being a
Merchaunt. But forasmuch as I have said, that he ought to be advised, both of
the quantity and quallitie, of that which he possesses: (I call not only that
Quantity which is measured by Geometry, as are Fields, Meadows, Woods, or
that which is accustomd to be numbered by Algorisme, as Flocks and Herds, but
that which is accounted as gold or silver coined) for (in the quadering and
making even of the enteries, with the expenses) no quantity is more to be
considered, then that of money, which may be gathered and received of Rent,
and such like revenues, which is often changing and incertaine: for Lands
are not always let at one rate, their price and profits rise and fall as other
mean things, or things of more account. In which incertainty and variable
state of things, a good Husbands judgment, experience, and diligence so much
preuailes, as not only is sufficient to preserve, but to increase his
substance, which being in the manurance and handling of an ignorant, or
ouerweener, does not only decrease, but perishes.

That call I Quallity of substance then, that is artificial or natural, of
living things, or things without life: Arteficiall are moueables or household
implements, and hapely the house it self, and money which was first found out
by man's appointment. Because we may live without it, as they did in the old
time, wherein exchange of things was made with out return of money: afterward
(by the law of man) was money invented, whereupon it was called Numus of (...),
which (by the Greek interpretation) signifies Law, which commodiously
fitting, and making equal things exchanged, has made the intercourse of
buying and selling, very easy, and more certain, then when they only used
exchange.

Arteficiall riches may all those things be called, wherein the workmanship of
the Master is rather sold and more esteemed, then the matter or the thing
made: Natural are those that are produced by Nature, whereof also some are
without life, as Lands, Meadows, Metals, and some with life, as Flocks and
Herds, whereof the good Housekeeper (oftentime) receives profit. Further it
comes into the consideration of Quallitie, to know whether the Lands or
possessions, lie near or far from any City, if they join to any standing
Lake or Poole, by the exhalation of whose evil vapors, the air becomes
filthy and infected: or whether any Springs or Ryuers be adjacent, which by
(often recorse and refluence) may gather virtue, to refine and purge the air:
and whether they be guirt or environed with hills, or lie open to the winds,
whether upon the bancks (to any nauigable water) or in a champant Country:
whereby the commodities raised thereupon, may be transported easily in Carres,
or other carriages unto the City, or whether it lie steepeward down the
hyls, uneasy and painful to be past, so that he must needs be chargde with
sompter men: whether it be near to any high way or common street, through
which the Trauailers, Italian Merchants, or those of Germany or France are
used to pass: or far from frequence, or resort of Passengers, or such as use
to bartre or exchange: if aloft, where it lies in prospect, or below in some
Ualley, where it may be overflowed: all which conditions, as they much increase
and deminish the price and value of the things possessed, so may they be occasion
of sparing in expenses, and teach thee to conserve and multiply thy Revenues,
if (like a good husband) thou advise thee and consider it.

But to come somewhat more perticulerly to the care and regard, that is
(indeed) required, he should so provide that whatsoever is necessary for the
use of his house in the City, be brought from his Ferme or Manor in the
Country, and to leave his house there, furnished of so much as may suffice him
and his family when he shall be disposed to soiourne there, and to sell the
rest at such convenient time as things are dearest, and with the money that
arises thereof, to buy those things which his own possessions yield not, and
yet are necessary for a Gentleman, now and then when they are better cheap.
All which he may easily do, if in sparing that expense he used at first, he
reserve some money overplus: again, he may keep his money by him many times,
when by his own conjecture, opinion of Prognostications, or speech of other
men's experience he hears, or fears any dearth or scarcity, and then to lay
it out when he perceiues the great abundance of the year, and fruitfulnes of
seasons, remembering that example of Thales, who (through his knowledge Thales,
one of the seven wise men of Greece.
of natural things) suddenly became rich, with a bargain that he made for
Dyle. This shall be the Husbands rare. But such things whatsoever as are
brought into the house, either from the Country, or bought about in Markets,
shall be wholly recommended to the wives charge, who is to keep and set the^ up,
in several places, according to their natures, for some would be kept moist
and cold, and some dry, othersome would be one while set in the Sun, another
while in the wind, some will be long kept, othersome a little while, all which a
good huswife (well considering) should cause those that will not keep, to be
first eaten, and make store of the rest. Howbeit, those also that will not
keep, (without corruption) may be helped many ways, and made to keep long.
For Salt and Uineger do not only keep flesh long time sweet, and seazoned,
but fish and foul, which will be suddenly corrupt. Besides, many sorts of
fruit that will quickly putrefie and perish, if they be sharp or tarte
(otherwise not) will be long maintaind in Uineger. Likewise the hanging up in
smoke, or baking of some kinds of flesh, or fish and diverse sorts of fruits,
draws away their moisture, (that is cause of their corruption) and makes that
they may be kept the longer.

Again, there are some things, which (being dried) would become both hard, and
naught to eat, without some kind of liquor or Conserues, whereof a good
Huswife making store, for her provision (if it happen that by some mischance or
hynderaunce whatsoever, there can not come sufficient store of meat from the
market, for her husbands Table, or that they suddenly are driven to entertain
a Stranger) she may (in a minut) furnish her mess with those iunckets, and ye
in such good sort, as there shall be no miss of any other meats. She must also
have regard, ye al her household Corn, be some ground for bread, and othersome
made fit for drink, and so distribute it indifferently with equal measure,
both to the men and maid servants, used for those purposes: amongst whom, she
shall have one above the rest, as the Master has his Steward or Cashur, that
shall keep one keye, and she another, that though the Master or Mistres be
abroad, there may be one to deliver out such things as shall be needful, and
to bid a Stranger drink, which custom is not gueason in some houses, where
the Steward or Butler bears the keys, as well of household necessaries, as all
things else, pleasing ye Master, and not unpleasant to the appetites of those he
entertaineth. Therefore a good Huswife should so provide, that all things
whatsoever (if occasion of resort of strangers be not to the contrary) may be
sparingly disposed: For thrift or liberality is as needful in a woman as a
man. Besides, she should busy herself in viewing and surueighing such things,
as she charged to be kept, measuring things to be measured, and keeping just
account of things that are to be accounted: neither ought her care only extend
to the spending of them, or unto other things rehearsed, but also to ye wynes,
wc the older they are, and ye longer they are kept, become so much the better,
I speak of choice wynes, which get strength with age: for the small wynes, and
those of little spirit that quickly lose their strength, should be first dronk
or sold if thou have any quantity. But her principal care should be of Lynnen
or of woollen weauing, wherewith she may not only make provision necessary and
fit, for the ability and credit of her house: but honestly gain, which is as
requisite in her, as is her Husbands profit gathered by the buying, selling, or
exchanging other things. Neither ought a good Huswife to dysdaine or scorn, to
set her hand now and then to some work. I mean not in the Kitchen, or other
soyled places, which may spoil or ray her garments, because such business are
not to be manedged and handled by noble Matrons (yet to be seen unto by such
whose state may tolerate such thrift) but in those only that without
noysomnes or filthiness she may be bold to touch, and such are properly the
wheels, lombes, and other instruments that appertain to weauing, wherewith a
good Huswife may furnish any sufficient house or dwelling, either for her
eldest Son or Daughter: and not without reason was this art first attributed
to Minerua goddess of wisdom, in so much as it was derived first from her,
as appears by these verses in the Book of Virgill. Inde, vbi prima quies
medio iam noctis abactae
Curriculo expulerat somnum, cum faemina primum
Cui tolerare colo vitam tenuique Minerua
Impositum ciner^m, and sopitos suscitat ignes
Noctem addens operi, famulasque ad lumina longo
Excercet penso, ^astum vt seruare cubile
Coniugis and possit pa^uos educere natos.
The first sleep ended, after midnight did the woman wake
That lived by spinning, and she gins the ymbers up to rake,
And adding so unto her labors some part of the night,
Hard at their distaffe does she hold her maids by candlelight
To keep her chaste, and that her children well maintain she
(might.


In which verses it appears, that he spoke not of base women, but of a
Mistres of a house, which had been accustomed to be attended on, by many
servants: and so much worth (it seems) that this art has in it, as it has
not only been ascribd or attributed to private huswiues, but to princely Ladies,
as appears by these verses of Penelope, the wife of wise V^sses. Come^a nobil
Greca ch' a'le tele sue
S^nio la notte, quanto ilgiorno accre^be.
As did that noble Grecian dame that bated in the night.
As much as she had wouen by day to bleare her suitors sight.


And Virgil of Circes which was not only a woman and a Queen, but a Goddess,
wrote thus: Arguto coniux percurrit pectine telas,
Upon a well divided loome thy wife does weaue apace.


In which example he followed Homer, who not only Homer (...) his Odiss.
brought Penelope and Circes in ye number of women weauers, but placed the
daughter of Alcinoe the King of Phaeaces amongst them: and albeit the Greeks
observed not so much decorum as was necessary. The Romans yet that were both
greater and more curious obseruers of such things, forb^d the Mistres of the
house all other works* the Kitchen Cookery and such like, but granted they
might weaue^ an^ that not without great commendation: and in this kind of work
was Lucretia often found, by Collatyn, by Brutus, and Tarquinius when they were
enamored of her.

But to return to the Mistres of the house or huswife, who being a fortunat
mother of Children, the further off she is front nobles or estate, so much the
less she may dysdaine to busy herself in such things, as carry meaner worth
in show, and less workmanship then weauing. And heerin seems it, that in
some sort she shall advance herself, and come into comparison with her good
man: for she not only gathers but increases, with the profitt of those
labors. Nevertheless, considering that those benefits are small, and but of
slender reckoning we shall do well to say, that it belongs to the wife to
keep, and to the husband to increase. But forasmuch as things preserved, may
the better be disposed, if they be carefully provided for, and ordered, the
good Huswife ought above all things to be dilligent herein. For if she reserve
not things confusedly but seperat, and placd in sonder, according to their
quallitie, and the opportunity of using them, she shall always have them
ready and at hand, and evermore know, what she has, and what she wants: and
if there can be no similitude inferd to this purpose worthy of consideration,
most notable is that of Memory, which A^ Memoratiua.
laying up, preserving and imprinting in it self all the Images and forms of
visible and intelligible things, could not utter them in time convenient and
dispose them to the tongue and pen, unless it had so ordered, and oftentimes
recounted them, as without that the memory it self could scarce contain
them, of so great efficacye and force is order, but it has also no less grace
and comlines, in beautifying and adorning things, as he that does acquaint
his study with the use of Poetry, very easily perceineth. For Poesy has
never more spirit added to it, with the greatest art and industry, then when
it is set forth with well disposed Epythetons, and significa^t terms, yt the
one ordered with the other, may altogether consent, or mustcally answer
cross, as has arteficially been used by Orators, which though it be pleasant
to the ear, is painful to the memory: and be it so, as As by repetition or
maintaining of a point as Mufitions term it.
some Philosophers have said, that the form or fashion of the World, is none
other then an order, co^paring little things with great, we may well report,
that the form of a house is the order, and the reformation of the house or
family, none other then a second setting it in order, wherein I purpose to
speak somewhat: which albeit of it self it bear no great semblance of
credit, yet for the order and clenlines it deserves so much, as having seen it
without disdain, and diuerstie admiring it, may without impeach (I hope) be
profitablye recounted.

Returning from Paris, and coming by Beona, I entered the Hospital, wherein,
though every Room I saw my thought, was worthy commendations, yet was the
Kytchen to be wondered at (which as it was not vsd continually) so did I find it
passing neat, and queintly tricked up, as if it were the Chamber of a new
married Bride: therein saw I such a quantity of necessary implements, not only
for the use of the Kitchen, but service of the Table, so discreetly ordered,
and with such proportion, the Pewter so set up, the Brass* and iron works so
bright, as when the Snn shyned on the wyndowes there upon, cast such a delicat
reflection, as it might (me thought) be well resembled to the Armorie of
Venice, and of other places, meeter to be spoken of, then showed to strangers:
and if Gnato, that disposd the household of his glorious Sig, Capitano, in
manner of an Army, ^ad but had a sight of this, I am well assured he would
have compared it, to some higher matter then an Armorie.

But returning now from keeping to increasing, it may be doubted whether this
art of increasing be housekeeping wholly, or but a member, part, or Minister
thereof. If a Minister, because it ministers the Instruments, as the Armorer
does the curasse and the Helmet to the Soldier: and that ministers the
subject or the matter, as ye Shipwright that receives the Timber of him that
fells and seazoneth the wood. It is very manifest, that the art of
housekeeping, and getting, is not all one: for the one it behooves to provide,
the other to put in ure ye things provided: now it rests to be considered,
whether to get, be a form or part of housekeeping, or utterly disioyned and
^straunged from it. The faculty of getting, may be Natural and not Natural:
Natural I call that, which gesseth the living out of these things that has
been brought forth by Nature, for man's use and (...): and forasmuch as nothing
is more natural then nourishment, wh^ the Mother gives to her Child, (...)
natural above the (...) (...) that (...) (...) be, that is had and raised of
the fruits of the earth, considering that the Earth is the natural and
universal Mother (...) all: Natural also are the (...) ^ents and (...) that
we receive of Beasts, and of the game that may be made of them, which is
distinguished (...) ^o that distination of Beasts; for of Beasts, some are
tame and com^ (...), othersome, solttary and untamed: of those are flocks,
Herds and droues compact, of which no le^ profit may be raised.: these they
make their game, to (...): and man of th^serue for sustentation and (...) of
the life. It also seems yt Nature has engendered, not (...)* brute Beasts
(...) the ^ice of Man, but has framed (...)* yt are apt to obey (...) those
whom also she has framed to co^d. So the whatsoever is gotten or obtained in
the wars being ^st, the same may also be termed natural gain: and hee^
will. I not conceal what Theucidides has obse^d in the pro^ of his History.
That in the old t^, praying or (...) ^e was not to be blamed. Whereupon we
read, that one asked another, whether he were a (...) or a (...) (...) though
it were no injury to ask him such a question. To which ^se or reason, Virgill
having regard, brought in Numa (...) thus. Caniciem galea, premimus semperque
recentes
Conuectare iuuat praedas and viuere rapto.
We hide our gray hairs with our helmets, liking evermore
To live upon the spoil, and waft our prays from shore to shore


And that may well be called Natural gain, which the Knights of Malta have
against the Barbarians and Turks. E^ry of which natural gains, it seems
necessary that Housekeepers have knowledge of, but especial of Husbandry:
and he that mingleth and exchaungeth the profit of all those things together
which he gathers, should happily therein do nothing unworthy or against ye
title of good Husbandry. For that trade or science is at this day co^onlie
called Merchandise, which is of many sorts, and to be taken many ways, but
that is the most just, which takes thence where things ^perfluously abound,
and transporteth them thither where is want and scarcity of those commodities,
and in their stedd returns other things, whereof there is some dearth,
because it grows not other-where so plentiously: and hereof speaks Tully in
his Book of Offices, that Merchandise if they were small were base, and but of
vile account, if great, not much to be dislyked: but his words in that place
are to b^ taken as the saying of a Stoyck, that too severely speaks of those
matters. For in other places where he ar^eth like a Citizen, he commends
and defends Merchaunts, and the manner of their trade, and calls that order
of the Publicans most honest, who had the whole revenues of the Common wealth
(...) their possessions, besides those things whereof the (...) tr^fique, and
the trade of Merchandise. But as that fo^me of Merchandise is just and honest,
which traffic their commodities to Countries where they want, and thereof
make their best, so most unjust is that, which having bargained for the
commodities of a Country, retaileth them, or sells them again in the same
place, watching the opportunity and time wh^ they may utter them unto their
most advantage: Howbeit, y^ care of opportunity to sell what is a man's own,
and what he gathers of his own Revenues, and possessions, and of his
flocks, herds and such like, seem not either inconvenient or dishonest in a
Husbandman.

And so much touching natural gain, necessary for a houskeeper, wherein he
shall much advantage him and his, if he be but indifferently instructed, not
only of the nature, goodness, and value of all things that are used to be
exchaunged: and are from place to place transported, but also in what Province,
Shyre or Country grow yt better, and in which the worse, and where in most
abundance, where in less, where they are held dearest, and where best
cheap. So should he also be informed of the fashions, sleights, and
difficulties of transporting them, and of the times and seazons where in they be
carried or recarried most coueniently, and of the league and traffic that one
City has with another, one Province or Country with another, and of the
times wherein such merchandise are sold, which for ye most part are called
Fayres or Marts.

Notwithstanding, the Housekeeper ought to handle these things like a
Husbandman, and not like a Merchaunt, for where the Merchant preposeth for his
principal intent, the increase and multiplying of his stock, which is done by
traffic and exchange, by means whereof, he many times forgets his house, his
Children and his Wife, and trauails into foreign Countries, leaving the care of
them, to Factors, Friends, and Servant. The care of the Husbandman or
Housekeeper, does reap his profit of exchange bya second object, directed
unto household government, and so much time and labor only he bestows, as
his chief and principal care may not thereby be anoyd or hyndered. Moreover,
even as every art does infinitely seek the end it purposes, as the honest
Physician will heal as much as he can, the Architect erect and build with as
much excelency and perfection as he can, so the Merchant seems to make his
benefit of things unto their uttermost. But the Housekeeper has his desires of
riches certain and determinat, for riches are none other then a multitude of
Instruments that appertain unto familiar or public cares, but the
instruments of some arts, are not infinite, either in number or in greatness, for
if they were infinite in number, the Artificer could not know them: for as much
as this word infinite, as touching the infinitive, is not comprehended in our
understanding, unless it be in things that cannot well be handled, managed, or
lifted for their greatness.

And as in every art, the instruments should be proportioned and fit, as well
for him that works, as the thing that shall be wrought withal (for in a
Ship, the Rudder ought to be no less then may suffice to direct his course,
nor greater, then the Mariner can guide, and in grauing or cutting, the
Chizzell should not be so ponderous and heavy, as the Mason may not lift, nor
so light, as he cannot with much a do pierce the out side of the Marble) even
so should riches be proportioned and limited unto the Housekeeper, and the
family that he is charged withal, that he may inherit and possess so much
and no more then shall suffice, not only for his living, but his living well,
according to his estate, condition of time, and customs of the City where he
lives and inhabiteth. And where Crassus said he was not rych, that was not
able to maintain an Army, he happily had reference unto those riches which
are needful for a Prince or Ruler within the City of Rome, which were too
too much and immoderate for any one in Praeneste or in Nola little Towns in
Italy, and happily superfluous for many men in Rome. For to muster and
maintain Armies, becomes Kings, Tyrants, and other absolute Princes, and is
not necessary or fitting for a Citizen, inhabiting a place of liberty, who
indeed ought not to exceed the rest in any such condition, as may interrupt
or spoil that good pro portion, that is requisite and meet in the uniting of
free men. For as the nose upon some man's face, growing by disorder or dysdyet,
more then Nature made it, may become so gross and large in time, as it may be
no more resembled or reputed for a Nose, so a Citizen, of any City
whatsoever, exceeding others in his riches, either miserably gotten, or
increased by wrong, is no more a Citizen be he what or who he will, for
riches are to be considered always in respect of him that does possess them.
Nor can we well prescribe how much they ought to be, but this we may soly and
safely say, that they ought to be apportioned to him that has them, who ought
so much, and no more to increase them, then may be after wards divided and
bequeathed amongst his Children, to live well and ^illy withal. Neither
rests any more for me to say, conserning this natural gain convenient for
a Housekeeper, which may as properly be taken and derived from the Earth,
Herds, and Flocks; as by the trade of merchandise, war, or hunting: wherefore
we may call to mind that there were many Romans called from the Plough and
Carte, to be Magistrates, and mighty (...) in Princes Courts, and afterward
disobed of their Purple, returned to the Plough: But because the Husbandman and
careful housekeeper, should have regard unto his health, not as a Physician,
but as a father of a family, he ought most willingly to apply himself unto
that kind of gain, which most preserves health, wherein he shall also
exercise himself, and see his famine and servant busied, in those exercises
of the body, which not defiling or defacing him, are great helps to health:
whereunto Idleness and super fluous ease, are enemies professed. Let him therefore
love to hunt, and to make more reckoning of those games which are got and
followed with pain and sweat, then those that through deceit, and vnconsorted
with some labor, have been, and yet are used to be gotten.

But sithence we have reasoned of that manner of gain that is natural, it
shall not be unnecessary, that we somewhat manifest the other, which is
unnatural, although it be impertinent to Husbandry and housekeeping. This we
divide into two forms or kinds. The one is called Exchange, the other
Usury, and it is not natural, because it does pervert the proper use,
forasmuch as money was found out, and used (a while) to make equal ye
inequality of things exchangd, and to eltimat and measure prices, not for that
it ought to be exchangd, for of money (as touching the metal) we have no
need, neither receive we any benefit thereof in our private or our civil life,
but in respert of making eue^ inequalities, and justly measuring ye worth and
value of each thing, it is thought both necessary and commodious. When money
then is changed into money, not directed and employed to some other use, it is
used beyond the proper use, and so abused. In which exchange Nature is not
imitated, for as well may exchange that does multiply or accumulat infinite
and excessive prou^ts, be said to have no end, or absolute determination as
Usurie, but Nature always works to a certain set and determinat end, and
to a certain end do all those means and members work, that are ordaind to
be stirrers up of Nature.

I have told you then that Exchange may multiply in profits infinitely, because
Number as touching Number, not aplied to material things, grows to be
infinite, and in exchange is not considered to be otherwise applied. But for thy
better understanding what we say, know that Number is reputed, either according
to the formal or material being. Formal number is a collection of a sum,
not applied to things numbered. Material number, is a summarie collection of
things numbered. Formal number, may infinitely increase, but the Material
cannot multiply so much: for albeit in respect of the partition or division, it
seem that it may multiply in effect, notwithstanding, since division has no
place in that we speak of, we may say, it cannot infinitlie increase, because
things of all kinds that cannot be divided, are of number certain. This
division being thus considered, much more may riches multiply that consist in
bare money, then that which consists in things measured and numbered from
money: for albeit the number of money be not formal, as that which is applied
to Gold, and Silver, more easily may a great quantity of money be heaped up and
gathered together, then any other thing, and so by covetous desire to become
infinite. Yet betwixt Exchange and Usury there is some difference. Exchange may
be retained, not only for the custom it has taken and obtained in many famous
Cities, but for the force of reason yt it seems to bear. For exchange is
used in steed of our transporting and conueighing Corn from place to place,
which being hardly to be done without great discomoditie, and peril, it is
reason that the party that exchaungeth may have some sufficient gain allowed.
Besides the value of money of some Country coigne, being variable and often to
be changd, as well by the Laws and institutions, as for the sundry worth,
weight, and finenes of the Gold and Silver, the Real exchange of money, might
be in some sort reduced unto natural industry, wherewith Usury can never be
acquainted, being an arteficiall gain, a corrupter of a Common wealth, a
disobeyer of the Laws of God, a Rebel and resister of all human orders,
injurious to many, the spoil of those that most uphold it, only profitable
to it self, more infectious Leuit. Pecuniam tuam non dabis fratri tuo ad
vsuram and frugum superabundantia^ non exiges. David. Qui habitabit etc. qui
pecuniam non dederit ad vsuram. Luk Date mutuum nec inde spe^tes.
then the pestilence, and consorted with so many perilous evils, as are hard or
never to be cured. Every or either of which, having not only been condemned
by Aristotle, but utterly inhibited by the old and new Law, who so considers
not, let him read what verdict Dante has given of it in these verses, who to
prove Usury a sin, cyteth a sentence put by Aristotle, in his book De
Phisicis. E'setuben la tua fisica note,
Tu trouerai non dopo molte carte,
Che la'rte vostra quella, quanto pote
Segue; come'l maestro fail discente;
Si che vostra art a Dio quasi e Nipote.
Da questi due; se tu tirechi a mente,
Le Genesi dal principio conuene
Prender sua vita, and auanzar la gente:
E'perche l' vsurier altra via tene
Per se Natura and per la sua seguace
Dispregia, poich'in altro pon la spent
If Aristotle's phisicks thou peruse,
Not turning many leaves thou there shall find
That art does Nature imitate and use
As pupils pleasing of their Tutors mind,
So that our art is Neipce to God by kind.
Of this and that, if thou remember it
In Genesis even God himself does say,
Quod ab initio oportuit
Humanum genus vitam sumere
Et vnum alium excedere
Per artem et naturam. Now because
The Usurers do wander otherwise
Without regard of God or godly laws
Nature and art (her follower) they despise,
For in their Gold their hope beguiled lies.


It is also said by Aristotle, that God is annimal sempiternum and optimum, of
whom both heaven and Nature do depend, which nature is imitated of our art as
much as may be, for art depending upon Nature, she is as it were her Child,
and per consequence Gods Neipce. So that offending Nature we immediately offend
God, and he that offends art offends God touching the hurt or annoyaunce
of Nature, but the Usurer offends Nature, for it is not natural that money
should beget or bring forth money without corruption, since Nature wills that
the corruption of one be the generation of another, and it offends God
because it does not exercise the art according as God commanded the first
man, when he said, in the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread, and it
is not artificial that money should bring forth money, as the Usurers would
have it, which puts the use in the thing. With those verses therefore, me
thinks not only our discourse of natural and not natural gain may be
concluded and determined, but whatsoever else we purposed at first concerning
Husbandry and keeping of a house, which you have now seen how it turns and
returns to the wife, how to the Children, how to the Servant, and how to
the converting and employing, as also the increase of whatsoever substance or
possession, which were indeed those Five especial points whereof we promised
to speak and to entreat perticulerly.

But for it is my chief desire that thou record effectually those things
whereof I have advised thee, and that in so precise a sort as thou hereafter
not forget them, I will bestow them and bequeath thee them in writing, that by
often reading and perusing them, thou may not only learn them but thoroughly
resolve to imitate and practice them: for practice is the end imposed to all
instructions of human life.

This was my Fathers discourse, gathered by him into a little Book, which I so
often red, and studiously observed, as you need not marvel that I have so
perfectly reported and repeated them. Now would I be silent, to the end that
my discourse should not be made in vain, for if any thing be said that in
your opinion may be bettered, let it not I pray seem troublesome unto you,
thereof to certefie me and amend it.

Sir (quoth I) for any thing that I can see, your father has not only well
and learnedly instructed you in all his institutions, but you (it seems) have
exercised them as industriously. This only could I wish, that somewhat more
might be annexed to that which he has uttered, and that perticulerly is this.
Whether household care or household gogernment be all one, if more then one,
then being more then one, whither then they be the knowledge and the labor of
one or more. You say true (quoth he) and herein only failed his discourse,
for the government of private houses and of Princes Courts are different, but
I can tell you why he spoke not of it, because the care of Princes Halles
belongs not to private men.

Trust me Sir (quoth I) you are of swifter understanding and more eloquent
devise then I expected. But since we sound that there is difference in
household governments. It rests that we consider, whether they be discrepant in
form or greatness. Forasmuch as if they only differ in the greatness, then even
as the consideration of the form of a Princes Palace and a poor man's
Cottage, appertains to one and the selfsame Mason, Carpenter or Architect, so
should the care of either houskeeping be one. But thereunto he answered thus,
though I were swift of conceit at first, yet now (I doubt) I shall not be so
prompt to find, or so judicial as to censure that which you propose. Howbeit, I
can tell you this, that if my heart or hap would give me leave to keep a
great yet (private) house, I mean not a little Court, I believe that private
house of mine, should far surpass that Palace for a Prince, which only
differs from the other in the pomp and greatness.

You are in the right (quoth I) for as a Prince is still to be distinguished
from a private man, by form: and as the form of their commandments is
distinguished, so are the governments of Princes and of private men
distinguished, for when it happens that in comparison of number, the household
of a poor Prince is as little as a rich man's family, yet are they to be
governed diversely: nevertheless, if that be true which is approved by
Socrates to Aristophanes In conuiuio Platonis. That to compose or write a
Tragedy and Comedy, be both the work of one, albeit they only differ not
in form, but are opposite and contrary: it should consequently be as true,
that a good Steward knows as well how to govern a Princes household, as a
private family, for the manner and faculty of either is alike: and I have red
in a pamphilet that is dedicated to Aristotle, that their governments or
dispensations of a house, are divided into four parts, Kingly, Lordly, Civil,
and Private, Regia, satrapicia, Ciuilis and priuata, which distinction I
reprove not. For albeit we differ far from those of elder times, yet I see
the governments of those houses of the Uiceroyes of Naples, Sicilie and the
Governor of Mylain, are as corespondent for proportion to those Royal houses
as were of old custom of the Dukes and other noble men: which proportion also
may be found amongst the houses of the Dukes of Reggio, a City in Lomberdy
There is Modone and Modona. Modone a City in Greece. Modona a City in
Italy.
Sauoy, Ferrara and Mantua, and those Governors of Asti, Vercellis, Madona,
Reggio, and Monteferrato. But I cannot see yet, how the governments of a civil
and a private house do differ, unless he call his government Civil, that is
busied and employed in Office, for the honors of a Common wealth, and that
man's private, that is segregat and not called to office, so that wholly he
applies him to his household care. And that this is his distinction may we
gather by the words that he has written. That private government is the
least, and yet rayseth profit of those things which are despised and dispraysed
of the others, which others are to be intended, those civil Governors or
officers, that being vsd and exercised in affairs of more estate, dislike of
many things, which nevertheless are entertaind and praised of private men.
But for it may percase come so to pass, that some of your sons following the
example of their Uncle, may endeavor and apply themselves to serve in Court, I
could wysh that somewhat might be said concerning that so necessary care of
governing a Princes house, but now it is so late, and we have set so long,
that time and good manners will hardly give us leave, albeit somethings
unspoken of might be revived and produced, whereof he shall have time and ease
to learn and to collect enough, part out of Aristotle's Books, and the rest by
his own experience in Court.

Therewithal the Gentleman seeming to be satis-fied with my speeches, arose
and accompanied me unworthy, to the Chamber that the while had been provided
for me, and there in a very soft bed I bequeathed my bones to rest.

Me mea sic tua te Caetera mortis erunt. T. K.

A dairie Book for good huswiues.

Very profitable and pleasant for the making and keeping of white meats.

AT LONDON Printed for Thomas Hacket, and are to be sold at his shop in
Lomberde street, under the sign of the Popes head, 1588.

To all good Huswiues dwelling within the County of South-hamshire,
Bartholomew Dowe, wishes unto them all here in this life, health, wealth, and
prosperity: and hereafter in the life to come joyful and endless felicity.
FOrasmuch as of late, an honest Matron a South-hamshyre Woman, was desirous
to have conference with me being a Suffolk man, to here my mind concerning
making of whitmeate, after the manner usage and fashion of Suffolk where I was
borne, albeit for forty and seven years passed, I have been and still am
inhabiting and resident in this County of South-ham. For that mine aunswers to
her demaundes and questions therein, was so well liked of by them that were
present at that time, and so acceptably taken among them all, that they very
earnestly required me, to reduce all our communication then had between us
into writing, to the end they might here it the oftener, and their neighbors
might also be pertakers thereof as well as they: which at their instant request
I have here taken upon me to do, more homely then seemly to satis-fie
their desires, and also to avoid idleness, which folks in age be sundry times
much given unto. And because also I am unapt to do any good labor or work,
and now none other thing in effect can do but only write, I have written
this simple quire rudely penned, and dedicate the same generally to all good
huswiues in South-hamshyre. Humbly desiring the^ all to bear me good will for
my doing thereof, seeing willingly I will deserve, none other at their hands.
Fully trusting, that the mirth and recreation that they shall take, by the
reading or hearing thereof: shall minister occasion of further profit to
increase amongst them. And to withdraw them from dumpes and sullen fantasies
(being a common disease amongst women) to be the quicker spirited, the better
and the liuelier occupied, and the lustier stomaked in all their business, as
well in whitemeate making, as in all other their huswifelye doings. And thus
wyshing all them to bear with my weakness, and to accept my good will, in this
my rude doing. I beseech almighty God send them here good life and a
joyful ending.

All yours. B. D.
A Dialogue between a South-[hamshyre woman and a Suffolcke man concerning
making of whitmeate.
The Woman. SIR, as I heard of late, ye have had much conference and talk with
some honest women of this Country, concerning the making of Butter and Cheese
after your Country sort: and for that your communication liked them well, by
the report they make thereof, I beseech you I may be so bold to ask you
some questions, concerning the circumstaunces of the same. And first of all I
pray you show me, if ever you used to make Cheese your self, seeing ye seem
so well to be experienced therein.


The Man. Never in my life good wife, I have made any, but I have in my youth
in the Country where I was borne, seen much made: for in the very house or
grange that I was borne in, my Mother and her maids made all the Whitmeate of
seauenscore Kine and odd.


The Woman. The number of Kine was great that you speak of, and therefore I
pray you show me how many maids your mother did then keep to milk them?


The Man. Not above seven maids, for every score of Kine a maid.


The Woman. Then I think they were very long in doing, for eight or nine Kine
is enough for one maid servant to milk in this Country, if they milked so
many Kine every of them: what time came they to Church upon the holy day?


The Man. To the beginning of divine service, as well as they that dwelt near
unto the Church. And yet they had a long mile thither, and soul ways.


The Woman. Then your Mother and her Maids were very earelie or rathe up in
the morning about their business.


The Man. She and her Maids were every day in the year Winter and Summer up
out of their beds, before four of the clock every morning.


The Woman. I perceive by your saying, they be better and earlier rysers in
your Country then they be here. I pray you now show or declare unto me, the
order of the milk houses in your Country. What manner of Presses they use to
press their Cheeses in, their Chernes for Butter, what buckets or pailes they
use to milk in, their Cheese fates to make their Cheeses in, or to put their
Milk a running in, and Trowes to powder and salt their Cheeses in.


The Man. All these things I will show you, as near as I can remember. First
the Milk house (if ye milk many Kine) ought to be made the more large, with
shelues of plankes round about the house, as just as may be to the walls of
the house, of three foot breadth, breast-high, to set your Milk and Cream
upon, in Earthen pannes that be but small, made flat in the bottom, shallow,
and glased within, as high as the Milk shall stand in them. They be best to
set your Milk in. The windows of the Milk-house where ye Milk does stand,
to be made vrrie ample and large, all a long on the North or East side of the
same house, and specially for the Summer time, to the end that the cold air
may take effect in the Milk, for thereby ye shall gather much yt more Cream.
Your Cheese presses that be made to press your Cheeses with a stone or other
weight, be not good, for commonly the Cheeses pressed with them, be more thick
on the one side then on the other, but the best presses for Cheeses be made of
a thick planck, with two pieces of Timber standing upright with long mortesses
in them, with a piece of Timber also brodest in the midst, and narrow at
both ends. And that shall be lifted up and down within the said Mortesses,
with two iron pinnes, and driven with a Mallet and wedges of Timber. In this
kind of press, ye may as well press four or five Cheeses at once, as one.
Your Chernes for Butter ought to be made higher, and broader in the bottom
then ye use to have them in this Country. Your Cherne staff in the lower end
thereof, to have two pieces of seasoned Timber of Ash, fast set on like unto
a Cross, of a hand breadth or more, flat, with two or three holes bored in
the ends of the same two cross pieces. With these manner of Cherne staves,
you shall more easily cherne your Butter, then with your cherne staves made of a
round boorde full of holes, and never have any small chips in your Butter, as
ye may sundry times have with your own fashioned staves: whether ye milk
in buckets or pailes it is no matter so they be cleene kept. Provided always
that ye suffer not your Maids to have their buckets or payles to milk in, to
have a furred coat at Midsommer, for of al the^ that delight in clenlines it
will not be well liked of. Cheese fats that be made in Suffolk, be far
stronger, and much better to all effects then those that be made in this
Country: for although ye Turners here be showed any of those fats made in
Suffolk (as I my self have done) yet undoubtedly they cannot make the like.
The Trowes to salt or powder Cheese in, in Suffolk, be but planckes of a
convenient thicknes, set breast high, that be not past three inches and a half
deep, to salt their Cheeses in.


The Woman. I pray you show me whether the women in your Country, after they
have flit or skymmed their evening Milk in the morning, do heat all the sams
evening Milk over the fire of a measurable heat, or else do they heat part
of the same milk very hot, to the intent that by the heat thereof, the reit
of the evening Milk may have heat enough to be put a running.


The Man. The best way in that point is, to heat all your evening Milk over
the fire somewhat more then lukewarm, and to strain your morrow Milk as
fast as it can be brought in from the Kine and so strained, put them together
a running: for if ye should heat some of the evening milk very hot to give
heat to the rest, ye shall have loss and hinderaunce thereby, for by mean
thereof, ye shall make yt less Cheese, and the Cheese so made will ever after
be bad Cheese, dry and toughe. For note ye this, the hoter the Milk is put a
running, the sooner it will be run, but if it be over hot, the Cheese will
be the worse and the less. And if it be put a running too cold, it will be
much the longer before it come or be full run, and the Cheese so made, though
it be good Cheese, it will ever be white, therefore the maker of the Cheese
must use her discretion therein.


The Woman. Whether do ye think it better to knede the Curdes after they be
run, in a bole or pan, or to break them but in the Cheese fate?


The Man. The best way is to break them very small only in the Cheese fate,
while they be warm, and to use such diligence therein, that none of the
Curdes be pressed into the Cheese fate unbroken small, for if they be, in that
place of the Cheese it will ever be wemmie or faulty. The Curdes being so
well and small broken, press them down often with your hands holden a
cross, until the Cheese fate be more then filled, and highest in the midst
of the fate, and let this be done over a Tub, Couell or Fate, wherinto the
whey may run from the Curdes. When the Curdes be broken into an other
vessel, the chief part of the buttrines or fatness thereof, remains in the
vessel, and so the Cheese by that means much the worse dry and lean meat.
And moreover then that, an other thing by the way, ye must well remember, for
it is well worthy, when the Milk is well run, then break your Curds, and with
a boledish speedily withdraw the whey from the Curdes, and let it run through
a tempse with a bottom of hair, standing upon a Milk Ladder, over the
vessel that is prepared to receive ye whey, and so with all convenient speed
that may be, make your Cheese, and press it without any clothe in the Cheese
fate at the first pressing. For mark well this, after the Curdes as a foresaid
be stirred, if you, or your maid that you do put in trust to make your
Cheese, do then go about other business and leaves the Curdes lying still in
the whey till they be cold before the Cheese be made, which practice is ought
times in use here in South-hamptonshire, of the Curdes so used I do assure
you, ye shall never have good Cheese, albeit the Milk whereof it were made
were never flit or scimmed, for that Cheese so made, will be of this
property, the longer ye keep it, the dryer meat it will be, and especially
in the midst of the Cheese dryest of all, for the moystest part of the Cheese
will be near the rind, or utter part thereof.


The Woman. I like your sayings herein very well, but I pray you if one keep
many Kine, and so has great plenty of Milk, is it not needful to have a
Chimney within the house where the white meat is made.


The Man. It is both needful and also necessary in very deed not only
for the heating of the Milk, but also to have warm water ready to scalde the
milk pa^es, and to wash the Cherne, other vessels and cheese clothes, for
after the Milkpannes in the morning be empty, they must be well scalded;
cleene wiped and so set up. And in the afternoon, before Milk be put in them,
they must be set with cold water a while before.


The woman. How many times suppose ye the Cheeses must be clothed, after
they be put into the press.


The Man. At the least three or four times: and if ye will have your Cheeses
for sale, or for your own Table to seem fine to the eye, ye must then after
the second clothing, clothe the^ afterward with finer clothes, and ye may not
suffer your Cheese to lie long in one clothe vnremooued, for if ye do,
especially in the first or second cloth, your Cheese will be as sweet as a
Child that has lien long be pist in his clothes. And that evil savor so
taken, will never after out of the Cheeses, though ye keep them until they be
very hard.


The woman. I think your sayings herein to be true, but considering that you
said at the first of our conference therein: yt Maid Servant in your
Country could milk so many Kine a piece, morning and evening, contrary to
the order and usage of this Country, I would feign here some part of your
mind how they use themselves therein, to the end our Maids here may do
the like.


The man. As near as I can I will satisfy your request herein. They that
have great dairies, or do keep many Kine to the paile in Suffolk, they
provide them Maids that be of a convenient age and strength, that be lively
and lusty wenches, willing to work, and such as think no pain too dear for
them, where as I see in this Country, some setts young girls and boys to
milk their Kine, that lack strength to do it. And mante others, because they
may get them women Servant the better cheap, or for small wages as it should
seem, they take dame drowsy, and dame slowbacke to their Servant, who use
to sit a milking upon their tails, their legs lying a long upon the ground,
their heads leaning against the flancks of the Kine, and there they catch a
napp while they might have milked diverse of their Kine, and then th^e scant
well waked, and (...) Kine not (...) (...),


The woman. (...) (...) well borne away of you, but as I do hear (...)
Country, they use there to milk the two fore teats of their Kine, and the two
hinder teates together, where as here they do milk the side teates
together, which I and others do take to be as good a way as yours.


The Man. You may according to your fantasy think what ye list therein, but
for true proof thereof, if you cause some of your Kine to be milked after my
Countreie sort hereafter continually, if they then that be so milked; give
not the more Milk, the better milk, and continue milche the longer, then
credit me not hereafter. And furthermore mark, that if your Milk be brought
in from milking, as flat as water in a Bucket, then surely your Maids have
very slacklie and slothfullie milked your Kine, for if the Kine be well
milked as they ought to be, the Milk then will have a great frothe or fobbe
upon it, and that comes of quick and hasty milking when it is done with
force. And it is profitable to have your Kine so milked, for so ye shall have
the thicker Milk and the more Cream.


The woman. Wherefore do ye will the Milk to be set so high from the ground,
as ye did at the beginning speak of.


The Man. For preservation and safe keeping of the Milk and Cream, for if the
pannes with Milk, or pots with Cream, were set upon (or near unto) the
ground, then they were the more ready for every dog and Cat that should
come into the house, and also in some Country, a^ Bedfordshire and the Isle of
Elie for Snakes, that should (...) (...) and consume the same. And principally
it is very fit and, necessary that Milk and Cream be so ordered, set and
placed, as Cattes cannot in any wise come therebie, for the will not only
lap and eat of the Milk and Cream, but when they have full fed thereof,
they will often times snuff: and cast out of their heads blood plentiouslie all
abroad upon the Milk and Cream. And an other thing that much worse is and
more odious, they may some times happen to leave behind them where they feed,
some of the hairs that do grow upon their tongues, which be well nigh as
evil as poison, for whosoever does eat or drink one of those hairs, it will
not tarry in the body, but where it comes forth, it breeds a grievous
and painful sore.


The woman. If Cats have hairs growing upon their tongues, it is more then
ever I heard of before.


The Man. I doubt not but ye will believe your own eyes, for they be too
necessary witnesses to be believed, open you ye mouth of one of them old or
young, and then ye shall well apperceiue them, for they be well nigh as stiff
as bristles, and these hairs once in a year, they cast from them, as some do
hold opinion.


The woman. I will regard Cattes the worse whilst I live, hearing thus much
evil of them, but all this while we have had no talk of making of Butter,
wherein I pray you I may also here some part of your mind.


The Man. As touching that matter, ye must see that ye have plenty of pots to
put your Cream in, so that always it is very apt and necessary that some be
empty, well washed and breathed whiles other be occupied. In Summer time before
you do Cherne, it is meet the Cherne be washed, and set with cold water in
it a good depth. And contrariewise, in Winter being cold weather, to season
your Cherne with hot liquour: and when your Servant is cherning of Butter, he
or she, must still cherne till Butter be come, for if they have cherned by the
space of half an hour or more, and do let it stand still but a very little
while, all their labor before bestowed is lost, and after the Butter is
cherned cause your Cherne to be dilligently washed and set up, leaning upon
the place where the Milk stands, with the bottom upward, to the end it
may take air and breath enough, to cause it to remain dry and sweet. And a
very apt thing it is for her that will make the most of her Kine to skimme her
Milk much part her self, by mean whereof she may judge and fully perceive,
when her Maids do it, whether it be to her hinderaunce or no, and often times
it is good for the Mistres or dame to have an eye to her Kine, whether they be
well milked or no, for sometimes and chiefly upon the Holidaies, the Maids
being disposed to go to dancing or other pastime, they will make more speed
in milking then shall be profitable for the owners of them. And consider that
if the Kine be not well milked and stroked, or some of them left vnmilked, it
is a marring to the Kine, for thereby they will the rather grow dry, and be
the worse milch long time after.


The woman. Yet all this while, I have heard nothing of your Country fashion,
for salting or powdring of Cheese, and drying thereof.


The Man. They lay their Cheeses to be salted in such shallowe Trowes as
before is spoken of, with bryne that comes only of salt melted up to the
middle of the side of yt Cheese if they be thick, the longer etc. When the
Chee^ be (...) out of salt, they must be well washed with warm liquor, then
well wiped and dried, and so laid: upon fair shelues or boordes, and every
day once to turn them, and the Cheeses, and the place where they do lie, to
be well and dry wiped each date, for if through default of not so doing, the
print or form of the Cheese is seen where it did lie: it is a point of
housewifrie that may be amended.


The woman. How is your opinion for Cheese, washed or unwashed, which think ye
best.


The Man. The Cheese washed is fairest in sight, but Cheese unwashed will
continue best, and continue moistest to be spent, and the better to be sold by
weight.


The woman. Now ye have answered me in all these points, I render unto you
right hearty and condign thanks.


The Man. And I likewise thank you good wife of your patience, and when you
hereafter have conference with any your Neighbors of this our former talk: I
pray you report that I have not taken upon me to teach you or others, how ye
should make whitmeate, for it were unseemly that a Man that never made any,
(but has seen and beheld others in doing thereof) should take upon him to
teach women that has most knowledge and experience in that art. I have but
only made unto you rehearsal of the order and fashion how it is used in ye
Countreie where I was borne, to the end that you and others, understanding
both, may use your own minds and discretions therein, for sure I am, old
custom and vsages of things be not easy to be broken.


The woman. For my part I like your talk so well, that I beseech you to make
some rehearsal again thereof concerning this mystery, by mean whereof ye
may call to memory some things yet unspoken of, and thereby also cause me the
better to bear it away.


The Man. I perceive well ye are desirous to have me make a new rehearsal or
recapitulation of my former sayings, which to do, because ye are a woman, who
be never satis-fied, till they have their will and mind fulfilled, I being
one well known, that always heretofore have been of good will to accomplish
women's desires, will now be content also to do as ye have willed me herein.

And first I will say unto you, it is both good and profitable to have your
Kine milked early in the morning, and rathe at night, for then (especially in
Summer time) they shall have time to feed out of the heat of the day, and by
that mean give the more milk. If your Kine be milked far from home, cause
then the milk to be brought home in vessels between two felkes, covered with
a fair Lynnen cloth twice double, and cheefely in the morning, to the intent
that thereby the milk may remain warm enough to be put a running with the
evening Milk made warm over the fire for that purpose. And if you send far
for your Kine to be milked at home, see in any case that they be quietly
brought home, for if they should be hastily driven, you shall have thereby
much the less milk. Your milking Maids (as I said) must be strong, quick,
and in all their doings clenlie. But mark ye one thing, that sometimes in
Summer season, by occasion of vehement heat, or by force of much thundering and
lightning, or by noise of great Gunnes the drink in your house may suddenly
change and grow ^ger, and then your sweet Milk with that sower Ale or Bear,
will make so pleasant a drink, called of some a sillibub, or a posset under
the Cow, that if it be not seen unto, ye shall find thereby, that your
Cheeses be not so well filled after that as they were before, nor so much
Cream gathered. Your pailes or buckets to milk in, ought to be kept clean
and sweet as before, for otherwise they will cause the Milk to turn when it
comes to the fire. If the inner side of the^ be colloured like a Gray Friars
or a Millers coat, I fear the Maids will be taken for (...), although their
Mistres or dame, will take occasion to excuse themselves, because they lay in
bed in the morning till their Maids had milked, where as if she had been a
fine and a thriuing huswife withal, she might while her Maids were in
milking, have flit or skymmed all her Milk pans of the evening Milk, there
lies much profit therein if she could find the way to practice it. Then use
your Milk thus, put the evening Milk skimmed and warmed over the fire, and the
morrow milk new milked together, and so run them together, then make your
Cheese as aforesaid, press it well, and clothe it often enough, scalde your
Milk pannes well, then dry them and set them up an edge. When ye change
your Cheese in pressing thereof out of one cloth into an other, if there happen
some part of the edges of ye Cheese to hang out of the sides of the same (as
commonly being well filled in the fate it will do) you must cut that away,
paring it even by the edges thereof, and cut that in small pieces for your
young Chickens. A better meat ye can not have to feed them with, and a more
apt place then your Cheese house is to keep them in, ye cannot have. But then
ye must remember to put your Hen in a Coope, or for defaulte thereof, to tie
her by the leg, in such place of the house as ye shall think meet for her,
laying near unto her a board of a foot and more in breadth, whereupon ye may
be well assured the Hen will always brood her Chickens rather then upon the
ground. And if folk hastily chance to come into the house where the
Chickens be abroode in the house, although there were in every corner of the
house a Hen tied that has Chickens, they will with all speed every of them
run for succor to their own dam, where she stands tied, as well as a
Soldier in the field will repair to his Captain in time of need. The next
morning after your Cheese is made, put them in brine as before is mentioned,
and being salted enough, wash them with whore liquor out of salt, wipe them
dry, and lay them on fair shelues or boordes, and every day turn them,
wiping the^ and the place where they lay, for as I said before, if the Cheese
lie so long unturned, that the form or print of the Cheese remains in the
boordes where it did lie, it is much discomendable, and of all folks
delighting in clenlines to be disliked. Put no Cheeses into any racks before
they be hard. When ye are disposed to make Butter, cause your Cherne
diligently to be prepared as before is spoken of, your Butter being come take
it out of the Cherne, into a fair old smoothe Bole, and therein wash it from
ye Butter whey, otherwise called Cherne milk, which being perfectly done,
put the Butter all abroad in the Bole, and with a Knife garse it every way,
drawing ever the edge of the Knife toward you, that done, then with your
forefinger strike the most part of the Butter from the side of ye Knife, then
between your forefinger and your thombe strike all the Butter from the edge of
the Knife, and hold that up between you and the light, and ye shall see
therein both Lint and hairs, though the Cream were never so well strained
into the Cherne, although this be not here in use, she that leaves it
undone, albeit to be very fine and clenly she seems herself, lint and
hairs will be in her Butter. Then salt your Butter, and weigh it, and note if
your Maids had as much Butter of like time gathered before.

And thus now I finish and make an end, saving one thing more yet I call to
mind, and that is, if your milking Maids be disposed to sing in time of their
milking, some Cow will take such a delight therein, that afterward when a
Maid comes to milk her and does not sing, she will not stand to be milked,
and when Maids come to milk Kine more gailiar apparelled, then they be
accustomed to milk in, the Kine will be very dangerous to stand to be
milked of them. And at a Copy hold here in South-hamshire of mine, I have had
also this experience, that one of my Kine has had such a mind and fantasy to
one of my Maids, that in her presence the Cow would never stand to be milked
of any other but of her only. And thus now I end and take my leave of you.


The woman. And I eftsoons render unto you condign thanks for all your
gentle communication, and rehearsal of your former sayings.


The Man. Because the keeping of so great a number of milch Kine in one ground
or pasture, as before is spoken of, shall not be thought to be fained: it was
at a Grange in Suffolk, belonging then to an Abbie of white Monks, called
Sibeton Abbie, five miles from Donwiche, and four miles from Framingham
Castle.


Hereafter follows a saying of her that was the dairie wife, and made the
whitemeat many years together of all the Kine aforesaid, in commendation of
early rising.

Arise earelie.
Serve God devoutly.
Then to thy work busily.
To thy meat joyfully.
To thy bed merrily.
And though thou fare poorly,
And thy lodging homely.
Yet thank God highly.
Ka. Dowe.

An other saying concerning the same.

To rise betimes, thy self to recreate
To look well to thine own, and to keep a sober estate
Long ere thou eatest, and not to sup late,
To lie high with thy head, and to sleep moderate
Makethman rich, long life and fortunate.
FINIS.

