A BRIEF TREATISE OF THE USE OF THE Globe Celestial and Terrestrial:

WHEREIN IS SET DOWN the principles of the Mathematics, fit for all
travelers, Nauigators, and all others that do love the knowledge of the same
Art.

By R. T.

AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for Thomas Man. 1616.

THE PREFACE TO the Reader.
I Do here present thee (gentle Reader) with a brief collection of the use of
the Globe, which may serve for an introduction to young Students in the
Mathematikes, requiring thee to accept thereof: for I doubt not it will be very
good for the furtherance of travelers in the Art of Navigations: and to all
others that are desirous of the knowledge of the beautiful frame of the
celestial Orbs, with their quantities, distances, courses, and marvelous
motions of the Globes of the Sun, Moon, Planets and fixed stars. If
therefore this my labor shall be gratefully accepted, as I doubt not but it
shall, if thou please justly to censure thereof: I shall be encouraged
hereafter to set forth a work of more worth: so I refer my self to your
favorable judgments and courtesies, committing thee to the sacred tuition of
him that rules all. Farewell.

Thine in all affection, R. T.

INTRODVCTION TO Astronomy.
Definitions of the Globe.
THE Globe is a perfect round body, contained under one plain: in the middle
thereof there is a point called the Ce^ter, from whence all lines drawn to the
outside are of like length, and called Semidiameters.

The axes of the Globe is a diameter, about which it moves; and the ends
thereof are called the poles of the Globe.

In this respect the frame of the heavens is called the Globe of the heavens,
and the earth his Center.

The axes is a line imagined, passing by the Center of the earth to the
heavens, and the ends thereof is called the poles, which are two points
imagined in the heavens, whereof the one is called the North pole, and the
other the South pole.

Of the Circles of the Globe.
Circles of the Globe are certain imaginary lines, and are termed either
lesser, or greater Circles.

Greater Circles are such as divides the Globe into two equal parts.

Lesser are such as divide the Globe into unequal parts.

Greater Circles of the Globe in common account are six in number, viz.

The
Horizon. Meridian. Equinoctial. Zodiake. Two Collures.
Lesser Circles in common account are four in number, viz.

The
Two Tropicks. Two poler Circles.
The Horizon divides that part of the heavens we do see, from that part we
see not, and is that Circle, where standing in a plain field, and looking
about, you would imagine the earth and heavens do meet together, and cannot
be perfectly discerned but at sea.

The axes of the Horizon, is an imagined line, passing by the Center of the
earth to the heavens, and the ends thereof, are called the poles Zenith and
Nadir.

The Zenith is the point direct over our heads, and the Nadir direct under our
feet.

As a man moves himself any way, so is altered the Horizon.

The Meridian cutteth the Horizon at right sphericall angles, and passes by
the poles of heaven, and by the Zenith and Nadir, and is that Circle wherein
the is at noone, and at midnight: it divides the Globe into two equal parts
by East and West, whose axes is a line passing by the Center of the earth to
the heavens, and the ends thereof the poles, which are the two points of the
intersection of the East and West.

Any many moving directly North and South, keeps the same Meridian: but going
East or West, he alters the same.

The Equinoctial cutteth the Meridian at right sphericall angles, and lies
equidistant betwixt each poles, and divides the Globe into two equal parts,
by North and South parts, to which Circle when the comes under it, it makes
the day and night of like length to all people in the world, except under the
poles, and the comes under this Circle two days in the year, viz. the 11.
of March, and on the 14. of September.

The axes and poles whereof are the axes and poles of heaven.

The Zodiac is a great Circle, having in breadth twelve degrees, which breadth
is limited for the wandering of planets, upon which Circle are the twelve signs
placed, which are twelve Constellations.

A Constellation is any certain number of stars, gathered together into one
form by the ancient Astronomers, who have given them names, whereby they are
known to all Christendom: which signs have certain characters given unto
them, and are these following.

1 March. 2 April. 3 May. 4 June. 5 July. 6 August.
Northen signs.
1 Aries. 2 Taurus. 3 Gemini. 4 Cancer. 5 Leo. 6 Virgo.
7 September. 8 October. 9 November. 10 December. 11 January. 12 February.
Southern signs.
7 Libra. 8 Scorpio. 9 Sagittarius. 10 Capricornus 11 Aquarius 12 Pisces.
The first six are called Northen signs, for that they are placed upon the
North side of the equinoctial; and the last six are called Southern signs,
for that they are placed upon the South side of the equinoctial.

In the middle of the Zodiac is a line called the ecliptic, from which line
the Center of the never swarueth, and this line cutteth the equinoctial at
oblique angles, and swarueth from it 23 degrees 30 minutes: which line when the
and are in a diameter, that is, opposite, then is the eclipsed, that is,
darkened by the shadow of the earth, the earth being betwixt the and the.

And when the and are both under the line in a semidiamiter, then is the
eclipsed, the being interposed betwixt our sight and the: this line eclipticke
is described upon the Globe for the whole Zodiac, whose axe is a line passing
by the Center of the earth to the heavens, and the ends thereof are his poles,
which are two points so far distant from the poles of the world, as the his
greatest distance from the equinoctial, viz. 23 degrees 30 min.

The two Collures are two meridians cutting the equinoctial, and the
eclipticke into four equal parts, the one passing by the first point of and,
and is called the equinoctial Collure. The other passing by the first point of
and, and is called the solstitiall Collure: these two Circles do divide the
year in four equal parts, viz. Springtime, Summer, Harvest, and Winter.

Springtime.
1 2 3
Summer.
4 5 6
Harvest.
7 8 9
Winter.
10 11 12
The meaning whereof is thus: From that time the enters into, till it enter
into, is called Springtime, and so of the rest, so that it is the passage of
the in the signs, that causes the alteration of season, and the passes
thoroughout the whole signs in one year, viz. in 365 days and 6 hours near.

Of the lesser Circle.
THe Tropic of is a Circle parallel to the equinoctial 23 degrees 30 min.
distant from it, Northward, and is that Circle under which the Center of the
makes her diagonall arc, when she is in the first point of, which is to us
that have Northen Latitude, the longest day in the year being the 12 or 13 of
June.

The Tropic of is a Circle parallel to the equinoctial, so far to the
Southward, as the Tropic of is Northward, viz. 23 degrees 30 min. and is that
Circle under which the Center of the makes her diagonall arc, when she is in
the first point of, which to us that have Northen Latitude, is the shortest day
in winter, viz. the 12. or 13. of December. These two Circles are termed the
limit of the progress: for between these two Circles the has his continual
course, and never exceeds beyond any of them.

The Circle articke is a Circle parallel to the equinoctial, so far distant
from the North pole, as the tropicke of Cancer is from the equinoctial, viz.
23. degr. 30. min.

The Circle antarticke is a Circle parallel to the equinoctial so far
distant from the South pole, as the tropic of is from the equinoctial, viz.
23. degr. 30. min.

Now you must understand, there is but one Equinoctial, one Zodiac, one
Ecliptic, two Collures.

But there are diverse Meridians, al which meet in the two poles of the world,
and cut the equinoctial at right angles, and are so many in number as there
can be points imagined in the equinoctial.

There are diverse Horizons: for the Horizon alters to any man, according as
he moves himself from his place of being.

There are diverse Parallels, so called for that they are parallel to the
equinoctial, and are so many in number, as there can be points imagined in the
Meridian.

Besides these Circles, before mentioned, there are four other kind of
Circles of great use, viz. Azimoth and Almicanthars, Circles of Longitude and
Latitude.

Azimoths are great Circles, and meet all in the Zenith, and Nadir, and cut
the Horizon at right angles, and are numbered in the Horizon.

Almicanthars are lesser Circles parallel to the Horizon, as the parallels are
to the equinoctial, and are numbered from the Horizon toward the Zenith.

Circles of Longitude are great Circles, meeting all in the poles of the
Eclipticke, and cut the Eclipticke at right angles, and are numbered in the
Ecliptic.

Circles of Latitude are lesser Circles parallel to the Ecliptic, as the
parallels are to the equinoctial, and are numbered from the Eclipticke, to the
poles of the Eclipticke.

Every Circle of the Globe is imagined to be divided into 360 degrees, and
every degree into 60. minutes, every minute into 60 seconds, and so tell the
tenth for the precisenes, for that a degree in the heavens is a large space.

In every great Circle the degrees are equal one to another.

In every lesser Circle they are equal in the same Circle, but unequal to
those of another Circle, according as they grow nearer the poles.

There belongs to the furnishing of a Globe two other things, that is, an
hour Circle, with Index and a quadrant of Altitude.

The hour Circle is of brass, divided into 24. hours by twice 12, and is to
be placed upon the Meridian, upon the pole elevated parallel to the
equinoctial.

The Index is a little ruler to be put upon the pole.

The quadrant of Altitude is a bowed ruler of brass, divided into 60. degrees,
equal to the degrees of the Globe, and has a joint to fasten the same upon the
Meridian, and is always to be placed upon the Zenith.

For the practice of Astronomy and Cosmographie, there are two Globes made,
the one of the Heavens, which is called the Celestial globe, and the other of
the Earth, which is called the Terrestrial globe.

Upon the Celestial Globe are pictured all the stars upon the Conuexitie
thereof, as we behold them in the heavens, in the Concauitie there of in form
and distance.

Upon the Globe of the earth is set sea and land, making one perfect body, all
the known parts being laid down in form, proportion, and distance by scale,
according to the proportion of the earth.

Of the superficies of the Celestial Globe.
TO the intent that the knowledge of stars might be brought in rule and
memory of men, therefore the ancient Astronomers gathered them together into
certain constellations, and gave them names, whereby they are known unto all
the world, yt have the knowledge of letters.

A Constellation is a certain number of stars gathered together in one
form, and so retain their names, whereby they are particularly known, and
are in number, according to the ancient account, 48. and are divided into three
parts, viz.

Northen Zodiake Southern
Constellations
21 12 15
Besides these there are 120. stars that are exempt out of all the
Constellations, so that the number of stars set upon the Globe are 1025, and
diverse of them have proper names, which I here omit.

You must understand that all the stars in heaven are not numbered, nor
cannot, for that diverse of them are so small, but these 2025 are the
principallest amongst them, and all that have yet ever been accounted of.

You must understand, that of these stars some are greater then other, and
(...) distinguished in six sorts of b^gnesses, and their measures is the
earth, and their proportions are thus delivered, viz.

A star of the first bigness is 107. times bigger then the earth.

A star of the second bigness is 90. times the globe of the earth.

A star of the third bigness is 72 times the globe of the earth.

A star of the fourth bigness is 54 times the globe of the earth.

A star of the fifth bigness is 36 times the globe of the earth.

A star of the sixth bigness is 18 times the globe of the earth.

1 15 2 45 Stars magnitude, 3 and the quantity of each magnitude. 208 4 474 In
all 1025 5 427 6 49 Cloudie. 5 Obscure. 9 Parnassus fair. 3

Upon each Globe there is a table set down in what form every star of any
bigness is made, whereby you may readily know any star in any Constellation of
what bigness it is.

And thus much in brief for the superficies of the Globe of the Heavens.

have Sotherne Latitude that dwell on the South side of the equinoctial.

The earth is divided into four parts, viz.
Europa. Asia. Africa. America.
Europe is bounded from Asia by the midland sea, and Mary mauritane, by the
marches called Palus meotis, and by the river Tanis and Dwiana.

The Provinces are these.
1 Germany. 2 Italy. 3 France. 4 Spain. 5 Denmark. 6 Norway. 7 Swedeland. 8
Moscouia. 9 Polonia. 10 Hungaria. 11 Clauonia and 12 Grecia.
The principal Islands.
1 England. 2 Scotland. 3 Ireland. 4 Sicilia. 5 Candia. 6 Corsica. 7 Sardigna.
8 Negroponte.
Asia is bounded from Europe by the river Tanis and Dwiana, from Afrieke by the
narrow neck of Land betwixt the red sea, and the mid-land sea.

The Provinces are
China. Persia. Part of Moscouia, and Tartaria.
In this part of the world was Paradise and the Land of promise.

Africa is bounded with the mid-land sea and the red sea.

Provinces.
1 Egypt. 2 Barbaria. 3 Aethiopia. 4 Nubia. 5 Abasmies. 6 A^onomotopa.
Islands.
1 Madagascat, or S. Lorreny^ 2 S. Thome. 3 Insule de Capo verde. 4 Insule de
Canaria. 5 Insule de Madera.
America is wholly bounded by the Sea, and the straight of Magellanus, and
consists in two parts, viz.

Mexicana. Pe^^ana.
FIRST PROPOSITION OF the Celestial Globe. The day of the month being given,
to find the place of the.
Upon the Horizon of the Globe is graduated the theoricke of the, that is,
there is placed the month, and their days, the signs and their degrees.
Therefore find the day of the month, and right against the same you shall
find the sign and degree that the possesses.

Proposition 2. The place of the being given, to find the day of the month.
Find the place of the in the Horizon, and against the same you shall find
the day of the month.

Proposition 3. The place of the being given, to find the Declination.
BRing the place of the to the Meridian of the Globe, and the portion of the
Meridian included betwixt the place of the and the equinoctial, shows the
declination.

Proposition 4. The place of the and the Meridian height of the being given, to
find the height of the Pole.
BRing the place of the to the Meridian of the Globe, and from that point
account downwards to the Horizon the height of the, and let the ends there of
end in the Horizon: then in the opposite part, you shall find cut on the
Meridian the height of the Pole, that is, the portion of the Meridian included
betwixt the Pole and Horizon, shows the height of the Pole.

Proposition 5. To rectify the Globe fit for use, the elevation of the Pole
being known.
SEt the poles answerable to the poles of Heaven.

Proposition 6. To rectify the quadrant of altitude.
SEt the joint thereof upon the Meridian so far distant from the
equinoctial, as the poles is eliuated above the Horizon, that is, place the
joint in the Zenith.

Proposition 7. To rectify the Index of the hour Circle, for any day
appointed.
BRing the place of the to the Meridian of the Globe, and then put the Index
upon 12 of the clock, or upon that 12, which is uppermost from the Horizon.

Proposition 8. The elevation of the Pole and place of the being given, to
find the Meridian, height of the.
THe Globe rectified, bring the place of the to the meridian, and the degrees
from the place of the to the Horizon, shows the demand.

Proposition 9. The elevation of the Pole and place of the being given, to find
the hour of the rising.
THe Globe and Index of the hour circle being rectified, bring the place of
the to the East side of the Horizon, and the Index of the hour circle shows
the hour of the rising.

Proposition 10. The elevation of the Pole and place of the being given, to
find the hour of the setting.
THe Globe and Index of the hour circle being rectified, bring the place of
the ^ ^o the West side of the Globe, and the Index of the hour circle shows
the hour of the setting.

Proposition 11. The elevation of the Pole and place of the being given, to
find the length of the day.
Find the hour of setting by the last proposition, and double that time, so
have you the length of the day.

Proposition 12. The elevation of the Pole and place of the being given, to
find the Amplitude.
THe Globe rectified, bring the place of the to the Horizon, and the portion of
the Horizon included betwixt the place of the, and the point of East or West,
shows the amplitude.

Proposition 13. The place of the and Amplitude being given, to find the
height of the Pole.
TVrne the Globe and move the Meridian until you have fitted the place of the
in the point of the Amplitude, and then the pole of the Globe shows the
height of the pole, that is, the place included betwixt the pole of the Globe
and the Horizon, shows in the Meridian the height thereof.

Proposition 14. The place of the being given, to find the right ascension
thereof.
BRing the place of the to the Meridian, and the degree cut by the Meridian in
the Equinoctial, shows the right Ascension.

Proposition 15. The elevation of the Pole and place of the being given, to
find the crooked Ascension.
THe Globe rectified, bring the place of the to the East side of the Globe, and
the degree cut by the Horizon in the equinoctial, shows ye crooked Ascension.

Proposition 16. To find the difference of Ascension.
FIrst find the right, and then the crooked Ascension: then take the less
from the greater, and that rest shows the difference of Ascension, except
that remainer do exceed 180 degrees, and then that rest taken from 360 degrees,
shows the difference of Ascension.

Proposition 17. By the difference of Ascension, to find the length of the day.
DOuble the difference of Ascension, and reduce that into time, by allowing 15
(...) turn the Globe, until the place of the touch the edge of the quadrant,
then the Index of the hour Circle shows the hour, and the degree cut on the
quadrant of altitude, shows the height of the at that time.

Proposition 22. The hour of the day being given, to find the Azminth of the.
ALL things rectified, turn the Index to the hour: then bring the quadrant of
Altitude on the place of the, and the end thereof in the Horizon shows the
Azminth.

OF THE STARS.
Proposition 1. To find the Declination of any Star.
Work by the Star, as you did by the in the 3. Proposition, viz. An
example: Arcturus in Boots legs brought to the Meridian of the Globe, the
portion of the Meridian betwixt the place and the equinoctial, shows his
declination to be Northern.

Proposition 2. The meridian height of any star being given, to find the
height of the Pole.
Work by the star, as you did by the in the 4. Proposition, viz. Arcturus
meridional height supposed to be given 60 degr. then the height of the Pole
opposite is found to be 52 degrees.

Proposition 3. To find the hour of rising of any star.
AL things rectified, work by the star, as by the in the 9. Proposition: for
to know at any time the rising of Arcturus, or any other*, you must know in
what sign the is. As for example: The rising in the 19 degree of, which being
brought under the fixed Meridian, and then the Globe and Index rectified,
Arcturns is then found to rise at 6 hours, and 30 minutes in the morning, and
sets in the evening at hour 10. 30 minutes.

Proposition 4. To find the hour of any star setting.
AL things rectified, work by the star, as by the in the 10 Proposition, or
precedent demonstration.

Proposition 5. To find the time of any star above the earth.
FIrst find the hour of rising, and then the hour of setting: the difference
of which time is the thing required.

Example.
Arcturus is found by the former Proposition to rise at hour 6. 30, which is
5. 30 before 12, and he sets at 10. 30: both which times added together,
makes 16 hours, and so is Arcturus found to be 16 hours above the earth.

Proposition 6. To find the amplitude of any star.
Work as by the in the 12 Proposition. Example: Arcturus amplitude is found
then, when he is brought to the Horizon; in the side is 37 degrees of Amplitude.

Proposition 7. The amplitude of any star being given, to find the height of
the Pole.
Work by the * as by the in the 13 Proposition. Example: Arcturus amplitude
being given, 37 degrees; the Pole of heaven is found to be 52 degr. above the
Horizon elevated.

Proposition 8. To find the right Ascension of any star.
Work by the star, as by the Sun in the 14 Prop. Example: Bring Arcturus to
the Meridian, and the point in the equinoctial being then under the Meridian,
shows the right Ascension to be 209 degrees.

Proposition 9. To find the crooked Ascension of any star.
Work by the star, as you did by the Sun in the 15 Proposition. Example:
The place of Arcturus being brought to the Horizon, the degrees of the
equinoctial against the Horizon, do prove his crooked Ascension to be 178
degrees.

Proposition 10. To find the Latitude of any star.
PVt the center of the Quadrant of Altitude, being taken from the Meridian,
upon the pole of the eclipticke, viz. Arcturus Latitude is to be measured from
the pole eclipticke with the Quadrant of altitude, and is found to be 31 degr.
30 min. and his Longitude is in 19 degrees of, to be reckoned with the quadrant
of altitude, being brought from the pole eclipticke, to the eclipticke or
zodiac, passing right on the place of Arcturus.

Compostella in Galicia is by sundry matters found to be in the 43 parallel,
which is in Latitude 43 degrees Northward, and in the 11 meridian 30 minutes,
which is in Longitude 11 degr..

Circles of
Latitude or Altitude, begins from the equinoctial by parallels Northward
or Southwards, to be reckoned to 90 degrees. Longitude to be reckoned by
Meridians numbered in the equinoctial, which is that meridian passing between
the equinoctial and the Isles of the Canaries, and are numbered into the East
round about ye globe, viz. to 360 degrees.
One hour contains 15 degrees or 60 minutes, and 4 of those minutes contain
one degree: therefore dividing still your number of minutes by 4, and the
quotient shall be degrees.

Example.
Twelve minutes of an hour give three degrees of Longitude, which is 12 min.
so that every minute of an hours time is part of one degree in Longitude, as
is proved by the work following.

Here follows the 11 Proposition concerning the Stars.
Two stars seen in the Horizon to rise or to set at one time, thereby to
find the height of the Pole. Example.
THe two stars rising together, the one is the first star in Orions girdle,
and the other * is that which is in Pegasus nose: therefore turn the Globe
until you fit the said two stars equal with the Horizon in the East: then
shall the portion, betwixt the North pole and that Horizon, teach you the poles
height to be in 53. degrees.

Proposition 12. The place of the and the length of the day being given, to
find the height of the Pole.
THe place of the given is in 17 degr. of, and the length of the day given, is
11 hours. Therefore first find out the right ascension of the, then number
from that place so many meridians, as do contain the half length of the day
given, and let the end of those degrees rest under the fixed meridian: then
move the meridian of the Globe, until you fit the place of the in the Horizon,
and then shall you find upon the meridian the just height of the Pole. For
example.

The being in 17. degrees of, her right ascension is found to be 195 degrees,
the days length given is 11: therefore take the one half, that is 5 hours:
which time reduced into degrees, facit 82 degrees 30 min. the which subtracted
out of the ascension 195, there rest 112 degr. 30 min. which number find out
upon the equinoctial, and bring it to the fixed meridian, and there keep the
same, until by moving the meridian you do bring the 17 degree of equal with
the Horizon: that done, then will the height of the Pole be found elevated just
51 degrees.

Proposition 13. The length of the day and amplitude of the being given, to
find the height of the Pole, and the declination.
THe length of the day given, is eleven hours. The amplitude of the given, is
10 degrees. Therefore number from the first meridian Westward, those degrees
that have the length of the given day, reduced in degrees do yield, and let
the end of those degrees begin in the equinoctial rest under the fixed
meridian: then move the globe until you have fitted ye first meridian to cut
in the amplitude given, and then shall the meridian of the Globe show the just
height of the Pole. Example.

The length of ye day given, is 11 hours, whose half is 5, the same reduced
into degrees, facit 28 degr. 30 min. the which taken out of 360 degrees, rest
277 degr. 30 min. the latter point whereof fix under the fixed meridian, there
holding the same, until by moving of the fixed meridian, you can bring the
given amplitude on the East side to fit upon the first point of the meridian:
which done, then shall you find the Pole elevated 51 degrees above the Horizon.

PROPOSITIONS THAT ARE resolved upon the Terrestrial Globe. That all
Propositions concerning the, may as well be resolved upon the Terrestrial as
the Celestial Globe.
Proposition 1. To find the Latitude of any place.
BRing the place, whose Latitude is required, to the meridian of the Globe, and
the portion of the meridian included between that place and the equinoctial,
shows the Latitude.

And so are the following places in Latitude Northward.
London 51. d. 30. m. Hamborough. 54. Amsterdam 52. full. Antwerpe. 51. scarce.
Bolloigne. 48. 30. Paris. 48. 30. Lions. 46. Bordeaux. 43. 40. S. Ander. 42.
30. The Groyne. 43. Lisborne. 39. 30. Seuill. 37. 30. Cape-Martin 39. 40.
Genoa. 45. Roma. 42. Naples. 41 Palermo. 37. 30. Venice. 46. Ragusi. 42.
Ciprus. 37. 15. Rhodus, 38. Jerusalem. 34. 40. Teneriffe. 28. 30. Capo-blanco.
20. Isla S. Helena. 16. 40. Southward. Nombre de dios. 9. Northward. Panama. 8.
Capodeuela. 10. Hauana. 22. San Domingo. 17. 30. Isle Icaris. 66. Fane Insul^.
64. 30. Islandie. 67. 30. Gibraltare. 35.
Proposition 2. To find the Longitude of any place.
BRing the place appointed to the meridian of the Globe, and the degrees cut by
the meridian in the equinoctial, shows the Longitude.

And so are the places here under found in longitude, viz.

London. 20. 30. longitude. Hamborough. 33. 30. Antwerpe 26. 30. Paris. 24.
Bordeaux. 22. S. Ander. 18. 30. The Groyne. 13. Lisbona. 13. Seuill. 17.
degrees. Genoa. 35. Roma. 37. Venice. 40. Palermo. 37. 30. Jerusalem. 69. San
Domingo in the West Indies. 310. Teneriffe. 3. degr. 30. Palona. 1. degr.
longitude.
Proposition 3. To find the difference between any two places upon the Globe.
TAke the distance with a pair of compasses, and apply the same to the
equinoctial, accounting for every degree 60 miles, or 20 leagues, or according
to that country wherein you are.

And so are the distances between

London and
Jerusalem 39. facit 795. leagues. Antwerpe 3. 30. facit 70. Paris. 4. 20.
facit 86.. Venice 13. 40. facit 273.. Bordeaux 8. 00. facit 170. Lisbona 13..
facit 273. Seuill 14.. facit 295. Roma 16.. facit 330 leagues. Teneriffe 27.
00. facit 540. Terra noua 28. 00. facit 560.
Proposition 4. The Latitude and Longitude of any place being given, to find
the same upon the Globe.
BRing the Latitude of that place to the Meridian of the Globe, and under the
Meridian in the Latitude, shall the place required be found.

By the first and second Proposition is this Proposition resolved.

Proposition 5. To find the Antipodes to any place.
BRing the place appointed to the Meridian, and note the Latitude: then in the
opposite degree of Latitude under the Meridian, you shall find the point of
Antipodes.

And after this sort are those Antipodes to London, that dwell 51 degrees
Latitude, and in 198 degrees Longitude in the South-maine.

And to Seuill, those that dwell in 37 degrees, 30 min. Latitude, and 196 degr.
Longitude, are Antipodes.

And to Lisbone, those that dwell in 39 degr. 30 min. Latitude, and 192 degrees.
Longitude, are Antipodes.

And to Antwerpe, those that dwell in 51 degr. Latitude, and 195 degrees. Longitude
in the said South-maine.

The people dwelling under the North and South pole, and under the Eclipticke
poles, are Antipodes the one to the other.

Those of Cusco in America, are Antipodes to those of Narsinga in East India.

Those of Lyma and Calicut, are Antipodes to each other.

The Insulanes of Serrana and Iona, are Antipodes to each other.

Those of Xalisco, Colinia, Guatatlan, Petratlan, Guaxaca, etc. are Antipodes,
to the Insulanes of S. Laurence.

Those of Malaca are Antipodes to that people dwelling in the province of
Omagua.

Proposition 6. To find the difference of time between any two places.
BRing the Eastermost place to the Meridian, and rectify the Index: then bring
the second place also to the Meridian, and mark where the Index cuts, it
shows the hour at that second place, when it is noone at the first. Or to
do this more precisely, find the difference of the Longitude betwixt these
two places: which remainder reduce into time, by allowing 15 degr. for an
hour, and the difference is found.

Proposition 7. To find the difference of the longest day between any two
places.
Find the length of the day at each place, by the Proposition before taught,
and the difference between them is found by their several lengths.

First it is to be noted, in Northen Latitude the longest day of the year is,
when the is in the first point of, and therefore according to that place is the
longest days of several places here under set down, the which precisely have
been calculated, by the difference of Ascension, that the made at one same time
in several places.

London lying in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 m. and the place of the taken in
the first degree of, had right Ascension 90 degrees, and crooked Ascension 58
degr.

Lisbona Latitude 39. 30, makes 10 degr. difference of Ascension: which
doubled, facit 40 degr. those reduced into time, facit 2 hours 40 min. those
added to 12, facit 14 hours, 40 min. for the longest day.

Genoa Latitude 45 degrees, the right Ascension is 90 degrees, the crooked 68,
(...) is always of 12 hours long, but winter or summer the declineth North or
Southward.

Capo de vela in the West Indies in 12 degrees of Latitude, at the same time
when the is in the first degree of, has 90 degrees right Ascension, and
crooked 85 diff. is 5, which doubled is 10 min. which reduced make 40 min. of
time, which added to 12 hours, shows their longest day to be 12 hours, 40
min.

Hauana at the same time differs the in Ascension 9 degr. 30 minutes, double
makes 19, which is time one hour, 16 min. which added to 12, makes 13 hours,
16 min. for their longest day.

San Domingo Island makes the 7 degrees for difference of Ascension: which
doubled, makes 15: is one hour time, so is their longest day 13 hours.

Fair Island in 64 degrees. of Latitude the has at the same time 90 degrees. right
Ascension, crooked 30, rest 60 for difference thereof, which doubled, facit 120
degrees, which makes time 8 hours, those added to 12 hours, shows that the
longest day there is 20 hours.

At Icaria Island in 66 degrees Latitude, the being in the first degree of, has
90 degr. right Ascentio^, crooked 20, which difference is 70: those doubled,
makes 140 degr. which is 9 hours, 20 m. of time, so is their longest day of
the year 21 h. 20 minutes.

Island in 67 degr. Latitude on the same time has crooked Ascension 8 degrees.
which taken from 90, differs 82 degrees, which doubled, are 164 degr. which
reduced into time, do give 10 hours, 56 min. and those added to the
equinoctial day, facit 22 h. 56 min. for the longest day in the year.

These differences of Ascension is more precisely found by proiecting the
figures, and then by scale and Compass, and yet more precisely by
Arithmeticall calculation, by which the said difference and length of days are
found.

14 h. 20. min. Jerusalem. 17. 30.

13. 48 d. 56 min. Teneriffe. 13. 37.

13. 12 d. 56 min. Capo-blanco. 9. 7.

12. 32. Nombre de dios. 4.

12. 28. Panama. 3. 30.

12. -- San Thome being under the equinoctial, the makes no difference, and
therefore always 12 hours.

12. 42. -- Capo de vela 5. 15.

13. 20. 48. m. Hauana. 10. 6.

13. 3. 4 m. San Domingo. 7. 53.

20. 44. 40 m. Fane Insula. 65. 35.

22. 9. 20 m. Icari Insula. 76. 10.

Proposition 8. To find the Horizontall position and difference betwixt any
two places.
FIrst rectify the Globe for that place, from the which you would know the
Horizontall position and distance to the other place: bring also that first
place to the Meridian of the Globe, then put the quadrant of Altitude on the
Zenith, there let the Globe rest, then bring the quadrant of Altitude over the
two places, and the degrees cut by the end of the quadrant in the Horizon,
shows the Horizontall position, and the degree cut by the second place in the
quadrant, account from the Center downwards, shows the distance.

For example.
The bearing of Jerusalem to London is 50 degr. accounted from the North point
Westward, and the distance is 38 degr. 30 minutes. And from London to Jerusalem
the bearing is 85 degrees, accounting from the South point Eastward, and the
distance is as before.

Now to find the Rhombe, add the two Horizontall positions together, and the
one half thereof shows it.

From Jerusalem to Aleppo, the bearing is 69 degrees from the North point
Westward, the distance is 43 degr.: and Aleppo bears to Jerusalem 77 degrees
from the North point Eastward.

Jerusalem to Teneriffe bears 77 degr. from the North point Westward; and
Teneriffe to Jerusalem 64 degrees, accounting from the North point Eastwards;
and the distance betwixt the two places is 55 degrees.

Jerusalem to Rome bears 67 degr. from the North point Westward, distance
24.: Rome to Jerusalem 86 degr. from the South point Westward.

Jerusalem to Gibraltare bears 76 degr. from the North point Westward, and
the distance is 43 degr. and Gibraltare to Jerusalem bears 73 degrees from
the North point Eastward.

OF THE WORLD.
THe world is divided into two parts, viz. Elementall, and Etheriall parts.

The first is subject to daily alterations, and contains four Elements: that
is, the Earth, the Water, the Air, and the Fire.

An element is that, whereof any thing is compounded, and of it self not
compounded; of these four elements, any part of any kind is named for the
whole, as any part of the earth is called the earth.

The Etheriall parts does compass the elementall parts in the concauitie
thereof, and contains 10 Spheres: whereof the first is the sphere of the
Moon, and is next unto us. The second is Mercurius: the third Venus: the
fourth Sol: the fifth Mars: the sixth, Jupiter: the seventh, Saturnus: the
eighth sphere is the starrie firmament: the ninth is the Christaline heaven:
The tenth, Primum mobile, which does contain all the rest within it, and
whatsoever is beyond or above that, is the habitation of God and his Angels.

The reason how these spheres were first found out, were their contrary
motions in the heavens, observed by the ancient learned Astronomers, and we
find that by our own observations, as thus, viz.

First, all things in the heavens turn about the earth, upon the poles of
heaven in four and twenty hours, and these motions are from the East into
the West, and this we attribute to the motion of the 10 sphere, or Primum
mobile, without staying, being so appointed by God from the beginning, and
carries about with him in violence all the other spheres.

All the rest of the spheres have contrary motions, every one in his kind,
though far slower then the other, and their motions is contrary from the West
to the East, and so are carried about often times by the first mouer, before
they make one perfect revolution in themselves.

The Christaline or ninth sphere his motion is almost insensible, and is called
the trembling motion, and is performed, according to Ptolomie his opinion, in
36000 years, but by the opinion of others in a far longer time, as in 49000.
years.

The eighth sphere, being the starrie firmament, performs his motion in 7000
years.

The rest of the spheres are the seven Planets, each sphere contains in it
but one star, whereof the uppermost and slowest is Saturn, which performs
his course in 24 years, 162 days, and 12 hours.

Jupiter performs in 11. years, 133 days, and 23 hours.

Mars performs in 322 days, and 23 hours.

Sol performs in 365 days and 6 hours, which is one whole year.

Venus in 385 days, 9 hours, performs her course.

Mercury performs as the in 365 days, and 6 hours.

Luna performs her course once every 27 days, and 12 hours.

THE CHARACTERS OF THE Planets are these following.
Saturn Mars Venus Jupiter Sol Mercury Luna

THere are points mouable in the Eclipticke, which are called the Dragons head,
and the Dragons tail, and their caracters are these: Dragons head, Dragons
tail.

The Dragons head is the point in the Eclipticke, which the touches, when she
crosses the Eclipticke, and passes to the Northwards of it.

The is the point in the Eclipticke, where the passes by, when she crosses
the Ecliptic, and passes by it to the South, and these two points are
opposite the one to the other.

To know how the Planets reign every hour of the day, and night: beginning
with Saturday.
Hours of the day.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.
Sat.....................................................................................

Hours of the night.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. Sat.

FINIS.

