THE VVHETSTONE OF REPROOF. OR A REPROVING CENSVRE OF THE misintitled safe
way: declaring it by discovery of the authors fraudulent proceeding, and
captious cauilling, to be a miere by-way drawing pore travelers out of the
royal and common street, and leading them deceitfully in to a path of
perdition.

Errare fecit eos in inuio, and non in via.

Psalm. 106. WITH A POSTSCRIPT OF ADVERtisments, especially touching the homily
and epistles attributed to Alfric: and a compendious retortiue discussion of
the misapplyed by-way.

AVTHOR T. T. Sacristan and Catholic Romanist.

CATVAPOLI, Apud viduam MARCI WYONIS. Anno M.DC.XXXII.

THE PREFACE.
I Have viewed and perused exactly a certain small vollume published by Sir
Humfrey Linde. He intituleth it the safe way, but I find it contains nothing
either safe or sound. To make it more plausible he gives it a Latin inscripton
printing in the front of it, via tuta, not much unlike to the practice of
Mountibanks, who to make their pouders more vendible set on their boxes strange
titles to persuade the ignorant, they are far fetched and of care virtue. He
calls it a way leading all Christians to the true Catholic Church.

But indeed it is no way but rather a diuerticle, or diuersion: or if it be a
way, its only a by-way leading sinple souls into woods and deserts and
leaving them there unmercifully to be devoured by ravenous beasts. If it be any
way at all, it is not via tuta, but rather via torta, and a Kind of negative
way consisting in negation of the true Catholic way, and therefore as
according to the doctrine of Aristotle, negatio est malignantis naturoe,
negation is of a malignant nature, so it being a negative way, it cannot
possible be any other then via, malignantium, the way of the malignant and
reprobate people. He adds it leads to the true ancient and Catholic faith
now professed in the Church of England, but this confirms that which I said
before, that his way is no true way but a by-way as leading to a by-place, to a
Country and people separated from the rest of the world, Tote diuisus orb
Britannus.
conducting to a nation divided from the rest of the earth, as in situation so
is it separated in Religion from others, yea from it self, from the truth,
from antiquity, as being no more ancient in all points then the days of
Queen Elizabeth as her 39. articles plainly testify, diverse of them being
first proclaimed by her and her parliament: hither the way leads and there it
leaves the poor traveler at a non plus, without any means to pass unto
Christ and his Apostles.

He says farther in the title that even the Romanists his adversaries do
testify, the safety of his way: but this is most ridiculous and most false of
all the rest of his inscription; he cites indeed great tropes of authors in
pretense of his positions, some of which are true Catholic writers, but others
not acknowledged for such by us, others manistly known to be his own
consectaries: and all those that are truly ours, he does either maliciously, or
ignorantly abuse, and so does but make checker-worke or Cross lines of them
alto gether for his ministers to play in the pulpit with their parishioners at
fox and geese.

I imagined his name had been Line, but now I perceive certainly it is not,
for he uses neither line nor square in his book, I mean neither method nor
square dealing. For setting aside his prologue and Epilogue, his first chapter,
or section might as well have been the last and the last his first as
otherwise, and as for his sincerity, it is not to be found, either in the
beginning, middle or ending: wherefore if his name be Linde as he subscribeth,
it is more agreeable to the inside of his work, which is very well linde
indeed I mean with lies. And the truth is the greatest part of his pamphlet
is but ouerworne brokery stuff, dropped from whites way and B. Mourtons
patched Appeal, forged Imposture, and vshers outrages, excepting some
frenchwares taken out of the corrupted store house of that famous mountibanke
Daniel Chamiere, with whom I perceive his worship has had no small
corespondence.

He styles himself knight which no doubt he is, but as that title soundes
honesty, honor, and nobillitie, so none of that I find in his book, which is
so replenishsd with bragges, boasts, and protestations, as one would swear him
rather to be a protesting puritan, then a pure Protestant.

Which with other reasons move me to suspect the book is not his, but a
ministerial bastard fathered upon his nobility for the greater authority of
the work: but that I will not much examine: only this I say that when I had
read it, I did soma't doubt whether the knight could be so versed in our Roman
divines as (thou' to little purpose) the penner appeeres to be: which caused me
to suspect the true author is some one of greater reading and industry then I
imagine Sir Humfrey is: Spuria multorum patrum proles.
yet on the other side I am verelie persuaded, that considering the multitude
of ignorant absurdities it conteines; the author of it cannot be a man of any
sollide learning in divinity, which being supposed, I cannot absolutely
condemn Sir Humfrey for taking upon him the name, yet he cannot be judged
wholely excusable in his honor for that he consented to be the putatiue Father
of so base a bratte.

This which I have is the third edition, and the fourth may be daily expected,
in regard the book is so full of matter, I mean of corruption: Yet after the
contents come once to be exactely discussed and discovered, I persuade my self
it will quikly loose it undeserved credit, and the dubtlesse if the leaves were
larger it would ride poaste to Tobaconistis, and grossers shops.

I confess Sir Humfrey I am Tom. Teltruth who cannot flatter or dissemble: yet
may you assure your self that although my speech be ordinarily directed unto
your self, my intent is directly to reprove those only who in their
contriuing of the work for you, and in your name, have so profanely
misapplyed, and abused sacred scriptures, ancient Fathers, and an number of
other grave and Catholic authors so corruptedlie produced against their own
professed faith. Neither yet have I any meaning by my words to offe^de the
dignity of your person which I respect in the highest degree of desert, as
neither the persons of those who truly are the authors of the work, and have
deceived both you and others: but rather with charitable S. Aug. I chiuse to
say of you and every one of my adversaries in religion: Homo viuat, moriatur
error. Let the man live, the error dye.

But now I will descend to particulars, and after due examine pass my sentence
upon every several section, chiefly insisting in discussion of the
citations of the adversary, dedicating my whole censure not to the gentry of
my Country as Sir Humfrey does, and of whose mature Judgments I can not
conceive so basely as once to imagine they will be dangerously enamored with
his book, but I will chiefly offer it to the more vulgar rank of people who
by reason of their smaler tallents may more easily be circumuented, whom if by
conferring the one book with the other I shall understand they come to be
right informed of the truth, I shall hold my self sufficiently rewarded by
them as by those whose wavering minds I only intend to rectify by my labors,
which otherwise for any matter of substance I find in the book, I profess I
should never have esteemed it worth the pains I have taken in the confutation
of it.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
PERIOD 1. THE proceeding of the Roman Church with the sectaries clered and
defended from the injurious impositions of the adversary. Father Campian and
other authors ill alleged. Where likewise the Romanists are freed from all
cause of contention between themselves and the pretended reformers, who are
truly the cause of all dissension in the Church by there Preposterous
pretended reformation. PERIOD 2. Neither are there any corruptions in either
faith or generally approved manners in the Roman Church. Nor any want of care,
and zeal in the Popes in procuring all necessary reformation in the Church.
But the adversaries abuse of the Councels of Trent and Pisa, and his lies and
equivocations discovered. His calumniations against Purgatory, indulgences
prayer to Saints reproved. PERIOD 3. No true Romanist ever renounced Popery
either in his life, or at his death: yet some formerly Romanists for desire of
licentious liberty, and other temporal motives, have apostated from the
Catholic Roman Church. Witness, Luther, Calvin, and other founders of the
misreformed Churches, to omit those of smaler note. Some cited for Romanists
which are not such, with abuse of some other authors. PERIOD 4. An idle and
calumnious discourse of the adversary foolishly affirming that the Roman
Church is hinderd from reformation by bumane Police, reproved. PERIOD 5. The
irrefragable argument of Catholics that the pretensiue Reformers cannot
assign a time in which any one point of the Roman faith was by any public
authority before the days of Luther condemned for erroneous, maintained and
fortified against the frivolous euasions of the adversary. Some Romanists by
him impertinently alleged others cited for Romanists which are not such.
PERIOD 6. The Catholic Roman doctrine cleared in it succession from all touch
of heresy. But contrarily the pedigree of the misreformers much stained with
the same where diverse ancient Fathers are abused and corrupted at the least in
sense and meaning. PERIOD 7. The pretensiue reformed doctrine is not proved,
eytherby testimony of Romanists, or otherwise, to have either universality or
antiquite, but convinced to be quyte void of them both. And the adversary
promissing to prove the antiquity and vniuersallitie of his faith by
testimonies of Romanists, only produces two or three and in two or three
only points and yet those impertinentlie. PERIOD 8. Neither justification by
faith, nor the denial of the real presence or transubstantiation, or private
Mass: not the dual number of Sacraments, not any unlawfulness of communion in
one kind, of prayer or service in an unknown langue, of due honor of images
or Indulgences proved by testimony of Romanists, or by any other apparent
argument: but all the adversary alleges is discovered to be faulty,
frivolous, or forged. PERIOD 9. Not one testimony of Romanists for the
certainty of the pseudo-reformed faith, or uncertainty of the Roman, as the
adversary idly pretended. But diverse of them abused and detorted. PERIOD 10.
No safety, comfort, or benefit for the soul, but much for the body, in the
pretensiue reformed faith: neither did any Romanists ever confess more then
this second part of saftie, comfort, or benefit to be in the new Religion.
Where diverse authors are depraved and abused by the false adversary. PERIOD
11. It is convinced to be absolutely false, and calumnious that the Romanists
either elude, or reject the ancient Fathers, but contrarily esteem much more
of them then any of the misreformers ever did. Where diverse authors are
falsely accused and abused. PERIOD 12. No true records ever razed by the
Romanists, but many by the false reformers partly razed, and partly
exauthorized, or destroyed. With discovery of some false dealing in the
adversary. PERIOD 13. It is a miere calumnious accusation of our malicious
adversary to affirm that the Romanists blasphemy the scripture: where it is
convinced that the Romanists use the scriptures with much more reverence then
the Nouellists do. And diverse Catholics are traduced and corrupted touching
this matter. PERIOD 14. It is miere frenzy to imagine that Bellarmine
testifies the truth of the misreformed doctrine either in ihe principal points
of controversy, or in any other point of their new tenets. And the same
Cardinal is much abused by the adversary in this passage. PERIOD 15. Ancient
martyrs not pretended but defended to have shed their blood not for defense of
the new pretended reformation, but in defense of the ancient Catholic and
present Roman faith. And the weakness and folly of the adversary discovered in
his proceeding. PERIOD 16. The Romanists have no need to draw any argument for
proof of their Religion from the confession of the sectaries. And to treat of
this was impertinent to the adversaries project. PERIOD 17. It is demonstrated
to be plainly false that the adversary has proved by confessions of
Romanists that his Religion is safer then theirs. And this is founded only in
his own crasie judgment failing and miscarying in the very foundation of his
work.
APPROBATIO.
VIso testimonio, cuiusdam viri docti mihique de fide and doctrina probe
cogniti, quo testatur hanc Censuram cuiusdam libelli qui inscribitur Viatuta,
nihil continere fidei vel bonismoribus aduersum sed multa Catholicae religionis
dogmata subtiliter explicata, orthodoxorumque scripta vindicata diligenter,
Dignam censui quam and ego approbarem Duaci 28. Nouembr. 1632.

GEORGIUS COLVENERIVS etc.

Correction of faults, and supply of omissions.
PAge 60. line 13. read Church Apostacy. p. 114. l. 18. for them, read it.
p. 116. for be read were. and for there formers read the Reformers. p 127.
omit real presence. l. 134. for saint read smarte. p. 142. for to dissent
read not to consent. p. 154. for to such contrary read contratie to such and
in the same page l. 23. for which is true, read which in his opinion is true.
and p. 155. touching the same matter. l. 15. for none of which is contrary,
read none of which abstracting from the institution is contrary. p. 145. for
but has, read but since it and the rest were there included has. page 156.
line 2. for the manner read the whole and entire manner. p. 158. for
declaredly and universally read, so declaredly and universally. page 226. for
the word of God, read either the unwritten word of God, and in the same p.
l. 14. add althou' there were no other Council for it. page 208. l. 20. to
people, add as ever so to receive it by Christ's command. p. 265. for thrice,
read once. p. 240. lin. 6. to Christ, add humane nature. p. 239. for
reconciliatio^s, read reconciliationis. p. 287. for dignity read decorum. p.
202. l. 7. omit other. l. 27. to exhibited add by it self. page 307. to not
determined by the Church, add in every particular. page 317. to illegitimate,
add concerning the doctrine of images. p. 371. to divine worship, add in
spirit. pa. 447. l. 16. for in, read since. pa. 463. for thim, read him. and
in the next l. 10. for may challenge, read may in that respect challenge. p.
467. l. 17. add in respect of the people. p. 433. lin. 16. for able, read
agreeable. and omit su. page 438. lin. 13. for to whom read, and yet. p. 475.
for conference read confidence. p. 485. l. 16. for heresy, read material
heresy. p. 480. for martyrs read examples. p. 493. l. 26. consequence. add
to this purpose. p. 566. l. 24. to soundes, add including the prayers. p 546.
l. 8. to glorious, add flashe. and l. 26. for gaspell, read Gospel. p. 545.
l. 2. read Pamphleter. p. 421. l. 18. omit in a visible manner.

In the introduction to the Appendix.

Page 73. line 10. add defined. l. 3. for false, read safe. p. 19. l. 20.
omit either, and in the next. l. read works. and l. 24. to some of, add them.

Besides these neglects I advertise the reader of an other fault committed in
the omission of titles for the distinct matters. Nevertheless this defect is
sufficiently supplied in regard that in the commencement or entrance of every
several period, the contents are breefely declared. There be many other
errors of less importance committed by the printer as being a stranger as Nice
with a great letter and the like, which the discretion and judgment of the
reader will easily correct. In like manner he will perdone the rudnes of the
style as penned by one who by reason of his absence and daily conversation
with strangers ignoreth the property of his native language. As also he will
conniue his tardance in the publication of the work, which if it had not
incountered vnimagined impediments might have appeared many months paste.

THE FIRST PERIOD.
THIS Period shall contain the first and second sections of S. Humfreys way,
and I resolved to join them together, by reason I find little matter of
doctrine in them, as being rather in the nature of preamble or introduction,
and consequently of too small substance for a scholar to insist upon.

In his first section he purposed to prove and disprooue the bitterness of
the Church of Room toward the reformed Churches, but he brings very little
or nothing to that purpose, only citing for his demonstration of the same some
unchristian speeches as he terms them, uttered by father Campian in his
first reason. She terms us (says S. Humfrey, meaning the Roman Church)
Heretics, Hellhounds of Zwinglius, Luthers whelps, Turkish Hugonotes, damned
persons, and worse then Infidells, which words if they wear truly related I
must needs confess include no small acrimony, but I having diligently read
over on purpose Campians first reason, I find not them all there, nay nor yet
the greater part of them, nor any other equivalent unto them. I find indeed
he speaks sharply against Luther and Calvin and he terms them and others
whom he cites, Quid ille nunc diceret, si viueret in terris, and Lutheros
Caluinosque concerneret opifices Bibliorum, qui sua lima politula and
elegantula, vetus nouumque testamentum esse raserint. Quid Lutheri Catulis vt
Tobiam, Ecclesiasticum, Machabaeos, and horum odio complures alios ea calumnia
comprehensos e syncero canone repent dispungerent? etc. Quae quidem Ecclesia
custos huius depositi non magistra (quod haeretici cauillnatur) thesaurum hunc
vuluersum quem Synodus Tridentina est amplexa vetustissimus olim concilij
publicitus vendicauit. etc. Castatio mysticum illud Salomonis Canticum. etc.
Nihilo pluris quam cantilenamed amicula and cum pedissequis author colloquium
amatorium venereus furcifer aestimauit. Camp. rat. 1.
heretics for their mangling the holy scriptures according to their own
private Spirits, but he has not one bitter word against the persons of any
sectaries of his own Country, but only justly reprehendeth the Nouelists in
general for rheir abuse of the word of God. But suppose Father Campian had
used such speeches indeed, what then? do not the reformers themselves most
frequently both in their writings and pulpits use far worse terms both
against the Romanists and the Roman Church, do not they accuse both her and her
members of Idolatry, Superstition, and Antichristianity, exaggerating matters
with all the satyricall phrases they can invent, as even in this very place
does appear where S. Humfrey himself railing not only against the particular
members of the Roman Church, but also against her sacred self, charging her to
have lost her breasts or at least to give her children little or no sincere
milk out of her two breasts, the two testaments, and that she does daily
practice spiritual fornication, and that she has played the Harlot with a
great H. and finally taxing her that she mainetayneth and practices manifest
and manifould Idolatry, and that her title is usurpation her devotion is
superstition, and she her self a professed enemy to the gospel, from whence
you may infer what a senseless blindness this was in the knight, to
dedicate the first chapter of his book to the disproouing of the bitterness of
the Roman Church, he himself having spent a great part of it in railing
against her, and also you may perceive how importunely he accuses her of
malignitie and want of desire to quench the unquenchable broils of the Church
as he terms them, whilst he himself through his exasperating speches,
as much as in him lies, puts no small impediment to the extinguishing of the
same, as the reader may plainly perceive, and notwithstanding he compares the
Roman Church and his own to two sisters (which comparison allthough it be very
fond and absurd in it self for that the true Church being but one only spouse
of Christ, she can admit no sister nor Corriuall according to the meaning of
the holy Spirit in the Canticles affirming his spouse to be one, (VNA ES SPONSA
MEA) nevertheless he must needs be convinced to have proceeded most
preposterously in this matter, and contrary to all reason, in that he
intending or at least pretending to show there ought to be love and union
between them as between two sisters descending from one and the same catholic
and universal mother as he calls her, yet as it were with one and the same,
breath he accuses the same Roman Church to have been the only cause of
separation; and carries the business in such a rough and uncivil fashion
toward her, giving her such great occasions of new disgusts, that it plainly
appears he does rather demonstrate his own bitterness and rancour toward
her, then with any probable argument show any such disposition to remain in
her against any such union as he pretends to desire. Why then does S.
Humfrey complain of that which is in a far worse manner practiced by
himself and his own brothers? besides this I pray you does the supposed
bitterness of F. Ca^pian prove the bitterness of the Roman Church? could he
alone be the whole Roman Church who was but one only member of it? Or are his
speeches or private positions to be attributed to the whole Church, he being
but one part thereof and yet not the greatest? what a false Metonymie is this?
if the head of the Church had used such speeches you would have seemed to have
had some reason to have attributed them to the whole, because that which the
head does may induce a denomination upon the rest of the body, of which
examples may be found even in nature, but whatsoever any other member does, it
cannot rightly be attributed to the whole. So that we now see that in this
allegation S. Humfrey himself does so carry the matter, and gives the Church
of Room even in this same section, so much occasion of new disgusts as besides
the rehearsed calumnies taxing her with creation of 12. new Articles and
coining of new expositions upon the old, far different from the doctrine of
the Apostles, and that she mayntaineth and practices manifest idolatry. And
the like most false and slanderous exprobrations, that as I said before, it
plainly appears that he has rather demonstrated his own bitterness, and
rancour toward the Roman Church, then showed any such defect in her, by any
argument drowen from Father Campians words by him produced, which words
allthough by his quotation of Jewel in the margent he will seem to have taken
them at second hand, yet certainly it is a plain imposture, and so let them
divide it as they please betwixt themselves, it being ever supposed that S.
Humfrey, and his Jewel, are of equal authority with the Catholics, I mean
of none at all. Moreover S. Humfteys whole drift in this section being to
clear his own Church from the infamous brand of Apostasy, he imposes the
whole cause of separation upon the Roman Church, and produces Erasmus for a
wittnes of the same, who being demanded (for sooth) of the duke of Saxony
what was Luthers capital offense that stirred up so many opposites against
him, made answer that Luther had committed two great crimes, for he had taken
away the Crown from the Pope, and had taken down the belly of the monks.

To which saying of answer that Erasmus is no competent wittnes against the
Roman Church, especially in a case where his sole testimony is interposed. And
if S. Humfrey had been circumspect he would not have cited Erasmus his answer
for this purpose, as containing one manifest lie if not twb. For neither did
Luther ever take the Crown from the Pope, which as the world knows, he still
enjoys maugre him and all his adherents: neither did Luther ever take down
the bellies of the monks, except it was by unjust usurpation and rapin to
fill his own, and to lead his life in luxurious concubinate with breach of
his vows to god and man.

Immediately before this momicall passage of Luther out of Erasmus (which
although S. Humfrey produced to color the pretended Reformers division from
the Church of Rome, yet does it far more strongly argue a cause in the Pope
justly to reject them, then any excuse of their preposterous separation)
before this I say he cited a place out of the Prophet Ose which because it
makes nothing to this purpose, Cap. 4.15.17.
but only upon his own false supposition, that the Roman Church is wicked and
idolatrous; therefore until I see him prove his supposition, which yet I know
he will never be able to perform, I leave it as impertinent: as also I omit
the examples he brings of Abraham's departure out of Caldea, and of the Jews
out of Egypt; which are as far from the case we treat of, as Egypt is from
Europe or Christendom from Iewrye. Therefore I will only give notice to the
reader how grossly he abuses certain authors he cytes, to testifye that by
Babylon is meant the Christian Rome. For there is not one of those authors that
affirms that after it was converted to the Christian faith, it was called
Babylon, according as the scripture usually speaks of Babylon either properly
or Metaphorically. Neither is there likewise any of the same authors which
teach, that since the conversion of that City to the faith of Christ,
Christians ought to depart from it, as out of a spiritual and idolatrous
Babylon, which is that our adversary here intendes to prove, or at the least
ought to prove, if any thing he means to prove against the Romanists.

And to speak first of the ancient authors here cyted by the kinght, which
are Tertullia^, S. Hierome, and S. Augustine, it is directly impossible that
they should mean by Babylon, the Roman Church depraved by any idolatry of
Christian people, for that they were all departed out of the world, before the
supposed departure of the Roman Church from the true Religion, is affirmed by
our new sectaries to have begun, which as they most commonly teach was not
before the 600. year after the time of Christ our Savior.

Now as for the modern authors to wit Orosius, Viues, Bellarmin, and
Baronius, and Ribera, they are all known Romanists yea and some of them chief
defendours of the Roman Church and faith, and so it is evident by this reason
alone that they had not such a thought as to mean by Babylon the Roman Church.
Cap. 22.
Viues upon the 18. book de cuit. Dei, explicates him self plainly saying:
Petrus Apostolus Roman Babylonem appellat, vt etiam Hyeronymus in vita Marci
interpretatur, qui ad Marcellam scribens, non aliam existimat describi a Ioanne
in Apocalypsi Babylonem, quam Vrbem Romam. Bellarmin also speaks yet plainer
in the very place cited by S. Humfrey viz. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 2. for
he says. Respondeo Babylonem vocari non Romanam Ecclesiam sed Romana^ vrbem,
qualis erat Ioannis tempore. Orosius I have not. But let Baronius speak for
him self and others. Baron. Adam. 45.
Nec per somninm quidem quis vnquam inuenit Romanam Ecclesiam esse Babylonis
nomine nuncupatam, sed ipsa^ tantummodo ciuitatem; ac id quidem non semper, sed
cum impietate referta aduersus ipsam Ecclesiam bellum gereret. Ribera
understands by Babylon persecuting Rome, not as it is now, I need not cite his
words in a case so clear. So that now I do not see why S. Humfrey produced
these authors, except it were by corruption of them, to make them precursors of
his corrupted way.

And hence also the reader may gather how weakly the knight proceeds in this
his first section, which is the introduction to the rest, in regard that by
indeuouring to reprove his adversary, he does unadvisedly prove his own
imperfections, and so doubtless he had better been idle the^ so ill occupied.
And I verily persuade my self, that if the Archflamen had duly examined the
contents of this section, he doubtless would have marked it with a, non
imprimatur.

In his second section S. Humfrey pretends to prove the cause of contention
betwixt the Reman Church and his own, originally to have proceeded from the
Romanists by their own confession. Thus much he promises in the title, but
performs nothing. For he cytes but three only authors, that is, Cassander,
Camde^, and Cesenas, in favor of his position, and yet none of them are
acknowledged by us for sound Romanists, at the least if we respect their
writings here produced. And of Cassander both the inquisitors in their Index,
and Bellarmin in his Controversies, sufficiently declare the unsoundness of his
doctrine and religion. Camden I hope is well know. Now for Cesenas
notwithstanding S. Humfrey styles him General of the Franciscans, as indeed
once he was though afterward deposed by his own order and excommunicated by
Pope John the 2^ for his pertinacie and malapert manner of defending, that the
Fryes of his order could have no rents or possessions, yet if he writ against
the Tyranny of the Pope, as he is quoted by the kinght, it is most manifest he
could not be a perfect Romanist: or at least that work could not be his, as in
truch I am persuaded it was not, but falsely fathered upon him, through the
iniquity of him who maliciously composed the mystery of iniquity, against
the Pope and Roman Church. And having now examined the matter I perceive that
which Cesenas writ or Ockam for him was not against the Popes in general: but
he writ only an epistle or treatise (if any thing he writ him self) against
the errors (as he terms them) of Pope John in particular, with whom he was
much disgusted by reason of the foresaid business and excommunications. And as
for the words which S. Humfrey cites touching two Churches, one good, and an
other evil, I find none such, nor any others to that sense in Cesenas. And
if ever he uttered any such words, which according to his whole discourse is
wholely improbable, yet doubtless he could not mean, that the evil Church
was the Roman Church entirely and absolutely, in regard his own words in his
foresaid work do evidently declare, that he subjected him self to the same
even in this same business, saying in his letters to the General Chapter of his
Order: (...)
Ad Sanctam Romanam Ecclesiam public and solemniter appellaui, and me and mihi
adhaerentes, and dicta nostra supposui correctioni, and emendationi, and
protectioni, and defensioni sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae. Et sum semper
protestatus me illam fidem tenere and seruare velle perpetuo, quam tenet and
seruat sanctae Romana Ecclesia, quae est omnium Ecclesiaram matter and magistra.
So that this passage is a manifest imposture either of S. Humfrey or Plessis
choose them whether, who out of an insatiable desire they have to find out
some track or step, though never so obscure, of their imaginary Church before
the days of Luther, care not what they forge or feign.

And yet more then this touching the small authority which Cesenas ought to
have, if he had done or spoken any thing against the Roman Church, if S.
Humfrey had looked well about him, or had been careful to know the truth,
he migst easily have found him registered in the expurgatorie Index, even in
the first Class for a prohibited author. And so a man may justly demand of
our adversary with what face then he can affirm his position to be confessed
by the Romanists? Or what truth or sincerity can any one imagine to be in him?
and what credit can prudently be given by the Reader to the rest of the
allegations of his whole book, who deals in this manner even in the
frontispice of his work. And in truth I wonder that at the least in humane
policy, he was no more circumspect, then to prostitute his reputation so
lauishly even then, when he ought in reason to be most careful of it. And now
this may suffice for the censure of this second section as containing nothing
in particular which deserves rehersall, or which may any wise redound, either
to the authors credit, or serve for the confirmation of his tenets specified
in the former section, the proof as you see being here as weak and silly as
the matter calumnious before, and consequently deserving no milder sentence of
condemnation, then the contents of the former section.

THE II. PERIOD.
NOw I will pass to a view of the third sectio^ of Sir Humfreys book which
is, in effect a continuation of the same matter treated in the two first
sections, his chief drift being to show the Pope and Roman Church to be in
fault for refusing reformation. (...)
And because he persisteth in the same manner of proof videlicet, by the
confession of the members of the Roman Church, I will examine briefly how
exactly he prosecuteth the same, and whether he recouereth in this section the
credit which he lost in the former.

He labors to show corruption both of faith and manners in the Church of
Rome, and that by confession of Roman Authors; and for the proof of this
confession he produces Pope Alexander the fifth out of the Council of Pisa
ses. 20. the Council of Senes, the Council of Trent in diverse places. Moulin
the 21. chap. of his Eucharist. Agrippa de vanit. Scient. chap. 17. the Bull of
Pius the 4. Philippus Mornaeus. Card. Caraph. Consill. de emendanda Ecclesia.
Paulus Vergerius in opusculis, and de Idolo Lauret. hist. of the Council of
Trent in English. These are all the writers he alleges, which are ten in
number. And although he citheth them all as if they were Romanists (for that he
rehearses them all to the same purpose and in one tenor or sequel of words)
nevertheless it is well known that five of the ten are so far from being
Romanists, as three of them are professed enemies to the Roman Church, to wit
Moulin, Vergerius, and Mornaeus, and the other two that is Agrippa, and the
Tridentine history in English, are of no authority, nor credit amongst the
Romanists, as being either plain heretics, or suspected of heresy. And as
for the other five Catholic testimonies, they contain not one word whereby it
may be proved that either the Pope, or the rest, of the Roman Church did refuse
to admite of due reformation, as Sir Humfrey affirms, but the contrary is
most manifest out of the Council of Trent it self, even in the same places
which he cites, where special decrees of diverse particular abuses to be
reformed by the Pastors of the Church are extant. True it is that where abuses
are decreede to be reformed, those same abuses are of necessity supposed to be,
either in times past, present, or future, and so far I grant the testimonies
cited by the K. out of the two Councels and other Catholic Authors be of
force: but to prove that those abuses be corruptions in faith, or yet in
manners, except we mean of the evil faith and ma^ners brought into the Church
by Luther and his followers) or that they being truly known to be in the
Church, yet the Pope will not have them reformed, this I say is a mere
calumniation divised by Sir Humfrey in disgrace of the chief Pastor of the
Roman Church, and cannot possibly be deduced out of the foresaid testimonies,
but rather the quite contrary is expressly to be found, and lastely in the
decrees of the Tridentine Council, as we have already said. Decret. de Refor.
That which Sir Humfrey affirms in the beginning of his 20. page, is
convinced to be a manifest untruth, to wit that the day of the Roman
reformation is not yet come. And although the Knight out of the abundance of
his wit, is not content only to say that the Romanists confess there are
corruptions in their Church only in manners, but also, that they confess the
same in doctrine: nevertheless of the point of doctrine he brings not any
proof at all, either out of Romanists, or any other way, but insteede of
proofs he utters diverse untruths, mingled with some impertinences and
equivocations. He tells his reader in the 20. page that the Council of
Trent, in Paul the thirds time, complained of Indulgences, but this is most
false, for the Council does not in any sort complain of the Indulgences
them selves, but only that the Popes officers in collecting the alms or
contribution of the people upon the grant and gayning of them, gave scandal
to faithful Christians, as appears by the very same words which he himself
cites, Vide Con. Trid. sess. 21. cap. 9.
among which there is not any one repugnant to the doctrine of Indulgences but
only to the abuses of the questours; as also the same words cited in Sir
Humfreys margent in lattin, do yet more plainly declare, so that this is no
less then an inexcusable falsitie uttered by the knight for want of an
argument, as it seems, to prove corruptions in doctrine in the Roman Church.
Another untruth he has in the 22. pa. where he says thus: neither did those
men (meaning the Fathers of the Council of Trent) seek a reformation in
manners only, but in the doctrine it self. Whereas they in that very place by
the knight alleged, wish only that the private mass might be restored to the
ancient custom of the communion of the people, together with the priest,
which as you know is no matter of doctrine in controversy between the
Romanists and the reformers, but only of practice, and consequently it proves
not the knights intent in this place, but rather his ignorant mistaking of the
true state of the question in that point of controversy about private mass.
Now that which he adds of the Latin service in the Roman Church to wit that
the Council commands all Pastors that they at the Mass do frequently
interpret and declare unto the people the mystery of the Sacrament, who does
not see how impertinent it is to the matter of doctrine, and how unapt a medium
it is to prove that the Doctors of the Council either did seek reformation
in the same, or to show how near the same doctors came to the doctrine of the
reformed Churches, as he presently adds, affirming them so to do, since the
Council proceeds not there, by way of definition or decree in matter of
doctrine, but only by way of ordinance and command as the words by him self
rehearsed do plainly specify; and yet not so but that the same Council, and
in the same place does either expressly command, or at the least suppose that
the Mass ought to be for the most part celebrated in the lattin tongue.

Moreover touching equivocations, certain it is that he does equivocate in his
allegation of Pope Alexander out of the Council of Pisa, where he says that
the Pope promised solemnly to intend the reformation of the Church, whereas in
truth Alexander means not of the faith of the Roman Church, as the knight
would have it, but of the reformation of manners, or of some abuses practiced
in the Church by particular persons. Besides this, it is not probable that the
Pope would meddle himself in matters of doctrine in such a Council as was
assembled purposely for the taking away of a schism. But concerning manners I
find that in the last period of the same Council of Pisa which Sir Humfrey
cites there is express mention both of some reformation already made by the
Pope and Cardinals, and also of more referred to the next general Sinod: the
words of which determination are these. Item cum Dominus noster Papa cum
consilio Concilij intendere^ reformare Ecclesiam in capite and membris, and iam
multa per Dei gratiam sint expedita per ipsum Dominum nostrum Papam, moreover
in the same Council of Senes which the knight also here produces I find no
mention of corruption in faith except by faith Sir Humfrey will understand the
corrupted faith of the wiclefists, Hussits, or the Grecians, the reformation
and reduction of all which both the Pope and Council endeavored so far to
effect and compass, as they declared the first two sectaries to be heretics
and that so earnestly as they threatened all those with excommunication who
should any way fauore them even with as much only as to give them salt to
their pottage, and as for reformation of manners there is not a word which
proves that the Pope made any resistance therein but rather expressly
labored for the same, tho by accident of impediments incident it was actually
hindered at that present. Sacrosancta Synodus vniuersalem Eccles. representans
nuntijs sanctissimi in Christo Patris ac Domini nostri Martini quinti summi
Pontif. specialiter deputatis ipsius reformationem intentus, incipiens a fidei
fundamento^ praeter quod nemo potest aliud ponere damnationem haeresum
Wiclefistarum and Hussitarum suorumque sequacium etc. In decret. Co^tra
Hussitas haereticos. Con. Sen. By which it is manifest how great the impudency
of Sir Hunfrey is in alleging these two Councels to prove want of reformation
in the Pope or Roman Church they standing both so plainly for the contrary to
his positio^ or rather impositio^. He equiuocateth also in that allegation of
Card. Schomberg whom he affirms to have opposed the reformation made in the
Council of Trent. Whereas yet he cites no words of the Card. but only a
bare relation taken out of a certain history of the acts of the Counsel
published in English touching the foresaid Cardinals oppositio^ or rather
proposition only, in the point of reformation. Which fact being related only
by an vnauthe^ticall history, the allegation can be of no more authority the^
is the relatour himself who was then a Caluinia^ sectary called Suauis who
has writ a very corrupted narration of that which passed in the Counsel as
relating the co^tentions or contrary opinions which the Fathers and Doctors
held whiles matters were in debate and vnconcluded, as if they had continued
after the definitions and decrees were made, and so abusing both the Council
and his reader egregiously. And yet more then this suppose the relation were
most true and authentical, yet does it not prove Sir Humfreys intent,
videlicet that the Pope denies reformatlon of Corruptions in faith and
manners, for that in the words related out of the foresaid history, there is
no mention of any corruptions of that nature, but only of abuses in general
terms, which Schomberg was of opinion that it had been better to let them
alone, yet that was only his particular dictamen and proposition, to which
neither the Pope nor the rest of the Council agreed, but resolved, upon a
course of reformation as the decrees themselves do testify: so that this
passage of the related history is impertinentlie alleged by the Knight.

Finally S. Humfrey does equivocate not only in that which we have said, but
also in the very substance of this his whole section. For his chief or rather
whole scope being not only to prove corruptions in doctrine and manners to be
confessed by the Romanists to be in their Church, but also that the Pope
refuses to take them away, he by his allegations of the testimonies of some
Romanists proves in part that there were corruptions in manners both before
and when the Council of Trent was assembled, but he quite dissembleth the
other part, to wit, that they were reformed also by the same Council; and
yet not withstanding the very same places which he produces out of the
Romanists do as plainly auerre the one as the other. And so out of those
proceedings of Sir Humfrey and the rest which has been said it may plainly
appear that he is so far from recovery of that honor which he lost in the
former sections, that he has now stained the same not a little more, and so we
may conclude this section and include it in the former censure.

THE III. PERIOD.
IN the fourth section the knight proceeds to greater matters, to matters I
say of life and death; for he affirms that manny learned Romanists convicted
by the evidence of truth either in part or in whole have renounced Popery
before their death, But let us see how exactly and sollidly he proceeds in so
weighty a matter.

He cites Med^cir. ^ celeberrimus professor D. Venerandus Gablerus, tanti
comitis exemplum secutus redijt ad Catholicismum. Adfuerat is Petro Paulo
vergerio e corpore migranti apud quem minor quae dam viderat quae illi animum
videbantur perfregisse vt non modo Catholicus sed pientissimus quoque
Catholicus fieret. Sane aiunt viri graves hunc Apostatam Vergerium sub mortem
teterrimos exhalasse faetores ac bouis instar horrendos edidisse boatus etc.
anno 1567. Surius Com. page 733.
the Council of Basil out of Genebrard. Aeneas Syluius out of Platina.
Harding out of Jewel. The Rhemish testament out of Causabon. The lord Cook.
B. Guard. out of John Fox. Bellarmins Controversies. And his last will or
testament. Albertus Pighins. Paulus Vergerius and his brother Baptist. These
are all the authors he cites in this section. For the proof of his vast
assertion, which authors being but ten in number yet three of them are known
to be no Romanists except he will have L. Cook and the two brother Bishops to
be Romanists, which nevertheless he confesses to to have protested against
the Romish doctrine; so that now according to his own confession the whole
number of Roman authors he cites here is reduced to seven, which small
number I cannot imagine according to what Arithmetic it can truly be accounted
many, especially if we compare them to the infinite number of the Romanists
which have been and yet are extant in the Christian world constant maintainers
of Popery. And this I say even in case it were true that all those seven had
ever renounced the Romish faith either in part or totally, as the knight
affirms; which nevertheless I will make apparent to be otherwise.

And first touching the Council of Basil, the very same words which Sir
Humfrey cites do convince the same, for says he the Council did allow the
cup to the Bohemians upon this condition: that they should not find fault with
the contrary use, nor sever themselves from the Catholic Church. Now what is
here to be found in these words of the Council which is any kind of
renuntiation of the Romish faith? nay what is there which concerns the Romish
faith at all? that which the Council determines being but only a grant to
one particular nation upon particular reasons, and that in a point of practice
not of doctrine, which also, if our English protestants were as conformable to
the Roman Church in all other points of faith and manners as the Bohemians then
were, might perhaps upon the like just reasons and upon the same condition be
granted in the realm of England, and that without any prejudice to either
faith or manners. But our English sectaries are so far from conformity to
the Romanists not only in diverse other points but even in this particular
that they continually exclaim against them both in their books and sermons as
violatours of Christ's institution in that they do not always and in every
country communicate the people in both kinds, Con. Basiliense initio
legitimum postea Conciliabulum Scismaticum, and nullius authoritatis. Con. lat.
sess. 11. ex Bell. non refero verba.
accusing them also that they mangle the Sacrament and unjustly deprive the
laytie of one part there of, judging the same for a laufull cause, at the least
in part, of their separation from the Roman Church, none of which particulars
are proved by the testimony of the Council of Basil to have concurred in the
case of the Bohemians, but rather the contrary is most plainly specified: so
that the knight has labored in vain or rather against himself by producing
the foresaid testimony, of the Council of Basil in which noe renuntiation of
Popery is to be found nor any agreement in doctrine or manners with the
pretensiue reformed Churches. From whence it is also consequently inferred
that to be clearelie false which our adversary affirms in the beginning of
this section, to wit that the reformed Churches have done nothing in this
otherwise then former Councels had anciently decreed.

He cites in the second place Aeneas Syluius, who was afterward Pope Pius
the second, as if he had renounced the Romish religion in that he says, that
as marriage upon weighty reasons was taken from the Priests, so upon weighty
reasons it were wished to be restored. But what is this to the purpose? is a
wish of an alteration in one particular point, and that not in faith but
manners or rather in practice of the Church a renuntiation of religion either
in part or in whole? or is the prohibition of marriage, or the celibate or
single life of priests any of the twelve articles which the knight is pleased
to term the new creed of the Roman Church? no suerlie. How then is it a
matter of faith, or the renunciation of it the renuntiation of Popery? and not
rather a renuntiation only of a precept of the Church in case it were truly
renounced by any Romanist whatsoever he is. Which renuntiation nevertheless
was never made by the author cited as his words rehearsed out of Platina by
Sir Humfrey himself do make manifest to any sincere and impartial reader.
In which not by way of wish or as giving his real assent with the reformers as
Sir Humfrey does corruptedly relate, but only by a doutfull delivery of his
own private dictamen that present time occurring unto him. Sacerdotibus magna
ratione sublatas nuptias, maiori restituendas videri. Plat. in pio 2. And yet
more then that after he was Pope and making reflection upon his former writings
published in his greener years, to the imitation of S. Augustine and others he
framed are tractation of diverse particulars passages of his own works among
which this is one, as appears by the tenor of the same which in his later
editions in force of a brief or Bull is usually prefixed to his books. To
omit that if the foresaid Syluius had been a renouncer of any point of
Popery it were too ridiculous to imagine that ever he would have been elected
Pope, as nevertheless the knight confesses him to have been afterward. And
thus the reader may plainly see that this allegation is of no more force then
the former toward the proof of Sir Humfreys intent.

In the next place is master Harding brought in for a renoncer of Popery. For
that as Jewel reports, he says that godly and faithful people have since
the time of the Primitive Church much complained of Private Mass. But suppose
it were true, what is this to the purpose of renouncing of Popery? For what
zealous and religious Papist is there in the world who does not justly
complain of want of devotion in the laity for that they have not that fervor
in frequenting the communion which those of the Primitive Church had? and if
this could be remedied what Romanist would not much desire it, yea and by all
means possible procure it? but is this to condemn as unlawful or contrary to
Christ's institution (as you sectaries do) all Masses as be celebrated without
Co^municants? no such matter. No more, nay much less then if for complaining
that Sir Humfrey Linde does not deal so sincerely in the citations of his
adversaries as becomes the reputation of a knight, a man should therefore
presently be thought to have quite condemned him of dishonest proceeding in
that nature even in the highest degree of false dealing and corruption. Which
collection if he please to grant, I know not who will be so uncivil as to
contradict him. Especially considering that even in this very citation he
has corrupted doctor Harding most vnconscionablie by applying against private
mass that which he speaks only against the negligence of the lay people
for that they so commonly omit to communicate at mass, as if that author
disalowed of the private mass it self, whose words nevertheless truly
cited as he has them in the beginning of the ninth leaf of his answer to
Jewels challenge will clear the business and manifestly discover where the
fault lies: that others do commonly forbear says he, to communicate with
the priest it is through their own fault and negligence not regarding their
own salvation whereof the godly and careful rulers of faithful people have
since the time of the primitive Church always much complained. And thus you
see how nimbly the subtle knight has abused both that worthy doctor and his
own reader. Wherefore it being by this which we have said apparent that M.
Harding was no condemner of private mass as either unlawful or against the
institution of Christ, it also is thence manifestly consequent that he was no
renouncer of Popery even in that particular point, and so the proof which the
knight would draw from him is of no force, nor available to his cause; nay it
is in truth so disagreeable to the state of the question that it is no small
wonder how either malice or ignorance could so much blind him as to make use
of it in this matter.

The fourth restimonie is out of the Rhemes Testament the authors of which (as
he affirms out of Causabon) avouch the scriptures to have been translated
into English by the importunity of the heretics. And he adds that the
Romanists have of late granted a dispensation to some men and women also to
read scriptures, and this also was done (says he) by the importunity of the
heretics. Moreover as it were in confirmation of the same, he adds that most
of the Romish proselites, (as he terms them) did frequent their Church and
service for the first eleven years of Queen Elizabeth: neither (says he) was
it forbidden by any lawful council. Thus he discourses touching this point.

Here is much a do and little to the purpose. And indeed after a great
deal of study a man shall hardly collect any thing out of the whole
discourse which may seem to have any show of proof for the knights
assertion, videlicet. That many Romanists have renounced Popery before their
death. Yet it seems to me, his whole drift may be reduced to these two
arguments. The first thus: The Romanists have translated the bible by the
importunity of the reformers, and give dispensations to some men and women to
read it; therefore many Romanists have renounced Popery. The second thus: most
of the Romanists did frequent the reformed Church and service for the first 11.
years of Queen Elizabeth's reign, neither was their communication with them
prohibited by any lawful Council, therefore many Romanists renounced Popery
before their death.

Lo here two learned Enthymems: they march like two march hares and run
stark wild. I wonder what nimble university man has taught the knight to
choppe Logike so minshingly, or what polipracticall Alchymist has instructed
him in the art of extraction so exactly, that out of the importunity of his
reformed consorts, he is able to draw the translation of the Rhemish
Testament, and that with a dispensation for some men and women to read it. So
skillful he is in extracting oil out of stones and milk out of mountains.
Neither does his exquisite knowledge stay here, but he will needs persuade
his reader he can extract also out of the same, that many Romanists have
renounced their Popery by translating the Bible into English and by giving a
dispensation to read the same; nay and that which is yet more marvelous he
seems to glory not a little that this has been all effected by the
importunity of his reformed brothers; as if forsooth, they had exercised an act
of some heroycall virtue therein. Whereas in truth, importunity is so far
from desert of commendation as it may be much more justly registered in the list
of vices then of virtues: and so we see that in the Scripture it self the
importunity of a beggar is branded with the mark of improbity, that which I
marvel, the knight being so great a Biblist as he is, did not reflect upon
it. And admit it were true that the Romanists moved by the importunity of the
sectaries did translate the Bible into the vulgar tongue for the laity to
read, by what rule of Logike I pray you Sir Humfrey does it follow that many
Romanists have renou^ced Popery before their death? prove but this one
consequence and I yield you the victory. And pray tell me what article of faith
is that which teaches the Romanists to believe that the Bible ought not to be
read by the laytie in no case, or upon no reasons never so weighty? or if you
can find no such article, as I know you cannot, then confess you have lost
the victory in the point, confess you have proceeded weakly, confess you
have by your first argument proved nothing: and so I will take that for
granted, and pass to the second, which allthough it has some more sense in
it then the other, yet it is senseless enough as shall presently appear. For
that being to prove your antecedent or first proposition you only produce L.
Cooks report, that most of the Romish proselytes did frequent your Church or
service for the first eleven years of Queen Elizabeth. But you must know
that this author is no competent witness against the Romanists, he is one of
your own crew, we care not for his reports, we leave them to the lawyers: He
indeed (as you do now) presumed to write matters of divinity, but in that he
played the Suitor vltra crepidam, as you do, and so labored only to make him
self ridiculous, as you do. But let us admit that which he reports, to be
true, and that foam frequented your Church and service in those times (as I my
self have heard they did at the least in exterior show, yet privately at
home frequenting Mass also,) does it thence follow that in their minds they
renounced Popery? no such matter. No more then do diverse of his majesty's
subjects, who even at this day go to your Churches, whom nevertheless you
your selves hold for none of yours: but therefore do commonly term them
Church going Papists. So that according to this and even ad hominem, that is,
upon your own Principles, your sequel is to be condemned to be of noe force;
or at the most out of that fact of those Romanists which you speak of, it can
only be inferred that they proceeded contrary to the profession of their
faith, but not that they renounced the same, which two things if you could have
duly distinguished, I verily persuade my self you would never have discoursed
so friuoluslie as you do in this point. But now I grieve I have spent so much
time in ventilating so largely such chaffie stuff.

After this wise discourse Sir Humfrey passes to his own persuasions, for the
proof of his assertion. I am verily persuaded (says he) that many at this day
in the Church of Rome do assent to our doctrine that dare not communicate with
us openly in the Church; adding an appeal to their consciences how many of the
Romanists have renounced Popery in those diverse points in this place. But to
this I answer that if Romanists would have been persuaded by this wise knights
motives they had long ago all renounced Popery and turned Puritans indeed,
but God be praised they never were, nor I hope ever will be persuaded by him
and his works, if they have any branies in their heads. No suerlie. And if
they come but once to examine this his book and get a view of the discovery
of his deceipts, they will be so far from being moved either by his reasons
or by his authority to relinquish their own faith, that doubtless they will
rather be quite out of love both with him and his religion. And even in this
particular persuasion of his he shows himself so ridiculous as no man of
judgment if he mark his proceeding can ever esteem him as a man worthy either
to be heard or followed. For what man in the world will be moved by him who in
steed of proofs brings his own persuasions only of the testimony of the
conscience of those whom he houlds for adversaries, and whose consciences if he
proceeds consequently, he must either hold for bad, or at the least for
unknown to himself. What is this but absurdum per absurdius? and yet he is so
confident in this his vain persuasion that he comes to specify diverse
points of Popery which he affirms to have been renounced by many Romanists,
some of which points are no Popery at all, but either his own lies, or else
his ignorant mistake of the true doctrine of Papists in those particulars.

For example in his page 32. he demands of us how many Romanists do smile
at fained miracles, at divine virtue ascribed to medals, beads, Agnus deis,
and the like which saying of his is merely grounded upon a false supposition
or rather a slanderous falsitie of his own coining, as if it were true that
the Romanists in general did both approve false miracles, and hold divine
virtue to be in medals, beads, and Agnus deis, neither of which is true or was
ever defended by any Romanist in the world, it being both true and manifestly
known that though all Romanists hold the foresaid things for holy, and do
assure themselves that God does sometimes please to work strange effects by
them, yet do not they believe that any divine virtue does reside in them, no
more then they hold to have resided in the shadow of S. Peter which
nevertheless wrought strange and miraculous effects. So that by this discourse
Sir Humfrey does only prove his own ignorance and malice, as also he does
most manifestly in the next lines, and that more subtillie then before, where
he demands how many (Romanists) do prefer the lawfulness of Priests
marriage before the keeping of a concubine; although says he, the contrary be
the common doctrine of the Church of Rome? In which words he does endeavor
craftily to insinuate to his reader that it is a point of Popery, and that
the Roman Church does approve the keeping of a Concubine by a Priest rather
then he should marrye, whereas the Church does not in any case allow either
of the one or the other; but only houldes that, that Priest offends God
more grieuouslie who marries to wit after his preisthood and vow of
chastity, Saecerdos si fornicetur aut domi concubinam foueat, tammetsi graui
sacrilegio sese obstingat: grauius tamen peccat si contrahat matrimonium. etc.
Costerus. Enchir. cap. 17. de caelib. prop. 9.
then he who keeps a concubine at home, as Costerus though incompletlie cited
and unjustly taxed by the knigth, does most truly affirm. And this is a
certain known truth among divines consequent to the prohibition of Priests
marriage which prohibition once supposed he that should marry should not
only commit a scandalous sin of the flesh, as that Priest does who should
be a Concubinarie, but also he should in that case commit a Special irreuerence
against the Sacrament of marriage by his sacrilegious frustration of the same
which sacrilegious action and violation of his now is of it self a more
grievous sin then is the keepinge of a concubine, as all men, Aug. de bono
vide cap. 11.
except the reformed brothers, do easily apprehend, conformable to which S.
Aug. says that marriage after a vow of continency is worse then adultery.
Plane non dubitauerim dicere lapsus and ruinas a castitate sanctiore quae
nouetur Deo, adulterijs esse pe^ores. ibidem.
To omit, that for a Priest to marry in that manner besides the foresaid
crimes it includes also the scandal of Concubinate it self.

But now Sir Humfrey for conclusion of his former discourse passes to the
point of merits. Lastly (says he) how many for fear of vain glory and
presumption and by reason of the uncertainty of their own works do rely
wholly upon the merits of Christ Jesus? show me that learned man that lives a
professed Papist in the Church of Rome and dies not a sound Protestant in
this prime foundation of our faith. Thus the knigth; who as you may easily
perceive by way of a glorious Epiphonema goes about to persuade his reader
that all the learned Romanists before their death renounce that article of the
Roman Church which affirms that a man justified by the grace of God can merit
the Kingdom of heaven by the good works he does by virtue of the grace of God
and merits of Jesus Christ, because forsooth, many for fear of vain glory
and presumption, and by reason of the vncertainelie of their own works at
their death do rely wholly on the merits of their Savior; whereas indeed
these are two far different points of doctrine, the first, that is, the
truth of man's merit in the sense declared being a matter of faith in the Roman
Church; the second which is the confidence in merits, being none; the one being
about the substance of merits, the other only about the quality; the one
about the absolute acknowledgment of merits, the other only about the
ouergreate confidence or presumption in them: And so he that renounceth the
first, renounceth Popery indeed, but he that renounceth the second does not;
neither can he be called a Protestant as the knight would have him to be, for
the only denial of confidence in merits, as in it self it is most manifest.
By all which, because Sir Hu^frey with all his divinity had not judgment to
distinguish, he proves nothing but does only hallucinate between truth and
falsehood. Neither does the example of B. Gardener which he alleges any whit
avail his cause; for suppose that be true which he affirms of him, to wit,
that in his sickness he set the merits of Christ in the gap to stand betwixt
Gods Judgment and his own sins, yet cannot he thence infer that therefore
the Bishop renounced the truth of the doctrine of merits in general, nay nor
his own merits in particular, but only the presumption of them, or the
confidence in them by reason of the uncertainty of them, as I have already
declared. Besides that, this which he is affirmed to say of himself being but
only a relation of Fox, we may justly doubt of the truth of it. For he has
been long since hunted to his hole by a learned Catholic and his unright
Reverence manifestly convinced to be a Father of lies.

Wherefore he is of no credit with us; neither can his testimony prevail
against us. We care not for him, his acts and monuments are of no moment among
us, his testimony is not the confession of a Romanist which is that our
adversary promised in the title of his book, and we expect he should perform:
and to omit the small credit which I and all Catholics give to the relations
of Master Fox, yet I find that he who has dealt so falsely with others, has
now found one of his own profession who dealt not very sincerely with him
in recounting out of his relation the passage of B. Gardener at his death, for
whereas Sir Humfrey will needs prove by the testimony of Fox, that this Bishop
renounced Popery at his death in the point of merits: yet Fox in his 2622.
page only says thus: That according to the report of one whom he will not
name (perhaps he could not) when D. Day Bishop of Chichester came to him and
began to conforte him (great comfort I warant you) with words of Gods promise
and free justification in the blood of Christ our Savior repeating the
scriptures to him. Winchester hearing that. What my lord, quoth he, will you
open that gap now, then farewell altogether: to me and such other in my case
you may speak it, but if you open this window unto the people then farewell
all.

And now according to this speech of B. Gardener let the judicious reader
imagine if he can how Sir Humfrey can possibly gather that he renowced Poprietie
and that a wiser man will not rather collect the contrary: to wit that although
days words might be uttered to him and others of learning and understanding
without danger of peruersion, but not perhaps to the common people who by their
ignorance and frayletie might easily misinterpret them (as he did that uttered
them) and so easily receive harm by them not withstanding that they of
themselves in a found fense include nothing but truth.

The knight also cites to the same purpose (yet to no purpose) Bellarmine in
his sixte book of Iustif. 7. chap. and his testament or last will. Saying in
the first place that it is the safest way to rely wholly on the merits of Christ
Jesus. But this according to that which has been already said of this matter,
is at the most but only a renuntiation of presumption or overmuch confidence
in our own uncertain merits, as is most apparent out of Bellarmines own
doctrine even in the very same chapter where the words cited by Sir Humfrey
are found thoug much otherwise then by him they are related as afterward I
will declare. Now in the second place, the words are these. I beseech him
(that is God) says Bellar. that he would admit me into the company of his
Saints and elect, not as a valluer of merits, but as a giver of mercy; which
words, if the knigth had not been overmuch distracted, he would easily have
perceived that they favor his intent nothing at all, as not co^teyning any
kind of renuntiation of the due estimation of merits in themselves, but only
signify a certain negative renuntiation of confidence in his own particular
deserts at the hands of God, which is both most conformable to the same most
learned and virtuous Cardinals own doctrine in his book of Justification
before cited, and also most pious in it self. But it seems our learned
Knigth, was either ignorantly or malitiouslie deceived in the true meaning of
Bellarmines words, imagining very sillilie, that because the Cardinal at his
death prayed God to receive him into glory, not as a valuer of merits, he had
held God for no valuer of merits at all, whereas God knows, the pious Prelate
had no such meaning; neither do his words rightly co^strued, carrye any
such sense rather do express the contrary by tearming God a valuer of merits
in general: although on the otherside considering his own weakness, Non
aestimator meriti sed veniae quaesumus Largitor admitto. Can. Miss.
and the uncertainty of his own particular deseruinges, out of an humble
mind, he feared to put himself upon God as upon an esteemer of the same
(which in case he had had no merits at all might have failed him) but rather
made choice at the hour of his departure to cast himself upon the mercy of
God which he assured himself could never be wanting to those who duly rely
upon his goodness and bounty. And put the case a poor distressed creature
should beg an alms of Sir Hu^frey entreating him to take pity on him, not
as a learned man but as a liberal knight, could he therefore iustelie say the
beggar denied him to be a learned man? no suerlie, and why? marie because the
beggar although he knew him well enough to be a learned man, yet he knew also
it was not his learning that could relieve his necessity, but his money. After
this manner it happens in the case we treat of: for as such a beggar could
not truly be said to have renounced the knights learning in that case, so
neither could Cardinal Bell: be justly supposed to renounce God as a valuer
of merits in the state he was in by recurring unto him only as to a bestower
of mercy. And thus we see that Bell: dyed as great a Roman Catholic as he
lived, notwithstanding all Sir Humfrey can say against him he can no sooner
make Bellarmin a Protestant the^ he can make a Protestant of the Canon of the
Mass it self which has the very same words which the Card. Piously, used
at the hour of his death. Next after Bellarmine Sir Humfrey has placed
Albertus Phigius, who if we will credit him, tells us he became a Caluinist
even in this very point by reading of Caluins institutions. Thus he relates
this story and will have us take it on the word of a knight, but he must
pardon us Roman Catholics if we refuse to believe it upon the bare relation
of an adversary, as houlding our selves to have full as great authority at
the least, to deny it as he has to affirm it. True it is he quoteth a place
of the author in the margin, but cites not a word of his in the text, as in
the like occasion he uses to do, which causes me to persuade my self there
is no such matter to be found, or at least some mistake in Sir Humfrey in the
true meaning of his words, as he mistook in Bellarmine. Especially
considering that Pighius is notoriously known to have been a professed enemy
both to Luther and Calvin as his works do testify. And that Pighius
differs both from the Lutherans and Caluinists in the maine paint. Of
justification it is most manifest by his whole discourse, and particularly in
that he absolutely affirms in his 53. page of his Controversy of
justification, that faith alone though it be never so perfect is not sufficient
to justification, saying: Sed fidem hanc solam non sufficere nobis etc. in
which place although he does not name or mention Calvin, yet does he
expresselie and professedlie dispute against that doctrine of his and Luther
which puts justification in faith only, so that it hence plainly
appears that if Pighius did read Caluins Institutions as Sir Humfrey
affirms, it was not to follow them but to confute them. He quoteth also
Ruardus Tapperus to what purpose I know not except it be to fill his margent
for ostentation, and so I leave it till he shall further please to declare his
meaning, touching that citation which may be he reserueth for a fourth edition:
in the interim that Taperus was a professed papist his books do witness. And
now having made it plainly appear that not one of the Romanists which the
knight cites in this section ever renounced any point of Popery before his
death, or at the least that no one, nor all the testimonies which he produces
out of Romanists do prove any such renunciation, as he auerreth: and also
that some of those which he alleges for proof of his assertion, as true
Romanists, were not as much as in external show of the Catholic religion
long before their death, and some of them in no part of their whole life as is
manifest in Jewel, Fox, and Cook, and consequently could not in reason be
produced by him as witnesses in favor of his cause noe more then Martin Luther
or John Calvin, this I say supposed, it only now remains that for the
conclusion of this Period we do not only censure the Contents of this
section for unsound doctrine, but also the author of it for an indirect and
false dealer in the confirmation of the seame.

THE IV. PERIOD.
THE fifth section of the book is about the impediments of reformation of such
things as the knight judges inexcusable in themselves: and for impediments of
reformation, he assigns wordlie policy and profitte, the things which he
calls inexcusable are the doctrine of Purgatory, Indulgences, prayer for the
dead, the communion under one kind, worship of pictures, and such other points
of Catholic doctrine all which he temerariouslie affirms to be inexcusable
and that only by way of an odious relation of then in particular, but
adduceth nothing whereby to prove any one of them to be such indeed, and so
neither will I prove any thing against him here more then that he utters
diverse untruths in this one section. First in that he affirms the faith of
Purgatory is confirmed by Counsels meerelie for the benefit of the Pope and
his Clergy, which is nothing else but a manifest calumniation without all
appearance of truth, it being a thing wholly improbable and contrary to common
sense, either that so many learned, grave and pious men as use to be assembled
in Counsels should determine any thing as matter of faith meerelie for any
Temporal respect whatsoever: or that the laity of the Christian world,
especially Princes, Kings and Emperors being so much more powerful as they
are known to be, then the Pope and Clergy, should condescend to a matter of
such indignity as the knight would have it and so much to their cost, if they
did not otherwise assure themselves both of the integrity of those who meet in
those assemblies, and also of the truth of the doctrine in it self. Besides
that the same is manifestly convinced of falsitie, for that prayer for the
dead, and consequently Purgatory, was known in the world before either
Pope, or Counsels were extant as appears by the history of the second book
of the Macchabies the 12. chapter which our adversaries themselves cannot deny
to be a true history, though they impudentlie deny it to be Canonical
Scripture against the plain testimony of S. Augustine who affirms the
Church to hold it for such though the Jews hold the contrary. Libros
Machabeorum non Iudaei sed Ecclesia pro Canonicis habet. Aug. l. 18. de Cuit.
Dei cap. 39.
So that this is but an odious fiction of Sir Humfrey and his companion
sectaries invented by them in disgrace of the chief pastor of the Church and
the rest of the Priests without either authority reason or sense, accusing
them as hinderers of reformation who labor most for it, only because they
refuse to admit a reformation of their fashioning which indeed is no
reformation but a deformatio^ or defacing of the ancient Church and an
introductio^ of a certain new fantastical Church most disfigured and ugly,
vniformiter difformiter deformis, void of all luster and beauty both internal
and external, nor ever known or heard of before the days of Luther.

His second untruth it in the end of the 39. page, where he affirms, that the
Romanists in the psalters leave out the second commandment. This second
untruth of the knight inuolueth a double untruth, the first is in that he says
the Romanists leave out the foresaid commandment in their psalters, whereas
it is well known that in the whole Psalter the second commandment is not to
be found, at the least formally as it is one of the ten. But this untruth
because I perceive it proceeds rather of ignorance the^ malice, I am content
to pardon. Yet because when he said the Romanists left it out of their
psalters, he either meant they left it out of the text of Scripture, or that
they left it out of their catechismes only, I answer that whethersoeuer he
meant, he cannot be excused for telling an untruth, first because he falsely
supposes for certain, that to be the second commandment which indeed is
but an explication of the first, in the opinion both of S. Augustine and either
all or almost all other divines of later years. Secondly because those same
authors: who hold those same words. Thou shall not make to this self any
graven image, to be the second commandment, do not hold that the Images of
Christ and his saints, and due honor of the^, are prohibited by that precept
among Christians, but only a gentilicall or idolatrous use of pictures or
graven images of false Gods and other such abuses as be repugnant to the due
honor of the true and only God. Lastly it is also false that all Catechismes
leave out that precept, if precept it be, as appears by the Catechism of the
Council of Trent and of Canisius and some others. So that you see now that the
knight is every way convinced of an untruth. And although it is true that in
diverse of their Catechismes the Romanists leave out all the rest of the first
commandment as they lie in the text of the 20. of Exodus excepting those:
Thou shall have no other Gods but me. Yet they do not so with any sinister
intention, as the reformers vniunstly accuse them to do, in regard, it is well
known that those who use to instruct children in their Catechism
notwithstanding they use not to fill childrens heads with such proclamations
against graue^ Images as the reformers do, yet they never omit to declare
and explicate exactly the whole tenor of the words of the commandment,
inculcating most diligently the true sense of the same and teaching them how
far it is true that images and the worship of them in prohibited by that
precept, and the difference between the use of Christian images and those
which according to the practice of those times were unlawful. But the true
reason why Romanists most commonly omit those words: Thou shall not make to
thy self any graven thing, and the rest, is because Catechismes being only a
short sum of Religion, it is fitting they be most brief and compendious as
being so more easy to learn and more conformable to the capacity of children,
then if they were large and prolixe in words, especially considering that that
which wants in words may far more easily be added by the master by may of
cxplication then many lines can be committed to memory by weak, and unapt
scholars. Neither do the Romanists make catechismes for Jews and Gentiles
but for Christians and Catholics and so it were both superfluous and
impertitinent to put in all the words of the text or more as the reformers
do, some of which do belong rather to the law of moses then to the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, and therefore for the very same reason the Romanists leave
out of their Catechismes diverse words of the precept of the Sabbath, as
judging them unnecessary for the instruction of Christian children. As also
because according to the doctrine of S. Augustine in his question upon this
commandment, those only words: Vide illum infra in fine op.
Thou shall have no other Gods but me: are the whole substance of the first
commandment, and the same in sense with the other which immediately follow in
the text, to wit, thou shall not make to thy self any graven thing, by which
graven thing S. Augustine in the same place understands an idol and not any
graven image as the reformers do corruptedly use to translate and commonly put
it so in their Catechismes for the false instruction of their children. And
hence it plainly appears that the Romanists leave not out of any of their
books of Christian doctrine any of the ten commandments, but rather that the
reformed brothers put in one more then either according to Scripture or the
doctrine of S. Augustine they ought to do, as by the true division and number
of them at the end of this work shall the be more manifestly declared.

Thirdly it is untrue which he affirms, though by way of insinuatio^ only,
that the Romanists do adore a piece of bread. For it is well known they adore
not the bread but that which christ, himself affirmed to be his body, for
which adoration besides the scripture, we say with S. Augustine: nemo illam
carnem manducat nisi prius adorauerit. Aug. in ps. 98. and so this, though Sir
Humfrey as it seems was ashamed to utter it plainly, yet it is no less then
a plain leasing. Besides these untruths which I have now rehearsed he has
diverse very idle positions either false or frivolous, as for example that the
power of binding and loosing depends upon Purgatory, that by defect of the
Priests intention the worshipper of the body of Christ in the Sacrament may
commit flat Idolatry and the like, these because they are left by him unproven,
I will also leave them vnrefuted till such time as I shall see his proofs
produced, and in the mean time I condemn this whole section, as containing
matter both idle, false, calumnious, and full of inuectiue bitterness and
puritannicall spleen against the Romanists accusing them that they turn the
necks of Scriptures clean about; and that it is a common practice of their
Church of Rome to make greater price of victory then verity, and other such
matter as is unworthy to be published either by printe or pen.

THE V. PERIOD.
THE knight in his sixth section promises to refute that which he terms the
Common practice of his adversaries in their refusal of reformation, because
says he, we cannot assign the precise time when errors came in. This I
confess is a matter of importance, and if Sir Humfrey can perform his promise
he will in part recover the credit which he has formerly lost; if not, his
honor must still lie in the dust. Now to perform his promise he must know
that it is not sufficient for him and his partners to assign the time and
persons when and by whom those points of doctrine, which they hold to be
erroneously maintained in the Roman Church, were first broached, but they must
also by some means or other convince them to be errors indeed. And as long
as Sr Humfrey fails in the demonstration of either of these, it is manifest he
does not perform his word. He says indeed very confide^tly in the beginning
of this section, that they (meaning as I suppose himself and his companions in
sect) are all eyewitnesses that the errors, of the Roman Church are this day
so notorious that a very child may perceive the^; but what is this to the
purpose? this is but a frivolous repetition of their own bare words, this is
no lawful proof among adversaries, this is no demonstration, it is not this
Roman Catholics are bound to stand too, this is no reasonable satisfaction for
us or any other be he never so indifferent. We must be convinced of errors by
Scriptures, by consent of ancient Fathers, by plain definitions of approved
Councels. And till you Sir Humfrey, or some of your consorts make this point
clear, we acknowledge no errors in our Church, and by consequence no
necessity of reformation in that nature, as your discourse in this section does
falsely suppose. Moreover touching the assignation of time and persons, when
and by whom the pretended errors of the Roman Church had their beginning, it
is apparent the knight is in a great error, in that he persuadeth himself
that the Romanists exact of the reformers to assign the time and persons when
and by whom such errors as they attribut to their Church were first broached:
For the Romanists do not stand precisely upon assignation of the very first
time and persons, or the very first Authors of those supposed errors, no they
put no such rigorous task upon the reformers, but only oblige them to show
when they were first so notorious and apparent in the world, as both they and
their authors were condemned in any authentical Council or assembly, and
this is that only which the Catholics demand of their adversaries, and not
that which Sir Humfrey imagines; and therefore whatsoever he produces in this
section for the confirmation of his intent in that particular, proceeds upon
false supposition, and consequently proves nothing but his own ignorance.
That which is a thing not only proper to Sir Humfrey in diverse places of his
book, but also so generally incident to the rest of his conreformers as in
reading their works I have often lamented their case to see them so labor in
vain like hounds spending upon a false sent. And surely nothing else but the
foresaid false supposition was the cause why Sir Humfrey proceeded in this
point in so far a different manner as he does from the rest of his fellows.
He not taking upon him as they ordinarily do (though without effect) to assign
the time when those imagined errors first began, and who were the first
authors of the same; but as it were supposing that to be impossible, or else
aduerticeing the ill success which his fellow sectaries have had in
prosectuing their way, fell upon a quite contrary course, indeauouring to
show a distinction and difference betwixt the heresies of the Arians,
Pelagians, and Donatists, and the errors which he supposes to be in the Roman
Church: granting that those heresies being such as did (says he) indaunger
the foundation and openly disturbed the Church, might easily be discovered,
adding that their first authors de facto were observed and the times known
and place pointed at. But the change of the Romanists doctrine, says he, was a
secret Apostasy scarcely to be known or discovered, condemning also that for
an impertinent demand which the Catholics usually require of the reformers,
to wit, that they show the first time and produce the first authors of the
supposed Romish errors; by this showing himself very desirous to rid his
hands of so hard a task as he has undertaken, as does plainly appear by
those examples and similitudes which he uses for that purpose though not very
well applied. And now this being the sense of the first part of this section,
let us briefly examine how soundly he proves his intent. Matthew. 13.24.
In the parable of the sower (says he) Christ himself gives a full answer to
those impertinent dedemaunds, he tells us that after the good seed was
sown, the enemy sowed tares when men were a sleep. Thus he answers to the
impertinent question of the Romaniste as he terms it. But good Sir Humfrey
if the question be impertinent why do you answer to it? why do not you rather
pass it with silence then spend your breath about it? but it seems you will
needs answer, yea and father your answer upon our Savior as if Christ
himself had answered in the words cited to the same question which you say the
Romanists demand of you. Fie what application of Scripture is this! are you a
master in Israel and yet ignorant that our Savior used that Parable to
another purpose? did not our Savior mean by the enemy, the Devil, by the
tares vices, and by the field the soul of man? is not this a common exposition
of interpreters? or if you will needs have it understood of errors in
doctrine, and of the sower of them in the field of the Church, of which we know
there are good store in your congregation, yet can the parable of our Savior
avail your purpose nothing at all. For that the question of the parable is
general and so a general answer was sufficient. But the demand of the Roman
Catholics is particular and so in reason it requiers an answer in particular;
for example, the question is if Purgatory be an error of the Roman Church,
who was the first author of it? In what age did he live? if not to communicate
in both kinds be an error of the Roman Church, who was the first author of
it? etc. So that in the question of the Romanists there is no impertinencie in
the sense in which they demand it, but the knight's answer is both impertinent
in it self and also falsely fathered upon our Savior.

True it is that the Roman Catholics, as I have said before, do not oblige the
knight nor any of his consorts to answer so metaphisically to their demand as
he erroneously persuadeth himself. But they only urge the reformers to name
the authors and time of such supposed errors in a moral manner; that is who
they were that have been in any lawful Council condemned for either the
broachers or public defe^dours of those he calls errors. Which is a demand
so far from impertinencie, that there has never been any notorious error
in the Church of God which has not been noted so by the writers of the
several ages wherein they lived, or at the least, by some others presently
after their time. And so hence it appears manifestly, that the Roman
Catholics being no wise guilty of impertinencie in their demand, yet Sir
Humfrey is most impertinent in his answer, and not only an impertinent
alledger of Scriptures, but also a perverse detorter of the same, as
interpreting them by the direction of his own private spirit, and fathering
upon Christ that which he never thought nor intended. And this being the
substance of his answer to the Catholics, which in truth has no substance in
it: yet he still prosecuteth the same making a great flourish out of the
circumstances of the same parable adding that the tares were sown by the
enemy when men where a fleepe, and that by consequence they could not see him
and much less produce him. I confess that there both have been and be yet in
the world who by reason of the excessive moisture of their braiue have sleeped
both very soundly and very long. I know the history of the seven sleepers
who slept some hundreths of years. But I never heard of any kind of
Congregation of people that all and every one of them sleeped about a thousand
years together and that so profundelie as that not one of them did ever so
much as once dream of the enemy who sowed tares in their field. Is it
possible that all the good men of the houses in all that space of time and in
every place should have been so drowsy and so overcome with sleep as none of
them could not one time or other awake and catch the thief before the days of
Luther. Surely there was never a Puritan in the world in all that long space
of time, for if there had been any, some of them would infalliblie have
awaked, their hott brauies and fiery spirits would never have suffered them to
lie so long in a lethargy, but up they would have been and laid about them
most vallantlie with the whole bulk of the Bible, and have gone to cuffes with
Penance, Purgatory and prayer to Saints, with pictures, Pope and prayer for
the dead, with merits, mass, and monasteries, with confession, tradition, and
transubstantiation, with Indults, fasts, and satisfactions. These I say and all
other such like tares as the knight esteems them, had been by those Zealous
Paterfamillians rooted out as soon as ever they peeped out of the earth, if
God had not permitted them to take a great quantity of Diapodium or powder
dormant by force of which, as I suppose, they were all so lulled a sleep as
not one of them could once awake till the time of Doctor Luther, who if he had
chanced to have taken one only dram of the same receipt, it is more then
probable that great work of his had lain undone till this present day, and
perhaps for ever. From this parable Sir Humfrey passes to confirm his answer
by reasons, saying that the doctrine which they complain of his a mystery of
iniquity, and mysteries are secret and work not openly and publikly but by
degrees, leasurelie, cunningly and warily to avoid discoueries. Thus he, in
which words you see he calls errors a mystery, but describes them rather like
a monster then a mystery, attributing such subtlety unto them as if they had
the use of reason; whereas all errors which are such truly, are by nature
void of reason, and so, no mysteries but rather monsters. He says they are
secret and work by decrees: And it is true, errors may be secret for a short
time, but long they cannot, especially such as we here speak of, that is
publicly defended by a whole Church and all or most of them many ages
together. Mental and private errors may be so smothered as not only not by
degrees, but so as they never come to light and knowledge of the world at all,
but vocal errors proposed and published to the people cannot possible be long
unknown or undiscovered. Witness the errors of Luther and Calvin and of all
other condemned heretics, all which doubtless for a time they were, meerelie
mental, yet even before the death of their authors notice was taken of them,
and perhaps also they were publikelie condemned. And so we see by this reason
Sir Humfrey proves nothing to this purpose, but tells us of nothing but mere
impossibillities contrary both to reason and common sense. Neither does it
avail him for defense of his answer to say that errors being at first
oftentimes in one or few persons only, they cannot easily be espied, for
this is not that the Catholics urge him too, we have told him already that
we will not deal so rigorously with him, we are content to grant unto him
that errors only so far published, were not easily, especially by his
drowsy consociates, to be discovered: nevertheless we see no reason at all
why our supposed errors being so publicly taught, penned, and preached as
they were long before either Luther or Wicklifs time should not have been
known for errors if such they were, long before either of their days, This
is the point of the question, this is the demand the Roman Catholics urge,
you Reformers are to answer, as long as you go about the bush as you do, and
answer not directly, neither your Evangelical parable nor your cockatrice
egg, though you write it with a great letter to make it seem bigger, will
serve your turn, they are but only similitudes or examples ill applied, they
prove nothing but only serve you for a vain flourish. Exempla illustrant
non probant, especially if they be equivocal as yours be. And as for your
distinction of public heresy and secret Apostacy, it is much more frivolous
then all the rest you have brought for the proof of your purpose in this
section. And although perhaps you showed no small subtlety in it, as you
thought, yet is it in it self a most ignorant piece of doctrine, for that not
only the common and usual sense of the word Apostasy, but the very
etimologie of the same word, which signifies a defection or discession, does
demonstrate that the thing signified by it must be a much more external and
public action in it self then heresy used to be, and so that which is
ordinarily and vulgarilie called Apostasy, must be public and not secret;
and therefore when any error comes to that degree of malice as it may truly
be called Apostasy in this sense, it must of necessity be known, and
consequently it is such as cannot be kept secret but may be most easily
discerned, yea much more easily then any heresy how public soever it be,
as being an aggravating circunstance of the same. And thus we see that for the
knight to yield a reason why the errors of the Roman Church could not easily
be discovered, because they were secret Apostasy, is both most absurd in
itself, and also inuolueth a contradiction in regard it includes that a thing
may be Apostasy that is a thing of it own self public, and yet remain so
secret that it cannot be discovered. Neither is that which Sir Humfrey farther
adds in the same place less absurd to wit that secret Apostasy works
warelie and closely in the time of Darkness when the servants of the
husbandman are asleep, for if all Apostasy as it is commonly taken, must be
public, as I have showed, how can it then truly be said to work in darkness
or by night? or how can the seed of it be scattered at unawares to the
servants of the husbandman, certainly except the servants be so sluggish that
they sleep both nights and days, months and years, yea and many hundredth
of years together, nay and all the days of their life, they cannot but
discover the tares of Apostasy, which is not ever in seed as the knight
falselie supposes, but is the increase or rather full growth it self, or yet
rather the ouergrouth of the crop of heresy which is truly the seed of it.

From hence the knight proceeds to the second part of his section, in which
he endeavors to show us an undeniable truth (as he terms it) that some
opinions were condemned in the Primative Church for eroneous and superstitious
vhich now are established for articles os faith in the Roman Church. And for
this his position he produces an instance out of S. Augustine lib. de moribus
Eccles. Cath. cap. 34. in which place he complains that in his time the ruder
sort of people were entangled with superstition even in the true Church; I my
self (says he) know many that are worshipers of Images and sepulchers whom
the Church condemns and seeks every day by correction to amend them as
ungracious children: Thus far Sir Humfrey out of S. Augustine. To which I
answer that this place of S. Augustine has been so often objected by the
modern sectaries that it is worn quite thread bare with handling, and I
persuade my self that all the Catholic authors that ever writ of
controversies have sufficiently answered it if it came in their way.
Nevertheless least Sir Humfrey should think himself neglected by me, Nolite
consectari turbas imperitorum qui vel in ipsa vera religione superstitiosi
sunt, vel ita libidinibus dediti vt obliti sint quicquid promiserint Deo. Aug.
supra.
I answer first that S. Augustine complains in this place of certain
gentillicall errors and abuses in the adoration of images and sepulchers then
practiced in the true Church by some private ignorant and vicious persons, who
without distinction either of the one or the other did worship the tombs and
pictures of all sorts of people. Secondly I answer that S. Augustine in the
place cited, speaks not of any general doctrine taught in his time touching
the adoration of pictures, but only of some superstitious abuses in the
practice of the same, and so also in this respect the objection is impertinent.
I answer thirdly that suppose there were some particular persons in the time
of S. Augustine guiltye either in the manner of their worship of pictures or in
their doctrine concerning the lawfullnes of the same, does it thence therefore
follow that Catholics are guilty also of the same crime? or is it consequent,
that that honor which Catholics grant to the pictures of Christ and his
Saints, is just the same with that which Saint Augustine mentions? No
suerlie. For as there may be abuse committed in the due honoring of pictures,
so there may be also lawful use in the due adoreing of them, and so it is
clear that it is no true manner of argument or true consequence to collect so.
Those people whom S. Augustine reprehended for adoring of pictures in his time
did worship images reprehensiblie: But the Romanists do also worship images,
therefore the Romanists do worship images reprehensiblie. This I say were it
in any figure, yet is it a captious form of argument containing a manifest
fallacy or equivocation in the minor by reason of which the Sylogisme
concludes nothing.

Now upon the foresaid words of Saint Augustine, Sir Humfrey adds a descant
of his own, in which he comits diverse faults. First in that he says that
although S. Aug. did note some people of his time for superstitious worshippers
of images, yet did he neither name the authors of that error, nor shows
the time when it began tacitlie, intending hence to infer that neither are
the reformers bound to assign the names of the authors of those errors
which they attribute to the Roman Church, nor yet the time of their defense of
them. But this inference of the knight is no conclusion at all, for that the
case of S. Augustines time which is the antecedent of the foresaid illation of
the knights, is far different from the case of the reformers as well for that
S. Augustine speaks of an error which happened in his own days (as Sir
Humfrey confesses) and perhaps by such persons as he could not name without
prejudice of their fame, as being such as practiced those superstitions so
privately that they were not known to more, or at the least, not to many
more then himself; after which manner preachers do use to reprehend vices of
persons known unto them, and yet name them not: as also and chiefelie because
S. Augustine was never demanded of them in particular, or any other way
urged to declare their names. None of all which circumstances occur in the
case betwixt the Reformers and the Romanists, and so out of the words of S.
Augustine, which be the Antecedent of the knights argument, no true consequence
can be deduced against the Romanists.

In has autem sanct as ac salubres obseruationes si qui abusus irrepserint, eos
prorsus aboleri sancta Synodus cupit ita vt nullae falsi dogmatis imagines and
rudibus periculosae errorem praebentes statuantur etc. Con. Trid. sess. ^5.
init.
Another fault sir Humfrey commits also in that he affirms that this
corruption which S. Augustine and the Church of his time condemned for
superstition was confirmed 400. years after by the second Council of Nice for
Catholic doctrine, and is now decreed by the Council of Trent for an article
of faith. Thus the knight. But this is all false, and grounded only upon an
erroneous persuasion of his own, videlicet, that the worship which those
people of which S. Augustine speaks, gave to pictures, is the same which the
Roman Church practizeth at this day according to the definition of those two
Counsels; that which he neither proves here, nor can ever prove in any
other place, as being manifest by the doctrine of those same Counsels in this
point, that they both condemned this superstitious practice of those people
reprehended by S. Augustine and the Church of his age, eue^ as much as he did in
those former times. And so neither this instance framed by Sir Humfrey out of
S. Augustins words, nor the whole argument it self concludes any part of his
intent in this section: but rather conuinceth by the fact of the same S.
Augustine that no error can possible so secretly steal into the Church, but
it is either presently or within a small time espied and noted for such by one
authentical author or other; which is quite contrary to the position which
the knight indeauoureth here to establish and whoely conformable to the tenet
of the Roman Church in this matter.

After this Sir Hum. makes a large repetition of diverse points of doctrine
defended by the Church of Rome, as if they were far different from the
intention of those who first taught or ordained them, but for this his conceit
he brings no proof at all, and so I leave it as a voluntary tenet founded
upon his own small authority. True it is he produces diverse authors for the
confirmation of the same alleging them all for Romanists, and yet some of them
are not so esteemed to be, as is manifest in Cassander, and Agrippa, which the
Roman Church houlds not for her true children but rather for illegitimate. Be
cites also Ioannes Ferus who although he was at the lest once a Romanist,
whatsoever he was afterward, yet there have been noted in his works diverse
ill sounding propositions, whether it be for that his books have been
corrupted by the sectaries of these times as by some editions of his works may
be justly suspected, or whether it be that the man was something more rash in
his assertions then he ought to have been. But howsoever it falls out with
him in that nature, yet the place cited out of him by Sir Humfrey if it be
rightly understood, it proves no more but that by the private abuses and
superstitions of some particular men, many things ordained by holy men with a
good intention, have received some accidental change. And although Ferus
exemplifieth in the feasts of the Church, Ceremonies, images, Masses,
monasteries, yet certain it is his meaning was not that all these are either
unlawful or superstitious, or that they are new articles of faith or not to be
used in the Church of God, as the knight and his companions would have the^ to
be, but only out of a pious zeal he wished that such abuses might be
corrected as he perceived in his days to have crept into the practice and use
of the same; which is a thing so far from Sir Humfreys purpose of proving an
alteration in the Doctrine of ancient times, as it is both very conformable to
reason, and also to the decree of reformation made in the Council of Trent
above cited. He cites also Marius de schis. and Council. Et Polidore de
invent. rerum, as speaking of the uncertainty of the entrance into the Church
of Priests marriage. But this is nothing to the purpose the knight here
treats. For how I pray you does this prove that there are errors of faith in
the Roman Church, whereas the restraint of marriage of Priests it self, is no
article of faith as Sir Humfrey ignorantly supposes, but only a precept of
the Church and a matter of manners; and yet in case it were so in it self,
nevertheless certain it is that the question or difficulty about the first
beginning of the restraint (of such only the cited authors speak) is no
matter of faith and consequently can be no error even in Sir Humfreyes own
false supposition of errors in the Roman Church. To omit that suppose the
first beginning of the restrainte of marriage in Priests were truly an article
of faith in the Roman Church, yet this being but one particular instance or
example drawn out of two Romanists only, it cannot sufficiently prove that
general position of Sir Humfrey, to wit, that there was a known time when
those tenets (meaning the points of doctrine which the Council of Trent
defined) were not certainly known or generally received by the Roman
Church; since that, according to the rules of Logike no general proposition
can be inferred out of a particular, and that touching the rest of the articles
of the Roman doctrine, the reformers are so far from the assignation of the
time of their beginning, that Sir Humfrey him self even in this very place is
forced to hold this precise time of the beginning of the same to be
unnecessary to be assigned. And although by reason that both those authors are
ce^sured in the expurgatorie Index, we are not bound to give credit unto them:
yet this I say that supposing they are both here produced to testify that the
beginning of the and prohibition of Priests marriage can not be assigned, it is
rather a great argument that it was appointed by the primative Church itself
then introduced of later years. Besides this Sir Humfrey does falsify Polydor
in the place he cites, for he does not affirm that marriage of Priests was not
altogether prohibited til the time of Gregory the 7. but that it could not be
taken away till that time. Alijs snper alijs promulgatis legibus non ante
Pontificatum Gregorij 7. coniugium adimi occidentalibus sacerdotibus potuit.
Pol. lib. 5. cap. 4. edit. Antuerp. 1554. Cassander although Romanists esteem
not of his authority either pro or contra, yet here he is corrupted by Sir
Humfrey for company lest he should laff at his follows, where for those
words non temere reperies thou shall not easily find, he translates was not
expresselie defined, speaking of the number of the 7. Sacraments, of which
Cassander says that a man shall not easily find any who have constituted
any certain and determinate number of Sacraments before Peter Lombard. non
temere quenqua^ reperies ante Petrum Lombardu^ qui certu^ aliquem and definitum
numerum sacramentou^ statuerunt. Cass. p. 951.

To the like purpose or rather to no purpose he cites also Gregory de Valentia
saying that it does not appear when the communion in one kind began, which
saying of Valentia is most true, and his meaning is that the custom of
communicating so, is so ancient that it has no known beginning, and
consequently it has been ever in the Church of God since the time of Christ
and his Apostles, and by them practiced. And therefore Valentia adds
prefentlie after to that purpose, that ever from the beginning of the Church
there has been some use of the Eucharist under one kind, as he has showed
before. Which words as making plainly against him he was content to omit.
So that this testimony either proves nothing to the knights purpose, or else
more then he desires, as also want of honest dealing in the citation of it. To
omit that when that manner of communion first began in the Church is no
article of the Roman faith. The same author is also once again cited by Sir
Humfrey for that in the same place he affirms the foresaid manner of
communion not to have been generally received but a little before the council
of Constance, which is no more to the purpose then the other allegation or
scarce so much. For this and some other testimonies which he cites page 60. at
the most do but only prove that some of the points of doctrine, or rather of
practice only of the Roman Church, were not declaredlie known and definede
successively in all differences of times since the establishment of the
Gospel; which the Romanists do not deny: though they know it is a point
impertinent to the matter here in question, which is not whether the Reformers
can show a time when the tenets (at he terms them) of the Roman Church were
not certainly known or generally received, but also and cheefely whether
they were erroneous; and then if such they were, when they were first
publikelie known and by what authentical Council they were condemned. Which
points because Sir Humfrey has proved neither of them, neither by the
testimonies of the authors he cites nor by any other forceable proof, he has
failed of his purpose and promise, and no way recovered the reputation in this
section which he lost in the former, but rather has much increased his
discredit, and consequently the censure falls more heavily upon him then it
has done before. To the testimony of Scotus about transub. I will answer in
an other place.

THE VI. PERIOD.
Here Sir Hu^frey from a divine is turned Herold and promises the Romanists
he will show them their Pedigree in faith drawn down from the ancient
heretics, and contrarily the pedigree of his own faith drawn from Christ
and his Apostles. So that here you see the knight has undertaken a large
piece of work, and how he will be able to perform it I know not. It is a
double task and therefore I doubt he will not go through with it without
double dealing. And I suspect this the more for that he says he will proceed
ordine retro grado, that is as I conceive, he will imitate the Crabbe in going
backward, and therefore I can expect no better of him then a crabbed piece of
business. He says he will perform his work by ascending upward, but indeed
his proceeding is so preposterous that a man can find neither ascent nor
descent it it. For he begins which lattine service, as he calls it and prayer
in a strange tongue, the beginning of which he attributes to Pope Vitalian
about the year 666. And ends with the restraint of marriage of Priests which he
affirmed in the 60. page, in his former section not to have been altogether
established till the time of Gregory the seventh; and so according to this he
does not ascend but descend, and yet more then this, in the middle of his
section he treats of transubstantiation as first decreed in the Council of
Lateran about four hundredth years ago, and thus you see one cannot conceive
that he either ascends or descends directly, but rather that he skippeth
up and down like a mad man without any order at all; but now I will cease to
seek order were none is to be sound, and come to the examine of the particular
passages of his pedigree.

He endeavors to prove the Roman faith to descend from ancient heretics,
first because they teach prayer in an unknown language not to be unlawful,
(as says he) Epiphanius affirms of the heretics Osseni in the first age.
But to this I answer that S. Epiphanius is here abused by the Knight, for he
censureth not those people of heresy because they held prayer not to be
unlawful in an unknown language, as Sir Humfrey falselie and ignorantly
affirms, but for other errors of theirs which the same Epipha: relates and
confutes in his 19. heresy. Neither does he only affirm the Osseni to teach
there was no need to make prayer in a known tongue as Sir Humfrey imposes
upon him to the end their error might some to agrree with the doctrine of the
Roman Church in this particular, Quibus porro vorbis and inanibus vocibus
postea in ipso libro decipit, cum cum dicit: nemo quaerat interpretationem sed
solum in oratione hoc dicati, and hac ipsa nimirum ex Habraica lingua
transtulis velut ex part deprehendimus cum nihil sint ea quae imaginatur,
iubet enim dicere: Abar, Anid, Moib, Nochile etc.
but he further charge Elxai the chief prophet of that sect that he deceived
men with idle frivolous and strange words containing nothing of that which he
imagined, and commanding his followers to pray in this manner: Abar, Anid,
Moib, Nochile etc. adding that they should not seek for any interpretation of
them, which form of prayer nevertheless holy Epiphanius does not so much
condemn for the strangeness of the words, as for the obscurity and
deformity of the sense, as appears by his words here quoted in Latin. All
which is far different from the doctrine and practice of the Roman Church in
this point, which neither in sense nor words uses any other prayers then
such as are conformable to that original prayer which Christ him self
appointed his disciples to use. Neither can Epiphanius with any show of
probabillitie be thought to have condemned them for heretics for that which he
knew neither to be contrary to Gods word, nor any definition of the ancient
Church, either before or in his time. And as for that which the Reformers
commonly allege out of the fourth to the Corinthians and first epistle. I say
that if the same Epiphanius had understood it as written against such like
prayers, infalliblie he would have alleged the place against those heretics.
But he well knew that the Apostles meaning was not to condemn prayer in what
language soever it were, but only to prefer prophecy before strange
tongues, or at the most to prefer prayer in a known tongue only as more
edificatiue, not as absolutely necessary, and the contrary to be condemned
as unlawful or superstitious, as the nouelists will needs have it.

And as for precept of the Church the same Epiphanius in like manner knew there
was none extant. True it is, in his time the practice of the Greck Church was
to have their prayer in Greek and the Latin Church in Latin, but as then
neither all those of the Latin Church did understand that kind of Latin which
then was used in the Church, so neither all those of the Greek which was used
in the public service of the Grecians do (excepting Scholars) as I have
been truly informed, by one of that nation; which practice as you see, is
nothing contrary to the practice of the present Roman Church but rather
agreeable unto it. In regard that though the Latin Mass be not understood of all
the hears, yet is Latin even by the confession of one of the most learned
Protestants of this age. The common language in the world and understood by
many. And so this citation is no less in effect then a falsification of the
foresaid Father; as is likewise another which follows out of S. Ambrose whom
the knight produces to the same purpose, yet citing his words somewhat
corruptedly, which he rehearses in this manner. There were certain Jews
among the Grecians as namely the Corinthians who did celebrate the divine
service and the Sacrament sometimes in the Syriake, and most commonly in the
Hebrew tongue which the people understood not. Thus the knight cites S.
Ambrose in his Comentary upon the fourth chapter of the first to the
Corinthia^s: but his words which I have read, in Latin are these. Hi ex
Hebraeis erant qui aliquando Syra lingua, plerumque Hebraea in tractatibus aut
oblationibus vtebantur ad commendationem, gloriabantur enim se dici Hebraeos
propter meritum Abrahae. Thus S. Ambrose, where as you see that understands
Latin, there be neither the words divine service, nor the word sacrament to be
found, but in tractatibus and oblationibus, that is as I conceive in their
exhortations and sacrifices. That which as it seems S. Humfrey did deceitfully
translate otherwise then the words do sound and signify, least it might
appear to his reader that the Jews converted, even in those primitive times
did celebrate sacrifice as the Roman Church does now, and not such a dry
Rapsodie as the reformers do in these our days. But that which is most
remarkable of all, it is manifest out of the same S. Ambrose in the same
Coment, that S. Paul did not condemn that practice of the Jews as contrary to
the law of God, as the sectaries do, but only that he sought to bring them
from it as a thing less profitable in regard of the Grecians among whom they
lived, and that in respect of their exhortations or instructions which the
Corinthians could not understand in Hebrew or Syriacke. That which manifestly
appears in the very same words of S. Ambrose immediately precedent where
speaking of the sense and meaning of the Apostle in the place upon which he
commenceth says only: vtilius est paucis verbis in apertione sermonis loqui
quod omnes intelliga^t quam prolixam orationem habere in obscuro, that is to
say: it is more profitable to speak few words in plain speech which all may
understand, then to have a long oration or prayer in obscurity. Besides this:
those last words: which the common people understood not, are none of S.
Ambroses, but added by Sir Humfrey and foisted in as if they had been the
reason yielded by S. Ambrose, why the Jews did amiss in using their service
in an unknown language, whereas yet he expressly says they did it for
ostentation and commendation, so that S. Humfrey deals here deceiptfully in
diverse respects for the advantage of his false cause. For justification of the
which he utters a most impudent untruth in his own words following:
affirming, that Saint Paul wrote that whole chapter of the fourteenth of the
first to the Corinthians expressly against prayer or divine service in an
unknown tongue, whereas in truth the Apostle expressly and directly labors
only to persuade the Corinthians that it is better to prophecy, that is, to
interpret Scriptures, then to exercise donum linguarum, the done or gift of
tongues. And although the Apostle in one place makes mention of prayer or
praising of God in general saying, si benedixeris lingua etc. yet he neither
makes express mention of public service in a known language, nor gives
any precept about it, but only prefers that prayer which he who prays
understands before that which he understands not; and that not absolutely,
but only with relation to that time; leaving it for future times to the
discretion of the Church to be determined according to the condition and nature
of the persons that live in it, and other circumstances. Always supposing that
although, caeteris paribus, some one thing be better then another even ex
natura rei, yet by some notable change of the time, place, or persons, that
same thing which once was more profitable, may afterward become less
profitable, yea and sometimes quite unprofitable, or at the least of very small
estimation, and importance. And yet for all this our Puritanicall crew run so
a madding with their Bible craste, that they will needs have a precept where
none is, rather then want their wills, especially if it be to Cross the
Papists. That which cannot appear more plainly then in the matter of which we
now treat, where the knight for the conclusion of his discourse cites Saint
Paul his words in form of a precept, as if he had said pray with the spirit,
pray with the understanding also, whereas the Apostles words are only these,
orabo spiritu, orabo and mente, that is I will pray with my spirit, I will pray
with my understanding, in which form of speech you see there is no form of
precept or command at all, except one will corrupt the text as he has done.

The knight also cites one Wolfius as affirming that Pope Vitalian first
introduced Latin service and prayer in an unknown tongue. But he might have
saved the labor of citing that author whom he knows we do not admit as a
competent witness in regard we find him to be a wolf indeed that is an
enemy to our religion, and for such he is noted in the Index Epurgatorie. How
be it we do not deny but that Vitalian for the conservation of uniformity in
the public service of the Church might make a general ordinance in that
particular and extend the practice of some particular and most ancient
Churches of the West in which Latin service was ever used, to all the rest of
the Occidentall Churches. Nevertheless we deny that by this action he either
did contrary to Gods law or renew the heresy of the Osseni which I have
showed all ready out of S. Epiphanius to have been of a far different
nature notwithstanding out adversary does endeavor falselie to persuade the
same to his simple reader neither was this as the knight untruely affirms to
introduce service in a strange language, but rather in the most known in the
world and that in which most nations agree: and so this may serve to
demonstrate that the Romanists derive not this part of their Pedagane from
ancient heretics (as our adversary does calumniate) but from the practice of
the most ancient Church at the least in the west parts of the world to wit
the Apostolical Church. And hear we see also that Sir Humfrey in steed of
deriuing the Pedigree of the Roman faith from Jews and heretics he deriues
his own from the Father of lies that is from the abuse of both scriptures and
ancient Fathers of the Catholic Church.

In the next branch of the Pedigree he plaplaceth transsubstantiation, going
about to prove that it was the doctrine or at least the practice of certain
heretics named Helcesaitae, who feigned a two fould Christ as (says Sir
Humfrey) the Mass Priests do, who admit one body with all his dimentions and
properties in heaven, and other in the Sacrament which has noe properties of a
true body. Thus Sir Humfrey talks most absurdely, ignorantly and falsely.
Ignorantly for that according to this discourse he houldes the want of local
dimensions or properties of a body sufficient to cause an absolute,
individual, and sustantiall diversity in it, and to distinguish it really
from it self and so to make it an other distinct body which is so void of
reason that if he had not been grossly ignorant in Philosophy have he would
never uttered such doctrine unworthy of other confutation them a school
stamp or hiss. He speak also falsely first in that he either affirms or
supposes Priests to admit that Christ's body in the Sacrament is without any
properties of a true body. For they all contrarily teach and believe that as
Christ's body in the Sacrament is the same which is in heaven, so has it all
the same properties excepting local extension. Secondly he speaks falselie in
that he Fathereth that on Priests which none of them either thought or tought,
and so makes them guilty if the Helcesaits heresy only for that which he
has forged in his own fantastical brain. Also abusing the authority of
learned Theodoret in misaplying his words in which he vtters not any jot or
title by which it can be gathered that these heretics meant of Christ in the
Sacrament when they feigned a double Christ; but of two visible Christ's, the
one above I know not where, and the other below in the world or I known not
where else: adding that the supernall Christ did in former times live in many,
but at being descended from above. And more, they said, he passed into other
bodies, and other such like fabulous stuff they have of Christ which never
enterd into the cogitations of any people of learning and judgment; and
therefore it is as great dotage in Sir Humfrey to impose this upon Catholic
Roman Priests as it was in the author to inuentit, as will yet more plainly
appear by the formal words of Theodoret which here I put in the margin.
Christum autem non vnu^ dicunt (Helcesaitae) sed hu^c quidem inferne, illum
vero superne, and eum olim in multis habitasse, postremo autem desce^disse.
Iesum aute^ aliquando ex Deo esse dixit (Elxai) aliqua^do vocat spiritu^.
quandoque autem Virginem matrem habuisse, in alijs autem scriptis ne hoc
quide^; Rursus autem eum etiam dicit transire in alia corpora and in vnoquoque
tempore diverse ostendi. Theodor. heret. fab. to. 2. lib. 2. page 380.


And the like absurdity Sir Humfrey commits in that which immediately
followees, attributing the doctrine of transsubstantiation to one Mark, an
heretic, because forsooth he by some kind of inchaunting invocation over the
Sacramental cup caused the wine to appear like blood, which sacrilegious
example and practice of Marcus what force it can have to prove the Romanists to
be of that fellows Pedigree let any indifferent man be judge. And moreover to
take away all doubt and assure himself the more, let the reader but consider
what S. Irenaeus in the same place cited by Sir Humfrey videlicet. libr. 1.
cap. 9. says of that Marcus, I doubt not but he will, see most clearly how
egregiously our adversary abuses the Romanists in this matter. Marcus (says
S. Irenaeus) pro calice vino mixto fingens se gratias agere, and in multum
extendens sermonem inuocationis, purpureum and rubicundum apparere facit vt
putetur ea gratia ab ijs qui sunt super omnia, suum sanguinem stillare per
inuocationem eius, and valde concupiscere presents ex illo gustare poculo vt
in illos stillet quae per magum hunc vocatur gratia.

By which words let the reader if he understand Latin judge how void of grace
is he who so shamelesselie applies this to the Consecration of the Eucharist by
Priests of the Roman Church.

And yet the preposterous knight not being content to have spoken so
irreasonably, yet further adds that the authors of transsubstantiation were
those disciples that beleaued the the gross and carnal eating of Christ's
Flesh. From whence he would deduce that the Romanists descend from the
Judicial Capharnaits in this point.

But this is a most gross and ridiculous conceit of him to imagine that they
can be successors to such as refused expressly and absolutely to believe that
same which they hold for a matter of faith though not in the same gross manner
which those incredulous disciples of Christ did apprehend, and as you also not
like reformers but deformers out of the madness of your noddles grossly
conceive them to do: but in a much more spiritual manner, and yet, truly,
really and substantially, and not only in spirit as your private spirits would
have it. Which, if it were so only, it were not the true Sacrament, which
necessarily requires to contain really and not by faith only that which it
represe^ts: but it were only a mere shadow or figure of a Sacrament as the
sacrifice of Melchisedech, the manna and bread of Proposition were signs and
figures of the Sacrament of the holy Eucharist as not containing but only
representing the body and blo^de there contained.

And supposing that Sir Humfrey himself absolutely denies the real presence
of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament, and supposing also that as S. John
does testify the Capharnaits did also refuse to believe the same, this fable
of Sir Humfrey, mutat o nomine, may much more aptely and truly be verified of
him and his companions (I will not say then of the Romanists) but even then of
the Capharnaits themselves; in regard the Capharnaites, as far as can be
gathered by the text of the sixth of S. John, did according to the
interpretation of S. Augustine but only make question of the real presence, or
possibility of Christ's giving his body to be eaten not otherwise the^ in that
gross manner which they then conceived in their minds, whereas yet the knight
and the rest of his congregation directly and absolutely affirm that Christ's
body and blood are as far from being really contained in the Sacrament as
heaven is from the altar or Communion table. And thus it appears that by
indeauouring to make us Capharnaites, Sir Humfrey shows greater grossness of
co^ceipte them the gross Capharnaites did by denying the real presence upon
the same or like carnal imagination for for which he and his mates renounce it.

From this Sir Humfrey passes to another part of his Pedigree where he puts
in the Popes supremacy as if it were derived fundamentally from the Gentiles,
and to this purpose he applies the words of our Savior Lucae. 22.25. so
ridiculously that it makes me think he is will read in the book of Quodlibets
or quaeris, he makes use of Scripture so ingeniously.

The words of our Savior are these. The King of the Gentiles exercise Lordship
over them, and they that exercise authority upon them are called benefactours.
Out of which place Sir Humfrey will needs infer and prove that the Gentiles
have given the Pope his supremacy and consequently that they are the
benefactours and founders of the Roman faith in that particular. Which passage
of the Scripture how falsely and impertinently it is applied and how contrary
to the true sense those words of our Savior are used and abused by the knight,
I will not spend time in examination of it, but leave to the judicious reader
to censure of it as he pleases: only I cannot omit to take notice how he
concludes this his idle discourse with another place of Scripture, out of the
20. of S. Math. where our Savior says to his disciples, whosoever will be
great amonght you, let him be your minister, and whosoever will be chief
among you, let him be your servant: by which words it is most appare^t and
agreed upon by all interpreters, except the nouellists, that our Savior
intended nothing else but to give his disciples a lession of humility, not so
that they ought not in any case to have superiority and dominion in that nature
one over an other, which were to destroy the Hierarchy and government of the
Church which he himself ordained, but that those who were to have it should
not abuse it by dominiering tira^nically over their subjects or subordinates.
And yet Sir Hu^frey I know not by what rule of Alchimie, will needs extract out
of this place that his and his fellows doctrine touching the supremacy is
received from Christ himself. But in truth with all my Logike I cannot
understand how he infers any thing hence for his purpose except he will
deduce ex quolibet quodlibet, and make a nose of way of the holy Scripture as
indeed he does very frequently, framing such a sense to the words as makes
for his position, and thence deduceing arguments for proof of the same. And if
one were disposed to make use of Scripture in that manner, he might-aswell
infer out of this place a kind of supremacy for the ministry, especially
if we write the word minister with a great M. as Sir Hu^frey does. And indeed
I must confess that your ministers are great among you in diverse respects.
For some of the^ have great Bishoprikes, others great benefices, and almost
all greare wives and great store of children. And if the King would be pleased
to suffer them, the^ why might they not come to obtain the supremacy every
one is his turn by succession, and in that case they might doubtless make
far better use of the cited places of Scripture in favor of themselves then
they do in applying them against the Romanists. And according to his false
dealing in applying the Scripture, so does he falsely affirm that the Popes
supremacy was first granted by Phocas falsely applying the testimony of
Vrspergensis to that same fol. 149. for Valentinian the Emperor who lived
above 100. years before Phocas in his epist. to Theodosius which is extant in
the preambles of the Council of Calced. says of the Bishop of Rome, to who^
all antiquity gave the principality of preisthood above all etc. And as for
Vispergensis although the authority of his book may justly be suspected as
having ben published by the reformers or rather deformers of Basil, yet does
he not say as Sir Humfrey affirms that Phocas first granted the supremacy to
the Bishop of Constantinople, but rather the quite contrary, for thus he
says. Post Gregrorium Bonifacius sedit cuius rogatu Phocas constituit sedem
Romanae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae caput esse omnium Ecclesiarum, cum antea
Constantinopolitana Ecclesia se scribebat primam omnium. After Gregory (says
Vrspergensis) Bonifacius did sit at vhose request Phocas constituted the seat
of the Roman and Apostolical Church head of all Churches: for before the
Church of Constantinople writ her self first of all Churches. So that as the
reader may plainly know, Sir H. has falsified Vrspergensis relating that to
be said by him of the Church of Constantinople which he directly speaks of the
Church of Rome: which nevertheless is so little to his purpose that howsoever
he takes it, being not a gift of the Emperor (as not being in his power since
that nemo dat quod non habet) but only a declaratiue constitution, I cannot
conceive why our adversary should have corrupted this author except it were
to exercise his hand. Especially supposing it is a thing impossible to
apprehe^d how either Phocas or any other man or Angel could give the Pope of
Rome his supremacy (which is that in this passage he intends to prove) by
co^ferring the same (according to our adversaries relation) upon the Bishop of
Constantinople. And so I leave this for one of S. Hu^freyes unintelligible
mysteries of his reformed faith.

For worship of Images S. Hu^frey deduceth the Pedigree of the Romanists from
the Basilidians and Carpocrationes. But his deduction is false and for it he
falsely cites S. Ireneus, who says indeed those fellows were heretics for
worshipping of images but in another kind far different from the honor
which the Romanists use toward pictures. Vtuntur aute^ imaginibus and
incantarionibus, and reliqua vniuersa pererga. Irenaeus. l. 1. cap. 23.
And he expressly conde^neth Carpocrates as plainly appears by his words,
Imagines depictas quasdam de reliqua materia habent fabrica^as dicentes formam
Christi factam a Pilato illo in te^porequo fuit Jesus cum hominibus and has
coronant and ponunt eas cum imaginibus mu^di Philosophoru^ videlicet cum
imagine Pythagorae and Platonis and Aristotelis and reliquem, and reliquoru^
obseruationem circa eas similiter vt gentes faciunt. Iren. eod. l. cap. 24.
because he put the Image of Christ among the images of gentilicall
Philosophers, and because also he put a croune upon it, and worshipped it in an
Ethnicall manner, and not according to the custom of Christians, but as S.
Epihanius here is. 27. explicateth, those heretics, Gentilium ministeria
perficiebant, they sacrified unto all those images to wit of Pithagoras and
Aristotle together with Christ's image after the manner of the Gentiles: and so
this part of the Pedigree contains an error in in heraldry, and proves no
true descent.

In the next passage which is about the Communion in both kinds Pope Leo tells
us, says the Knight, that the Manicheis a sort of heretics in his time used
the Sacrament in one kind videlicet in bread only. Cum ad tegendam
infidelitatem suam (Videlicet Manichei) nostris audea^t inesse mysterijs ita in
Sacramentorum communione se temperant vt tutius latea^t, Ore indigno Christi
corpus accipiunt sanguinem autem redemptionis nostrae omnino haurire declinant.
Leo ser. 4. in quad.
It is true S. Leo says so, but he does not condemn them for heretics for
that reason, but be cause they abstained from wine as from an unclean
creature, and because they did not believe that Christ had blood in in his
body, and so that which Pope Leo did when he gave command that those should
be diligently observed who usually received but in one kind, was done purposely
for discovery of the Manicheis who crastily to conceile their heresy touching
the truth of Christ humanity communicated with the Catholics dissemblingly:
the Custom of that time being to communicate sometimes in one kind and in
both, as now the Grecians practice, and therefore that holy Pope did discretely
command those should be diligently observed who in all occasions did use to
receive under the form of bread only, houlding that for an evident argument
of their aborring of the blood of Christ. By which it is evident that even that
same time the communion was lawfully used by some in one kind otherwise S. Leo
needed not to have used any great diligence for the dicouerie of the Manicheis
in regard that if all generally had been obledged to communicate in both, the
Manicheis who frequented the Communion would have been discovered at the first
by their abstaining from the chalice. And in like manner the knight abuses
Bell: toutouching a proof of his taken from the example of the Nazarites as if
he had derived wholly or chiefly the communion of one species or kind from the
practice of their communion, whereas he does not so, but having by other
arguments of Scriptures, Fathers, Counsels and reasons sufficiently
established the doctrine of the Church in that particular; he brings that of
the Nazarites only as a confirmation of the same.

Lastly the knight concludes this point with those words of S. Luke, drink
you all of this, whereby he would prove that the communion in both kinds came
from Christ, and so it did indeed, but not by precept given to all in
general, but only to those then present and to those whom they represented
as to be their successors that is the Apostles, and all Priests after them but
not to any Puritan or Puritannicall minister as not having from them any true
succession. After these passages Sir Humfrey proceeds to invocation of Saints
and Angels, the founders of which he affirms to have been the heretics
called Angelici, and for this cites Saint Augustine ad quod vult Deum. But
this is idle for the Angelicalls were heretics not for the invocation of
Angels, but either for that they held them to have been creatours of the
world, or in regard they used to boast of their own Angelical manner of life,
or because as Saint Augustine testifies they were so addicted to adore Angels,
Erant in Angelorum cultum inclinati quos Epiphanius iam omnino defecisse
testatur. Aug. haeres. 29.
that they did use to worship them with latria or divine honor, all which
kind of adoration the Romanists with the same Saint Augustine give to one
only God. And so the knight does pervert the truth and abuses S. Augustine
who in his 61. q. upon the Genes. explicating that passage of Apocalips 19. in
which the Angel prohibited S. John to adore him says: neither let it move the
that in a certain place of scripture the Angel does prohibit a man to adore
him and does admonish him that he rather adore God: for the Angel did so
appear that he might have adored him for God, and therefore says S. Aug. the
adorer was to be corrected by which it is manifest that when S. Augustine
teaches that the Angelici were heretics because they were inclined to adore
Angels, he means because they adored them with divine honor and not because
they gave that due inferior worship unto them which the Romanists use.

For works of merit and supererogation he produces for authors the
heretics named Cathari and Puritans, but the heresies of these sectaries were
far different from the doctrine of the Romanists touching these two points.
Nay they were never defenders of either merit or works of supererogation that
ever I read, but that for which they were condemned by the Catholic Church was
chiefelie for their defense of the errors of Nouatus and particularelie for
denying remission of sins and the authoririe of the keys in the Church, and
for that they affirmed their own pretended purity to be above the doctrine of
the Apostles as not contained in it but far exceeding it, and therefore they
were called Cathari that is pure ones. Cathari qui seipsos isto nomine propter
munditiam superbissime atque odiosissime nominant: Secundas nuptias non
admittunt, paenitentiam denegant* Nouatu^ sectantes haereticum, vnde etiam
nouatiani appellantur. S. Aug. haeres. 38. And S. Isidor in the very place
cited by Sir Humfrey says of them. That they named them selfs Cathari for
their purity for glorying says he in their merits they deny penance etc.
And so it appears by this that the knight belyes Saint Isidor in two respects.
Because he quotes him lib. 8. cap. de Haeres. Christian: as if he did testify
that these heretics were the first authors of doctrine of merit, and works
of supererogation. Whereas S. Isidor has neither the one nor the other. Nor
yet makes any mention in that place of works of superogation.

And so according to this let our Puritans of England, and Sir Humfrey him
self as none of the least of them, examen their consciences well, and doubtless
they will find themselves to have far more affinity with the foresaid
fellows then the Romanists, who both gra^nt remission of sins by virtue of
the Ecclesiastical keys and also deny and renounce all such purity of
Spirit as the Puritans pretended.

He adds for conclusion the worship of the blessed Virgin Marie to have been
the heresy of the Collyridians, Quaedam mulieres currum quendam sieve sellam
quadratam ornantes expanso super ipsum linteo in die quadam illustri anni per
aliquot dies panem ponunt and offerunt Mariae. Epipha: impres. Basilicae Iano
Corn. interp. omnes autem panem participant in ^tum enim hoc m^lier^ opinio
est. ibidem. Continentiam praedicat nuptias autem scortationem putat asserens
nihil differ matrimonium a scortatione sed idem esse. Epipha. ibid. nec
recipient in suorum numerum coniugio vtentem. Aug. haer. 25.
and restraint of the marriage of Priests he attributes to the Tatians and
Manicheis, and for proof of this he cites Epiphanius heresy 79. and 46. But
he abuses this author in both those places. And first touching the
Collyridians both the same Epiphanius and others do expresselie teach that
they worshipped our blessed Lady idolatrously by attributing divinity and
sacrificying unto her, or her image a cake of bread or tart as the very word
it self in greek does signify; and so this superstitious heresy can be no
part of the Popish pedigree. Moreover Sir Humfrey does falselie affirm that
Epiphanius calls these women Idolaters, for he does not in any place give them
that general name, although they iustelie deserved it, but he calls them
simulachrificae that is sacrifiers to images, which is an heresy as much
repugnant to the Roman Catholics doctrine as it is to Protestancie: which
word alone is sufficient to clear the Romanists from the heresy of those
profane people: but this, as it seems, the crafty Cauallier dissembled for
the advantage of his false accusation. Secondly concerning the heresy of the
Tatians it is certain out of that Epiphanius, Ireneus, and others that they
rejected Matrimony absolutely and compared it to fornication which as the
world knows the Roman Church does not, but only for the greater decency and
reverence to the service of God, prohibits it in those only who dedicate
themselves to the same by receiving holy orders and priesthood. And thus you
see Sir Humfrey insteede of deducing the succession of the Romanists from
ancient heresies, he makes but a Pedigree of his own lies. And the like I say
of the Manicheans whom the knight falselie, and injuriously affirms to have
been our predecessors in that they prohibited marriage in Priests quoting in
the margent S. Epiphanius heresy 46. whom nevertheless I have diligently
read but cannot find it. Yet I find in Saint Augustine who both followed S.
Epiphanius much in his descriptions of heresies, and also was better acquainted
then any writer of his time with the errors of the Maniches, that they did
not only prohibit matrimony in Priests, but that they absolutely detested
the same, for so he says of those sectaries. Verum si ad virginitatem sic
adhortamini quemodum hortatur Apostolica doctrina: lib. 3. contra faust.
Manich. cap. 6.
qui dat nuptum been facit, and qui non dat nuptum melius facit vt bonum esse
nuptias diceretis, sed meliorem virginitatem sicut facit Ecclesia quae vere
Ecclesia Christi est, non vos spiritus sanctus ita praenuntiaret dicens
prohibentes nubere. Ille enim prohibet qui hoc malum tsse dicit, non qui huic
bono aliud melius anteponit. Denique eum vos precipue concubitum detestamini
qui solus honestus and coniugalis est, and quem matrimoniales quoque tabulae
praese gerunt liberorum procreandorum causa, vnde vere non tam concumbere quam
nubere prohibetis. And presently after. Nec ideo vos dicatis non prohibere qui
multos vestros auditores obedire nolentes in hoc, vel non volentes, salua
amicitia toleratis, illud enim habetis in doctrina vestri erroris, hoc in
necessitate societatis. Thus plainly S. Augustine whose words to make them
also plain to those who understand not Latin I will put them in English. But
if (says he) you so exhort to virginity as the Apostolical doctrine do^th
exhort: he who gives in marriage does well, he who does not give in marriage
does better so that you should say that marriage is good, but virginity better,
as that Church does which is truly the Church of Crist, the holy spirit
would not thus prenuntiate you saying: prohibiting to marie, for he does
prohibit who says this is evil, not he who does prefer before this good
thing an other thing better then it. Finally you do cheeflie deteste that
carnal conjunction which only is honest and matrimonial, and which the
matrimonial writings also declare to be for procreation of children, whence it
is that you do not so much prohibit carnal copulation as you prohibit
marriage. And presently after the same S. Augustine adds. Neither therefore
can you say that you do not prohibit to marie. Because many of your auditors
being not willing or refusing to obey in this, you tolerate them for friendship
sake, for you have that in your doctrine of your error, this in necessity of
society. By which words of this most famous doctor we may plainly gather
that suppose S. Epiphanius had those words: in sacerdotibus: yet he did not
mean of Priests only when he spoake of the Manichean heresy, but of a
direct and absolute prohibition of marriage as unlawful and detestable in all
sorts of persons: and consequently this passage of Sir Humfrey drawn out of
the words of S. Epiphanius contains no kind of disproofe of Roman Catholic
doctrine in this particular, but a faule imposture of his own, if he can not
produce out of this author the words which he cites.

And whereas he affirms that the Maniches were our predecessors and
prohibited marriage in Priests quoting S. Epiphanius in the margent, Dices mihi
omnino in quibusdam locis adhuc liberos gignere presbyteros, Diaconos; and
Hypodiaconos at hoc non est iuxta canonem, sed iuxta hominum mentem Epiph.
Haeres. 59.
I find no such heresy in his Cathalogue of the heresies of Manicheus: but
contrarily I am sure I find in an other place of his works that Priests were
by the Ecclesiastical Canons prohibited to marie. For thus he speaks.
Doubtless you will tell me that even yet in certain places Priests, Deacons
and Subdeacons get children. But this is not according to the Canon but
according to the minds of men etc. And with these and other errors which he
affirms to be taught in the Roman Church but does not specify, he ends his
Pedigree of the Romanists, which though he houlds it to have descended either
from ancient heretics, or at the least to have, as he says, near affinity
with their adultered issue, nevertheless presently after having better
examined his conscience and considered more deliberatelie of the matter, he
seems to loose some of his former confidence, and so adds that if he has
failed in calculating the right nativity of their ancient doctrine, yet sure
I am, says he, they are utterly destitute of a right succession in persons
and doctrine from the Apostles and the ancient orthodox fathers of the
primative Church, so the knight, by which discourse you may easily perceive
even by his own words, and the if which he makes that all which he has
hitherto said has no greater warrant then his own surety, which although his
authority and credit were far greater then either we have found it to be, or
it can be in it self, yet were it not safe for any man to rely upon it, but
rather to hold it for very uncertain and fayleable. Especially considering
that all which he has produced in proof of the same are either mere trifles,
or at the most very poor arguments grounded upon false suppositions yea and
upon plain untruths, falsifications, and corruptions both of scripture and
fathers, and so partly through ignorance and partly through malice he has
showed himself a most partial and false Herold.

And now although this might suffice for the censure of the section ensuing
because it pertains to the same subject, yet least the knigth should gru^ble
I will a forde it a Period a part.

THE VII. PERIOD.
IN his eight section therefore, Sir Humfrey promises to produce testimonies
of his adversaries touching the antiquity and universality of the Protestant
faith in general. So he proceeds in the title. To which he adds by way of
asseueration that if the Roman Church does not confess that the reformers are
both in the more certain and Safer way in the Protestant Church, I will,
says he, neither refuse the name nor the punishment due to heresy. Here we
see the knight is as free in his promises as ever he was, let us therefore
examen how he performs them, for if he does not, he cannot escape either the
name of an heretic, or at the least, the desert of punishment itself even in
this mortal life. He begins thus. He that shall question us where our
Church was before Luther, let him look back to the Primative Church: nay let
him but look into the bosom of the present Roman Church and he shall find
that if ever antiquity and vniuersallitie were marks of the true Church, of
right and necessity they must belong to ours. So Sir Humfrey. In which words
as it were by way of general assertion he briefly declares the antiquity
and universality of his Church to be found both in the Primative Church and
also in the present Roman Church, in which assertion there being two parts and
that no small ones, the first he endeavors to prove by showing a conformity
between the doctrine of the Church of England with that of the Primative
Church, and descending to particulars he tells us that his Church teaches and
believes the same three Creedes which were instituted by the Apostles and the
Fathers of the Primative Church, and not created by Luther: as also two of the
seven Sacraments which were, says he, by the confession of our adversaries
instituted by Christ. The same he affirms of 22. books of Canonical
Scripture which he says were universally received in all ages. Likewise of
the seven general Counsels he affirms that four of them were ratified by
the Cannons of the Church of England, and confirmed by act of parliament, and
thus he runs through the points of doctrine and faith in which they and we
agree, adding to them the confession of his adversaries. And yet in all his
large rehearsal of points of faith, he makes no mention of either those in
which the Romanists and reformers disagree, nor of those new articles of the
English Creed which dissent from the doctrine of the Primative Church, and
which indeed are those that make the reformers guilty of heresy, as its the
doctrine of Justification by faith only, the denial of the real presence
and such like: But craftily leaving them out as if they were not to the
purpose he treats, whereas in truth by reason of these new errors
obstinately defended by them, there can be no universality nor antiquity in
their Church notwithstanding they had never so great conformity both to the
ancient primative, and modern Roman Church in all the rest of their belief.
Especially supposing that any one error in matter of faith obstinately
defended is sufficient to take away all true antiquity and vniuersallitie of
any Church or congregation whatsoever, as even the reformers themselves, as I
suppose, cannot deny, for that, as the scripture affirms, that he who
offends in one thing is made guilty of all the rest, so he that in one only
point of faith houldeth contrary to the most universal and ancient Church,
makes himself presently guilty of want or defect both of universality and
antiquity in his belief. For as Saint Nazianzene says to this purpose in his
37. oration toward the end: the articles of faith are like to a gould chain
from which if you take away any one link (as Saint Ambrose says) Ad cap. 9.
Lucae lib. 6. in fine.
you take away your salvation, vnum horum, says he, si detraxeris tetraxisti
salutem tuam. And so we see that the knight by reason he omitteth in his
discourse that part upon which the very medium of his argument chiefelie, or
at the least greatly depended, his proof of antiquity and universality in
his Church falls to the ground. But besides this defect he fails also in
that he says he believes the three Creedes instituted by the Apostles and
Primative Fathers of the Church. For either he means that those three Creedes
do sufficiently conteyne all that he is bound to believe or no. If the first
he means, then what will become of his solifidian justification, and of the
39. articles of the English faith, the greater part of which is not to be
found in those Creedes. If he means the second, then does he ill in leaving
those particulars out in the rehearsal of his faith. Nay more then this, for
if matters were well examined, I doubt not but the knight notwithstanding the
protestation of his faith of the three Creeds, yet he would be found holting
in the true and generally received, or Catholic sense of diverse of the same,
as that of the perpetual virginity of the mother of God, in that of the
desce^t of Christ in to hell, of the Catholic Church, the communion of
Saints, remission of sins, and the like I say of the doctrine of the 4.
first General Councels, and of the Sacraments: in which particulars our
adversaries vnderprese^ce of reformation maintain diverse deformed errors,
specified and confuted by divines of the Roman Church. Moreover the knight is
also defective in the proof of the antiquity and universality of his faith,
and does egregiously equivocate in that he says that two of the Sacraments
which the Church of Rome houldeth, are professed by the reformers and confessed
by their adversaries to have been instituted by Christ, not broached by
Luther. This I say is equivocal and does not prove his intent: for although
it neither is nor can be denied, but ingenuously confessed by the Roman Church
that there are two Sacraments, yet does she not confess that there are only
two Sacraments instituted by Christ as the reformers profess, but houldeth and
believes five more as well as those two to have been instituted by Christ,
which five being denied, or at the least three or four of them, both by Luther
and the rest of the pretended reformers, and on the contrary having been
received for Sacraments in ancient times, as afterward shall be declared, the
deniers of the^ whosoever they be, cannot rightly claim either antiquity of
universality of doctrine in that particular. And the same may be said for the
same reason of the 22. books of Scripture, and the seven first general
Counsels, in the which he faith of the reformers is neither ancient nor
universal first for that they hold those twenty two books for canonical
Scripture and exclude all the rest out of the cano^, which nevertheless as
appears by the testimony of S. Augustine herecited in the marge^, Totus autem
canon Scripturarum in quo istam consideratione^ versandam dicimus his libris
continetur. Quinque Moses etc. Tobias, Hester, Judith, and Machabeoru^ libri
duo and Esdrae duo. Et postea. Nam and illi duo libri vnus qui sapientiae, and
alius qui Ecclesiasticus inscribitur de quadam similitudine Salomonis esse
dicuntur nam Jesus filius Sciach eos scripsisse consta^tisse perhibetur: qui
tame^ quoniam in authoritatem recipi merueru^t, inter propheticos numera^di
sunt. Aug. l. 2. de docti Christiana. c. 8.
were also canonical in the ancient Church. And secondly because they receive
but only four of those seven general Councels, which nevertheless Sir
Hu^frey himself here confesses to have been genenerall by giving them all
that title as well as the four first. To omit other general Councels which he
and his brothers violently reject.

And now touching Apostolical traditions Sir Humfrey does no less plainly
Sophisticate then in the former points, for that it is well known that the
reformers either hold no traditions at all to be believed but rely wholly upon
pure or sole Scripture as the total rule of their faith: or if they hold any
traditions to be necessary yet do not they hold all those which the ancient
and now the modern Roman Church does hold, and consequently their manner of
houlding Apostolical traditions is in words only, and has no true descent
from the Apostles nor any universality or antiquity at all, as neither has
their book of common prayer and manner of ordination and vocation of Ministers
or Pastors: and so although they have some part both of the ancient liturgy
and also of the Apostolical manner of ordination, yet because they do not
wholly agree with them, no not in the substance and essential parts of the
action, that is to say not in the consecration of the Eucharist, nor in the
essential form and matter of order which are the words and imposition of
hands, they are defective in the antiquity and universality of the same in
regard that the manner and form of prayer and administrations of Sacraments
which the reformed Churches use at this present is different from that of the
ancient Church, and never known nor heard of in former ages but broach by
Luther and his sectatours, quite contrary to that which the knight affirms
and indeauoureth to prove, as by comparing their Church service, their book
of common prayer, and of ordination of Ministers with the ancient liturgies,
as that of Saint James, Saint Basil, Saint Chrysostom and others, does
clearly appear: as also by confronting the same with the writings of the
ancient Fathers and their forms of administration of Sacraments, by which we
shall find a maine difference betwixt the one and the other in regard that in
those ancient monuments of antiquity, be found sacrifice, oblation, altar,
incense, host, chalis, holy oil, Chrysme and the like: But in the form of
service and administration of Sacraments used now in the pretensiue reformed
Churches, there is none of this to be found or heard. By which it may farther
appear that it is no silly or senseles question, as our adversary would have
it, to demand of the reformers where their Church was before Luther. Because
it has now been made manifest that allthough some part of their doctrine
that I mean in which they and the Romanists agree, has both universality and
antiquity if it be considered in it self, yet diverse other points of it has
neither the one nor the other. That which cannot be found in the doctrine of
the Roman Church for that allthough it is true that some part thereof was not
expressly definde as matter of faith before the time of the later Counsels,
and sectaries, who by their defection from the ever succeeding Roman Church,
and their new errors, gave occasion of new declarations of some particular
points, yet were those neither new in them selves nor first broached and taught
by the foresaid counsels, but only they by their authority determined and
established for certain doctrine that which diverse nouellists presumptuously
brought in question, the same nevertheless in all the ages before Luther
having been both aunciently and universally tought, or at the least by many
doctors of the Church with out contradiction of the rest: or perhaps if any
were of a different opinion, it was because matters were not then so plainly
declared by the Church, and under her correction. And so the question proposed
by the Romanists to the reformers can neither be rightly detorted upon them, as
the knight vainly auerreth, nor yet can the reformers ever be able to answer
it, as plainly appears both by that with has been already said, as also
by the doctrine of their 39. articles diverse of which are not only new in
themselves and never heard of in ancient times, but also expressly broached
by Luther himself, and that not only in negative but also in some positive
doctrine, as is evident particularly in the point of iustisicatio^ by faith
alone. And hence also it is manifestly inferred how untruly the knight
affirms in his 77. page that noe Romanist can deny but that the doctrine of
the reformers lay inuolued in the bosom of the Roman Church as corn covered
with chafe or gould with dross: for neither is it true that either all the
doctrine of the reformers has been in the Church before Luther, as I have
showed, nor yet that any Romanist ever affirmed the same, and so S. Hu^frey
delivers two falsities under one form of speech continuing the same for the
space of a whole leaf grounding his discourse upon false suppositions, and
equiuocatio^s, and promising to produce testimonies of his adversary the
Romanists for the antiquity and universality of the protestant faith (he
means the Puritan faith) in general, yet produces not one for the same
excepting Pope Adrian the 6. and Costerus and D. Harding in Jewel none of
which three authors prove S. Humfrey intent. Costerus and Harding only
speaking of one or two particular points and that in no matter of faith, to wit
about the manner of the introduction of communion under one kind and private
Mass into the Church, as their own words declare.

And as for Pope Adrian, his own words truly and completely cyted show him
to speak only of the conditional adoration of Christ in the Eucharist in
case the host should not be consecrated, and so he is here produced by the
knight both most falsely and most ridiculously to prove, for sooth, that the
Romanists excuse their absolute adoration of Christ in the Sacrament by that
conditional, I adore theif thou be Christ: which manner of adoration
nevertheless they never use but only in special cases of doubt whether the
Priest performed his office according to Christ^ institution. The Popes words
are these in Latin. Concilium Constantiense excusat simplices adorantes hostiam
no^ consecratam quia facite implicatur condition, si consecration sit recte
facta etc. And now let the reader judge how conveniently they be applied to S.
Hu^freys purpose of proving absolutely that the Romanists excuse their
adoration of Christ in that manner. Further more Sir Humfrey does not adduce
any reason at all for the proof of his antiquity and universality, but only
uses his own conceiptes consisting mearely in iffes an andes, or conditional
asseueratio^s, and thus quite throu' the rest of his section he rides post
like a man that caries news of a false victory now and then dropping a lie by
the way for the haste he makes to come to the end of his journey, which is
nothing else but his own discredit: which because it has been already
sufficiently manifested I need not go to particulars for more proof of the
same, especially for that I know I shall have occasion hereafter to handle more
largely all those several points which our adversary co^gesteth in this place
rather by way of recrimination then of treaty, as that Costerus and Harding
excuse the communion and private Mass, the one by saying that the cup was not
taken away by the commandment of the Bishops, but that it crept in the
Bishops conniuing there at, which he attributes to Costerus: the other, that it
is throu the negligence of the lay people that they communicate not at every
Mass, which he ascribes to D. Harding. All which is imposed by the knight upon
those two Catholic authors contrary to their true sense and meaning, for
that as it is apparent by their own words which I will rehearse in an other
place, they say not those things by way of excuse in regard they know there is
no need of excuse where no fault is found nor acknowledged: it being certain
to them and all other Romanists that how soever private Mass, and single
communion were at first introduced, yet they are both lawfully practiced. And
so I conclude this section of his, inroling il with the former censures: or
rather I may with great reason frame a more rigorous censure for it, in regard
that the knight having promised more then before, yet he has performed less,
and having under the name and punishment due to heresy undertaken to show by
the testimonies and confession of his adversaries the antiquity and
universality of his faith, and that his way even by the confession of the
Romanists is more certain then their own, yet he has performed nothing but
spent his whole discourse in equivocations and iuggeling tricks, and so he
cannot possible escape the same sentence which his own execration called upon
him.

THE VIII. PERIOD.
THIS Period shall contain the ninth section of S. Hu^freys book: with though
by reason of the largenes of it, he divides it in to several paragraffes, yet
because they have but small substance in them as he handles them, though
otherwise they be in themselves matters of importance: as also for that his
doctrine in te same points has been already in part examined and confuted,
therefore I will not stand to make so many several distinctions in the treaty
of them as he does, but reduce them all to one only period, briefly examining
how far those testimonies of Romanists which he promises to produce as
witnesses of the antiquity of his own doctrine, and the nouelty of theirs, do
reach in the particular points of the same. He begins therefore with
justification by faith only, Page. 85.
I says he, will make it appear that before and after the conquest, the
priests and professors of those times protested openly against the doctrine of
Romish merits preaching salvation by Christ alone, and with all publicly
professed and administered the same sacraments in the same faith and truth which
we teach and administer to this day. Thus he proceeds by way of assertion
with a promise to make it appear, which assertion nevertheless containing two
parts, yet neither of them is true, but both either false or equivocal, or
rather partly false, and partly equivocal. The first part is clearly false
in of it affirms that the priests and professors both before and after the
conquest protested openly against Romish merits. That this is false it is
manifestly convinced first because all the works of learned men, and histories
both of England and other contries that write of that matter, do testifye that
from the time of S. Gregory's mission of S. Augustine into England to preach and
establish the Roman faith (to omit more ancient times) both the Kings,
priests, and people as well before as since the conquest have continually
professed the same Roman doctrine which then they received, until the time of
Henry the eight at the least, and among the rest the very same doctrine of
merits which now the Church of Rome defends. As is diligently proved by the
author of the protestants apollogie in the first section of his first treaty
the 63. page even by the testimonies of Protestants themselves. And what S.
Gregory's own doctrine was in this particular, he himself testifies in his
book of moralls the 42. chap. saying that because in this life there is
diversity of works among us therefore with out doubt there will be in that
diversity of dignities, to the end that as hear one does surpass another in
merit, so there one may transcend another in the retribution. Thus Saint
Gregory to whose testimony as I could, if need were, join the express
authorities of Fathers of precedent ages for witnesses of the doctrine of
merits, as of S. Augustine, Hierome, Ambrose, Hilarie, Cyp. Tertull. and other
Grecian Doctors even till the time of the privative Church: so may the consent
of those who succeeded the the same S. Gregory be added for the confirmation of
it S. Bernard: to omit other places alleged by me in an other occasion: in his
8. sermon. upon the Cantic. says. Omne quod feceris bonum malumne, quod quidem
non facere liberum sit, merito ad meritum deputatur. Concilio Aran. can. 18.
debetur merces bonis operibus si fiant, sed gratia quae non debetur praecedit
vt fiant. To which might be added the Councels of Lateran sub Inno. 3. cap.
firmiter, the florent. decreto de Purgatorio, and the late Council of Trent.
Which all teach the same doctrine of merits as our adversaries cannot deny, to
which also might be joined all those are testimonies of ancient Fathers who
teach that faith only does not justify, nor is sufficient to salvation, by
all which its manifestly convinced that the doctrine of justification could not
be openly protested against both before and after the Conquest by the Priests
and professors of England, except Sir Humfrey will persuade us that the faith
of England in those times was different from the faith of all the world beside,
and even of those who directly sent preachers for the conversion of it from
gentilisme and superstition, all which being wholely incredible, so by
necessary consequence is the whole discourse grounded thereupon. Secondly I
answer that its manifest out of the words cited by the knight out of the book
of the form of administration of Sacraments used in those times (supposing the
book is authentical, which nevertheless may be suspected as being being
only produced by Cassander a suspected author) there is not any word,
sentence, or syllable which excludes from salvation those merits which the
Roman Church defends: but only such merits as either exclude, pressely
exclude the merits of the passion of Christ and therefore the question which
according to the order of that directory the Priest makes to the sick person
runs in this tennour. Do thou believe to come to glory not by thine own
merits, but by the virtue and merits of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ?
which interrogation as you see manifestly contains an opposition between the
merits of the infirm man and those of Christ, and for that cause he calls
them his own as being wholly wrought by his own natural power without the
concourse of the merits of our Savior and consequently in that sense of no
force or virtue for the obtaining of salvation. That which is yet more manifest
by the like question ensuing made also by the Priest to the same person in this
manner. Do thou believe that our Savior Jesus Christ did die for our
salvation? And that none can be saved by his own merits or by any other means
but by the merits of his passion? where you see the opposition still runs,
and especially hear more clearly, betwixt man's own merits or other means
which proceed not from Christ's Passion, but from some other cause, not
including or depending upon them as the principal agent of all meritorious
operations.

And verily I am persuaded that the reason why in those days and in those
occasions the forms and speech where somewhat different in the matter of
merit, from the forms used in our times, is no thing else but the differences
of errors reigning in the world in those times, and those that are now at
this present defended by the nouellists. For the Pelagian heresy which did
attribute over much virtue to the merits of man having once been and perhaps
some requikes of it yet remaining very rife in England when the foresaid
directory was used (if any such there were) or at the least not long before,
it was necessary that in all occasions humane merits should be as much
extenuated as could possible be without prejudice of faith in that point. But
contrarily in these our days since the publication of the errors of Luther
and other sectaries in this matters, it was convenient, if not necessary, to
extol the same merits as much as could be without prejudice to the merits of
Christ.

Now touching that which is added in the second part of the knigts assertion
videlicet, that the Priests of former times preached salvation through Christ
alone, it is most plainly equivocal, and in one sense it is true and
conformable to the doctrine of the Roman Church in all ages, but in another
sense it is false and disagreable to the same, it is true that Christ alone is
the author of salvation and that no other then he can save us according to
that of the Apostle Saint Peter Act. 4. non est in alio aliquo salus. Nec enim
aliud nomen est sub Caelo datum hominibus in quo oporteat nos saluos fieri.
Neither is there any other name under heaven given to men wherein we must be
saved: and in this sense and no otherwise the Priests of England in more
ancient times preached salvation by Christ alone: yet notwithstanding all
this, it is false that those Priests preached salvation with an exclusion or
denial of the merits of man wrought by the grace of Christ and by virtue of
his death and Passion, neither was such doctrine ever taught either in England
or any other place before the time of Luther, except it were by some more
ancient heretics. Moreover that which the knight puts in the second part
of his foresaid assertion, to wit that the Priests of those times published and
administered the same Sacraments in the same faith and truth, which they
(meaning the reformers) teach and administer this day, this I say is partly
equivocal in that he says they public professed and administered the same
Sacraments. For though it were true that two of the Sacraments which those
Priests administered videlicet. Baptism and the Eucharist, be the same which
there formers administer at this day, yet it is false that the foresaid Priests
did the use in their time either to profess or administer two only, as may
appear by the same rituall out of which S. Hu^frey draws this testimony, in
which all the seven Sacraments are contained and appointed to be administered,
if the book be perfectly published without corruption. Partly also that same
part of the assertion is false, for that it is manifest the foresaid Priests
did not receive those two which the reformers hold for Sacraments in the same
faith which they do, for as much as the Priests mentioned received those two
in the faith of five other Sacraments which also they believe to be such as
well as the rest, supposing that the number of all the seven Sacraments were
then in belief and practice as much as now they be, as both the rituall
cited, if it be not corrupted, and also the histories of those times can
testify, of which five Sacraments nevertheless the reformers have no such
faith as they themselves confess. To say nothing of the faith of those same
Priests in other points of religion, which as it is certain by the relation of
historiographes, was far different from the faith of the reformers and
practice of their Churches, and consequently it cannot with truth be said to
be the same. And as for the rest of the words which the knight cites out of
the same rituall, they prove nothing against merit it self but only against
confidence in proper merits as appears by those words in particular, place
thy whole confidence in his death only, have confidence in no other thing,
that which is so far from the denial of merits as that it is counseled and
advised even by those who are most professed defendours of the Roman doctrine
in that point as out of Bellarmine and other divines we have showed before.
Period. 4.
Nay and besides this it is most plain in my judgment that the foresaid
rituall in certain other words following in the same place did never intend to
exclude all kind of merit from the works of man performed by Gods grace and
assistance, for that it expressly says in the person of that sick man: I
offer his merits (that is the merits of Christ) in steed of the merits I ought
to have, for if he ought to have merits as he affirms even upon his death
bed, though he have the^ not, evident it is that he denied not the same but
plainly supposed the truth of them. And thus we see that the words of the
order of baptizing benigniouslie interpreted make nothing for S. Hu^freyes
position nor against the Roman doctrine of merits, How be it the same was
iustelie corrected by the Inquisitors both because the manner of phrase which
it uses might easily give occasion of error especially in these our days: as
also because it is iustelie suspected to be Apochryphall, in regard it
contains certain ill sounding sentences not only in the doctrine of the
Roman Church: but also according to the tenets of the Reformers. As where it
says thus. These protestations of such as lie a dying were reuailed to a
certain religious man. And those words: he that shall protest such things as
follow, from his heart cannot be damned etc. All which propositions and some
othgers are commanded by the authors of the Index to be blotted as well as
the words which Sir Humfrey here cites. And yet more over it is to be
advertised that there is not a word in all that which our adversary produces
against merits which does prove justification by faith only, which is that
which he intendes to prove in this place as the title of his paragraph does
declare. And so by this means he has quite fled from his text. And so this
may suffice to demonstrate the falsitie of the knights assertion and the
nullitie of the proof thereof by the testimonies of his adversaries, seeing
plainly that he does no thing therein, but partly by untruths and partly
by equivocations deludes his reader not citing any one author either Romanist
or reformer in all this paragraffe more then the words rehearsed out of the
foresaid Rituall, which nevertheless having been, as suspected of corruption,
chasticed by the Inquisitours, the uncensured coppies (which doubtless he and
his fellows only use) have no authority nor credit in the Roman Church, or
at the most, very little, and consequently he proceeds most weakelie in
produceing for a testimony of his adversary that which they do not
acknowledge for theirs, especially considering he alleges nothing else for
the proof of his tenet. The second paragraffe is of the Eucharist and
Transubstantiation. As concerning the Sacraments of the Lords supper says the
knight. In the days of Alfrick about the year 996. There was a Homily
publikelie to be read to the people one Easter day, wherein the same doctrine
which, says he, our Church now professes was publikelie taught and received,
and the doctrine of the real presence (which in that time had got some
footing in the Church) was plainly confuted and rejected. The words which he
cites are these. There is a great difference betwixt the body wherein Christ
suffered and the body which is received of the faithful, the body that
Christ suffered in it was borne of the flesh of marie with blood and with bone,
with skin and with sinews, in human lims, with a reasonable soul living:
and his spiritual body which nourishes the faithful spirituallie, is
gathered of many corns without blood and bone, without lim, without soul,
and therefore there is nothing to be understood bodily but spirituallie etc.
Thus far out of the homily. And this doctrine faith the knight was delivered
in those times not by one only Bishop but by diverse in their Synods and by
them commended to the Clergy, who were commanded to read it publikelie to
the people one Easter day for their better preparation and instruction in the
Sacrament, and for the same cause translated into the saxon language by
Alfrick: and to the same purpose the Knight also cites two other writings or
Epistles as published and translated also into the vulgar tongue by the same
Alfric.

But to this I answer first that whatsoever doctrine is conteynd in the Hom.
and Epistles cited, the Romanists are not bound to believe it, because the
knight only cites them out of his own authors and as printed by the members
of his own Church, to wit out of B. Usher, and Doctor James, and so it is
both absurd and impertinent to produce the^ as testimonies of his adversaries,
as he professes to do in the title of his section, especially supposing that
he has not aledged any one author of the Romanists religion where by to prove
them authentical, nor yet any other indifferent witness, but only those two
reformers whom we have named, who by the Romanists may justly be suspected of
partiallity in favor of their own cause, especially if we consider that Sir
Humfrey himself grants that the Latin epistle written by Alfric is to be
seen mangled and razed in a manuscript in Benet college in Cambridge. And
certainly the English coppies being found not to aggree with the Latin
manuscript which is either the Original it self, or at the least comes much
nearer the time in which the author of it lived, then any other coppie the
knight could possible have, there is far greater evidence that the latter
translations and impressions are corrupted by the reformers, then that either
the Index expurgatorius or any other Romanist has made any alteration or
change in the original coppies or first authentical manuscripts, or in any
other except it were only to restore them to their prime innocenty and
original truth: cheefely supposing that the inquisitors in their expurgation
of books intend no other thing more then to reduce such as be corrupted to the
former purity of their originalls. Thirdly I answer that admit the editions
which are published in England be true and sincerely translated and printed,
which nevertheless may justly be suspected by reason of the manifould
corruptions found to have been used in that nature by diverse of the reformed
profession as by the expurgatory Index does plainly appear, the authors of
which Index have discovered diverse works Fathered partly by ancient and
partly by modern sectaries upon those who never writ them: which was the
cause as I suppose, why Antonius posseuinus in the preamble to his select
Bibliotheke says that Sixtus, Bellarmine, and others have manifested very
maine pestilent books attributed by heretics to ancient and good authors
among which we may number one cited by Sir Humfrey in some part of his work,
entitled de fiducia and misericordia Dei, which Bell. in his book de Scrip.
Eccles. declares to be counterfeit and suppositious and none of Bishop Fishers
on whom it is imposed. Nevertheless how so ever the matter stands touching
the truth of the foresaid homily, and admit it be never so true and
authentical: yet I am confidently assured that the words by Sir Humfrey cited
out of it against the real presence, are not so obscure but that they admit
such a comodious exposition as does not in any sort fouour the denial thereof
but rather impugn and it confute it. First for that there is not one word
which includes a denial of the real presence of Christ's body in the
Eucharist, but the words only show a difference between the body in which
Christ suffered and the body which the faithful receive, which difference is
not reallie in the substance of the body it self, it being one and the same
in nature in every place where it existeth; but only in the properties and
manner of existence, or being in place: it having been in the passion visible,
mortal, and with it entire local extension: but in the Sacrament invisible,
impassible, and vnextended: in which sense also it may rightly be called
spiritual: yea and not altogether improperly, especially taking it with a
relation or respect unto the same body perfectly extended in the manner above
declared, it may be said to be without blood, bone, sin woe, limb, or soul,
that is without extensio^ or motion of these parts, as the cited words do
signify, which by reason of the foresaid manner of being of Christ's body in the
Sacrament do call it his spiritual body, from thence as it were inferring
and concluding that noething is to be understood there bodily but spiritually:
all which is noething contrary to the doctrine of the Romanists in this point,
but rather most agreeable to the same, which teaches that Christ's body though
it be truly in the Sacrament, yet without extension and not in a Corporal,
but in a spiritual manner; yea and very comfortable to the doctrine of S. Paul
who speaking of the resurrection of the flesh douteth not to call one and the
same humane body both corruptible and spiritual: 1. Cor. 15.
Seminatur corpus animale, surget corpus spirituale, and that not for the
difference of the body in it nature and substance which it has not but only
by reason of the accidental difference which it has in it properties and
manner of existence, and which the same body receives in the resurrection not
having had them in this mortal life. True it is there is one passage in the
homily which in my opinion has more difficulty and show of repugnance to the
real presence and transsubstantiation then the former words, to wit where the
author makes a comparison betwixt the manna and water which flowed from the
rock in the desert, both which he affirms to have been figures of Christ
body and blood as the Eucharist also is. Nevertheless he has consequenter an
other passage or two which plainly declare that similitude to be nothing
contrary either to the real presence or transsubstantiation. For so he adds.
The Apostle Paul says that the Israelists did eat the same gostely meake, and
drink the same gostely drink, because that heavenly meat that fed them 40.
years and shat water which from the stome did follow had signification of
Christ's body and his blood that now be offered daily in Gods Church: it was
the same (says he) which we offer, not bodily but gostely. But which words it
is evident that Alfric puts a maine difference betwixt that spiritual meat
and drink of the Jews, and the spiritual food which Catholic Christians
receive in the Sacrament, that being but a signification, as the author of the
Homily expressly affirms, of Christ's body and blood, it being the same not
bodily but only spiritually or figuratiuelie with that body and blood of
Christ which he auerreth Priests to offer daily and of which he also teaches
the foresaid water to be a representation, not the body and blood themselves,
which as being every day sacrificed in the altar, even according to common
sense they must of necessity be reallie and truly in the Eucharist. And
although the author of the Homily calls if a figure of Christ's body and
blood, yet does he not say it is a figure of the^ absent, as the water flowing
out of the rock was, but truly and reallie present, as those his words in
which he says and diverse time repeateth, that Christ's body and blood are
offered in the same Eucharist by Priests in sacrifice, do evidently convince,
supposing it is impossible to conceive the author of the homily should
affirm that Christ's body and blood be offered, in the altar, and yet not
believe the same to be reallie truly and substantially present in the
Eucharist. Moreover the same Homily says in plain terms, the wine which in
the supper by the Priest is hallowed, show one thing without to humane
understanding and another thing with in to believing minds, without they seem
bread and wine both in figure and taste, and they be truly after their
hallowing Christ's body and his blood throu' gostelie mystery. And afterward
these words do follow, we said unto you that Christ hallowed bread and wine
to housell before his suffering and said this his my body and my blood, yet he
had not then suffered: but so notwithstanding he turned trou' in visible might
the bred to his own hodie, the wine to his blood, which words how plain they
be for the real presence and transsubstantiation, any one that is not
violently partial in his own cause may easily perceive, considering that for
Christ to turn by invisible might the bread and wine into his body and blood,
is nothing else but that which both the definitions of the Roman Church and
Catholic divines call by the names of real presence and transsubantiation.

Thirdly it is manifest that the foresaid testimony cannot in reason be
alleged in favor of the reformers doctrine in this particular, for that they
deny the body of Christ either to exist or to be received really in the
Eucharist otherwise then by faith and figure, neither of which neuertelesse is
denied by the words above cited, but contrarily they expressly and
absolutely auerre that the body of Christ is received by the faithful, and
although they call it his spiritual body, yet doubtless they do it only for
the reason alleged as also for that it nourishes the receivers spirituallie,
yet they never deny it to be a true body, or to be truly present in the
Sacrament, or affirm it to be received by faith only as the reformers
commonly do, and Sir Humfrey in particular most expresselie in diverse places
of his book.

Fourtlie the words alleged call the body which the faithful receive in the
Eucharist a body gathered of many corns, without blood and bone, without lim,
without soul. But the reformers profess to receive no such body in the
Sacrament, but the very same body which sits on the right hand of God in
heaven endued with all the properties and dimensions of a true body, though by
faith only; and so there being such small affinity between both the words
and sense of the foresaid place and the reformers doctrine in this point,
neither S. Humfrey, nor those from whom he received it, had any reason to
produce it as a testimony wherebie to prove their Church to have been visiblie
extant, and their faith publikelie professed before the days of Luther. And
from hence we may further deduce how vain a flourish the knight makes in the
end of his 97. page were by way of conclusion he affirms that the most
substantial points of his religion were visiblie known and generally
published not in pryuate corners but in public libraries, not in obscure
assemblyes. But in open Churches, and general congregations of our own
country in the darkest ages long before Luthers days; All which deduction is
most frivolous and idle: first for that suppose it were most true and certain
that the denial of the real presence were contained in the foresaid writings,
the contrary to which I have made most manifest, yet is it a most vain and
false brag of the knight to say that therefore the most substantial points of
his religion were visiblie known and generally professed in his country
long before the days of Luther, it being manifest that with all the
Arethmatik he can use, The denial of the real presence and transubstantiation
confessed by Sir H. to be the most substantial points of his religion.
the whole some of substantial points of his religion falselie pretended to be
sound by him in the foresaid epistles and homily, do not pass the number
of two: whereas yet on the contrary there are truly and unfeignedly above
twice as many against him and for the Romanists, as mass, prayers in Latin,
water mixed to the wine in the chalis, offering of the same, sacrifice, the
pronouncing of Agnus Dei in the mass, the sign of the Cross. As also because
there are no certain premises out of which any such illation of the knights
can be collected, but the quite contrary as has been already showed: and so
for Sir Humfrey to say the most substantial points of his faith have been
generally published not in private corners but in public libraries before the
days of Luther grounding his saying only upon the foresaid writings, is most
absurd and void of truth. To omit that if as the knight affirms, there is a
copy of the foresaid Epistle mangled in the foresaid library a man may doubt
how the prete^siue reformers could come by any more true manuscript then that
razed copy, out of which they could by comparing the one with the other,
discover that that which was so blotted and defaced, did contain any doctrine
contrary to the real presense or transubstantiation or agreeing with their
own copies now of late translated in to English and printed by them. And also
we may further suspect that the copy which Sir Humfrey mentions as mangled
and razed, is the only true original, and that the transsumpts of Alfrickes
sermon now published in English, are altered and changed from the purity of
their first copies, all which I leave to the judgment of the indifferent
reader and my own further examen of the matter as opportunity shall serve.
And yet besides this, I cannot conceive how this business hangs together, to
wit that Sir Humfrey produces the foresaid homily against transubstantiation,
and yet the same Sir Humfrey page 98. affirms that they (I know not who) have
in that same homily suggested transubstantiation by two feigned miracles. Now
if in that homily there be two miracles to prove transubstantiation, as indeed
there be, how can it then be truly produced by the knight against the same?
So that here must of necessity be some iuggling in the matter. And more, for
my part I cannot possible imagine how that old mustie copy of the homily
being in the saxon language could make two such monsterous iumpes as first to
leap out of old saxon in to English, and then out of exiter into Oxon even
just at that present time when M. Fox had need of them for the fornishing of
his moulie momuments. Certainly I hold this for one of the greatest miracles
that any of the reformed brothers ever committed. Besides this in my opinion
it sauoures rank of forgerie to say that the words razed in the Latin copy
of Alfricks Epistle to Wolstan Archbishop of york were supplied by the saxon
copy of Exiter, as some of our adversaries do affirm, not-obstanding others
say they had the supply from worcester. And I demand further, whether it is
not much more probable that the sentence which he mentions if any such there
were in that Epistle, was never taken away in the Latin, but rather added by
Swinglius, Oecolampadius, or Bucer, or some other greater Doctor of that
potatorie Confraternitie. More D. James says that the Latin Epistle so razed
is entitled: De consuetudine monachorum, and yet the same Doctor out of Fox
relates it to be against the bodily presence. Quibus speramus nos quibusdam
prodesse ad correctionem, quamuis sciamus aliis minime placuisse: sed non est
nobis consultum semper si lere, and non aperire subiectis eloquia diuina, quia
si praeco tacet quis Iudicem venturum enuntiet. D. James detect. part. 2. page
55.
Now what connection the bodily or vnbodilie presence of Christ in the
sacrament has with the custom of monks, I am persuaded that, excepting these
two great Doctors, all the world beside can not imagine: Especially
considering that in the words related by James, there is no mention at all of
the body of Christ, but of correction of some certain persons. And surely
Alfrick being an Abbat himself it is to be judged far more proper to him to
have writ of things appertaining to the profession of religious persons, the^
of the Eucharist or transubsta^tiation, or as they will have it, against the
same. Finally Fox referres the translation and publishing of the Homily and
Epistles to the year 996. Yet James affirms that the Archbishop wolstan to
whom Alfrick writ his Epistle concerning that business, was a boute the
year 1054. which year differs much from the other. Wherefore let Sir
Humfrey be assured that till he cleares these difficulties this his new-founde
writing caries no authority against the Romanists. And so for conclusion of
this matter I say that till Sir Humfrey or some of his companions can produce
some authentical author before Luther who without their own glosses or
illations does teach plainly these negatiues: Christ's body and blood are not
reallie present in the Eucharist: the bread and wine consecrated by the Priest
are not turned into the body and blood of Christ by virtue of Gods word and
power, let him not trouble himself and us with such obscure new found
fragments as this, with which as being subject to diverse expositions he fills
his own head and ours with proclamationes neither disprouing over doctrine nor
proving his own, and only gives occasion of altercation and expense of time
in vain about the trial of these his questionablie and faulty wares. From
hence Sir Humfrey passes to the second part of his Paragraffe, that is to the
doctrine of transsubstantiation in these words. Look says he upon their
doctrine of transsubstantiation, and you shall see how miserably their Church
is divided touching the antiquity and universality of that point of faith.
Thus the knight.

To which I answer that having exactely examined all the particulars which he
produces for proof of this his boisterous affirmation, I find that as he
charge most falselie the Romanists of division in the doctrine of
transubstantiation, so his proof of the same by authority of the authors
which he cytes, is also most deceitful, in regard he produces them as if they
disagreed in their faith of the soresayd point, and consequently as if even
according to their own tenets, they had neither antiquity nor universality
in their doctrine, whereas in truth none of the cited authors have any
disagreement among themselves, but all with one unanimous consent professedly
acknowledge the faith and doctrine of the change of the substance of bread and
wine into the body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist, some of them only
differing about the manner of it. Some houlding it to be sufficiently
expressed in scripture, as (unless it be Caietan whose meaning I will
explicate in an other place) all scholasticall divines affirm. Some others
(among which scotus is one, or rather scotus alone) being of opinion there is
no place of scripture so express that without the dermination of the Church it
can evidently convince, and constrain one to admit transubstantiation in
the Sacrament. Others that the doctrine of transubstantiation was held even in
the Primative Church, though perhaps the word it self was not used in those
most ancient times but since invented. But not obstanding what they held in
these particulars, yet do none of them which the knigth cites, impugn
tran^ssubsta^tiation, or deny that the bread and wine are truly converted
into the body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist, but they all expresselie
auouche, and maintain it, so that a man may marvel where Sir Humfreyes eyes
were when he read and rehearsed them.

And as for Cardinal Aliaco, he does not express his own opinion in the
words alleged by Sir Humfrey, nor yet affirms it to have been defended by
any author in his time, but says only, tertia opinio fuit, the third
opinion was. Putting his own which he calls more common, and more agreeable
to the scripture and determination of the Church, as also to the common opinion
of the holy Fathers and doctors: only granting that it does not evidently
follow of the scripture that the substance of the bread does not remain after
consecration together with the body of Christ, or absolutely cease: or,
that which I rather conceive of his true meaning, it can only be gathered out
of this author (whom I have exactelie read in this passage) that in times
past there were some few who, before the matter was plainly defined by the
Church defended that it is possible, yea and more conformable to natural
reason, and more easy to be conceived, nor were evidently repugnant to
scripture, that the body of Christ might remain with the substance of bread
in the Sacrament: none of which is contrary to the doctrine of
transsubstanciation as it is believed actuallie in the Church, nor to the
universality of her faith therein, supposing that an act may consist with
possibility to the contrary, of which nature it self yealdes infinity
examples especially in such effects as depend upon indifferent or free causes.

But not obstanding this division of the Romanists which, as the reader may
easily perceive, being only in accidental points of this controversy
betwixt them and the reformers, makes nothing for Sir Humfreys purpose: yet
besides this the testimonies which the knight alleges out of the same
authors are so far from proving his intent, that there is not one of them
which does not either expresselie contain or at the least suppose the truth
of the Roman doctrine in the chief point of the controversy of
transubstantiation, two especially that is dutand in his Rational, and
Cameracensis, speak so plainly in that particular of the conversion of the
substance of the bred and wine into the body and blood of our Savior, that it
is to be admired that one of the contrary opinion could possible be either so
ignorant as not to perceive them to be against him, or so impudent that
perceiving the same, he should ve^ture to produce that which he might easily
have perceived it could serve for nothing else but a testimony of his own
confusion: especially considering with how small sincerity he has dealt in
using or rather abusing for the advantage of his cause, both the words and
sense of some of the foresaid authors, as appears particularly in the
citation of Bellarmin. page 111. where he affirms him to say that it may
justly be doubted whether the scriptures do prove the bodily presence of
Christ in the Eucharist. In which he shamefullie belyeth the Cardinal, for he
says not those words merito dubitari potest cited and Englished by the knight,
of the proof of the real presence out of scripture, of which neither he nor
Scotus (of whose opinion he there treats) makes any doubt at all: but he
only says that although to him the scripture seems so clear that it may
force one that is not obstinate to believe transubstantiation, yet merito
dubitari potest, it may with just cause be doubted whether transubstantiation
can be proved so expressly by scriptures as they may constreine any man not
refractorie to believe it: which are far different matters as any one that
is not either very ignorant or very desirous to deceive, may easily
understand. Secundo dicit Scotus non extare vllum locum scripturae tam
Expressu^ vt sine Eccles. determinatione euidenter cogat tra^substantia
tiationem admittere: atque id no^ est omnino improbabile: nam etia^ si
scriptura quam adduximus videatur nobis tam clara vt possit cogere hominem no^
prosteruu^: ta: an ita sit merito dubitari potest, ca^ homines doctissimi and
acutissimi qualis in primi Scotus fuit, contrarium sentiant. 3. addit Scotus:
quia Ecclesia Cath. in Concilio Generali Scriptura^ declarauit, ex seriptura
sic declarata manifeste^ probari transsubsta^tiatione^. Bell. lib 3. de Euch.
c. 23.


And in the same fashion, if not worse, does he abuse Maldonate the Jesuit
affirming that he confesses Saint Augustine in the doctrine of
transubstantiation to be wholly theirs, citing the foresaid Maldonat's words
upon the 6. chapter of Saint John. the 5. verse. For the same; which although
they be truly rehearsed by the knight, yet have they no such sense or meaning
as he does either ignorantly or malitiouslie suppose, nor does he treat in
them either of the real presence or transubstantiation, but only of the
exposition of the words of the foresaid verse, Patres vestri manducauerunt
Manna and mortui sunt, qui manducat hunc panem viuet in aeternum. Making a
question whether in them there be made by Christ a comparison between the
several persons that did eat, or between the several kinds of breades which
they did eat. And whereas Maldonate cites Saint Augustine and others to
follow that opinion which houlds the comparison to be betwixt the eaters, he
with other authors who lived since the time of S. Augustine rejecting that as
less probable and more near to the exposition of the Caluinists, leaves it
so, and imbraceth the contrary: and in this point only, and in this manner
does Maldonate persuade himself that Saint Augustine as a most great enemy to
heretics would have been of another mind if he had lived in these our days,
and seen his own exposition of the foresaid words come so near the gloss
of the Caluinists. And this being all; yet our learned knight is so curious an
Alchimist that he will needs draw out of Maldonate by art, that he
confesses S. Augustine to have been wholly for the reformers in the doctrine of
transubstantiation, and (also that which is further fetched) that the Romanists
have neither antiquity nor universality in their doctrine. But alas his work
has succeeded so unfortunately that insteede of gould he has extracted
dross, I mean that in lieu of one single truth he has uttered a double lie,
falsifying most shamefullie Saint Augustine and maldonate both at once, and
with in the space of a very few lines.

And the like Circulatorie and circumuenting tricks the knight also uses in
the citations of Alfonso de Castro Gregorius de Valentia and Cardinal Cusanus.
As if they did testify that there is no antiquity nor vniuersallitie in the
Fathers touching the doctrine of transubstantiation, where as in deed they
have no such matter, as appears even out of the very same words which he
cites in this place: Castro only affirming that there is seldom mention of
the transubstantiation of the bread into the body of Christ in antiquis
scriptoribus in the ancient writers, not in the ancient Fathers as the knight
does falselie translate. And that which is yet much falser, he translates
conversion for transsubstantiation; where it is also to be noted that Castro
speaks there only of the word transubstantiation not of the thing signified
by the word, as is evident by his other words which presently fellow,
saying thus. Who but an heretic will dare to deny these things because they
are not mentioned in ancient Fathers under such names? So that both Castros
words, and sense are grossly corrupted by Sir Humfrey. Valentia only
affirms that it is not to be marueled, if one or two, or some of the
ancients (not Fathers as our adversary yet somat more corruptedlie then
before traduceth) before the question of transubstantiotion was throulie
debated in the Church, have tought less consideratelie, and less weigtilie of
this matter. In which words the knight also translates palam, throulie for
openly, and leaving unmentioned the other ansers which Valentia gives to the
testimonies of Gelasius and Theodoret upon whose occasion he speaks in that
manner, Haec ergo tam multa and tantorum virorum testimonia satis esse debent
vt oste^ damus Luthero transsubtiationem non esse noua^ nec trecentenariam vt
ipse asserit, sed multo vetustiorum nempe ab ipsis Ecclesiae primordijs
proditam. Castro li. 6. haer. 5. f. 178.
and yet further omitting the conclusion of the sentence, to wit: maxim cum
non tractarent ex instituto questionem; as also other words which follow to
the same purpose. Cusanus lastly says no more but that certain of the
ancient divines (if we may give credit to the knight not here citing his
words) are found to be of this mind that the bread in the Sacrament is not
transubstantiated in nature but still remains, and is clothed with another
substance more noble then it self. In which words as you see, whatsoever
those innominated men, and as it seems unknown to Cusanus himself,
whatsoever I say they did hold touching the truth of transubstantiation, yet
certain it is that they were not Caluinists in the point of the real presence
as plainly appears by that noble substance which they held to clothe the
bread after consecration, which doubtless could be nothing else but the most
precious and noble body of Christ which the reformers deny to be present in
the Sacrament.

This therefore is all that the cited authors affirm. And to omit that none
of them uses the name of Fathers as the knight would have them, translating
and transforming the words scriptotes, veteres, and antiqui Theologi, or the
like, into Fathers, or at the least citing the foresaid authors as if they
spoke planiely of the ancient fathers, which nevertheless their words do
not show, I say, to say nothing of this which though it is a trick to deceive
the reader, yet it is so poor a one as it cannot much advantage his cause. And
to admit that by those forms of speech the foresaid modern authors mean
the ancient Fathers: yet does not this argue want of antiquity or
vniuersallity of the Fathers in that point, in regard it is not required to
the argument of antiquity that all ancient Fathers in all ages none excepted
agree in the point for which that kind of argument is used, especially
before the matter be sufficiently declared and determined by the Church in
case of doubt or opposition of heretics or otherwise: but only it is required
and sufficient that the most part of them do consent therein the rest not
obstinately contradicting the same, or carrying themselves at least
indifferent according to the advice of Vincent lyr. Contra prophanas haeres.
nouit. saying that, si in ipsa vetusttate discrepantes sente^tias reperiamus,
sequamur sententiam plurium and illustriorum Doctorum. That is, if in
antiquity it self we find. different opinions, let us follow the opinion of
the more famous Doctors. And this is therefore true because that if such
methaphisicall antiquity and universality were necessary for all points of
faith, noe Church in the world could truly be said to have antiquity and
universality in all points of doctrine or to have been always Catholics, it
being a thing manifest that not any Church either is, nor was, nor ever will be
so ancient and universal as that ail and every one of the ancient Fathers
agree ever actually with her in every point, as it is most clear in the
ancient Father Saint Cyprian and yet more clear in Tertullian and origin,
who by reason of some points of doctrine which either were not in their time
sufficiently and expresselie determined by the Church, or of which they had,
not occasion to treat may seem in some sort to dissent from the present
Church even in such doctrine as now is known, and believed for matter of faith
even by the nouelists themselves, as appears in the point of rebaptization
defended by S. Cyprian and his adhere^ts in those times. Which if it were not
so, its evident, that the reformers were yet in far worse case then either
the Romanists should be upon that supposition, or then now they are, if in
worse they can be imagined to be, who neither have, nor ever can have any
kind of universality or a^tiquity of Fathers either metaphisicall or moral
on their side. And now this being all in substance, are rather more then those
three cited authors affirm, it hence appears how small reason Sir Hum. had
to cite them in his favor, especially considering that one of them that is
Alfonsus a Castro, does only say that there is seldom mention made of
transubstantiation in the Fathers, not denying as it is manifest, their
agreement in that point, but rather insinuating their consent therein though not
so frequentlie expressed. Furthermore the knigth adds for the conclusion of
this point that many writers, and school men in their own Church are so
far from grant of antiquity and universality to this doctrine, that they
profess the tenet of transubstantiation was lately received in the Church for
a point of faith. And for this he cites Scotus as affirming that before the
council of Lateran transubstantiation was not believed as a point of faith and
that the doctrine of it is not very ancient in the Church. Thus Sir Humfrey.

Tho which I answer that all though Bellarmin affirms that Scotus said
transubstantiation was not an article of faith before the council of Lateran
yet I find he speaks not so absolutely, but at the most he says it was not
sole^nly declared as an article of faith before that Counsel, not denying but
that it minght be also declared in other particular councils as in deed it was
declared by the Roman counsel under Nicolas the second, above a hundredth and
fifty years before, and more expressly in another Roman council under
Gregory the seventh: yea and maintained in the Church time out of mind.
Nevertheless by way of argument I am content to grant to the adversaries that
which Bellarmin affirms of Scotus: Et tunc ad tertium, vbi stat vis: dicendum
quod Ecclesia declarauit istum intellectum esse de veritate fidei in illo
simbolo edito sub In. 3. in Consilio Later. vbi ponitur veritas aliquorum
credendorum magis explicit quam habeantur in simboloo rum vel Atha. vel
Nyceni: and breuiter quicquid ibi dicitur esse crede^dum, tenendum est esse de
Substantia fidei, and hoc post istam declaratione^ solemnem factam ab Ecclesia.
and Paulo post. Non enim in potestate Ecclesiae fuit facere istud verum vel non
verum, sed Dei instituentis. Et secundum intellectu^ a Deo traditum Ecclesia
declarauit directa in hoc vt creditur spiritu veritatis. Scot. 4. d. 11. q. 3
in resp. ad arg.
yet not withstanding this liberal grant, I do affirm with all that our
Church wants neither antiquity nor universality either in this or any other
point of her doctrine, and the reason is because allthough some points of her
faith were not in all ages and times known expresselie for articles of faith,
yet were they in themselves such indeed and for such believed with an
implicit faith at the least, that is with such a faith as all contained in the
word of God is believed by all true Catholics as an infalible truth, although
no one particular were known unto them. For as it is most certain that every
faithful Christian which cannot read believes many things contained in
scrpture with be knows not, in regard that although he is ignorant of them in
particular, yet in that he belieueth all that they include, he also belieueth
truly even those particular trueths which he knows not: so also it is
certain that every faithful Christian believing universally all that which
the word of God conteines, has an universal faith of whatsoever points of
doctrine either was, is, or shall be declared for matters of faith by the most
universal Church in any difference of time, and consequently he has as
ancient, and universal a faith of those particular points so declared as he
has of those which even both in the Apostles time and in all succeding ages
were expressly known for articles of faith to all the Christian world. And
let this suffice to declare that noe point of doctrine definde by the most
universal Church as matter of faith contained in the word of God, can truly
be termed new, but has as much antiquity and universality as the greatest
mystery of the Christian faith, and also that if any novelty it has, it is
only in the declaration of it, and quoad nos; that is in respect of that new
or express knowledge which we receive of it by the proposition of the holy
Church. Which infalible manner of arriving to a new knowledge of matters of
faith, because the sectaries neither have it nor admit it, it necessarily
follows that whatsoever doctrine they discover in these later times, must of
necessity want both the foresaid properties of antiquity and universality as
we have declared, in regard they can not show as much as an implicit
perpetually succeeding faith in the articles they have newly broched. Sir
Hu^frey further more cites also Hostiensis and Gaufridus out of Durand. in 4.
d. 10. q. 1. n. 23. who (as he affirms) says there were others in those
days who taught that the substance of bread remains; and that their opinion
was not to be rejected, so the knight relates. But how false and corrupted
this relation is I know out of Durand himself for that I find in his 10. d.
of the 4. of sent. q. 1. n. 15. that this passage cited by him, is neither
Durandes own doctrine, nor yet theirs whom he cites about it, but only
related by them, and taken out of them by Durand to frame his objection in the
beginning of his question, as he uses to do, which he afterward solues in
plain terms saying in his 25. number. Quod ante inducitur de Glossatoribus
Gaufrido and Hostiense super decreta: dicendum quod licet recitent tres
opiniones nullam tamen approbant vt veram nisi illam quod corpus Christi sit in
altari per transsubstantiationem panis and vim: and si express non dicunt
aliquam aliam erroneam, non propter hoc non est erronea, non enim sciuerunt
omnes passus scripturae a quibus discedat opinio supra posita sicut ostensum
est prius: And thus the business being well examined, I say no more but that I am sorry the worthy knight should be so unfortunate as to stumble upon the
objection in lue of the doctrine of the author himself. How be it I know it to
be a thing so incident to the frailty of other of his religion, that I do not
much admire the case.

The same Durand is also abused by the knight in regard he produces him to
prove that the Roman divines are divided in their opinions touching
transsubstantiation, which nevertheless I have showed by his own words how
plainly he maintains it. And that which Bellarmin is here cited to affirm
of him lib. 3. de Euch. cap. 13. is not that his opinion is heretical touching
the maine point of transsubstantiation, but only because by a singular opinion
he houldes that only the form of bread and wine, and not the matter is
converted in to the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, which although it
be false, yet does not the author therefore make any doubt of
transsubstantiation it self and so this is an other of Sir Hu^freyes tricks
by which he cousens his reader and iniureth both these divines at once. But put
the case Durand were truly cyted, yet I say as I said before, that a small
number of writers against the whole torrent of the rest cannot hinder the
antiquity or universality, either of the doctrine of transsubstantiation, or
any other point of faith. And if the antiquity and universality of Fathers
were to be taken in that rigor which Sir Humfrey will have it, it is manifest
that he and his consortes may cast their cappes at it for any such they should
ever be able to find in their reformed congregations, it being now evident out
of the examen and censure of the former sections, that to speak within
compass, they have not (I do not say the tenth part in number of the
ancient Fathers for the proose of the antiquity and universality of their
whole Creed, which the Romanists have for theirs) but not so much as one only
author before Luther, which truly cited and understood does defend their
doctrine in all and every particular point.

And according to this, I answer also to the testimony of B. Tunstall whom the
kinght cites as houlding the point of transubstantiation to have been a matter
of indifferency and not an article of faith within less then five hundredth
years. To which I replye first that Sir Humfrey deals here according to his
accustomed manner that is insyncerelie, first because he produces this
authors testimony as if he had been of opinion that perhaps it had been
better to have left the doctrine of Transubstantiation undetermined and free
for every one to use his own conjecture, as in his Fancy it was before the
Council of Lateran; which is most false for that the Bishop does only relate
that as an opinion of some others which yet he names not, his resolution being
in that point far different as his book testifies in that same place.
Secondly he deals insincerely in that he takes hold of that only which
makes for his purpose in some sort but, leaves out not only that which
makes expressly against him and for the real presence ( quaefuit says
Tunstall ab initio Ecclesiae fides, which was the faith of the Church from the
beginning) but also he leaves out the very resolution it self of the author
in this same point of transubstantiation, where after the words by the knight
cited, he says expressly he houldeth it just for that the Church is a pillar
of truth, that her judgment is to be observed as thoroughly firm. Adding
further that those who contend that, that manner of transubstantiation ought to
be rejected (meaning that same which the Roman Church both then taught and now
teaches) because the word is not found in scripture, nimis praefracti iudicij
sese esse ostendunt. Quasi vero says he Christus eo modo illud quod vult
efficere non posset, cuius omnipotentiae and spiritus S. operationi in totum
detrahere sua assertione videntur. By which plain words of this learned
Bishop the reader may plainly see how deceiptfullie he is dealt with and how
much he is abused by the knight. Secondly I answer that how indifferent soever
the doctrine of transubstantiation might seem to our adversary to have been
before the Council of Latran, neuertelesse both this author and all others
truly Catholics both since and before that council, haold it not for a
matter indifferent, but for a certain truth and verity as appears planely
by that which has been said already in the declaration and answer to those
testimonies which have in this paragraffe been produced for the contrary.

Lastly I answer that there was never such indiffere^cy in the Roman Church
concerning the foresaid doctrine of transubstantiation, but that so many
authors in all ages followed the affirmative, that the reformed flock shall
never be able to show any for the negative, no not one classical author.

He makes use also of the testimonies of the other. Durand in the fourth of his
Rationale chap. 41. of Odo in Can. d. 4. And Christopher de cap. fontium lib.
de correct. Theol. Scholast. cap. 11. and alib. who seem to say that Christ
did not consecrate with those words, this is my body: but by his benediction.
But to these authors I say first that whatsoever they held in this particular,
they all agree in that point which is here in controversy betwixt Sir Humfrey
and the Romanists, that is they all accord and teach the real presence and
transubstantiation, and so they are all impertinentlie alleged. Secondly I
say, that these authors dispute in the places cited, only by what words, or
action Christ himself did consecrate, and not of the words of Consecration by
which the Priests use to consecrate: And although they propose a question of this
also, yet they agree in that the Priests do consecrate by no other words but
those. This is my body. That which in durand, at the least, is most plainly
expressed when in his page 166. he says. Cum ad prolationem verborum istorum,
hoc est corpus meum: hic est sanguis meus sacerdos conficiat de consecrat. d.
11. credibile iudicatur, quod and Christus eadem verba dicendo confecit. By
which words it is most apparent that durand made no doubt of the determinate
words by which Priests do consecrate, nor yet was of opinion that Christ
himself did use any other, how be it he relates an opinion of some others
which think that Christ did not consecrate with those same words, but he
says in the opinion rather of others then himself) that virtute diuina nobis
occulta confecit, that he did it by divine virtue or power himself, and
afterward expressed the form sub qua posteri benedicunt, by which the
succeeding Priests do bless or consecrate. Now Sir Humfrey in his citation of
this author lefe out the latter part of his text which does plainly
declaire his mind to wit the words, scilicet hoc est corpus meum, which
durand includes in the benediction or consecration of Christ, chimericallie
joining to some of the authors former words, others which belong to another
opinion related by durand, which houldes that Christ repeated the words twice
first to give them power and virtue of confection or consecration, and
afterward to teach the Apostles the form of consecration, by which the
reader may easily perceive that the knight instead of making durand his own,
he both lost him and his own reputation by either most ignorant or malicious
perverting of that Catholic authors words, and sense.

The like to which proceeding he uses also in the testimony of Odo whom he
cites to prove that Christ's body is made in the Sacrament by his benediction,
and not by the words: this is my body. For he neither sincerely relates, nor
truly construes them. And first whereas that author by may of exposition of
that word, benedixit, says benedixit, corpus suum fecit, meaning that Christ
blessed the bread, that is to say made it is body, Sir Humfrey does English
the words both with a false interpretation of them and a false separation so:
Math. 26.
and then made that his body, adding the word then of his own stamp.
Secondly he makes a false construction of Odos words in that whereas Odo
understands by benediction consecration, as diverse other divines do, and as it
manifestly appears by his own words uttered presently after, to wit those
which Sir Humfrey cytes, saying, virtute sermonis Christi factum est corpus and
sanguis Christi: that is, by virtue of Christ's speech the body and blood of
Christ are made: the ignorant knight imagined that because he affirmed before
that Christ by benediction made his body, therefore he made it without those
words this is my body: which nevertheless are the very words of
benediction or consecration which Christ himself used. True it is Odo speaks
some thing intricatelie and obscurelie by reason of his brevity, yet those
plain words which follow in the same place and matter, videlicet virtute
sermonis Christi fiunt corpus and sanguis Christi, do sufficiently explain
the authors mind, and serve for a clear exposition of the rest, as the
judicious reader of his whole text, will easily perceive.

Concerning the citation of Christopher De capite fontium I suspect there is
some legerdemaine used in it: because it seems not to me a thing credible that
any man of learning, and judgment as he is held to be, should be so far out
of temper as peremptorilic to conclude for an infallible truth to which
scriptures, Councels and all antiquitite yeald an undeniable testimony and
consent that the words, this is my body, are not the words of consecration,
how be it the might say with the opinion of some others that those are not the
words by which Christ himself consecrated, which point as it is not yet
declared by the Church as a matter of faith, so neither is it pertinent to the
matter we here treat, if so it were: as being no denial of transubstantiation,
which only is here in question and not the words of consecration. and
consequently if that author (whom I could not have whereby to examen the
truth) if I say he speaks in that sense only, then his testimony was cyted
in vain. As also I may not rashelie avouch that, especially if he means in
the other sense, and as according to their rehearsal of our adversary, the
words do sound. That surely he had tasted of a wrong fountain when he
spoake in such an exorbitant manner, if so he ever spoake.

I have exactelie examined Card. Aliaco, and find he speaks in those words
cyted by Sir Hu^frey, only of the possibility of the coexiste^ce or presence
of the substance of the bread and the body of Christ under the same accide^ts,
which possibility he affirms neither to repugne to reason nor to the bible,
no more then that two quantities or qualities may possibly stand together
under one matter videlicet de potentia absoluta, that is by the absolute power
of God: which is true in regard that no text of scripture can be found to such
contrary possibility, nor implicatio^ of contradictio^ in reason. But all this
how true soever it is, yet is it out of the purpose and state of our question,
which is not about the possibility, but about the fact of
transsubstantiation, in which point the resolution of this author is plainly
for us saying that although it does not evidently follow of the scripture that
the substance of the bread does absolutely cease to be, nor yet, as it seems
to me, of the determination of the Church, nevertheless because, says he, it
does more fauore the determination of the Church and the common opinion of the
holy Fathers and Doctors, therefore I hold it. And this same is that which
the Council of Tre^t declares: to which doctrine if Sir Hu^frey would consent
as far as Aliaco, this disputation were at an end, for that here is
nothingels required either of him or any other of his profession but that they
obey the authority of the Church in her definition. Ses. 15 c. 4 Secundum hanc
viam dico quod panis transsubsta^tiatur in corpus Christi ad sensum expositum
in descriptione transubstantiationis. Alic. in 4. q. 6. art. 2.


In his 111. page the knight proceeds most sophisticallie in this same matter,
where, upon a false if, or conditionally false supposition that neither
according to the doctrine of S. Thomas, the Roman Cathechisme, and the
Masse-Preists, as he pleases to term them, the consecrated bread is
transubstantiated by Christ's benediction before those words, this is my body,
be uttered, nor by the same words uttered after benediction, as says he, the
Archbishop of Cefarea and others do affirm; he presently thence inferres
that absolutely there are no words at all in the scripture to prove
transubstantiation for an article of faith: which collection of his
nevertheless is no other then to deduce for conclusion of his discourse an
absolute proposition from a conditional and this also grounded upon a mere
equivocation: for admit it is true that the foresaid authors do not agree
whether determinately transubstantiation be made by the benediction, or by the
words of consecration, yet they all accord most constantly and conformablie
in this, that by one of the two, to wit either by benediction or consecration,
or at the least by both the one and the other, the transubstantiation is
undoubtedly effected, and consequently they agree vnanimouslie against the
position of Sir Humfrey, affirming that there be no words of scripture to prove
the same. And the truth is that Sir Humfreys captious ratiocinatio^ proves no
more the^ if two should argue, the one that the color of the sea water is
green and the other blewe, and that some ignorant Cockes-come should step in
and tell them that it follows on their variance in opinion that the Sea water
has no color at all. Which who so ever should presume to do he deserved to
be soundly hist at for his audacious folly, and so does Sir Humfrey.

And as for Biell whom the knight cites saying, it is not expressed in
scripture how the body of Christ is in the Sacrament, he has indeed those
words which are quoted by him, though not in his 49. as he puts it, but in his
40. lection upon the Canon: but yet this his saying is not contrary to the
Romanists who easily admit that the manner of the existence or being of
Christ's body in the Eucharist, is neither expressedlie declared in the
Scripture, nor yet in all ages, and by all authors expressedlie tought in the
Church as matter of faith: nevertheless this author himself in the same
place adds in plain words, that now that opinion which defendes
transubstantiation is received by all Catholics, yealding for a reason of the
same, because (says he) we ought to hold of the Sacraments as the holy Roman
Church does hold. And afterward he adds. Wherefore because by the
determination of the Church conformable to the authorities of the holy Fathers
we ought to believe that the body of Christ is in the Sacrament by conversion
of the bread into it, we are to fee etc.

And the like I say of Scotus, and Yribarne his Scholar, who although they seem
to diminish the antiquity of transubstantiation, yet their meaning only is
that it was not in ancient times declaredlie proposed by Public authority of
the Church as an article of faith: yet both of them expresselie believing and
defending the same professedlie as a matter of faith. And by occasion of this,
I desire the reader to take notice that whenever he finds any Catholic
authors to say that this or that doctrine was not a matter of faith before
this or that time, their meaning is not that the object in it self was no
matter of faith in any one time since it was first reueiled by God, either
expresselie in it self or as included in some other verity, but only that
it was not expresselie and generally known, and believed for such by all
faithful people, by reason it was as then not declared and proposed publikelie
unto them by the Church in any General Council. For that as much as
concerns the doctrine in itself, it is no more an article of faith after the
definition and declaration of the Church then it was even before it was so
defined, as may appear in the consubstantialitie of the eternal son with
his eternal Father, in the unity of person in Christ and the distinction of
natures and the like: which in them selves were reueiled verites and matter of
faith ever since the new Testament and the law of Christ was published to the
world, not obstanding they were not declaredlie and universally known for
such in a long time after to wit not till the time of the Nicene, Ephesin, and
Chalcedon Councels in which they were defined and proposed for matter of faith
against the Arian, Nestorian and Euthycian heretics. And according to this
rule it passes in our case of transubstantiation for declaration of which this
brief observation may suffice to satisfy any indifferent mind.

Now as I said of Scotus and Yribarne, the like I say of Caietan cited by the
knight out of suarez, in his comment. upon S. Thomas page 108. who although in it
upon the first art. Of the 15. quest. he says transubstantiation, which there
he calls conversion, is not in the Euangell expresselie, conuersio non habetur
explicitein Euangelio: and before he says: we expresselie received from the
Church that which the Gospel did not explicate. Yet afterward, the same
author expresselie teaches and inculcates that those words: this is my body:
cause both the real presence and transubstantiation. For thus and adds. Et
perhoc, verbae Christi: hoc est corpus meum: quia efficient vtramque nouitatem
scrilicet conuersionis and continentiae etc. That is. And by this, because the
words of Christ: this is my body: do effect both novelties videlicet of the
conversion, and the containing. By which words it is manifest what this
authors meaning was absolutely touching the real presence, and
transubstantiation; howsoever he spoake of the manner in which it is contained
in scripture, which is not our question.

And in this sense speaks Aliaco when he says, in the place cited by our
adversary, that manner of meaning which supposes the substance of the bread
to remain still a possible neither it is contrary to reason, nor to the
authority of the scriptures etc. For he means only it is not repugnant to
any such express scripture as does convince the transsubstantiatton plainly
to every one, without the authority and declaration of the Church and
therefore he adds: if it could stand with the determination of the Church: in
which Aliaco shows such obedience to the Church as Sir Humfrey and his
fellows obstinately deny unto her, most piously captiuating his understanding
even in that which he held more easy, and conformable to reason, and
scripture, according to human intelligence and discourse.

More ever touching the citation of Bishop Fisher contra cap. Babyl. cap. 10.
His intent in that place, was only to prove that merely by the bare words of
scripture without the traditionarie interpretation of the Fathers, no
certainty can be had in questions of controversy, or matters of faith. And to
prove this (which is a direct conclusion against Sir Humfrey and the rest of
our nouelists) he argues exhiposthesi, or upon supposition, saying that not
obstanding it is true and certain that our Savior by virtue of those words:
this is my body: did make his own body really present in the Sacrament: yet
if one were obstinate, standing preciselie to the pure text without the
interpretation of Fathers, and sense of the Church, he might deny, that it
does thence follow that in our Mass, Prests make really present the body of
Christ. Not meaning to affirm that they do not in deed (for that the rest of
his book does demonstate him to believe the real presence in Mass especially
the fourth chapter) but only intending to declare by examples and reasons,
that it can not be convinced that Catholic Prests do so, by pure scripture
secluding the exposition of the Doctors of the Church, and her infallible
authority. And now this being the true sense of B. Fishers discourse: Sir
Humfrey very coningly, by leaving out the precedent, and subsequent words of
the author, so manageth the matter as if he had flatly denied that the real
presence of the body, and blood of Christ, can be proved by any scripture to
be made in the Mass. And that, this is the true meaning of this author both
the title of his chapter out of which our adversary takes the words he
cites, which is this. Of the interpretation of scripture by Fathers. And the
whole tenor of his discourse, do sufficiently declare, so that if the matter
comes to scanning, the fraud will easily appear with shame enuffe to this our
professed adversary of truth. who not content with this, has also like a
cheating gramster to mende his ill game, dropped a card, I mean the word
nostra which he has left out in his translation: but this but a pore trick,
and so let it pass. And perhaps it was only the negligence of the printer.
But for the readers better instruction I will punctually rehearse the authors
words concerning his true meaning, as well those which Sir Humfrey has
omitted for his own advantage, as the rest. Thus he says. Doceamus quod citra
Patrum interpretationem and vsum ab eisdem nobis traditum, nemo probabit ex
ipsis nudis Euangelij verhis sacerdotum quempiam his temporibus verum Christi
Corpus, and Sanguinem consecrare, non quod res haec ambigua fit, sed quod eius
certitudo non tam haheatur ex Euangelij verbis quam ex Patrum interpretatione,
and vsu tanti temporis quem illi posteris reliquerunt. That is let us teach
that without the interpretation of the Fathers, and the practice by the^
delivered unto us, noman can prove by the bare words of the Gospel them
selves, that any man in these our times does consecrate the true body and
blood of Christ, not because this thing is doubtful, but because the
certainetie of it can not be had so much by the words of the Euangell, as by
the interpretation of Fathers, and the practice of so long time, which they
left to posterity. By which words it is void of all doubt and
tergiuersation, that the author of them never made question but that true
Catholic Prests, as he him self was, truly consecrate, and make present the
uerie body, and blood of Christ, the contrary of which our adversary
pretendes to prove: only intending by this pasage and others to declare
against his adversary Martin Luther, that scriptures alone without the
exposition of the Fathers and practice of the Church, are not sufficient to
convince the truth expecially when the words are obscure and subiet to diverse
senses. And therefore in his page 172. giving the reason of this, he says. Hoc
idcirco dixerim ne quis ipsis Euangelij verbis pertinacius adhaereat spreta
patrum interpretatione quemadmodum Lutherus fecit, vsum, and interpretationem a
patribus traditam nihili pendens, and nuditati verborum infistens, quae non
sufficient ad id quod velint conuincendum. Therefore (quoth B. Fistier) I said
these thinhs least any one should over obstinately adhere to the words of the
Gospel themselves, as Luther did not esteeming the use, and interpretation
delivered by the Fathers, and insisting in the nakedness of the words, which
are not sufficient to convince that which they desire. And in the ensuing page
he concludes in this manner. Therefore that is manifest which before we
promised to sbow, to wit that long continuing custom, and concording
exposition of Fathers none dissenting, does yeald more solid certainetie how
any obscure place of the Gospel must be understood, then the bare words;
which may be varioufly detorted by contentious people at their pleasure. By all
which words it is more then certain and manifest that this author never
intended to show that the real presence of the body and blood of Christ can
not be proved by any scripture to be made in the Mass, as our false
adversary does endeuore to persuade his reader: for he only affirms that
this can not be convinced by the bare text of scripture without the exposition
of Fathers, if any contensious person should obstinately deny it, as his
words above cited, evidently declare.

And as for those words which Sir Humfrey quotest in his margent which in
English are these. Neither is there any word put there by which the very
presence of the flesh, and blood of Christ may be proved in our Mass: I say
that he deals not honestly in the recital of them in regard he omittes the
next words following, not obstanding they belong to te integrity of the same
discourse, and also are a plain explication of the former as the reader of the
whole discourse may more clearly understand, the words being these. For
although (says he) Christ made his flesh of the bread, and his blood of the
wine, it does not therefore follow by virtue of any word here set down, that
we as often as we attempt the same, do effect it. In which as the reader may
plainly perceive, the author absolutely affirms not that Priests do not
effect that which Christ effected concerning the real presence of his body
and blood in the Eucharist, but only says there (that is among the words of
the institution of the Sacrament as they are related, by S. Math. and in which
those words: do this in remembrance of me, are not contained) there is not
any word by virtue of which the same can be concluded of Priests which is
there affirmed of Christ our Savior: yet not denying, but expresselie auerring
that by other words of the scripture, and particularly by those words
rehearsed by S. Luke, and S. Paul: do this in remembrance of me: interpreted
according to the exposition, and practice of the ancient Fathers, the making
of the real presence of Christ in the Sacrement is firmly proved, and
established. And hence it is that after he had uttered those words which Sir
Hu^frey also cites, though not entirely; to wit non potest igitur probari, per
vllam scripturam, it can not therefore be proved by any scripture that either
lay man or Priest, as often at he shall make trial of the business, shall in
like manner make the body and blood of Christ of bread and wine, as he him
self did, since that, neither this is contained in the scripture: immetiatelie
after this I say, he subionines for conclusion of his discourse, this ensuing
clause. By these things I think no man will be ignorant, that the certainty
of this matter (the faith of consecration, as the note in his margen does
declare) does not so much depend upon the Gospel, as upon the use, and
custom, which for the space of so many ages is commended unto us by the first
Fathers themselves. For it seemed to them, the holy Ghost teaching, so to
interpret this part of the Euangell, and judged it was so to be used in their
times: that whosoever now would introduce, either an other sense, or an other
use, he should utterly resist the holy Ghost, by whose instinct, the former
Fathers did deliver this rite, and ceremony, in the consecration of the
Eucharist. Thus plainly does Bishop Fisher explicate his own meaning in that
which he had before delivered somat more obscurelie; so that now I doubt not
but this will be sufficient to make the reader capable of the authors true
sense, in which I was forced to enlarge my self more then the substance of the
matter required, the more plainly to discover unto him the fraud of the
aduerfarie both in detorting the sense, and mangling the tenor, or continuation
of the text of this most Catholic, and renowned Prelate.

Moreover Sir Hu^frey allegeth S. Thomas in 3. par. q. 75. ar. 7. as also the
Roman Cathecisme at random. as affirming that the substance of the bread
remains till the last word of the consecration be uttered. But this is
nothing to the present purpose in respect that how long souer the substance of
the bread remains, if at lenght it cease as they both confess, they both
agree with us Romanists and not with the nouellists, in the faith of
transsubstantiation so professedly, that it was more then ordinary impudency,
and madness once to mentione them for the contrary.

Now for conclusion of the second paragraffe of his 9. section, Sir Humfrey
affirms in his 115. p. out of Bell: and suauez, that many writers in our
Roman Church profess the tenet of transsubstantiatien was lately received for
a point of faith. Which affirmation nevertheless is not justifiable, but
false, and calumnious to the authors he cyteth for it, videlicet Scotus,
Durand, Tunstal, Ostiensis, and Gaufridus. Which being all the Romanists he
either did or could produce (supposing Erasmus whom he likewise alleges, is
no Romanist in much of his doctrine, in what faith soever he ended his life, of
which, I am not able to judge) yet none of these Romanists I say ever affirmed
the doctrine of transsubstantiation to be no point of faith, as I have above
sufficiently declared in my answer to every one of their testimonies in
particular.

And touching Bellarmin and suarez the one being alleged by our adversary as
affirming Scotus to have said, that the doctrine of transubstantiation, was not
dogmafidei, a decree of faith before the Council of Lateran: the other as
aduising to have him, and those other schoolmen corrected, who teach that the
doctrine of transubstantiation is not very ancient. I profess I have
diligently read Scotus in this matter, and I sinde he only says, that what
soever is auerred to be believed in the Council of the Lateran capite firmiter,
is to beheld de substantia fidei as of the substance of faith after that
solemn declaration: yet he in no place has this negative: transsubstantiation
was not a point of faith before that Council, not obstanding our adversaries
allegation to the contrary out of the Cardinal, who, if he conceived right of
his whole discourse, could not judge Scotus to have absolutely denied
transubstantiation to have been a point of faith in it self, as Sir Humfrey
will have it: but at the most quoad nos, or in respect of our express and
public faith of the same. For that some of Scotus his own words plainly
importe that tra^ssubstantiatio^ is included in the institution of the
Eucharist, how be it, it was not explicitly or expresselie declared for such
in all ages, before the solemn declaration, as he terms it, made in the
General Council of Lateran.

The words of Scotus to this sense and purpose are these. Scot. d. 11. q. 3.
ad ar.
Non enim in potestate Ecclesiae fuit facere istud verum vel non verum, sed Dei
instituentis. Et secundum intellectum a Deo traditum Ecclesia explicauit,
directa in hoc vt creditur spiritu veritatis. That is. For it was not in the
power of the Church to make this (the point of transsubstantiation) true, or
not true, but of God the institutour: And according to the understanding
delivered by God, the Church did explicate it, directed, as it is believed, by
the spirit of truth. By which ratiocination or discourse, of Scotus, it is
most clear and apparent that the point of transsubstantiation was in it self
a matter of faith ever since the Sacrament was instituted by Christ, in regard
that it being now a point of faith, it must of necessity in substance have
been ordained for such by God himself, for that it is not in the power of the
Church to make, but only to declare, and propose to believers, the articles
of Religion, And according to this, I say, that suarez (saving the due respect
I owe unto them both) had yet less reason then Bellarmin had concerning
Scotus: to tax the same Scotus and some other divines, as if they had tought
that the doctrine of transsubstantiation is not very ancient. For neither
Scotus as his words which I have related do testify, nor any other approved
divine of the Roman Church, do use any such manner of speech, or at the least
have no such sense in their words, as even by all those their several
passages which our adversary could allege, does manifestly appear. How be
it some of them have not omitted to say, that the word transsubstantiation
has not been auncientlie used in the Church, but either invented by the
Fathers of the Lateran Council, or not long before: or at the most, that there
have been some in the world of a contrary opinion to the truth of
transsubstantiation in itself: which although we Romanists should grant to be
true; yet does it not argue any novelty in the doctrine, but rather the
nouellitie of some few extrauagant wits, as heretics or corrigible Catholics,
in opposing the same, which otherwise was generally maintained by the rest of
the Orthodox divines in all succeeding ages: the antiquity of which doctrine,
even those same authorities which the same Scotus himself professes to be
produced by him out of S. Ambrose, Scot. d. 11. quest. 3.. qua^t. ergo.
to the number of 11. do evidently convince, yet further adding that many
others are alleged cap. de consecrat. and by the master in his 10. and 11.
distinction. Wherefore in my opinion both Bellarmin and suarez might much
better have spared to pass their censures in that manner upon any Catholic
divines supposing such reprehensions serve for little or no other use, then to
aforde our adversaries the nouelists new occasion and matter of contention
without either necessity or conueniencie, of which the present fact of Sir
Humfrey lind even in this place, does already yealde us some experience.

In the last place the knight cites for his tenet Erasmus but he might have
saved the labor for that the Romanists hold him absolutely for none of theirs
(as in like manner neither do they acknowledge wicklif and the waldensians
which neuertelesse he was not ashamed to produce for his tenet though only by
way of omission) howbeit in this particular Erasmus only affirms that it
was late before the Church definde it, which is not contrary to the
certainetie of the doctrine in it self, but only a superficial relation of
the time when it was declared expressly for a matter of faith or infalible
truth in that nature.

And now of this and the rest of the testimonies which have been discussed in
this paragraffe which if it had not been for the satisfaction of the common
people which may easily be deluded by them I would never have prosecuted so
largely, as containinge noething worthy of a scholars labor: it may I say be
easily collected and perceived how fondly he concludes his whole discourse as
if he had made it appear that the reformed faith touching the spiritual and
sacramental participation of Christ's body, had been generally believed and
taugh both in the former and later ages, and as if the doctrine of
transsubstantiation had noe unity among the Romish authors, nor universality
among the ancient Fathers, nor certainety in the scriptures. This I say is a
most impudent vaunt of the bragadocho knight, for that it has been already
made manifest by the same testimonies which he produces against the Roman
doctrine, that not only the antiquity and universality of the same in those
two points stands firm and sound, but that there is no antiquity or
universality at all to be found in the doctrine of the reformed Churhes in
those particulars: to say nothing of other points of theit deformed faith, and
so this shall suffice for the censure of this paragraffe which as it is larger
in words then the former so deserves it a larger sentence of condemnation as
containing noething more but a greater multitude of diverse sorts of ill
proceeding.

The third paragraffe is of private Mass in which for the honor as I suppose
which he bears toward the mother Church he places her definition in the
first rank, and then afterward the article of his own Church. The decree of
the council of Trent. ses. 22. can. 8. is this. If ame shall say that Masses
in which the Priest alone does communicate are unlawful and therefore ought to
be abrogared, let him be accursed, but the article of the reformed Church will
not have it so, but protests that private Masses that is the receiving of the
Eucharist by the Priest alone with out a competent number of communicants is
contrary to te institution of Christ and the practice of the primative Church.
Thus the knight sets down the matter of disputation, thus he places the
two armies in battle array with their contrary colors one confronting the
other.

And this special difference I note in them, that the one army consists of
milites veterani that is of old Roman soldiers gathered out of the whole
Roman Empire and Christian world, the other of fresh men fetched from a corner
of the world that is from Ireland. Lo here the armies set in order, now let
us see who carries away the victory. You may perceive by Sir Humfreys relation
that the Council speaks with authority, it intimates those aged Synods of
the primative Church, it does so fulminate that it makes the reformed brothers
tremble to here it. Nay it seems it so daunteth the valiant knight that he
found no other refuge then to fly to Ireland for an article of his faith. A
man would rather have expected that to confront the Council of Trent and it
definition, Sir Humfrey would have had recourse to the Council of Gapp. or of
Dort, or to some consistory assembly of Geneua, or to an Act of an English
Parleament. But alas the poor Caualier found so small hope of assistance in
these, that he was constrained to sail to Ireland for an Irish article as he
himself does term it. True it is the Irish article directly opposes the
definition of the Council, but by what authority I know not, yet certain it
is that in the Counsel of Trent there were assembled by themselves or their
legates, or at the least conuented, all the Princes both of the old and new
Religion, and Prelates of the Christian world, as the Bull of indiction, and
the oration had in the last session most plainly testify. And so the
authority of this Synod even in common sense must needs be very great: but
the authority of the articles which our knight opposes to the Council, what
authority they had, is yet unknown: neither could they possible have any
authority of great moment, for that they were gathered only out of a very
small corner of the Christian world, and far inferior in virtue, learning,
and other natural parts to the most great, grave and venerable number of the
members of the foresaid Synod. Wherefore let the indifferent reader judge
whether of these two armies is to be followed. The authors of the article
protest that private Mass is contrary to the institution of Christ and the
practice of the Church, and hence the knight infers that it is unlawful and
therefore to be abrogated: and farther that the Council of Trent by cursing
those who hold that masses in which the Priest alone does comunicate are
unlawful and ought to be abrogated, does curse Christ that ordained it and
God that commanded us to observe it. Here you see the knight talks with as
great authority as if he were the greatest graduate, either in Oxford or
Cambridge, nevertheless he must give him leave who is no graduate to let him
know that he fails mightily in his colection, yet not so much in the
gradation it self as in the premises, which being either false or at the least
aequiuocall, the conclusion must of necessity be faulty. That which deceived
him is his Irish article of faith in that it affirms the receiving of the
Eucharist without a competent number of comunicants, is contrary to the
institution of Christ. For though it is true that when Christ instituted the
Sacrament, he did actuallie comunicate those that were present, yet it is not
true that he included in the institution of it that just so in all occasions it
should be practiced, neither gave he any negative precept therein in that
respect, but only an affirmative which according to it nature, not always
but only according to time, place, and persons, obledgeth. So that the
distribution is neither any essential part of the Sacrament, nor yet any
necessary property of it to be in all occasions exercised, but rather
appertains only to the due administration of it according to the foresaid
circumstances: and herein consists the aequiuocation of the first article.

Now touching the second part which affirms that the receiving of the Priests
alone is contrary to the practice of the primative church, is also equivocal,
for if it means that the primative Church did in all circumstances of time,
place, and persons, practice the same either by virtue of Christ's institution
or command, so it is false as we have already showed: but if it means only
that indeed so it was practiced in the primative Church either always, or for
the most part, yet not as a thing alsolutely necessary either by virtue of
Christ's institution or precept, so we cannot deny but that it is true which the
second part of the article affirms, but then this being a matter in this
sense either of indifferency or at the most of greater merit and perfection,
it might lawfully be altered by an introduction of the contrary custom or
practice of the Church, especially the communicating or not communicating of
the auditors of every Mass being a thing wholelie depending upon the
devotion of the people themselves. Which devotion although the Church could
have desired it had continued in the same fervor in which it was in those
primitive times, nevertheless there was no reason why either she should obledge
the people to the same, or yet that the Priest for want of devotion in the
people, should omit his own, and cease to exercise so high and profitable a
function to the members of the whole Church as is the public liturgy and
common prayer of the same. And truly this is a matter so conformable to
reason and piety that if it were not that our adversaries are quite possessed
with a spirit of co^tradiction they would never contend so much about it as
they do, Especially supposing that of all points of controversy between them
and us that is of the least moment, and a thing for which they have the smalest
reason to strive as well because they themselves reject all sorts of Masses as
vain and superstitious whether they be private or public, with communion of
the people or without: as also because even they themselves after their new
manner celebrate their own liturgy as they call it, oftentimes yea most
ordinarily not only without the comunion of the people, but even with out the
comunion of either Priest or clarke, as is evident by the most common practice
of all the reformed Churches, which only with a dry fothering pass the
greater part of the su^daies of the whole year. And yet these same Zealous
brothers are so Cross in their proceedinge that they are not ashamed to
reprehend in us the same which they themselves ordinarily practice in a much
worse manner. In regard of which preposterous dealing of theirs in my opinion
we may not vnaptlie apply unto them the saying of a certain ingenious
Protestant in his description of a Puritan, to wit that they are become so
cross in their teaching, that he thinks verily, that if the Roman Church
should inioyne the putting on of clean shirts every sunday, rather then obey
her precept, they would go lousy. Ouerb. Caract.


But besides this Sir Humfrey for the proof of his Irish faith alleges
scripture out of S. Matthew. 26. Mark 14. Luke 22. but the words he cites do
not argue Christ's institution in both kinds in respect of all sorts of
people, Accepit Jesus panem benedixit dedit discipulis suis, and dixit accipite
and manducate.
but only his action, manner of administration, not his ordination. we know,
as well as the reformers Christ did comunicate his body and blood to all his
disciples there present at the institution of the Sacrament, even to the
traitor Judas as many deuines do hold, but we know with all he did not
ordeine it so to be administered in all occasions. Neither do we find one
word of command in the whole bible by virtue of which the Priests are
inioined to celebrate this mystery always just in the same manner that Christ
did: And otherwise if we should be so tied to every circumstance which Christ
himself used and particularie to give the communion to all that are present,
we should be bound to give it to those also which we know are unprepared for
it, nay even to excommunicated persons and to such traitors as Judas. That
which nevertheless I persuad myself the most pure precisian of them all will
scarsely do, though otherwise I hold the^ not for very scrupulous in that
nature so they know the receivers to be members of their congregation. And
touching the foresaid citation out of the Evangelists, it is to be noted that
because Sir Hum. will not have his reader hear of the consecration of the
Sacrament which the reformers never use, in their Churches, therefore he left
out the words, and he blessed it, putting only the words of thanks giving,
whereas yet the Greek (...) signifies both blessing and giving thanks, and
therefore when our Savior multiplied miraculously the fishes Luc. 9. the
Evangelist says (...) he blessed them.

The knight also cites a place of S. Paul 1. Cor. 11. But the Apostle indeed
reprehendeth there the fault of the richer Corinthians in that they did exclude
or at the least not expect the poorer sort to eat the usual supper with
them, when they met to gether to receive the blessed Sacrament, but gives no
precept to them that all that are present should every time they did meet in
the Church actually receive the communion, with the Priest: or that the Priest
ougth not in any case to celebrate without a competent number of communicants,
which is our question in this place: but at the most S. Paul there ordaines
that when the people comes together to eat either the usual and common
supper, or the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, they uncharitably
exclude not or prevent one an other, but expect, and do it with order and
sobriety, and like brethren together, without scisme or separation: and as
Christ himself did who imparted his supper most lovingly to his disciples
there present without exception of persons: to which although I admit the same S.
Paul in part alludes in his first verse of this chapter; saying: be you
followers of me as I also of Christ, yet not in that sense as if he had
persuaded the Corinthians that our Savior commanded that the Eucharist should
never be celebrated by the Priest alone with our receivers, as our adversary
foundlie infers for proof of the article he opposes to the Council of Trent.
Neither is the doctrine of that article in any sort favored by S. Augustine
in his 118. Epistle cited by Sir Humfrey: he only there affirming at the most
that the Apostle speaks of the Eucharist, when he says those words: Propter
quod fratres cum conuenitis ad manducandum inuicem expectate. etc. That is in
English: Therefore my brethren, when you come to eat, expect one an other etc.
Which words either of S. Augustine, or those of the Apostle, are not contrary
to the celebration of private Masses except it be in the imagination of the
Nouellists, as I have sufficiently above declared: To omit that the greater
part of divines both ancient and modern, expound not those words of S.
Paul rather of the Eucharist but of the common supper, the truth of which
exposition the text itself, in my judgment, does plainly convince. Yet not
to stand upon this it is sufficient for the defense of the doctrine of the
Council of Trent, in this particular and confutation of the contrary
position, that neither in the cited place of S. Paul, nor in any other place
of scripture, private communion, or receiving of the Priest alone without other
company, is affirmed to be repugnant to Christ's institution: nor condemned as
unlawful either by Saint Augustine or any other Orthodox writer.

But yet I must further advertise the reader that I perceive Sir Humfrey has
not dealte so faithfully as he ought to have, in his recital of S. Paul's
words, putting in by parenthesis and in the same letter those (to eat the
lords supper) which words nevertheless S. Paul has not, at the least in
that place, and then omiting the first words of the next verse he connecteth
them with the latter part of the same verse, to wit: that you come not
together to judgment. Procuring by this fraud to persuade his reader that
those words contain the penalty due to those who communicate not with the
Priest and the rest of the people which directly they do not, but rather the
punishment amenaced by the Apostle to such as by excluding uncharitably there
fellows from participation of the oblations, or common supper then used in the
Church, and by other abuses and sins mentioned in this Epistle, indignelie
receive the body, and blood of Christ in the Eucharist.

And yet not to stand upon these particular circumstances, certain, it is that
none of them could yeald any warrant at all for Sir Humfrey to alter the
tenor of the Apostles words either by addition, or transposition of them.

Sir Humfrey adds also that Saint Paul 1. Cor. 10. calls the Eucharist
the communion. But he might have saved labor in citing scripture, the commonly
received phrase both by us and them being sufficient to prove that. And yet he
might much better have spared the interpretation of the word it self for
whether his etimology be true or false, which I will not stand to examen,
certain it is that no judicious man can thence infer that all the people
present at Mass must of necessity communicate, but it only follows that when
they actually receive the Sacrament, they receive the Communion as a common
union not only of Priest and people but also and ceefly of the people among
themselves, according to the words of the same Apostle in his next chapter and
33. verse cum conuenitis, when you come together to eat expect one-another etc.

And much like as he did proceed in the former place of S. Paul, so does he
in this: The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ? Where for, communication he puts communion. And yet the scope
and sense of the Apostle in this place is not of the communion of Priest and
people, nor prescribes he any rule in that nature, but only reprehendes
those who voluntarily and without ignorance eat idolothytes or meats
sacrifyced to Idols, saying that as those who receive the body and blood of
Christ comunicate or are joined in society with him: so they who of knowledge
eat things offered to Idols are made companions of the devil. And therefore
the same Apostle in the latter part of his 20. verse says thus. And I will
not have you become fellows to devils. And presently in the next verse he
adds: You can not drink the chalis of our Lord, and the chalis of devils. So
that the whole tenor of the chapter afordeth not a word or letter for Sir
Humfreyes purpose. Wherefore let him examen his conscience diligently, and he
will easily find that neither the one place nor the other prove any thing
else in this matter then his own dishonest dealing, and his abuse of the
sacred text of scripture. Especially considering that in the first place, the
Apostle reprehendes not the Corinthians so much because they did not
communicate together, but chiefly because the rich did vnchristianlie exclude
the poor. Which case as the reader may easily perceive, has no place in the
Masses of the Roman Church, where none are excluded but rather expresselie
exhorted unto the communion, as the very same decree of the Tridentine Council
which our adversary him produces, does sufficiently declare in these words.
Optaret quidem sacrosancta Synodus etc. The Sacrosaint Synod could wish that
the faithful people which assiste at every mass would communicate with the
Priest, not only spirituallie, but also by Sacramental reception. Thus the
Council. Which words alone doubtless were sufficient not only to justify
the practice of the present Roman Church in this particular, but also to
satisfy the adverse part, if their importunity were not so exobbitant, that
they will rather suffer pore Christians to pass out of the world without that
divine viaticum ordained by God for the confort of their souls, and defense
against their enemies in that dangerous trance, then suffer them to receive it
without a competent number as they term it: which impious order of theirs may
be seen in their book of common prayer title of the communion of the sick:
not obstanding our Saviors most strict, and general charge affirming that
unless we eat his flesh, and drink his blood, we cannot have life in us. But
certain it is that in this as is in other matters the pretensiue reformers may
ritelie be compared to the Pharisees, exolantes culicem, camelum autem
glucientes I who strain a gnat, and swallowe a camel, in that they stand so
peremptorily upon the communion of the people with the Priest in all occasions
which is but a circumstance of the precept: and yet make no scruple of
violating the precept itself even in time of it greatest necessity and
obligation. But this I speak only upon supposition their communion were
sound and according to Christ's instition, for taking it as it is, the want of
it is no loss to the not receivers of it: and so I leave them to the general
liberty they usurp as well in this as in other matters of Religion, and
ancient practice of the Church.

Furthermore the knight cites the counsel of Na^ts, to prove his tenet, but
most ridiculously. For that there is not a word touching the communion in all
that text which he cites. Definiuit. Sanctum Conciliu^ vt nullus presbyter
praesumat solus missam cantare. Cassander. p. 83.
And the truth is the council only reprehendeth the saying of Mass with out
a clarke, or Minister as it seems some cloisters of monks did accustom to
do in those times, so you see this is quite out of the purpose, as is also
another citation out of Innocent the third libr. 2. c. 24. Illos igitur
(Angelos) quos habemus in oratione participes habemus in glorificatione
consortes. Innoc. lib. 2. 24. fine.
he only saying that it is piously to be believed that the Angels of God do
assist at Mass accompaning those that pray. Not speaking a word good or bad
of the communion of the people in that place.

Lastly Sir Humfrey alleges the testimonies of diverse Romanists which he
calls the confession of his adversaries, that private Mass was altogether
unknown to the primative Church. But I answer that when the knight cited those
authors he ought to have remembered what he was to prove according to the
Irish article which he undertakes to defend and according to his own position
viz. That private Mass is contrary to Christ's institution, and unlawful, and
to be abrogated. This then he ought to have proved if he meant to prove any
thing against the Roman doctrine. But in steed of this which he will never be
able to prove, he proves at the most by the foresaid testimonies, only that
which the Romanists, do not deny, to wit that the primative Church did
practice the administration of the Eucharist to those that were present, but he
proves not that either that Church did so in all occasions, nor that she held
it necessary by virtue of any law, or institution of Christ, and so he
labors in vain as well in this as he has done in other proofs often times
before. Neither is this present point of Controversy between us and the
reformers about the ancient custom of the primative Church concerning the
communion of the people present at the Liturgy, but whether it is contrary to
Christ's institution or command to celebrate private masses? the affirmative
of which question excepting Cassander (whom I have already advertised the
reader to be no Romanist) nay nor yet Cassander himself nor any one of the
cited testimonies does prove. Nay there is not one word in any of the places
cited touching any such doctrine or precept of the Primative Church but only
mention is made of the fact of ancient Christians in that particular, with an
addition of their own verdit as houlding it for more profitable to the
receivers to communicate at every Mass, if their devotion were so much
extended as in those more feruorous times of the primative spirit it appeeres
to have been. And although not only all or most of the authors rehearsed,
but also the Council of Trent itself does hold the foresaid practice of the
ancient Church to be more fruitful for the Laytie then the custom of more
modern ages: yet does Sir Humfrey most absurdelie hence infer either the
novelty of the Roman doctrine, or the antiquity of his own. For that as we
have showed already neither in any of the cited authors nor in the Council
of Trent it self, as their words do witness, is there any mention of
doctrine or precept of the Primative Church but only of her fact and
practice, from whence also may most easily appear the great impertinencie of
a further illation which the knight does make concluding the greater
fruitfulnes of his own communion then of ours, whereas indeed his being no
true communion at all, as not containing that which according to the
institution of Christ ought truly and reallie to be in it, and so
communicated truly and reallie to the people, and not by figure and faith
only, I mean the body and blood of Christ, certain it is that no such
inference can be made out of any comparison made between the Catholic
communion and his own, in regard there is no true paritie or similitude to be
found in them: and moreover it is so far from being confessed by the cited
authors that the communion of the reformers is more fruitful then their own,
that they teach expresselie that according to the doctrine of the reformed
Churches touching the real presence, the receivers of their Sacrament can
receive no fruit at all. And now let this suffice for anser to those authors
In general: Yet because it may be my adversary will not be satisfied with
this general anser alone, as also because I find he has used not a little of
his usual proceeding in want of fidelity in the citation of the authors, I am content to descend to particulars, and examen them in order. The first the
knight cites, is Cochlaeus out of Cassander, but neither he nor Cassander have
any thing in that place against private Mass, but only testify what the
custom of the ancient Church was, which, as I have already declared, is
impertinent to this purpose. Besides Sir Humfrey translates Cochleus words
corruptedlie, for he does not say that the holy Ghost has thought us a
remedy against the slouthfulnes of the Priests in celebrating of private
Mass, but he says, the holy Ghost has invented and introduced a pious
supply of this negligence by the frequentation of such Masses as Priests
celebrate alone. So by inuerting the words, the malicious knight imposes upon
the Priests only for a fault that which Cochleus calls a remedy provided by
the holy Ghost to supply the fault of the less devout sort of people as
well as the defect of the Priests. Which defect nevertheless Chocleus places
not in their slothfulness in celebrating private Masses: but in not exhorting
the laytie to communicate at every Mass, as his words sufficiently declare.

In the second place he cites Durand mymatensis who as speaking only of the
custom of the ancient Church and consequently not against the Romanists, yet
he corruptes him both in that for Domino dicente, he translates; according to
Christ's command: as also by leaving out his ensuing words which declare the
reason of the alteration of that ancient custom. Sed excrescente fidelium
multitudine traditur institutum vt tantum Dominicis diebus communicarent.
Durand. rat. lib. 4. c. 53.
But the multitude of believers increasing, it is delivered unto us to have
been instituded that they should communicate only on sundays.

Odo upon the Canon does not disprove private Mass, but only relates the
different customs of the Church in different times. Cum primitus missae sine
collecta non fierent, postea mos inoleuit Ecclesiae solitarias, and maxim in
Caenobijs, fieri missas. d. 2. in Can. circa init. The same I say of Belethus,
yet Sir Humfrey omits the rest of his words. As he did in the testimony of
durand.

Hugo in spec.
In the testimony of Card. Hugo who witnesses only the same in substance, he
adds the word together, which is not in the text, to mend his ill market,
also letting slip some of his words which denote the cause of the change of
the ancient use, which are these. Initio nascentis Ecclesiae Christiani qui
celebrationi Missae ad erant, post acceptam pacem co^municare solebant.
Durantus de rit. cap. 58.
Sed propter peccatum circumstans nos, statutum est vt communicaremus terin
anno solum. But by reason of sin compassing us about (says Hugo) it was
determined that we should communicate only thrice a year. And in the next
allegation of Tolosanus who says no other then the rest, he translates
mystery for Mass.

In the citation of Mycrologus the craftily omits: iuxta antiquos Canones: And
for ante oblationem he translates before communion, because he will not have
his reader to hear that either the communion of the people in every Mass
might seem to be an Ecclesiastical custom or law only, or that there is
any such matter as oblation in the celebration of divine service, for that
they themselves have it not in their new Raphsodie.

For Cassanders authority we do not care. And yet I can not find in
Mycrologus those words which Cassander and Sir Humfrey allege out of him, to
wit, it can not properly be called a communion except some besides the Priest
do communicate. How be it the same Cassander in the same place does not
condemn private Masses for a Sacrilegious action, or to be prohibited, as Sir
Humfrey and the rest of the Nouellists commonly maintain: But only playing
the part of a Pacifyer, which he professes, persuades that the ancient
custom may be restored. Nay and he adds further and that truly, that the
Priests say when they celebrate privately, they do not participate of the
Sacrament in their own private name, but in the name of the Church and people:
which doubtless in reason is sufficient to make it a true communion, if
otherwise it were not. And as for Mycrologus, certain it is that he is no
condemner of private Mass, how soever he might esteem that communion less
proper, according to the Etymon of the word, Vid. Cassander. page 998.
in which more then one do not actuallie receive, which is all he intendes, if
any such saying he has, which notwithstanding is not contrary to the
doctrine or practice of the Romanists. Innocentius tertius only explicates
the ancient custom of the Church touching the communion of the people at
euetie Mass, and the change of it at seuarall times and by degrees. And
surely if we consider that the Nouelists hold this Pope for one of their
greatest opposites in doctrine, it were madnesses to imagine that he should in
any sort favor their tenets. And because I reflected that Innocentius as
being a Pope had no reason to find any greater favor at Sir Humfreys hands
then other Romanists have found, upon vewe of the place I discovered that he
had falselie translated some part of Innocentius words, which make against
him to wit, for these words: quia nec hoc digne potuit obseruari, he
translates: by reason this custom was neglected, whereas he should have put in
English: Because neither this could be dignely, or with due reverence observed:
By which false translation he inuertes the true cause of the altetation of the
foresaid custom.

Hoffmeisterus only declares the publicitie of the ancient custom with a
desire that endeauours may be used for the restitution of it, with whom we
Romanists all join to our power; so this is out of the compass of our
question. The allegation of Doctor Harding who speaks much to the same
purpose, I have ansered in an other place and showed the deceit of the
relatour, although in this place I find he rehearses his words truly, by
reason it had auailed him nothing to have here abused him.

Justinian makes no mention of either private or public Masses but only of
the participation of one consecrated bread or loaf to signify more
expresselie the union of charity, which is not to this purpose: as neither is
the place of Bellarmin following lib. 2. de missa cap. 9. as afterward I will
declare.

But to return to Doctor Harding, it is true I find Sir Humfrey cytes him
toward the end of the same paragraffe out of Jewel, which although he makes
nothing for the proof of his intent in this place, but is only brought in
upon the by to enlarge and fournish his discourse, as I suppose, yet does he
abuse that learned divine in that he leaves out one special reason which he
alleges why the primative Catholics used to communicate every day with the
Priest, because, says he, they looking hourelie to be catched and put to death
by the Panimes (I relate the sense not the formal words) should not depart
without the viaticum. Which words being the very heart of the authors
sentence, Sir Humfrey very slily omits it, as if it were not to the purpose,
and by that means he most deformedlie couples the head and the heels
together, which corruption although it does not much avail him, yet it seems he
makes a recreation of that art, and so he will rather play small game then
sit out.

Lastelie the words of Justinian taken out of his Commentary upon 1. Cor 10.
are impertinent, for he does not affirm that the Communion directly was given
to all that were present, as his words cited by the knight do testify, which
author being the last which he cites, and no more to his purpose then the
rest, let this suffice for the censure of the contents of this whole
paragraffe, and particularly for the confutation of that aspersion of
Novelty, and corruption with the knight does indeuore calumniouslie to cast
upon the Roman Creed, it now being plainly cleared and justified by that
which has been said, and he himself convinced of false dealing and forgerie.

The paragraffe insueing is of the seven Sacraments. And to be plain with Sir
Humfrey, I say that in the very entrance of his treaty he tells a plain
lie to his reader, affirming the Romanists to rely wholly upon the Council of
Trent in this point. For this Council expresselie has in the margent of the
decree of the septenarie number of Sacraments, the Council of Florence, and in
the decrees of every several Sacrament there is reference to scriptures,
Councels and Fathers, as the margines do testify. Wherefore thus the knight
begins, and how he will proceed I know not, but yet for the most part an
ill beginning makes an ill ending.

First he reprehendeth Bellarmin for saying that the authority of the Council
of Trent if there were no other ought to suffice for proof of the septinarie
number of the Sacraments. But he might with far greater reason have reprehend
both his own temeritie and the presumption of the reformed Churches. Which
without any such authority as the Council of Trent has, do deny the
foresaid number of Sacraments. Besides that Bellarmins meaning is not that the
Counsel of Trent has sufficient authority to define the same without
foundation of the word of God, or without scripture as it seems Sir Humfrey
falselie supposes, but that supposing such a foundation, it has infallible
power to declare the same as conformeable to truth and to the ancient
doctrine and practice of the Church in former ages, and consequently as a
matter of faith. And certainly that Church which has not this authority is
no true Church nor such an one as is described in the scriptures, but a mere
conuenticle or Scismaticall congregation vnsuteable to the word of God. And
whereas it seems strange to Sir Humfrey that according to Bellarmine, one
testimony of a late Council might suffice for the establishing of an article
of faith for that by his own tenet such an article requires both antiquity,
universality and consent: let him but truly and sincerely consider what
Bellarmines meaning is, and he will presently cease to marvel at his
position. He must therefore know that whereas Bellarmin affirms that the
Council of Trent alone might be sufficient to declare unto the whole Church
as an infallible truth that the number of Sacraments properly and truly so
called is no more nor less then seven, his meaning is that because the
foresaid Council is of as great authority as other general Counsels ever
have had in times past, it ought to have the same credit in the present Church
touching those points which it has defined, that they had in the Church of
their times in such matters as they then defined, and consequently that as
those points of doctrine which notwithstanding they had been doubtful before,
were nevertheless by the same Councels determined as certain and infallible
doctrine of faith without any defect of antiquity universality, or consent,
and in such manner as all the whole Christian world was bound under pain of
damnation to believe it, as is manifest in the consubstantiallitie of the
second person definde in the Council of Nice, the divinity of the third
person in the first Council of Constantinople, the unity of the person of
Christ in the Ephesin, and the duplicitie or distinction of his natures in the
Council of Calcedon, as also the duplicitie or distinction of his wills in the
sixth Council celebrated at Constantinople: so in like manner ought the present
Church to do with the Council of Trent in all it definitions, and
particularly in the definition of the number of the seven Sacraments, which
definition ought to be held for certain as well as the former determinations
of the foresaid Councels, both in respect it was decreed by the authority of
the same succeeding Church by which those definitions were made, as also in
regard it has antiquity, universality, and consent, both in as much as it is
deduced from the scriptures by infallible authority, and also for that we do
not find any either of the ancient Fathers, or modern divines to have
denied the Sacraments to be seven in number, or affirmed them to be only two
as the reformers commonly teach.

Now for the second reprehension which Sir Humfrey makes of Bellarmin for
saying, that if we take away the credit of the present Church and present
Council of Trent, the decrees of all other Councels, nay even Christian faith
it self might be called in question: this reprehension I say is as frivolous
as the former, for that according to both Bellarmines supposition and the
truth itself, the present Roman Church and Council of Trent, being of the
same authority, as I have above declared, with the Church and Councels of more
ancient times, and also it being evident that as in those days diverse points
of doctrine have been called in question by the heretics of those times, so
they might at this present be brought again in doubt by others, as experience
itself has taught us both even in those same matters which in former times
have been definde, as appears by the heresy of the new Trinitarians, and
others: as also in other truethes which as yet were ever held in the Church for
certain, all this I say being most apparantlie true and out of all manner of
doubt among the learned sort of people; doubtless if, as Bellarmine says, we
take away the credit of the present Church and present Council of Trent, or
others which hereafter may be assembled, there will be no power left whereby
to suppress such new oppinions, and errors, as by heretics in diverse times
and occasions may be broached contrary to the Christian faith as well
concerning matters already determined in former Counsels, as also touching
such new doctrine as may hereafter be invented by other sectaries, of which we
have too much experience in the Nouellists of these our days who call in
question diverse points defined in former Synods, of which we have instances in
the doctrine of the distinction of the divine persons questioned by the new
Trinitarians, of the doctrine about the lawful use and honor of images
defined in the 7. General Council the doctrine of transubstantiation in the
Council of Lateran. The number of the Sacraments and the like rejected even by
Sir Humfrey him self and his fellows: and consequently that which Bellarmine
affirms in this sense is most plain and certain and so far from Atheism,
as the contrary is from truth it self. And if Bellarmine be reprehensible
for equalizing the present Church and Counsels with those of ancient times,
suerlie the reformers themselves are far more faulty and guilty in this
kind, for that they do not equalize but also prefer the authority of their
own present Congregations and Parleaments before the Church and Counsels of
far more ancient times then is the date of their doctrine and religion. And
this they do not only in these points of doctrine which the later Counsels
have determined against the later errors of Sectaries, as the knight does
odiouslie sugiest, but also in some articles of most ancient faith and
doctrine, as is manifestly apparent in the point of the real present,
justification, and the like.

And as for the reason which Sir Humfrey yields against the authority of the
present Church, alleging that the word of Christ is alone sufficient for the
faith of all believing Christians; this reason I say is of no force, it is but
an old song of the Puritans which has been a thousand times repeated by the
reformers, and as osten refuted by the Romanists. And who denies but that the
word of God certainly known for such, and truly interpreted, and declared,
is sufficient for the faith of all Christians? but to this who does not also
know that the authority of the Church is necessary in all times and places?
nay who does not see that the one of necessaritie and as it were intrinsically
inuolueth the other, and that in such sort that the sectaries by excluding the
infalible authouritie of the present Church from the sufficientie of the
scrpitures do nothing less then deny that part of the scripture which
commends unto us the constant and perpetually successiue authority of the
Church till the confommation of the world. And if Sir Humfrey had considered
the reason which Bellarmin yeeldes, surely he could not so much have marauiled
that he gives so great authority to the council of Tre^t, and present Church,
for says he, if we take that away we have no infallible testimony that the
former Counsels were ever extant and that they were legitimate and that they
defined this or that point of doctrine etc. for the mention which historians
make of those counsels is but a humane testimony subject to falsitie, thus
Bell. all which discourse of his because he might have more color to complain
of him, and the the Roman Church, the insyncere knight resolved to keep it from
the eyes of his reader. True it is that the reformers out of their great
pureness or rather out of their pure madness, do usually exclaim against
the supposed superstitions of the Roman Church, but the Romanists may far
more justly complain of them in the same kind, in regard that, superstition
is noething else addording to the etimologie of the word, but superfluous
religion, and to tie the word of God to the precise written caracter alone, in
my conceit, is the highest degree of superstition that can be imagined,
because these precisians by that means do so excessiuelie, and superfluously
extol the written word, that by their exclusive hiperbole of the sufficiency
of it alone, they renounce all other sorts of word of God, either preached or
otherwise delivered to the Church, either in plain terms or at the least by
necessary sequelle, which is noething else but out of a superfluous precisenes,
to assign limits to that which is illimitable, and bounds to that which is
infinite, and consequently out of a superstitious zeal of religion to
destroyall true religion, and the true word of God it self.

Furthermore for the sufficiency of the written word preciselie, the knight
cites the Apostle S. Paul act. 20. verse. 27. were he says so: I have not
shunned to declare unto you all the council of God. but this is so
impertinentlie alleged that it needs no answer: it being manifest that the
Apostle neither speaks of scripture alone, nor intends to exclude other
parts of the word of God, nor yet so to limit that which he himself writ or
spoake as if he had delivered in writing all the doctrine with out exception
which is any way necessary to the salvation of every man's soul both in
general and in particular. Otherwise it would follow that all which the rest
of the sacred writers have published in the scriptures were superfluous and no
way necessary to have been penned. Besides that S. Paul in the place cited,
says not that he has written, but only that he has declared unto them all
the council of God, and so he neither in words nor sense favors the
reformers tenet of the all sufciencie of the written word but rather Sir
Hu^frey is here to be noted for a corruptor of the text. And no less idly
does the knight cite for the same purpose the testimony of Bellarm. his
meaning being so far from this matter as that if he were not his aeuersarie
as he is most plainly even in this point, yet had it been mere madness to
have as much as named him in this darticular, and so perhaps for this reason
only he was ashamed to quote the place, yet as commonly he does in other
occasions.

Finally for conclusion of his disproofe of the authority of the present Roman
Church, Sir Humfrey demands of us how the faith of Christians can depend
upon a Church which is fallen from the faith, or general belief of
Christianity can rely safely upon a counsel that is disclaimed by the
greatest part of the world. By England by France by Germany? But to this I
answer that in this double question, he tells his reader at the least a
double lie, both which we must take upon his own credit, for he alleges
nothing but his own worthy word, which of how little worth it is we have
sufficiently tried allreadie. Wherefore we must with his leave tell him that
neither it is true that the Roman Church is fallen from the faith, except he
means from the faith of Luther and Calvin, or from his own English faith,
from which nevertheless the Roman Church cannot truly be affirmed to have
fallen, but it from her, she having been in the world many hundrethes of
years before the authors of the new Religion were created: nor is it true
that the Tridentine Council is disclaimed by the greater part of France and
Germany at this present time in matters of faith. To say nothing of Italy,
Spain, Poland, Hungary; and those most vast and spacious Indian Regions of
later years reduced to the Roman faith, all with nations do contain a far
greater number of such as embrace the foresaid Council then there are
reformers in the world who reject the same. Especially considering that even
amongst the reformed Churches themselves notwithstanding the most rigorous
laws and proceedings which they use against the Roman Catholics where they
have the superiority of power, yet is there no small number to be found of
those who willingly receive all the doctrine of faith, contained in the
Tridentine Sinod: and consequently it appeeres by this that Sir Humfrey has
failed mightily in his Cosmographie and calculation, when he affirms that
the foresaid Council is disclaimed by the greatest part of the world; except
in his greatest part he includes Jews, Turks and Gentiles, or at the least
count for his own, all those which are not Romanists of what sect or faction
soever they be, as some of his reformed brothers use to do not excluding the
most unchristian heretics the Arians out of the number of the members of their
Congregation, to make it show more ample and glorious.

After this the knight out of the vehemency of his zealous Spirit, falls into
a fearful execration taking upon him the Anathema if any man alive shall
prove that the seven Trent Sacraments were instituted by Christ, or that all
the Fathers, or any one Father in the Primative Church, or any known author
for about a thousand years after Christ, did teach that there were neither
more nor less then seven Sacraments truly and properly so called, and to be
believed of all for an article of faith. Thus he* with so many turnings and
windinges as you see, and so many limitations of his speech, that a man would
think it impossible but that he might escape the snare of his own conditional
curse, which yet he does not, but rather falls flat into it, as I will
presently show.

And first I say that if Sir Humfrey would content himself with the authority
or testimony of dead men, I could remitte him not to one but to one hundredth
authors who yet alive in their works do testify the foresaid institution in
plain terms, to wit all those divines who lived and writ ever since the
time of Petrus Lombardus, of whom as from their common master they received the
doctrine of the seven Sacraments as successively deduced from the institution
of God, and delivered it to their successors with great uniformity and
consent, as appears by their books. And although this might be sufficient to
satisfy any reasonable person in the world, nevertheless because Sir
Humfreys importunity is so great that he will needs have the testimonies of
live authors, I remitte him to all those who either in the public
universities or pulpits of all Catholic countries do teach and preach the
same at this day to wit that not only a thousand years after Christ, but
even from the time of Christ himself or at the least from the time of his
Apostles preaching and writing, there were neither more nor less, then seven
Sacraments truly and properly so called and to be believed of all for an
article of faith as instituted by Christ. The number of which authors being
not only very great in itself, but also far greater and of far more
learned men then all those who in the reformed Churches hold the contrary as
I persuade my self Sir Humfrey cannot deny: it is most evident that (to say
nothing of those ancient writers which by their proofs of every particular
Sacrament by Scriptures and Fathes do plainly witness the same truth) he
had no reason at all for this part of his great demanded.

And now touching the rest of it, I answer first that as it is certain the
reformers themselves if we should demand the like of them concerning the
number of those Sacraments which they defend for truly and properly such, and
to be believed as an article of faith and as instituted by Christ, cannot
prove either by scripture or any one author, I do not say for about a
Thousand years as they do, but for a Thousand and four hundredth years after
Christ, that they are precisely twoe and no more nor less: so consequentie
they ought not to require of us that which they themselves are not able to
perform in their own cause and case.

Nevertheless that our adversary may plainly see we are not behind with
him, but rather far before him and the rest of his brothers in this
particular, I answer farther that all those Fathers who by express places of
scripture prove every one of those Sacraments in particular, and no other,
which the Roman Church houldeth for truly and properly such, do thereby also
show at the least tacitly, that those and no more nor less are believed for
such by faith. For testimony of which truth because it would be too tedious
in answer of one argument to produce so many of the Fathers as might be
alleged, I will only allege. Call. Instit.
S. Augustine, who being even according to our adversaries oppinion of him, a
faithful witness of antiquity, his testimony may justly serve for all the
rest: and because of the Sacraments of Baptism and Eucharist there is no
controversy, I will only produce those testimonies which convince the other
five.

Wherefore that confirmation is truly and properly a Sacrament S. Augustine
affirms lib. 2. contra lit. Pet. cap. 104. where he says thus. The Sacrament
of Chrisme in the nature of visible signs, Sacrosanctum est, is a sacred and
holy Sacrament as Baptism; and he has the like of order lib. 2. cont. Epist.
Parm. cap. 13. sayinh. They are both Sacraments, and both by a certain
consecration are given to man, that when he is baptzed, this when he is ordered
and in the same place he also says, that both of them be Sacraments which no
man doubts. Of Penance he says lib. 1. de adult. coniug. cap. 26. and 28.
eadem est causa Baptismi and reconciliations, fine quibus Sacramentis homines
credunt se mori non debere. The same cause or reason is of Baptism and
Reconciliation with out which Sacraments men believe they ought not to dye.
Matrimony he compares with Baptism lib. 1. de nuptijs and concup. cap. 10.
where he says that the matter of this Sacrament is, that man and woman joined
in marriage may inseperably persevere together as long as they live. And the like
saying he has of the perpetual effect of this Sacrament comparing it with the
perpetual effect of Baptism. And in the 14. chapter of his book de bono
coniugali, he compares matrimony with the Sacrament of Order, which order as
we have cited before, he compared with Baptism in another place. Finally of
Extreme unction he makes mention lib. 2. de visit. infir. cap. 4. and in his
215. Sermon of the saints. Where although he does not in express terms
affirm extreme unction to to be one of the Sacraments, yet he expressly
affirms there, and sermon. de temp. 115. that the ceremony of unction which S.
James mentions, and the promise, belong unto the faithful, and are to be
practiced by the Priests as the Apostle commaundes: all which proves plainily
that S. Augustine held it for a Sacrament as well as the other six, and although
some doubt may be made whether the book de visit. infir. be truly S.
Augustines work, yet certain it is that the author of it is both good and
ancient. And thus much out of S. Augustine for the proof of every one of the
seven Sacraments in particular, besides that which he speaks in general of
them, and of the benefit which the Church has received from God by the
institution of them, in his first sermon upon the 108. psalm, where he says
thus. What a great gift is the office of the administration of the Sacraments
in Baptism, Eucharist, and in the rest of the holy Sacraments? so that we see
that S. Augustine stanneth plainly against the doctrine of Sir Humfrey. And
does fully answer his question touching the number of the Sacraments defended
by the Roman Church. And supposing he makes so special mention of these seven
as he does more then of any other external sign or ceremony of the Church
(to some of which nevertheless he gives also the name of Sacrament) and
supposing also he co^pareth or all most of them with those two which the
reformers themselves hold for proper and true Sacraments, in their effects and
sanctity, as also amplifying the benefit which God has conferred to the
Church by the institution of them (that which he does not with the rest of the
holy signs and ceremonies which the same Church also uses) supposing all
these circumstances I say, it is more then certain that he speaks of them
as of true and proper Sacramants which for such have been recreaued and
believed in the universal Church even ever since the time of Christ the
institutour of them. And so let this suffice for an answer of that vast
demand of our Thrasonia^ knight, and to demo^strate, that notwithstanding all
his circumspection, his own conditional curse is turned into an absolute, and
so is fallen upon him with all it weight and forces as a just punishment of the
temeritie and excess of that boldness, which he commits in protesting,
against a truth confirmed with such authority and testimony as may satisfy
the most tender conscience and settle the most wavering mind in the world. And
yet for confirmation of the foresaid answer, we may further add, that
supposing the Master of Sentences so many years past defended the seven
Sacraments with the institution of them by Christ himself and their necessity
and profit in the Church of God: and supposing the same author writ nothing
but what he found in the ancient Fathers, from the collection of whose
sentences he took his appellation: supposing I say all this which his works
do witness, it is most apparent in the moral judgment of any indifferent
man, that the doctrine which he delivered concerning the foresaid number of
Sacraments, was no other then the faith of the universal Church and also the
very same which by the general consent of school divines in later ages has
binne taught and preached even by those of the Grecian Church, as by the
testimony of Hieremie the late Patriarch of Constantinople in his answer to
the Augustan Confession does plainly appear; where the septenarie number of
Sacraments is expresselie maintained against the Lutherans as his words here
quoted in the margent clearelie testify with shame enuffe to the reformed
brothers: for thus he says. Sacrame^ta vero ritusque in hac ipsa Catholica
recte sententium Christianorum Ecclesia, sunt septem. Baptisma, Chrysma sancti
vnguenti, diuina communio, manusimpositio, matrimonium, Paenitentia and sacrum
Oleum Et statim. Quod vero haec sola sint nec plura numero: etia^ diuisione
clarum fit etc. Patriarcha Constantinop. Res. ad Doctores Wittemb. fol. 11.
Truly the Sacraments and rites in this same Catholic Church of right
understanding Christians are seven: Baptism, chrisme of holy ointment, the
divine communion, imposition of hands, Matrimony, Penance, and sacred oil.
etc.

But the knight goeing yet further in the proof of his duall number, tells
his reader, that the two Sacraments which his Church defends are properly
Sacraments because they have element and institution: but the other fine are
not such because they want either of these. But to this I answer that the five
Sacraments which the reformers reject, have not only this which Sir Humfrey
requires to his two defaced Sacraments, but also besides this, they have
promise of iustificant grace, which according to the description he makes
here, his two do want; and so I retort his prrofe upon him. For if our five
be not properly Sacraments because in his conceit they want institution and
element; surely neither are his two properly Sacraments because they want
grace, as being but signs or elements instituted by God not giving grace both
according to his former declaration, Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 14. and 15.
and also in the common doctrine of the reformers: And so we see that the
knights discourse touching the property of his two ministerial elements is
but a graceless piece of doctrine, especially considering that if he had
binne but half so conversant in our divines as he will needs seem to be, he
might most easily have found both institution element, and grace, annexed to
all those five Sacraments which he renounceth: which Catholic divines although
they do not all agree in the assignation of the several matters and formers
of the same, yet do they nevertheless with great conformity consent in the
number and general definition of them, to wit that they are all external and
sensible signs which by divine institution have the promise of justifying
grace annexed. And least the knight take exceptions and complain that I do
not satisfiie his argument my self, but remit him to others for an answer; I
will breiflie show out of scripture both the institution and element of every
one of the foresaid five Sacraments in particular. Confirmation therefore was
instituted by Christ in those places of scripture where he promises to his
Apostles the Holy Ghost after his ascension, as S. John the 16.5. Luke the
24.48. which collation of the holy Ghost was exercised by the Apostles Act.
10. and 19. by imposition of hands after they had received the same holy Ghost
by that extraordinary manner which is described Act. 2. which impositio^
together with the words used Act. 8. when they prayed for the^ on whom they put
their hands, are the matter and form of this Sacrament. And now here we see
both the institution and the element in this Sacrament, which is all Sir
Humfrey requires of us; and so I will say unto him that which S. Hierome said
to his adversaries the Luciferians the 4. chap. Si quaeris quare in Ecclesia
baptizatus non nisi per manus Episcopi accipit Spiritum Sanctum, disce hanc
obseruationem exea authoritate descendere quod post ascensionem Domini Spiritus
ad Apostolos descendit, That is to say, If thou do ask me, why he that is
baptized does not receive the holy Ghost but by the hands of the Bishop,
learn that this observation descended from that authority that after the
ascension of our Lord the Spirit descended upon the Apostles.

Secondly the Sacrament of Penance has both element and institution; the
element is the acts of the penitent declared by sensible words or signs, the
institution is the collation of power conferred by Christ to remitte sins, to
his Apostles and in them to all true Preistes according to that of the 20. of
Saint John, Receive ye the holy Ghost, whole sins you shall forgive they
are forgiven, and whose sins you shall retain they are retayued. In which
words both the institution and the element be sufficiently declared;
especially if we join the declaration of the Church, without which even those
two which the reformers hold for Sacraments cannot be convinced to be truly
and properly such, if one were obstinately disposed.

Thirdly in the Sacrament of Extreme Unction both the element and institution
are plainly enough found in the 5. chap. of S. James: where the Apostle
says. If any man be sick among you, let him bring in the Priests of the
Church and let them pray over him anointing him with oil in the name of our
Lord, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and our Lord shall lift him
up, and if he be in sins they shalbbe remitted him. In which place to the
external signs of prayer and oil, remission of finnes is annexed, as the
reader may plainly perceive: which effect even according to the doctrine of
the reformers themselves as I suppose cannot be found but only in such
ceremonies as properly are instituted by Christ himself for Sacraments.

Fourthlie the like I say of Order, the substance of which is so plainly
contained in the scriptures, Vid. Call. l. 3. Inst. c. 4.. 20. etc. 19.. 31.
that some of the greatest reformers have not had the face to exclude it out of
the number of the Sacraments of the new law, and the places of Scripture which
convince the truth of it are 1. Timo. 4. and 2. Thimothie 1. where both the
sensible element which is the imposition of hands, and the effect of grace
annexed, are cleerlie described; which effect I think our adversaries
confess, cannot be possibly conferred but only by Gods authority and
institution. The words of the Apostle are these in the first place. Do not
neglect the grace which is in the: which was given the by prophecy with the
imposition of the hands of preisthood. In the second place the words are
these. For which cause I admonish the to resuscitate the grace of God which is
in the by the imposition of my hands.

Now lastly concerning Matrimony, a man might justly marvel that our new
Eua^gelistes should make any question of it in this nature. For supposing
their extraordinary affection that way, and that single life is so unsavory
to them that if it lay in their power, they would rather suffer the whole quire
of virgins to perish, then they would make a religious vow of perpetual
chastity, or live without a woman: supposing this I say in my opinion they
ought in all reason sooner to have honored matrimony with the title of a
Sacrament, then to have quite deprived it of that which the scripture it self
does give it. Yet supposing they be so preposterous, that they will rather
impugn that which they otherwise love best, then seem to agree to the Roman
doctrine, I tell them all and particularilie him with whom I dispute, that
although marriage was by God himself only ordained in paradise as a civil
contract: Nevertheless Christ who came not to dissolve the law, but to
eleuate it to a higher degree of perfection; amongst other things he pleased to
honor the same with the true nature and properties of a Sacrament; giving also
though not immediately by himself, yet by his Apostle S. Paul, the very name
and title of a Sacrament; whereas notwithstanding neither he himself nor any
of his Apostles or Evangelists ever gave that name to any of the rest of the
Sacraments. Wherefore to come nearer to the purpose; I say that the institution
of this Sacrament was by Christ himself, who in the 19. chapter of S. Mathewe
ordained the conjunction of man and wife to be inseparable to the end it so
might be a sacred sign of the indissoluble conjunction of Christ and his
Church, as it is declared by the Apostle Ephesians. 5. where he expreslie gives it
the name of a great Sacrament in regard of the sacred conjunction (partly by
the hypostaticall union, and partly by the union of charity) betwixt Christ
and his spouse the Church which it signifies. Which foresaid conjunction of
man and wife explicated by words of the present tense is the element; and
Christ's ordinance and application of the same to the foresaid signification, is
the institution, by virtue of which it also conferreth grace to the receivers,
to the end they may live in that perpetual union of minds which is required
to the representation of the inseparable union of Christ and his Church; which
is all and more then our adversary himself demanded of us before in this
particular matter. To which if we add the authority of the Church and
ancient fathers for the interptetation of those scriptures which we have
produced for proof of the truth of this, and the rest of the foresaid five
Sacraments (which authorities of the fathers if need required and the place did
serve for them I could easily produce) it would yet more plainly appear
with how little reason the pretensiue reformed Congregations do exclude them
out of the number of true and proper Sacraments.

And so now according to this a very easy answer may be framed to all that
which the knight brings against the septenarie number of Sacraments in the
rest of this paragraph, and particularilie to the testimonies of those Roman
authors and Fathers which he produces in favor of his cause. And first
touching the Fathers which he cites besides that which has binne already
spoken I further add, that there was not one of them which was of the
reformers opinion in this matter as is most apparent in that Sir Humfrey
himself could not produce so much as one Father that auerreth the only duall
number of Sacraments: Nay they are so far ftom this, that there is not one of
them, who does not in one place or other make express mention of more then
two, if professedlie they make mention of any at all.

Secondly I say, that as the reformers cannot with any probability infer
out of those Fathers who affirmed that the two Sacraments Baptism and the
Eucharist have flowed out of the side of Christ, that there are no more nor
less then two; so neither can they in any sort thence infer that the same
Fathers taught not the septenarie number of Sacraments. And more then this if
the reformers stand upon this so much that the Fathers by the blood which
issued out of our Saviors side, understood the Sacrament of the blood of
Christ, then they must consequently either confess that the same Fathers
held the real presence of the blood of Christ in the Eucharist, which yet
they themselves deny, or else at the least that the reformed Churches have no
true Sacrament at all, for that according to their confession, there is in it
neither blood nor bone. And out of this general answer to the testimonies of
the ancient Fathers, we may infer how falselie Sir Humfrey in the end of his
149. page affirms, that they did insist sometimes in the number of two and so
restrained the Church to the definite number of two only, which saying of his
is a manifest falsitie and injurious to those Fathers whom he so charge, as
that which I have produced out of S. Augustine in this period does plainly
convince in these five Sacraments which the reformers deny: Neither was he
able to produce one testimony out of any of them for proof of his feigned
position; but so leaves it vnconfirmed more then with that fame untruth by
which he belyeth most impudentlie the foresaid Fathers all at a clappe.

Neither has that which he further adds of the same Fathers in the next page
any greater truth or foundation then this, where he says that had the Fathers
believed that those five Sacraments had binne instituted by Christ they would
of necessity have concluded them for true and proper Sacraments, and have
easily found in them the number of seven: Thus in effect Sir Humfrey
discourses, to which I answer first that doubtless if the Fathers had had but
half the occasion which the Church has had since their time, and especially
since the foundation of the reformed Churches; they would of necessity have
treated and spoken expresselie of the septenarie number, and have distinguished
as now the Church and divines do betwixt proper and improper Sacraments: But
the occasion failing, they neither had necessity nor conueniencie to speak
otherwise of them then they have done: Nay some of them, especially those who
writ against the Gentiles, were rather obliged by the course of those times,
not to mention the secret mysteries of our faith at all, then to reveal them
to the profaners of them, more then was preciselie necessary for the answer
of their objections, Vid. Theodoret. Dial. 2.
which indeed is the true reason, why diverse of the foresaid more ancient
Fathers have spoken so obscurelie and sparingly even of some of the chief
mysteries of Christian Religion.

Secondly I say, that howsoever the ancient Fathers spoke of the express
number of the Sacraments, certain it is, they either expreslie taught, or at
the least supposed for certain doctrine of faith that all those which the
Roman Church now holds for true and proper Sacraments do give divine grace
to the receivers, as it is apparent out of those places which I cited before
out of Saint Augustine for the proof of every several Sacrament and their
several effects; and consequently they held implicitelie at the least, and if
either necessity or just occasion had required they would have concluded
expresselie the septenarie number of Sacraments, and that they were instituted
by Christ for such truly and properly.

And now for the more modern divines who wrote since the time of P. Lumbard,
of which Sir Humfrey cites to the number of twelve or thirteen, there is not
one of them who holds only two proper Sacraments as the reformers do: nay
there is not one of them that does not expreslie defend the septenarie number
of true and proper Sacraments, excepting perhaps Alexander Hales and Durand may
seem to opinate otherwise to the incircu^spect reader, of which two authors
nevertheless I say first that Hales does not deny all those seven, nor any
one of them in particular which the Roman Church defendes to be truly and
properly Sacraments, but he only is of opinion that only four of them are
to be called Sacraments of the new law, for that as he imagined the other
three, to wit Penance, Order, and Matrimony, had their beginning before. True
it is, Hales cannot be excused from error in that he affirms Confirmation to
have binne instituted by the Council of Melda (except he means only, that
there it was declared to be properly a Sacrament as I am persuaded he does)
but nevertheless supposing this his singular opinion, yet notwithstanding it
being with all certain, that he holds the same Sacrament to be one of the
seven no less then he does Penance which yet he held (as it seems to some
later writers) to have binne instituted by the Apostles, Iuxta numerum malorum
spiritualiu^ debet sumi numerus Sacrame^torum, septem sunt differentiae
morboru^. Hal. 4. part. q. 8. mem. 7. act. 2.
notwithstanding all this I say, he is impertinentlie alleged by the knight as
an impugner of the Roman doctrine in the septenarie number of Sacraments,
which notwithstanding his other allucinations, he as expresselie maintains as
other divines do as his own words plainly testify saying thus in his 4.
part and eight question. According to the number of spiritual diseases, the
number of Sacraments is to be taken, there are seven differences of diseases.
What therefore can be more manithe^ that this author tought the complete
number of seven Sacraments?

And as for Durand, certain it is that he does not deny Matrimony to be a
Sacrament absolutely as the reformers do, but he at the most only affirms
that it is not properly and vniuocallie a Sacrament conferring grace in the
same manner the other six do; which opinion of his although as it sounds it can
not stand firm with the doctrine of the Church: yet this not our question, and
in case it were, yet is there no reason why one man's private tenet, nay nor the
private tenet, or error of more then one or two should preiudicate the common
doctrine of the Church both before and after him, nor diminish her antiquity
and universality in any point of doctrine especially where there is no
obstinacy in the author, as in these there was not: neither can the
adversaries draw any argument of force against the same in any case, out of
one only author or more, if more there were, contrary to the torrent of all
the rest. To omit that as vasques notes, the same Durand in the same place
expreslie affirms that it is an heresy to deny that Matrimony is a
Sacrament, which doubtless is a co^cluding argument that when Dura^d affirmed
Matrimony not to be vniuocallie or just as the rest be a Sacrament, he did
not absolutely deny it to be one of those seven which the church did both then
hold, and now houldeth to betrue Sacraments; but at the most he only denied
the truth and property of it in that strict and univocal manner of conferring
iustifica^t grace, as he and other divines affirm of the rest: which being so,
then cannot the Reformers have any color to allege this testimony either
against the absolute truth of that Sacrament, or against the Septenarie number
of it with the other. Nay more then this having now exactelie examined the
matter I find that Durand besides that he expresselie defendes the total
number of seven Sacraments disputing severally of the nature of every one of
them, he does in particular affirm of Matrimony even in his resolution or
direct anser to the question, absolutely that it is a Sacrament; and puts it
in the last place for one of the seven. And these are his words in their
several places noted in the margent. Tenendu^ est absolute quod matrimonium
est Sacrame^tum. Quia hoc determinauit Eccle. in 4. d. 26. q. 3.
Et ita sunt invniuerso septe^ Sacramenta. Idem d. 2. q. 2. n. 6.


To which if we add that which Capreolus does testify of the same durand, all
doubt of his true meaning in this point will quite vanish away. Coactus fuit in
vltimo opere cautius loqui, vt scilicet confiteretur matrimonium esse vere and
proprie Sacrame^tum, sed non vniuoce cum alijs nouae legis Sacramentis etc.
Capreolus in 4. sent. d. 26. q. 1..
For Capreolus says that in his last work or edition he was constrained to
speak more cautelously so that he confessed matoimonie to be truly and
properly a Sacrament, but not univocally. By which, and that also which I have
said before touching Alexander Hales the learned reader may perceive that both
the one and the other are against truth and reason alleged against the
septenarie number of Sacraments, and against the universality of the doctrine
of the Roman Church in that point, supposing they differ not from the rest of
the Romanists as their own words witness, Except it be in the manner of
defending that same number, yet both agreeing in the substance of the
Controversy here proposed by the knight our adversary, Quantum ad tertium
durandi.
and absolutely affirming that there are truly seven Sacraments in the
Catholic Church.

Moreover in the citation of the other modern divines, Sir Humfrey uses much
fraud and cosenage: and remitting the rest till afterward which I will examen
in their due places as they are quoted by the knight, I will first produce
those two whose books I had at the first, and both of whom he egregiously
abuses. Bellarmin is corrupted by him in three several places cited in this
one paragraph. And first he is corrupted in his Second book of the effect of
Sacraments chap 24. where the Cardinal saying only that the adversaries
ought not to require of the Romanists that they show the name of the
Septenarie number of the Sacraments either out of scripture or Fathers; Primo
notandu^ non debere aduersarios petere vt ostendamus in scripturis aut Patribus
nome^ septenarij Sacrame^torum, na^ nec ipsi possunt ostendere nome^ Binarij
vel ternarij etc. Bellar. l. 2. de effect. Sacr. c. 24.
yet honest Sir Humfrey translates out of the Latin quoted in his own margent
the number of seven for the name of the number of seven, repeating the same
twice for failing, and so daceiues his ignorant reader persuading him there by
that even by Bellarmins confession the number of the seven Sacraments is not to
be found either in scriptures or Fathers, whereas nevertheless Bellarmin says
no such thing, but only that the name of the foresaid number is not to be
required in that manner supposing that the substance of a thing is oftentimes
found both in scriptures and Fathers, and yet not the name it self, as
appears in the word Trinity of persons, and in the name of the number of two
Sacraments, neither of which is extant in scriptures.

Secondly Bellarmin is corrupted in his book of Extreme Unction cap. 2. Non
omnes co^ueniunt an cum Apostoli vngebant olto infirmos (Marci 6.) and
curabant, illa fuerit vnctio sacramentalis an solu^ fuerit figura quaedam etc.
Bellar. lib. de Sacr. Extrem. Vnct. c. 2.
Where the false knight makes his reader believe that Bellarmin was one of
those who disagreed from the doctrine of other divines in the doctrine of the
five Sacraments, which he and his companions deny to be truly and properly
Sacraments, and yet the Cardinal only affirms with some other authors that
that unction which the Apostles used about the sick and restored them to
health the 6. of S. Mark, was not the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, but rather
a figure or obumbration of it: Which as you see is a far different matter
from the denial of Extreme Unction as it is used in the Church, to be
properly a Sacrament or one of the five rejected by the pretensiue reformed
Congregations. Thirdly the knight corrupts Bellarmin whom he cites in the
nynth chapter of his first book of the Sacraments, where he peruertes both the
translation of the words and sense. The words in that he Englisheth these,
non est ita notum, it is not so certain, whereas he ought to have translated,
it is not so known: The sense he corrupts in that he persuades his reader
that Bellarmin confesses that the foresaid five Sacraments have not their
institution from christ immediately: whereas he speaks not a word of the
institurion, but affirms only that the sacred things which the Sacraments
signify are three; justifying grace, the passion of Christ and eternal life;
all which, that Baptism and Eucharrst do fignifie says he, res notissima
est, it is most notorious, de alijs Sacramentis non est ita notum, of the rest
of the Sacraments it is not so notorious or known. Yet further adding that it
is certain that even these five Sacraments which the reformers reject signify
all those three things at the least implicitlie: But to say that the foresaid
five Sacraments have not their institution immediately from Christ, never
entered in to Bellarmins thoughts. tamen certum est saltem implicit ea omnia
significare etc. Bellar. loco cit.
And so if the knight had dealt playnelie and sincerely in the citation of
that place of the Cardinal, he could have found nothing for his purpose, but
rather the contrary.

Furthermore Sir Humfrey also corrupts vasquez most shamefullie in the 3.
part d. 2. cap. 5. n. 3. de Sacram. Matr. Where he impudentlie belyeth him
affirming that Vasquez knew well that neither modern divines nor ancient
Fathers did conclude Matrimony for a true Sacrament of the Church. And yet the
knight could not be ignorant that the same author professedlie defendes the
same to be truly and properly a Sacrament in the third chapter of the very
same disputation which he himself cites: and in his 4. chap. Vasquez proves
it by the testimonies of diverse Fathers, putting for part of the title of the
same chap. that the Vasquez de Mat.
definition of the Church touching the truth of this Sacrament had foundation
in the testimonies of the Fathers, and who will please to read vasquez will
find it so. In so much that Sir Humfrey in this particular is wholelie
inexcusable, especially considering that out of the place cited nothing can
possibly be collected or inferred wherebie it may in any sort be imagined
that vasquez ever dreamed that either ancient Fathers or modern divines
(excepting durand and perhaps the Master of Sentences of whom he speaks
doubtfullie, not daring to affirm him absolutely to have been of the same
opinion with Durand, as in truth he is not) did conclude matrimony not to be a
true and proper Sacrament, but only affirms that none of the places which
divines allege out of S. Augustine to prove the truth and property of that
Sacrament, convince the same in the sense in which (says Vasquez) we now
dispute. Which imagination of Vasquez though it were true, as in my judgment
apparentlie it is not, yet does it not prove Sir Humfreys intent in disprouing
the septenarie number of Sacraments. Especially supposing, as the same Vasquez
affirms, Co^. Carth. 4.
that the fourth Council of Carthage (in which S. Augustine was present as a
great member of the same) makes mention of the Benediction of the Priest used
in marriage as in a holy and sacred thing. Grant I say that Vasquez opinion
were true, yet would it not serve the knights turn, either for the poofe of
his intent, or for the excuse of his false and crafty dealing.

Next after Vasquez I will put Suarez althou' according to the order of Sir
Humfrey he is the first man he belies in this Poragraph. in 3. part d. 12. sec.
1. where he charges him to say that the council of Florence did insinuate the
number of 7. Sacraments, Propter quod tandem haec veritas definita est in Con.
Flor. in decreto Eugenij qua^ Graeci and Armeni facile cum Latinis suceperu^t.
Suar. loc. cit.
and the council of Trent did expresselie decree it for an article of faith,
yet suarez says in plain terms, that the same was defyned in the council of
Florence. So that here is false dealing with suarez and with the truth to make
the point of the septenarie number of Sacraments seem new, as there is also in
the words following in which the same Sir Humfrey affirms that the Romanists
rely wholely upon the Tridentine council.

Ambrose, Austin, Chrysostom and Bid be impertinently alleged. For they none
of them deny that the Sacraments are no more nor less then seven. And of S.
Isidore it is falsely affirmed by Sir Humfrey that he accounts but of 3.
Sacraments for although in the place quoted by him he speaks only of three
(which yet is more then the knight will allow of) yet does he not affirm that
there are no more: yea and in other several places he mentions three more,
Penance, Order, matrimony. And of them all he treates only occasionallie not
professedlie as the reader may easily perceive, and therefore doubtless there
is no mention of Extreme unction among the rest, of which nevertheless he was
not ignorant how plainly S. James describes it, neither would have omitted it
if occasion had served to treat of it. Of Penance he treates lib. 8. orig.
page 83. and lib. 2. de offi. Eccles. of Order in his 2. book de offic.
Eccles. page 597. and 598. and of matrimony he has express words in the
same book page 69.

Touching S. Chrysostom, Ambrose, Cyrill and Theophilactus it is false that
they maintained only two Sacraments, and as for Chrysostom and Theophilactus,
upon the 6. of S. Paul to the Hebrews, they both make mention of
Confirmation. S. Ambrose lib. 1. de Penit: makes a kind of comparison betwixt
Baptism and Penance, saying: vnum in vtroque ministerium est, etc. and S.
Cyrill of Jerusalem lib. 12. in so. cap. 56. does also compare these two
Sacraments together, and both of them mention the Sacrament of Chrisme. the one
Catech. 3. the other lib. 3. de Sacra. cap. 2. and de ijs qui mysterijs
initiantur cap. 7. so that none of these Fathers which Sir Humfrey produced for
the number of 2. only Sacraments, do agree with his doctrine: and yet more
not one of them treates in any one place of their works of the precise number
of Sacraments, but only so far as their matter and drift required.

Pascasius also is falselie dealt with by Sir Humfrey, both in his meaning and
in the translation of his words: for the does not say, the Sacramets of
Christ are Baptism, Chrisme, and the body and blood of our lord, as Sir
Humfrey does put in English but. Sunt autem Sacramenta Christi in Ecclesia:
that is: but Sacraments of Christ in the Church be Baptism Chrysme etc.
Meaning only that Baptism, Chrysme and the Eucharist are such Sacraments as
he treates of making mention of those only, not to show the precise number
but the nature of a Sacrament in general, especially touching the
signification and effects of the same, and therefore he does exemplify in those
only which are most notoriously known for such and their matter and forms
most obuious, omitting the rest as being less to the purpose he there handles.
And for Sir Humfrey to affirm that Chrisme is crept in to the text of the
later editions, that is but an idle imagination of his own, otherwise sure he
would have produced some other more ancient edition in which the word Chrysme
is not found. And certainly he that should compare the faithfulness, and
sincerity of the Romonists in that nature, and the care they have to publish
authors purely, with the insinceritie of the sectaries, he would presently
judge that copy which wantes the word Chrisme to be razed by them that have
of late years abolished the use of it in their Church, rather then have the
least suspicio^ in the world that the same should be added by Romanists whose
doctrine and practice in that particular is so frequent and ancient.
Especially considering that it makes no more to our purpose of maintaining the
septenarie of Sacraments against the pretended reformers, whether the word
Chrysme be in Pascasius or no, then if it were undoubtedly true that he had
made no mention of it. Supposing it is sufficient for us to know that this
author in that place neither intended to prove the number of three Sacraments,
nor yet to exclude the number of seven. Howbeit, I do not deny but that the
word Chrysme being in the text, it suffices to convince that the Sacraments of
Christ are more then two. And in deed I marvel why the sectaries especially
those of the English Church should labor so much to exclude Confirmation from
the number of the Sacraments, supposing they either do practice if or at the
least ought to practice it according to their own ordinances, although there is
nothing prescribed by them touching the use of Chrysme, but only or chiefly
mention is made of the blow which the confirmer gives to the confirmed with a
certain phrase or form of words. Concerning which ceremony I have heard
that upon a time, a certain nominall Bishop of theirs at the time of
administration, was so extraordinary well pleased with one of the company, of
the feminine gender, that in steed of the ceremonial stroke he gave her a
kiss of kindness, by which the young maid assured her self she received
more grace the^ if she had received Confirmation it self accordnig to their
ordinary manner. And now this may be sufficient for the true meaning of
Pascasius.

Hugo a sancto Victore is most peruerselie dealt with when out of Perkins he is
produced by Sir Humfrey against the Sacrament of Penance. For I have read him
lib. 1. de Sacramentis cap. 12. where he says thus in express terms. Septem
sunt principalia Sacramenta quae in Ecclesia ministrantur. there be seven
principal Sacraments which are ministered in the Church. And he numbers them in
particular and Penance for one: And in his summa sentent. tract. 6. cap. 10.
he says. Sacramentum Paenitentiae redeuntibus ad Deum semper est necessarium.
Est enim secunda tabula post naufragium, quia post baptismum si quis vestem
innocentiae peccando amittit per paenitentiam recuperare poterit. And by this
you plainly see this Romanist is groaslie abused both by Perkins, and his
imitatour, as if he were a denier of the septenarie number of Sacraments who
so particularly does acknowledge them. As in like manner the same author is
abused by the knight page 128. Touching the custom of the communion of the
people at every Mass in the Primative Church, by omission of his ensuing
words which are these. Sed propter peccatum circumstans nunc statutum est vt
communicaremus solum semel in anno. That is to say. But by reason of sin
which does compase us about, it is now decreed that we communicate thrice a
year. Whereas likewise neither in the former words of this author cited by
Sir Hu^frey, there is a jot against private Mass, as he would have it, but
only a relation of diverse customs of the Church in that particular point of
practice, as I have declared in the paragraph of that matter.

Bessario^ in his words rehearsed by Sir Hu^frey does not deny the septenarie
number, nor does absolutely affirm that there are only two Sacraments, but
only says that we read of two only manifestly delivered in the Gospel:
which is not contrary to the Tridentine Council, nor yet that which the
knight intendes to prove, to wit that the doctrine of seven Sacraments is no
article of faith. And what if Bessarion should say that some of the seven
Sacraments are found not in the Gospel but in the Epistle, what would Sir
Humfrey reply to that? But in earnest I have vewed Bessarions treaty of the
Eucharist where I find that, although he makes no plain mention of the seven
Sacraments as not having any just occasion there offered to handle that
matter, yet out of some passages of his discourse with other circumstances
there unto annexed, it is evidently gathered what his meaning, and faith was
touching the same. For in the place cited by the knight and there aboutes,
Cardinal Bessarion treates particularly of the form of the Sacrament of
Eucharist, proving that it consists of no other words then those same which
our Savior himself consecrated with, and delivered to the Church videlicet.
This is my body: This is my blood. And by occasion of this he mentions
Baptism, as being one of the two Sacraments which only have their forms
expresselie and in special terms contained in the Gospel and specified by
Christ himself. And therefore a little before that which Sir Humfrey cited out
of this author, he said. Illud quoque haud contemnendum videtur quod cum duo
nobis Sacramenta a Saluatore traditae fuerint Baptismus and Eucharistia
vtrumque verbis suis confici iussit: By which words it is certain and clear
that he there speaks only of such Sacraments as our Savior most verbally or
most expresselie ordained his disciples to consecrate and administer.

And now that this Cardinal did believe that there are more Sacraments then
these, it is evidently convinced out of those his words fol. 169. saying.
Ante omniaigitur sciendum est tam hoc Sacrosanctum Communionis de quo agimus
quam caetera Ecclesiae Sacramenta ideo sacra vocitari, quoniam aliud in se
habent quod videtur aliud quod non corporis oculis sed solo intellectu
comprehenditur. And after in the same page. Etenim in Sacramento Baptismatis
ablutio carnis per aquam ita est Sacrementum vt duntaxat signum sit ablutionis
peccatorum. Ipsa enim peccatorum remissio res est significata nihil vltra
significans. And to these words he presently adds that which is plainly to
our purpose, to wit: Hoc idem in reliquis Sacrame^tis. Ergo and in Sacramento
Eucharistia. And yet more plainly f. 175. Que^admodum in caeteris omnibus,
ita etiam in hoc Sacramento concordes sunt Occidenibus Orientales. That is.
Even as in all the rest so in this Sacrament the Occidentals (that is the
Romanists) do accord with the Orientals) that is the Grecians). Besides, this
author was a Greek Cardinal of the Roman Church, and a chief agent, and
promoter for the union of the Latin and Greek Church in the Council of
Florence, where the number of seven Sacraments was defined and declared. To
omit that the same Bessarion fol. 181. makes express mention of the Sacrament
of Confirmation for so he says. Quod manifestum fiet si quis ad Sacramentum
Chrysmatis mentem conuerterit. So that Sir Humfrey could scarce a chosen a
worse Patron for proof of his pare of deformed Sacraments, then is this
Cardinal, if he had sought all Greece over: it being manifest that he was a
professed defender not only of the two Sacraments he mentions in the place
cited by him, but also a firm believer of the other five which the pretended
reformers renounce and thrust violently out of the rank of true Sacraments.
It is true I have advertised some small sleight of Sir Humfrey in translating
or transforming the word manifest in Latin, into the word plainly in
English: but this but one of his diminutiue tricks and so I pass it over.
Only I desire the indifferent reader to reflect how peruers and incredulous a
generation this is which refuses to believe points of doctrine because they
are not manifestelie contained in the scripture. Whereas on the contrary this
most learned and Catholic Cardinal Bessarion although he granted that two
only Sacraments of the Church are so expressed in the written word of God,
yet does he with a firm and constant faith embrace the rest.

S. Aug. is impertine^tlie cited both in his third book of Christian doctrine
c. 9. and also de simbolo ad Cathecu. l. 2. c. 6. in regard that in neither of
the places he speaks of two only Sacraments as his words cited by Sir
Humfrey himself do manifest. Nay in the latter place he speaks not at all of
proper Sacraments, as his words following faithleslie omitted by our
adversary, do declare, for thus S. Austin finisheth his sentence. Aqua in qua
est sponsa purificata, and sanguis in quo inuenitur esse dotata: That is, water
in which the spouse is purified, and blood in which she is found to be
endowed: in which passage no mention is made of any of the seven Sacraments,
as the reader may plainly perceive.

Of S. Cypria^ I say the same I said of S. Ambrose, Austin and the rest. Vid.
lib. de operib. Card. sub nom. Cyp.
And yet more, I know Sir Hu^frey will be loath to grant five Sacraments as S.
Cyprian does although we should give him leave to put the lotion of feet for one,
as S. Ambrose did put it for an improper Sacrament.

Dominicus a toto cited out of Bellarmin cap. 4. de Sacramento Ordinis doubts
not of Order in general, but he only makes a question of Episcopal Order in
particular, whether it be truly a Sacrament: and so he is ignorantly and
impertinentlie here alleged, with abuse both of him and the reader. As in like
manner Suarez or rather Hugo, Lombard, Bonauenture, Hales, and Altisiodor. Of
whom although Suarez Tom. 4. de Sacramento Extremae Vnctionis affirms that they
were of opinion that Extreme Unction was not instituted by Christ, but by S.
James from whence suarez says id plainly follows not to be a true
Sacrament, yet suarez himself adds (which Sir Humfrey fraudulently left out)
that those authors denied the consequence. By which it is manifest that those
divines absolutely believed Extreme Unction for one of the seven Sacraments:
not obstanding their material error about the institution of it, which error
being impertinent to this present question of the septenarie number of
Sacraments, their testimony was impertinentlie alleged and proves nothing to
our adversaries purpose.

S. Bonaue^ture also is abused by the knight p. 165. where out of Chamier he
carps him saying: that for want of better proofs, he was prodigal of his
conceiptes in honor of the septenarie number of Sacraments. But here I find
greater prodigality in the dishoneste proceeding of Sir Humfrey, and his
master minister chamier in their unjust taxeing of Bonauenture, then I find
want of proofs in that author, for if either Chamier or the knight had been
disposed, they might have found warrantable allegations in him out of scripture
for the probation of every Sacrament in particular as his several questions
upon them do testify. But these men being much more disposed to cauille then
to find the truth: they would not cast their eyes so far, but only laid
hands upon that which came nearest in their way, I mean upon some of the
congruences only (and yet purposelie omitting the chief) which that pious
divine makes use of more for explication then for proof of the doctrine. And
thus these ill occupied Pedants trifle with him who had more learning, and
gravity, without comparison, then they and their whole Congregation nor yet
had they both wit to cite the place they alleged truly, but quoted the second
book for the fourth.

Just according to this manner of proceeding the knight also deals with S.
Thomas, the Council of Trent, and Bellarmin and others, as if they had been
so destitute of arguments of scripture and Fathers for their proofs of the
seven Sacraments, that they were glad to refuge to figures and similitudes of
seven virtues, seven capital vices, seven planets, seven defects proceeding
from Original sin, seven days of unleavened bread, the offering of seven
Rams, seven lauers of naaman, seven candlestickes, seven seals, seven books
and the like: whereas in truth these mystical numbers are applied to the seven
Sacraments by the foresaid authors whereby to confirm and declare the matter
more plainly over and above their other most pregnant and authentical
proofs of the same as in them all and particularly in S. Thomas, and
bellarmin, is too plainly to be seen in their works, to be brought in
question by any one of reading and understanding; S. Thomas having seven
severally distinct questions of the seven Sacraments a part, besides that he
has of them in general: and the like I say of Bellarmin. And as for the
Council of Trent it either produces proofs of scripture and Fathers
actuallie for every particular Sacrament, or remittes the reader to other
former Counsels and decrees which have them. And so we see by this that Sir
Humfrey does but cogge and trifle for want of solid subject.

Touching the citation of Caietan upon the 5. cap. of S. James, it is true I
find the same which Sir Humfrey relates at the least in sense, and so I cannot
accuse him in this place of the ordinary imperfection which he uses in citing
authors. Nevertheless he might easily have known that the same Caietan in
his Commentary upon the 65. question of the 3. part of S. Thomas art. 1. does
agree with him in the septenarie number of Sacraments: and therefore in his
gloss upon the second article of that same question he numbers Extreme Unction
for one of the seven, saying: In titulo intellige per ordinem praedictum,
ordinem quo numerata sunt Sacramenta in praecedenti articulo. videlieet
Baptisma, Confirmatio, Eucharistia, Paenitentia, Extrema Vnctio, Ordo,
Matrimonium. By which it is manifest that Caietan defended with his master S.
Thomas Extreme Unction to be a Sacrament, and consequently he is no favorer
of Sir Humfrey in this point of which now we treat. And the same I say of the
same Caietan alleged by the knight as saying that the reader cannot infer
out of the words of S. Paul, Sacramentum hoc magnum est, that matrimony is a
Sacrament, because saint Paul says not, Sacramentum hoc magnum est, sed
mysterium hoc magnum est. But what soever out of the predominating subtlety of
his wit, Caietan held of the interpretation of this place of saint Paul: in
which as also in the exposition of some other scriptures, he is noted and
notorious to have been more subtle then solid, yet certain it is that he
absolutely defended Matrimony to be one of the seven Sacraments of the Church
as both his words above cited do manifestly convince, and also the great
pu^ctuality with which he is known to have observed and followed his much
respected and reverenced Patron saint Thomas in all points of doctrine,
swearing in a manner every where in the words of his master; so that the
knight cannot have as much as any conlorable reason to imagine that Caietan
stands for him in this matter and against the Romanists: As neither he has to
conceive the like of Canus, whom he in the same manner cites as if we were a
denier of matrimony to be a Sacrament, or at the least a testifier that other
divines pronounce doubtfullie of the same: whereas in reallitie Canus in
defense of his own private opinion that matrimony is not a Sacrament nor
conferreth grace except when it is administered by a Priest, does only name
some divines which vary in their opinions concerning the determinate matter
and form of matrimony, and touching the manner how or when it gives grace,
yet both he and the rest constantly and expressly teaching, that absolutely
it has both matter and form and gives graces in one sort or other, and
numbering it among the rest of the seven Sacraments as their writings do
testify. So that it was great preposterousnesse in Sir Humfrey to use the
testimony of Canus against the truth of the Sacrament of Matrimony since
neither he nor those other divines which he names viz. Lombard, Scotus, saint
Thom. Ricard. Palud. Durand. Vid. Magistrum. in 4. and vid. S. Th. in 3, part.
q.
Except they be detorted from their true sense and meaning can possibly be
imagined to have been others then professed Patrons and assertours of the
whole septenarie number of Sacraments, as by all or most of their own words
cited by me in other places, may evidently appear to the reader.

And these being all the authors which the knigth cites is this paragraffe, or
at the least all that deserve anser, we may plainly see that not obstanding
all the art and skill which he has used to make them seem his own, yet the.
Roman faith touching the seven Sacraments of the Church stands still firmly
ancient, universal, and visible, which is that he intended to destroy, and I
maintain.

Whence we may infer for the conclusion and censure thereof, that all which
our adversary brings in it to prove that there is neither antiquity, nor
universality in the Fathers, nor consent in the schoolmen (as he speaks)
sufficient to show the seven Sacraments to be instituted by Christ, is meare
Sophistry, founded upon his own misinterpretations, falsifications, and
corruptions of the authors he cites, and that consequently his own
conditional curse is absolutely fallen upon him, in which we must of
necessity leave him till such time as by humble recantation of his errors he
shall desire absolution.

And now hence I pass to the next Paragraffe which is of the Communion under
one kind. In which the knight by a special parenthesis which he makes in his
172. page, peruersely persuades his reader that the foresaid manner of
Communion in one kind, was decreed as it were in dispite of God and man by the
Counsel of Constance, and that from the time of that Counsel the Communion
under both kinds was adjudged heresy, which is not so, for the Roman Church
does not teach that the communion in both kinds is heretical, but only that
it is heresy to condemn the communion in one kind for unlawful, or
repugnant to Christ's institution, and so his position is both false and
calumnious, as appears not only by the decree of the same council, but also
by the tenor of the decree of the Council of Trent neither of which councels
defined communion in both kinds either conformable or disconformable to any
precept of either God or man in the nature of faith, but they only declare the
practice of the communion in one kind as a thing not unlawful, or contrary
to Christ's institution or precept, but otherwise convenient for the present
state of the Church, in respect of the reverence due to the Sacrament: Si quis
dixerit ex Dei praecepto, vel necessitate salutis omnes and singulos Christi
fideles vtra^que specie^ sa^ctissimi Eucharistiae sacramenti sumere debere,
anathema sit. Co^c. Trid. de co^mun. sub vtraq. specie. can. 1. vid. can. 2.
and for other just causes also condemning them that shall affirm that all
and every faithful person is bound to receive both kinds either by the
commandment of God, or as necessary to salvation by virtue of Christ's
institution: or that the communion in one kind is unlawfully appointed by the
Church, or that the Church did err therein. Which doctrine is so plainly
declared by the two foresaid Councels and especially by the Council of Trent,
and so often repeated and inculcated by modern divines, (to say nothing of the
more ancient) that if our adversaries were not over much disposed to cavil
they would never have the face to calumniate the same by their
misconstructions, as Sir Humfrey does in this place. The knight cites some ten
or eleven Roman divines, and among them to increase the number he foysteth in
Cassander, whom yet he either knows or ought to know he is none of ours: but
the matter is not great because neither he nor the rest teach any thing here,
contrary to the doctrine of the Roman Church in this point: but they only
relate the custom of the Primative Church to have been that the lay people
commonly received in both kinds: yet not denying but that the same succeeding
Church has upon just reasons altered that manner of communion. Yea and the
same authors here cited defending the lawfullnes thereof either in the very
same or in other places of their works: nay and Cassander. consult. de vtraque
specie.
some of them if not all, teaching with all that some times the communion in
one kind was practiced in ancient ages, so that it was great madness in Sir
Humfrey to produce then either as confessers of want of antiquity and
universality in the Roman Church, or for the proof of them in the doctrine of
the pretensiue reformed Churches, since that out of their testimonies, as shall
be declared, neither the one nor the other can with any colorable probability
possible be collected: and for this reason and because I have in an other place
ansered what our adversary can say in this matter, I know I have no need to
proceed to particulars, but only pronounce my sentence of this whole
Paragraph in general terms: yet because I find all, or many of the authors
cited to have their sentences and meaning mangled and perverted, therefore I
deemed it convenient to give the reader notice in particular of the authors
ill proceeding. And first although Vasquez with some others, is of a contrary
opinion to Taper and many other divines to wit houlding as more probable that
those who receive the Sacrament in both kinds do receive some more spiritual
fruit then the receivers of one alone, yet neither does he condemn the
contrary opinion and practice, not yet does he conclude that it is absolutely
better or safer for the laytie to receive both forms then one only: but
rather defendes the quite contrary expresselie in his 216. disputation and
last chapter: where not obstanding his own opinion defended in one of his
former questions, yet he solues the sectaries argument in this latter place,
and so clears the difficulty of their objection, that it is impossible for
Sir Humfrey or any of his confederates to gather any thing in favor of their
position out of that author, as his own words do make apparent to the
reader of them, as here I place them in the margen. Licet secundum aliquoru^
opinione^ quam praecedenti disput: defendi, laici aliquo fructu priue^tur dum
ipsis calix denegatur, tamen cu^ sumentes tantum vnam speciem nulla gratia
necessaria ad salutem carea^t (vt notauit Conciliu^) omissis alijs causis
postulantibus, recte potuit Ecclesia laicis altera^ speciem denegare. Vasq. to.
3. in 3. p. disput. 216. cap. vlt.


Salmeron is abused by Sir Humfrey in regard he takes only some certain
words of his which seem to make for his purpose, and omits others which make
against him which follow in the very next leaf, and do so temper the sense
of the former that taking them together neither the one nor the other favor
the reformed doctrine. For thus he says. Nos enim etc. For we quoth he, do
so confess the custom to have been of communicating the lay people under
both kinds, that yet always in some cases, the use of one kind has been
practiced. Which words quite dashe Sir Humfreys design of proving that the
Church of Rome in this particular, has created a new article of faith
manifestly repugnant to Christ's word, institution, and practice of the
primative Churh, except he will be so audacious as to condemn here also of
sacrilege for her practice in those cases, as he does our present Church. In
which passage I much wonder at the slownes of him that otherwise uses to be so
nimble and active as that in this place he took not pains to turn one leaf
further for the discovery of the truth. And the same I say of Valentia who
speaks just to the same sense and purpose de legit. vsu Eucharistiae cap. 10.
as also did Father Fisher and Castro in the places cited by our adversary.

And as for saint Thomas upon the 6. of saint John. And lyra in 1. Cor. 11.
they neither of them disprove communion in one kind, as Sir Humfrey does
allege, but expresselie defendit. Vide S. Thom. in 3. part.
S. Thomas relates that the custom of the auncint Church was to communicate in
both forms which custom he says was observed even till his days in some
Churches where also, quoth he, the ministers of the altar do continually
communicate the body and blood. But for danger of effusio^, says he, in some
Churches it is observed that the Priest only receive the blood, and the rest
the body. Neither is this, says he, contrary to the sentence of our Lord,
because he that communicates the body, communicates also the blood, since that
Christ is whole in both the species or kinds even in respect of both his body
and blood. Thus saint Thomas. By which it is clear how far he was from
patronizing Sir Humfreys new tenet maintaining that the communion of the laity
in the Roman Church is but a half communion.

Now touching Lyra, Sir Humfrey has deceiptfullie omitted those words of his,
which include the very reason and approbation of the change which the Roman
Church has made, it being the same which saint Thomas alleges in part as
his words in the margen declare. Fit autem hic mentio de duplici specie, na^
in primitiua Ecclesia sic dabatur fidelibus: sed propter periculu^ effusionis
sanguinis, modo datur tantu^ sub specie panis. Sacerdos tamen celebrans accipit
sub vtraque specie non tantum pro se sed etiam pro alijs Lira. in 1. Cor. 11.
So that both these authors are so plain against Sir Humfrey, and for us,
that a man may almost perceive that he now repents that ever he cited them, as
also the authors following. To the words of Arboreus: but now the communion
of both kinds is abolished: Sir Humfrey ought to have added that authors
reason of the abolishment to wit this. Propter scandala quae contigerunt, and
adhuc contingere possu^t. Arb. Theos. lib. 8.11.
For the scandals which have happened, and which yet may happen. And the like I
say of Taper, to whose words should have been joined that which follows,
videlicet. This communion of the people in both kinds has danger of
Sacrilege annexed unto it in sheding the blood of Christ, and in the omission
of the chalis no danger does occur nor any loss of Spiritual grace.

The Council of Constance is impertinentlie alleged as I have declared
before. Bellarmin in the same place and words cited by Sir Humfrey, does
directly impugn that for which he is alleged by the knight, to wit for the
Communion of all the people in both kinds. For so he says. Bellar. de Euchar.
l. 4. c. 24.
And besides* all did not receive in both kinds. As for Cassander although we
have him not in the rank of Romanists; Ex his itaque confici puto hanc
integram in vtraque panis and vini communicatione^ etsi simpliciter necessaria
non habeatur, ei co^municationi quae in altera tantu^ specie fit, etiamsi
mandato contraria non putetur, multis nominibus esse antepone^dam etc. Cass.
loco. cir.
yet for any thing I can perceive, he does not absolutely stand for Sir
Humfrey in the subsustance of this Controversy, as neither houlding it
absolutely necessary for the laytie to communicate in both kinds, nor yet
contrary to Christ's institution, as his own words in that treaty page 1046.
Do plainly either suppose or insinuate. And for as much as concerns private
or extraordinary communion, he himself relates diverse examples of it. So that
the reader may perceive how small reason Sir Humfrey has to use Cassanders
authority for diverse respects in this matter, especially if he consider his
own drift in this place, although I cannot deny but the same Cassander leanes
unto him, in that he desires the present practice of the Roman Church might be
changed as less perfect and legitimate then the contrary, in his conceipte.

And this being all I need to say touching the testimonies of the cited
authors and of Sir Humfreyes proceedings about them, I will now conclude the
censure of this whole Paragraph; that directly it contains nothing which
requires so exact a discussion as I have made of it. And that I have
oftentimes maruailed why the reformers should stand so peremptorily against the
Communion in one kind, supposing that even according to their own principles,
neither the words of Christ nor the intention of the minister, nor both these
together, are of force and efficacy to make any change or alteration in the
matter of the Sacrament, but that when they have said and done all they can,
they shall remain bread and wine as truly as if they had received them in the
tavern; especially if we consider yet farther that, according to the reformed
doctrine, the intention of the minister is not necessarily required to the
constitution of any Sacrament; and yet without the same it is clearly
impossible to conceive how the Eucharist can be received by them in remembrance
of the death and passion of Christ more in both the forms of bread and wine
then in one alone, especially supposing that by virtue of the institution and
command of Christ each of them in particular is to be received in memory of
him. And this I say has caused me many times to wonder, even yet persuading my
self the Nouellists can have no other motive then the satisfaction of their
own contentious spirits, to stand so nicely upon this puntillio with the
Church of Rome; which refractory proceeding of the^ in this matter may yet
seem more unreasonable to the reader if he consider that, although Vasquez and
some other Roman divines are of opinion that greater fruits of grace are
reaped by the communion in both kinds then in one, yet does it not thence
follow that the communion in one kind cannot be lawfully practiced, as our
Precisians will needs have it, nor yet that the communion under one kind is
but a half Communion, as the knight does here maliciously inculcate; but in
either of the two kinds it is most evident there is a perfect and entire
Sacrament according to the true definition thereof, in regard there is found in
either of the consecrated forms a visible sign of an invisible grace
instituted by God: as also because the body of Christ even according to the
tenet of our adversaries being truly, really and substantially received under
the form of bread only although they mean only by faith; it does follow
infallibly that unless they grant that Christ can dye again by separation of
his blood from his body, or that his perfect and entire body is not there
received but only a part of it: it does I say necessarily follow that under
the form of bread alone there is Christ's blood with his body, and so a perfect
communion of them both received in that one kind.

The Parahraph following is about prayer and service in an unknown tongue, in
which point Sir Humfrey says true in that he affirms that the Roman Church
celebrates Mass and public service in Latin, and it is also true that the
Council of Trent has declared it not to be expedient that it be celebrated
every where in the vulgar language. But yet it is false to say that either the
Church or Council has commanded it to be celebrated in an unknown language;
for Latin cannot truly be said to be an unknown language, but rather it is a
general language, a known speech, more used then any one language in the
world: And although it be not understood of the ignorant sort of people, yet it
is less uncouth unto them then any other language excepting their own mother
tongue, yea then any other public language, I mean then either hebrew or
greek, and finally it is a language fitter for mutual communication in
religion then any other tongue, and among the more learned sort of people of
all nations, the most familiar of all. And I would feign know of the reformers
what they have to do to call that in question which has binne generally
practiced in the Church for many hundred years before they and their
reformation were hatched. Who appointed them for judges in this matter? Let
them meddle in their own affairs, their cause is not ours, we are all one
both in our religion, and in the form, and rites of our religion; we
communicate with all the members of our Church even in the same external
Ceremonies in what place soever they be, and they with us. But you in England
have built a new Church different even from the rest of the pretended reformed
Churches of other Countries; you are not uniform, neither in doctrine nor
Ceremonies, and so it is not amiss for your purpose that you use a language in
your public service in which you as little agree with your brothers as in your
religion: Nay in my opinion supposing your separation in communion of religion,
you have taken a politic course to separate your selves also in the language
of your service, otherwise it might happen unto you and your French and dutch
brothers, as it has done already between the Gu^marists and Arminians,
(especially now when Arminianisme begins to spread itself) who are known to
have entered into the Church with zealous communication one with another and
yet the fervor of their spirits has so much increased, that before the sermon
was ended, there has appeered good store of broken pates and perhaps worse;
for avoiding of which inconueniencies our English Nouellists as it may be
supposed have their several Churches and forms of service, and doctrine for
themselves, the French, and the Dutch: whereas one the contrary the
professors of the Roman Church by reason of their public service or Mass is
in a common language, are put to no such shifts, but wheresoever they meet,
they find means to serve God and to communicate together in the very same
manner they do in their own Countries, whether they be old or young, learned,
or ignorant; of which great comfort the reformers by reason of their new form
of service in the vulgar tongue, in many occasions do wilfully deprive
themselves. To say nothing of the dignity which the service of God receives
from the gravity of the Latin tongue, and the disparagement which it
suffers by a vulgar language, supposing also that by that means even the
secret mysteries of the Christian faith come to be as familiar in the mouths
of every apish boy as they be to the greatest Doctor of the Church, a thing
both much repugnant to the practice of ancient times, and also which gives
great occasion to many to vilify, and disesteeme the sacred words of God
included in the public service; yea and oftentimes the things themselves by
the words signified, as experience does daily teach us: to omit the alteration
and corruption which it is more subject unto in a vulgar tongue then in Latin
which is always the same, as the same experience does make manifest.

But Sir Humfrey goes on, and tells his reader, that some of the Trent Bishops
adjudged the first part of the decrec of the Council to be questionable, for
that it seemed to contradict itself in that it affirms the Mass to contain
much instruction for the faithful, and yet commands that part of the
service to be uttered with a low voice, and in an unknown tongue, and for
this, for want of better authors, he cites the history of the Council of
Trent. But all this is but a mere cavil grounded in the relation of a false
historiographer: for that if any such thing had happened after the foresaid
decree was once confirmed, it is not so long a time since the Council was
finished, but that the fact of those Bishops would have binne known to the
world, yea and their punishment for such their temeritie, if they had remained
refractorie, would have binne so published, as at the least some one or other
writer would have taken notice of the same, as well as the author of that
relation: neither is their any contradiction in the said decree, in regard it
is manifest that by the instruction of the people, the Council means either
wholly or cheeflie the epistle and Gospel of the Mass; as also for that the
same Council withal does expresselie give Order that the Pastors of the
Church interpret and declare the mysteries of the Mass to their parishoners,
which order takes away all color of contradiction which can be imagined in
the words of the decree; especially supposing that in what language or with
what voice soever the Mass be celebrated, the foresaid exposition will supply
all the obscurity which from thence can arise. But how be it this which I have
said is true: yet I have discovered by reading that passage in the foresaid
History, that it does not so relate it, but quite in an other manner, for that
history does not affirm that the Tridentine Bishops made that doubt or
question of the decree which ordains the celebration of Mass in a low voice
and unknown language as ambiguous in the construction: Mandat sancta Synodus
pastoribus and singulis curam animarum gerentibus vt freque^ter inter missarum
celebratione^ vel per se vel per alios ex ijs quae in Missa leguntur aliquid
exponant etc. Council. Trid. Sess. 22. cap. 8.
but the history says expresselie that the Protestants made that doubt by way
of objection, to which the Bishops ansered in that form which the same
history relates. Which is so foul a falsification in Sir Humfrey that I
confess I had small mind to make any further examen of the rest of the
citations of this book if otherwise I had not already so far engaged my
self. Let the reader survey the 650. page of the Trid. history printed in
Latin at Franckford 1621. and he will easily find the deceipte. And now you
see this is but a fiction of a contradiction devised in discredit of the
doctrine of the Council in this point either by the knight, or some other
Sycopha^t of whom he received it upon trust. Besides that if any such thing
had happened in the time of the discussion of the doctrine of the Council, yet
certain it is that all such doubt was cleared and quite taken away by the
establishment of the decree itself; whence it also appears how false a
consequence Sir Humfrey deduceth out of the same decree, to wit that because
the Council affirms that the Mass does affoard great instruction to the
people, and for that end ought to be interpreted unto them, therefore says the
knight the Fathers of the Council do consequently affirm that the service
and prayer in the reformed Churches in the vulgar tongue was better for the
edification of the Church. For it is manifest out of the very same place cited
by our adversary himself that the Council of Trent does command that the
Pastors do frequently expound some part of those things which are read in
the Mass, not for that it having decreed the contrary, could possibly hold
it better to have the Mass in a vulgar language then otherwise, but because
that, supposing for other reasons it was better for the Church the Mass should
not be in a vulgar tongue, and that besides this, it includes matter of great
instruction for the faithful people, therefore the Council prudentlie decreed
not for one only, but for both these causes, that it should oftentimes by the
Pastors and Priests be declared to the common people for their greater
edification and better understanding of the doctrine contained in it. And this
is all that in substance the Council either says, or from the words of the
decree can be truly inferred; and so, that from the Romanists own confession
it can be gathered that the service and prayer in the vulgar tongue was better
for the edification of the Church, is but such a dream as Sir Humfrey uses to
have the night before whenever he cites the Council of Trent in favor of
the reformed doctrine.

After this the knight endeavors to prove that the Mass ought not to be
celebrated in a silent and unknown voice, because says he the Apostles were
commanded to show forth the Lords death till his coming: and to this end he
cites Haymo upon the 14. chapter of the first to the Corinth, and Justinian
the Emperor in Nou. Constable. out of Cassander, also the Greg. Decet. Tit. 31. de
Off. Iud. Ord. cap. 14. But to this I answer that both the knights reason and
the testimonies of these authors are impertinent, because the command laid
upon the Apostles was not that in this mystery they should show forth Christ's
death in words, but principally indeedes, and therefore our Savior in the
institution of the Eucharist did not bid his Apostles, say it in remembrance of
him, but do it in remembrance of him. Hoc facite in meam commemorationem.
Otherwise the Sectaries themselves should be convinced to violate Christ's
commandment, since that those who receive their communion say not one word.
In like manner let the reader veiw and understand perfectly the sense of the
the words cited out of other authors, and he will easily perceive there is
not one syllable in them against Latin service or prayer as condemning it
either for unlawful in itself or otherwise contrary to the commandment of
God. Haymo does only comment upon that passage of saint Paul 1. Cor 14. If I
am ignorant of the virtue of the voice, I shall be to him to whom I speak
barbarous, only declaring in playner words that which the Apostle speaks
breiflie and obscurelie, but says not a word against the office of the Church
in Latin. Justinian (if any such constitution he made, of which it is much
doubted, by reason this clause is not found in the ancient translation,
neither is it expounded by Cuiacio) ordains only in general that Bishops,
and Priests celebrate the oblation, and minister the Sacraments of Baptism and
the Eucharist non tacito modo not secretly, but with a loud voice; but he
speaks not in particular of all parts of the Mass, and at the least he
speaks not of the Canon except he means of the words of consecration which
the Romanists do not deny but the Grecians have a custom of pronouncing them
loud. And as for other parts of the Mass, the most of them are pronounced
commonly in the Roman Church so that the auditors may here. And according
to this Justinian peradventure might advise the Preistes of his time to do,
when nevertheless it is certain the Mass was in no vulgar language. The
decretalls speak not of any vulgar tongue but only of Greek and Latin, as,
the decree of Innocent the third which may be seen in the ninth chap. of the
General Council of Lateran, does declare. Neither does the Roman Church so
strictly command that the public service be ministered in the Latin tongue,
that she does condemn either the Greek or Syrian Church for using the Grecian
or Caldaian tongue in the divine offices or public service, but only
commands as more couenient that they be not performed in a vulgar language.

Lastly Sir Humfrey cites some eight or nine Romanists who confess (says he)
that in the first ages public prayers were used for the understanding of the
people. But to omit that he uses no great sincerity in the citation and
translation of the testimonies of some of the authors he cites in this
paragraph, as may appear particularly in the quotation of Waldensis; I say
not to stand here upon this which I shall more conveniently examen
afterward: I answer, that those authors affirm that which we do not
deny, to wit, that perhaps (which word Sir Humfrey deceitfullie leaves out in
his translation of S. Tho. testimony cited out of his 3. lection upon 1. Cor.
14.) In 1. Cor. 14. lect. 3.
the case of the primitive Church was different from the practice of the
ptesent time in this matter: yet withal the same authors do affirm that the
alteration was made upon just causes, which causes are so sufficiently
delivered by Bellarmine and others, even those whom the knight here cites,
that I need not rehearse their reasons they being so easily to be found as
they are to those that read their books: And although saint Thomas aduertiseth
his reader, that it might have seemed madness in the primitive Church to have
performed all the Ecclesiastical offices in the Latin tongue, for that they
were rude and ignorant in the rites of the Church and ceromonies, yet does he
add that now all are so well instructed that though it be in Latin, the people
understands what is done in the Church: whose saying is most true, at least in
general yea and in particular so far as is necessary for every person,
state, and vocation; for that throu' the diligence of their pastors and
preachers, and their own industry, they may have sufficient instruction.
Howbeit that if it were necessary for every one that prays or sings to
understand all they say, the Puritans themselves might put up their pipes, it
being most certainly true that there be many things in the psalms which they
sing so merrily, and in the scriptures which they read so readily, Conscquitur
ergo Canonem clare and aperte legendu^ vt ad gratiarum actionem Sacerdotis
populus respo^deat, Amen. Cassander. ex Gerardo Lorichio p. 65.
which by reason of their great obscurity they cannot possibly understand
even in their own mother tongue. And from hence I pass to a brief Survey of
the rest of the authors cited in this paragraph, among which I find Cassander
in the first rank of corruption: for although the testimonies which Cassander
cites do not prove fully his intent yet is it evident by the words of those
he produces that he speaks in that places of the Canon of the Mass
especially when he says in the title of his chapter canonicam precem etc. And
Sir Humfrey translates it not the Cano^ of the Mass as he ought to have done,
but Canonical prayers, so odious and reformidable unto him is the report of
that great Canon that he durst not name it. Moreover the testimony of
Cassander is detorted by Sir Humfrey quite from the sense in which he speaks
it. For he speaks not there of the vulgar tongue one word, but whether the
Canon of the Mass ought to be pronounced with a loud voice (especially the
consecration) that the people may hear it and anser, Amen.

And the same I (or Cassander form me) anser to the constitution of Justinian
which Cassander himself alleges to that same purpose and in no other sense.
And so in like manner the words of the Decretals are violently draw to a
sense repugnant to the authors meaning that is from doctrinall tongues to
vulgar languages.

To the words of Lyra, if he had dealt sincerely, Sir Humfrey ought to have
added those which immediately ensue and explicate his mind more clearelie: Sed
postquam populus multiplicatus fuit and consueuit se conformare ministris
Ecclesiae vtpote stando cum dicitur Euangelium deposito caputio adorando
Eucharistiam, and consimilia fiunt in Ecclesia Latina in Latino, and sufficit
quod Clericus respondeat pro populo, expeditius enim fit hoc modo quam in
vulgati. But since the people increased and is accustomed to conform it self
to the ministers of the Church, to wit by standing at the Gospel, by putting of
their bonet to adore the Eucharist and such like, are done in the Latin Church
in Latin, and it is sufficient that the clearke ansers for the people, for it
is thus more readily performed then in the vulgar tongue. Lyr. in 1. Cor. 14.

Which words are so plain against Sir Humfrey in diverse respects that he may
be ashamed to hear them. Belethus cited out of Cassander to prove that service
and prayer must be in the vulgar language, is abused by them both. Inde etiam
inoleuit vsus vel laudabilis co^suetudo in Ecclesia vt pronu^tiato literaliter
Eua^gelio statim in vulgari, populo exponeretur. Belet. in Proae. Exp.
diuinorum offic.
For Belethus expresselie supposes that the Mass and office of the Priest are
in Latin, and therefore even in this same place and even in some of the words
cited by Cassander he mentions a laudable custom of some places an which,
says he, the Gospel being pronounced, it is presently expounded in the
vulgar tongue. Now if it were read in the Mass by the Priest in the vulgar
tongue, then it had been vain for Belethus yea and impertinent to have made
mention of that custom in the entrance of his work of expounding the divine
offices for the use of the less learned sort of the Clergy as he professes
to undertake. It is true he has in the same passage that it was prohibited to
speak with tongues without an interpreter, but that is nothing else but the
very same which the Apostle himself declared 1. Cor. 14. understanding by
tongues the miraculous speech of strange languages which the speakers them
selves did not understand, about which says this author there was in the
Primative Church a prohibition except it were with an interpreter. And this is
that which by accommodation Belethus applies to the argument of his book by way
of Prologue.

In the rehearsal of D. Hardings words Sir Humfrey takes only those which
testify that in the Primative Church prayers were in the vulgar language. But
he leaves out the just reasons which the Doctor alleges for the alteration of
the same made by the authority of the Church even with in the first four
hundredth years: as also he omits those pregnant proofs which he brings to
show that six hundredth years after Christ the service of the Church was in no
other language then in Greek or Latin: By all which the reader may perceive
this author is not sincerely dealt with in this passage, that which yet will
more plainly appear if he will please to see his anser to Jewels challenge
the 3. article.

The testimony of Waldensis is used by Cassander only to prove that divine
service or Mass ought to be pronounced with an intelligible voice that the
people may anser; Amen, but not to prove that the public office must be in
vulgar language, and so it is impertinent.

Honorius cited by Sir Humfrey page 193. is falsified in regard he is alleged
for the cause of the alteration of the ancient custom of the use of service in
a known tongue. For that author speaks not a word of the vulgar language but
only of the secret pronou^cing of the Canon which was decreed, says he, (I
know not how truly) by occasion of a strange accident which happend in times
past touching that matter. Vnde sinodali decreto sub anathemate est praeceptum
vt nullus Canonem nisi in libro and in sacris vestibus, and super altar, and
super sacrificium legate. In which words I know not what linx except our
Egleeyd Humfrey can see service in the vulgar tongue.

Gretzer is abused both in sense and words. In sense because he speaks only
of the Latin tongue and of that time when it was either vulgar or very common
to many nations: and yet the knight applies his speech to prove that public
service ought to be delivered in the vulgarly known tongue of every nation
and at all times, not contenting himself with less then this. In words he
does also abuse Gretzerus, for that he cites them neither entirely nor
consequenter in English, omitting or at the least altering those which have
relation to the authors precedent sentence, to wit: hinc illae exhortationes
etc. hence are those exhortations of the Fathers etc. and also others before
them which he ought to have rehearsed completely because they are to the same
purpose. I will put the whole tenor of his words in the margen that the
reader may more plainly see the fraud: Latini Patres quos citat. (Whitakerus)
loqunn tur De eo te^pore quo lingua Latina erat multis ge^tibus vulgaris, aut
valde co^munis, hinc omnes simul psallebant and Missae linguae populo nota
celeba^tur quia Latina lingua erat omnibus vel plerisque nota. Hincillae Patru^
exhortationes vt omnes simul psallant, vtque faciant atte^te and
intelligibiliter voce^que suam cum Sacerdotum vocibus coniungant. Quae
admonitiones iustissimae erant qua^doquidem lingua auditoribus non ignosa omnia
perageba^tur, and co^suetudo ita ferebat vt tota ecclesia simul psalleret. Nu^c
alia est ratio antiquato vulgari linguae Latinae vsu, quam lingua^ propter
intermissum commune^ vsum, ex Ecclesia diuinisque osficijs minime conueniebat
exturbari, inque locu^ eius vulgares and vernaculas substitui. Multa etiam
dicta Patrum etc. Gretzerus defens. lib. 2. c. 16.
and how repugnant Gretzerus is to Sir Humfreys tenet in this particular as
professedly he must of necessity be, as being a professed defender of
Bellarmins doctrine in matters of Controversy. But now because I have already
treated in part of this before, and briefly given sentence already of that
which Sir Humfrey produces for the defense of his doctrine, I will include the
contents of this whole paragraph in the same censure, and so pass along to the
next which is of the worship of images, where we are to examine whether the
knight brings any sounder matter then he has done here, where (as I should
have noted before) he falsely relates a history of certain shepheardes out
of his false friend Cassander, which shepherds he affirms according to his
emendicated relation, to have transubstantiated bread and wine into the body
and blood of Christ by pronuntiation of the words of consecration which they
had learned; whereas indeed the authentical history of that strange accident
written by Sophronius, says only that the bread and wine were suddenly burnt
by fire from heaven and the shepherds struken speachlesse for a time. But this
howsoever it happened, being it can serve Sir Humfrey for no greater purpose
then to replenish his pages, I leave it to the reader to consider of this his
proceeding as he pleases.

Presently in the entrance of the 7. Paragraph Sir Hu^frey pronou^ceth a very
sharp sentence against the Counsel of Trent for decreeing that due honor and
veneration is to be given to the images of Christ and his Saints, condemning
it for a wicked and blasphemous opinion. Lo here the sentence of
condemnation, which is to be judged so much the more rash and temerarious in
respect the peremptory Judge leaves out the greater part of the doctrine he
censureth, which if he had added at large as it stands in the Council it
would sufficiently have justified it self: and because Sir Humfrey for reasons
of state would not take so much pains, I will do it for him.

The Council therefore in the 25. Sess. page 202. decrees in this manner, The
images of Christ the Virgin the Mother of God and other Saints are chiefly in
Churches to be had and retained, and due honor and veneration is to be given
unto them, not that it is believed there is in them any divinity or virtue for
which they are to be worshipped, or that any thing is to be asked of them, or
that confidence is to be put in them, as in times past the Gentiles did who put
their trust in Idols, but because the honor which is exhibited unto images is
referred unto the Prototipes which they represent, so that by the images which
we salute, and before which we uncover our heads and kneel, we adore Christ
and reverence the Saints whose similitude they have, that which by the
decrees of councels especially of the second Nicene Synod has binne
established against the oppugners of images, thus the decree of the Council of
Trent; in which we find not one word either wicked or blasphemous, nay rather
every word sounds nothing but piety and religion toward Christ and his
Saints, whom it will have honored not only in themselves but also in and by
their images, which manner of honor as it is declared by the Council is not
only not contrary to scriptures as Sir Humfrey falsely affirms, but also
very conformable to them, both in regard the scriptures make mention of honor
due unto material things for the relation of representation which they have to
God or other his holy creatures: Psalm. 95. Matthew 5.
as also for that we use no other reverence to images the^ the Church does
teach us, whose authority the same scripture commends and commands us to
follow and obey, and more then this the Counsel is so far from attributing to
images any unlawful manner of honor, that it does not once use either the
word worship, or adore, except where it speaks of Christ himself: which
words nevertheless if they be taken in the sense in which divines do
commonly take them, include no offense at all, as signifying an exterior
action of honor indifferent even according to the phrase of scripture both to
God and creatures, and being distinguished only according to the diversity
of the internal affection, and submission of the mind, which submission and
affection in the honoring of an inanimate creature, as an image is, is never
by the worshipper exhibited to the image it self, but only to the thing it
represents: nay nor yet the exterior sign of adoration as genuflectio^, or
inclination of the body, is given to the image itself for itself and to
remain in it, but rather by the image which we salute, or before which we
prostrate our selves, the same sign of honor is transferred ioyntelie with
the affection of the mind to the thing which is adored. Which doctrine is both
so clear in itself and so plainly declared by the Council expreslie
teaching that the honor exhibited unto the^ is referred to the Pattern, Co^c.
Trid. Sess. 25. decret. de imag.
that a very child may conceive it to be free from all superstitious worship
and adoration, in so much that it is but gross ignorance, malice, and madness
in our adversaries to exclaim against the Romanists as idolaters for the
honor they give to images. And I would feign know of Sir Humfrey or any
other of his reformed companions in what place of scripture this proposition.
The images of Christ and his saints are to be duly honored: is condemned for
wicked and blasphemous? and the same I say of the ancient Fathers. And if they
cannot produce as much as one only place either out of scripture or Fathers
which does truly serve to that purpose, I mean which does truly condemn
the foresaid proposition in that manner, as I know neither they nor the knight
can perform, let him confess that is censure of the Romanists is temerarious
and false, and nothing else but a renouation of an old Jewish complainte against
the Christians of more ancient ages.

It is true I know the reformers use commonly to allege for their denial of
honor to images both scripture and Fathers as also Sir Humfrey does in this
paragraffe, and particularly they use to produce the words of that which they
call the second cammaundement, to wit, thou shall not make to thy self any
graven image. But touching this I have showed above In the 4. Period.
that according to the doctrine of S. Augustine there is no such second
commandment, those words being only a part of the first. Secondly,
howsoever the matter stands, certain it is that except the sectaries will
turn Jews or Turks they ought not to take those words in that rigorous
sense which they do, for so by consequence if they tie themselves so strictly
to the letter of the text, they must do the same in the commandment of the
Sabbath and so they will be come Sabatizing Jews indeed. Wherefore except Sir
Humfrey will turn plain Talmudist, he can prove nothing against Christians
out of the foresaid words.

Now touching authorities of ancient Fathers he confesses that he for
bears to cite any in particular, and what soever he falselie pretends, the
true reason was because he found none to cite except he had produced such
places as they use only against the idolatry of Gentiles and Ethnikes as,
Chamier lib. 21. de imag.
Daniell Chamier and others of the reformed Doctors commonly do, which
places never the less secluding their own glosses upon them do not in any
sort fauore their cause. And so Sir Hu^frey insteede of Fathers he cites
Jews and Gentiles in whose doctrine touching this point, he shows himself
to be more conversant then in Christian writers as finding more for his purpose
in them then in these, and therefore also as I imagine he uses no other
answer to Bellarmin affirming that the making of images is not absolutely
prohibited by the law of God because God commanded images to be made, the
knight I say uses no other anser then the anser of the Jews, to wit that God
did lay a general command upon them, and not upon himself: and so I say no
more of it, but leave to the reader to judge howsolid and good such an ansere
may be, and whether it sauoreth not much more of Iudaisme then of Christian
religion.

True it is he cites diverse authors which have writ since the Council of
Francford, but some of the^ as Agrippa, Erasmus, Cassander and Chemnitius, are
of no authority with us, others are suspected of corruption, I mean to have been corrupted by malignant publishers, as Polidor Virgil and Agobardus. Others
are impertine^tlie alleged in regard they either speak only of the image
of God himself as Philo Iudeus and S. Augustine, or of the manner of worship
not of the substance of the honor, as Peresius Bellarmin. Wicelius, Hincmarus:
for that they either only condemn the adoration of pictures taking the word
adoration for that kind of honor which is due unto God only, or else they
speak only of the private errous of some simple people: of which sort is
Polidor and Biel when they reprehend the abuses and superstitions of some
simple people, who out of ignorance give more honor to images then either they
ought to do or the Church allows, yet does Polidor expresselie approve of
due honor of the same as his own words declare even in those places where he
uses that reprehension: for thus he says after he had made relation of diverse
images of Christ and his Apostles mentioned by Eusebius and others even in the
most primative years of the Church. Hinc igitur natum vt merito tam ipsi
Saluari qua^ ei^diuis statuas in templis poni and venerationi haberi
consueuerit. Polid lib. 6. cap. 5.
Hence therefore grew the use of putting in Churches and honoring as well the
statues of our Savior, as his Saints. And he adds Ecquis igitur tam
dissolutus tamque audacia praeditus est qui velit possitne dubitare seu aliter
somniare ne dicam sentire vel cogitare de imaginum cultu ac demum sit tot long
Sanctissimorum Patrum decreto constitutum.

By which words it is manifestly convinced that is other words razed by order
of the Index have either been foisted in by the new sectaries, to wit those
which auerre that till the time of S. Hierome all the ancient Fathers rejected
worship of images for fear of idolatry; or else he means only that they
durst not practice the same least their action might seem idolatrous either to
the ignorant Gentiles, or to such as were then lately converted from Gentilisme
and as yet but infirm in faith, and easily scandalized in this nature. All
which nevertheless cannot possible prejudice the doctrine and practice of the
Church it self in general: So that neither any of these authors severally
nor all of them together prove that absolutely to honor the images of Christ
and his saints is wicked or blasphemous, which is the assertion the knight here
maintains; and yet he is not ashamed to call their testimonies the confession
of his adversaries, among which also that his impudency might more clearelie
appear, he foysteth in to that rank Bellarmin and Vasquez, which authors if
the reader be not over grossly ignorant he will easily perceive, at the
least by the rest of their works, that they cannot truly fauore Sir Humfreys
tenets in this point of Controversy, they having both writ professedly of it
against the reformers doctrine and in defense of the practice of the Roman
Church touching the use and honor of images.

And as for the Emperors Valens and Theodosius whom he cites out of Crinitus
saying they made proclamation to all Christians against the images of Christ.
It is false that those two Emperors ever published any decree against the
images of Christ, but expresselie in honor of of the same by establishing by
law that the image of the Cross of Christ should not be framed upon the
ground, as upon the stones of sepulchers or graves where it might easily be
profaned by the feet of those that passed over them, and that this is the
truth of that passage of those two Emperors, or at the least of Theodosius,
Crinitus his very words would have plainly declared if they had not shrunk
in the wetting I mean if they had been entirely related by the knight who is
not the first that has corrupted the tenor of Theodosius his law by leaving
out the word, humi, upon the ground for the words of the foresaid law being
these, let not the Cross of Christ be painted upon the ground, or some such
like, by leaving out the words, upon the ground, the sense as you see comes
to be quite contrary, that is the sense falls out to be this, let not the
Cross of Christ be painted, which trick of the sectaries was discovered long
since by Alanus Copus in his 4. Dialogue the 11. chap. to their utter shame and
discredit. And yet besides this, I marvel greatly that either Sir Humfrey or
his predecessors offer to make use of the foresaid words of the law which as
they are cited by him are so general that they quite condemn the practice of
the reformed brothers themselves, none or very few of them being as yet
mounted to that degree of purity as expresselie to proclaim a general law
against the pictures of Christ as not to be painted or graven at all, and so I
conclude that either those words of the two Emperors are to be read as the
Romanists do use to read them, and then they plainly prove the reverence of
the Cross to have been practiced in ancient times: or if they be to be read
so generally as the sectaries will have them, then if they prove any thing,
they do no less then reprove even the Puritans themselves and their practice
in that particular.

To the testimony of Tertullian whom also so the knight produces l. de
idolat. c. 5. saying. Thou have his law make thou no image. And prese^tlie
after, make no image against the law unless God command the as he did
moses: I answer first that if it be against the law to make any image at
all, then be these words of Tertullian as much against the reformers as the
Romanists. For both the Church of England and all the Lutheran Churches at the
least, make both the images of Christ and his Apostles. And I know a famous
Puritan I mean a pure Caluinist (whose name is Daniell Chamier) who
expresselie defendes that images are not absolutely prohibited by that precept
which he calls the second commandment, Chamier lib. 2. de imag.
but only to the end to honor them religiously. So that the words of
Tertullian must of necessity be either otherwise tempered then they be by Sir
Humfrey, or they will fall upon his own Church, as well as upon the Roman
Church.

Wherefore I answer secondly that Tertullian speaks only against
idolatrous images, or Idols, as the very argument of his book does show,
which is entitled against idolatry not against Christian images, as is
manifestly convinced out of an other work of his, De Pudicitia.
in which he makes express mention of the picture of Christ himself graven
in the chalices of his time, which he also me^tioneth as a thing frequentlie
practiced: so that unless Sir Humfrey will say that Tertullian plainly
contradicted himself, he cannot possibly be imagined to have spoaken against
the images of Christ and his saints, but only against such as the Gentiles in
his time, or the Jews made in time of the old Testament contrary to the law
of God as being representations of false and fained gods and godisses as is
own words in his book above cited plainly testify, where thus he
discourses against the Christian makers, of Idols. Potes vnum Deum praedicare
qui rantos efficis? Canest thou preach one God who make so many? Tot a die
ad hanc partem zelus fidei perorabit ingemens Christianum ab idolis in
Ecclesiam venire, de aduersaria officina in domum Dei. The zeal of faith will
plead all the day long on this side lamenting a Christian to come from idols
into the Church, from the adverse officine in to the house of God. And a little
after: to reach those hands to the body of our Lord, which give bodies to
devils. Eas manus admouere corpori Domini quae daemonijs corpora conferu^t.


The same I say of Orige^ cited out of Cassa^der by Sir Hu^frey, whom they
both abuse in that they use his testimony against the veneration of images in
the primative Church. For I have diligently read his 7. book cited by the^
where I find him to speak much against idols but nothing against Christian
images his words are these. Illarum enim gentium nemo ab his alienus est quod
vereatur numen ob viles has ceremonias detrahere quae versantur circa aras and
materias effigiatas varijs imaginibus, nec quod intelligat daemonas inhaerere
certis locis and statuis sieve incantatos quibusdam magicis carminibus sieve
alios incubantes locis semel praeoccupatis vbi lurconum more se oblectant
victimarum nidoribus voluptatem captantes nefariam and vetita^ diuinis atque
naturae legibus. Caeterum Christiani homines and Iudaei sibi temperant abhis
propter illud legis: Dominum Deum tuum timebis and ipsi soli services. Et
propterillud non erunt tibi dij alienipraeter me, and non facies tibi
simulachrum nec vllam effigiem etc. Non adorabis ea neque seruies illis.
Aliaque multa his similia quae adeo nos prohibent ab aris and simulachris vt
etiam emori iubeant citius quam cotaminemus nostra^ de Deo fidem talibus
impietatibus. Et postea. Liquet enim haec dedicari ab hominibus falsam de Deo
opinionem habentibus. For none of those nationes is free from these things
because they fear to dishonore the divine power in respect of these vile
ceremonies which are used before the altars, and tables carved with diverse
images: For that they neither understand that devils inhabit in certain
places, and statues either inchaunted by certain magical verses, or others
lying in places once preoccupated, where they delight themselves life gulliguts
with the sauore of the sacrifices, taking nefarious delight prohibited both by
divine laws, and the laws of nature. But Christians and Jews temper
themselves from these for that of the law: Thou shall fear thy lord God, and
shall serve him alone. And for that. Thou shall not have strange Gods besides
me. And. Thou shall not make to thy self any semblance, or anielikenes etc.
Thou shall not adore them nor serve the^. them, and many o her things like to
these which so debar us from altars, and likenesses, that they command us
sooner to dye them to contaminate our faith of God with such impieties. And
afterward he adds. It is clear that these things are dedicated by men which
have a false opinion of God etc. Thus origin about the end. By whose own
words the reader may evidently perceive, he discourses only against the
images and altars of false Gods. Which authors words I did therefore so
largely relate that he himself might demonstrate how much he is abused both
by Cassander and Sir Humfrey touching this matter. And indeed I have often
times much wondered to see the great stupiditie of the sectaries in this point,
and especially the most learned sort of them, in they be either so sotishlie
ignorant or so Iewishlie superstitious and blind, that they are not able to
distinguish between the honor which Christians give to the picture of Christ
true God and man, and the worship which the Gentiles give to the images of their
imaginary and counterfeit Gods. Not ceasing either in their sermons or
ordinary discourses to compare most grossly the one with the other, and to
pronounce sentence of idolatry against them both a like, and applying most
absurdelie unto the condemnation of the reverence which the Romanists usually
practice toward the foresaid images of Christ and his saints those same
sentences of scripture and Fathers which by them were only spoken against the
pernicious error of the Pagans, whereas in truth there is as much distance
betwixt the one and the other as there is between Heaven and earth, God and the
devil, Christ and Belial. the person represented by the picture of Christ
being both capable and worthy of honor, but the persons represented by the
images of the false gods being neither capable nor worthy of worship as being
either wicked men or plain devils. And moreover, the honor exhibited to the
picture of Christ being not given to the picture for the picture or by the
picture itself I mean nor without relation to the Prototipe, nor yet in the
picture permanentlie, but rather to the Prototipe in and by means of the
picture or by the picture transitorilie: not much unlike to an arowe or darte
which although it passes by the air and in the air, yet does it not stay there
but in the mark only: whereas one the contrary the Gentiles went grossly
to work, for the honor which they gave to the statues and figures of their
Gods the same they gave to the images themselves by themselves and for them
selves attributing divinity, or at the least divine operations unto them, and
adoring them with actions of honor proper to the true God alone as sacrifices,
and the like, all which is so far different not only from the practice, but
also from the cogitations of any Christian man, that it can be esteemed no
less then most gross ignorance in the reformers to bring it in question.

And although it is true that the leight of nature only is not sufficient to
establish the honor of images which the Council of Trent decreed as the
knight does captiously infer out of the words of a modern divine whom he
cites: nevertheless the leight of nature does sufficiently teach us the
difference between true and idolatrous worship of images, and does also
plainly dictate unto us that those are both ignorantly blind who are not able
to conceive it, and temerarious and rash who not being able to conceive it,
condemn it as contrary to the law of God, our as sectarie commonly do. And
thus much for the answer to the testimony of Tertullian and to show that
antiquity is neither for the reformers nor against the Romanists in this
matter, as the knight does vanely endeavor to prove, but expressly for them
in regard that as I have showed out of the same author even in those most pure
and primative times there was use of the picture of Christ, yea and of a graven
image (which is that the reformers most directly impugn and exclaim against)
and that even in the chalices where of necessity it must needs have been
honored, the same author further affirming that the foresaid image was much
used in his time being the second hundredth year after Christ our Savior when
idolatry was not yet extinguished, which is an argument co^uincing that it was
not a thing then first invented but long before established, nor offensive to
the most sincere and entire Christians of those prime ages as now it is to the
Nyce nouelists of our days, many of which are so superstitiously precise that,
as an honest Protestant writer affirms, Sir. Th. Ouerb. Caract. of a Precis.
they had rather see Antichrist then the picture of Christ in the Church
Windoe. And now let this suffice for a brief Scantlin of the antiquity of the
reverent use of images to omit others, as S. Augustine who in his book of the
Trinity calls images religious signs. Lib. 3. cap. Greg. l. 7. epist. 53.
And S. Gregory who speaks of prostration before the^ which is one of the
greatest actions of honor that the Romanists use to exhibit toward any image.
So that by this the reader may plainly see the Romanists want neither
antiquity nor universality for their doctrine in this point as contrariwise
the misreformers want them both, for their pure negation of the same.

And if they demand scriptures of us besides that which I alleged before, we
may truly answer them as a grave divine in the seventh Synod answered the
heretics of that time. If they ask us (says he) in what place of scripture
we read that the picture of Christ is to be honored, we answer that there
where we read that Christ himself is to be honored.

And if now the reformers demand of us what reason we have for the honor of
the images of Christ and his Saints: we may answer them that we have the same
reason that they have to honor the image of their King or his dearest
fauorits. For as in civil honor, to respect or honor the Kings picture, does
not diminish the honor due unto the King himself, but increases it so it
passes in the worship of the image of Christ, and if the Puritans deny this,
there we leave them as guilty of treason against God and man.

And now here before I conclude I must of necessity aduertice the reader of
such abuses as Sir Humfrey has committed in his citations of some of the
authors he produces in this place. Wherefore in the first place I put the two
counsels he alleges as being as I suppose of greatest authority in our
adversaries conceipte. The one is the Council of Francford which because it is
corruptedlie rehearsed by Chemintius, we may iustelie disclame from it, if there
were no other reason. Yet Sir Humfrey knows besides this that the Romanists
hold that council for illegitimate. As for the Council of Eliberis, it is
not absolutely rejected by Romanists, yet they know it was but Provincial
consisting of 19. Bishops which whatsoever they defined in this matter which as
yet is uncertain, yet could it not be any General doctrine or practice for
the universal Church, but at the most for their own whole Country as the
circunstances of that time, and place required. But of what authority soever
they were, neither of those two councels condemned the adoration of images as
it is understood and used in the Roman Church, for unlawful and much less
for wicked and blasphemous as the knight here contendes: but if they truly
condemned any worship of images, it was only divine not honorarie worship
they condemned, and so they neither of them preiudicate the antiquity and
universality of the Roman doctrine in this point, and much less do they
establish the antiquity or universality of the misreformed Churches, which
for the most part will not suffer any images either painted or unpainted to
appear in their sinagoge, either upon walls or windows. And yet besides
this, it is well known the Council of Nyce as consisting both of Latin and
Grecian Fathers, was much more general then either the Francfordian or
Eliberitan Sinod; and in the Nycene it is certain that the honor of Images was
defended, and established, as our adversary not unwillingly confess, and the
decrees of it plainly testify; where as in the other two it remains
doubtful and ambiguous even till this day what was truly delivered in them
touching this point, there being only some certain fragments of them extant
touching this matter: out of all which incertaintie it is plain that no
assured antiquity or universality can be extracted for Sir Humfreys cause.

In the citation of Clemang is he takes only that which seemed most for his
purpose, and couninglie left out that which makes against him: Postquam vero
satis in fide (Christiani) imbuti, satis co^firmati fuerunt, saluberrima rursus
ratione visu^ est illud statutum debere aboleri, and per generale^ decretu^ est
Synodu^ imagines atque picturas in Ecclesijs fieri, quae a laicis and
simplicibus pro libris habere^tur. Clemang. de nouis celeber. non inst.
for also that author affirms that the universal Church induced by just
occasion did decree in the Primative Church that no Images should be placed in
Churches in regard of those who were converted from Gentilisme to Christian
faith (which how true or false it is imports not much for the present
dispute) yet the same Clemangis presently after affirms also that the same
Church did alter that law and ordain that Images should be used in Churches
for the instruction of the vulgar sort and for memory of Christ and his
saints, and yet further adding that he brings this but for an example to show
that this being but an Ecclesiastical law it may be changed at the Churches
pleasure: so that if Sir Humfrey had cited this author home, he could have
found nothing to prove his position to wit that the doctrine of Image-honor is
a blasphemous opinion, but rather the contrary is expressed sufficiently by
Clemangis, for that to set Images in a holy place that is in the temple of
God, as he expressly affirms the same Church did for most wholesome reasones,
is one of the greatest acts of honor that the Romanists exhibit unto them.
And by this we se that our adversary has neither dealt sincerely in the
alleging of this author, nor in the rehearsal of his words in which he
passes in silence the chief part of them viz: those in which he shows that
prohibition of the primitive Church which he mentiones touching the placing of
pictures in Churches, to have been only an Ecclesiastical precept and
changeable, yea and de facto changed by a general Council, as his words
related in the margen declare. That which Cassander also does plainly
insinuate when in his consultation of the use of images, he says (tho falsely)
the Fathers in the beginning of the Church did abhor all veneration of
images: yet afterward in the same treatise, he grau^tes convenient, and due
honor, unto them as in another place I will show by relation of his own
formal words. So now this being all which I need to speak of this matter
seeing that by this I have said it will manifestly appear that Sir Humfrey
has failed both in the authentical proof of the antiquity, or universality
of his own position touching the use of images, and in the disproofe of ours,
I pass to the next paragraph in the which doctrine of Indulgences used in the
Roman Church is impugned by him most courageously by virtue of an old challenge
made in Martin Luthers days but as yet never performed, therefore let us see
how our new Champion Sir Humfrey uses his arms.

First he relates the decree of the Tridentine Council Sess. 25. yet in a some
thing different manner then it runs there. But the true tenor of it is this
in substance: that whereas by Christ the power of Indulge^ces was granted to
the Church and that she has used that power delivered unto her by divine
ordinance even in the most ancient times, the sacred Synod does teach and
command that the use of them as very prositable to Christian people, and
approved by the authority of sacred Counsels ought to be retained, and does
condemn those with a curse who either affirm them to be unlawful, or deny
that there is in the Church authority to grant them: this is the true tenor
of the decree which Sir Humfrey has not so sincerely rehearsed as he ought to
have done, which whether he did it to advantage his cause or only out of an
ill custom he has got by his frequent exercise of such tricks in diverse
places of his book, I know not; only of this I am sure, that he produces
nothing of any force for the impugnation of it in all his paragraffe,
notwithstanding he boldly auerreth that it will be found (I know not where)
that neither Christ nor the primative Fathers ever knew, much less ever
exercised such pardons as are now daily practiced in the Church of Rome. this
he affirms most strongly, but proves his affirmation so weakly that its
hard to judge whether his temeritie in affirming, or his defectiuenesse in
proving that which he affirms, be more excessive, how be it most certain it
is that neither the one nor the other can be justified, for that if he had used
the least circumspection in the world, he might have found not only in
Bellarmin, and other divines but also in the Council of Trent which he cites,
mention both of scripture and Fathers copiouslie cited and quoted for the
proof both of the power and use of Indulgences in the Church from time to
time, of which as it seems he durst not take any notice, but passed it over
in silence, to the end his great words which he uttered in the beginning
might carry a fairer color of truth, which other wise would presently have
discovered themselves to be false.

True it is he describes one kind of mitigation or relaxation of punisshment
imposed upon offenders for denial of their faith, or sacrificing to idols,
which he grants to have been called by the name of pardon or Indulgence,
and to have been derived from saint Paul who released the incestuous
Corinthian from the bond of excomunication, all which though it be true in
itself, yet is it but an evasion which he uses to the end he may with greater
color reject those pardons which are truly and properly Indulgences that is
a relaxation from a temporal punishment due unto a penitent sinner according
to Gods justice for satisfaction of the pain of his offenses already remitted
touching the guilt and eternal punishment of the same, by virtue of the keys,
that is by the power of bynding and loosing sins which Christ gave to his
Church, and in her particularly to the chief visible pastor thereof. Of the
power and practice of which Kind of pardon, if Sir Humfrey had not been
disposed to cogge, he might have found good store of testimonies both out of
scriptures, Counsels, and Fathers alleged for the same by Roman divines.

And as for scriptures there are two places especially which do plainly
enuffe convince the foresaid truth of Indulgences if they be reight
understood according to the interpretation of the ancient Fathers. The one
is that general sentence of our Savior Math. 18. in which he gives an
illimitated power to his Apostles and in them to their lawful successors for
binding and loosing without any restriction either to this or that one matter,
or to this or that manner of remission, and consequently in that most general
power is included the authority of remitting the temporal punishment due to
sins which is that we call the power of Indulgences of which general power
granted to Priests we have diverse testimonies of Fathers and particularly of
S. Aug. who upon those words and iudicium datum est Apoc. 20. Says: Non hoc
putandum est de vltimo Iudicio dici, sed seeds Praepositorum est, and ipsi
Praepositi intelligendi sunt per quos Ecclesia nunc gubernatur. Iudicium autem
datum nullum melius accipiendum videtur quam id quod dictum est: quae
ligaueritis in terra ligata erunt and in Caelo: and quae solueritis in terra
soluta erunt and in Caelo. ^ug. lib. 2. ^e Ciuit. c. ^9. idem: ^act. 49. ^
Joan. ^d. tract. ^. Vide etia^ ^il. can. ^8 math. ^ Hier. in ^p. 18. ^ath.
The like he has upon the Gosp. of S. Ioh. Ideo cum processisset mortuus adhuc
ligatus, confitens and adhucreus vt soluerentur peccata eius ministris hoc
dixit Dominus, soluite illum and sinite abire quid est soluite and sinite
abire. Quae solueritis in terra soluta sunt in caelis. S. Ambrose also speaking
of the same power l. 1. de Paenit. c. 2. says: Deus distinctionem non facit
qui misericordiam suam promisit omnibus, and relaxandi licentiam Sacerdotibus
suis fine vlla exceptione concessit. God, says S. Ambrose, makes no
distinstion, who promised his mercy to all, and gave to his Priests license to
release without any exception. Neither can any reason be assigned why the
pastors of the Church should have power to apply the merits of the passion of
Christ for remission of the guilt of the sins themselves with the eternal
pain and yet not have power to apply the same for the remission of the
temporal punishment as due unto them, after the remission according to the
order of Gods justice, as the eternal punishment was due before it,
especially considering that the temporal pain as being far inferior in
nature and quality to the sin itself, it requires much less power and
fewer conditions for its remission then does the guilt of the sin and
eternal pain to the guilt annexed.

The other place of scripture is not only for the proof of the power to
grant Indulgences, but also of the practice of the same by S. Paul himself
the 2. chapter of the second epistle to the Corinth. where speaking to the same
Corinthians, he says of himself: And whom you have pardoned any thing, I
also. For, my self also that which I pardoned, if I pardoned any thing, for
you in the person of Christ that we be not circumuented of Satam. Which words
although they be obscure in the Gramaticall construction, yet do they
sufficiently declare those parts and conditions which are found in such
Indulgences as are now practiced in the Roman Church that is to say power in
the collator or giver, piety in the cause, and grace in the receiver. S. Paul
shows his authority in that he affirms he gave perdon to the incestuous
Corinthian in the person of Christ that is by authority from him received: he
shows the cause to have been the common profit of the Corinthians
themselves, to wit least they should be circumuented by the devil so that they
in the like occasion might fall in to desperation by over much rigor as the
incestuous man might have done if he had not been pardoned in the performance
of some part of the punishment due to his offense. Lastelie he in the
precedent words shows the receiver to have been in the state of grace in
that he signifies his sorrow and penance to have been so great that he was
ready to have been swalowed up by the excess of it. And so by this we may
perceive how deceitfullie Sir Humfrey proceeds in his 220. page where he
insinuates that S. Paul in the place now cited did only release the
incestuous Corinthian from the bond of excomunication, whereas indeed the
Apostle did not only that, but also did absolve him from that temporal
punishment and affliction in which if he had pleased he might have constreined
him to continue longer, and so supplied by his authoritatiue and suffragatorie
pardon that part of satisfaction which otherwise remained to have been
performed by the continuation of the punishment imposed and due to the penitent
according to the exaction of Gods justice, he supplied it I say by application
of the merits or satisfactions of Christ, which application also, and not
only the authority by which saint Paul did it, is included in those
words, in the person of Christ. Theod. in 2. Cor. 2.
That which by the comentarie of Theodoret upon this passage does plainly
appear who discreetlie notes that saint Paul is said here to pardone the
incestuous Corinthians sin because it was greater then his penance. And S.
Ambrose lib. 2. de Paenit. cap. 2. speaking of the same matter, says of S.
Paul: Donauit Corintho peccatum per paenitentiam. And a little after: Etenim
qui de remittenda praedicauit paenitentia, debuit and de ijs qui iterandum
putant Baptismum non silere. By which testimonies of these two most famous and
ancient authors Sir Humfreys evasion saying that the Apostle did only free
the incestuous Corinthian from the bond of Excommunication, does evidently
appear to be false and frivolous. And thus we see that not only the
relaxation of a punishment enjoined, as the knight would have it, but also the
same or very like form of pardon which the Roman Church uses at this present
time, was practiced by S. Paul himself in the foresaid case.

And in truth supposing at the least certain received maxims of divinity
which might easily be demo^strated by scriptures if the place did serve for it:
to wit that after the guilt of sin is remitted, some temporal punishment
remains which according to the exigence of justice must be remoueed before
the soul can attain to perfect blessedness, either by just indurance or
merciful remission: and more over that the same temporal affliction which
many suffer in this life even after their sins be entirely remitted, is not
for correction and commination only (as the sectaries do friuolouslie
contend) as appears plainly in the example of David who although he knew
from the mouth of a Prophet that the guilt of his adultry was pardoned, yet
understanding nevertheless by the same Prophet that there remained no small
punishment behind to wit no less then the death of his dearest child, and
that as the scripture it self testifies neither for correction nor
commination only, but because by his scandalous actio^ he had caused the
enemies of God to blaspheme his name and as the text declares in the 2. Book
of the Kings the 12. chapter, propter verbum hoc that is for this thy fact
taking word for action as it is most frequently taken in the scriptures: and
yet besides all this the same David did voluntary penance composing the whole
miserere Psalm and crying out with an amplius laua for a perpetual testimony
of the same. And now supposing as I say all this, the doctrine and practice of
Indulge^ces now used by the chief Pastors of the Roman Church is so well
grounded that except only in those in whom obstinacy reigns more then
reason, it admits no trergiuersation in the credibilitie and faith of it.
For as God is infinitely not only just but also merciful in himself by
essence, so has he communicated to the governors of his church a kind of
participatiue mixture of both those attributes between which according to that
of the psalm iustitia and pax osculatae sunt, he has made a most loving
league to the end that according to diverse causes and occasions his spiritual
officers may so use them in earth as the use may be approved in Heaven,
sometimes using rigor of discipline for the satisfaction of Gods justice,
other times lenity for the exercise of his mercy.

But now touching the confirmation of this doctrine by the authority of Fathers
I will only produce the testimonies of Tertull. and S. Cyprian who being both
so ancient as they are known to be, they may justly serve for sufficient
witnesses of the ancient practice of the same in those primative times.

Tertullian therefore in his book to the Martirs and first chapter speaks of
the remission of the pain due to sins which the Bishops gave unto the
sinners either at the petition of martyrs, or for other causes, calling it by
the name of peace. Which peace faith he some that have it not in the Church are
accustomed to ask it of the martyrs in prision, and therefore you also
(meaning the Bishops) ought for that cause to have, norish, and keep it in
your selves to the end that if perhaps you may communicate it to others. where
Tertullian by the word peace understands the Bishops absolution at the least
from some part of the sinners penance by application of the superabundant
satisfactions of the martyrs which application is also in the word peace
included, as manifestly may be gathered out of the same Tertullian, who
afterward falling in to heresy in his 22. chap. of his book of chastity
recalled that which he had tought before, to wit that indult could not be given
to those that had fallen, at the petition of the martyrs, because says he (now
turned Heretic) there remain no satisfactions of martyrs, (which
satisfactions he calls oleum faculae) which can suffice for themselves and
others. All which as the reader may clearelie perceive is nothing else in
substance but such an Indulgence as is now practiced by the Bishops of Rome, of
whom and others by their commission, the foresaid author does speak in the
place rehearsed.

And the same says S. Cyprian in his last Sermon de lapsis says, paenitenti,
operanti, roganti, potest clementer ignoscere, potest in acceptum refer
quicquid pro talibus and petierint martyrs, and fecerint Sacerdotes. To the
working or laboring penitent (the Bishop of whom he speaks as I suppose) may
clemently pardon, and accept as received whatsoever the martyrs demand, and
the Priests do, or perform. And the like the same S. Cyp. has l. 3. epist.
15. or 11.

I omit Saint Gregory whom yet both S. Thom. and Atisiodorus his
predecessor testify to have granted Indulgences in form, which although it is
not found in his works now extant, yet it is far more credible, and
certain that those two authors would not have used that testimony with out
infalible ground that it was S. Gregory's, then that it was feigned because
kemnitius and other nouellists reject it as suppositious. And if they will not
admit of this testimony because they see it not. At the least they must of
necessity admit of that which being yet more ancient is to be seem in the
Chapel of S. Cross of Jerusalem in Rome written in legible letters, that S.
Siluester who was Bishop and Pope above 1200. years paste did consecrate that
Chapel and adorn it with maine reliquies of saints and indulted diverse
perdons to the visiters of it. I could also cite the Popes which since the
time of S. Greg. in several ages have very frequentlie granted Indulgences,
but because I know our presumptuous adversaries contemn their authority (though
iniustlie for that they have been of as great authority as their anticessours)
I will save the labor, and only aduertice the reader that there is far
greater reason for a prudent man to give credit unto them in the affirmative of
this question then there is to rely upon the authority of the sectaries for
the negation, in regard that even by their own confession the affirmative has been tought and practiced publikelie in the Christian world at the least for the
space of 400. years even according to Kemnitius, who (though most falsely for
that it may be proved That Leo the third who lived in the 8. or 9. hundredth
year gave pardons according to the manner of those our times) affirms that
Indulgences began about the year 1200. who neuertelesse on the contrary
contradicting himself grants that the first denyers of the same were the
Waldenses, a company of pore ignorant beggarlie fellows. From whence we may
infer how impudentlie the kinght affirms antiquity and universality in
his own Church for the denial of Indulgences, yet dinying the same in the
Church of Rome for her defense of them: supposing he could not produce as much
as one author either more or less ancient for the negative part living
before the pore men of lions, who having no other saint for their founder then
one waldo a very idiot, appeared about the year of our Lord 1170. that is
many hundreths of years after Indulgences had been practiced in the
Christian world even according to the form now used. It is true Sir Humfrey
alleges diverse Roman divines as he uses to do, but it is but a mere shift
he uses to color his position as being destitute of all other ancient
authority and proof. For I have examined those authors and I find there is
not one of them which is not a zealous defender both of the power which Christ
gave unto the Church to grant Indulgences, and also of the lawfullnes and
profit of them; nor does any one of them confess the want of antiquity and
consent of the same: but some of them only confess indeed there is no
certainetie of their beginning, or when the use of them came into the Church in
the manner they are now used. To which purpose the testimony cited out of B.
Fisher may seem to serve, who yet does not say (as the knight falselie
relates) that it is not sufficiently manifest from whom Indulgences had their
Original, but he only says non certo constare a quo primum tradi caeperunt,
that it is not certainly apparent who first began to give them. And although
that author has the rest of the words which Sir Humfrey cites, yet has he
others in the same place which do sufficiently declare his meaning in that
manner of speech; for he presently adds that S. Gregory is said to have
granted Indulgences, and they say (says he) that there was some most
ancient use of them among the Romans which the stations of the City, give us
to understand. And hence it is that the same Bishop in the same place turning
his speech to Luther his adversary, says unto him, wherefore thou art a mere
imposter, or deceiuer of the people, not the Popes to whom (in this point of
Indulgences) both the Gospel favors, and a general Council subscribes, and
also the universal company of modern interpreters upon those words of Christ
math. 16. whatsoever you shall bind in earth shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever you shall loose in earth shall be loosed in heaven thus he. So that
it is plain that Bishop Fisher never duobted of the power of Indulge^ces, or
that the use of them is not lawful or profitable, as neither does he bring in
question whether the ancient Fathers and divines did deny, or not acknowledge
these particulars, but as I said before, he only treates of the antiquity
of the use of the same, as manifestly appears even by the same words which
the knight cites where he says that, Indulgences began not till a while after
the saint, or tremble of Purgatotie. By which also it does further appear
that in his passage that renowned Prelate who not only with his pen, but also
with his sacred blood defended the Roman faith as well in this as all other
points, is not sincerely dealt with, nor pertinentlie alleged to the true
state of the question proposed by our adversary.

Now other authors which Sir Humfrey cities, only affirm that much can not
be said of Indulgences of certainty, and as undoubtedly true seeing scriptures
speak not of them expresselie as Durand affirms: to which purpose also
Antoninus speaks, and yet neither of them say that nothing can be spoken with
certainetie of them. Which is not contrary to the doctrine of the Romanists
who, although they believe there is sufficient ground of the power and truth of
them in the Bible, yet they willingly grant with all, that diverse particulars
concerning them are disputable among divines. And it is clear that Durand and
S. Antoninus as they say only that pauca few things can be said with
certainetie of pardons or Indulgences, and that the scripture does not speak
expressly of them, so by the same reason evident it is that the same authors
grant that both some things may be pronounced certainly of them, and also
that at the least, there is implicit and unexpressed mention or containement of
them in the scripture: to wit of power of the Church to grant and use them,
which a lone is sufficient to show that they consequently maintain the
vniuersalite and antiquity of the Roman doctrine in this point and impugn the
contrary position of the false reformers who absolutely and obstinately
deny such power to reside in the Church of God. And as for that which Durand
affirms, that diverse of the ancient Fathers make no mention of Indulgences,
yet he does not say that it does thence follow that they did reject the power
or use of them in the Church, and much less does Durand affirm that other
ancient Fathers did not mention them; yea if he had affirmed this, yet he him
self kewe well enuffe that this being but a negative argument at the most, it
proves nothing. But that which follows of those ancient Fathers silence in
this matter, is that they had not occasion to speak of them as others had, or
at the most, that Indulgences were not much in use in their times which does
not contradict the Romanists, who do not stand upon defense of the frequent
use of them in the Primative Church, but of the power which they maintain to
be as ancient as the spiritual power of binding and loosing given by Christ
him self to the Pastors of his Church in most general and ample manner. Mat.
16.
And to this I add that which Sir Humfrey for his own advantage omitted in
the citation of both Durand and Antoninus, to wit, that they both allege the
testimony of S. Gregory for the use and actual grant of Indulge^ces,
Gregorius tamen loquitur qu^ etiam Indulgentias Rom^ iustituit instationibus,
vt dicitur. Durand. id 4. sent. d. 20. q. 3.
which Pope, say they is reported to have instituted the Roman stations, which
words of Durand, and the like of S. Antoninus if the knight had rehearsed as
he ought to have done according to the laws of plain dealing, the use of
Indulgences would have appeared not to be so new as he indeuores to persuade
his reader.

Touching the citation of Caietan Sir Humfrey proceeds no less insincerely,
for in the same place which is his 15. Opuscle, Ex his ha^betur textibus non
solum quod Indulgentiaru^ gratia antiqua est in Christi Ecclesia and non noua
inue^tio, sed habentur clare quatuor etc. Caiet. Opusc. 15. c. 1.
he adds that in the fourth of the sentences it is alleged by S. Thomas that
S. Gregory did institute the stations of Indulgences, and producing many
other testimonies out of the Ecclesiastical decrees he concludes thus. Out of
those texts it is had that the grant of Indulgences is not only ancient,
but etc. Where also the reader is to be advertised that Caietan is corrupted by
Sir Humfreys translation of the word hunc or hanc, them, which the author
referres to the beginning, or certainty of their beginning, not to the
Indulgences themselves or power to grant them.

And doubtless siluester Prierias had the same meaning where he said, if so
he said, that Pardons are not known unto us by the authority of the
scripture but by the authority of the Church of Roman, for the sense is that
they are not expressly declared and delivered unto us by the text of the
scripture in plain words but by the Church whose office it is to propose such
doctrine in particular to the faithful as she finds not so plainly delivered
in the scripture as they themselves can without her directions come to due
knowledge of it. And surely this athour is so far from denying the
Antiquity of the power and use of perdons that he professedly defended the
same against his professed adversary Luther.

And the same I say of Eckius and Tecelius, who as Sir Humfrey can not be
ignorant were also Luthers Antagonists eue^ in this particular, to omit that he
cites those two authors only upon relation of the Council of Trents history
in English to which as I have alreader noted we give no credit. Nay and since I
writ this at first, I find that Prierias Eckius and Tecelius are falsely
charged by the same false history of Trent to have laid for their ground of
Indulge^ces the Popes authority in their impugnation and conuincement of
Luther. Page 6.
And the marginall note of that place is yet more false, then the text, saying
that the adversaries of Luther proved the doctrine of Indulgences by common
reasons only. And as for Eckius I have read his whole treatise of Indulgences
and so I am sure he foundeth them not upon the Popes autheritie either only
or chiefly, but principally upon scripture, for so he says page 313.
Indulgentiarum figurae fuerunt Iubilei in veteri Testamento. De his sumus
contenti eo quod habeamus solidum S. Paul^ fundamentum ne credamur
diligentiores in lucrosa. Porro etc. 2. Cor. 2.


And to the sense of these authors may be reduced that which Cunerus says of
the doubtful manner of writing of some Catholic authors, of Indulgences, if
the place be sincerely related which a man may justly suspect especially for
that the knight has it out of Chamier and at second hand. And in deed the
truth is if that authors sentence had not ben violently abrupted before the
end of the same period which he delivered with one breath, it would have
plainly declared that there is nothing for Sir Humfreyes purpose of proving
that neither Christ nor the Primative Fathers (as he speaks) ever knew or
exercised such pardons as are now daily practiced in the Church of Rome. For
the words omitted are those. Cunerus declam.
Cum in clauibus Ecclesiae and symbolo Apostolico clarissime fundatae
deprehendantur. That is since that (Indulgences) are most clearly discovered
to be founded in the Apostolical symbol or Creed, and in the power of the
keys of the Church etc.

And so now we see that those testimonies do not prove want of antiquity or
consent in either scripture, Fathers or schoolmen for the doctrine of
Indulgences themselves, but only at the most in some accessorie points of
that Controversy, yet not one of them proving any such want in the maine of
the question above declared, no more then he should be thought to prove want of
antiquity and vniuersallitie in the doctrine of three persons, and one God,
who should affirm the same not to be in express terms contained in the
scripture, Fathers, and schoolmen just in that manner in which the Church
believes and defends it. And yet granting nevertheless that it is truly
contained in the same scripture in an other equivalent manner, or inexpresselie.

As also the same does yet more plainly appear even by those same words
which Sir Humfrey cites here out of Alfonsus, which although they be not
sincerely related by him, as leaving out that which most conduces to the
explication of that authors true meaning, to wit that, who but an heretic can
deny transubstantiation, the procession of the holy Ghost and Purgatory
because they are not mentioned by ancient authors sub his nominibus, by these
names or words. And after: what marvel therefore is it if it happened in this
sort of Indulgence that, says Castro there be not mention made of them in the
ancients. By which words it is plain this author speaks not absolutely of
the substance of Indulgences or of the authority to grant them which indeed
is the chief question of Controversy in this place, and of which he makes no
doubt but that it is sufficiently contained in scripture and Fathers although as
he says minus express less expresselie. But he only speaks of the name as
his words now related do testify; or at the most of the antiquity of their
common use, which not withstanding it is no matter of faith, yet does he show
it not to be so new as the sectaries of our times will have it: and therefore
he adds by way of conclusion. Quod non est tam recens Indulgentiarum vsus
quantum isti haeretici (meaning the Lutherans) exprobrant, nam apud Romanos
vetustissimus praedicatur earum vsus vt ex stationibus Romaefrequentissimis
colligi vtcumque potest. Et de Beato Gregorio huius nominis primo fertur quod
aliquas suotempore concesserit. And in the same tenor of words he adioyneth
that, et si pro Indulgentiaram approbatione sacrae scripturae apertum
testimonium desit, non tamen ideo contemnendae erant quoniam Ecclesiae
Catholicae vsus a multis annorum saeculis receptus, tantae est authoritatis vt
qui illum contemnat haereticus merito censeatur etc. By all which it is evident
that nothing can be proved by the words of Alfonsus against the substance of
Ecclesiastical Indulgences nor contrary to the antiquity and universality
of the Roman doctrine in that point, but rather Sir Humfrey and his brothers
are manifestly convicted of heresy for contemning the same. Now Mayor in 4.
d. 2. q. 2. is impertinentlie alleged for he only affirms that it is hard
to found authenticallie in scripture just that manner of Indulgence which is
used at this day in the Church: and that some of the ancient Fathers made no
mention thereof, which the Romanists do not deny for they say difficilia
quae pulchra. And so that which is hardly founded is truly founded. Yet the
power and use of Indulgences even as they are now practiced the same Mayor
defendes as well as other modern divines, yea and deduceth the use of them
from S. Gregory the great, and thus this author is excused and the citer
reproved.

Touching Siluester Prieras although I cannot have that same work of his which
Sir Humfrey cites. (if any such be extant now in the world) yet I have viewed
the treatise of Indulgences which he has in his sum, and there I find that
he does not say all that with which our adversary does charge him, nay nor
scarce half so much, for he neither excludes scripture from the ground of
Indulgences, 2. Cor. 2.
but expresselie cites the same place of S. Paul for them which others cite,
although it be with a licet at the and. And much less does he affirm that the
authority of the Church of Rome and the Popes is greater then the authority of
the scripture, which proposition if he had uttered and defended obstinately in
my opinion he had deserved the fygot almost as well as his adversary Martin:
but I persuade my self the discretion of Prieras was greater then so. And in
the same manner. I vehemently suspect our adversaries has used some of his
Gipsian sleights in the citation of the place he quoteth. But yet is meaning is
only that Indulgences, that is the present use of them, is not manifestly
declared unto us by scripture and Fathers as his words cited here in the
margen insinuate, absolutely granting both the power and practice of them.
Indulge^tia nobis per scriptura^ minime innotuit: licet inducatur illud. 2.
Cor. 2. Si quid donaui vobis; sed nec per dicta antiquoru^ doctorum, sed
modernorum. Dicitur enim Gregorius indulgentiam septennem in stationibus Rome
posuisse. Et quia Ecclesia hoc facit and seruat credendum est ita esse quia
regitur Spiritis Sancto. Syluester in sum. verbo Indult. Bell de Indul. l. 2.
c. 1.


Lastely touching Bellarmine and Vale^tia, I say they are neither of them
cited by Sir Humfrey either with any great sinceretie, or to any great purpose.
For although Bellarmin does insinuate that there are not many of the more
ancient authors which make mention of Indulgences; yet he does not affirm
that there is want of antiquity and consent in the Fathers in this matter as
Sir Humfrey does falselie deduce out of his words, but only insinuates that
the defect of number of the more ancient Fathers which mention Indulge^ces, is
sufficiently supplied by the use and custom of the Church without writing, by
reason (says he) that many things are retained in the Church by that means
only.

And as for Valentia who as he is cited by the knight, relates out of S. Thomas
the opinion of some who called Indulgences a pious fraud to allure men to the
performance of those pious works which are required in the form of the
Indulgence granted, it is true there was such a tenet in those days: but as
it is true that S. Thomas relates it, so is it also true that he conde^nes the
same for very dangerous, that which our adversary if he had dealt honestly
ought not to have omitted. And yet not obstanding, he could not but see that
position censured by S. Thomas in the very place cited by Valentia, as also he
censureth another little better, to wit that by virtue of the Indulgence
itself no punishment neither in the judgment of God, nor the Church could be
remitted: notwithstanding all this I say, yet Sir Humfrey subtillie let it
pass, making by that means his reader believe that the foresaid tenet was
long before the days or Luther according to the relation of Aquinas (as he
says) an uncondemned opinion of some divines, and rejected as erroneous by
Valentia alone: who nevertheless expresselie affirms it to have been an
opinion hised at by all Orthodox writers, opinio ab Orthodoxis omnibus explosa.
Nay and which is yet more gross, Sir Humfrey leaves quite out some part of
the words of the foresaid opinion as it is rehearsed by Valentia, to wit those
which mention satisfaction made to God by reason of the devotion of the gainer
of the Indulgence and value of the pious works in joined him for the obtaining
of the same, all which because it sounded contrary to the doctrine of the
pretensiue reformed Churches, it struct Sir Humfrey deaf one that ear, and so
he left it out.

I omit diverse particulars which our adversary vtters here and there in the
progress of his Paragraffe. Because they either consiste of some
inauthenticall relations about the use or rather about the abuse of some
particular graunts of Indulgences as that out of the office of Saram and out of
Guitcherdin: or else they co^siste in his own plain calu^nious untruths, as
that Indulgences are granted only to draw money from the grainers: and
that the Romanists pretend universality of Fathers for every point of faith:
and that the article of Indulgences wantes authority of scripture, of all this
I say I need to make no further discussion in regard the apparent falsitie of
it does sufficiently confute it self and shows that it proceeds rather from
a man malitiouslie affected and ignorant of the state of the question, and more
disposed to cauille then careful to attain to the truth of the doctrine. For
suppose the abuses were never so true (which as in all other things so in this
I confess there have been some especially in the questors or inferior
administrators of Indulgences, and may be more: nevertheless these abuses of
particular men, do not impeach the power, and authority, and lawful use of
the same, which only is that which my adversary and I have now in question.

And so now for conclusion of this matter we may hence infer how impiouslie
the sectaries proceed in the denial and impugnation of the Indulgences used in
the Roman Church, which although they had no other utility or profit in them
then to induce people to the exercise of such pious works as are required in
the tenor of them, that is fasting, prayer and alms so heighly commended in
the scriptures, and receiving of the Sacraments, yet in common reason ought
they not to be rejected, but rather maintained and sought for with great zeal
and devotion. And so now let this suffice for the intyre discussion of this
paragraffe, in which I have found nothing to the excuse the author from the
same censure I have laid upon him in the precedent matters.

THE IX PERIOD.
WE are now come to the 10. section of the book in which Sir Humfrey
produces the testimonies of the Romanists touching the infallible certainty
of the Protestant faith, and the uncertainty of the Romish. this is his
design, but I am verily persuaded he will fail of his purpose. I will examen
particulars that the truth may appear. But before this I must advertise the
reader that in this section there is little substance to be found, and it
consists chiefly in a large recapitulation of the supposed confessions of the
Romanists: as that they have confessed that justification is by faith only,
that the conversion of the bread in to Christ's body, was not generally
received by the Fathers, that the certain and definite number of Sacraments
was unknown to scripture and Fathers, and that the Indulgences now used, have
no authority from scripture or Fathers, and the like all which particulars we
have allreadie disproued in their several places. In substance a great part
of it is but an idle repetition of those falsities which the kingh has uttered
before, with some new additions to make the number of his lies more ample and
complete and this he performs with great abundance of words of
amplification: and thinking to make all sure calls to witness both men and
Angels: And thus for space of a leaf or two, he brings nothing but verbal
discourses which with the very breath of any judicious reader presently vanish
away, and so they need no other confutation. Afterward he comes to some
particulars which I have not yet touched and of these I will make a brief
examen.

And to omit those points which I have before discussed, in his page 242. he
indeuoreth to prove out of Bellarmin that the Church of Rome has overthrown
in one tenet all certainty of true faith, and he performs it very solidly,
because for sooth Bellarmin affirms that none can be certain by certainty
of faith that he receives a Sacrament by reason of the uncertainty of the
intention of the minister without which the Sacrament can not be made. And the
argument the kinght framed of the doctrine of the Cardinal is this. It is a
positive ground of the Roman Religion that a Sacrament can not be made without
the intention of the minister but the intention of the minister can not be
known by faith, therefore the Church of Rome has overthrown in one tenet all
certainty of true faith. I ansere first that although this is the form which
Sir Hu^freys argument must be reduced unto if any it ca^ have, nevertheless
if we should examen it according to the rules of logique there will scarcely be
found either form or figure in it, yet least the knight should hold himself
too rigorously dealt with as not making profession of that art, I am content to
let that pass and answer secondly that I grant the mayor in this sense viz.
That whenever the Priest does administer a Sacrament it is required that he
intends at the least in general to do that which the true Church uses to do
in that action I mean either formally or virtually, and this is defined by the
Council of Trent as a certain truth. But in the minor there lies secretly a
certain false supposition which is this. That to the faith of a Sacrament is
necessarily required that the intention of the minister in particular cases be
known by faith which is not true, nor defined by the Council; because to the
faith of a Sacrament is sufficient that faith by which a Christian believes
that every one of those visible signs which the Church proposes to the people
to be believed and received as Sacraments of the new law are instituted by
Christ to confer grace to the receivers, and that to every one of them is
required a sincere intention to administer or perform that particular action
as is was instituted, or as the Tridentine decrees, intention saltem faciendi
quod facit Ecclesia, that is at the least with intention to hoe that which the
Church does; and that seriously and not in mockrie: but notwithstanding it is
not necessary that either he that performs that ceremony, or he that
receives the same, have certain knowledge of faith that this or that
indiuidual Sacrament has been instituted with the forsaid intention, but to
this a moral certainty does suffice both in the minister and in the receiver,
and the reason is because to know whether one has received, or does truly
receive a Sacrament or not, falls not upon the essence, or making or marring
of a Sacrament as a thing necessarily precedent unto the constitution of it,
but it is only a thing consequent or following the same as serving only to
rectify and quiet the consciences of those that either administer it or
receive it, to the which as being but a moral matter, moral certainty only
is required. And surely if all true faith should therefore be overthrown, as
Sir Humfrey infereth because of want of certainty of faith in the receivers
that they receive true Sacraments every time they reciue the^, then should it
follow by an argument ad hominem, that the faith of the reformers were also
overthrown; for that they themselves neither have nor can have any such
certainty of faith: or if they say there is no faith of any such intention of
the minister in their religion, so do we say the same of ours: for although it
is a matter of faith in the Roman Church that the intention of the Priest is
necessary in general to the constitution of a Sacrament, yet that intention is
not necessarily known by faith in every particular case, and in this
consists the equivocation of the whole argument, and if the knight had
distinguished between the intention and the faith of the intention, he might
easily have perceived that his discourse was founded upon a false foundation.
To say nothing of the conclusion which although the premises were never so
true, yet had they not ben able to infer such a vast consequence as is the
overthrow of all certainty of true faith, precisely in respect of the
supposed want of faith of intention about the Sacraments.

And now by this general ansere may be solued what soever Sir Humfrey says
afterward of the intention required to the Sacraments in particular. To which
I alson add that if certainty of faith were required in the receivers of the
Sacraments that as often as they receive them, the receive true Sacraments hic
and nunc, and that as often as they want that faith they overthrow all
certainty of true faith, then the reformers themselves were in a more pitiful
case then the Romanists, in regard that it is impossible for them to known
more then either by their own seight, or by relation of others, that the true
matter and form of the Sacraments, be truly applied unto them: and yet
certain it is that upon neither of these two knowledges any supernatural
faith can be founded, but only either a kind of natural cognitio^ or
knowledge at the most, taken from the senses, or a certain moral certitude
proceeding from the relation of their parents or others, all which is far
inferior to the knowledge of faith as no man can deny.

That which may by a special reason be yet more plainly urged against the
receivers of the Sacraments in the reformed Churches, in regard they are so
far from certainty of faith of the truth of their Sacraments in particular,
that they cannot possible have as much as a moral certainty of the same nay
nor moral probability I mean such an one as may justly move a prudent man
to give credit, by reason they have no certainty, nor yet probability of the
truth of the vocation and ordination of their ministers, without certainty of
which two conditions, it is well known on both sides, that no certain
knowledge of the truth of individual Sacraments can possibly he had. And so
we see that whereas Sir Humfrey thought he had framed a stong argument against
the doctrine of Bellarmin, he only heapeth coals upon his own head. And from
hence also we may gather an easy solution to that which he adds against the
necessity of the Priests intention in some of the Sacraments which he
specifieth as baptism, Order, and Matrimony.

Touching which matter I desire the judicious reader consider whether it is not
much more conformable to reason, to the dignity of the Sacraments, to the
honor of Christ who instituted them, and to the confort and security of the
receivers, that a sincere intention of the Priest Gods substitute, be required
to the truth and due administration of them as the Roman Church does teach and
ordain: or only so, that if the receivers take them in the name of God, as
the reformers speak, it is sufficient for the minister to perform that
external actio^ which Christ did institude, though he does it in jest or
morkery as Luther teaches, or animo illusorio, that is with an intention or
meaning to delude as kemnitius affirms, or to have no intention necessarily
required as Sir Humfrey here professes: this I say I leave to the judgment of
any indifferent man to discern whether the Romanists or the reformers proceed
more safely and religiously.

And as for the illations which the knight deduceth out of the necessity of the
intention of the minister in administration of Sacraments they are so ignorant
and sotish, as I am ashamed to rehearse them, for example when he says that
if the Priest fayles in his intention at the time of solemnization of
matrimony the married people live all their days in adultrie, or fornication:
which is a most gross error in the knight: for that the Romanists and the
reformers agree in this that although Matrimony were no Sacrament, and
consequently that the married people should not receive it as a Sacrament, yet
were it sufficient to free them from adultery, in regard they receive it at
the least as a civil contract, whatsoever the Priests intention be. And if it
were not so, certainly all sectaries of this time, and particularilie Sir
Humfrey himself for one should live perpetually in that damnable state of
adultery which he mentions. And yet this sequel I am sure it importes him
to deny as earnestly as he can if it be but only for the conservation of
his own, and his wifes honor.

And the like foolish and false inferences he makes about all the rest of the
Sacraments, as also about the succession of the Popes and pastors of the
Church as if by the confession of Romanists themselves there were no certainty
in any of them: whereas yet he himself cites Bellarmin in this very place
as teaching that in all these things there is at least moral and sufficient
certainty of their real exista^ce and truth. Certitudine autem moralem and
humanam quae sufficit and vt homo quiescat ex Sacrame^tis, habemus etia^si
pendia^t ab intention alterius. Bell. de Sacr in genere li. 1 c. 28.
So that all these deductions are void of all sense reason, and truth,
meerlie framed by the knight out of the superfluity of his brain, and
obtruded upon his reader as confessions of his adversaries in a peremptory and
odious manner in disgrace of that Church whose doctrine he is not able to
impugn in any more substanciall manner.

In a semblable fashion does he also prosecute the like captious kind of
argument against diverse other points of the Roman doctrine, as for Example
because he finds in Biel and Peter Lombard that they speak not with any
certainty of the manner how Saints do understand the prayers of their
supplica^ts, he infers that the Romanists are uncertain touching the
doctrine of invocation of Saints it self, which nevertheless is a most false
illation for that although there be some uncertainty in what manner or by what
means the Saints do come to know our prayers by reason of the diverse
opinions of divines in that particular, yet as well those who Sir Humfrey
cites as also all the rest of the Romanists agree and hold for certain that
Saints are piouslie and profitablie to be inuocated and prayed unto, all
without exception teaching and inculcating the same expresselie in their books
and writings. Gabriel Biel is so plain for the doctrine of the Roman Church,
that if the knight had not corrupted him both in words and sensc, he could not
have alleged him with any coulorable pretense: For in the very precedent
lection to that which he cites against us. Biel resolves the question in our
favor saying. Whence it is apparent that our prayers, and hope of obtaining
beatitude by the mediation of the Saints, are not void in Heaven: but by order
constituted by God himself; we ought to recurre to their help, and
assistance: and perpetually implore them with due veneration that we may be
saved by their merits. In which words, and the rest following, I am sure there
is sufficient to make the author a plain Papist, yea and much more then Sir
Humfrey desires to hear in favor of the Roman doctrine and so it is clear he
has corrupted his sense. And now for his words, he has likewise corrupted
them most peruerselie, by displaceing, and tranferring them from one purpose to
an other. For these words: non est certum per omnia: By which Biel ansers
only to that question, whether it pertaines to the accidental Beatitude of
the Saints to hear our prayers (which question as you see is only about the
manner, or quality of the Saints understanding our petitions, not of the maine
substance) he respondes: Non per omnia certum est. It is not altogether
certain. And yet Sir Humfrey applies this, as if Biel had said, that it is not
certain that the Saints hear our prayers at all. Yet further connecting unto
the same, those other words: vnde probabiliter dicitur: Which he also soma't.
Insincerelie Englisheth: it may seem probable: and rehearsing them in one
series, or tenor, whereas yet they are uttered by their author, many lines
after, and to an other purpose, where ansering to the question before proposed
he said thus: Vnde probabiliter dicitur etc. Whence it is probably said, that
although it does not necessarily follow the beatitude of the Saints, that they
hear our prayers: by congruitie, yet God almighty reuelles unto them all that
is offered unto them by men. All which particulars concerning the corruption of
this place by the guilie knight, may more plainly be perceived in the author
himself, then I can possible here express.

As for the Master of sentences, and Scotus in the 45. d. of the fourth book,
although perchance they seem to one that reads the^ superficially, not to
speak with certainetie of the invocation of Saints, yet to the anttentiue
reader it appears clearly they both suppose for certain, and of which they
frame no disputation, that the Angels, and Saints hear our prayers, and that
we lawfully and profitablie pray unto them, of which points it is most
undoubtedly to be supposed that those two authors could not be ignorant, nor
maintain the negative part, in regard the public letanies in which the
invocation of Saints is expresselie included were used in the Church long
before their days, as histories so commonly testify that I need not produce
them. Besides that the writings of the ancient Fathers whose sentences Peter
Lombard professedlie collected, as much as was for his purpose, and of which
Scotus could not be ignorant, are full of the same doctrine as in our Catholic
Controuertists may easily appear to the reader.

And therefore whereas the Master uses the words: non est incredibile, and
scotus probabile est, they speak not either of the absolute invocation of
Saints, or of our prayers unto them of which neither of them proposes the
question: but they apply those words to the manner only of their
understanding our intercession. And therefore the Master puts the title of the
question thus: Quomodo Sancti glorificati audiunt pre^es supplicantium Magister
in ^it. quaest. ^. 45. in 4. ^ent.
quomodo? how or in what manner, or, by what means do the Saints hear our
prayers, and how they interced for us unto our Lord? To which he ansers, it is
not incredible that the Saints which in the secret of the face of God, inioye
the illumination of the true leight, understand in contemplation of him so much
as appertains either to their own joy, or our assistanse. For as to the
Angels, so to the Saints who assiste in the Seight of God, our petitions are
known in the eternal word. In abscondito facie Dei.
By which it is evident that Lombard speaks only of the means by which the
Saints understand the prayers of faithful supplicants. And there being two
several ways chiefly where by the Saints may understand our prayers: the
one by virtue of their beatitude, or beatificall vision by which they see the
prayers directed unto them by seeing God: the other by special revelation
accidental to their blessedness. The Master is of opinion, they see them in
the word by virtue of their vision of God, as I conceive: But Scotus seems to
hold that, the knowledge that Saints have of our prayers, does not
necessarily follow of their beatitude, but is only accidental, and by
congruitie: and therefore he says in his anser to the question. Dico quod nrn
est necesse ex ratione beatitudinis quod beatus videat orationes nostras. Neque
regulariter sieve vniuersaliter in verbo, quia non est necessaria fequela
beatitudinis, neque quod reuelentur, neque talis reuelatio necessario sequitur
beatitudintm: Beatitudo enim in obiectis creatis, non transcendit quiditates
seu illa quorum essentia visa est necessaria ratio videndi: tamen quia congruum
est beatum esse coadiutorem Dei in procurando salutem electi eo modo quo hoc
sibi potest competere, and ad istud requiritur sibi reuelari orationes nostras
specialiter quae sibi offeruntur quia illa specialiter innituntur meritis eius
tanquam mediatoris perducentis ad salutem quae petitur, ideo probabile est quod
Deus beatis reuelat de orationibus sibi vel Deo in nomine eius oblatis. That is
in English. It is not necessary by the nature or state of beatitude that the
blessed see our prayers, neither regularlie or, universally in the divine
word, because that is not any thing which as is it were a necessary sequel
of beatitude. Nor that they are reueiled because neither such a revelation
necessarily follows bertitude: for the beatitude of the understanding in
created objects transcendes not the quidities, or those things the sight of
whose essense is the necessary cause of seeing. But because it is congruous or
convenient that the blessed man be Gods cooperator in procuring the Salvation
of the elect, in that manner in which it grees unto him, and that to this is
required that our prayers be reueiled unto him especially those which are
represented unto him, for that they especially are founded in his merits as a
mediator conducting to the salvation which is asked. Therefore it is probable
that God gives a revelation to the blessed of the prayers offered to him, or to
God in his name. Thus Scotus. By which it is manifest he only here discusses
the diverse ways by which according to the diversity of opinions in divinity,
the blessed Saints in Heaven understands the prayers of us that live in this
world, houlding for probable that the knowledge which they have of our
supplications unto them is not by any other means but by revelation from God.
And in this sense he speaks when he says probabile est it is probable, and
not because he held the invocation of Saints it in self as a matter only
probable, this being quite contrary to his cited words as being about the
manner of the saints understanding our prayers which necessarily implies that
the prayers them selves directed unto them are lawfully made. And so now it
clearelie appears by all these words and circumstances that these two famous
divine are as rank Romanists as the rest in this particular, in regard they
call not in question the lawfulnes of prayer to Saints in it self but only
the condition or quality of it.

And this I have added of the doctrine of Scotus not as used or abused by my
adversary but only the better to declare the true meaning of the Master of
sentence.

And as for Caietan whom also Sir Humfrey produces to the same purpose, it is
manifest even out of the words cited by him, that he only speaks of some
want of certainty in the miracles which the Church uses as an argument in the
Canonization of saints by reason that although as he confesses expressly, they
be most authentical, yet are they not says he, omnino certa altogether
certain, because the credit thereof depends upon the reports of men. But for
all this neither does he affirm absolutely that miracles are the ground
wherein the Church foundes the Canonization of the saints (as Sir Humfrey
affirms most corruptelie translatinng his words omitting those. Quae maxim
authentica sunt: and for ab Ecclesia suscipiuntur, putting in Inglish whereon
the Church grounteth the Canonization, and detorting them to that sense as the
reader may clearly perceive by conferring the translation with the quotation in
Latin) nor yet does the same Caietan either in this or any other place of his
words deny either the certainty of the doctrine of the invocation it self,
or yet the doctrine of the certainty of the Canonization, but he only, at the
most, says that the Church cannot receive full, but only humane certainty
from such miracles alone as she has by relation of particular men, not
evidently operated in the eyes of the whole Church.

And according to this we may easily answer to the saying of S. Augustine, that
many souls are tormented in hell whose bodies are honored in earth, for this
S. Augustine speaks only of certain suppositious saints whom the common
people honored for true saints, as it is manifest by the example which the same
S. Aug. produces out of Sulpitius who relates how the vulgaritie did long
celebrate one for a martyr who afterward appeared and told them he was
damned. And the like is related of a discovery which S. Martin made of a false
martyr: which particular examples of error in the common people ought not in
common prudence to preiudicate the certainty of the doctrine of honor due
unto such as the whole Church in all succeeding ages has honored for true
saints and blessed friends of God. Neither does S. Augustine in the cited place
speak to any such purpose of calling in question the general doctrine and
practice of the Church in the points of honor or invocation of Saints as may
appear by that in other places of his works he expresselie auerreth the same
as in his first sermon of S. Peter and Paul, and in his 44. ep. where he has
these notable words. In Petro quis honoratur nisi ille qui defunctus est pro
nobis? Who is honored in Peter but he that dyed for us? And in his 84. treatise
upon the gospel of S. John he says. At the table we do not so remember
martirs as we also pray for them, but rather so that they pray for us. And in
his book de cura pro mortuis Cap. 14.
he expresselie speaks of the prayer of Saints for those that are buried
near unto their tumbes. All which sayeings of S. Augustine are plain enuffe,
and yet our noble adversary turns the cat in the pan and persuades his reader
that he flatly denied invocation of saints, but to convince him and his
follows yet more plainly I will conclude this point with the words of the
same S. Augustine in psalm. 99. where speaking of the worship of Angels against
the Gentiles, he says: vtinam and vos colere velletis, facile enim ab ipsis
disceretis no^ illos colere. Would to God you also would wosship them for you
might easily learn of them not to worship them. That is not to adore them as
Gods but as saints. To this I add that Bellarmin professes he could never
find the foresaid words in S. Augustine, neither could I having deligently
searched for them; ever find them. In this same manner Sir Humfrey proceeds in
the matter of Purgatory. For where as S. Augusitn in his 69. chapter of his
Enchir. speaking not of the existe^ce of Purgatory but only of some
particulars which are consequent unto it propounds a question whether the
soul separated from the body be subject to those inordinate affections to
temporal things to which she was subject when she was united to the body,
to which question because Saint Augustine answers doubtfully and with
uncertainty, the kinght handles the matter so nimbly and cunningly that
the reader may easily be persuaded by him that S. Augustine was doubtful of
the existence or being of Purgatory it self and so for the greater
furtherance of this persuation, where S. Augustine speaking only of the
foresaid question says* it is not incredible that some such thing should be
aftfer this life, honest Sir Humfrey to make his market the better foysteth in
the word Purgatory in the beginning of the sentence as if that were it of which
S. Augustine says quaeri potest, it may be questioned, and so deludeth his
reader egregiously with the falsification both of his words and sense.

Some other particulars touching this same metter Sir Humfrey adds partly
impertinent and partilie false. Impertinent, for example, is that passage of
his 248. page. in which he affirms that Bellarmine says it is dpubtfull
whether the punishment of Purgatory be by material fire, or some other
means? For what incertaintie soever there were in the Church about this
point: yet this being I say not touching the pain it self but only the
quality or manner of the pain, it is out of our controversy in this matter,
which is not here of the circumstances of Purgatory, but of the existence or
being of Purgatory it self: the manner, continuation of time, and instruments
by which the souls are punished and the like, being left to Catholic divines
to dispute at there pleasure. And so this allegation of Bellarmin by the knight
against the certainty of the Roman doctrine concerning Purgatory, is as far
out of quare as if he had alleged either our divines or his own to prove
there is neither Hell nor Heaven, because they make disputable questions or
doubts, concerning the pains of the one, and glory of the other.

And yet besides this, it is not true that Bellarmine makes any such doubt of
the materialitie of the fire of Purgatory, but he expressly auerres that the
common sentence of divines is for it. Adding that it is not in deed a matter of
faith, because it is in no place defined by the Church. Yet says he, it is a
most probable opinion (besides other reasons he alleges) in regard of the
consent of the Scolastikes, which cannot be contemned without temeritie. And
now supposing the Cardinal speaks so plainly: Sir Humfrey proceeded not
sincerely in that he insinuates the contrary by a defective citation of his
words.

Secondly he falsely affirms that S. Greg. gave the first Credo to
Purgatory, and that he learned it by revelations, insinuating also that the
Roman Church groundeth the faith of Purgatory upon the spirits and apparitions
of dead men, which is all false and calumnious, for that neither S. Gregory
nor any other Romanists ever founded any doctrine of faith upon such grounds,
but only at the most, use them for confirmation and illustration of those
arguments which are founded in scripture for that purpose as their writings
make manifest.

And that S. Gregory was not the first established, or gave the first Credo
(as the knight speaks) to Purgatory, it is manifestly convinced by the
testimonies of such Fathers as lived long before him, and make express mention
of it. And to omit others yet more ancient, S. Gregory Nyssen in his oration
of the dead, has these plain words* Non poterit a corpore egressus
diuinitatis particeps fieri nisi maculas animo immixtas purgatorius ignis
abstulerit. The departed can not be partaker of the divinity, unless
purgatory fire take away the spots residing in his soul. adding after words:
alijs post hanc vitam purgatorio igne materiae labes abstergentibus. Others
clensing after this life the corruption of the matter with purgatory fire. I
indeed find these words smat different in an other translation, as also the
words of an other pregnant place of the same author to the same purpose in his
precedent page about the midest of the oration: but the sense is the same in
all places and versions,

S. Austin also in the 16. of his 50. homilies says thus. Qui temporalibus
paenis digna gesserunt per ignem quendam purgatorium transibunt, de quo
Apostolus ait* saluus erit sic tamen quasi per ignem. Those who have done
things deserving temporal pains, shall pass by a certain purgatory fire,
of which the Apostle says: he shall be saved, yet so as it were by fire. So
that all this which the kinght vtters of S. Gregory, is frivolous, and untrue,
as these testimonies convince.

Only one place which Sir Humfrey cites out of S. Augustine, carries some
more appearance then the rest. Where in his book de vanitate saeculi the first
chapter he says thus. Know that when the soul is separated from the body,
presently it is either placed in Paradise for it good works, or cast headlong
in to the bottom of hell for it sins. To which I say First, that book
attributed to Saint Austin is not found in the Index of his several works
collected by Possidonius nor cited by Beda in his commentary upon the Apostles
of S. Paul consisting of the sentences of S. Aug. Wherefore it is noted by
Bellar. de scrip. Eccles. not to be his: yet because it is printed among his
works and perhaps composed by some ancient author: I answer Secondly that
suppose it is his work yet S. Augustine speaks only of those that either
dye in mortal sin, or of those that die quite free from sin and all
punishment due unto it, as martyrs do.

Thirdly I answer that S. Augustine speaks there only of those two places
to which all souls are finally destinated, and to one of which generally
speaking, and for the most part, every one presently passes, yet as there
is no rule so general which does not admit exception so does this general
sentence of saint Augustine include those only who dye in either of those
states which he mentions in that place, that is either absolutely in such
good works as presently deserve paradise, or else in such ill works as
presently deserve the pains of hell; and yet it admits an exception in
others who pass out of this world in neither of those two states, but are of
those whom the same S. Augustine in an other place calls nec valde bonos nec
valde malos: or, mediocriter malos and mediocriter bonos. Enchyr. c. 110. and
lib. de cura pro mot. cap. 1.
Neither very good, nor very evil, and of whom he also means when in his
first book of care for the dead he says non dubium est orationem prodesse
defunstis, it is no doubt but prayer is profitable to the dead, which speeches
he would newer have uttered if he had ever denied the faith of Purgatory and
that this is S. Austins true sense, it is plain in regard it was sufficient
for his purpose in that place, whose intent is only in general to persuade to
virtue and good life, that when men come to die they may be found in state
rather to go presently to heaven the^ to hell, to which purpose of his because
it was impertinent to mention Purgatory, therefore he passed it in silence,
where as yet in other places where it comes in his way, he does not omit it.

Lastely I advertise the reader of the small fidelity which Sir Humfrey uses
in the citation of this place of S. Austin traslating those words pro meritis
bonis: for his good merits, his good works, flying from the word merit out of
his Purita^nicall spirit as a bear does from the ring.

From hence Sir Hu^frey passes to prove the uncertainty of Indulge^ces and
honor of images by the testimonies of the Romanists, but the truth is none of
them prove any vncertainlie among the Romanists touching the substantial
points themselves, for all the authors which he cites here for this purpose
do uniformly consent in both those particulars of exhibition of honor to
images, and about the power and lawfullnesse of the use of Indulgences as we
have showed before.

And only there is some vncertainlie in that which is not determined by the
Church, as for example how far Indulgences are extended, and about the
beginning of the practice, what manner of honor is due to images, and the like,
which questions are out of the subject of this section the title of which is,
if Sir Humfrey remembers, of the certainly of the reformers faith, and
vncertainlie of the Romish faith, and not of such disputable questions as the
Romanists in the cited places speak of. Where also it is to be noted by the way
that the kinght ahuseth S. Thomas, first in that he affirms him to teach that
the image of Christ is to be adored with divine honor. For although it is true
that S. Thomas says that seeing that Christ is adored with adoration of
latria, it is consequent that his image is to be adored with adoration of
Latria: nevertheless the same S. Thomas adds afterward, non propter ipsam
imaginem, sed propter rem cuius imago est, meaning that although both Christ and
his image be adored with the same external action of divine honor which he
calls adoration of Latria, yet is not the Latria it self or divine honor in
spirit and truth attributed or exhibited to the picture, but only to Christ
himself by reason of his divinity, which divinity as S. Thomas knew it not
to be truly and reallie in the picture, so knew he also that divine worship
ought not to be given to the same not as much as by accident, but only that
the external adoration, or external action of Latria or the matter of it was
so to be exhibited to the image that the formal part there of, that is the
affection of the mind ought wholelie to be cast upon Christ himself
represented by the same.

Secondly I say that the knight abuses S. Thomas in that he calls him the
founder of image worship, whereas yet he himself had cited the seventh Synod
immediately before which uses the same term of adoration, and that which is
more the foresaid Synod is alleged by Sir Humfrey in another place for the
author of idolatry, which nevertheless was celebrated some hundreths of
years before Saint Thomas of Aquin was borne. And although this doctrine of his
is some what obscure in the terms which he delivers it, and sounds
harshelie in the ears of the common people, yet as it is true in the sense he
speaks it, so may it also be so explicated by pastors, and preachers, that
even children themselves may be capable of it, especially if first they be
told in general that no picture is to be honored by it self, without
relation, or reference to the prototype, or thing it represents, or for
itself; and that whenever they exhibit any act of honor toward an image,
they must withal fix their mind and affection upon that only which it
represents, referring the whole action finally and lastelie not to the
picture, but to the thing pictured: even as they do who bow or make courtisie
to a man whom they salute and honor by touching his garment (as the fashion
in some places) in which action of honor although the exterior sign is directed
as well to the apparel as to the man him self, or rather more immediately to
the apparel then to the person, yet the internal affection of the saluter is
settled upon the person only where finally it stays and remains. An so
it is in the worship of the images of Christ and his Saints, in which there is
no more danger or show of idolatry then there is danger of excess of civil
reverence toward him whose garment is honored in the manner before described.
And according to this if Sir Humfrey and his blind mates had but light of
understanding to conceive it, they should not need to fear any danger of
idolatry in the Romanists, though they were never so ignorant, or simple, but
those might more justly fear spiritual idolatry in themselves who do so
much adore the Idol of their own private spirit that they will not yeald to
the judgment of the most universal Church, and to those who are both far
more in number, and incomparably far more learned and religious then all the
impugners of honor due to the images of Christ and his Saints.

And yet upon supposition of this same false idol of his own conceit that all
kind of reverence done to any kind of image is idolatry, Sir Humfrey does
most shamefullie calumniate Gregorius de Valentia affirming him to maintain
that there is a kind of lawful idolatry. Whereas the foresaid learned divine
only says that a man might not obscurelie gather out of S. Peter's words in
his first epistle chapter 34. verse. 3. that he insinuates that some worship of
images to wit, of sacred images, is lawful, and reight, by reason that saint
Peter speaking against idolatry, he calls it not absolutely worship of
images, but unlawful worship of images, illicitos simulacrorum cultus. Which
discourse of Valentia how well grounded it may seem, I will not dispute. But
this I assure my self that defense of idolatry was so far from the toughts
of that pious man (as plainly appears by the rest of his doctrine even in
the place cited) that if Sir Humfrey either had not been very full of
corrupted meaning, or had not had great want of matter for the finishing of his
false dealing in this section, and for his last plaudite there in, he would
not have had the face to abuse so much the innocence of so sincere a writer.
Especially considering that although Valentia had committed such a gross error
as to defend some kind of Idolatry to be lawful, yet had his error ben
wholelie impertinent to prove the uncertainty of the Romish faith in the
doctrine of honor of images, which is the point here in controversy; of which
Valentia being know not to have ever doubted in any part of his works,
whatsoever orher absurdity he might be supposed to have taught in that matter,
it can not argue any disagreement from the rest of the Romanists in this
particular.

The knight also citeteth Bellarmin and Canus But I have before sufficiently
declared their meaning in an other occasion, and as for Canus, he by laboring
to establish his own singular opinion that matrimony is no Sacrament but
only a civil contract except it be celebrated by a Priest with sacred and
solemn words as he is an Ecclesiastical minister, only alleges the
uncertainty of the doctrine of divines touching the determinate matter, and
form of that Sacrament, and about the manner how it gives grace, or rather
when it gives grace and when it does not, by reason he holds it uncertain
among divines whether it be a sacrament or not, except in those cases in which
it is celebrated by the Priest, and by consequence he holds it uncertain
among divines whether in those occasions it conferres grace to the receivers,
which he will not have for a matter of faith, nor yet more then the more common
opinion, Si hoc, (matrimoniu^) inqua^, argume^te^tur Sacramentu^ Ecclesia non
esse, tu^c Catholicus respo^deat fidenter, animose defendat, secure contra
pugnet. Canus l. 8. c. 5.
and therefore he says. Nego scholae certo constantique decreto definitum
matrimonium sine Ecclesiae ministro contractum, esse vere and proprie
Sacrnmeneum, nego eam rem ad fidem and religionem pertinere. Yet
notwithstanding all divines agree and Canus with them, that matrimony is
truly one of the seven Sacraments: and consequently that which Canus says
in the place cited is not for the knights purpose. And so now I will end this
section in which our adversary in steed of proving the infallible certainetie
of the reformed faith as he promised in the beginning, by reason of his
unfaithful proceeding he has lost all certainty of his own humane faith for
which he deserves a most rigorous censure.

The X. PERIOD.
THIS Period shall contain the eleventh section of the knights book, in
which. He indeuoreth to prove by the testimonies of his adversaries that there
is greater benefit, confort and saftie of the soul in his faith, then in the
Romish. And this his task he begins with great gravity saying that he
proceeds from the certain way to the safe way. Against which position
nevertheless if one were disposed to proceed according to rigor of
Philosophy, he might easily demonstrate a plain impossibility in it by an
argument ad hominem. For if as Sir Humfrey houldes there is no certainty in
the Romish faith and way, and that all the certainty is in his own as he
hitherto has labored to show, then can he not truly say that his way is the
safer way, for that the word safer inuolueth a comparison between two which
are both safe, because a comparison as Philosophy teaches, cannot be but
betwixt things of the same common nature, comparatio non est nisi inter
resciusdem generis. Wherefore since that according to the tenet of Sir Humfrey
there is neither certainty nor safety in the Romish faith, and yet that, as
he supposes, they are both in his own, it is consequent that although it were a
safe way, yet upon his supposition it cannot possible be truly called either
a safer way, or of more confort and benefit then the Romish way. To say nothing
of our knights presumption and folly in offering to call that a more safe, more
confortable, and more profitable way to the soul, which as yet he has not
showed with any probability either before or now in this section, to have
any one of those attributes in it, but has been rather by me already
convinced to be void of them all. Ad although this general ansere might serve
for all Sir Humfrey brings in this place, as being in substance but a new
repetition of the same points of doctrine of which he treated in several
places before: yet to give him fuller satisfaction, and because though the
doctrine be the same, yet the application is different: I will descend to
particular examen of it.

He begins with Bellarmin whom he cites as a confesser of the all sufficientie
of scripture as he terms it, but it is as clear as day that Bellarmin made
not any such confession there being not any such word or sense to be found
in his works, but rather the quite contrary is found even in the same book
which Sir Humfrey here cites, in which he expresselie confesses and
professes traditions to be necessary besides the scriptures, yea and in the
very-next words to those which the knight cites he adds that all other
things (meanig besides those which the Apostles publikelie and commonly
preached to all men) are not written. His words are these in Latin. Dico illa
omnia scripta esse ab Apostolis quae sunt omnibus necessaria, and quae ipsi
palam omnibus vulgo praedicauurunt, alia autem non omnia scripta esse. I say
that all those things are written by the Apostles which are necessary to all
men, and which they openly preached to all vulgarly or commonly, but all
other things are not written. Which last words not with standing they are a
part of the same positio^ or sentence, and contain the very point of
difficulty in this controversy: yet by a notorious imposture Sir Humfrey left
them out, and so at one stroke quite corrupts both Bellarmins sense and
sentence. Wherefore, qui legit intelligat, he that shall read Bellarmine in the
place cited by the knight, that is de verbo Dei non scripto lib. 4. cap. 11.
Will easily preceiue him to be so far from the confessing all sufficiency
of scripture in that sense in which the reformers take it, that the very title
of his book, which is of the unwritten word, does manifestly convince the
contrary. And as for the words which Sir Humfrey cited although we take them in
that mangled manner in which he has rehearsed them yet if they had been reight
understood by him, I am persuaded he could have found no just coulor to
produce them in favor of himself. For that it is manifest by those two
limitations, necessary for all men, and preached generally to all men, that
the Cardinals meaning could not be that absolutely all things which are
necessary for every person or state of persons in particular, or as the
logitians speak, necessary either pro singulis generum or pro generibus
singulorum, are written in the scriptures: but only Bellarmin meant that
although all those things are written which all men both in general and in
particular must necessarily know, and have for the obteining of salvation,
yet that there are some other things necessary to some particular persons or
to some particular states of persons included in that general number of all
men, which are not written, as namely about the Government of the Church and
administration of the Sacraments, and in particular the Baptizme of children,
and the rites of the same, and that the beptizme of Heretics is valid. All
which Bellarmin does so plainly specify that it is imposible for him that
reads and understands him, to doubt of this his meaning.

And yet not unlike to this does Sir Humfrey proceed with the same Bellarmin
whom he cites to the same purpose in his first book of the word of God:
where out of these his words, the scripture is a most certain, and most safe
rule of believing, the kinght concludes that it is a safer way to rely wholely
upon the word of God which can not err, then upon the Pope or Church which is
the authority of man, says he, and may err. Which conclusion nevertheless
is most false, and captious, as well in regard that according to Sir Humfreys
own confession Bellarmin houldeth the scripture to be but a partial rule of
faith; ^age 258.
as also and cheeflie because when Bellarmin calls the scripture a most
certain, and most safe rule, he does not exclude the authority of the Church
or divine tradition, but expresselie includes them both as the other part of
the total rule of faith, which scripture also, so only, and not otherwise,
he calls with great reason regula credendi certissima and tutissima, knowing
nevertheless on the contrary and supposing for certain that with out the
authority of the Church and traditions the scripture can neither be known to
be true Scripture, not in what sense it is to be understood, and consequently
as Sir Humfrey takes it, it is not either an all sufficient, certain, or safe
rule, and by and an other consequence, it can much less be imagined to be a
safer way to rely wholelie upon the written word as the reformers do then to
rely upon both the scriptures, and the authority of the Church and divine
traditions, as do the Romanists, taking God for their Father in the written
word, and the visible Church for their mother in the knowledge,
interpretation, and sense of the same.

And thus we see by this discourse, that Sir Humfrey proves nothing but his
own dishonest dealing with Bellar. whom besides that which I have already
showed, he does more then impudenlie belie in that he affirms him to allow
the word of God to be but a pertiall rule of faith, which Bellarmin does not
say, but only that the scripture is a partial rule, Page 258.
not denying but the word of God in all it latitude js a total rule of all
the Christian and Catholic faith, but yet supposing for certain that the
scriptures are not totallie conuertible with the word of God, but that they
are distinct things the one from the other, as ta part is from the whole which
any man of common judgment may easily perceive. And if these be the tricks
and shifts by which Sir Humfrey means to make Bellarmin a confesser of his
reformed religion, in steed of gaining him, he will loose his own faith and
credit.

The knight still passes on his way, and tells his reader it is a safer way to
adore Christ Jesus sitting on the reight hand of God the Father then to adore
the Sactamentall bread which depends upon the intention of the Priest. But I
tell him again that the safest way of all is to adore Christ both in Heaven,
and whersoeuer else he is. And he himself has told us his body and blood are
in the Sacrament, when if we will not be accounted infidels we most
constantly believe he is. And so we say with that most ancient and vanerable
Father Saint Cyrill of Jerusalem, Hoc est corpus meum: hic est sanguis meus.
Math. 26. Mark. and Luc. 22.
since that Christ himself affirms so, and says of the bread: this is my
body, who dares here after to doubt of it? and he also confirming, and
saying: this is my blood, who can doubt, and say it is not his blood?

And supposing this his real presence which we Romanists truly believe with
ancient S. Cyrill and the rest of the Feathers, the safest way is to adore him
in the Sacrament and not as sitting at the reight hand of his Father only.
But as for you reformers as it can not be safe for you to deny Christ's real
presence in the Eucharist, so neither is it safe for you to refuse to adore him
there where in the true Sacrament he is truly present. I know Sir kinght you
make your comparison between the adoration of Christ in Heaven and the
adoration of the Sacramental bread, but it proceds upon a false supposition,
for the Romanists adore not the bread, but Christ under the form of bread,
whose existence there, does not so much depend upon the intention of the
Priest, but that sufficient certainty may be had of the same and at the least
much more then you can have that you receive a true Sacrament when you take the
bread at the ministers hand, who if he has no intention to do it as Christ
did when he gave it to his disciples, then may you receive as much at your own
table as at the communion table. But the truth is that all this is nothing but
captious cogging in Sir Humfrey; for proof of which he most impertinentlie
produces S. Aug. de bono pers. lib. 13. cap. 6. Where he has not a word to
this purpose but only treats there of the supernatural actions of man,
saying that to the end our confession may be humble and lowly, it is a safer
way to attribute them wholelie to God, because although we will, yet it is God
that works in us to work. All which is quite out of this matter, and serves
for nothing but to stop holes with a vaneflorish graunded only upon the
words safe way which the knight found in S. Augustine to sound to his own
tune and there upon founded a verbal argument. And the like dictionariall manner
of proof does he use whereby to show his safer way in the points of private
Mass and communion in both kinds but most rediculously.

For whereas he finds in some of the Romanists that the Mass as being not
only a sacrifice but also a Sacrament is both more commendablie administered
and more frutfullie received when both Priest and people together are partakers
of it, Sir Humfrey applies this to the Raphsodie of the reformed Churches:
which nevertheless has not a scrap in it either of true sacrifice or
Sacrament, but is only a pore hungerie scamling of bread and wine not
conformable either to the form of the ancient Lythurgies of S. Chrysostom or
S. Basil, nor ever heard on in the Christian world before the days of Luther,
and of so small estimation even among themselves that if it chance to fall,
they will scarce take pains to take it from the ground, as may appear by a
prittie passage of that nature which not many years past I received from the
mouth of one who was then of the ministry, what he is now I know not, who
told me that coming in to a certain Church, the minister as he delivered the
communion to his parishoners did let a peace fall from him, but there was not
one in the whole congregation excepting a dog that showed so much devotion
toward their vnuenerable Sacrament as once to offer to take it from the
ground. It is true he told me with all that the honest minister by tasting a
little to often of the cup was some what distempered in his head, but that me
thought was but a pore excuse for a man of his coat, and a teacher of reformed
doctrine, especially at such a time and in such an occasion. Which want of
respect in the reformed brothers toward their communion, does yet further
appear if we compare it with the extraordinary great diligence and care which
the Priests and people use in the Roman Church for the avoiding of all Kind of
irreuerence toward the holy Eucharist as both the rubrickes of the Missal,
the ancient Canons, and daily practice testify, in so much that one, and
perhaps the cheifest reason of the restrainte of the Sacramental Cup to the
laytie was for the avoiding of such irreuerences as might easily have happened
among such multitudes of people as use to Communicate at one time in the Roman
Church. So that now we see it was great absurdity in Sir Humfrey to argue the
greater saftie of the doctrine of his Church out of that which the Romanists
speak only of their own, especially considering there is not one word of
safety to be found in any of the places cited by him, the authors of them
not intending to show any less safety to be found either in the doctrine or
practice of the Roman Church concerning private Mass and single communion, but
only at the most, that some more spiritual profit would redounde to the
people then now does, if either their devotion were so far extended as that
in every Mass some would communicate, or that the Church, in other respects
had greater reason to permit the use of the Chalis to the laity then not to
permit it, always supposing as a certain truth that not withstanding in some
respects the contrary to that which is now practiced might be more profitable
yet, that all circumstances considered that is the safest for men's consciences
which is done according to the present custom of that Church which is known
even by our adversaries to have visibly succeeded from the Apostles, at the
least personally, and is also known even by Jews and gentiles to be the most
universal Church in the Christian world. And let this be sufficient to
redargue the proceedings of the knight in this matter, yet not omitting that
two of the authors he cites for Romanists to wit the Apostata Deane and
Cassander, are not such, and that in the citation of Bellarmin he uses one of
his accustomed tricks, and whose words although he rehearses them truly in
the margen, yet he translateth them corruptedlie. For whereas Bellarmin says
that the Mass in which communicants are present, is more perfect and
legitimate, ex hac part, that is in as much as it is ordained to the
spiritual refectio^ of the people, the knight omitteth in his translation the
words ex hac part, and by that trick does notably pervert Bellarmin's
meaning, making the reader believe he affirmed that absolutely, which
nevertheless he did expresselie and purposelie utter with limitation, with an
intention to show that although in one respect private mass is less perfect,
and less conformable to the ancient custom of the Church in regard of the
profit of the people, yet that absolutely in it self it is as perfect and
lawful as that in which communicants are present.

Furthermore touching the marriage of ministers, Sir Humfrey says it will
appear by the confessions of the Romanists that it is the safer way to live
chastely in matrimony the^ by a single life to hazard their souls by
incontine^cie, thus the knight which if he means of the ministers of his own
misreformed Church only, I will easily grant that supposing their slipperie
inclination to lechery, and the small means they use for mortification of the
flesh and conservation of chastity, it is a safer way in my opinion for them
to marry then to live a single life, especillie considering they are no true
Priests but only equivocal Clergy men both in Order and function, and that
if they had not wives it is to be doubted the maids of their parishes would
scarcely live with out danger among them. But if Sir Humfrey speaks of Roman
Priests which have true vocation, true ordination and sacred function, then I
will say with diverse grave authors that if the Priests of the old testament
observed those days continency in which they sacrificed by their turns, then
ought the Priests of the new testament to observe chastity every day,
because, they every day offer sacrifice. Hier. ^. tit. ^os. l. ^fi c. ^ ve^.
^. ^ ca. ^c.


And therefore the Roman Church has most religiously ordained the law of
perpetual chastity of Priests, for that although perhaps it may seem more safe
for some particular persons to marry supposing their negligence and frayltie
in that nature: and abstracting from a vow already made, and the law of the
Church in that particular, yet althings considered, and for as much as even the
most inclined to vice may live chaste with Gods grace if they will make use of
his gifts, and of such means as the Church has ordained for that end and
purpose; it is to be judged better, safer, and greater honor to God, that the
whole state of Preisthood or Sacerdoce should be tied with the sacred band of
perpetual chastity. ^e non ^ius ^otes (...) plu^ ^orati ^am (...) sal^tur
^cerdo^ ^uga^ ^i in (...) pre^atu ^a^tur. ^as (...). l. 2 de (...) con. (...).
under.
Neither does all nor any of the authors which the knight cites absolutely
confess the contrary to be safer then this, but only (they being but three
in number) one of them with a perhaps it were not worse, an other with an it
were good, and wholesome, and the third (who yet is no Romanist) with a may be
thought necessary, but show their particular dictamens, and being so few as
they be, thou' they were the greatest Oracles in the world, they could not
possible cause any safety in the consciences of those who shall follow them
against the stream of all other divines, nor can they in any true sense be
said to be the confession of the Romanists as the knight does affirm, since
that two or three cannot in any case carry the name of the whole nor iustelie
preiudicate the weight of their authority in case they did agree with the
misreformed doctrine in this particular as yet they do not.

And touching Panormitan whom Sir Humfrey calls a great Canonist I will not
examen how great he was in that science: yet I do not see why his authority
should be accounted great in the Roman Church, supposing he was only a
Scismaticall Cardinal of the scismaticall Pope Felix. Secondly suppose he
were as great a Canonist as the author of the Canons himself, yet does his
great authority fauore Sir Humfreyes cause never a jot in regard he does not
affirm, as the latter part of the 32. article of the English Creed does, that
it is lawful also for Bishops, Priests and Deacons, as for all other Christian
men to marrye at their own discretion: But Panormitan only said (to use his
own words) I believed it were a wholesome statute for the good and health of
souls) that these who will contain, and merit more maybe left to their own
wills: but those that are not able to contain, may marry. Because experience
tsacheth that the quite contrary effect follows of that law of continency.
In which saying although I must needs confess, he erred in presuming to
prescribe a new rule to the Church, yet is it plain he differs from the faith
of Sir Humfrey in this point in diverse respects. First in that he uttered not
this as a matter either of faith, or yet of moral certainty, but only
delivered it as his own private opinion. How be it Sir Humfrey hearing the
sound of the word Credo (as it seems) he presently conceived it to be as
certain as the Apostles Creed it self or at the least desired his reader
might so apprehend it. Secondly Panormitan does not affirm absolutely that
it is either wholesome or yet as much as lawful for Priests to marry
notobstanding the precept of the Roman Church to the contrary (as our
nouelists do who also condemn that law of single life for unjust, ^rte quod
^erdoti^ inter^tum fuit ^iugium, ^factum ^impia ^annide, (...). ^l. Inst. l. ^.
cap. 12. ^ 23.
and tirannicall) But he was only of opinion that it were good for the health
of the souls of some particular persons, that the same Church should alter her
course, and make such a statute for the time to come. Thirdly Panormitan if his
words be duly ponderd, does not affirm that the Church might do well to
constitute that Priests with the restriction of Sacerdoce or Preisthood, I
mean after they have received orders, may marry, but he means only that
Priests with ampliation, that is such persons as intend to be Priests may
marrye if they find themselves not able to live chaste: where as the pretented
reformers hold it lawful not only for Priests but also even for such
religious persons as have made a special vow of perpetual chastity, to
marry at their pleasure, as the very author and Antesignane of their sect did
both in words and example teach them. By all which particulars it is manifest
that Panormitans case is far different from the doctrine and practice of the
modern sectaries especially of the Church of England; and consequently his
testimony can not possible prove any safety for Sir Humfrey in this part of
his way, as being quite an other extrauagant way which neither meets with his
nor ours. More over for conclusion I wish the reader to take notice that I
neither find in Panormitan those formal words which Sir Humfrey cites, nor
any others intyrelie equivalent unto them, nor yet are they intyrelie and
continuatlie rehearsed by the knight but with interruption, as the authors own
words which here I truly quote in the margen will declare. Credo pro bono
and salute animaru^ quod esset salubre statutu^ vt volentes continere, and
magis mereri relinquere voluntati eorum: non vale^tes autem continere, possint
contrahere quia expe, rientia docente contrarius prorsus effectus sequitur ex
illa lege co^tine^tiae. etc. Panor. 3. p. c. cu^ olim de Cler. coniug.
And besides this the faithless knight in steed of the words non valentes
puts non volentes, and for the word Credo (which denotates the weakness of
the authors dictamen, signifying thereby that it was only a particular
credulity of his own) he translates, it were good, and behouefull, and
attrihutes the surmised Licentiousness of the Catholic clergy to the law of
celibate it self, whereas the author only says. sequitur ex lege, the
contrary effect follows of the law.

And by occasion of this passage, the reader may reflect what a pore shifte Sir
Humfrey was forced to use for excuse of the falacitie of his misreformed
ministry when he catched at the authority of this one Apochryphal Cardinal,
who nevertheless upon due examen appears to have so much frustate his
sinister expectation.

Now for Aeneas Syluius, the does less fauore Sir Humfreys tenet, nay not at
all, as his own words above quoted in the margen do manifest to the reader.
He only speaks by a perhaps it were not worse that very many Priests had
wives: and yet this he recalled of his own accord after his assuption to the
chief Pontifical seat or Popedom, by a special Bull of retractation of that
and some other immature positions uttered in his youth. So that the kinght was
far out of his way, when for the safetye of this part of his new divised
way, he produced these authors, and if he have no better guard and defense for
it the^ the testimony of the^ (as in truth he has not) then ought every one
to take heed of it, and avoid it as a most vnquoth, and perilous path.

And so to conclude this I may not unfitly say with Erasmus: quae malum est
ista tanta salacitas in nostris uouis Euangelistis vt sine vxoribus esse non
possint? what in the mischief, says Erasmus, a great inclination to lechery
is this in our new Evangelists that they can not be with out wives? An I say
further that if they persuade themselves they can not possible contain, and
therefore must needs be married; at the least why do they reprehend Roman
Priests who have the contrary persuasion, for obledging themselves to a single
life? If they upon supposition of such carnal conceits hold they can not go
safe to Heaven without wives at their heels, why should those be condemned who
hold it safer to go without them? An oculus tuus nequam est quia ego bonus
sum? wherefore do the ministers censure the Roman Priests so seuerlie for that
which is a virtue in them? But in deed it is to be feared that those who can
not possible live chastelie without a woman, will hardly content themselves
with one in all cases, but rather some times make bold with their neighbors, or
at the least fall to that large axiom of lecherous Luther, si non velit vxor,
veniat ancilla, in which I know not what safety can be found for the soul,
except Sir Humfrey houldeth that for the safest which is most agreeable to the
delights of the body.

Wherefore if we will discourse rather like men then blatter like beasts, the
only safety that can be had in this matter, especially for Priests, is to
follow that melius facit of S. Paul 1. Chorinth. 7. I mean that statute of a
chaste heart which there he mentions, and this statute being once well and
firmly made, the melius est nubere has no place, but then the spiritual
marriage of the soul with Christ her sponse is made, and then it is to late to
use that violent medicine; an other antidote must be used for the cure of that
surfeiting Vri, to wit mortification of the body, which medicine the same
Apostle prescribes in an other place saying, castigo corpus meum. And if the
reformed ministers would make use of this, then perhaps they would change their
opinion and account the way of single life safer then the way of marriage, and
that way which as S. Hierome says fills Paradise, Contra Iouin.
not that which fills the world, and finally that which S. Paul counsels
absolutely, not that which he only permits as a remedy for a supposed
imperfection, which permission though it be the easier way, and therefore perhaps
is more willingly imbrased by Sir Humfrey in favor of his deformed Clergy, as
a man not ignorant of their imperfections in that nature, yet was the other
ever commended as the safer way both by God and his Saints, and generally
embraced by the Church an clergy before the days of Luther.

About prayer in an unknown language none of the authors the knight cites,
affirm that it is the safer way to pray in a vulgar tongue, or yet, that it is
absolutely better, but only secundum quid, that is for the edification of
the Church as Caietan speaks, yet not meaning but that is the best and safest
all things considered which the Church does practice: which practice as the
same Caietan well kewe (as being a Cardinal of the Roman Church) is to have
the public service in Latin rather then in the mother tongue for such reasons
as I have delivered in an other place. And touching the testimony of S. Thomas
whom here the knight produces in his commentary upon the 14. chapter of the
first Epistle to the Corinthians (as I suppose, for he quotes not the place) as
affirming it is manifest that he receives more benefit who prays and
understands what he says, because the mind of him who prays and
understands not, is without fruit and refection. To this I anser, that S.
Thomas does not mean by this that it is better that the public service of the
Church be in a vulgar language which is that we here have in question, and not
the private prayers of every particular person, of which S. Thomas only
speaks, as his own words do testify in that place which I have exactelie
read and duly pondered. Ever supposing that many things may be profitable
for single persons which yet in common are esteemed much worse yea and in some
circumstances absolutely ill, as by examples which pass in the laws of
temporal Republikes may plainly appear. That which S. Thomas did
doubtlesselie persuade him self to be true whom the world knows to have
daily celebrated Mass in Latin not in any vulgar language. To omit that even
those simple people who pray in the Latin tongue although they want that
particular instruction of the understanding which the learned receive in
prayer, yet sans doubt they often times perform that action with greater
devotion and feruor in their wills and affections then the greatest scholars
in the world: God almighty by reason of their pious and humble desires
supplying as it were in one power that which wantes in an other.

And the same I say to the words of Lyra and Caietan who speeches to the same
purpose which S. Thomas does and upon the same place of the Apostle 1. Cor. 14.
where although Caietan extendes his speeh even to public prayer of the Church:
yet is it manifest that the same Caietan does neither condemn the contrary
practice of the Roman Church, nor yet houldes it absolutely better or safer
that public prayers were (especially in these our times) not in Latin but in
the vulgar language. But he only means that it were better in that one
respect of edifying the Church if other circumstances did also in like paritie
concur, or if there were not more prepondering reasons for the present
practice of the Church. And therefore Caietan presently after the words cited
by Sir Humfrey adds others which if they had not ben omitted by him, they had
quite cleared this difficulty, for so he proceeds saying. Et ne intelligeres
reprehendi a Paulo eiusmodi diuinas lauds (to wit such prayers as are made in
an unknown tongue) subiungit: nam tu quidem been gratias agis: by which words
it is plain that Caietan was not of knight Humfrey opinion in this particular.

Lastelie the Rhemes Testament cited by Sir Hu^frey upon the same passage of S.
Paul confesses the same that S. Thomas says of a particular man's private
devotion, that in deed it is not so fruetfull for instruction to him when he
prays in a stange longuage, as when he understands his prayers, yet the
authors of the note add an other clause which if the kinght had proceeded like
a friend, he ought not to have omitted, to wit that the Apostle forbides not
such praying neither: confessing that such a man's spirit, heart, and affection
prays well toward God though his mind and understanding be not profited to
instruction, as otherwise it might be if he understood the words: neither does
he appointe him to translate his prayer into his vulgar tongue etc. Thus the
Rhemists, Which as the reader may easily perceive does quite contradicte Sir
Humfreys purpose, and the doctrine and practice of his Church.

Sir Humfrey also falsifyes Gabriel lect. 12. in Can. or at the he least he
falsely and ignorantly vndersta^ds him, when in his own 265. page he cytes
him, affirming that he diliuereth there seven reasons why vocal prayer should
be understood by the people, For Biel teaches not there in what lenguage
vocal pryer ought to be, but only proves that it must not be meerelie
mental but so uttered and pronounced as it may be known for such by the
people, vt innotescat populo, which words do not signify (as the kinght
falselie English them) may be understood, but may come to the notice or hearing
of the people in regard it is vocal prayer in what language soever it be,
Hebrewe, Greek, or Latin. Circa primum an oration debeat vocaliter perfici? --
Tu^c dicitur ad dubium quod oration publica necessario est vocalis. Oportet enim
quod talis oration innotescat populo pro quo offertur. Biel. in Can. lect. 62.
f. 124.
So that the reader may perceive that this author is neither pertinently nor
sincerely produced by our adversary.

For the greater safatie of his rejecting the wiship of images he produces
expresselie three only authors, two of which nevertheless are no Romanists,
one of them being the dimi-Romanist Erasmus, the other Cassander neither of
whose authorities we admit for current. It is true the same Cassa^der brings
out of Biel something to the same purpose, who supposing he be truly
alleged, yet it must always be true that one suallowe makes not summer, and
so what soever he says his authority alone can not engender safety. And
since I writ this by taking a view of the authors themselves, I find that Sir
Humfrey has thryse corrupted Cassander by omission of some of his words which
he rehearses out of the 979. page of his consultation of images: for all that
clause of Cassander: imaginum moderato vsu pacis and tranquilitatis causa:
conseruato: Sir Humfrey lets quyte drop out of his pen, which words not
withstanding are of so much importance to have been truly related that together
with some others in the same page (which he also pretermits) they be the only
words which most declare the authors meaning touching the honor due to images.
The words are these. Non tamen haec quae diximus eo pertinent vt imagines
sanctorum si in ijs modo decorum seruetur non aliquo honor illis conuenienti,
and debito affici possint, videlicet si vt signa and monumenta sanctorum
honorifice habeantur and in gratiam illorum quos significant and referunt,
reuerenter conspiciantur and tractentur, modo ab eximo cultu temperetur, and
nihil diuinitatis and virtutis illis tribuatur, sed eo tantum loco habeantur
quo litterae and voces quae rerum absentium quas diligimus and veneramur gratam
memoriam suggerant. All which long sentence as being much disagreeable to Sir
Humfreys Precisian spirit he made shifte to pass over in lurchers silence. And
in deed in my judgment the foresaid words taken as they stand in the text,
are so plain for the worship of images in that sense in which the Roman Church
houldes it lawful to honor them, that I can not easily preceiue in what they
differ from the tenor of the decree of the Tridentine Council in that point.

In the other place Sir Humfrey likewise omits the latter part of Biels
sentence as it is cyted by Cassander, and as the words are found in Biel
himself, the words which Sir Humfrey scips are these, quia qualitercumque
consideretur imago est res quaedam insensibilis and creatura cui adoratio
latrie minime exhibenda. Which words in deed are those by which both Biel and
Cassander chiefly declare what they deny to be lawful in the due worship of
images that is adoration of Latria or divine honor: And yet both of them
grant an other inferior worship or honor due to them, so that the industrious
knight to save labor falsified these two authors both at once. And although Biel
does reprehend and that most iustelie, the blockish error of some ignorant
people (of which perhaps some there may be some times in the universal Church)
that believe some divine virtue or sanctity to reside in images, yea and in
one more then an other, and the like sotish conceits, yet does it not follow
out of this reprehension of Biel that he denied it absolutely to be lawful to
worship images in due manner, as our captious knight would have it: Nay Biel is
so far from this that in the very same place quoted by Sir Humfrey he
expresselie defe^des adoration of the images of Christ even with Latria
improperlie or per accidens, which is as much as any Roman divine grauntes to
any image what soever. To which we may add that the same Biel does in
express terms put for conclusion of his 59. lection these words. Haec de
imaginum adoratione ratione representationis. This of the adoration of images
in respect of their representation. By which words it is clear that is author
this grossly abused in that he is cited by our adversary against honor of
images, he being so plain a defendant of the same that he doubts not to use
the words Latria and adoratio.

Erasmus and Cassander are also here produced by our adversary against the use
of images practiced in the Roman Church. But these two although I doubt not but
both of them in their writings incline much more to Catholic Religion then
they do to Protestancie: yet absolutely they are but neutrals who followed
more their own wandering wits then any other certain rule of faith. And so
their testimonies are not admitted by us for Orthodox and authentical. And
therefore Sir Humfrey committes an error as often as he uses them for
Romanists.

Against the safety of invocation of Saints he produces S. Augustine saying.
Tutius and iucundius loquor ad meum Iesum. But this sentence he cites he knows
not where, and it proves he knows not what, nor I neither. S. Augustine truly
affirms that he speaks more safely and delighfully to Jesus the^ any
other, and so do I, but as he does not say that he speaks not to his Saints
also, no more do I. Tract. 84. in Joan.
And as Saint Aug. tract. 84. in Io. says that we make commemoration of the
Saints at the table that is at the altar, to the end they may pray for us, so
do I. the knight cites also for his purpose Chemnisius and Cassander, but I
care not for them, their testimony is neither safe nor sound.

Against the saftie of the doctrine of merits he cites also S. Bernard saying
that, dangerous is the habitatio^ of those that trust in their own merits. But
here the knight rides beside the saddle, for S. Bernard speaks not directly
of merits but of confidence in merits, which we Romanists grant to be unsafe
by reason of the uncertainty of them in this or that particular man. In an
other place the same S. Ber. says he duelleth in the wounds of our Savior
with more saftie: which saying we grant also to be true in the highest
degree, but what is this to the denial of true merits grounded in the mercy
and grace of God? of which the same S. Bernard says in an other place,
indeuore, or procure to have merits, but when thou' have them acknowledge that
thou have them given thee. merita habere cura, habitadata noueris. And the
truth is that by rejecting the counsel of holy S. Bernard in this
particular, the reformers commit a most pernicious error in regard that by
houlding all merit of man with God impossible, they come to neglect the
exercise of virtue and those good works in which both merit does consiste, and
without which the Kingdom of Heaven is not obtained, which doctrine how
domageable it is to the Salvation of souls let the indifferent reader consider.

Sir Hu^frey cytes also frayer walden whom he most falselie affirms to agree
with the Protestants in the doctrine of merits. For as appears by those same
words which he cites here, he does not deny all merit, as they do, but at
the most such a kind of merit in particularie: that is, that no man
simpliciter, simply meriteth the Kingdom of Heaven, which merit yet he does
not absolutely deny, but only says that no man can merit it but by the
grace of God or will of the giver, which are his own express words as they
are rehearse by our adversary, and in a sound sense do not differ a jot from
the doctrine of other divines. In fine he does with the rest of the Catholic
divines expresselie teach that the good works of the just performed by the
grace of God are absolutely meritorious of the Kingdom of Heaven, yet he is
opinion that the words ex condigno and congruo, are not to be used; in which he
differs in deed from the opinion of most divines, but not from the Roman
faith which stands not upon those terms, but only upon true merit, as may
be seen in the Council of Trent. ses. 6. Can. penult. p. 48. Which Council
uses not those terms, but only the words vere mereri, that is to merit
truly. And consequently friar walden agrees with the Council of Trent but
not with Sir Humfrey and his precise brothers who fly the very name of merit,
as devils fly the Cross. And to descend, to a more particular discussion of
friar waldos meaning touching the doctrine of merits of which the knight
subtillie contendes to make him a flat denyer.

I say in primis, waldo in the place cyted by Sir Humfrey disputes against
Wiclef, who thought such confidence in proper merits that he seemed to exclude
the merits of Christ, and his saints. And therefore speaking of his perverse
tenet he says thus. Maledicta ergo doctrina Wiclef quae potius confidere iubet
in merito, and hoc proprio, vt Christi, and Sanctorum videatur excludere, quam
in oratione humili pro Christi gratia. That is: Maledicted or cursed be the
doctrine of Wiclef which rather commaundes to confide in merit, and that
proper, so that it may seem to exclude the merits of Christ, and his Saints:
then in humble prayer for the grace of Christ: Now this Kind of confidence in
merits, as our adversaries themselves can witness if they please, is not any
part of the Roman doctrine, but rather we Romanists concur with friar waldo
in his approved curse. Yea and we are so remote and auerted from the doctrine
of Wiclef in this point, and from teaching such confidence even in true and
approved merits, that we cantelously advise the members of our Church as the
safer way not to rely upon them but upon the mercy of God as in an other
place I have more largely declared.

More having most atte^tiuelie read his several treatises upon that subject, I
plainly perceive that religious, and zealous defender of the Roman doctrine
against Wiclef, did only reject such merits as either excludes, or at a the
least preferres not the grace of God before them, or admits not grace as the
foundation of merits. For touching merits founded, and performed by the
concourse of Gods grace, friar waldo absolutely grauntes both in this same
chapter cited by our adversary, where he mentiones both the merits of Chtist
and his saints and particularly of Saint Paul in these words. Whence it is
that neither the Apostle did apply any thing to his own merits but by
premitting or preferring the benefits of God, according to the psalmist saying.
Because he would so have me. As also more clearelie in his tenth Title and 98.
chapter where he most professedlie defendes against Wiclef, the very
participation of merits especially among religious persons. Which doctrine of
participation of merits necessarily supposes a grant of merits themselves, as
common sense does easily apprehend. Not to let pass, that some of the
authors own words in that same place, evidently convince the same to be
true: For that thus he questiones his adversary. cur merita non ijs partimur
quos reddimus been meritos nostris meritis? Why do not we part merits with
them whom we make well merited by our merits? By which words waldensis
appears to be so clear from denial of merits maintained by the Roman Church,
that he rather heapeth merits upon merits in defense of the same. And in the 8.
chapter of his first Title he speaks most expresselie even of merit of
eternal life saying. Sed noueriut vitam aeternam dari nobis pro meritis si cum
meritis ipsis numeremus and gratiam sine qua nec ipsa sunt merita, quia nec Dei
dona. But let them know (says walden) that eternal life is given us for
merits, if with merits we number grace, without which neither are they merits,
because they are not the gifts of God.

And by this it further appears most manifestly that those words of waldensis
alleged by Sir Humfrey and with which he makes his flourish, to wit. I repute
him the sounder divine, and more consonant to sacred scriptures who simply
denies such merit: in reallitie are not for his purpose, in regard that there is
not in them any denial of that merit which the Roman Church defines and
appooues: no not the merit of eternal life: but the author of them, only
reiects from the desert of eternal life tale meritum, that is merit as it is
signified by those terms de condigno, And, de congruo, used among divines
both in his time, and at this present: from the use of which according to his
private dictamen, it were more conformable both to divinity, and the scripture
to refrain, to the end (as he after adds) they might by the avoiding of those
terms, be found both to accord better with the former saints (he means the
ancient Fathers of the Church) and with the phrase of the Apostle saying: 1
Cor. 3.5.
sufficientia nostra ex Deo est: our sufficiency is of God. As also for that
in respect of the grace of God, they might be found more disagreable (as in
their doctrine so in their manner of speech) from the Pelagians, and wiclesists
who (as the same walden says) either conceile or deny the grace of God, and
wholely confide in the merits of men: Qui gratia^ Dei, vel tacent vel abnega^t,
and in meritis hominum omnino co^fidunt. Ibid.
so you see that all the controversy which friar walden has with our Roman
deuines is only a boute the use of those two phrases: meritum de condigno,
and, meritum de congruo: as persuading the foresaid divines that when they
dispute of merits, they never silence the grace of God, but either express
grace and not merits: or else prefer grace before meritis: and as he says in
Latin. exprimentes gratiam, silentes de meritis, aut gratiam meritis
praeferentes. All which is but question de nomine: a nominal or verbal
disputation, or about what manner of speech may seem most fit to be practiced
in this point for a voyding offense in the hears: yet walden and those same
divines uniformly according in the substance of the doctrine of merits
themselves as I have said once before. And so now let this be sufficient to
declare unto the reader how far out of square our Cross adversary has
detorted the true sense of this religious divine, to make him seem to teach
according to his own new divinity in the matter of merits. I confess I have
enlarged my self much more then the matter requires: if otherwife I had not
considered how much it importes in all occasions to daunte the audaciousnes of
a presumptuous adversary, who by making most plausible use of that is least
for his purpose maintains the small reputation of his own newfashioned
religion chiefly by the ruins of other men's honor: not sparing this his own
renowned contriman indeuoring by indirect means to make him speak against his
own faith and conscience among the rest: of which I could not possibly be
insensible: but was obliged even according to the rules of natural affection,
to labor to clear him of such a foul and injurious aspertion.

But now I come to a conclusion, where yet the reader if he please may further
take notice of some other more triuiall abuse offered to this same famous
divine by the sliperie knight by leaving out the aduerbe igitur in his
translation of the Latin in to English, which in reason he ought not to have
omitted in regard it necessarily implies a relation or reference to the
authors former discourse in which he argues against merit without mention of
grace, and of which he speaks in his subsequent words, tale meritum etc.
alleged by Sir Humfrey in a contrary sense to his meaning. Besides this, the
same Sir Humfrey has not a little transposed some of waldens words in his
recital of them in English. Connecting to these: or will of the giver: those,
as all the former sants, (until the late schoolmen) and the universal Church
has written. Which nevertheless, he ought to have set immediately after
those other which follow in the authors text: to wit: inuenirentur esse
discordes: they might be found disagreable. But because in deed I do not
perceive it could much importe our adversary to proceed in this manner;
therefore I charitablie persuade my self it was not done of malice, but rather
of ill custom.

Lastelie Sir Humfrey produces Bellarmin for the safety of his way in this
same point. But he that should have read his fifth book of Justification, would
judge that man fitter for Bedlam or Bridwell then for the school of diuinie,
that would offer to cite Bellarmin against the doctrine of merits. The words
and meaning of him I have declared in an other place and so hold it in diverse
respects superfluous to repeat them. He cites also S. Austin out of chemnitius
as it seems, as saying (I know not where for he quoteth not the place) that
he speaks more safely to Jesus, tutius and iucundius loquor ad meum Iesum.
But what is this to the purpose of denying invocation of Saints. For besides
that this comes only out of a iuglers bugget and so may iustelie be supected
for false wares, yet admit S. Austin says so, what Romanist is there who does
not say the same yea and practice the same daily in their prayers* While they
acknowledge with all submission and humility that all their saftetie and
conforte of conscience proceeds from Jesus as the fountain of their
Salvation, as the conclusion of all or most Catholic prayers demonstrate: Yet
not so but that they may cry also unto his freindes and servants as being more
near allied unto him both in place, favor, and merits then we our selves,
that they interced and mediate for us for the obtaining of that which we our
selves are not worthy either to obtain or crave at his hands. Which kind of
invocation of Saints, S. Austin himself does approve in diverse places as
tract. 84. in Io. Ser. de verb. Apost. and de cura pro mart. cap. 4. And so
these being all the authors which Sir Humfrey has produced in this section, I
will conclude the censure of it in this manner. That whereas he promised in the
beginning to show the greater saftie of the Protestant faith then of the Roman
by the confession of the Romanists themselves, he has showed no saftie at all,
but only trifled in the words and meaning of his adversaries doctrine, and
that only in some few negative articles of his faith omitting all the rest,
and so he has performed just nothing which may serve for the demonstration of
any way at all, and much less of a safe and perfect way, but only has
brought him self and his reader further into the laberinth of his wandering
wits.

THE XI. PERIOD.
IN his 12. section Sir Humfrey tells his reader that the Church of Rome does
seek to elude the records, and real proofs in the Fathers, and other
learned authors, touching the chief points in controversy betwixt us. This
accusation no doubt makes a foul noise in a pulpit, but let us see how the
knight will be able to justify it.

For his first witness he produces S. Chrysostom Hom 49. operis imperf.
where it is said that, the Church is known only by the scriptures. But first
the very title of the treatise shows this testimony to be of small
authority as being opus imperfectum an imperfect work, and so it ought not in
reason to be admitted for a sufficient proof: especially considering that Sir
Humfrey alleges no other witness; and yet on the contrary we know that
our Savior said. In ore duorum, aut trium testium stet omne verbum, in the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word may stand. And so suppose it were
true that S. Chrysostom said just that which Sir Humfrey would have him, yet
is not one testimony enuffe to convince an adversary, thus much I say for as
much as concerns the point of controversy it self of the all sufficiency
of scripture. But because the knight may say this is not that which he
intends directly in this place but only to convince that Bellarmin has
eluded the foresaid testimony, therefore I answer secondly that Sir Humfrey
needed not to have gone to Bellarmin's Chronology for the censure of the
foresaid work, for he might have found it more plainly censured before in
his controversies, as appears lib. 4. de verbo Dei non scripto, the 11.
chapter. Where the Cardinal has these words. But this testimony is not of
Chrysostom but of the author of the imperfect, who was either an Arian or
certainly his book was corrupted by the Arians in many places: Thus
Bellarmin. Showing the corruptions by two several instances taken out of the
work it self, where he speaks against the Homousians that is against the
Christians of the Catholic Church to which he gives that name because they
defended and believed the consubstantialitie of the eternal son with his
Father, and yet its well known that saint Chrysostom never either writ or
spoake against the Homousians as being one of them himself and a professed
enemy to their adversaries the Arians.

And hence it is plain that Bellarmin had reason to censure that work and not
to acknowledge it for S. Chrysostomes, as Sir Humfrey would have it, except he
would have condemned that glorious Doctor of the Church for an Arian heretic,
as the reformed brothers must of necessary consequence do if they will have
him to be the author of that imperfect treatise. Neither did yet Bellarmin
tax it for that sentence which the knight alleges out of it as he craftily
and falselie insinuates, but for other erroneous doctrine which it contains,
which is no more contrary to any article of the Roman faith, if it be truly
understood: then it is to the faith of the reformers, except perhaps they be
nearer in some points of their doctrine to the Arians then the Romanists be,
who quite deteste and abhor the same. Which I leave to their own
consciences to determine. For although the Romanists deny that the sole scripture
and pure text of the bible is sufficient to determine all controversies and
doubts in doctrine or ma^ners, yet they do not deny but that the sole
scripture does sufficiently declare the most and greatest part of the
doctrine necessary to salvation, and particularly they grant that the true
Church may be sufficiently known by only scripture truly expounded, which
is the very same that the author of the imperfect affirms in the foresaid
words. Neither is it all one to affirm that the Church is known only by
scriptures and to affirm that the scripture only has all sufficiency as
Sir Humfrey does falselie suppose when he uses the first proposition taken out
of the author of the Imperfect as a medium to prove the second which is his
own position, because to know the Church only is not all the doctrine which
the scripture contains as necessary to salvation, but only a part of the
same, and so it is clear that how true soever it be that the church is known
by scripture only, yet ca^ it not be thence inferred that all the doctrine of
the Church necessary to salvation is sufficiently known by only scripture
except out of the pregnance of his wit and extrauagant skill in logique, the
knight can infer an universal proposition out of a particular, which I know
he can no more perform then he can extract by art two oysters out of one
apple. And thus we see that Sir Humfrey has not proved by the exception of
Bellarmin against the foresaid treatise, that either the Roman Church or
Romanists have eluded their records, or real proofs of Fathers touching the
question of all sufficiency of scripture, for that the sentence thence
produced proves no such thing. And consequently there was no necessity that
Bellarmin should endeavor to infringe the authority of the whole work for
such a testimony drawn out of it as is not contrary to the Roman faith,
neither can it with any color be imagined that the Cardinal would ever have
laid his censure upon the same if it had not ben faulty in greater matters.

Secondly Sir Humfrey produces saint Augustine touching the denial of honor
of Saints, where he says that many are tormented with the devil who are
worshipped by men on earth. And whereas Bellarmins answer, according to Sir
Humfreys relation, is that peradventure it is none of Augustins that sentence,
the honest knight as if Bellarmin were all the Romanists that ever writ or
spoake, makes a general interrogatorie saying what say the Romanists to this?
As if that which one only private man speaks in a private matter were to be
accounted the voice of all men of his profession. And yet Bellarmin does not
only add more in his ansere yea and much more to the purpose, which not
withstanding our brave Sir Sycophant very slily omittes viz. that he could not
find those words in S. Augustine, but also adds three other principal
anseres to the same objection. And so it appears that instead of proof that
Bellarmin eludeth the records of S. Augustine, the elusorie knight eludes both
Bellarmin and his reader egregiously by deceitfullie omitting that which both
justified the Cardinals proceeding, and also declared the true meaning of the
place cited in saint Augustins name.

Thirdly, he taxes Bellarmin and stapleton for saying that S. Augustine was
deceived, or committed a humane error in his interpretation of those words
super hanc Petram, caused by the diversity of the Hebrewe, Grek and Latin
tongue which either he was ignorant of or marked not. But I ansere first that
what soever error S. Augustine might commit in this matter, certain it is that
it was only about the interpretation of those words Math. 16. thou art
Peter, and upon this rock, will I build my Church For touching Saint Peter's
supreme authority in it self (which is that our irreligious adversary
intendes chiefly to diminish in this occasion) it is most apparent that S.
Augustine strongly maintains it in his second of Baptism cap. 1. saying. Quis
nesciat illum Apostolatus Petri principatum, cuilibet Episcopatui esse
praeferendum? That is who can be ignorant that Principality or soueraintie of
Peter's Apostolate is to be preferred before any Episcopate or Bishoprike? And
in his 15. sermon of the saints, he speaks yet more plain to this purpose,
affirming that our savior did nominate S. Peter for the foundation of the
Church, and ideo digne fundamentum hoc Ecclesia colit, supra quod Ecclesiastici
officij altitudo consurgit. And therefore (says S. Augustine) the Church
deservedly honoreth this foundation upon which the altitude of the
Ecclesiastici structure arises. And by this S. Augustins faith of S. Peter's
soueranitie in the government of the Church most clearilie appears, so that no
other peculiar opinion of his concerning the sense of those words super hanc
Petram, could possible preiudicate his own constant doctrine in the substance
of this matter in it self, as neither could stapleton or any other Catholic
divine by their taxation of him.

And yet neither did S. Augustine in deed reprove the common opinion of divines
in expounding that place of S. Mathewe of the person of S. Peter: but
expresselie remittes the choice of the one or the other to the judgment, or
affection of the reader, as is manifest by his own words upon this same
subject in his retractions concluding his discourse about the two several
opinions in this manner. Lib. 1. retract. c. 21.
Harum. autem duarum sententiarum quae sit probabilior eligat lector. Of these
two opinions let the reader make choice of which is more probable. And so this
allegation is nothing to the purpose of Sir Humfreys malicious endeavors in
proving the evident testimonies of ancient Fathers to be eluded by Romanists,
as being neither any evident testimony in it self, as I have declared, nor
yet within the sphere of faith, or including the point of controversy in the
matter proposed by our adversary in this passage, as he falselie supposes:
out of which compass every one may lawfully abound in his own sense: as
well the Fathers in the delivery of their private opinions, as also the
modern divines in passing their censures of the same as occasion serves, So it
be performed with discretion and modesty, as here it was by learned Stapleton,
as his words do show.

And besides this, although we should admit the foresaid words of the
Evangelist may diuerselie be expounded either of our Savior or of saint
Peter, or both: nevertheless the Popes supremacy cannot suffer thereby any
prejudice, as being sufficiently established both by other words of the same
passage, and by other places of scripture, particularly by that of S. John 21.
pasce oues meas etc. Feed my sheep. Which words are so forcible for the
proof of saint Peter's supreme authority over all Christ's flock that they
alone with the circumstances of the text, were sufficient to conuicte any
reasonable persons judgment.

Thirdly concerning the communion of the Cup he reprehendeth Bellarmin for
saying in his answer to the words of S. Ignatius one cup is distributed to
all, that in the latin books is not found distributed to all, but for all.
But first I say that why should Bellarmin be produced for an eluder of the
Fathers records for telling the truth? or for reporting that which he did see
with his eyes, and perhaps without spectacles. And if it be found by eye
witnesses to be otherwise in the Latin copies then in the Greek as truly it
is, as also it is found that the Greek copies are not sound in diverse other
particulars in which they are discovered not to agree with the citations of S.
Athanasius and Theodoret, What sin did Bellarmin commit in uttering the same?
But howsoever it be good Sir Humfrey, does Bellarmin rely only upon that
anser, nay does he not give two other more chief ansers then that? both which
you dissemble. And yet more then this, you have shamefullie corrupted that one
ansere which you cite. For Bellarmin says not that S. Ignatius has the words
distributed for all, but, one chalis of the whole Church, vnus calix totius
Ecclesiae, meaning that there is one common chalice because it is offered to
God for all. Nay besides this, Bellarmin yet further adds, that the
Magdeburgers read those words of S. Ignatius as the Romanists do, of which
also crafty Sir Humfrey takes no notice: so that the reader may see that
Bellarmin is here diversely abused by the false knight, and yet is he no more
guilty of eluding of the Fathers records in this particular then the foresaid
Lutherans them selves, that is nothing at all.

Fourthlie he taxes Sixtus Senensis for saying he suspecteth Origin to have been corrupted by the heretics where he says: Thus much be spoken of the
typical and symbolicall body. But what if Senensis utter his opinion in that
manner of that place of Origin. For does not either he, or at the least, a
number of other divines give other solid ansers to the same as may be seen in
Bellarmin and others. As that it is not certain that works is truly Origens:
and that those words are not spoaken of the Eucharist, but of the bread of the
Cathecumes which we commonly call holy bread, that Origin terms the body
of Christ Sybolical and Typical because it is present in the Sacrament as a
type or sign of the same body of Christ as it is united to the divine word
in the mystery of the Incarnation in a visible manner. For in that place
Origin compares the body of Christ as it is in the Sacrament with the same as
it is in it proper existence.

And so in like manner sanders and Baronius for diverse reasons hold the words
cited by Calvin out of the epistle of Epiphanius to John of Jerusalem touching
the cutting of a veil with an image of Christ, or some other man, which he
found at the entrance of a Church; for suppositious as being added after the
whole epistle was ended. And yet notobstanding, they rely not entirely upon
this answer, but yeald others also which, supposing the foresaid addition were
truly the words of that holy Father, yet those same authors abundantly
clear the difficulty and declare the truth of his meaning in the
controversy of honor of images. As also does Valentia about the words of
Theodoret touching transsubstantiation, who says that the substance of bread
and wine ceased not in the Sacrament. To which both Valentia and other divines,
(notobstanding they kewe by that which passed in the Council of Ephesus,
Theodoretus authority not to be great, or at the least not to be so great as
that he alone could or ought to preponderate the rest of the Fathers, Vid.
Greg. de Val. l. 2. de transub. c. 7. and Suarez de. Eucha. D. 46. sec. 4.
I have given other solid answers to his words besides this which is related
by the knight, as that he calls the accidents of the Eucharist by the name of
the substance of bread and wine attributing to the natural properties of
nature or substance, the name of nature or substance it self, as both the
scriptures and other Fathers in the like occasions use to do, Gelas. ep.
and particularly Gelasius whom the reformers use to cite against the truth
of transsubstantiation, he only taking the word substance (which is
ambiguous and signifies both the interior substance itself, and the external
signs of the same) for the second, not for the first: all which may be easily
perceived by him who shall read the authors them selves with attention and
care. And as for Theodoretus, James Gordon in his fourth Controversy of
transsubstantiation notes that if he be truly translated according to the
force of the Greek words, all difficulty touching his true meaning does
presently cease. And thus much for Theodoretus who is no way eluded by
Valentia, but truly and sincerely expounded.

As for Bellarmin whom when he answers to the testimony of S. Cyprian
about traditions, the knight seems to tax for attributing error unto him.
It is not true that Bellar. says that he does not marvel that S. Cypria^
erred in reasoning, as Sir Humfrey affirms, but the Cardinal only says of
S. Cyprian, ideo non mirum si more errantium ratiocinaretur: therefore it was
no marvel if he should argue after the manner of those that err, because he
writ that passage to which Bellarmin does ansere in the place cited by the
knight, when he defended his error about rebaptization against S. Augustine.
But withal Bellarmin adds that S. Cyprian rejected not all traditions as the
reformers commonly do, at the least in faith and manners: but only he
disalowed that tradition in particular which S. Augustine alleged against his
error, and only for that reason because he conceived it to be contrary to
scriptures, which yet afterward appeared not to be so by the definition of
the Church not to be. So that Bellarmin is both here falselie accused to have
absolutely affirmed S. Cyprian to have erred in reasoning, and also it is
false that his testimony touching traditions in general is by him eluded,
which is that Sir Humfrey ought to prove if he speaks according to his own
purpose in this place.

And not much unlike to this is the same Bellarmin falselie accused by the
knight to have affirmed that S. Chrysostom exceeded the truth when he said.
It is better not to be present at the sacrifice then to be present, and not
comunicate, for Bellarmin said not that saint Chrysostom exceeded the truth,
but only that he spoake by excess, per excessum ita esse locutum, or
amplificandi gratia, as he says afterward, which is not to exceed the truth
but to use a tropicall speech by which the truth is as far extended as may
be possible within her bounds but no further. And more over Bellarmin adds
so much besides to this ansere to Saint Chrysostomes words, Vide Bell. l. 2.
de Missa. cap. 10. Porro Chrysostom.
as takes all difficulty quite away touching his meaning in the point of
Private Mass.

Neither is Sir Hu^freys complainte against Bellarmin less unjust, where he
says, yet not specifiing about what matter, that the Cardinal affirms
Prudentius to play the poet, for why should any man be reprehended for
attributing to a Poet that which is proper to all those of his profession that
is to speak by way of fiction or to use poetical license. The truth is I can
find no such words of Bellarmin as Sir Humfrey cites, but suppose he
speaks in that manner of Prudentius, yet I hold it to be no greater an
extenuation of his authority then it were an extenuation of Sir Humfreys
honor to say he uses his weapons dexterouslie or plaieth the Champion
courageously. But yet worse then this does Sir Humfrey deal with Bellarmin
about his ansere to a certain testimony of Tertullian. For whereas he only
says that Tertullians authority is of no great accounte when he contradicts
other Fathers, and when, as S. Hierome speaks, he was no man of the Church:
the knight to save labor, but not to save his honesty, leaves out that
speech of S. Hierome and puts the whole censure of Tertullian upon
Bellarmin only, notobstanding it appears plainly that the greater part of
it is taken out of S. Hierome, and so consequently if any proof or record
were eluded in Tertullian, Sir Humfrey might more iustelie have accused him,
then the Cardinal. But it seems the knight proceeded in this as those that in
cases of revenge either for want of wit, or valor, still strike their next
fellow whether he be in fault or no.

In conclusion Sir Humfrey had no reason to stand upon Bellarmin's ansere to
those two authors, I mean Prudentius and Tertullian; for that neither of them
in the places cited speaks of any point of doctrine defined by the Church,
but of other matters in which as it was free for them to speak what they
pleased, so was it also free for Bellarmin to ansere what he pleased,
especially supposing that Tertullian speaks but doubfullie in the matter for
which he is taxed by the Cardinal, that is in the manner of Christ's
penetration of his mothers womb: and if he held he was borne according to the
course of nature, he contradicts the rest of the Fathers, in which case no
one Father has the credit of an absolute testimony amongst the Romanists,
neither can he or any for him iustelie complain if he be disesteemed in such
a case.

Now for the censure which Riuera gives of Origin to wit that he was full of
errors which the Church has always detested, it is so manifestly true that
no man that will not dogmatize with him can deny the same. And the truth is
that the reformers make as little, yea and much less account either of him or
any other ancient writers, then the Romanists do, as the world knows,
especially when they find them contrary to their positions. And not of one,
two, or three dissenting from the rest, but even of the torrent of their
consent of which over plain testimony is extant in Luther, Calvin Kemnitius,
and Chamier. Vid. Luth. de capt. Babyl. c. 1. Calu. 4. Instit. c. 18 Kem. page
798. Cham. de descens. Chr. ad Inf.
And yet for all this the knight could produce nothing in particular in which
he could accuse the Romanists to have rejected the records of the foresaid
authors at the least in matter of faith.

As for S. Hierome whom Canus affirms to be no rule of faith. I would know
what reformer will maintain the contrary? And if they hold him to be a rule
of faith then a dieu their all-sufficiencie of scripture. Besides Canus yealdes
a pregnant reason why S. Hierome was not to be followed in that particular of
which he speaks in that place, to wit in the assignation of the Canon of the
old testament, because says Canus he followed Joseph the Jew, but S. Austin
followed the Christians in that point of doctrine: which reason of Canus Sir
Humfrey ought not to have omitted if he had dealt sincerely.

As impertinent as this also is the taxation of Bellarmins answer to Justin,
Ireneus, Epiphanius and Oecumenius who seem to have held that the devils are
not to be tormented with the pains of hell before the day of Judgment. For
this is so absurd a position that I think few or none of the misreformed
Churches defend it, and so I see not why Bellarmin can iustelie be reprehended
for saying that he sees not how the foresaid authors can be excused from
error in that particular, for that the Cardinal only condemns them in
that which the reformers themselves according to reason and sound doctrine
ought to condemn also, and that in no question of Controversy between us and
them, nor which can iustelie prejudice the foresaid Fathers authority in other
matters, especially in which they all agree.

Lastelie says Sir Humfrey, we produce the uniform consent of Fathers against
the immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin. To which Salmeron the Jesuit,
quoth he, ansereth that, weak is the place which is drawn from authority.
But first I ask of Sir Humfrey what he and his consorts have to do with the
immaculate Conception? For that is no Controversy of faith betwixt the
Romanists and them, it is a question among some Romanists them selves, and
lawful for either side to make the best use they can of the testimonies of
Fathers either by imbrasing them, or expounding the^ in that particular point,
as they find them most aduantageous for the defense of their several opinions
so far as the Church permits the^, and that without any disparishme^t to
their authority in regard their words are not so plain, but that they may
seem to admit diverse expositions in that particular. And as for Salmero^ he
neither speaks of the Fathers in general when all or most of them consent in
a matter of faith, nor yet when they plainly agree in any other point of
doctrine, but only when they speak doubtfullie or obscurelie, and this I say
upon supposition the place of the foresaid author is truly cited, which, in
regard I have taken the knight so often tardie in that Kind of proceeding, I
may vnrashlie suspected. And the truth is that having now viewed the place in
the book which is in the 51. Disputation of Salmeron upon the 5. to the
Romans. I find that he speaks not of the uniform consent of Fathers or
Doctors, but only of a certain great number of the^ to which he opposes an
other as great, as he supposes, yea and greater: and therefore he adds. Quare
si authorum numero decertare velint (meaning the opposers of the immaculate
conception of the Virgen) procul dubio absorbebuntur. So that this author is
abused just as I did conjecture before I sa his book. And although I can not
much commend Salmeron for any great ingeniousnesse in his application of the
shepards sentence, yet sure I am that if he applied it not very aptelie, you
Sir Humfrey apply it much worse and more absurdelie. And thus having now
examined all the particulars of this section and having found nothing which
proves the authors intent, I will end my period yet noting by the way how
vanelie Sir Humfrey concludes his discourse affirming his reader to have heard
the proof of the Romish witnesses in the behalf of the Protestant doctrine
made good by the testimonies of the Fathers themselves; which notobstanding is
all false and mere delusion, for that I have made it clearelie appear that
neither any Romanist by him cited has granted that any one of the Fathers
does teach any point of Protestant doctrine, nor yet that they speak in those
places here cited of the chief points of doctrine in Controversy: but
contrarily it appears that they speak only either of other matters which
little concern the Catholic faith, or at the least they speak in an other
sense then the reformers pretend: yea and that which is more remarkable, not
with uniform consent, but rather few or at the most two or three in one
matter, in which manner of proceeding, what argument soever may be deduced from
them, it is no more truly to be judged and called the testimony of the
Fathers absolutely, then that may be called absolutely the testimony of the
reformers in which nevertheless only some few of them yeald their
testimonies, and yet that but in some particulars, and those no principal
points of faith.

And as for this complaint which Sir Humfrey makes so formallie of the elusion
of the proofs, and records of the Fathers, as also touching that which he in
like manner frames against the Roman Church for her prohibition, or censure of
books, I wonder with what face he can reprehend that which he knows to be so
much practiced in his own Church, in which there cannot the least pamphlet, or
smalest volume come forth which if it does but seem to co^tradict any part
or point of the English faith, or any other point of Puritanimse, is not
presently ceased upon by a pack of Pursuiuants, and put to the tortor of the
Consistoriall assembly there to receive sentence of condemnation, by virtue of
which it seldom scapeth the flames of Vulcan. Of which in part is witness
Doctor Mountagues lately published book, which by reason it sauored a little
of some points of Romanisme; by an express Apeale even to Caesar himself,
could not be saved from the severe censure of the Puritan sinagoge. And
particularly touching the authority of ancient Fathers, if it were a fault
in the Romanists to call in question some passages, or sentences of some of
their writings where they iustelie suspect them to have been corrupted by
heretics: Surely the sectaries of these times are much deeper plunged in this
nature the^ they are, in regard that under the breight color of reformation
they do not only use to reprehend particular passages, but reject whole
books, and that not only of the most ancient Fathers as appears in the
Hierarchy of saint Denis, but also whole books of the scriptures themselves,
as is manifest in the books of the Machabies and others which they utterly
renounce and condemn for Apochripha, not sparing the book of wisdom it
self, such cruel patrons they are of ignorance, and, of want of divine
knowledge. Nay and now of late they are be come so precise in this their
spiritual tyranie that in their last editions as I am informed, they have
quite banished the foresaid books of Machabies Tobie, Judith, wisdom
Ecclesiasticus out of their bible. To omit other books of less moment which
they have either mangled or left quite out of their editions, as in the
Inquisitors Index may be seen. So that now the reader may plainly perceive
that Sir Humfrey and his pure simmists, are so far from excuse for their
importune complaint of the Romanists in this particular, that we may iustelie
compare them to those Phariseis who could sooner see a mote in their fellows
eye then a beam in their own. And so here I leave them all to be censured for
hypocrites by Christ himself, and pass to the next section.

THE XII. PERIOD.
THIS Period shall contain an other accusation of the knight, in which he
charge the Romanists with the crime of razing the records of the reformers,
and clipping their own authors tongues, by which, says he, they are
convinced of an ill cause, and conscience. But how falselie the Romanists be
accused by Sir Humfrey it plainly appears by the examen of witnesses which I
will make presently: and in the mean time let but the reader reflect upon
that which has hitherto ben said, and he will easily perceive that Sir
Hu^frey himself is convinced not only of a bad cause, and an ill conscience,
but also of such gross proceedings as is not able either to the parts or su
credit of a Caualier. But now to particulars.

His first charge is laid upon the inquisitors for blotting out a certain
note made in the margen of the Bible of Robertus Stephanus upon the 4. chapter
of the deuter. That God prohibiteth graven images to be made. But what razing
of records is this? Is a new note made by some one, modern, unknown author
not suitable to the true sense of the text, and in such an edition of the bible
as cannot be of any long standing, to be accounted one of your records? And
if it be yours how came it into the Bible what does it there? has not the
Inquitor as much authority to put it out as some obscure brother of yours had
to put it in? the true meaning of the scripture neither in the place of that
note, nor any other is, that God did prohibit absolutely all graven images
(as one of the greatest divines you have, does ingenuouslie confess) Daniel
Chamierus Panstrat, l 21. de imag. c. 8. n. 1.
but only he did forbid them to be made to the end to adore them as Gods, or
at the least to adore them with danger of idolatry, and yet the foresaid wise
annotation makes the scripture to forbid all graven images absolutely.
Wherefore its nothing but a false record ordained to deceive the reader by
abusing the true sense of Gods word, and so the Inquisitor when he branded it
with a deleatur, he did but execute justice upon a falsifier of the Kings
letters, which in him neither argues bad cause nor ill conscience, but shows
both of them to be in the author of the counterfeit record which he foysted in
to the sacred bible. To omit that it being no note of any Roman author as it
manifestly shows it self not to be: yet the knight leaped quite out of the
quire when he cited it for a record of his own, except he supposes all the
writings of the pretended reformed Doctors of what sect soever they be, to be
records for his Church against the Roman doctrine: which is both most
ridiculous in itself, nor yet was any such razing of the reformers records
ever intended either by the Inquisitors, or by any other censurer of books in
the Church of Rome.

His second charge is about a certain gloss upon Gratian, which gloss
affirms (according to Sir Humfreyes relation) that the Priest cannot say
significatiuelie of the bread, this is my body, without telling a lie. This
gloss (says he) is condemned by the inquisitor to be blotted out. It is true
the Inquisitor did so, but what then? did he therefore do it wit an ill
conscience, I deny the consequence. And in your conscience Sir Humfrey is it
not an idle gloss indeed? Do not your ministers themselves when they deliver
the communion call it the body and blood of Christ? And if the Priest lies
when he says so not of the bread (as the false gloss says if so, it says)
but of that which is contained under the form of bread, surely your ministers
tell a far greater lie when they say significatiuelie of the bare bread, that
it is the body of Christ, truly and reallie, as Master Calvin affirms.
Instit. l. 4. cap. 17.
And so I conclude this point, that Sir Humfrey had no reason at all to accuse
the Inquisitor of an ill conscience in razing only such a record as is no
less repugnant to the doctrine of the reformed Churches, then to the Roman
faith if any matter of faith it were, which indeed it is not; and so by
consequence it is also impertinent to the matter here in question.

Thirdly Sir Humfrey charge the Inquisitor for blotting out Cassanders whole
tract of the Communion in both kynds. But what worse conscience shows the
Inquisitor in this fact then the Inquisitors of the reformed Churches do, who
are not content with a simple doleatur, but daily condemn whole Catholic
volumes to the unmerciful Vulcan. And as for the records which you take out
of Cassander we make no more accounte of them then we do of those which you
take out of Luther or Calvin, and so you may take them and make your self
merry.

Fourthlie Caietans opinion that the words, this is my body, do not
sufficiently prove transubstantiation, is no record for you, as you falselie
suppose, for he does not deny transsubstantiation as you do, but expresselie
defended it, as his own words declare which I afterward recitie: nay he
does not affirm absolutelle (as suarez words quoted by your self in your
own margent expressly declare) that the foresaid words do not sufficiently
prove transsubstantiation as you corruptedlie relate, but only says at the
most that, secluding the Churches authority, they do not prove it: which, not
as contrary to faith, but as a singular, and extrauagant opinion of that
author, Pope Pius did (if perhaps he did) piouslie blot it out, not preciselie
because it favors the reformers (as in truth it does not to any purpose)
but because it sm'at disfauored the truth, which is that transsubstantiation is
indeed plainly enough contained in those words of Christ, this is my body.
Howbeit I must needs aduertice the reader that I neither find those words
supposed to be Caietans, blotted in any Index that I have seen, nor yet can I
find them in any edition of Caietan in the place cited by Suarez, that is
upon the 75. q. art. 1. But only these. Conuersio non habetur explicit in
Euangelio, and these. Quod Euangelium non explicauit express, ab Ecclesia
accepimus. Nay more then this I find other words in the same place which
convince that Caietan held transsubstantiation to be sufficiently contained in
those words this is my body, for so he argues. Sacramenta nouae legis
efficient quod significant, ac per hoc verba Christi hoc est corpus meum quia
efficient vtramque nouitatem scilicet conuersionis and continentiae (vt
express dicta sacri Concilij authoritas testatur) consequens est vt cadem
Christi verba significent vtramque nouitatem. Wherefore supposing Caietan said
not that the words: this is my body: contain not sufficiently
transsubstantiation, but only not expresselie: I cannot conceive what
foundation Suarez might have for this his relation, except peradventure Pius
quintus found that edition alone of Caietan to have been corrupted by
heretics, and therefore caused it to be corrected in that passage: as indeed
an other place of the same Caietan 2. 2. q. 122. is discovered by the authors
of the prohibitiue Index to have been in that same fashion fraudulently
depraved, as the same Index expresselie testifies in these words quoted in the
margen. In Thomae Caietani commentarijs in D. Tho. 2. 2. q. 122 art 4. omnino
corrigantur errores qui fraud haereticorum irrepserunt, vt notatur in expurg.
Index lib. prohib p. 89. Geneu. impres.


The Epistle of Walricus is suppositious, which is paoued to be so because it
is superscribed to Pope Nicolas to whom according to the computation of times,
the first Pope Nicolas was before Walricus was borne, and the second Nicolas
was not borne till after he was dead. Neither is it any way probable that such
a holy Bishop as Walricus was, should commend marriage in other Priests, who
lived and dyed in unmarried chastity himself, and so the foresaid Epistle
being a false record, as containing an improbable yea a morally impossible
relation, it was justly condemned with a deleatur. To omit that if this
Epistle were authentical, the reformers would gain nothing by the bargen for
that it teaches expressly that the Roman Bishop is head of the Church, and
that Priests at the least after ordination cannot lawfully marry.

Sixthly it is false that Bertram's whole book is condemned, as may appear by
the judgment of the University of Doway approved by the Censurers of books
inserted in the Index of Quiroya published by Ioannes Pappus a reformed
deformed divine with certain odious prefaces of his own coining, and printed
at Argentin 1609. In the 17. page of which Index it is manifest that the whole
book was not commanded to be blotted out, but only some few things to be
corrected, or altered in the reading, or to be expounded benigneously. And as
for the doctrine of transsubstantiation, the foresaid Doctors of Doway
expressly declare that Bertram often times in the first part of his
disputation teaches Catholic transsubstantiation plainly enuffe, using the
words conuertere, mutare, commutare, permutare transponere creaturam in
Christum, in corpus Christi etc. in so much that Illiricus compelled with the
plainness of those words, confesses there are in Bertram semina
transsubstantiationis, seeds of transubstantiation. And also the same Dowacene
Doctors conclude that those difficult places which are found in him touching
the real presence, which cheefely are two, to wit that he seems to have been
of opinion that Christ's body is no more in the Eucharist then the body of the
people, and that that thing which is celebrated or done in the Church cannot be
called God; are either to be understood of the external forms of bread and
wine: or else that those sentences be inserted by heretics who printed that
book first at Colen. 1532. and after at Basil. 1550. and 1555. so that this is
no record of the reformers, except it be upon supposition of their own
corruptions or false glosses added unto it; but rather may serve for a pregnant
testimony against them, and consequently he that should have blotted it out,
had done them no injury but a very great favor.

Seuenthlie I say to the sentence taken out of the book of baptizme under the
name of Anselme, that many passages be blotted out by the Censurers of books,
by reason they are such as may easily be taken in an erroneous sense, and so
scandalize or give occasion of error either to the simple, or malicious
reader, which nevertheless in a sound sense contain no false doctrine, and
so might be left uncorrected if it were not for the corruption and malignitie
of the time. And of this nature be the words of the book of the visitation of
the sick and Baptism, if they be ritely recited by Sir Hum. Do thou
believe that the Lord Jesus Christ dyed for our salvation, and that there is no
means to be saved by own merits? Which sentence in a true meaning is no
record of the reformers, and in a false meaning, it is better blotted out the^
left in. And such diligence argues no ill conscience, but a motherlie care of
the Church toward here children.

8. We have said sufficient already touching the credit of Cassander, whose
doctrine the Romanists hold for false records either in part or totalitie.
And he makes such preposterous glosses upon the Ecclesiastical himnes, as the
Index notes in one place, that all his whole scholium is repugnant to the same
like a commentary contrary to the text. Yet to give the reader a taste What
truly this man was, who is so far in Sir Humfreys books: I say that although
we hold not Cassander for a Romanist, as being in the Index of prohibited
books for diverse singular positions, nevertheless the knight cannot iustelie
brag of him in regard it is manifest by his works which I have seen and read
in part, that he expresselie defendes the Roman doctrine in most points of
Controversy betwixt us and the Reformers: as also because in a greater part
even of the same places which Sir Hum. cites in his favor, he is not a little
abused and either corrupted or detorted by him contrary to his meaning.
Howbeit in respect he professes the part of a Pacifer and mediator betwixt
us, he could not but lean some thing to their side, yet is it so little that I
perceive by one of his writings that he had small thanks for his pains from
some of the faction, and therefore was most sharply handled by them accusing
him of dissimulation, imposture, interruption of the course of the Gospel and
the like. An unfortunate man who by his great labors and earnest endeavors to
content both parties, contended neither: a just punishment due unto such as
destitute of true knowledge in divinity (which he himself in part confesses
in his general Preface) presume to treat of those sublime subjects sans a
guide.

The Basilean edition of Polidor virgill printed in the year 1544. compared
with other former and the most ancient editions is found to have been corrupted
by the sectaries and so no true records can be taken out of it for Sir Humfrey
and his confraternitie. And such is that passage which the Inquisitours
commanded to be blotted out, which is this. All most all ancient Fathers
condemned images for fear of idolatry. This sentence as false and foysted
into the foresaid Basilian edition, is iustelie cast out as none of the
authors doctrine, or at the least vehemently suspected for none of his. And
touching the doctrine of honor of images it self, it is clear that he can
aforde no record at all for the reformed divinity, for that he expresselie
relates the use of images in Churches deduceing it historicallie from the most
primative times. Langius or Langus is of no authority among the Romanists and
so he yealdes no records of credit. And at the best he is but a pedanticall
Annotator, and as I take it a Lutheran, that is neither of Sir Humfreys
religion nor of ours.

As for Ferus certain it is that some of his editions have been found to be
mightily corrupted particularly that of Mogunce. Which the knight cites and
so the records drawn out of him are of no authority. But suppose Cephas did
indeed not signify the head, yet what great record I pray can that be for
Sir Humfreys Church? And so whether Cephas signify the head or the feet, and
whether ridiculum est be in, or out of the books, it auayles him nothing but
some small matter to quarrel about: yet the truth is that the most
authentical edition of Anwerpe 1585. has the same words which Sir Humfreyes
cites out of the Roman print: in such sort as one may rather much more suspect
those words, it is ridiculous: to be falselie added in the Moguntin edition
then detracted in the others.

Finally whether the words of the Council of Laodicea be that we ought not
to leave the Church of God and invoke Angels, as Sir Humfrey will have it,
and also some Catholic copies have: or whether in steed of the word Angels
we read angles or corners, as some other editions have, the matter is not
great so the decree be reight understood, that is so that the sense be this:
we ought not to leave the Church of God and invoke Angels superstitiouslie
as some did in those times. For this being the true meaning of the Council as
it appears by the subsequent words which are those, and make congregations
of abominable idolatry to the Angels, it is more then plain that no record
can there be found for the doctrine of the reformed Churches. But only it
serves Sir Humfrey to make a plausible flourish to the simple reader, to the end
that by working upon his weakness by falselie taxing his adversaries, he may
make his own impostures saleable, which otherwise would putrify and spoil
for want of utterance.

Lastelie for proof of his accusation, Sir Humfrey after all this stir he
has made, produces only one witness, and that a false one: and although for
the greater credit of his cause, he held it expedient to give him the decree of
a divinity reader and professor, and Deane of Louaine, yet having examined the
matter, I found by better information then Sir Humfrey can have, that Boxhorne
before his reuolte had only the place a certain of obscure Deanrie: which
function although it be a place of some credit, yet it is far inferior to the
dignity either of a Deane of a Capital Church, or of a public professor of
divinity in the university of Louaine, both in learning, honor, and profit.
And yet this man as I received by authentical relation of the Deane of S.
Gudula Church in Brussels, and others: after some extraordinary familiarity
which out of his over amorous nature he used to a domestike maid servant of
his own, and out of an unsettledness of his lubrik mind, began at first to
defend that, it was not necessary for the Priest to prononce the words of
consecration orally, but only to speak them mentallie, and afterward (as
nemo repent fit malus) Boxorno once a pettie-master.
by degrees falling into plain heresy, found opportunity to pass into the
land of liberty, I mean into Holand, with bag and bagage, I mean with his
Sacrilegious spouse and the sacred spoils of his Church. Where from the place
of a fugitive Pedant, he is preferred to the dignity of a new Evangelist, and
is become a blostering trumpeter in the pulpits of the misreformed
congregations.

And this is the only man which Sir Humfrey could bring for a witness against
the practice of the Roman Church in her manner of censuring books or
correcting the same, or approving them according to the order and decree of the
Council of Trent, which collapsed Deane being so infamous in his life as by
this which I have specified, and more which I could relate, does appear, and
being also now a professed enemy and Apostata from his mother Church, let the
reader judge whether in reason his testimony ought to be admitted against her:
and let him withal be pleased to consider that Sir Humfrey in lue of
conuincing his adversaries of ill conscience, he has by his own bad
proceeding in this section convinced his own to be the worst of all, and so is
fallen in to the same pit he prepared for his enemies incidit in foueam quam
fecit, by forgeing of false records, and has incurred a far deeper dungeon
of ce^sure then hitherto he did, in which he must remain either till he has
paid a double fine, or put in surety for the amendment of his manners.

THE XIII. PERIOD.
IN His fourteeneth section Sir Humfrey indeuoreth to convince his adversaries
of the defense of a desperate cause by their blasphemous exceptions, as he
calls them, against the scriptures, by which we see that as his book
increases in number of leaves so he increases in multiplication of his
malicious and false accusations, and these being the cards he plays with,
let us examen his gaime.

He continues confidently his allegation of his false Deane of Louaine for a
witness against the Romanists, whose word notwithstanding ought not either in
reason or according to the course of law to be admitted for record against
those from whose religion he has revolted. And so whereas he accuses the
Roman Church of poison in religion and tyranny in the commonwealth, it is to be
taken as proceeding from a poisonous mind, which being once corrupted hates
the truth as much as an ill stomach loathes dainty meats.

As for the scriptures, it is false and slanderous to affirm that the
Romanists refuse to be tried by them so they be taken together with the
authority of the Church which the same scriptures commend, as Saint Augustine
speaks against his adversaries, and in a true sense without which as one of
the ancient Fathers says, verbum Dei male intellectum non est verbum Dei that
is, the word of God ill understood is not the word of God. Quamuis certum de
scripturis non proferatur exe^plum tame^ earundem scripturaru^ a nobis tenetur
veritas cum id facimus quod vniuersae placet Ecclesia quam ipsarum scripturarum
comme^dat authoritas. Aug. lib. 1. co^tra Cres. c. 33.
And according to this not that sacred Bible which was in the Apostles till the
days of Luther without alteration, is as you calumniously affirm, ranked by
the Inquisitors inter libros prohibitos, among the prohibited books, but your
execrated Bible I mean your execrable translations and annotations, and
mutilations of the most holy Bible, are those that are registered in the
censure, where whether it have, as you affirm, I know not certainly, but I
am sure it deserves the first place, because as the Philosopher says
corruption optimi pessima, and so as your Bible-corruption is in the highest
degree of badnesse, so ought it in reason to be ranked in the highest station
of such false wares as that Catalogue condemns.

And of the censure of your own abuses I grant you may with shame enough to
your selves be eye witnesses, but if you mean you are eye witnesses of the
censure of the true scriptures it is most false and calumnious that either
they, or the authors of them be called in question: and yet more false and
slanderous it is that Christ and his Apostles are arraigned and condemned at
the Popes assizes (as you odiouslie affirm) of obscurity and insufficiency
in their Gospel. Bibliorum versiones tam vet. quam noui Test. a dictis
(damnatis) authoribus editae, generaliter prohibentur. Index ex Purgatorius.
Regul. 3.
For that neither Pope nor Prelate of the Roman Church ever uttered more of the
sacred scriptures in that nature the^ that which S. Peter himself affirms,
to wit that in the epistles of S. Paul there are many things hard to be
understood, or that which S. Augustine says in general of the written word.
That is, that certain obscure speeches of the scripture bring a most dense or
thick miste upon them. And that they are deceived with many, and manifould
obscurities and ambiguities that rashly read them, understanding one thing for
an other. Lib. 2. de Doctr. Christ. c. 6.


And as for the Gospel of Christ and his Apostles, neither the Pope nor any
other Romanist ever condemned it of any insufficiency or defect, but only
teach with the same scripture itself that it does not contain all things
necessary so explicitlie that they suffice for the instruction of the whole
Church according to all states of people and in all particulars without
traditions, as appears by the saying of saint Paul 2. These. 2.
Therefore brethren stand and houlde the traditions which you have learned
whether it be by word, or by our epistle. Which words of the Apostle neither
can truly be verified nor his command obeyed, except we grant that he
delivered more to the Church of the Thessalonians then he left in writing.
Neither do the Pope and Romanists any more condemn the scriptures of
insufficie^cie by denying that they contain clearly all things necessary, or
by affirming that divine and Apostolical traditions are also necessarily
required, then the reformers them selves, who besides scripture profess at the
least in words to believe the Apostolical, nycene, and Athanasian Creed: not
no more then that man should be thought to condemn the common laws of
insufficiency who besides them judges it also necessary to observe those
ancient customs which the laws themselves commend as by the legislators and
first authors of the same delivered to the people by word of mouth. And so to
conclude, touching the scriptures thus understood, the Romanists are so far
from refusing to be tried by them that they fly unto them with saint
Chrysostom in all occasions as to most hight montaines in which they find a
most comodious place to plant their ordinance against the enemies of the faith,
and particularly against the sectaries of this our present age, as is most
evident in the late Council of Trent all the decrees of which renouned Synod
are founded upon those heigh hills of the written word of God according to the
true sense and meaning of the same. And as for Causabon and Agrippa whom the
knight cites, he and they may go together for their authority viz. in lying.
Agrippa and Causabon are already registered in the Predicament of Nouelists,
Vide Indicem lib. prohib.
and althou' the knight as yet is not preferred to that honor, yet his deserts
are such as he may iustelie expect the like advancement.

You ask us, Sir Humfrey, whether the word of God is subject to alteration or
needs and Index expurgatorious, but to this your wise demand I anser, that
the word of God in itself is wholelie immutable, so pure that it can need no
purifying, yet as it is and expressed by artificial caracters for the use of
man, so it is not only mutable and corruptible, but also de facto it is and
has been corrupted, witness your own Bibles in England. And witness that
renowned King James your own sovereign and best defender of your faith, who
was so ashamed of the translations which he found at his arrival to the
English Crown, that he presently sought a remedy for the same (though he found
it not, as appears by his new translation which yet is not as it ought to be)
publikelie declaring in the Conference of Hampton Court, Anno Domini. 1624.
and ingenuouslie confessing that he had seen no true translation, and that
the Geneua translation is the worst of all others.

Neither ought the corruptions found in the reformed Bibles to be called
peccadillos or small faults as Sir Humfrey would have them to the end they may
be the more easily winked at: for suppose they were never so little in
themselves, yet are they to be esteemed great and horrible abuses in regard of
the great reverence which ought to be had toward those sacred volumes of the
word of God, it being treason in the highest degree to offer to falsify or
alter them any way whatsoever. And let the reader be judge whether it be but a
small fault to translate images for idols, as the English bible of the year
1562. has in the text: or as an other of the year 1577. has in the margen
upon the first chapter of the Epistle of S. John, in the last words. Or as the
same, or other editions upon the words of Jacob. Genesis 37. v. 35. descendam ad
filium meum Iugens in infernum, has translated the word infernum, hell, into
the word Sepulcher, or grave: notobstanding both the Hebrewe word Seol and
the Greek word adis signify not the grave but either properly hell it
self, or some part of the earth far deeper then the grave. And in this
manner Beza has done upon those words of the psalm. non relinques animam
meam in inferno, translating for animam Cadauer and for inferno, sepulchro, and
so Metamorphizeth Christ's soul into his body, and hell into his grave. And
vpn the 22. of saint Luke where according to the Greek text, the sentence is,
This is the cup of my blood which cup is shed for you: Beza to eneruate the
force of the argument for the real presence, purposelie translateth the words
thus. This is the cup of my blood which blood is shed for you. Also the English
bibles, whereas saint Peter in the first chapter of his second epistle v. 10.
says, brethren labor the more that by good works you make sure your vocation
and election. Least here, it should appear that good works are auayleable or
necessary to salvation, they leave out in their translations the words: by
good works, notobstanding the Latin copies have them universally, and some
Greek copies also, as Beza confesses. And if these be the faults which Sir
Hu^frey calls but peccadillos, surely he has a conscience as large as a
friars sleeue: and if these be his small faults doubtless according to due
proporrion his greater sins are abomination. And this is that Bible which the
Romanists say needs an Index expurgatorie, not that Sacred Bible which is
truly and sincerely translated according to that text which has been at the
least since the time of S. Augustine commonly used in the Church, as appears
by the Rhemes Testament, which because it is found to have been rightly
translated, is not arraigned by the Pope, but exposed to be read even by the
laity, at the least by license and advise of their Confessors.

Further more in regard of the foresaid corruptions and many other which for
brevity I omitted, made by heretics in the holy scriptures, those modern
authors which Sir Humfrey cites (if they be truly cited) have been induced to
utter some such speeches concerning the same as, if they be not truly and
piouslie interpreted, may give occasion of offense to the reader: for example
when they affirm (as he says) the scriptures to be dead caracters, a dead,
and killing letter etc. such phrases nevertheless (as it manifestly appears
by the rest of their doctrine and discourse in those places) are not used by
those authors with an intent in any sort to disgrace or diminish the
dignity of the true word of God, but only by those comparatiue speeches, to
declare how subject the scriptures are to be corrupted and detorted to the
defense of heresies and errors if they be considered preciselie as they are
the external written letter, and interpreted otherwise then by the authority
of the visible Church in all ages, the ancient Counsels, and Fathers, they
have been vhderstood. Wherefore those Romanists which the knight cites as if
they had spoken irreuerentlie and blasphemonlie of the holy scriptures do no
more injury unto them then S. Paul did when 2. Cor. 3. he says of them,
litera occidit, the letter kills, Lib. de Synodis.
or then did S. Hilarie when he teaches that many heresies have their origin
from scriptures ill understood, or then Martin Luther who called the Bible
liber haereticorum the book of heretics. None of which speeches as I suppose
Sir Humfrey will dare to condemn either of blasphemy or irreuerence, nay if
he have his senses about him he will easily perceive that those and other
such like phrases are not meant actiuelie of the word of God, but only
passiuelie, that is that throu' the malice of the false interpreter it is so
irreuerentlie detorted and abused as if indeed it were as flexible as a nose of
wax. And according to this we see that none of that which our adversary
produces here out of the Romanists is any argument of irreuerence against the
truth, and inuiolabilitie of Gods word, but a calumnious accusation quite
contrary to the sense and meaning of the foresaid authors, who had not any
intention to tax the scriptures but the corrupters and false interpreters of
them, such as you pseudoreformers are your selves.

And now although by this which I have said in general touching this point of
blasphemy against scripture supposed to be perpetrated by the Romanists, the
authors by the knight cyted remain sufficiently cleared from the imputation
which he lays upon them in that nature: nevertheless because by the
particular examen of the places cyted I have discovered that either all or most
of their words, be either corruptedlie rehearsed, or their sense detorted, and
abused, therefore I will severally repeat their passages, and declare in what
respects our adversary has deceitfullie traduced them.

And to begin with Lindanus, his stromata in deed I could not have, but I have
read the place cited out of his Panoplia, where I find that when he names the
scripture a dead and killing letter, he only alludes to the words of S.
Paul 2. Cor 3. for the letter kills, but the spirit give lives. Sicut illud
eiusde^ authoris dogma in mortuas, imo ceidentes adeo literas relatum. Panop.
lib. 1. c. 44.
Neither speaking nor meaning worse of the same scripture then the Apostle
himself: and affirming at the most, that the bare letter of the word of God
ill interpreted does kill the soul, but reight expounded according to the
tradition of the Church, it does revive and nourish it, and brings it to
eternal life: yea and having better pondered his words in the end of the
chapter quoted by Sir Humfrey, I perceive the does not absolutely call the
scriptures a dead and killing letter, but only that the doctrine of that
author (meaning the holy Ghost as I conceive) is put in to dead and killing
letters. As his words quoted in Latin in the margen declare. And in this same
sense I may iustelie and truly suppose the same author speaks in the place
quoted out of his other work if any such saying he has, in regard that a
grave and learned man as he is known to have been, is ever judged to be suitable
to himself in all times and places. Which learned divine is yet further
co^uinced, never to have spoake^ otherwise then reverently of the scriptures
in that in every several place cited by our adversary, he styles them sacrae
litterae. sacred letters. And in like manner I conceive of Charon, who as being
of the same faith and religion he neither did nor dared to speak otherwise
then with the same due respect which the Roman Church commaundes the Romanists
to use toward the holy written word of God.

Canus in his 3. chapter of his second book is abused by the knight, Nec esse
eas volunt cereum quenda^ nasum in sensum omnem flexibiles, sed potius esse per
se expositas and in promptu cuique sine magistro and docente patere Canus lib.
3. ca. 7. f. 176 edit. Louan.
by his imposing upon the Romanists that which Canus speaks of the Lutherans
saying, that they will not have the scriptures to be like a nose of wax
subject to diverse senses but rather plain for every one to understand without
a master or teacher: and thus the preposterous kniht does positiuelie and
affirmatiuelie impute that to the Romanists which Canus only relates to be
negatiuely asserted of the scriptures by the Lutherans.

Turrianus agregiously abused in that he is accused to call the scriptures a
Delphick sword, the riddles of Sphinx and the like: for he does not absolutely
say they are such, but only says that if Christ had left in his Church that
rule only which the pretended reformers received from Luther, to wit that
scriptures are easy to be interpreted and understood, and according as they
have hitherto expounded them in their own sense, then says Turrian, what else
should we have of them then a Delphick sword? In which words you see he does
not affirm absolutely that the scriptures are such a sword, but only that
according as the sectories handle them in their false manner of expounding,
they may be so compared: and for this cause he puts for his marginall note, how
to interpret scriptures according to ones own proper sense is as to have a
Delphick sword: and so by this and the authors words which I quote in the
margen in Latin, his meaning is sufficiently declared together with the knights
calumnious proceeding against him. Vos enim sicut a Luthero didicistis
scripturas sanctas faciles ad intelligendum and interpreta^dum esse putatis,
and sic eas hactenus vestro sensis intellexistis and interpretati estis. At si
hanc solam regulam fidei Christus in Ecclesia reliquisset, quid aliud quam
gladium delphicum haberemus etc. Quomodo interpretari scripturas ad libidine^
proprij sensus sit vt habere Delphicu^ gladium. co^tr. Sad. p. 99.


Lessius is ill cited, for in his 11. reason he has none of those words
quoted by Sir Humfrey, yet in his table he has those. Scriptura qua ratione
nasus cereus, regula lesbia etc. nuncupetur. Cyting for this, his own page
130. of his consult. Where yet he has not those formal words which Sir
Humfrey cites, but only some others to that sense: yet the truth is he does
not apply either the words or the sense to the Romanists, but to the nouelists
saying of them and their interpretation of scriptures by their private spirit.
Scripturam autem quisque pro suo captu and iudicio intelligit, vnde cum se
putant scripturam habere, regulam credendi, loco scripturae habent
imaginationem propriam etc. So that here we find no blasphemy in Lessius, but
imposture in Sir Humfrey.

It is true, Lessius in his disputation of Antichrist has those formal words
cyted by Sir Humfrey, in his page of the same number where he says: the
scripture is called by Catholics a nose of Wax and a Lesbious rule etc. but he
presently explicates in what sense, to wit when it is taken for the bare words
or letter only secluding the sense of the Church and the interpretation of
Fathers as says he, it is taken by heretics. So that it is plain that
Lessius does not say that Catholics call the true scripture together with the
true sense, a nose of Wax, but only the naked text and as it is abused by
corrupters. Lessius demonstr. 15. p. 131.
An non regula illis Lesbia quam omnibus suis imaginationibus quantumuis
absurdis accommodant and seruire faciunt, qui per Antichristu^ designari volunt
non vnum hominem, sed plurimorum seriem etc. And presently. Apud Catholicos non
est regula Lesbia quia est animata vero nimirum sensu qui contrarijs placitis
aptari nequit Among Catholics, says Lessius (the scripture) is not a lesbie
rule because it is animated with true sense which cannot be applied to
contrary opinions. By which words it is evident that this author is mightily
wronged being he has the very negative proposition to that is imposed upon
him.

In the citation of Pighius Sir Humfrey ought to have continued his rehearsal
from the beginning of his words to the end of the period of the authors whole
passage, and then it would have appeared plainly how falselie he is accused.
For so he discourses. But because (says he) no place of scripture is so
plain or open as it can defend itselte from the injury of the heretics who
adulterate, deprave, and detort it to their own sense, for they (as one no
less truly then merrily has said) are even as a nose of wax which does
easily suffer it self to be fashioned and drawn this way, and that way, and
which way thou wilst, and like a certain leaden rule used in the buildings of
Lesbos, which is not hard to be accomodated to what you will; there must be a
line joined unto it, such a one as is not as flexible as it self, but firm
and stiff, I say that pillar, that firmament of Catholic truth, that is the
common sense and sentence of the Church, then we shall be certain and sure of
the true understanding of the scriptures, if it be consonant in all things to
her which as she gives Canonical authority to the scriptures, so is she truly
the Lydius Lapis or touch stone of the true and Orthodox interpretation of the
same etc. Pighius l. 3. Hierarc. c. 3.
Thus far, Pighius. Where he puts also for his marginall note. Scriptures ab
haereticorum vi and iniuria se prorsus vindicare non posse. That is: the
scriptures can not vendicate or free them selves from the violence, and injury
of heretics. By which note alone, if his words in the text were not so plain
as they be: yet is it clearer then the leight, that the comparisons which
Pighius uses be not applied by him to the scriptures absolutely but only as
considered according to their bare caracters and letter, and as they are
subject to be corrupted by false interpretations: neither is he who used such
speeches only with relation to the abusers of scripture more guilty of
injurious proceeding against the scriptures them selves as truly they are the
word of God: then those are esteemed to be injurious to the writings of S.
Thomas, and Aristotle, who by reason they are expounded in contrary senses
occasioned by their obscurity, affirm their expositors make them a nose of
wax, or compare them to some such other flexible matter, mierly in that respect.

And conformable to this also which we have said because the Romanists know by
experience how falselie the misreformers use to deal in their citations as
partly has been convinced in diverse places of this censure, therefore and
not for any other cause do they some times if they cite the Fathers, iustelie
reject them as by them corrupted or falselie cited. And so if they cite
Berengarius and the waldenses they iustelie reject them as heretics: If they
cite reformers for Romanists they justly reject them for none of theirs. If
they cite Catholic authors impertinentlie, corruptedlie, or in a false sense,
they iustelie rejected them as abused by them and so remit them to the
Censurers purgatory. If they cite scriptures either falselie translated by
addition, or detraction, or falselie interpreted, or falsified, they iustelie
reject them as imperfect, and as made by them a couerture for thieves, and an
officine or shop of heretics, And yet notobstanding all this it is manifest
both by an express decree which the Council of Trent made in the fourth ses.
against the profaners of the sacred scriptures, Decret. de edit. and vsu
sacrorum l. verse. fin.
as also by some ceremonies of the Mass it self, that the Romanists give
far greater reverence every way unto them without comparison then the
Reformers. And the same I say of the ancient Fathers who^ the Romanists as it
is well known, respect so much that they accounte it plain temeritie in any
writer to teach any doctrine contrary to the common consent of them: Whereas
one the contrary, there is nothing more ordinary among the writers of the
misreformed Churches the^ to reject the authority of the ancient Fathers, or
at the least to vilify them and speak contemptuously of them as diverse of
their works do testify.

But for all this Sir Humfrey is still harping upon that string that the Roman
Church houlds the scriptures to be imperfect: but I know none that makes them
so imperfect as the misreformed Churches by cutting of diverse parts of them,
and condemning them for Apochripha in their consistoriall sessions, and by
corrupting the text by false translations and erroneous interpretations as I
have above declared. And touching the Roman Church I have already told him
that he belyeth her. For neither she here self nor any of her members ever
defended that tenet absolutely that the scriptures are imperfect. But only
some Romanists affirm the scriptures alone to be no perfect rule of faith, yet
they never say they are imperfect. For one thing it is to be perfect in them
selves, and an other thing to be perfect as they be a rule of faith. The first
is absolutely true and maintained by all Romanists; the second is but true
secundum quid, and with restriction, as before has been declared, or as it is
but one part yet the cheifest and the far more perfect and noble. Wherefore
the Romanists as the reader may perceive hold both the scriptures and Fathers
for perfect and campleit absolutely speaking, where as the reformers whatsoever
they say in words, yet indeeds they do mangle and martyrize them most
cruelly, as a book published by a reformed minister, called the censure of
the Fathers does give over plain testimony. Censura Patrum.
And thus handled by thim I grant the reformers may challenge them for theirs,
but taking them in their compleit and perfect latitude and purity, the
Romanists my iustelie say all mine, in which action notwithstanding there is no
police used to deceive the ignorant, as the reformers use to do, but plain
dealing for their true instruction.

And to say the Romanists silence scriptures, it is so manifest an untruth as
it needs no other confutation. But by the lie. Neither do they otherwise purge
either them or any learned writers, but only, or at the least chiefly from
such darnell as you enemies to the Crop of Christ use to sow by night in the
field of faith. According to the sentence of the author of the Impect
Commentary of S. Mathewe hom. 44. speaking of heretical Priests, whose words
although the knight world feign apply them against the Romanists, yet they can
not possible be so truly and fitly accommodated to any as to his own
ministers and Bishops, whose common and known practice is by severity of
laws and all fortes of punishment and not by their books and writings to
musle the Romanists mouths, because (to use the words of the foresaid author)
they know that if the truth be once laid open, their Church shall be forsaken
and they from their Pontifical dignity shall be brought down to the
baseness of the people. And now we see by the examen of this whole sectio^
how false Sir Humfreyes cards have proved and how plainly he has lost the
game notwithstanding all his iudling tricks and counterfeit shuffling, of which
sleights there are such great store in this section that there is no place for
any matter of substance but only verbal florishes to give color and
countenance to his fained and calumnious accusations.

THE XIV. PERIOD.
SIR Humfrey tells us that in this section following there are contained
allegations collected out of Bellarmin for testification of the truth of the
reformed doctrine in the chief points of controversy.

I have already declared that the Romanists reject not either true scriptures,
or Fathers; nor yet any other authors of the Roman Church, but only as
either corrupted by heretics, or else only where we find them to have some
singular opinion, or tenet against the uniform doctrine of the rest in matters
of faith manners, or Ecclesiastical practice or discipline: or else in some
particular points not then sufficiently declared and determined by the Church
when they did so utter their opinions; of which sort of writers nevertheless
there never were any such either in number or quality of doctrine as could
either make or mar the antiquity and universality of the Church in that
nature.

And as for Bellarmin whom Sir Humfrey cites in this section, we are so far
from taking exceptions at any thing that he ever writ and published, that we
all hold him for a most faithful and diligent defender not only of the
principal points of our faith but also of every one of them in particular,
and of the whole Roman doctrine in so much that I accounte it no less then
plain madness in that man who shall offer to make use of his testimony for
the contrary, knowing for certain that if he be sincerely alleged and
rightly understood, nothing can be found in him for the adverse part. And
to the end that this may more plainly appear I will breeflie examen those
particular places which Sir Humfrey produces, for the contrary.

First therefore he cites Bellarmin as confessing the uncertainty of all the
Tre^t Sacraments (as the knight terms the^) because forsooth in his third
book of Justification the 8. chap. he grants that none can be certain by
the certainty of faith that he receives a true Sacrament, in regard in
depends upon the intention of the minister. But this testimony I have already
showed to be delusorie, and it is wholly impertinent to the purpose, for that
the question about the necessity of the knowledge of the intention of the
minister by faith, is no principal controversy betwixt us but rather meerelie
incident. Neither yet can the reformers find the contrary position in any
place of scripture by that means to make it a point of faith for themselves.

Secondly he induces Bellarmin lib. 3. de Eucharist cap. 23. touching the
reformers denial of transsubstantiation. To which place I have also ansered
before; and it is not for this purpose, in regard there is no mention of any
denial of the truth of trassubstantiation, or confession of the Reformers
tenet in that point: but only of an other incident question, viz. whether
transsubstantiation can be proved by express words of scripture. And at least
touching the maine point (to omit the other as impertinent and disagreable to
the title of our adversaries question which is of principal points of
controversy,) it is too clear that Bellarmin defended the affirmative in
terminis, in plain terms. And so this is no such confession as Sir Humfrey
seeks for in this place. Besides that all Bellarmins confession is but one
pore non est improbabile:

Thirdly he cites Bellarmins confession against private Mass lib. 2. de
Missa cap. 9. and 10. But the latter place I have examined before and found it
corrupted by Sir Humfrey both in words and sense neither are the words
sincerely recited by omission of omnino, and sine declaratione Ecclesiae, and
transposition of the text. And here I further add that neither of the places
is to this purpose, because they prove no unlawfulness, or absolute
imperfection in private Masses, but only at the most their less lawfulnes,
their less perfection, or their want of frequentation in the primative ages:
which is no principal point of controversy between the Reformers, and
Romanists, nay none at all.

And touching Bellarmins confession contained in the first place, viz. That we
read not expressly, but gather by conjectures that the ancients did sacrifice
without communion of some person, or persons, I say it is impertinent in
regard it inuolues no disproofe of private Masses, as our adversary
counningly indeuores to persuade his unadvised reader. It being sufficient for
the instification of the practice of them, that besides the authority of the
present Church which approues them, not any word either of scripture, or
ancient Fathers can be produced in which they are condemned for unlawful, or
repugnant to Christ's institution, or command. And if more then this were
required for matters of practice in this nature: certain it is the pretensiue
reformers of the Church, would never be able to justify their own order, and
prescription of communicating at Easter, or some twice or thrice more in the
year: or their new prohibition of not receiving their communion even at the
point of death without a competent number: of neither of which they have not as
much as one pore instance, or example in the primative Church. By which it
appears that Bellarmins confession is in this passage preposterously alleged
by the knight both in respect of the Roman Doctrine against which it concludes
nothing, as also in respect of the inconvenience which by sequel and illation
it induces to his own: who yet offers the Cardinal some further abuse by
omission of the word facile, in the recytal of his text. Tamen id possumus ex
co^iecturis facile colligere. Bellar. supra.


Where the reader may yet once more reflect, that although Bellarmin in his
modesty termed the examples of antiquity which he produces for the practice
of private Masses at the least in some particular cases, no more then
conjectures: yet if some of them be duly pondered and urged with their
circumstances, they may justly pass for solid reasons: as that S. Chrysostom
diverse times reprehending the people most sharply and vehemently for making
the Masses private by their not communicating in them: yet does he not once
either condemn such Masses in them selves, or he him self ever ceased to
celebrate them daily even then when he most preached against the negligence of
those who were present in them without receiving the sacrament with the
priest. Which doubtless is a morally concluding argument that Masses without
communion of the people were used and esteemed lawful even in those more
primative and ancient ages. To which may not vnaptely be added for confirmation
of the same discourse by way of aduertisment, that S. Chrysostom never
affirmed in these occasions of complainte of the people, that Masses in which
communicants ar wanting, be evil or contrary to Christ's ordinance or precept,
but the most he said was, that the oblation is frustrate when there be none to
participate: which words of his ar so far from reproving the practice, and
use of Masses without comunion of the people, that they necessarily implye that
the sacrifice was in realitie cebebrated, notobstanding the people did
frustrate the intention of the priest in that by their want of devotion they
received not the Communion which he had prepared for them: supposing it is
absolutely inpossible to conceive that the Mass or oblation could be
frustrated for want of partakers, except it were in it self a Mass or
oblation truly and really performed by the sacrificer.

Fourthlie it is true that Bellarmin confesses that in the primative Church,
because the Christians were but few, they did all sing and ansere in the
divine offices. But he affirms not that either it then was, or now is
unlawful to have the public, or private prayer in an unknown tongue, which
is the only point in controversy, the reformers defending touth and nail
the affirmative, and the Romanists the negative. Nay Bellarmin is so far
from confessing the reformers doctrine in this particular, that he expresselie
affirms in the same place that the divine offices in those primative times
were celebrated in Greek which all the people did not understand, and yet
clears this whole question so far that if Sir Humfrey had used any spark
of sincerity in citing Bellarmins words home and truly, they would have
taken away all doubt concerning his meaning: Whereas by leaving out
deceitfullie the latter part of his clause, he caused in his reader a
preuidicate opinion of the true sense, touching which, and the faithless
proceeding of our adversary about the same, the Cardinals own words entirely
recited will tell the truth: for thus he speaks. At obijcies sicut Apostolus
etc. But (says Bellarmin) you will object. As the Apostle would that the
people might subioine, Amen: so also he was to ordain that the divine offices
should be celebrated in the vulgar tongue that the people might answer, Amen.
Bellar. l. 2. de verbo Dei. c. 16.
I anser by denying the consequence, because the divine offices were performed
in the Greek tongue which many of the people did understand, though not all,
and this was sufficient; for the Apostles will was not that all should anser.
Besides this, because then the Christians were few, they all sung together in
the Church, and ansered in the divine offices: but afterward the multitude
increasing, the offices were more divided, and it was left to the sole clergy
to acomplish the common prayers, and Lauds in the Church. Thus plainly does
the Cardinal declare himself for a ptofessed adversary of Sir Humfrey and
his comperes in this particular even so far as to solue their greatest
objection which they use to frame against the practice of the Roman Church.

Firstlie touching the allegation of Bellarmins confession of the reformers
tenet about the Communion in both kinds, it is most false that Bellarmin
confesses it in the point in controversy, Bellarmin. l. 2. de verbo Dei c. 16.
I mean it is false that he confesses either Christ to have commanded the
communion in both Kinds, or that the ancient Church practiced the same only
in both kinds, both which points Bellarmin so expresselie declares that Sir
Humfrey could not possible have found any color to have alleged his
confession for the contrary if he had not mangled his words as he did in
truth most shamefullie as may appear most plainly to him that will take
pains to examen them as they are by him delivered toward the end of the
chapter cited by the knight, where it is evident that the Cardinal proceeds
diametrally contrary to the reformers doctrine in the principal point of this
question according to his own express words quoted in this my margen.
Idcirco quaerendu^ superest vtrum salte^ diuino praecepto positiuo eiusmodi
obligatio (communicandi sub vtraque specie) in Ecclesia sit nos enim negamus,
illi (sectarij) asserunt. Bellar. lib. 4. de Eucha. c. 24.


Sixtlie touching the confession of Bellarmin about the duall number of proper
Sacraments, we have already showed him to be quite opposite to the reformers
doctrine, and also have examined the same place which Sir Humfrey cites here
and found the sense of the Cardinal to have been egregiously by him
transuerted and corrupted, and so here is no confession of any principal
point of controversy made by him in favor of his adversaries, but a new
repetition of an old imposture of the knights own making.

Lastelie the knight cites two places, of Bellarmin. The first out of his 3.
book of Justification the 6. chapter, is touching the reformers faith and good
works which he affirms Bellarmin to confess. But what a ridiculous
allegation is this? For it is true Bellarmin confesses in the place cited that
the reformers hold faith and repentance are requisite to justification and
that without them no man can be justified, but this is no principal point of
controversy: nay no question at all between the Romanists and the reformers,
but only a point of doctrine which the reformers do commonly teach and the
Romanists do not deny. So that this is impertinentlie alleged out of
Bellarmin for faith and good works since that in the words cited out of him
there is not one syllable of good works, but only of faith and repentance as
the reader sees. But yet that which is most absurd of all is that Sir Humfrey
haueing here cited Bellarmins confession that the reformers hold both faith
and repentance to be required to justification, yet presently after he cites
the same Bellarmin as concluding with the reformed Churches justification by
faith only, so that within the compass of one page the knight out of the
profunditie of his great head peace resolves in favor of his own cause out
of Bellarmin both that without a lively faith and an ernest repentance no man
is justified, and also that according to the doctrine of the reformed Churches
man's justification is by faith only. Let the reader if, he be able couple
these two together, but if he can not let him hold for certain that Sir
Humfrey line was far out of quare when he uttered such disparates. Now the
second place of the two last is touching justification by faith only. But
this has been examined before, and found to contain no confession of
justification by faith only (as the knight will have it, unadvisedly
contradicting himself out of an inordinate desire to make Bellarmin seem to
stand for the doctrine of his Church) but only that Bellarmin speaks there
of confidence in merits according to the sense above declared.

And thus Sir Humfrey having cited all he can, which all nevertheless is just
nothing, he adds for all this that he wondreth why the Romanists should send
out such Anathemas and curses against all or any of those that deny their
doctrine. But I wonder more that he who has produced nothing either in this
chapter or in the rest of his book out of Catholic authors which in his
sense and meaning does not rather deserve to be hissed at, then to be admitted
for any proof of his doctrine, yet should not be ashamed to affirm that the
best learned of the Romanists confess that many principal points of their
own religion and many articles of their faith, are neither ancient, safe, nor
Catholic. And suerlie I can not conceive but that both he and who soever else
should use so much false dealing as he has done, in propugning their own
tenets especially in matters of religion, deserve the Anathema in the highest
degree, that curse being the proper brande of the defenders of erroneous,
heretical, or scysmaticall doctrine. And indeed it seems Sir Humfrey had not
very great conference in the industry which he has used in this his work.
For notobstanding it appears manifestly that he puts the greatest
streingth of his proofs through out his whole book in the multitude of
authors especially Romanists, whom by way of emendication or begerie he
alleges as confessers of his faith, yet he here flies to the little flock
and to the paucitie of believers and to the simplicity of babes as to special
caracters of the true Church, and utterly disclaming from humane wisdom,
power, and nobility: a pore refuge after so many great boasts and bragges of
the victory obtained (as he imagines, but falselie) by mere authority and
multiplicitie of testimonies piled up both in text, and margin; now to plead
paucitie, simplicity and want of power, and wisdom. And as for your paucitie
in number Sir Humfrey I will not stick to grant in regard that how great a
show soever you have made to the contrary, yet I know you to be most pore
and beggarly in that nature, but yet I deny that to be a special and
infallible mark of the true Church as you insinuate, no more then the paucitie
of Manicheans or Donatists was a mark of the truth of their Churches. And the
same I say of the want of might, wisdom, nobility, I mean of true, power,
wisdom, and nobility, for of power, wisdom and nobility of the flesh you
must needs have much more then the Romanists, in regard it is well known you
both handle and eat far greater quantity then they do, witness your
little abstinence and the rest which modesty causes me to pass in silence:
And touching your simplicity except by simplicity you mean plain ignorance,
you have no color here to brag of it, for that there was never flock in the
world, in my opinion, so full of all sorts of duplicitie as your own. Neither
has any man greater reight to be a sheep of that fould then the noble knight
Sir Humfrey, who out of the abundance of his double dealing even in this place,
to say nothing of that which is paste, has made choice of as false and
fallacious marks of his own Church as he has calumniouslie fained marks for
ours to wit counterfeit miracles which nevertheless we disclame from and
detest more then he and all his consortes. And if they will needs meddle of
these matters, let them reflect upon their Master Calvin how feign he would
have confirmed his new Gospel with a forged resuscitation of a poor man who
by his instructions, fained death, but the false Prophet failing of his purpose
committed a murder in steed of a miracle.

The knight says further that we believe lies: But I say that he does not
only believe them but makes them, as appears by this his pamphlet in which,
as we see, there is great store. In Deuteronomy. 14.
We do not deny with Lira but that some times in the Church there may be great
deception of the people among the Priests in fained miracles: but these
miracles if any such there be, are in the Church and in the Priests only, as
Lira discretely insinuate, not approved by the Church, and the Priests or their
companions for lucre, as the false knight injuriously affirms, most
corruptedly omitting in his translation of Lyra's words both the word
aliquando in the beginning, and also the end of his sentence to wit: Lyra in c.
14. Dan.
and talia exstirpanda sunt a bonis prelatis sicut ista extirpata sunt a
Daniele. De ciuit. l. 2. c. 8.
And we yet further affirm with S. Augustine that he that seeks to be
confirmed by miracles now, is to be wondered at most of all himself in
refusing to believe what all the world believes besides himself. But in those
words S. Augustine does not deny but that true miracles may be in the Church,
nor yet that they were not in his time, Lib. 22. c. 8.
for in his books de Ciuit. he affirms expressly that Christian doctrine,
not only in the beginning but also in the progress, of the Church was
confirmed by miracles, as besides other places the very title of that same
chapter rehearsed in my margen makes appear to which these his words in the
discourse following plainly agree. De miraculis quae vt mundus in Christo
crederet facta sunt, and ficri mundo credente no^ desinunt. Tit. c. 8 li. 22.
For (says S. Augustine) even at this present time miracles are operated or
done in his name: (in the name of Christ) either by the Sacraments, or by the
prayers, and memories of his saints. And the same S. Aug. in the same place
further relates one famous miracle in particular done at the body of S.
Geruase, and Protase in Mila^ where he himself remained at that present time.
And by this it is evident that S. Aug. in the other place produced by Sir
Humfrey only condemns him who for want of miracles should refuse to
believe, to which we Romanists most willingly agree. And by this it appears
that S. Augustine is here impertinently alleged by the knight. But the truth
is that because these companions have no miracles in their own Church, they
strive by all means possible to obscure the miracles of the Church of Rome and
cry out like Bedlames: there is no need of miracles.

And now to come to a conclusion of this section, and the censure of it, I
would feign know of Sir Humfrey what is all this discourse of miracles to the
purpose of testifying his doctrine by the confession of Bellarmin, surely
nothing at all. and I persuade my self the knight was mightly distracted when
he penned it, and so I leave him till he returns to his more perfect senses.

THE XV. PERIOD.
SIR Humfrey plays the part of a Charlatan so far that he is not content
by his prestigious tricks and sleights to lay clame to ancient Fathers and
modern Romanists for confessors of his own faith, but also out of the
groasenes of his education, in this section he presumes to lay his greasy
hands upon those holy primative martyrs, and champions of Jesus Christ
engrossing and conueying those sacred wares into his own stinking
storehouse, which nevertheless all ages, all Christian people, all nations
have till the days of Luther proclaimed and testified to pertain to the
renown and glory of the Roman Church. And although he would seem to prove that
the foresaid prime martyrs do not belong to the Church of Rome, yet his chief
proof is but prating and an idle application of his own tenets already
examined and confuted in their several places, where they have been all found
either plainly false, or at the least equivocal and founded upon false
suppositions upon which no true argument can be framed: which being so I may
iustelie save labor to descend to particulars, yet one only will I specify
which is so shamefullie impertinent that it is sufficient alone to shame the
rest.

He says therefore that Father Garnet being demanded whether if he were to
consecrate the Sacrament that morning he should suffer death, he durst after
consecration affirm upon his Salvation that the wine in the cup consecrated
was the very blood of Christ which flowed from his side, he made ansere it
might iustelie be doubted. This is the wise story which Sir Humfrey tells us
out of Bishop Andrews, which although we are not bound to believe as being
justified only by our adversaries, yet suppose it is as true as their
Gospel, it makes not any thing for this purpose, for that Sir Humfreys task
in this place was not to meddle with martyrs of these later ages, but to
demonstrate that those ancient martyrs of former ages did not die for that
faith which the present Roman Church professes, and so what soever he or his
Prelate can faigne of Father Garnet is but a fools boult which flying at
random comes not near the mark. Father Garnet says he, durst not
pronounce openly over the cup after he had consecrated it, this is the blood
of Christ, ergo never any martyr did take it upon his death that the
consecrated bread is the corporal and real flesh of Christ. Behold I pray
this most subtle Logike of a knight and admire it. Or if you list rather laffe
at it as I did when I found it out, and so I left it without any further
confutation, imagining that perhaps Sir Humfrey long before he was borne did
miraculouslie speak with some of those ancient soldiers of Christ, and so
came to know that none of them ever gave their lives for the real presence.
Which in deed is the point in question, and not whether a man can lawfully
pronounce upon his Salvation whether this or that host in particular after
consecration, contains the body of Christ, as the knight captiouslie
supposes

But yet showing us some more grains of his folly he says further, that it
is undoubtedly true that the ancient martyrs could not dye in that faith nor
for that religion which was altogether unknown to their church. O ingenious
ge^tilman! but yet I pray tell me if the fore said martyrs dyed not for the
Romanists religion because as you faigne, they dyed not for the profession of
the real presence, For what religion did they dye? Suerlie not for yours,
because if our religion was unknown unto them, much more was yours unknown to
their ages which was not in the world before the days of Luther, except
perhaps your 39. articles were known unto them by extraordinary revelation
before they were coined. It is true here we have Sir Humfreys ipse dixit for
confirmation of his tenet, and so it must needs be doubtless, his authority is
so excessiuely great. Sir Tho. Ouerb. in his caract. of a Purita^ or Precisian.
And so I grant the hypotheticall to be most true: And me thinks it is not
much unlike to an other such like position of the Puritans, who use to say: it
is impossible for a man to be damned in their religion, and so a facetious
Protestant confesses for certain, as long as heliues in it, but if he dies in
it, there is the question. Wherefore since all is but trifles that Sir Humfrey
brings, I wish the reader of his book to consider with himself how small
probability there is to imagine that those glorious champions of Christ who so
valerouslie suffered torments and died for him in the Roman Church, and many
of them at Rome it self, could possibly belong to any other Church in the
world, then to that Church which as in that time it had the name of Roman
Church so does it still remain with the same appellation not otherwise then by
a continual succession of the Popes of Rome, three and thirty of which (as
eloquent Campian truly observes) were put to death for their faith, which
their faith as it is manifest partly by their own works, and partly by the
authentical histories of their martyrdomes, was the very same according to
the manner I have before declared, which now is tought in the present Church
of Rome.

And if this be not so, if those glorious martyrs were not defenders of that
Roman faith which by succession of pastors is derived and arrived to this our
time, I demand of our adversaries of what other faith they were, for of the
reformed faith they could not possible be in regard that none of them either
tought in their life, or died for the defense of Justification by faith only,
or for the denial of the real presence of the body and blood of Christ in
the Eucharist, nor for denying that there is any other word of God but only
scripture. Nor for affirming that the images of Christ and his Saints are
Idols, or that they who honor them adore idols, or sticks and stones, or that
the Pope was Antichrist: nor do we find in any history either any of
this, nor yet that the foresaid martyrs suffered for these, or any other point
of the reformers doctrine which is contrary to the faith of the present Roman
Church. Wherefore the said reformers must necessarily confess that the
ancient martyrs died either for ours or for no other Christian doctrine, and
consequently that they are either ours or no martyrs at all.

And if they were Popes of Rome as you Purita^s your selves cannot deny, how
could they possible be yours who believe the Pope is Antichrist, and are so
far from that kind of government that you do not willingly admit either
Pope, Prince, or Prelate, but only a consistoriall Anarchie without head or
feet. And he that shall duly ponder these particulars, doubtless his
conscience will tell him how vniustelie Sir Humfrey indeuoreth to wreist from
the Roman Church those rich prises. And let this suffice for the censure of
this section and to show that the Romanists by their claim to the martyrs of
the primative Church pretend nothing but their due.

THE XVI. PERIOD.
THE 17. section contains an ansere to an objection of the Romanists drawn
from the opinion of Protestants touching the Salvation of professed Romanists,
where Sir Humfrey tells us, he is come to the greatest wonder. And I confess
the wonder which the knight proposes is great, but it being of his own
making, it is not he that ought to wonder at it but rather in my opinion he
should leave that to others. And truly it is most wonderful to me to hear
that the Romanists themselves should confess their own doctrine to be
different from the ancient Church in many principal points of faith, but this
having already ben demonstrated to be false and feigned by Sir Humfrey, the
greatest wonder of all wonders is that he should have the face to make a wonder
of his own so often repeated untruths. It is true the Romanists constantly
hold that neither Lutheran nor Caluinist, nor any other heretic or
Scismatike dying in his heresy obstinately can be saved, for so they say with
him that could commit no rash judgment, he that does not believe is already
judged. Qui autem non credit iam iudicatus est. Joan. 3.18.
Nevertheless we Romanists do not deny but that probably some simple people
may live in heresy, and yet not be damned at the least for heresy, and yet be
saved by ignorance if with all they be free from other mortal sins, either
because they never lost their baptismall grace, or if they lost it, by
contrition they recover it again; which although it be not impossible, yet is it
very full of dangerous difficulty morallie speaking, and almost a
Metaphisicall case, and for such I leave it.

Sir Humfrey proceeds on babbling about a City seated upon seven mountains
which he fondelie houldeth for a mark of the false Church and applies it to
the Roman Church. But if Rome were the seat of the false Church because it is
planted upon seven mountains, then how escaped it from that stain all those
five hundredth years in which the reformers themselves grant it was the mother
Church? Iacobus Rex epist. monit.
Neither has the Roman Church any such mark of assuming supreme authority
over Kings and Princes as the knight does odiouslie affirm, but only with
due respect and humility uses that authority over them which Christ himself
did confer upon her, in such manner as is most conducing to the Salvation of
their own souls and their vassals according to the rules of Christian
prudence, and the precept of charity. Yet not to dominier over them, or their
subjects in any sort, and much less to approve or allow of their oppression
either by Massacre, or any other unlawful means, as the sectaries and
especially the Puritans do use calumniouslie to object, notobstanding that
none in the world are more guilty then them selves in those practices, of
which we have too many examples in Scotland, France, and other places even
against Kings, and Princes, which doubtless caused King James of great
Britanie to speak so plain as he did both in his books and ordinary
discourses, of that particular. Nihil nisi calumniam and seditionem spira^tes
Basilic. dor.


After this Sir Humfrey descends to diverse particulars and demau^deth whether
he and his fellows be accursed for maintaining them or no? and whether the
Romanists be blessed for such and such points which they defend against the
sectaries? And thus he runs a long between blessing and cursing till he
concludes casting the curses upon the Romanists and the blessings upon his own
Congregation. But because there is little or nothing but such false stuff as I
have already examined and ce^sured, and because I have quite surfeited with so
frequent repetitio^ of the same subject: I only say in general, as he is
blessed who hears or obeys the Church in all things in regard that by
obeying the Church he obeys Christ who blesses them that obey him: So
contrarily he that disobeyeth the Church in one only thing he is accursed
according to the words of Christ him helfe, if he will not hear the Church
let him be unto to the, like an Ethnike or Publican. Mat. 18.
And so Sir Humfrey had no reason to marvel if the Romanists accounte him and
his fellows accursed because they refuse to embrace and obey any point of
that doctrine which the most universal Church of the world proposes unto
them as doctrine to be received, believed, or practiced by all faithful
Christians. And as S. Augustine in the 41. of his fifty homilies says.
Whosoever is separated from the Catholic Church that is to say that Church
which spread in over the whole world (as he specifieth in the precedent words)
how laudably soever he thinks he lives, for that only sin that he is
divided from the unity of Christ he shall not obtain life eternal, but the
wrath of God remains upon him. In which words as the reader may see
according to the sentence of S. Augustine, separation from the obedience of the
universal Church is sufficient to bring the curse upon any man notobstanding
in other respects he lives never so virtuously.

And according to this the Romanists may bouldly say they are accursed who
deny all merit in works proceeding from the grace of God, Scr. 68. in Cant.
and they blessed with Saint Bernard (whom Calvin himself calls a holy and
pious man) that affirm with him that it is a pernicious prouertie to want
merits, and yet especially at the hour of their death for humility with the
same S. Bernard put all their confidence in the mercy of God; that which the
Romanists do much more then the reformers, notobstanding their defense of
meritorious works.

They are accursed who otherwise then Christ tought or affirmed, teach and
affirm it unlawful for the laitye to communicate in one kind: And they
blessed who with Christ and his Church take it for a thing indifferent of it
self to receive in one or both kinds, and stand to the ordinance of the most
universal Church without contention, according to the difference of times,
places, and persons.

They are accursed who being unlearned read scriptures and interpret them
falsely for the maintenance of their errors, according to that of S. Peter
saying: Epist. 2. c. 3.
there are certain places in S. Paul's Epistles which the unlearned deprave to
their own perdition: but blessed are they who read them as the Eunuch did,
that is with a S. Philipe, I mean with one to show them the true sense, and
as S. Basil and his brother Nazianzene did, Lib. 11. cap. 9.
(who according to Rufinus) read the scriptures following the sense of them
not according to their own presumption, but according to the writings of
their predecessors, notwithstanding they were both, very famous, and renowned
in learning.

They are accursed who either prohibit marriage or meats as ill in them selves
as some ancient heretics did, or abstain not from them both at such times
and in such cases as God and his Church ordains them to abstain: And they
are blessed who according to the order of the Church directed by the spirit of
God remain with S. Paul unmarried, and refaine from eating flesh at such times
as the same Church appoints.

Those are accursed for contemning of Christ in his Church, who contrary to
her appointment, do schismatically administer the public service and
Sacraments in the vulgar tongue, erroneously defending the same to be
commanded by the scriptures: and blessed are those who for reverence to the
holy scriptures and conservation of the dignity of the divine offices, and
other just reasons, hold it fitting to administer public service and
Sacraments in a language most common to all nations, to wit in the Latin tongue.

They are accursed who love Christ and his Saints so little as they accounte
it idolatry, and contrary to the scriptures to honor their images,
notobsta^ding there is no place of scripture truly interpreted to be found
against them: and those are blessed according to the same scriptures who to
show their exterordinarie affection to Christ, duly reverence both the images
of him and his blessed servants.

They are accursed that refuse either to adore Christ's body whersoeuer he
affirms it to be, or account it idolatry or superstition to honor the
Saints who he him self says he honoreth with a crown of glory: and blessed
are they that perform his pleasure in both by adoring his precious body and
blood in the sacrament, and by honoring his Saints in Heaven where he does
honor them as his servants and friends. Si quis mihi ministrauerit
honorificabit eum Pater meus etc.


They are accursed who contrary to scripture reject such ancient traditions as
the most universal Church approves: and blessed are those who with due
obedience observe the same.

Accursed are they who reject charity from the formal cause of
justification, Mayor autem horum est charitas. 1. Cor. 13.
which notobstanding according to the Apostle, is greater then either hope or
faith: and blessed are they who admit it in justification as well as faith and
prefer it before faith with the same Apostle.

Accursed are they that by denying with the Jews the books of the Machabies
to be Canonical scriptures, deny Purgatory and prayer for the souls
departed: and blessed are they who with the Church and S. Augustine hold the
foresaid books for canonical scripture, and say with him it is an undoubted
thing that prayer does profit the dead. Non dubiu^ est oration prodesse
defunctis. Aug. de cura pro mort. c. 1.


And in this manner, if need were I could pass throu' all the rest of the
points of controuerted doctrine, and easily show the curse to fall upon the
misreformed brothers for their obstinacy and disobedience to God and his
Church.

Sir Humfrey would feign seem to bear a charitable mind toward the
Romanists in regard he says, he dares not pronounce damnation upon their
persons, and yet he proclaims confidently and openly to the whole world that
their doctrine is damnable, to which it is necessarily consequent that all such
as die obstinately in it are directly damned: and so if Sir Hu^frey proceeds
co^sequenter to this his tenet, he must necessity judge the same of at the
least in general of those which dye in the foresaid obstinate manner and with
out invincible ignorance end their lives in it. But if this be that which he
calls greater charity them Romanists have, and all the favor he does us, we
thank him not for it, and such charity he may better reserve to himself and
his brothers who in my opinion have no more the^ they can spare. And if this be
all the difference which can be found betwixt the proceeding of the Romanists
and the reformers in this particular, then I say that notwithstanding Sir
Humfrey much labors to make his reader believe that he and his reformed
brothers are more charitable the^ the Romanists in judging of the state of the
souls of such as depart in each religion: nevertheless it is manifest he
quite fails of his intent: supposing that the Romanists do not use to judge
but rather suspend their judgment of particular persons, except they have some
special reasons prudently and morally to persuade themselves that this or that
party died in actual obstinacy and defense of his erroneous faith, otherwise
their censure is only conditional or a general and abstractiue manner. It is
trrue he grants that some of his doctors affirm that a Papist may be
saved, but he delivers his own gloss upon it saying it is meant only by
invincible ignorance, and so by his own comme^tarie he corrupted the whole
text. And if this be the best construction his charity can afford we will
thank him for it as much is it deserves. Nevertheless it is no matter what
either Sir Hu^frey or his fellows say in this point, we esteem not so much
of there judgments as to frame out of them, any rule for the safe way of
salvation: for this rule, we had long before their Church was built we had it
from the way maker him self. And I tell you by the way Sir Humfrey that if
any of your Church be saved in the manner I have declared in the beginning of
this Period, they are absolutely said to be saved in our Church not in yours,
thoguh exteriorlie they live and dye in yours. And so to conclud, if you will
not permit the Romanists to draw an argument from the confession of some of
your authors, but will needs affirm with your greatest doctor and Arch
Puritan whitaker, that upon his word there is not one Papist to be found in
Heaven, I for my part upon condition you brag not of a victory as you use to
do, I will not contend with you, but as in a matter neither of faith, nor yet
of any great consequence supposing your own perverse glosses, I leave you to
your own sense, as also I do those Romanists who used that argument against
some of their adversaries.

THE XVII. PERIOD.
SIr Humfrey has played the Jack so long that in this his last section he
plays Jack on both sides, telling us in the title that he intends to show
that the Protestant religion is safer by the confession of both parties, that
is, both of Romanists and Reformers.

But I know not to what end he made this section except is was only to make
the number of his sections eue^, for I find nothing in it but a new repetitio^
of old matters so often already inculcated that my ears are weary to hear
them. And if Sir Humfrey was disposed to play in the number, he ought rather
to have made choice of the od number the^ of the even as being in the Poets
opinion more pleasing to God, Deus numero inpare gaudet. But let this pass,
for how soever he does, I for my part desire not to stand upon numbers but
upon substance. If he had brought either new matter, or at the least, some new
proof of the old, it might perhaps have been worth the labor to examen it, but
I find only old matter and new equivocations, sleights, and falsities, and
these only I will breefely discuss.

But the whole drift of the knight in this his last sectio^ is, as he says him
self, to make good the title of his book, which is that therefore he and his
fellows are in the safer way because quotteth he, the Romanists agree with us
in the principal points of doctrine: and because that is the safer way wherein
differing parts join both in one, and this I hold to be the substance of his
whole discourse if any there were to be found in it.

First therefore he tells us great news to wit that there is a Heaven and a
hell, in the belief of which, says he, we both agree, and thence he
concludes that this is the safer way because both sides join in it. But this,
if you mark it, is mere Sophistry, for in stead of a whole way both in this
particular and in the rest of the points of controversy he passes throu' in
this section, he shows but a piece of a way. The whole way which he ought to
show in this one point is the reformers belief of heaven and hell and their
denial of Purgatory and limbus, Now Sir Humfrey puts in truly the first
part of his way to wit, the reformers belief of heaven and hell, (how true
this is I know not) but he leaves out deceitfullie the second part of the
way viz. the Reformers belief in the denial of Purgatory and Limbus, and so
as I said before in stead of the whole way he shows but a piece, which piece
although it be supposed to be never so safe, yet it will not serve the turn to
bring a man to his iourneys end, nor yealdeth him any more certainty or
saftie in his way then he that should tell one who is upon his journey to
york, that his safest way is to go from London to Islinton, and there should
leave him to shifte for himself for his directions in the rest of the way, in
which case certain it is the traveler should be little or nothing obledged to
him who shows him that part of the way only which all the world knows.
And the truth is that Sir Humfrey argues in this whole matter as if he should
say of himself and his fellow reformers, we and the Turks agree in the creed
of one God and differ in the belief of Christ the Messiah, therefore it is the
safer way to believe only in one God in which we all agree, then to believe
in God and Christ too, in which we stand single. Even so concludes the knight
of the faith of Purgatory, Limbus, and the rest of the points in controversy
which he particularizeth in the discourse of this section, arguing no otherwise
then in this absurd manner. Neither is it, o Sir Humfrey, our standing single
by our selves, or double with you that either makes or marreth either the
faith of Purgatory, or any other article of the Roman doctrine as you
falselie and fallaciouslie suppose in your argument: But scriptures, general
Counsels, Fathers and the authority of the most universal Church are the
pilars upon which the house of our faith is built.

And as for your joining with us in any one article, or else in the general
assertion of some of your authors that we may be saved in our Church, how
soever it may seem to some to be a confirmation of our faith, yet it is not
any part of the foundation of our faith, but only a kind of moral
argument or motive that we are in the safer way because even some of our
adversaries themselves hold we may be saved in it. But yet as this alone, if
otherwise we did fail in the true grounds of our faith themselves, can not be
a sufficient proof that we are in the safer way then you, so ought it not to
be a sufficient proof that you are in the safer way because we agree with you
in some part of your doctrine. Especially considering you fail in the chief
grounds of your faith as has been showed partly in my this ce^sure, and
partly by other Catholic divines in their several works. And if any
argument for the greater safety of your way could be drawn from our agreement
with you in some points of faith, so in like manner might we deduce a proof of
the greater saftie of our way from the certainty of those points of faith in
which you agree with us, all which is but nugatorie, frivolous, and absurd in
regard that as, a part ad totum, from a part to the whole no lawful
deduction can be made, so neither can it be inferred that because one part of
the object of a man's faith is true, therefore the whole object of is faith is
true by reason that notobstanding one part of the object be true, yet there
may be in the whole object or matter truth and falsitie mixed together, of
which we have insta^ces both in divine and humane matters.

And more then this, Sir Humfrey must give us license to tell him that he was
to forward in the proof of his tenet. For before he went about to prove his
way to be safer then ours, he ought first to have convinced his own way to be
a true and perfect way, and not to have given his reader a part for the whole
by a false Senecdoche, or contrary to the Grammar rules to obtrude upon him a
comparatiue without a positive, that is a safer way were no way is to be found
at all, or at the least no safe and intyre way. And yet more over it is to be
observed that besides those positive points of doctrine in which he says that
both parts agree, there be also diverse negatiues which they quite distinguish
one from an other, which negatiues nevertheless are part of the reformers
faith as well as their positive doctrine, and so in this part of their Creed
they stand single as well as we, and consequently if standing single, as he
auerreth or at the least supposes, does hinder the safety of our way, the
same effect it must of necessity have in theirs, and according to this ground
of Sir Humfreys it is manifest that the reformers can never have the safer way
till we join with them in every point thereof by that means to hinder their
single standing, which yet we assure our selves will never come to pass,
except God almighty reduce them to us from whom they once departed, as we
greatly desire and daily pray.

And according to this we may breeflie ansere to all the rest of the instances
which the knight produces. And so we Romanists confess we stand with the
reformers in the affirmation of heaven and hell, but we stand not with them in
the denial of Purgatory and limbus. We stand with them in the affirmation of
the merits and satisfactions of Jesus Christ: But we stand not with them in the
negation of the merits and satisfactions of those that live in the grace of
God, and by the virtue of the same and the cooperation of their own free will,
perform good works of charity, mercy, justice, and the like, houlding for
certain with S. Augustine that he who created us without us, will not save us
without us: yet further assuring our selves that God does not operate with
bests and men both in one manner. We stand with them in the defense of Baptism
and Eucharist so far as they Orthodoxlie maintainte them, but we stand not
with them in the impugnation of the other five Sacraments. We stand with them
in that they affirm that the images of Christ and his Saints are ornaments and
memorialls of the absent: but we stand not with them in their denial of due
honor to be exhibited unto them for the great love and reverence we bear to
Christ and his Saints. We stand with them in the defense of the divine worship
of God: but we stand not with them in the denial of intercessiue invocation
and honor of his Saints. We stand with them in that Christ is the prime
mediator betwixt God and man: but we stand not with the^ in their denial of
the secondarie mediators, or intercessors which are his servants and friends. We
stand with them in that Christ is head Monarch of the whole Church triumphant
and militant: but we stand not with them in their denial of the visible and
Vicarious head the Pope or chief pastor of the visible Church in earth
subordinate and subiet to Christ in the government of the same. We will not
refuse to stand with them in that they grant that S. Peter had a Primacie of
Order: but we stand not with then in that they deny his Primacie of power and
Jurisdiction. We stand with them in that they teach there are 22. books of
Canonical scripture: but we stand not with them in the refusal of the book
of Tobie, Judith, two first books of Machabees, the book of wisdom, Esdras
and Baruch the Prophet. We stand with the^ in that they affirm the scripture
is the rule of faith: But we stand not with them in their denial of divine
traditions, not properly added to the scriptures but commended by them and
included in them in a general manner. We stand with them in that they say there
are twelve articles of the Creed: But we stand not with them in their denial
of the rest of the doctrine defined in general Counsels: as neither do we
join with them in the defense of all the 39. Articles of the English faith or
Creed.

And so now by these particulars the judicious reader may evidently perceive
that by reason the Romanists agree with the knight only in some part or
partial of his doctrine, he could not possible prove by their confessions the
greater safety of his way, as both in the title of this his last section, and
also in the title of his whole book he did propose. Nay he is so far from
the proof of this, that he has most apparentlie failed in the proof of the
very argument of his whole work which to the end it may more plainly
appear I will reduce to this Sylogisme.

That faith is the safe way leading all Christians to the true, ancient and
Catholic faith, which is proved by the confessions and testimonies of the best
learned Romanists to have been visible in all ages especially before the days
of Luther. But the faith now professed in the Church of England, is proved by
the confessions and testimonies of the best learned Romanists to have been
visible in all ages especially before the days of Luther. Therefore the faith
now professed in the Church of England is the safe way leading all Christians
to the true, ancient, and Catholic faith.

Now there being contained in the minor of this Sylogisme the whole argument,
purpose, and drift of Sir Humfreys whole book, and yet nevertheless it having
ben by me in this my censure demonstrated not to have been proved and made good
by any argument by him produced, all he produces to that purpose being void
of force as by the discussion of the particulars of every section the reader
may easily understand, it follows by a necessary sequel that his way can
not be safe, but is to be avoided with most great care and circumspection as a
false and erroneous path, by all those that tender the safety of their souls
and eternal Salvation.

And thus having now resolved the man into his principles or prime matter I
mean into the dust and ashes which he casts in his reader eyes: and having
passed throu' all the passages of his imaginary safe way, I have found it and
showed it to be no way at all, but an intricate diuerticle or obscure path
leading pore distressed travelers quite out of the true royal street with an
impossibilite ever to come to the end of their journey, that is to the true
ancient Catholic faith, which faith although the knight both in the title of his
book and in diverse other places of it, has seriously promised to show it to
be the same which is now professed in England, even by the confession of the
Romanists yet have I made it manifest that no true Romanist that is no author
which is acknowledged by the Roman Church for a member of the same, did either
in general or in particular ever confess the foresaid faith of England to be
the ancient Catholic faith, or that did ever, absolutely and in the same
sense in which the reformed Churches do, defend any one article of the
pretensiue reformed doctrine in matter of faith or generally defined manners.
In regard of which and because my chief intent was when I first resolved to
undertake this business out of a tender compassion to free the readers from the
great and general delusion which I understood this pamphlet of Sir Humfreys
had caused, or might hereafter cause in the minds of many, and especially
the more unlearned sort of people, although in very truth in itself it
contains nothing worth the labor of a scholar, I do now aduertice them as
they esteem the saftie of their souls, to beware of it as of a shop of most
deceitelie and poisonous drugges of which they ca^ not safety taste without an
antidote, I mean the illiterate or unexperienced persons in this kind of
study, can not securely read the the book except with all they view the
adverse part, and so by detection of the authors frauds, and couning
deceipts they behold the truth discovered, which otherwise as being most
subtillie inuolued and mixed by him with abundance of plausible untruths,
equivocations, false suppositions and Sophismes, can hardly be found out even
by those of greater learning and capacity then ordinarily the laytie use to
be.

And as for Sir Humfrey him self, although I have small hope of his reclamation
in regard of the great arroga^cy which I perceive in him, as being mightily
blinded with the vanity of his own conceit, If truly the work is this.
yet will I not omit to cry a loud unto him with the sacred psalmist, vtinam
saperet and intelligeret, ac nouissima prouideret, would to God he would
seriously consider that there will come a time when his book shall pass a
far more strict examen and sentence of condemnation then here it has passed,
or can possible pass in this mortal life. And yet if perhaps he finds in the
answer of it, any more sharp or unpleasing speeches then he would willingly
hear, I earnestly entreat him to account them not as spoken against his
person, but precisely as he is infected with the spiritual plague of schism
and heresy, and as whose conversion to the most universally flourishing Church
an faith (notobstanding whatsoever words have passed in heat of disputation)
I earnestely desire and pray for. And with this desire and affection I commend
him to the infinite goodness and mercy of almighty God.

THE ROMANISTS AGREE WITH S. AVgustin in the division of the Commandments.
In his 71. question upon the book of Exodus and in his 119. epistle to
Ianuarius he divides them in this manner.
1. THou shall have no other Gods but me. 2 Thou shall not take the name of God
in vain. 3. Thou shall sanctify the sabbath. 4. Honor thy Father and thy
mother. 5. Thou shall not kill. 6. Thou shall not commit adultery. 7. Thou
shall not steal. 8. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
9. Thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife. 10. Thou shall not desire any of
thy neighbors goods.
The Romanists in their brief Catechismes for children commonly rehearse them
thus.
1. THou shall have no other Gods but me. 2. Thou shall not take the, name of
God in vain. 3. Remember to sanctify the Sabbath day. 4. Honor thy ffather
and thy mother. 5. Thou shall not kill. 6. Thou shall not commit adultery. 7.
Thou shall not steal. 8. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor. 9. Thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife. 10. shall not desire
thy neighbors goods.
The misreformers division of the Commandments is this.
THou shall have no other Gods but me. Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven image etc. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain
etc. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day etc. Honor thy father and
thy mother etc. Thou shall do no murder. Thou shall not commit adultery. thou
shall not steal. Thou shall not bear false witness. Against thy neighbor.
Thou shall shall not covet thy neighbors house; thou shall nor covet thy
neghbours wife, nor his servant, nor his made, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.
In this division they dissent both from S. Augustine and the scriptures as
appears by their Catechismes publissed ever since the change of Religion in
England.

From S. Augustine, in that they put for the second Commandment: thou shall
not make to thy self any graven image: where as he on the contrary in his
epistle to Ianuarius, expressly puts not for the second but for the first
Commandment these words. Thou shall not make to thy self any idol.

They dissent also from the scripture both in that those words which they put
for the second Commandment, the scripture sets them down in the very same
tenor and continuation of style with those which according to both parties is
the first Commandment, to wit: Thou shall have no other Gods but me, adding
also one and the same punishment after that which the Reformers will needs
have to be an other Commandment, which yet if they were distinct
commandments, they should rather have had distinct punishments assigned them
severally.

As also secondly because in the text of Exodus out of which the reformers
rehearse their Commandments, the words are not, as they corruptedly translate
and relate them. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, but: thou
shall not make to thy self any graven thing. Which is yet more plainly
explicated in the fourth of the Deuteronomy. to be understood not so that there ought
not any graven similitude to be made, but that there ought not any to be made
of those things which God prohibited, especially supposing that the
Deuteronomie as the word it self does signify, is an exact explication of
the law Exodus, and that that which in the first Commandment is forbiden in
the Exodus, in the 26. of the Leuiticus the same is declared to be idolum, and
sculptile, that is an idol and a graven thing.

And thus we see the reformers stand single in this matter, and that the
Romanists in their division of the ten Commandments proceed upon a most sound
and approved foundation, it being both conformable to the doctrine of S.
Augustine who they more willingly follow then any other, and especially to the
true sense of the scriptures them selves expounded aceording to the orthodoxe
faith and tradition of all succeeding ages.

A POSTCRIPT OF ADVERTISSEMENTS FOR THE READER.
I Request the reader of my Censure so take notice of some particulars which
occurred since the finishing of it.

And imprimis touching the homily and epistles alleged by Sir Humfrey in the
9. section of his safe way against the real presence and transsubstantion, I
ansered in the 8. Period of my Censure what I conceived at that present, to
wit, that there was not any doctrine publikly or commonly read or preched in
England contrary so the real presence, or transsubstantiation, or in any
publik manner delivered to the people either by Alfric or any other Bishop or
Bishops in any synod or publik assembly in those days. since which time of
the dispatch of that work some delay having ben made in the committing it to
the press, and having had greater opportunity and leisure to view the
histories of our country which treat of the affairs of those ages in which
Alfric lived, which was in some part of the 10. and leuenth Centuries, by more
exact examination and search in to the matter I find my self assured of the
truth of that which I then delivered. And now for greater satisfaction of the
reader and more clear conuincement of the same, I add that touching Alfrics
person, and state of life, he was first a monk by profession in the monastery
of Abington, and as Malesburie relates, lib. 1. de gest. Pont. Aug. page 203.
Abbat of the same: then Bishop of wilton, and after Archbishop of Canterbury.
There is diversity of opinions whether Siricius alias sigericus, or Alfric did
immediately succeed S. dunstan in that seat, but that imports little;
certain it he was a Roman Catholic, Vid. Harpsf. saec. 10. cap. 7.
for that an ancient Chronicle writ by a monk of the same monastery of
Abington (where of as I alleged our of Malesburie, Alfric was Abat) conuinceth
testifying that he went to Rome for his Episcopal pall, as the custom was,
which journey Alfric would neiuer have made, nor ever have obtained his
request, if he had not ben of the same faith in every point which at that time
the Pope him self professed.

That which also is most plainly demonstrated by an ample testimony which the
church of Canterbury gave of the same Arcbishop Alfric, and at their request
sent to the monks of his order and monastery Abington for a perpetual
memory of his faith and manners: which for greater sattsfaction of the reader,
I will here rehearse at it as recorded by the foresaid religious man.

To the children of the holy church of Canterbury the clergy, and the same
church after their devout prayers. It is known unto you all how long since it
is that by the successes of diverse and various events the mother church of
England has been deprived of her pastor and destitute of her rector, which does
pertain not only to our loss but also to the detriment of you and all this
Island, since it is apparent that the solicitude and care of the whole country
is committed to the Metroplican. For which cause we have elected Alfric by name
monk of the holy church of Abington most sufficiently known unto us, noble in
brith and manners, endued with Apostolical and Ecclesiastical discipline, and
in faith a Catholic, by nature prudente, docible, patient, temperate, chaste,
sober, humble, affable, merciful, learned, instructed in the law of God,
cautelous in the senses of the scripture, exercised in Ecclesiastical decrees
or determinations. And according to the path of scripture, orthodox traditions,
and Canons, and constitutions of the Prelates of the Apostolical seat,
understanding, teaching, Praesulum Sedis Apostolica.
and observing the Ecclesiastical rules in a sound sense, and embracing that
faithful word which is according to doctrine: and reprehending with modesty
those who resist it; and having power to resist and redargue them:
hospitable, modest, well ruling his house, not a neophit; having a good opinion
or testimony, ministering in every degree or order according to
Ecclesiastical tradition. Prepared for all good works, and to give
satisfaction to every one that shall demand it, of the hope which is in him.
etc. Thus proceeds the testimony of the electors of Alfric.

And to this I join that S. Dunstan his immediate predecessor (excepting
Ethelgar or at the most according to the opinion of some writers. excepting
Ethelgar and Siricius who both lived but five years or there aboutes) as our
histories report at the time of his death spoke much of the real presence of
Christ in the Eucharist in a sermon he made the same day he dyed. Svy S.
Dunstan.
And in like manner of Elphegus Alfrics successor it is reported by our English
historians, he was such a mortifyed man by reason of his great abstinence, and
fasting that when according to the custom of the Roman church he elevated the
sacred hoaste in mass, the reflected air appeared as it were in a glass
throu' the iunctures of his fingers. Now touching the twoe immediate
predecessors of Alfric which I mentioned before to wit Ethelgar and Sricius
neither any historiographer nor yet any of our adversaries themselves do
note them to have diuulged or admitted in their time any other doctrine
concerning the Eucharist then that which was then professed in the Roman
church. By which it is manifest that both immediately before and immediately
after Alfrics days, the same doctrine of the real presence which at this time
the Roman church maintains was commonly tought and practiced in England and no
other: so that morally speaking it is not apprehensible that in the time of
Alfrics being Bishop of Canterbury which according to the computation of times
was but ten years or littlemore, Godwins Catalogue.
the contrary doctrine and the denial of the real presence and
transsubstantiation could have bin publikly professed and published by diverse
Bishops in their synods as Sir Humfrey Line affirms.

Besides this Lanfranc who in the next age succeeded Alfric in the seat of
canterbury, habetur in vlt. edit. Bibl. Patr. tom. 11.
in his book against Berengarie of the sacrament of the Eucharist: som'at
after the midest he speaks thus against his adversary. Propulsatis iam
quantum satis visum est calumnijs etc. having sufficiently repelled the
calumniations which with cantumely of Bishop Humbert and the Roman Church thou
have temerariously uttered; it remains that we expound the faith of the holy
church and the opinion of this sect, and that having expounded them we approve
one and reprove the other by a few authorities and brief reasons. For neither
epistolar brevity does permit, nor any reason requires that we insert prolix
testimonies of either scriptures or arguments of disputation. For such as ar
faithful people but seduced, do not pertinatiously insist in defense of their
deprauation: but rather having heard and understood reasons, desire humbly to
return to the way of truth, few things will suffice. But those who ar
addicted to contentions, and determined to persiste in their infidelity, would
not be satisfied althou many reasons should be proposed unto them.

Diuinitus.
Wherefore we believe that the terrestrial substances which in the table of our
lord ar divinely sanctified by preistlie ministration, ar infallibly
incomprehensibly, and admirably by operation of supernatural power converted
in to the essence of our lords body, the species or forms of the things the^
selves remaining with some other qualities least the receivers should abhor
crude and cruent things: Cruda and cruenta.
and to the end that the credents or believers might receive more ample
rewards of their faith, the body of Christ it self existing nevertheless in
heaven at the reight hand of his Father, Illeso.
immortal unviolated, intyre, incontaminated, unhurt, so that it may truly
be affirmed that we receive the body of Christ which he assumed of the Virgin,
and yet not the same. The same truly in respect of the proporties of true
nature and virtue: but not the same if you respect the species or forms of
bread and wine; and the rest before comprehended.

This faith from ancient times did hold and now holds that Church which
diffused throu the whole world is named Catholic: whence it is that, as it is
said before, our lord said in the Euangill. Receive and eat, this is my body.
And this is the chalis of my blood etc. In this clear manner speaks Lanfranc
of the real presence in this place. And page 346. of the same book: he says
thus speaking of Ecclesiastical histories. Which Scriptures says he) although
they do not obtain that most excellent tower of authority which those do
which we call Prophetical and Evangelical scriptures: yet they are sufficient
to prove that this faith which now we have, all faithful people which have
gone before us, have had the same from privative times. A primis temporibus
And page 347. the same Lanfranc directing his speech to Berengarie adds
thus. more ower if that be true which thou believes and maintains of the body
of Christ, vbique gentium.
it is false which the church believes of the same matter in every nation. For
all those who rejoice to be called, and to be Christians, do glory in that
they receive in this sacrament the true flesh and blood of Christ's body
received from the virgin. Inquire of all such as have knouledge of the latin
tongue, and of our writings. Inquire of the Grecians, Armenia^s, or of
Christian people of any nation what soever, and they will with one mouth
testifye that they have this faith. Furthermore if the faith of the universal
church be false, either there never was Catholic church, or she has perished.
nothing is more efficatious for the perishing of souls then a pernicious
error. But no Catholic will grant that the church either was not, or that
she has perished. In this plain sort testifyes Lanfranc of the faith of the
universal church in which it were madness to imagine he did not include his
own I mean the church of England. And supposing he lived and writ this the
very next age following the age in which Alfric dyed to wit in some part of
the leue^th centurie, it is more then monsterous impudency in our adversaries
to affirm that in the days of Alfric the denial of the real presence and
transsubstantiation was commonely preached and believed in the Realm of
England.

Further more. Pascasius Rathbertus writ a book entitled of the body and
blood of our lord against the doctrine of Bertram, as is commonly supposed
althou I find him not named by Pascasius: and he has also an Epistle of the
same subject to one Frudegard, with an exposition of those words of the
Evangelist. Math. 26.
Caenantibus autem illis etc. In all which writings Pascasius most plainly
defends both the real presence and transsubstantiation, most frequently
repeating and inculcating that the same body and blood which Christ received
of the Virgin Marie, and the same in which he was crucified, is really and
truly present in the Eucharist and offered in sacrifice. I need not relate his
words for every particular, because I know our adversaries can not deny but
that this Author is plainly for the Romanists and flat against them in those
points of doctrine: only I will rehearse some general words of his in which
he declares the faith of the universal church in and before his times: for
after testimonies of diverse a^cie^t fathers alleged to this purpose in the
conclusion of the foresaid words of S. Mathewe thus he says. Ecce habes
amantissime etc. Behold most loving brother, thou haste in the end of this
little book the sentences of the Catholic Fathers compendiously noted, by
which thou may learn that I have not seen such things in rashness of speech
when I was a child, but that I have proposed them by divine authority, and by
the authority of the holy Fathers to such as demanded them. But now it being
clear that Since that time the faith of all men is not one and the same, then
cease I pray to believe with such as they be, if as yet they can not
understand that nothing is impossible to God, and let them learn to assent
unto the divine wurdes in all things, and to doubt nothing of those: For till
this present no man is read to have erred in them except those who erred
about Christ himself: notobstanding many doubted or have been ignorant of the
Sacraments of so great a Mystery: And afterward the same author in the same
treatise says thus. Qua expleta voce, etc. Which words being pronounced
(meaning the words of consecration) we all with one consonant voice say. Amen.

And so the whole Church in all nations and languages does pray and confess,
that it is that thing which she prays for, whereby let him who will rather
contradict this then believe it regard what he does against our lord him self,
against the whole Church of Christ.

Therefore it is a nefarious and detestable villainy to pray with all and not to
believe that which truth it self does testifye, and that which universally all
in every place do teach. Whence it is that since he him self affirms it is
his body and his blood, doubt ought not to be made in any thing, although we
see not with carnal yes that which we believe. We have seen also what Pope
Gregory houldeth of this, what S. Cyrill with all his fellow Bishops assembled
in Ephesus, what Greece with them, what Egypt, and what S. Hierome him self
who published the lives of the holy Fathers in latin. And therefore not
obstanding some err in this by ignorance neuerthebesse as yet there is none
that openly contradictes that which the whole world does believe and confess.
Thus Pascasius a learned and venerable, and virtuous Abbat testifyeth the faith
of the universal Church in his days touching the real presence, of Christ in
the Eucharist. Who although he was not English nor lived just in the time of
Alfric, yet he lived within the compass of the same age in which Alfric was
Bishop of wilton and Archbishop of Canterbury that is the year 900. yea it
may be Pascasius was yet alive when Alfric was Abbat and consequently when he
is supposed by our adversaries to have writ those epistles which they produce
in his name concerning this matter. So that by this testimony of Pascasius a
forcible argument is made that the contrary doctrine of the real presence
cauld not possible have been so public and common in any part of the
Christian world in so short a space of time as passed, (if any passed)
betwixt Pascasius and the writing of the homily and Epistles attributed to
Alfric if he did- ever write them.

And how beit is may appear by the writings of Pascasius that there were some
in, or about his time who argued and writ in an unaccustomed and new manner
touching the doctrine of the presence of Christ's body and blood in the
Sacrament as particularly Ioannes, Scotus, Bertrame and Frudegarde, yet as much
as I can perceive by reading Pascasius, Fulbertus, Stephanus Edue^sis, and
others who writ of this matter, the broachers of this question did never
absolutely auerre and maintain any assertion directly repugnant to the true,
and real existence of Christ's body and blood in the Eucharist, but only made
a school question of it arguing the matter pro and contra: and that not
determinately of the real presence, but whether the same body, and blood of
Christ which was borne of the Virgin Marie and was crucified upon the Cross,
was contained under the forms of bread and wine in the Sacrament, and not
rather some other kind of Christ's body and blood, yet truly his and truly
present in the Eucharist, thou in a figurative and tropicall manner.

And that neither the named authors nor any other in or about Pascasius time
did plainly or of set purpose impugn the real presence, it plainly appears
by his words above cited affirming that not obstanding some erred by
ignorance, yet that none did openly contradict that which the whole world did
believe and confess.

That which is yet further confirmed, for we read not that either Scotus,
Frudegard, or Bertrame were ever condemned by the Church in their persons in
any Council, or otherwise, which is an evident sign they were not obstinate
in defense of their opinions, but only delivered their doubts by way of
proposition, as at the least in Frudegard in particular, does manifestly
appear by the responsion of Pascasius to his Epistle, saying thus. Quaeris
enim de re ex qua multi dubitant. You inquire of a thing of which many doubt.
And for conclusion of his own Epistle Pascasius says to Frudegard. Tu autem
velim, relegas libellum nostrum de hoc opere. For I would have you read my
book of this matter which you say you have read in times past. And if you
reprehend, or doubt of any thing in it: let it not be tedious unto you to
reuiewe it. And finally toward the end of his exposition of the words of the
institution of the Eucharist, he speaks to Frudegard in this manner.
Quapropter charissime. Wherefore most dearly beloved do not doubt of this
Mystery which Christ the truth it self has of him self bestowed upon us. For
although he sits in heaven at the reight hand of his Father, yet does he not
disdain to be Sacrifyced daily by the priest in the Sacrament as a true hoaste.

Now that the same Frudegardus doubt was only whether the body of Christ
contained in the Sacrament was the same body which he assumed of the Virgin
Marie, is plain by Pascasius anser saying thus almost in the beginning of his
Epistle. Ergo cum ait. Wherefore when he says this is my body, or my flesh, or
this is my blood. I think he intimated no other flesh then his own propter
body which was borne of the Virgin Marie and hanged en the Cross. Nor any
other blood then that which was spilt upon the Cross, and which then was in
his body. No man therefore which is soundly wise does believe that Jesus had
any other flesh or blood then that which was borne of the Virgin Marie and
suffered upon the Cross. And for conclusion of his foresaid exposition he
says thus to the same Frudegard. Ad vltimum quaeso te. Lastely I pray fallow
not the fooleries of the tripartite or triple body of Christ. Do not mingle
salt, nor hunnie in it, as some would, do not add nor substracte any thing,
but believe and understand it all as Christ instituted, etc.

As for Scotus and Bertrame althou' their books have hen reproved, yet it does
not fallow that their authors did directly and absolutely impugn the real
presence, or transsubstantiation, but they only delivered their minds in a
doubtful, obscure, and ill sounding manner, for which cause and for avoiding
of danger they were justly prohibited, the only the Council of vercelles:
the other by the purgatory Index. Howbe it I find nothing in Bertram which
with a pious interpretation might not pass among the learned sort of people.

And thus much may suffice for proof that in Pascasius time there had been no
plain denial of the real presence or transsubstantiation in the Christian
world, but only some incident doubts made by some particular persons, and that
in a discussiue manner, not as obstinate maintainers of such Doctrine.

And now by this same and the rest which I have above produced out of the same
Pascasius and Lanfra^c and others, the false Archbishop and Primate of Ireland
is convinced of an apparent falsitie, for that in the 79. page of his anser to
a Jesuits challenge, he had the face to affirm that til the days of Lanfranc
this question of the real presence continued still in debate: and that it was
as free for any man to follow the Doctrine of Bertram (he calls him
Ratrannus) or Ioannes Scotus, as that of Pascasius. This audatious affirmation
of usher I say is clearly condemned of falsitie by the same Pascasius whom he
cites, and who as I have alleged, testifyes that the doctrine of the real
presence in his time was not as yet contradicted by any (except those who
deny Christ) but believed and professed by the whole world, althou some, says
he did err in the same by ignorance. And this only by way of diuertion,
breefly to signifye to the reader how common a practice it is even among the
most famous of our adversaries to maintain their doctrine by lies and false
dealing of which I perceive by a brief vewe I took of some part of his work
an industrious reader may discover no small stoare in the great primate doctor
Usher, as well as his fellows.

But now to return to my direct purpose, I yet more efficatiously confirm
that which I have said of Alfric by the chronology of our English historians.
In his cata. wulstan dunst.
For first according to the computation of Bishop Godwin there passed only some
six years betwixt the decease of wlsta^ in the Archibishoprie of york, and
the promotio^ of S. Du^stan to the seat of Canterbury in which space, as
likewise in the time of wulstan himself it is quite incredible that there was
any doctrine contrary to the real ptesence commonly toucght in England,
since S. Dunstan at the day and hour of his death expressly professed the
same as out of our own histories I have already showed by the relation of
Harpesfeld. Vid. Osborne in vita dunst.


Besides this it is certain there were but only twoe wulstans Archbishops of
york as appears by Godwins Catalogue: the one as he reports deceased the
year 955. which was at the least forty years before Alfric possessed the
seat of Canterbury according to the account of the same catalogue. The other
wulstan as the same Goduin recounteth began not his seat at york till the
years 1003. which was more then 50. years after the death of the first
wulstan. now this conographie being thus established even by one of our
adversaries: Safe way. sect. 9.. 2.
I argue in this manner against knight Humbrey affirming that the homily and
Epistles which he alleges were translated by Alfric, and appointed to be read
to the people in his days, my argument is this.

If this supposed homily, and Epistles were ever translated, written, or
published by Alfric, either it was when he was. Abbat, or Archbishop. But
neither of these is true.

Therefore it is not true that the homily and Epistles were ever translated or
published by Alfric.

The Minor which only has need of prose I convince by the testimony of my
adversary, who affirms the translation and publication of the freifaid
writings to have been a boute the yare 996. Sir Humf. page 92.
and directed to wulstan Archbishop or york and wulfstius Bishop of sherborne
by Alfric Abbat, I mean the Epistles. And yet at this time neither was Alfric
Abbat but Archbishop of Canterbury, neither was either of the two wulstans
Archbishop of york at that time. the one being dead 40. years before, and the
other not invested in that dignity until the year 1003. as Godwin does
witness. so that by this argument it manifestly appears that the knights
relation touching this matter of the publishing of the homily and Epistles
alleged by him- against the real presence and transsubstantiation is
contradictious and void of truth.

More over I find in our English histories that about the year 950. which
was some forty and od years before Alfric was preferred to be Archbishop of
Canterbury, Vid. Harps
in the time of Odo Archbishop of the same seat, there were some conuented
before him who were in an erroreous opinion about the presence of Christ's
body in the Eucharist, but the maintainers of it (how soever Fox does fable)
neither were many, nor did it long continue, but was miraculously at an
instant exstinguished. For the pious and zealous pastor Odo much lamenting the
illusion of those miserable people, prayed God with tears in mass, that his
divine majesty would be pleased by his infinite power manifestely to show some
thing by which both the truth of the real presence might appear, and the
contrary error might be confounded, when suddenly at his servants petition
God almighty turned the consecrated bread in to visible flesh, and the wine in
to visible blood. Which wondrous spectacle being seen, the incredulous
persons presently complained of their own perfidie and misbeleefe, and all the
rest of their days conserved their faith entire and sound: now this having
happened about the same time at which that wulstan was Archbishop of york
who having ben in that place some years: deceased the year 955. as Godwin
relates, it clearly appears incredible that Alfric then Abbat should direct
any doctrine repugnant to the real presence to wolstan Archbishop of york,
and to vlsine, vlsius, or wulfstius Bishop of sherbourne, as our adversaries
affirm, since that Odo Archbishop of Canterbury and Primate of England, at
the very same time, as of out of histories I have rehearsed, did by the power
of God operate so strange a miracle in confirmation of the same, and
confutation of the contrary error.

More then this, Vlsin or vlsius whom the knight calls wulfstius (of which
name nevertheless I find none in Malesburies Catalogue of the Bishops of
Sherbourne) could not possible have any Epistle directed unto him by Alfric
while he was Abbat of Malesburie or Abington, as Sir Humfrey and the rest of
these tryfelers allege, for that while Vlsine, or wulfstius was Bishop of
Sherbourne which was but only five years, as our histories do testifye,
Hrapsfeld. saec. 10. c. 9.
being Abbat only of westminister in the days of S. Dunstan and by his
procurement, whose death happened the year.988. as Stowe relates: Alfric was
no more Abbat but Bishop of wilton, and consequently he could not as Abbat
write to Vlsine, Vlsius, or wulfstius Bishop of Sherbourne, but if he had writ
any such letters as our adversaries attribute unto him, to that Bishop, he
should have styled him self not Abbat, but Bishop as in deed he was all the
time yea and some years before the foresaid wulfstius was by king Ethelred
preferred to the Episcopal seat of Sherbourne.

But that which does strik this quite dead, is that (there having ben but only
twoe wolstans Archbishops of york) the first wolstan dyed before ever Alfric
was Abbat, to wit the year of our Lord 955. where as Ingulphus in Edgar relates
Alfric to have been created Abbat only about the year 970. at the soonest,
so that he could not possible write any Epistles to the first wolstan while
he was Abbat as our nouellists pretend, bebause this wolstan was departed out
of this life before Alfrics time of being Abbat. And as for the second wolstan
it is well known and testified by Godwin that he was not Archbishop of york
before the year 1003. At which time Alfric was not Abbat but Archbishop of
Canterbury as our adversaries them selves refuse not to grant.

And so this computation and collation of times utterly destroys the
machination of our abuersaries in attrituting the foresaid writings to Abbat
Alfric.

And touching Vlsius or Vlsinus I add to this that Alfric was consecrated
Bishop of wilton in the year 985. or there aboutes some fourteeme years after
the coronation of Ethelred. lib. 1. de. Pont Aug. page 203.
And he sat 11. years in that place as Malerburie relates. But now Vlsine as
it appears by a breef of John the 15. Pope of this name touching the peace he
composed betwixt king Ethelred and Richard marquis of Normandy, was Bishop of
Sherbourne about the year 991. of which year the Popes letter carries date,
in which althou the Pope does not call him Vlsine, but Edelsine, yet both by
the time and place of his seat, as also for that there is noe other in the
Catalogue of the Bishops of Sherbourne year the after in which I find related
by Ingulpsus, Alfrics was Abbat of malesburie which resembles that name; it is
convinced that this is the same man which the kinght calls wulfstius, and to
whom he affirms one of Abbat Alfrics Epistles to have been directed. which
neuershelesse is concluded to be false in regard that at that time of the date
of the Popes Epistole to wit the year 991. Alfric was not Abbat but Bishop,
this having happened but five years before that Alfric then Bishop of wilton,
was assumpted to the Arcgbishoprie of Canterbury which was the year 996. as
all agreeably testifye.

Now if our adversaries should say that this Vlsius, Vlsine, or Edelsine is not
that Bishop of Sherbourne to whom they mean that Alfric writ his Epistle, but
an other long before him called wulfstius.

To this I replye, first that I find not this name of wulfstius in any author
or Catalogue of the Bishops of Sherbourne, and so I suspect it is a trick of
knight Hu^frey who as it seems first inverted the name, Westminst. an 940.
supposing I find it not in any other either frei^de or for the name of any
Bishop of that seat. Secondly.

It is true histories make mention of one Vlsius Bishop of that seat and
successor to Alfred, but neither the name agrees to knight Humfreyes feigned
wulfstius, neitheir was he then in the world when Alfric was Abbat, but
according to the catalogue annexed to Ingulphus, deceased the year 966. For
whose successor the same catalogue puts Alfwoldus. where is yet it appears by
the testimony of Ingulphus that Alfric was not Abbat till either in, or after
the year 970. by which it is clear he could not write to this vlsius or
wulfstius as Abbat, in respect he was dead some years before Alfric was
preferred to that place by appointement of king Edgar. and so this evasion is
intercepted by the way and appears to be frustrate and false.

Further more according to Bishop Vshers chronology affirming that Alfric writ
his homily about 605. years a go Alfric should have writ the same the year
1026. or there aboutes, deriuing the accou^te from the time of Vshers
publicatio^ of his book; for so by putting five or six years which I suppose
has passed since the time of Vshers writing, to the 605. years which he
assigns for the time in which Alfric writ, and ioining to all this 1026 or 7.
the whole number amountes just to 1632. which is the year we now live in. But
this implies impossibility in regard it is received by both parties that
Alfric dyed the year 1006. that is some 20. years before 1026. which Usher
assigns for the year of Alfric's writing the homily by which it appears
that Primate Usher is a most prime yea and a most vnmyndefull liar in
attributing this writing to Abbat Alfric. And concerning the writing of Alfrics
twoe supposed Epistles, if Usher means they were writ and directed to wulfsine
and wulstane at this same time, he is likewise manifestly convinced of
falsitie, for that at the time assigned by him, there was no vlsius, vlsine or
wulfsine (as he names him) Bishop of sherbourne in the world to whom Alfric
could have directed any writings, the last of that name being dead the age
before as I have showed, as also the first wulstan Arcbishop of york. True it
is the second wulstan of york was then a live to wit unto the year 1023. but
then Alfric being dead Archbishop of Canterbury (as I have showed by Godwins
Catalogue) almost 20. years before, the supposed direction of Epistles unto
him is even in that respect concluded for repugnant and impossible with a
plain dissent of the author from him self as affirming the publication of
these writings to have happened in the days of Alfric, and yet only about
605. years ago.

More over these relators agrees in their Chronographie like dogs and cattes,
the parts of which hang together as thieves hang upon the gallows never a
one joining to an other. For as I have said, Usher affirms Alfric Abbat's
Saxon homily to have been written by him about 605. years which according to
true computation considering the time in which Usher writ this, comes to fall
about the year 1020. In the 2.. of the 9. sect of his safe way.
But Sir Humfrey speaking of the same homily, says it was publicly appointed
to be read to the people on Easter day about the year 996. at which time
Alfric was not Abbat but Arcbishop of Canterbury, as even our adversaries them
selves do relate: and so these twoe brothers in Christ proceed not like
brothers but repugne plainly one to an other in their accountes: the knight
affirming the foresaid homily to have been published and read some 24. years
before Usher alleges, it to have been written. Besides this, Alfric dyed
Arcbishop of Canterbury the year 1006. Godwin in Alfric p. 65.
according to Godwins Catalogue. How then could he possible write his homily
about 605. years ago as Usher tells us? that is the year of our lord 1020.
as I have declared: except Alfric did miraculously rise again to broache the
new English faith of the Eucharist, which our adversaries will needs defend
for ancient thou' it cost them as dear as the forgeing of a false history.

More over the publisher of the same writings I mean the homily and Epistles
printed at London 1623. under the name of Alfric, tells us, he writ them 700.
years ago in king Edga'rs time which falls iumpe with the year of Christ
923. if we count from the time of the foresaid publicatio^ of them. And yet as
both Malesburie, Stowe, and the rest of our historians testifye, Edgar was not
created king until the year of our Souiour 959. so that here is an apparent
blurre in this wise Conographer's computation inuolueing both an impossibility
in it self, and a contradiction to the rest of his companions in this business,
who as I have declared attribute them to Alfric in the time of Ethelred about
some 600. years since, others some years before.

Lastely Fox in his Acts and monuments althou' he does not dissent from his
follows (excepting the fore said late publisser) in his assignation of the
time in which the homily imputed to Alfric, is by them affirmed to have been
proposed for the instruction of the people in England, viz. about the year
996: nevertheless in two several respects he proceeds most deceitefully and
quite contrary to common honesty, and reason. First for that he feigneth and
prefixeth a title against the real presence and transsubstantiation to the
said homily; secondly because in his rehearsal of the tenor of the same, he
leueth our the relation of two most manifest and palpaple miracles for the
proof of both those points of the Catholic faith in it alleged by the
author, which crafty and vulpine tricks of Fox (with which and many others
of like nature he farceth his huge volumes) as it appears seemed so shameful
that his successor the late diuulger of the same homily was ashamed to imitate
him: yea and not obstanding he was bound under pain of loss of the labor of
his translation and publication of that work which otherwile he well
considered would have been in vain, to tax the said miracles of fiction (as he
did in a marginall note) yet was he not so impudent nor frontlesse as to raze
the^ quite out of the copy. inexcusable deceit in Fox.
And how be it I ca^ not deny but there is a great difference belweene these
twoe actions, yet must they give me license to tell them that neither of them
both is clear of ill proceeding, the one being guilty of plain imposture,
the other of plain temeritie. For supposing they would venture to make use of
the homily for the advantage of their denial of the real presence and
transsubstantiation, for all that, they ought to have taken it as they found
it for better or for worse, and not go a boute to pick out what they find for
their purpose, and cast a may the rest, like such unreasonable caterers as will
needs buy flesh without bones. And in deed those twoe, bones that is those
twoe most pate^t and clear miracles by which both the real presence of the
body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist ar manifestly demonstrated against
the new doctrine of these our times, were too hard for old Father Foxs teeth
to chewe, or for his stomach to disgeast, therefore doubtless he left them out
both in his saxon and English transsumpte. But these sycophants as they deal
with the scriptures them selves, so they deal with ancient authorities and
testimonies. lib. de bono person. c. 11.
Suo quidem priuilegione dicam sacrilegio vtquod volunt accipiant, quod nolunt
reijciant. as S. Augustine said of the Manichies.

Again concerning the Epistles attributed to Alfric there is yet more discord
among our adversaries. For the publisher of them and the homily above
mentioned in his preface unto them affirms there were certaines lines rare zout
of a book extant in the library of worceter which lines, says he, which
contained the chief point of controversy (that is as he supposes against the
real presence and transsubstantiation) were taken out of twoe Epistles of
Alfric written by him as well in the Saxon tongue as in the latin. But Doctor
James and Sir Humfrey tell us that the foresaid passage was razed in a latin
Epistle manuscript of Bennitts College in Cambrige yet there to be seen. And
whereas the author of the publication says that the lines razed ar to be
restored by twoe other Epistles of the same Alfric in latin extant in the
library of Exceter, contrarily D. James tolleth us they are to be restored not
by any latin copies, but by certain Saxon copies of the same Epistles which
he affirms to have been in the public library of Oxon when he writ his book
which was the year 1611. Besides this the same James out of Fox says the
Epistle which he affirms to have been thus mangled and torn was to wulfstan
Archbishop of york and has for title, de consuetudine Monachorum: whereas yet
the foresaid publisher of Alfrics new found writings, intileth that Epistle of
Alfric de consuetudine monachorum of the order or manner of monks,
Egneshemensibus fratribus, to the fryres or brothers of Egnesham. Which iarres
I confess I am so unable to compose that I can not but vehemently suspect
these men's reports to be false and counterfeit. Especially considering that
James affirms the latin Epistle so razed as they report, to have been
directed by Alfric to that wulstan who was Archbishop of york about the
year 954. where as yet the author of the pamphlet in which these writings ar
contained, in his prefate to the same, says that this Alfric to whom he
attributes them was equal to Alfric Archbishop of Canterbury which he also
affirms to have been in that seat six years before that wulstan to whom
Alfric's Epistle was written, was Archbishop of yoke: so that the one reports
this Epistle to have been wriren to the first wulstan and the other to the
second not obstanding all histories and Cathologues of Bishops (among which is
Godwins) do testifye so long a space of time to have passed betweixt their
standings, as it is from the year 955. and 1003. so that these twoe relators
draw back ward and fore ward like twoe ill match asses.

More over the foresaid publisher will needs have Alfric the supposed author
the homily and epistles to have been a distinct man from that Alfric who was
Archbishop of Canterbury whereas neuershelesse John Leland who professedly
writ of the writers of England relating the several works of Alfric the
Archbishop of Canterbury makes noe mention of any other writers of that name
but of him only, neither does he put any epistle among his writings but only
one entitled, de consuetudine Monachorum, of the manner or custom of monks,
which subject how far it disagreth from the presence of Christ's body in the
Eucharist, and transsubstantiation, I leave to the judgment of the reader to
consider.

In fine to conclude my whole discourse touching this matter I say first, that
if it were true as our adversaries pretend that in the foresaid writings there
weere any thing contained contrary to the real presence and
transsubstantiation, yet have I co^uinced by insoluable reasons that neither
Alfric could be the author of them, neither could any such doctrine have been
publicly maintained in the Church of England in or about his days. But what
soever doctrine was then published and tought in our country was canformable
in all points with the doctrine and faith then professed in the Church of Rome
with which the English Church and her Pastors had correspondence and
subordination as I have manifestly declared. Secondly Althou I am not able to
judge determinately who might be author of those writings because I have noe
means to come to the view of them otherwise then in that patched and mangled
manner in which they are published by our adversaries: nevertheless I persuade
my self they were writ by some Roman catholic author, so that taken in
their innocence and prime purity and piously interpreted they contain no
unsound or erroneous doctrine, but rather express testimony and proofs of
diverse points controuersed betwixt the nouellists of these our times and
catholic Romanists. As appears in the mention they make of mass, miracles,
the sign of the Cross, and other particulars which I have noted in my censure.

Thirdly. the judicious reader may easily persuade him self that supposing
these writings according to the relation of our adversaries, have remained in
public places and libraries for the space of above 600. years, if they had
contained any doctrine repugnant to that faith of the Eucharist which I have
historically demonstrated above to have been professed in our country of
England ever since, and before, that time: its more then morally evident they
would have received long a fore this time reprehension, or censure according to
their desert.

Finally. Supposing it were true that the foresaid writings did in deed
contain doctrine contrary to the real presence, and transsubstantiation as
they are believed and defended by the professors of the Roman Religion whereas
yet they do not so, but only exclude the carnal, palpaple or Capharnaitical
presence of Christ in the Eucharist, and instruct the people in the invisible
presence of his body, and blood in the Sacrament in an obuius and easy
manner: yet in reason ought not any judicious Catholic to alter his faith of
the same for any argument which can be drawn or deduced from such testimony
as is void of other credit then is to be given to adversaries in favor of
their own cause which is just none at all, especially they being no other then
these who not only in this particular, but also in other matters of
controversy have used much partiality, and deceit as in an other place I
have demonstrated out of their several works. And in particular the publisher
of the same pamphlet in which the homily and Epistles of which I hear treat,
are contained, besides diverse untruths which he utters as well touching the
author and time of his writing, as also his titles and marginall notes, and
likewise in that he couningly and couseningly publishes in the same volume a
treatise of the old, and new testament in the name of Alfric as if it included
a different canon of scripture to that which is now used in the Roman Church,
and agreeable to their now English Bible: which is yet most apparently false
for that (as I remember) it puts in the number and order of the Canonical
books Ecclesiasticus, Sapience, Tobie, Judith and the Machabeis, which yet our
adversaries reject for Apocryphal: As also in that more over the same
Pampheter adds a testimony to show that in times past the lords prayer, the
creed and the ten commandments were extant and used in the vulgar tongue; a
work most impertinently performed by him, and as it seems only or cheefely
to enlarge the bulk and price of his pamphlet: it being certain that the
Romanists never neither held that matter unlawful, or at this present prohibit
the use of the vulgar language for the ten commandments and private prayer of
the common people but rather the contrary as both their Catechismes and their
daily practice most plainly witness.

By all which particulars and the rest of this my aduertissement it is
evidently apparent that the glorious which the nouellists of our country make
by their publication of the homily epistles and o- writings in the name of
Alfric, be no other then certain prestigious impostures to persuade the simple
sort of people by these false florishes, that their denial of the real
presence of the body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist, and
transsubstantiation is not quite void of antiquity, but has been preached and
professed in our country before the days of luther. And now let this suffice
to repulse this fictitious and deceitefull calumniation of our adversaries
touching these putatiue wrings of Alfric by the publication of which and the
like counterfeit wares they pick simple peoples purses who take all for as
true as gaspell that is put in print by any of their own brothers.

The second aduertissement I give to the reader is that whereas the kinght page
205. of his fafe wais cites Agobard for a denyer of honor of image in his book
of that subject: Agobardus Episc. Lugdun. li. de pict. and imag.
I have dilgently perused the same, and find that in deed this author speaks
more harshely of this matter then any other catholic writer of these days
how be it this was the age in which images had their greatest enemies.
Nevertheless it is most certain this author only confutes the exhibition of
divine honor and the like, unto images, as is sacrifice, or confidence in them
or prayer unto them: reprehending the error of some particular persons who
superstitiousely adored them, for so he discourses a boute the end of his
book saying.

But none of the ancient Catholics did ever think them to be worshipped or
adored: yet now the error by increase is become so perspicuous that it is
near, or like to the heresy of the Antropomorphits to adore figments and to
put hope in them, and that by reason of this error faith being removed from the
heart, all our confidence be placed in visible things. And a little after. So
also if we see penned or fethered Angels painted, the Apostles preaching,
martyrs suffering torments, we must not expect any help from the pictures
which we behold, because they can neither do good nor ill: rightly therefore
(these are the words cited by the kinght) to euacuate such superstition it was
defined by orthodox Fathers that pictures should not be made in churches least
that which si worshipped and adored be painted in the walls which words being
not his own but alleged out of a fragment of the Provincial council of
Eliberis in Spain and having joined them imediately to his own in which he
only treates of divine honor as not due to images, it is clear and evident he
intendes to prove nothing else by their authority then that which he there
proposes. To omit that this passage of the Eliberitan counsel was delivered
in a sense much different from this in which Agobardus construeth it, as I have
convinced in others places, and occasions.

And that this author intendes to teach nothing else, but only that images
must not be honored with worship due to God, the several testimonies which he
largely produces out of S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and other ancient writers do
manifestly demonstrate, not one of which can be taken (if they be truly
understood) in any other sense, as clearly may appear to the diligent
reader of their words, which expressly exclude only honor of Sacrifice,
prayers directed unto the images them selves, or religion proper to God only,
in the worship of saints, and their pictures: and also Agobardus him self
upon occasion of the places which he cites does auerre, plainly declaring
that he grants some sort of honor to images where thus he exhorts.

Let us behold the picture as a picture destitute of life, sense, and reason:
let the eye be fed with this vision, but let the mind reverence God who both
gives to his saints a crown of victory, and to us the assistance of their
intercession. And the like he affirms of honor of saints a little above in
this same page. Where althou' he justly reserueth the supreme worship of
Sacrifice to God a lone, yet he expressly grauntes an other inferior honor to
Saints and Angels saying. Adoretur, colatur, veneretur a fidelibus Deus, etc.
Let God be adored, worshipped, or served, and reverenced by faithful people,
let Sacrifice be offered to him a lone, either in the mystery of his body and
blood, or in the Sacrifice of a contrite and humble heart, let Angels or holy
men be loved, honored, with charity, not with servitude, let not Christ's body
be offered unto them. And according to this sense Agobardus speaks throu' his
whole book, particularly in his second leaf where he reprehendeth certain
idolaters who imagined a certain sanctity to reside in images saying. In
which nature these also who call images holy, are found not only
Sacrilegious for that they give divine worship to the works of their hands,
but also foolish in attributing sanctity to images which have no life or
soul. By all which words it is clear that Agobarde only condemns the
exhibition of such honor to saints, or images as is due to God a lone. Which
doctrine is so far from being any way contrary to the honor of images
practiced in the Roman Church that it does rather exactely agree with the honor
of the Council of Trent in this particular, which in the 25. Session defines
that, due honor is to be given to images not because it should be believed that
there is any divinity or virtue in them for which they are to be worshipped, or
that any thing should be craved of them, or that confidence or hope should be
put in the^, as in times past the Gentiles did, who placed their hope in
Idols, but because the honor which is exhibited unto them is referred to the
prototypes or persons which they represent. so that by the images which we
salute or kiss, and before which we uncover our head, and prostrate our
selves, we adore and reverence Christ, and the saints whose representations or
similetudes they bear.

True it is, I have noted in reading his book that Agobard purposely refuses
to use these words adorare, colere, adore, or serve: yet I plainly gather by
his whole discourse, he does not so to signifye there by that images are not to
be used with any honor at all, as I have already declared by his own text:
but only declineth the use of those words in regard he takes them in a
strict sense, as they signify religion or honor proper to God him self, and
not due to any creature: and perhaps also because at that time as it may
seem by his nicenes, and some others of that age, the word adoration was
offensive even to some who otherwise were both Catholic, and learned men: to
say nothing of the common people some of whom peraduentute out of ignorance,
and weakness of judgment, even at this day make danger to use it, and scruple
to hear it: yet neither the one nor the other omitting to honor images
according to the approbation, and practice of the Church. Whereas yet if it be
taken in the sense in which the Roman Church, according to the definition of
the 7. Synod and custom of divines, accepts it, that is for a kind of
inferior honor distinct from proper latrie and religion, and as (even according
to the use of scriptures) it signifyes worship common also to creatures, then
does it include no manner of scandal or offense at all. Cumque introisset in
conspectu Regis. and adorasset eum pro nus in terram etc. 3. Reg. 1. 24.


And now in that rigorous meaning Agobard takes the word adoration when
alledgeing the same words of the Eliberitan Council which Sir Humfrey here
researseth, he intends only to prove that images are not to be adored or
served: in which passage he proves nothing against the Roman Catholic honor
of images, but only disputes either against some reliquies of the
Antropomorphitan heresy: or against some other superstitious, and idolatrous
adorers of Saints and images of those days, from both which kinds of errors
as Agobardus him self was, so also the Roman Church with her chief Pastors
and rulers (to which he then was a subordinate member, and prelate as other of
his works do witness) were free and innocent as likewise now they be in this
our present age not obstanding the frequent calumniations of our modern
sectaries to the contrary.

Finally I add to this that in the very conclusion, and last period of his
book, Agobard expressly teaches that genuflection is to be made to the name
of Jesus, which yet our Puritan adversaries out of their singular purity, or
rather pure singularity, reject as idolatrous, not obstanding by Gods
commandment, not only men but devils also ar enjoined, and compelled to
bow their knees at the sound of that sovereign name. And surely he who holds
this for lawful, as Agobardus does, must for the same reasons hold it likewise
lawful to honor the images of Jesus, supposing that the name of Jesus being to
be honored only for the representation it has of him, much more lawfully may
his image be so honored in regard it does more permanently and ferfectly
represent him then does his name which consists in carracters, and a
transitory sound of letters. Besides this, Agobardus as the very first
words of his book do declare, does not directly and professedly treat in it
of the honor and use of images as it is practiced in the church, but of the
sense of the first commandment, in which he includes the prohibition of the
adoration of images delivered by God in the old Testament as a part of the
same, only intending to prove in his whole work that by virtue of this
precept, divine honor is not to be tendered to any creature but to God alone,
and not to either idols or images.

And Therefore in his last page the same Agobardus expressly speaks of honor
proper to God him self, applying to his purpose the words of Isaias honorem
meum alteri non dabo. by all which it is most clearly apparent that what
soever Agobarde seems to utter against the adoration of images, is only
spoken against such as attributing over much honor unto them worship the^ in an
idolatrous, or superstitious fashion contrary to the tradition of Fathers and
practice of the Catholic Church as his words quoted in my margen
sufficiently declare. haec est sincera religio hic mos Catholicus haec antiqua
patrum traditio etc. Agobardus fol. vlt. post authoritates Patr. citatus
And so I leave him as no enemy to the Catholic cause, nor any fauorer of
the disalawers of the same in this particular point, how be it the ambiguitie
of his speech may give occasion of error to ignorant, or ill affected readers.

To this I join my responsion to the other words cyted by our adversary in
the same place and out of the same book of Agobardus as I suppose, for he
ioynes them to the rest of those which there he had. to wit these which follow.
There is nos example in all the scriptures, or Fathers for adoration of images.
They ought to be taken for an ornament to please the sight, not to instruct the
people. To which I answer in primis, touching the former part of the sentence,
Agobardus has no such express words as those; he only saying thus: the
ancients also had the images of saint painted, or graued: but for rembrance
not to worship them: which words ar soma't different from those other
rehearsed by sir Hum. nevertheless because they seem to include a denial of
honor of images, I responde secondly. Agobard takes the words colere and
adorare which there he uses, in the same sense in which he uses them in the
rest of his book; that is for divine honor as I have above declared by several
passages of the same. According to which acception his words ar very true,
nor any way repugnant to the doctrine of the Roman Church either in those
days, or at this present time, which as in all former ages, so in this in
which we live does zealously detest, and abhor as plainly idolatrous all
divine adoration of creatures, though never so eminent either in nature, or
grace. Thirdly to the latter part of the same sentence, I say confidently, I
am sure there ar no such words in Agobardes book even as it is published and
printed at Paris by Papyrius Masson him self, out of whose Bibliotheke be it
good, or bad, sir Humfrey produces it: so that I do not understand this
iugling for other then plain forgerie, or falsification.

Fourthly, those last words. They (images) ought to be taken for an ornament
to please the sight, not to instruct the people: ar just contrary to the
doctrine of S. Gregory teaching expressly that pictures ar the books of the
illiterate, and simple people. Which doctrine of S. Gregory, Agobarde was
neither so ignorant as not to know it, nor yet so impudent as to deny it.

Fifthly, those same words manifestly disagree to the rest of Agobardes own
doctrine, as his words by me related sufficiently declare, partucularly those:
Habuerunt namque and antequi magiues sanctorum ad recordandum etc. Lastely, Sir
Humfrey must know that Papyrius Masson is registered by the authors of our
expurgatore Index, and consequently, he is no current Romanist, and much less
is he any of our best learned men as neither was Agobardus which are yet those
whom he professes in the title of his book to allege against us.

And so by this, Agobarde is absolutely cleared from all imputation of
iconomachie or error against images, and the objection of our adversary
convinced to be void of force.

Furthermore touching that which the knight alleges out of Hincmar concerning
the decree of the counsel of Fra^cfort a boute images, he delivered it only
as a relator, and being young in years and unexperienced he mistook the
definition of the foresaid synod for the schismatic determination of a
private Co^uenticle, which having ben in the same place and at the same time,
or presently after the dissolution of the council, he might easily take the
one for the other. In which historical passage, as some authors opinate, by
the credit he gave to the supposed Carolin books, he both erred himself, and
gave occasion of error to others who relying upon his report have put the
same in their general histories published since his time: yet this being only
a private error of fact and that uncertain it was without any prejudice to
the faith and practice of Catholic Church

Besides it appears evidently by an epistle of 55. chapters which the same
Hincmare Archbishop of Rhemes writ to his adversary Hincmare Bishop of laon,
he was a very pious and Cotholique prelate and an ackowledger of the Popes
supremacy over the rest of the Christian Churches Greek and Latin, for so he
speaks in Hic fifth chapter of that work. qui in illius (Sedis Apostolicae)
primata beatus Petrus cunctoru^ oucra portat, cuius principatus authoritate
mediator Dei and hominum homo Christus Jesus sedem Romanam super omnes sedos
sublimauit, Alexandrinam decorauit, Alexandrinam confirmauit etc. wherefore it
is improbable that Hnicmare who speaks so honorably of the Roman Church,
should at the same time have uttered any doctrine so contrary to the then
received practice of the same, as is contained in those words viz. Images ar
to be taken for an ornament to please the sight not to instruct the people.

To this I add for confirmation of my anser, it is not credible to imagine
that there having passed diverse letters betwixt Pope Adrian (in whose time due
honor of images was defined against the opposers of it) and other Popes of
those times, and this Hincmare, for composing the controversy between him and
Bishop Hincmare of Laon, as also about other matters; it is not credible I
say those Popes should not once have reprehended and condemned him for this
position, if truly he had been a maintainer of it Besides the Ecclesiastical
histories do testifye that about the same time, this same Hincmar at the
persuasion of Pope Nicolas confuted the criminations of the Grecians against
the Roman Church, of whom he would never have made choice for such a business,
if he had been either known or suspected to have defended any doctrine
repugnant to the use and honor of images established in the 7. Synod and then
commonly practiced in the Christian world.

And thus we see that nothing produced by our adversary out of this author
repugneth to the doctrine of that moderate honor of images which has been
universally professed in the Roman Church both in the time of Agobarde and in
this present age.

My third aduertissement is that the knight in the 289. page of his safe way
injuriously accuses Charon for a blasphemer of scriptures alledgeing him to
affirm they are imperfect, obscure, doubtful, ambiguous, perplexed. And yet I
find that this author in his third book de tribus veritatibus (which is the
same our adversary cites althou' not in the same language) page 97. 98. and
the rest imediately following in his french edition (for I could not have him
in latin) expressly cleares him self and Roman church of that foul and
odious calumniation feigned by Plessis in their disgrace. Charons words ar
these. Venons an particularitez qu'ils nous font dire, encore qu'ils les
proposent mal, and autrement que nous ne le disons, pour nous render odieux:
premierement que nous le disons l'escriture este imperfecte: an contraire nous
la croyons, confessons and preschons, perfect, pleine, entiere,
tres-suffisante come estant oeuure de Dieu, du quel ne sort rien qui ne soit
tell. Parquoy tout ce que Du Plessis dict, scauoir est qu'elle est perfect,
suffisante, a salut que IESV son autheur est la perfection, c'st en vain. car
cela a este enseigne par nous deuan luy: and ne fut iamais dict par les
Catholics chose au contraire. quant a l'obscurite, doubt, ambiguite, nous
n'en parlons pas de tout si cruement, mais nous disons bien franc hement deux
chooses, and l'auons asses dict and monstre cy dessus, que l'scriture est fort
difficile a entendre: qu'elle est prise and employee de touts indifferemment
bons and mauuais en caution and defense de toutes opinions, and a la ruin de
plusieurs. These ar Charons express words which I english in this manner. Let
us come to particulars, which they make us speak althou' they propose the^
wrong, and otherwise the^ we utter the^ to make us odious: first that we say
the scriptures ar imperfect: on the contrary we believe, confess, and
preach them to be perfect, complete and entire, sufficient, as being the work
of God, from whom nothing proceeds which is not such, for which cause all that
which Plessis says viz. that the scripture is peafect, sufficient to
salvation, that Jesus the author of it, is perfection it self, is in vain.
For that has been taught by us before him: neither was any thing to the
contrary ever spoken by the Catholics. For as much as concerns, obscurity,
doubtfulnes, ambiguitie, we do not spaeke altogether so crudely or rawly, yet
we say freely twoe things of which we have sufficiently said, and demonstrated
them before, that the scripture is very hard or difficult to understand: that
it is taken and applied by every one indifferently good and bad in caution and
defense of all apinions, and to the ruin of many.

This is that I find in this author to this purpose, which how repugnant it is
to our adversaries purpose the reader can not be ignorant except he be
affectedly ignorant as the knight seems to be even in this particular, only
this excuse I conceive he may have, if it be as I persuade my self, to wit
that trusting to that pit of corruption Plessis, he delivered this passage to
us by retaile as he received it from him which if he did I shall not besorie,
for that I desire not to charge my opposites more then I must of necessity:
neither is there any need of amplification in that nature, where the matter is
so copious, and aboundante.

Touching Christophorus de cap. fontiu^ alleged by Sir Humfrey in the 108.
page of his safe way for a denyer of transsubstantiation althou' I have said
something already in the place cited it self: yet having since had a seight
of that authors work against the sacramentaries, I have further discovered he
is falsely and with manifest injury to his person produced by our adversary,
supposing he is so far from uttering any doctrine against either the real
presence or transsubstantiation, that he professedly defends them both in his
foresaid treatise, in which particularly touching transsubstantiation I find
these plain words; in the 58. chapter of his fourth Action-
Transsubstantiationis articulum verbi Dei authoritate probaturi, illud in
primis tanquam basim ac fundumentum immobile ponimus, haec Christi verba (hoc
est corpus meum) in literali sensu esse verissima, proinde supernacaneum ne
dicam impium esse haec ita deprauare, detorquere, mutare, vt and corpus in
corporis figuram, and verbum est in significat, conuertatur, quasi haec
sententia alioquin vera esse, sibique nisi ad hunc modum mutata constare non
possit, dicimus igitur singulae dominicae sententiae verba in sua naturali
significatione sumenda esse. Hoc ita co^stituto vt verborum Christi veritas
constet, primum necessario consequens esse dico vt panis essentia conuertatur
and mutetur. We being (says Christophorus) to prove the article of
transsubstantiation by authority of the divine word, Jn primis we put it were
for an immovable foundation or graunde work that thief words of Christ (this
is my body are most true in a literal sense for which cause it is I will not
say impious, but at the least superfluous so to detorte, deprave, and change
them, that the word body be changed into a figure of his body, and the verb
is into signifye as if this sentence could not other ways be true and hang
together, unless it be altered in this manner. Wherefore we say that every
word of our lords sentence is to be taken in their natural signification.
This being thus established, to the end that the truth of Christ's words may
stand firm, J say first that it is necessarily consequent that the essence of
bread be converted and changed etc. Thus clearly speaks the Archbishop,
which if perhaps it be not sufficient to convince our adversary that this
author was noe denyer of transsubstantiation, let him but take a brief view of
his book, and he will be sure to find both that point and the real presence
most exactely and copiously proved by such a multitude of testimonies both of
scriptures and ancient Fathers, as I know he will not be able to look upon
them without confusion.

It is true I must confess this author, in his first Action of this work,
has broached an extrauagant opinion touching the words of consecration, for
which cause principally as I suppose the expurgatorie Index prohibiteth his
book till it be corrected. for in his 264. and 265. pages he endeuoreth to
prove that priests do not consecrate by virtue of those words hoc est corpus
meum: but by virtue of those, hoc facete in meam commemerationem. In
confirmation of which his opinion althou' he discourses in an unaccustomed
manner among deuines both ancient and modern, yet having diligently conferred
one of is passages with an other and duly pondered the whole sense and meaning
of them, I perceive his intention was only to dispute against and disprove
those who hold that by the virtue and operation of these words (hoc est
corpus meum) only materially and literally accepted and pronounced the
consecration is performed, he him self earnestly contending that those words
have their virtute and force from the precept Christ (hoc facite in meam
commemorationem. And therefore in his page 263. where he stateth his question he
has these words fellowing. permulti sunt qui horum verborum (hoc est corpus
meum) materialiter pronunciatorum operatione ac virtute consecrationem fieri
putant, Vnde nonnullos equidem vidi qui cum ad consecrationem peruentum esset,
miris modis halitum suum cum dictis iam verbis, super panem and vinum
conijcerent, non secus ac si and in quantum nuda tantumiuodo verba sunt, nihil
aliud in ipsis considerando, consecrationem fieri arbitrantur. Ego vero
consecrationem horum verborum operatione (hoc facite in meam commemorationem)
fieri existimo. Christus enim etc. There be very many (says this author) who
think that consecration is made by virtue and operation of these words (this
my body) materially pronounced. Whence it is that I have seen some who
comeing to consecrate do in a strange manner cast their breath with the
foresaid words upon the bread and wine as if in as much only as they be
naked words, not considering any thing else in them, they did hold
consecration to be performed by them. But I think that consecration is made by
virtue and operation of these words, do this in rembrance of me. For Ghrist
etc. By which words it clearly appears that Christophorus did not
absolutely deny that priests do consecrate by these words, this is my body;
but he only affirms that they have not their consecratiue virtue or force
included in their own material sound, but receive it from the precept of
Christ contained in those other words of his Do this in remembrance of me.

That which I yet further convince by o- other words of the same author in
this same Action where thus he discourses in confirmation of his position. Nemo
proinde existimet haec verba hoc est corpus meum technice and materialiter
prolata consecrationem efficere, sed ipsius Sacerdotis orationem (in qua and
haec ipsa recitantur) mandati huius, hoc facite, virtute atque operatione
irrogatam ac spirituali virtute roboratam. Let noe man therefore think (says
he) that these words (this is my body) artificially and materially
pronounced do make the consecration, but the prayers of the priest (in which
these same words also are recited) proceeding from the virtute and operation
of this precept do this, and strenthened by virtue of the same. Thus
Christophorus. By which it is manifest he had noe intention to deny these
words, this is my body to be them by which priests do consecrate since he
expressly affirms that they are included and rehearsed among those prayers,
benedictions and gratiarum actions by which according to his tenet, they daily
consecrate: But he only in his own private opinion houldes, that as well
those words (this is my body) as the rest of the prayers which the priests
use, have their virtue and efficient force of consecration not from their own
material sound, but from the precept of Christ, do this in remembrance of
me. Which although as it hypothetically or totally soundes, it is an extrauagant
and singular placet or dictamen of his, yet is it not repugnant to the
Catholic Roman faith, either in the point of the real presence, or
transsubstantiation, as may plainly appear to any judicious reader: But
only has some affinity with the tenet of the modern Grecians in this
particular; who not obstanding constantly defend both the one, and the other,
as I have showed in an other place by the doctrine of their late Patriarch in
his responsion to the lutherans.

And now I hence infer as a thing more directly for my purpose that the
words which Sir Humfrey produces against transsubstantiation out of a
certain treatise intuled de Correctione Theologiae Scholasticae, are not
truly the words of this author; But that Treatise is falsely ascribed unto
him and forged in his name how soever our adversaries make great estimation and
use of it: That which I clearly demonstrate because it contains doctrine
repugnant to that which he him self teaches in his own vndoubded work
against the Sacramentaries. For whereas according to the citation of the knight
in his 108. page of his safe way, in his Treatise inscribed de correct. Theol.
Schol. Christophorus has these words: Therefore it most certain that Christ
did not consecrate by those words (this is my body) neither ar they any
part of consecration. And yet in his Treatise against the Sacramentaries he
directly affirms the contrary saying thus Christus enim horum verborum (hoc
est corpus meum) vi and operatione consecrationem confecit: panis natura in
verum ipsius corpus sese mutante etc. Which is in English. Christ did
consecrate by virtue and operation of the words (this is my body) the nature
of the bread being changed or changeing it self in to his body etc. Now it is
plane that these words plainly contradict the other rehearsed by our
adversary, these directly and expressly affirming that Christ did consecrate
by these words (this is my body) the other directely and expressly denying
the same. In so much either we must of necessity grante that the Archbishop
plainly contradicted him self, which is not to be admitted especially in a
grave and learned divine as he was: or else that the Treatise in which is so
expressly contained a denial of that same which the same author affirms in
his own known and acknowledged work, is not truly his, but falsified and
falsely published in his name. and consequently what soever our adversary
produces out of it proves nothing, but is to be registered in the list of such
other co^terfeit wares as he sells to his reader for curre^t in the rest of
his work. And touching his Treatise against the sacrame^taries and some other
of his works althou' they co^taine some extrauagant positions and therefore
were justly condemned to be expurged by the authors of the Index, yet because
particularly in his book against the denyers of the real presence, the author
exprssely submits his doctrine to the censure of the Roman Church purposely
placeing in the frontispice of his book, omnia sanctae Eccesiae Catholicae ac
sanctae sedi Apostolicae Romanae iudicio submissa sancto, therefore his
authority can not any way prejudice the Roman faith. And now let this suffice
to show the falsitie of this citation: only the reader must further suppose
that if I had seen the Treatise it self I could have cleared the matter more
exactely: But our adversaries take an order for that keeping closse all such
obscure works and reserving them for their own pallates as great novelties
and most dainty dishes.

Some few more authors remain unexamined by reason I could not have them: as
Cardinal Carapha. Ioa^nes Marius, and twoe or three others. But I assure the
reader the allegations drawn out of them by my adversary contain no matter
of importance which is not sufficiently cleared without any further search of
the places as they stand in the books. Only this inconvenience there is in
this matter viz. That if I had obtained a sight of the authors the^ selves, I
should probably have discovered some more of the alledgers ill proceeding. In
respect of which, and my other more triuial defectiuenes. I will use the same
excuse which S. Augustine has for a certain work of his, concluding thus. Si
quid ab eis dici solet quod forte disputando non attigi, tale esse arbitratus
sum, cui mea responsio necessaria non fuisset, sieve quod tam leave esset, vt a
quolibet redargui facillime posset.

AN APPENDIX TO THE VVHETSTONE, OR A COMPENDIOUS ANSER TO THE BY-WAY, CHIEFLY
consisting in a breife discovery of the authors indirect, partial, and false
dealing with a detection of some particular examples of falsification.

BY THE SAME AVTHOR.

Sicut nouacula acuta fecisti dolum.

Psalm. 51. CATVAPOLI, Apud viduam MARCI WYONIS. Anno M.DC.XXXII.

THE INTRODVCTION TO THE APPENDIX.
BY that time I had in a manner finished my censure of knight Humfreyes
nicnamed false way, I received sudden news of another way, either of the same
author or of his friend for him, which like a second part of the Pickro came
ruflling out with a greater noise then the first: and the reason is as I
suppose as well for that it carries a more extrauagant title to wit via deuia,
as also in regard it is some what larger both inleaues, and as I think in lies.

Why the author should call his first book via tnta or the safe way, and this
via deuia or the by way rather then the contrary, in my conceit few will be
able to imagine any other reason then his own knightly pleasure: and for my
part I must needs confess that his titles severally applied to the contents
are to me mere riddles, as not containing either explicitlie or implicitlie
that which they make show of, but rather standing only for ciphers or marks
of the authors affected folly promising much but performing nothing, as I have
made appear in part by mine ansere to his first work, and partly also shall
be showed by Gods assistance in this against which I now write; of which although
I do not intend to make any fotmall confutation in every particular point of
doctrine as I did before, more then once repenting my self that I spent so
much time upon such idle matter: yet will I make a breife survey of every
distinct section principally noting and notifieing to the reader such faults
as I shall find the author guilty of, whom I also advertise that
notobstanding the knight with these his two books as it were with the
delivery of two prodigious twins, would seem to have brought forth some
great and strange novelty to the world: yet in verity there is nothing of
moment alleged by him either in this or in his former treaty, either out of
scriptures, Counsels, or Fathers, which has not binne long since examined and
confuted by a greater and far more learned number of Catholic divines then
all the pretensiue reformed Churches can afford as apposers of the Roman
doctrine. And although I do ingenuouslie confess that Sir Humfrey has used no
small art and industry in the application of his predecessors labors to his
own intent and purpose; nevertheless he has performed the same in such a
cousening and deceitful manner, that the reader may assure himself it is
almost one and the same labor to discover his lies, equivocations, false
suppositions, impertinent and corrupted allegations, and other his insincere
dealing, and to confute his doctrine, it being little more then a mass or
compound of those and the like corrupted and vicious ingredients, nor
containing any grave or solid discussion of any one question in terminis or
professedlie, but only or cheiflie consisting in a certain abstractiue way
by compacting patches and shreads of furtiue and stolen divinity delivered in
a plausible and persuasiue manner: of which although I do not deny but the
author has received great part at the second hand from his antecessors,
especially from his great Patron Daniel Chamier who in the art of cheating
does in my opinion either exceed or at the least equalize any that ever writ
before him; in regard of which although the knight might seem in some sort
excusable at the least by ignorance: yet has he or his chaplins invented and
added so much in that nature of his own coining, that I do not see what
coulourable excuse can possibly be alleged for justification of his bad
proceedings. And when reading of Bellarmines books of controversies I found so
many untruths, falsifications, and corruptions, by him discovered out of
Luther, Calvin, Beza, Brentius, Kemnitius, and other sectaries who had writ
before him, I imagined that, at least, for, very shame their successors as
being such great professors of reformation would have reformed themselves in
that kind; but now of late since I came to read the works of Daniel Chamier
and Sir Humfrey Lind, I profess I have quite lost my hope of their
reclamation, especially reflecting that as they are all men of one profession,
and have all of them an ill cause to maintain, so are they all fallen into a
fatal necessity of abusing their readers with tricks and sleights: the
reason of which is plain, in regard that falsehood as being of a contrary
nature to truth it cannot possibly be defended and patronized by the same
truth, but must of necessity be defended by it self. And as for Sir Humfrey
he is so deeply plundged in that muddie ditch, that he and his honor are
like to lie there for ever, his ill custom being now almost turned into
nature, and as proper to him as black is to an Ethiopian, or white to a swanne.

And to proceed to particulars, he is so void of shame that he doubts not to
abuse Bellarmine in the very fro^tispice of his book, where for posye or
sentence of the same, he puts certain words of his taken out of his first
book de verbo Dei cap. 2. intending by this indirect means to persuade his
readers that the contents of his whole work have that famous Cardinal for
their patron and approuer, which in my judgment is a point of the greatest
cousenage and impudency that ever was heard of among Christian writers; since
that neither that which Bellarmines words import contain the whole, or yet the
chief drife of Sir Humfreys book, neither are they uttered by him in that
sense in which he does apply them, to wit that the scriptures are the sole rule
of faith, and that there is no other rule but only them: where as Bellarmin
only affirms that the scriptures are a most certain and a most safe rule in
case they be rightly interpreted and according to the ancient tradition of the
Church, Vid. li. 1. de verb. Dei c. 2. and l. 3. de verb. Dei c 1. and seq.
Scriptura regulacredendi certissima tutissimque est supra. Lib 4. de verbo Dei
cap. 12.
and that they are not to be neglected by embracing the private spirit, which
is fallible and uncertain, and to be relied upon by none but such as neglect
the certainty or safe way of salvation, in which sense and meaning how the
words of Bellarmine can possibly be applied to Sir Humfreys Deuia or by way,
let the indifferent reader judge, especially considering that he could not be
inuincibly ignorant that the learned Cardinal in another place plainly
declares himself touching the totallity and partiallity of the rule of faith,
where yet nothing is to be found in that sense which the knight fraudulently
framed to his own purpose.

And now from hence I pass to the Epistle dedicatory, on which I had scarce
cast mine eyes, when presently I discovered two or three slanderous lies
uttered by the author: the first is, that the pretended Catholic Church as he
phraseth her, is made the whole rule of faith by the Romanists: the second,
that the Roman Catholics are tought to eat their God and kill their King:
the third that the Pope at this day allows of the Jews Talmud and inhibiteth
the books of Protestants. And those untruths I have noted only, not for that
I could not have marked out others, but because they seemed the most obuious
gross and palpable. I omit also to specify diverse places of Bellarmine cited
by Sir Humfrey both here and in many other parts of his work, which well
examined can serve him for no other purpose the^ to coulore his cousinage.

And as for the rest of his preface, I can assure the reader, it is little more
then an idle and tedious repetition of the same matters which he handled in his
first book: and whosoever will take the pains to read both his pamphlets
will find so frequent rehersall of the same things that his ears will tingle
to here them: nay some whole chapters of this book there be, which excepting
the title have little other matter then the same which is found in the other,
as will appear in particular to him who shall confer the two last sections
of it with the tenth and eleventh sections of the safe way; In so much that I
think I may not unfitly say of the works of Sir Humfrey that which a certain
pleasant wit said once of the writings of Luther, Toll contradictiones,
calumnias, mendacia, dicteria, ac schommata scurillia in Catholicos Romanos,
inanes digressiones, ambages, atque inutiles verborum multiplicationes, and duo
eius volumina in vnum haud magnum libellulum redigi posse non dubito: that is,
take way Sir Humfreys contradictions, calumniations, and lies, take away his
scoffs, and ieastes against the Roman Catholics, his idle and vain
digressions, and multiplication of words, or repetition of matter, with his
frivolous circumlocutions, and I do not doubt but both his volumes may be
easily reduced to the bulk of one small pa^phlet. And thus much concerning the
Preface and the book in general, from whence I pass to particulars.

THE DISCVSSION OF THE SEVERAL sections in their order.
Sec. 1.
In his first section, I think I may truly say Sir Humfrey tells but one
untruth, but it is so lardge a lie that it reaches from end to end, I mean but
one total lie, for partial lies there are diverse. This total untruth is in
that he affirms in his second page, that the difference betwixt us and them,
is such as was betwixt S. Augustine and the Donatists, which is manifestly
convinced to be false even by those same words which he himself cites out of
that holy doctor, Aug. de unit. Eccl. cap. 2.
who directly says that the question between him and them was vbi sit
Ecclesia? where the Church is? And yet the question is not betwixt the
Romanists and the Reformers where the true Church is, but which is the true
Church? that is, whether the Roman church and all the rest of the particular
Churches in the world adhering to and obeying that Church as the chief and
mother Church be that true Catholic Church mentioned in the Creed and
commended in the scriptures, or the reformed Church or Churches wheresoever
they be: which the reader may plainly perceive to be a far different
question, from that of which S. Augustine speaks in the place cited by the
kinght. Secondly the whole discourse of this section runs upon a false
supposition to wit that the Romanists refuse to prove the truth of their
Church by scriptures only, as S. Augustine did, says the kinght, against the
donatists; but this is not true, for the Romanists are so far for reproving
that course in this point, that they scarce use any other proofs then those
same scriptures which the same S. Augustine ordinarily uses for that purpose,
as may be seen in the works of both ancient and modern divines.

Thirdly nevertheless when the Romanists say they prove the truth of their
Church by scriptures only, they do not therefore mean so that they exclude
the interpretation of them according to the ancient tradition of the same
Catholic Church; for so neither S. Augustine either against the Donatists or
any other heretics in the like case, alleged the scriptures, but as the same
Saint Augustine says thou' partly in different words and to another purpose,
De unit. Eccles. c. 19.
vt non nisi verum sensum and Catholicum teneamus, not so but that we do
follow the true and Catholic sense of the same scriptures. And in few words
that which the Romanists mean is, that they do not use the scriptures for
proof of their Church in the sense of the pretensiue reformed Churches, but
ouerly in that sense which anciently has binne embraced by the most
universally floryshing Church in all or most ages according to the diversity of
times.

And thus we see cleerlie that Sir Humfrey in diverse respects has grossly
and ignorantly mistaken the state of the question both betwixt S. Augustine
and the Donatists, and also betwixt himself and the Romanists. And
consequently those authorities which he produdeth either out of S. Augustine
or other ancient Fathers are impertinent and of no force against the faith of
the Roman Church: but on the contrary by his false dealing he has fallen
into that by path which in his erroneous imagination he has prepared for his
adversaries; in which nevertheless he himself if he proceed in this manner is
like to walk even to the end of his journey, I mean throu' all the sections of
his book.

Sec. 2.
In his second section he pretends to ansere to the pretenses, as he terms
them, taken by the Romanists from the obscurity of scripture, and from the
inconveniences which he says his adversaries allege for the restraint of the
lay peoples reading them, yet he is so far from performing his task in this
behalf that he does not so much as relate completelie those reasons which move
the Roman Church to ordain the said restraint, but only catching at one or
two of the less important causes alleged by Bellarmin to that purpose, and
giving a very slight and superficial ansere unto them, he spends a great
part of his time in forging a new cause which he falselie conceiueth to have
binne the only or chief motive which the Roman Church had to prohibit the
reading of the Bible; to wit for fear, as he says, their Trent doctrine and
new articles should be discovered, And also in breathing out an odious relation
of the speeches of some particular Romanists touching the inconveniences which
that liberty which the Nouellists have given to the common people in reading
the scriptures, has caused in the Christian world in these our present times,
as that to permit every ignorant man or woman without distinction or order to
read them is to cast pearls before hogs, and the like, which because thy are
both impertinent in this place, as also for that I have in part ansered them
in my censure, I omit to rehearse them: Period. 13. and alibi.
that which in like manner I do for the same reason in the rest of the authors
which the knight cites in this section, only aduertising the reader that
besides that they make not to the purpose, diverse of them are by him
corruptedlie alleged and mangled either in words or sense, or rather both in
words and sense, By way page.
as particularly may appear in the citation of Sanders whom our adversary
affirms to say that it is little better then heresy to translate the
scriptures, Haeresi^ esse si quis dicat esse necessariu^. vis m^. Haer. 191.
and yet Sanders only says that it is an heresy if one do affirm it is
necessary for scriptures to be translated into vulgar tongues, as the same
words which Sir Humfrey cites do testify.

He also abuses Acosta whom he cites lib. 2. de Christo revel. cap. 2. and
yet Acosta speaks note a word of reading scriptures in vulgar language, and
much less affirms that much profit may redound to the lay people by reading
them in these our days, especially in that manner as the knight falselie
alleges, who if he will prove his intent must needs speak in that sense
when he imposes upon that author the approbation of reading the scriptures in
the vulgar tongue.

In this fashion he also couseneth his reader in his citation of S. Hierome,
affirming that in his epistle to Paulinus he says that the book of Genesis is
most plain for every man's understanding; whereas S. Hierome rehearsing
severally all the parts of scripture with an intent to show breiflie what
they contain, and what means is required to the true understanding of them,
and particularly signifying to Paulinus that he would have him understand that
he cannot undertake the work or interprise of reading scriptures without a
master; puts the book of Genesis first in order as it lies in the Bible,
sayeing thus, videlicet manifesta est Genesis, meaning not that the contents of
the book are manifest and easy to be understood as Sir Humfrey does most
falselie affirm him to say, hut only affirming that in the whole number of
the books of scripture the Genesis is manifestly known to be one and the
first of the same number: for which reason he does in like manner
consequently add of the two books following, saying presently after, patet
Exodus, in promptu est leuiticus etc. By which particulars the true sense of S.
Hierome does so plainly appear to make nothing for our adversaries purpose,
that we may justly wonder how he could have the face to pervert and detort it
in so shameless a fashion.

And by such tricks and frauds as this, and now and then dropping a lie or
two by the way, as that the Romish Preistes agree like Pilate and Herod both to
the condemnation of Christ and his word: and that it is a crime worthy the
Inquisition for the people to have a Bible, and the like; still dissembling the
true state of the question, which is not whether the laytie can lawfully read
the scriptures absolutely, but whether they can read them commonly and
without license, and that in vulgar tongues; it being ever supposed, that in
Latin Greek or Hebrew any one that can, may read them: by those frauds I
say and such like insincere dealing the knight patches up this piece of his by
way for his private spirit to walk in, where I leave him to his melancholy
contemplations and pass forward to the next matter.

Sec. 3.
The third section is about the interpretation of scripture, in which question
Sir Humfrey affirms that according to the judgment of the ancient Fathers the
Bible is the sole Judge of controversies, Quod si no^ poteris assiduitate
lectionis inuenire quod dicitur accede ad sapientiorem, vade ad Doctorem.
Chrysostom. hom. 3. de Laz.
and interpreter of it self. For this his affirmation he cites diverse places
out of S. Augustine, Ambrose, and Chrysostom, but in this he shows very
small judgment in the reading and understanding of the ancient Doctors: For it
is clear to any clear wit that these holy Fathers only speak by way of
instruction, and to such only as for their own private profit, comfort, and,
understanding read and interpret scriptures as they read them to themselves,
and not as public Judges or deciders of doubs in faith or manners: And in this
sense only and not otherwise the foresaid Fathers proceed (excepting the
place of S. Augustine cited out of his confessio^s which yet is to a different
purpose from this we here treat as in an other place I will declare) perhaps
to the end they might more easlie persuade such as in their time were slow and
ought to have binne more diligent by reason of their profession quality and
capacity, to retire and cohibit themselves from the accustomed vanities of
those days, and apply themselves to that holy and wholesome exercise. And
yet more then this except Sir Humfrey will add to the Fathers sentences the
word sole, as his Father Luther did to the text of S. Paul: nay and the word
controversy also, he will never justify by their authority his vast
proposition, viz: that scripture is the sole Judge and interpreter of itself.

Optatus speak of one particular case for which the scriptures were plain and
clear, not in general, nor yet does either he or Pope Clement speak of sole
scriptures, but of scriptures interpreted according to the traditionarie and
current sense of the successiue Catholic Church or chief pastors for the time
present, Euangelio non credere^ nisi Ecclesiae Catholicae me commoueret
authoritas. tom. 7. contr. ep. fund. Quisquis falli metuit huius obscuritate^
quaestionis, Ecclesiam de illa consulat etc. Lib. 1. co^t. Cresc. cap. 33.
not of particular Doctors of private spirits, in which distinction consists
the main difference betwixt the Romanists and the Reformers in this points,
which if you Sir Humfrey had duly pondered, and considered how much
authority the ancient Fathers and particularly saint Augustine commonly
attributes to the Church in expounding scripture and determining controversies,
I persuade my self you would never have had the face either to deny that ever
the ancient Fathers made ansere to the Heretics of their times that they must
here the Church or that their Church was that Catholic Church which is the
sole judge of Controversies, and the viue or live interpreter of scriptures,
and which they ought to here in all doubtful cases and obscure, or difficult
questions: nor yet could you have so inconstantlie hallucinated as to affirm
in one place that the text of scripture is the sole Judge and expounder of
itself indefinitlie and without li^itation, and yet on the contrary in
another place that you do not deny the authority of the Fathers jointly
agreing in the exposition of them in matters of faith, and yet further that the
same Fathers referred the meaning of the scriptures to the author of them; as
if the holy Ghost were bound to appear visiblie to deliver the true sense of
them as often as any controversy of faith occurreth: All which and the like
disparates the vertiginous knight utters within the compass of this one
section, also further accusing the Romanists that they make themselves Judges
and plaintiffes in their own cause, whereas indeed the Romanists neither make
themselves, but the ever visible continueing Church Judge of their cause, nor
do they hold themselves for plaintiffes but for defendants and faithful
possessors of that doctrine which as it were by inheritance they received from
their ancestors. And here I request the reader to reflect how disconformably
the knight discourses to his own received Principle touching the
interpretation, and sense of scriptures of which he and his brothers make
every private person, man or woman, Judge and vmpier, and yet condemns for
unreasonable that the Roman Church should use the like authority, even when it
is publikelie assembled in a general Council. So that these and all those a
foresaid particulars delivered by our adversary touching this point are but
only his own fancyes of which he makes use for want of better materials to
patch up this part of his by path, in which as you see he continues his
peripateticall exercise even to the next section.

Sec. 4.
In which, it being the fourth in Order he prosecuteth the same matter, telling
his reader that the Romanists though they pretend otherwise, yet they make
themselves sole Judges and interpreters of scripture, thus the knight fableth,
of whom I tknowe I may justly say with the Poet mutato nomine de te fabula
narratur. And in reallitie of whom I pray can this be so truly verified as of
those who notobstanding that under a false color that even in cases of doubt
and controversy they ingenuouslie profess that scriptures must be interpreted
by themselves only, Vid. Cha^. Panstrat. I. de inten. scrip.
yet nevertheless do most pertinaciouslie maintain that the exposition of
them belongs to every member of their Church in particular, and that the
spirit of interpretation is as common to one as to another; for what is this
but to make themselves sole Judges and interpreters of the scripture, and not
the scripture itself as they deceitfullie pretend? Let the indifferent reader
be Judge of this.

It is true the Council of Trent does decree that none expound the scriptures
contrary to the uniform consent of Fathers, yea and Pius Quintus does also
declare in his Bull of the profession of faith that such as are preferred to
dignities and places of care of souls take an oath of the same; but as they
take the oath so do they perform also the obligation of it. And I demand of
Sir Humfrey who has such a great talent in reprehending, whether he thinks
not in his conscience that those who under the strict bo^d of oath are obliged
to any matter, are not more like to perform it then those who have no such
obligation whereby to restrain their actions? surely there is a great
difference in the circumstances, and consequently a great reason to judge that
those Romanists who have such an oath obliging them to follow the consent of
Fathers in their interpretations of scripture, will be far more careful to
perform the same then the reformed Doctors who have no such bridle to
refrain the inclination to novelty of their itching wits,

Now whereas Sir Humfrey after his ordinary cauilling manner does say, that if
the Roman Church can make good the uniform consent of Fathers for their
twelve new articles of faith he will listen to their interpretation and
prefer it before any private or later exposition, this I say is a mere
sophisme in regard that the Roman Church does not teach as he ignorantly
mistakes, that he who interprets scriptures must have positiuely the uniform
consent of Fathers for his expositions, but only that he must not wittingly
expound any place of scripture in matters of moment especially in faith and
manners contrary to the whole torrent of the same Fathers; the which because
the kinght did not rightly understand as it seems when he read the Concell and
the Bull of Pius, he abuses Caietane, Canus, Andradius, Bellarmine, Baronius,
and other modern Romanists as if they had contradicted the foresaid decree,
whereas yet one of them to wit Caietan writ before it was established, the rest
being known for notorius defenders of it: and so running upon false grownes,
the wandering knight passes forward citing among Romanists some of his
consorts, and building his By-way (to omit others of less moment, and diverse
scurrilous scoffs touching the application of scriptures by the Romanists
notobstanding its well known he and his companions are much more guilty in
that kind) with two notorious untruths affirming that all the pristes and
Jesuits are sworn not to receive and interpret scriptures but according to
the uniform consent of Fathers, and that it is an article of the Roman faith
so to do: all which needs no further examen in regard that to any iuditious
reader these two particulars only will be sufficient to acquaint him which the
rest of the authors iugling tricks which he uses in this part of his by-way,
which being void of substantial matter it suteth best to him that made it,
but agrees nothing to the Catholic Roman faith.

^ect. 5.
In the fifth section he handles his Canon of scriptures, which he promises
to prove by pregnant testimonies of all ages, that it is the same which learned
Doctors and professors entirely preserved in the besome of the Roman Church in
all ages.

I have treated of this in part in my former Censure, to which I add
returning that Sir Humfrey says of Campion upon himself, which is that if
this Nouellist had binne as real in his proofs as he is prodigal in his
promises, he had gome beyond all the reformed proselites sinces the days of
Luther, for never man made greater florishes with proorer proofs, all that he
brings being founded upon the same equivocation which he used in his safe
way consisting of this proposition, the Fathers of every age have acknowledged
the 22. books of scripture which the reformed Churches hold for Canonical to
be the true Canon and no other. For it is true the Fathers of all ages received
from Christ and his Apostles those same books, acknowledging them for
Canonical, but it is false, that the same fathers in all ages held no other
for Canonical, of which truth particular instance may be made in S. Augustine
who (as Calvin confesses being a faithful witness of antiquity) Lib. 18: de
Ciuit. cap. ^6.
Calu. li. 4. ^nst. c. 14. Sac.
testifies touching the books of the Machabees, that althou' the Jews
receive them not for Canonical, yet the Church does receive them.

And according to this it being true that few or none of the great multitude of
writers which the kinght produces in every several age do positiuely affirm
that those 22. books of scripture only which the reformers use were by the
universal Christian Catholic Church held to be the complete or entire
Christian Canon of the old testament, or that those particular books now in
controversy betwixt us and them were expressly rejected eue^ by the Jews
themselves, as not Canonical, or not of infallible credit, and not rather held
by them for sacred and divine althou not registered in their Canon (which is the
chief part of Sir Humfreyes proposition) it follows clearly that he quite
fails in his proof, and that for all his braggs, he only steppeth out of
his pretended safeway into the same by path he has ever walked in since he
first began to write, never omitting his occustomed sleightes in the
allegation of authors and concluding his section with that laregelye so often
repeated by him in this and other places, as affirming that by his adversaries
own confessions the true and orthodox Church did reject those Apocriphall
books which his Church rejects, and the Trent Council allows at this day
for Canonical: out of which thrasonicall audacity of this boisterous Caualier,
the reader may easily take a scantling of the rest, and so come to know the fox
by his tatterd tail.

^ec. 6.
In his sixth sex section he pretends to solue the Romanists arguments deduced
from authority of Fathers and Counsels for those books which the reformers
hold for Apocriphall. Touching which point, althou' it cannot be denied but
that doubt was made in former times among the fathers whether the foresaid
books were Canonical or not, in which there was diversity of opinions
especially before the Council of Carthage: nevertheless it is certain that
neither the whole Church in any Council, nor yet any of the Doctors or
fathers did positiuely at any time ever agree to exclude them out of the
Christian Canon, but as some of the fathers made doubt of the same so others
made none at all, among whom S. Augustine was so confident in that matter that
in his 2. book of Christian doctrine, and that not obiter but professedly
treating of it; he sets down the very same number and names of the very
same books which the Roman Church defends for Canonical at this present
day: and yet notobstanding this our adversary is so presumptuous and void of
shame that he doubts not to affirm that Saint Augustine did not allow the
books of Judith, ^. 132.
wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabees for Conanicall. In justification of
which his impudent assertion it is wondrous to consider how the crafty
Sicophant does exercise his wits in framing euasions whereby to elude the
plain testimony of that renowned orthodox Doctor, and the decree of the
Council of Carthage in that particular, to which, the same S. Augustine
subscribed eue^ in this same point of the Canonical scriptures rejected by the
prete^siue reformed Churches. Howbeit all that Sir Humfrey could invent for the
infringeing of these two sound and irrefragable authorities consists either
wholely or cheeflie in equivocations and insincere dealing in the citing and
construeing of the authors he alleges, yea and in uttering of diverse plain
untruths, as where he says of the third Council of Carthage, that it is not
of that authority as the Romanists themselves pretend, adding presently after
for reason of his first lie another as great or greater against Bellarmine,
affirming that the Cardinal when the Protestants produce this Council against
the head of their Church, answers that this provincial Council ought not to
bind the Bishops of Rome nor the Bishops of other Provinces, and citing him
for this sayeing in his 2. book de Romans Pont. cap. 31. where nevertheless
there are no such words to be found, And finally to omit other of less
noise, he affirms that S. Augustine declares by pregnant and several reasons
that the Machabees are Apocriphall, and yet he denies not even in this very
place but that the same S. Augustine both put them in the Canon of the
scriptures in his second book de doct. Christ: nor yet that he affirmed in his
18. book de Ciuit. Dei cap. 36. that the, Church has them for Canonical
thou' the Jews hold them not for such.

By which it appeeres, that Sir Humfrey touching this point of controversy, is
not in the way of S. Augustine and of the determination of the Church of Rome
in his times, but is with shame enuffe fallen again into his own by way,
where he and his progenitors have ever wandered since the days of Luther.

Sect. 7.
In the seventh section he reprehendeth the proof of Catholic doctrine by
traditions, and makes such a trade of dealing untruely, that one would think
sure he lives by lyeing. And now I verily persuade my self it is most true
which a certain ingenious Protestant said of the Puritans, that they will
rather afford ten lies then one oath. In his very first words he affirms
that to admit traditions and other constitutions of the Church is the first
article of the Roman Creed to which all Bishops and Priests are sworn, citing
in the margen the Bull of Pius the fourth: this is his first lie in this
section, but he will make sure it shall not be his last, for he incontinently
adds two or three more one in the neck of another affirming that those
observations and constitutions of the Church which Pope Pius mentions, are
declared by the Council of Trent to be those traditions which the Church
receives with equal reverence and religious affection (for so the knight
insincerelie translates the words pari pietatis affectu) as she receaues the
holy scriptures: Ego firma fide credo omnia and singula qua contine^tur in
symbolo fidei etc. Bull: Pij. 4. sup. form. iur. prof. fid.
adding more that here was the first alteration made touching the rule of
faith, with diverse other falsities too large to recount. And yet if when he
read the foresaid Bull he had not for have scipped over the whole Creed (which
the Pope places in the very first part of the profession of faith) showeing
even by that unfaithful trick how little faith he has, I think he would
never have had the face to calumniate in this manner. And if to speak in
commendation of divine and Apostolical traditions in that form of speech
which the Council uses, were to make alteration in the rule of faith as the
knight will have it, yet is it apparentlie false that the Tridentine Council
was the first author of that alteration, for that (to omit other authorities
of ancient Fathers of the same nature) saint Chrysostom who lived in the
beginning of the fouerth age of Christian religion uses the same manner of
phrase if not playner, Com. in c. 2. Epist. 2. ad These.
sayeing that it does appear that the Apostles did not deliver all by
epistles, but many things without writing, but as well these as those deserve
the same faith. The which is not only as much as can be expressed for the
authority of traditions, but also a more plain and commendable testimony
then any Romanist ever uttered concerning the same. From whence the reader may
deduce that the knight is here also out of the right way of the primitive
Church, in which he runs forward till the very end of his section, and like
a man over heated breaths out nothing but abuses of diverse modern divines
which he cites and in a cauilling and captious sort peruerts their true sense
and meaning in all, or most places by him alleged.

Sec. 8.
In the eight section he pretends to prove that the traditions of the Roman
Church were unknown to the Greek Church and that they want universality
antiquity and succession; but on the contrary that faith which the reformed
Churches maintain at this day, is the same in substance which the Apostles
published in Greece, and therefore has antiquity universality and
succession. And this is the substance of his section, if any substance it has.

But in truth he proves his position with such mediums, that I am scarce
willing to relate them for loss of time; the greatest part of his proofs
being but either his own bare and false affirmations, or only frivolous
arguments long since ansered and destroyed by Bellarmin, and other Romanists,
and partly also by my self in my Censure; or else they are only authorities
drawn from his own brothers both in religion and lyeing, as from Illiricus
whom Bellarmine does cleerlie discover to have binne most expert in that black
art, or from other professed enemies of the Roman Church as Nylus and other
Grecian Scismatikes: adding also the resistance or disclame of some Grecians in
different occasions, and here and there a without doubt of his own citing
diverse authors vnfaithfullie for his own advantage contrary to their meaning,
especially Bellarmine whom he abuses in diverse places, partly by
perverting his sense and partly by mangling his sentences, as lib. 2. de verbo
Dei cap. 16. lib. 2. de Monach. cap. 30. lib. 1. de Sanct. beatid. cap. 19.
mingling also some untruths, as that most of the Greek and Latin Fathers did
hold that the faithful till the resurrection do not attain to the
beatificall vision of God etc. And now let the prudent reader judge whether Sir
Humfrey does proceed sollidlie, or rather not most absurdlie and weaklie in
that he goes about to eleuate the antiquity, universality, and succssion of
the Roman faith either in general or particular points by virtue of a
scattered company of modern Grecians, who in those matters they dissent from
us contrary to the doctrine of their most ancient and renowned ancestors,
have no more authority then the pretended reformers themselves; nay and
especially considering them to be of a religion which agrees neither entirely
with ours, and yet much less with theirs, what a madness is it in the knight
to make use of their authority, either to infringe the antiquity,
universality, and succession of the Roman doctrine, or for confirmation of his
own?

Dicunt (Armeni) in Christo Domino vnam naturam esse, vnam voluntatem vnamque
operatione^. Aub. Mir. not. Episc. p. 43.
Hodie (Aethiopes) and baptisantur and circumciduntur. Idem p. 54.
Neither is Sir Humfrey (thou' most repugnant to the known truth) content to
say, that the Greek Church has continued the truth of his doctrine in all
ages, but he also adds further that if we look beyond Luther, we shall
easily discern that the Muscouites, Armenians, Egiptians, and Ethiopians, did
teach their reformed doctrine, even from the Apostles time till now. By which
porticulars I doubt not but the reader may perceive even without a comentarie
how ridiculous he makes himself and his Religion and to what streits this man
was put, and how impossible it is for him to avoid the by way in the proof of
his antiquity, universality, and succession, who by his own confession was
forced to fetch his faith from such by places and deuious regions where yet he
has not found it, but remains still in his own vnquoth English by way.

The nynth section pretends to prove that the scriptures are a certain safe
and evident way to salvation, and traditions a by way. In which section Sir
Humfrey begins with a large homely about the certainty and safety of
scriptures, which two words because he peradventure dreamed the night before
he writ this, that he had seen them in the scripture, the one in the first of
S. Luke 4. the other Philip. 3.1. he assured himself he had thrust the Papists
from the wall at the first push. But alas for pity, his dream proved so
false that when he awaked he found himself in the channel; for in neither of
those places are those words found, nay nor yet the sense which he intends
here, which being no other then that only scriptures and no tradition is to
be followed in any matter of faith or manners, neither those two places of
scripture nor any other testimony that he brings either out of any
scripture or Fathers does prove his peremptory position, but only show that
all scriptures are profitable to instruct a man in all good works to the end
he may be perfect, and moreover that the scriptures be as Bellarmine says a
most certain and most safe rule of faith; yet that they be the sole or only
certain and safe rule, neither Bellarmine nor any other Romanist, nor yet
any proof or testimony which the knight produces does either teach or
testify. It is true Sir Humfrey alleges diverse authors, but all according to
his accustomed manner, that is neither much to the purpose nor yet very
faithfully, and the testimonies of those either impertine^tlie produced, or
already cleared by Bellarmine and other Controuertists, to contain nothing
contrary to the Roman doctrine in this particular: or else such obscure
grolles as neither his predecessors, as I think, did ever cite by reason of
their small authority, nor are they of that moment that they deserve any
ansere at all: as Waltram and Fauorinus which at the least by reason of the
ill use he makes of the^ serve the knight for nothing more then to lead him
out of the common path of the euerduring and constant Church (as a sure guide
which according to the scriptures cannot fail even by the power of hell) into
a dangerous diuerticle of scriptures expounded by deductions proceeding from
the private spirit of particular men, which is all he concludes in this his
section.

Sec. 10.
From hence Sir Humfrey passes to another matter, that is to the testimonies
of the ancient fathers, where he charge the Romanists that they either openly
reject them, or secretly decline their authority by euasions in particular
points. This is the tenth section a great part of which is repeated out of his
first book and ansered by me in my censure. He makes a large preamble
touching the claim the Romanists make to the ancient fathers as patrons of
their doctrine, and as if they did arrogate that which is not their own: but
the discourse is very idle and mutatis mudandis, may be very justly verified
of the knight and his predecessors, especially Jewel and Plessis who both of
them were the greatest braggars in that kind that ever were, and yet none so
shameless in corrupting the Fathers works and abusing their sense, as
themselves. The rest of this section is very mean stuff consisting of
captious constructions of the sayeings of some Romanists, and contorting them
to this matter as if they did disesteeme or reject the ancient Fathers
authority which is impossible to be true, as is manifestly convinced by the
continual use they make of them much more then the Nouellists, as it is well
known to the world: And the truth is that the Romanists only modestly
confess especially when they are urged to it by the clamours of the
sectaries, that some of the Fathers in their single opinions, or in such cases
as they did not all consent together, did sometimes perhapps fall into some
erroneous point of doctrine, and that they are not always and in every point
to be followed in their expositions of scriptures or otherwise in matters
nothing concerning the controversies of these times: But only when they all
agree in matters of faith, or by granting that in points of practice (for
example about the Communion in one kind or private Mass) they are not all and
in all matters expreslie for them: How beit they know they neither are against
them all things considered. Which if it be duly pondered is no inconvenience
at all, in regard that these things and such others be mutable according to the
diversity of times and persons, and consequently might be otherwise the^ by
practiced the^ by us. Neither do the Romanists when they affirm the Fathers
to be for them teach (as the knight does falselie and deceitfullie suppose)
that all the Fathers in every point of faith be it transubstantiation or any
other, are positiuelie for them; but only that the whole stream nay nor any
part of them is positiuelie against them in any such doctrine, and that in the
most points they are expresselie and wholly for them, and against the
reformers in all.

Page 290.
Out of which the reader may collect how impudently the kinght does belie the
foresaid Romanists, when he affirms that, they are reputed no good Catholics
by their own tenets that teach not contrary to the uniform consent of
Fathers, especially considering that he himself has already related how the
same Romanists take an express oath to follow that consent. Sect. 4. init.
And by this it may in like fashion be easilye perceived, how little credit
this man deserves when he accuses his adversaries of citation of counterfeit
authors, whereas he himself does deal so unjustly in that nature, especially
with Bellarmine, that he does not only mutilate his words, but also cites
that which is not to be found, as by way of example you may see page 290. where
he affirms Bellarmine to profess that they are not to be numbered among
Catholics that think the Virgin Mary was conceived in original sin; for
having deligently passed over two several times the 15. chap. of the 4. book
de amiss. great. which is that same Sir Humfrey cites, I find no such sentence
nor words in it, but rather the quite contrary doctrine, as by his own words
in my margen related clearly appears: Neque desunt qui impudenter affirment ab
Ecclesia Romanae defendi co^ceptionem immaculatam Virginis Mariae tanquam
articulum fidei. Bell. loco cit.
neither is it less plainly false which he affirms for the conclusion of
this section, to wit that Bellarmine and the Romanists in general some times
condemn the Fathers as counterfeit some times they purge them as if they were
full of corruptions, and that according to several occasions they have their
several devices to produce them or avoid them at their pleasure, yea and that
they confessing the^ to be counterfeit, yet produce them for their doctrine:
all which particulars are so far from truth, that they cry shame on the
author, and so much the more in regard that he and his brothers are not a
little guilty in this business, but do daily offend in the same kind as by
many instances might be proved and particularly in that one for example of the
Imperfect, which passing under the name of S. Chrysostom is convinced by
Bellarmine and others not to be his, in regard it houldeth the Homousians for
heretics, and yet is it commonly cited by our adversaries and even by Sir
Humfrey himself in diverse places of his works, in which they verify most
fitly that of the Apostle, Romans 2.21.
in that while they preach to others that they must not steal, they steal
themselves.

Neither yet do any of the testimonies which the kinght produces for his
accusation of Bellarmine in this nature prove his intent, nor any thing more
then that both Bellarmine and other Romanists do indeed some times produce
such authors in favor of their doctrine as are not by all Romanists held to be
of certain and undoubted authority, or at the least not certainly judged to be
the works of those authors whose names they bear, thou' otherwise althose who
cite them hold them for works of ancient standing and not counterfeit, at
least in the substance of theie authority, as the knight does counterfeitly
indeuore to persuade his reader: nay Bellarmine whom the knight particularly
taxes in this behalf shows himself so just and sincere in this point that he
is not content either always, or for the most part to advertise the reader
when he cites doubtful authors in his tomes of controversies; but also to take
away all occasion of scruple in himself, and of calumniation in others, he has
made a particular censure of such authors as are in any sort held for
doubtful or Apochriphal, or otherwise called in question. And so to conclude
this, the reader may see by what indirect courses Sir Humfrey huddles up this
part of his by-way for himself and friends to spend their time in.

Sec. 11.
In his eleauenth section he indeuoureth to prove that the substantial points
of the Roman faith as they are now received and taught by the Church of Rome
were never taught by the primitive Church nor received by the ancient Fathers;
these are the contents of the section, but it contains so little substance
that we may truly say it stands only for a Cipher to increase the number. He
begins with a great commendation of the scriptures, because he would seem to
say some thing plausible to the common people, but I know none make less
estimation of the^ in reallitie then he and his consorts who tie them like a
nose to the grindestone, to the interpretation of those private spirits who
have walked with in the compass of a hundred years or little more, rather
then to the consent of all succeeding ages since they first were penned. And I
pray you what is this preamble to the purpose of proving the Roman faith not to
have binne taught by the ancient Fathers or the primitive Church? the knight
produces certain places out of saint Augustine, and Ambrose, to prove that
they preferred scriptures before the writings of the Fathers, and that they
appealed from them to scriptures: but what Romanist in the world denies that
the scriptures have incomparable pre-eminence above all other writings
whatsoever? or what Roman Catholic does not willingly grant that when the
scriptures are plain and the doctrine of the Fathers obscure or doubtful,
provocation from them to the scriptures is rightly made: But that even in such
cases as the Fathers do vniformlie agree in matter of faith or generally
received practice of the Church, it is usual and lawful to appeal from them
to scriptures, especially when they are not plain and manifest; this I say
neither those holy Fathers produced by the knight did ever teach, neither can
any reason be found to prove it, but rather it is cleerlie against all reason,
as opening the by-way to all sorts of heresy.

And if Sir Humfrey when he read S. Augustine contra Crescon: had but passed
one other step forward, he might have found that famous Father not to appeal
to scripture only, but also to the authority of the Church, since that
presently after he had said that he held not saint Cyprians epistle for
Canonical, but examined it by Canonical scripture (which are the words our
adversary cites) he adds and that with a great emphasis sayeing. Non accipio
inquam, I say I do not receive that which S. Cyprian holds of rebaptization,
because the Church does not receive it for which blessed saint Cyprian shed
his blood: By which the reader may plainly perceive that one and as it were
the chief motive which saint Augustine had to reject the doctrine of
rebaptization, was not the sole authority of the scripture, as not being in
that case so clear as to convince S. Cyprian, but he struck the last stroke
by force of the authority of the Catholic Church. And thus you see Sir
Humfrey is still out of the way of the Fathers which he himself cites, if
they be ritelie understood; and follows his own crooked tract, relating the
particular points of the Roman doctrine vnfaithfullie as he uses to do and
making many conditional promises to subscribe in case the ancient Fathers be
found for us, but remitting the performance to his next opportunity, which is
so far to seek that I assure my self he will never find it.

Sec. 12.
In his twelfth section he comes to particulars contending that S. Augustine is
rejected by the Romanists in the several points in which he agrees, Page 317.
as he supposes, with the Reformers. I expected Sir Humfrey would have
performed the large promise which he made in his precedent section, sayeing he
dares confidentlie auowe that in all fundamental points of difference the
Romanists either want antiquity to supply their first ages, or universality
to make good the consent of Christian Churches, or unity of opinions to prove
their Trent articles of belief: but in steed of proving this he goes about
the bush and euading the difficulty which he found impossible for himself to
overcome, he only indeuoures to persuade his reader that according to the
Romanists own confessions, saint Augustine is wholelie for the presumed
reformers doctrine; for proof of which he produces diverse instances out of
Roman divines, but effects nothing, in regard that althou' it is true that
some of the Romanists confess that S. Augustine did dissent from their
opinions, partly in the interpretation of some certain passages of scripture,
and partly in some other particulars, yet none of them confess that in any
main point of religion or faith even those which have binne declared by the
late Council of Trent, that holy Doctor dissenteth from them, and in this
consists the equivocation, which together with some untruths, which he
utters, as when he affirms that those which he rehearses here, be chief
points in question betwixt us, and such like, is the by-way in which his
worship walks with great gravity all the lenght of this section.

Sec. 13.
In his next ensueing section which is the 13. in number, he pretends that S.
Gregory who sent S. Augustine the monk into England to preach the Christian
faith is directly opposite to the Roman religion in the main points of faith.

By the contents of this section it appeeres that the knight is as fit to
write matters of divinity as an ass is fit to play on the fiddle, and he
makes such fiddling work as one may plainly perceive that either he does not
understand the Fathers, and other Catholic authors that write in Latin, or
that passion and malice quite obfuscate his wits when he reads them. In his
350. page he affirms that in the undoubted writings of Gregory there will be
found few or no substantial points which are not agreeable to the tenets of
their Church, and altogether different from the Roman, this he says but in
stead of proof coming to particulars he committs diverse palpable frauds: for
first whereas he professes to compare the doctrine of Tridentine Council and
his own with the doctrine of saint Gregory in lieu of that he cites the
doctrine of Bellarmine, the notes upon the Rhemes testament, and the
expurgatorie Index, which although they be authentical Catholic authors, yet
are they not rules of the Roman faith. Neither yet does our adversary convince
them to be repugnant to saint Gregory's true meaning in any one point of
faith. And I earnestly wish I had time and place to discover to the reader the
egregious fraud the knight has used in his translation and interpretation of
this holy Fathers words touching the real presence of Christ in the
Eucharist: Greg. in 6. ps. poenit.
for by this only passage, he might frame a conjecture of the rest.

Secondly whereas our adversary treats in this section of substantial
points of faith, yet some of the particulars in which he exemplifies, are not
substantial points of faith, but rather of manners which according to
diversity of times may alter and change, as private Mass, the double
Communion, reading of scriptures in vulgar language, in which there is a main
difference from matters of faith, which can never vary.

Thirdly of all the points which he rehearses being all as I take it 9. in
number. There is but only one in which it can be said with any coulourable
probability that saint Gregory in any of the places here cited does
contradict the doctrine of the Roman Church, and that is the point of the Canon
of the scriptures, in which patricular althou' he refused to give the books of
Machabees the title of Canonical scripture, (as yet S. Augustine and others
did before him, and the rest of the writers, for the most part, ever since
have done (whether it were because he meant only they were not contained in
the Canon of the Jews, or for that the whole Church had not then declared them
for Canonical under that name) Nevertheless he is not to be judged more
repugnant to the doctrine of the present Roman Church in that point, then those
who notobstanding that in the primitive Church certain books of the new
Testament, as the epistle to the Hebrews and others, were doubted of, yet now
with infallible certainty and faith receive them for divine, and sacred
scripture, althou' they were not accounted and believed for such by all the
orthodoxall Fathers of the Church in all former ages since the time of the
Apostles who first published them to the world. Especially considering that
the same saint Gregory never denied neither in the place cited nor in any
other of his works, but that as the declaration of the Church was sufficient
to assure all faithful people that those books of which before his days
there had binne doubt, were then truly Canonical scripture thou' not known
for such in every age before him: so might the same succeeding Church in later
times determine the like of those books which in his time so generally and
undoubtedly were not as yet held for such. Neither according to the rules of
divinity can that man be reputed not to be of the same religion of which
another is, because he now beleaueth some thing more in the material object of
faith then the other did in that time in which he lived; but at the most it can
only be truly verified that he has the same habit of faith thou' some what
more extended in the object, as neither the Apostles were of a diverse faith
when they were first instructed by Christ before his passion from that they
had after his resurrection, when yet doubtless they received more express,
and extensiue knowledge in matters of faith then before they had received. And
sure I am S. Gregory without exception cites both the book of Tobie, and
Ecclesiasticus: and sapience most frequentlie: none of which books
nevertheless the misreformers admit for the word of God. And till Sir Humfrey
or some of his associates can produce out of S. Augustine and S. Gregory as
plain and pregnant places either for his own tenets, or against the Roman
doctrine as the Romanists have long since produced for theirs as their works
upon every several controversy make apparent, let them for shame never
claim them for theirs in any one point of controversy: for notobstanding
they make a plausible use of some few patches of their more ambiguous, ill
construed, and ill related sentences, yet turn but the judicious and
impartial reader to the books them selves, and he will ingenuouslie confess
and absolutely cry a loud, all is ours.

And if it would please his majesty of his royal clemency to suffer us
freely to make trial of our cause by scripture, and Fathers, I know which
side would be found minus habens, many grains to light. But it is our great
misery (yet in one sense our great happiness) to be so crossed and curbed with
severity of temporal laws that we cannot be safe in the most private corners,
much less can we appear in any public assembly for defense of our Religion.
Vid. Bell. in quatuor Co^tr. tom. vale^t. Anales. fid.


But yet supposing that S. Gregory had binne contrary in that particular of
the books of Machabies (for touching the rest mentioned by the knight he is
sufficiently cleared from that imputation by Bellarmine and other Romanists)
yet could it not possibly prove that monstrous great proposition of our
adversary, to wit that S. Gregory in his undoubted writings directly
opposes the Romish faith in the maine points thereof: and consequently from
hence it manifestly appears how far Sir Humfrey has walked by the way,
when in the end of his eleauenth section he avouched his reader should plainly
discern how the later Popes and Bishops do differ from the former, and how
these two Fathers of the Church (meaning saint Augustine and saint Gregory)
concur expresselie with the doctrine professed in the reformed Churches
different from the Roman; it being most apparent by the premises, that by any
thing which he has here produced out of the foresaid Fathers, he has neither
proved any one point of his own religion, nor disproued ours; but has only
prestigiouslie deluded the eyes of the reader with a coulorable flourish, and
yet in realitie remains still in the same byway in which he has hitherto
walked separate from the royal street of the ancient Doctors of the primitive
Church.

Sec. 14.
The next section being the fourteenth is that the ingenuous Romanists confess
that the Counsels which they oppose against the Reformers, were neither called
by lawful authority, nor to the right ends.

Here I find that to be most true which a pleasant Protestant pronounces of
the Puritans sayeing, their religion willingly admitts no founder, but Bragger
and they flourished much about a time. And in sober sadness the best Sir Humfrey
can make of his adversaries confession throu' out his whole work in favor of
his doctrine, does nothing more then plainly convince him to be of no other
progeny: Neither do their confessions fit his purpose any better then if he
should put his shoes upon his hands, or his hose upon his head.

A pattern of this you may see in this very section, in which how soever he
vaunteth of the confession of his adversaries, and that by two principal
conditions (as he says) ancientlie in use for the authority of Counsels are
both acknowledged to be abrogated by later Counsels, to wit because, quoth the
knight, now a days the Pope calls Counsels without right, and he and his
assemble them in their own name and for their own ends: for proof of which
calumnious position he cites but only two authors and those scarce held for
sound mettle among the Romanists: neither yet does either of them plainly
auerre his position as it is uttered by him; but they only speak by way of
reprehension of such abuses as might be practiced in that nature by the malice
of men without taxing the Pope or any other in particular, as the knight would
maliciously infer out of their words for the confirmation of the sinister
opinion he has of the Church of Rome and her head in earth. The rest which he
has in this section is but either his own bare assertions and those not true,
as that from Moses to the Machabies all temporal Princes practiced power of
calling assemblies, and that as soon as Kings received the Christian faith they
executed the same power, and that the later Counsels celebrated in the Roman
Church are not assembled in the name of Christ: all the rest I say is either
such stuff as this, or else malicious corruptions of some Roman divines as
appeeres in Bellarmin and Valentia, the sense of both which authors he
deceitfullie peruerteth, the one lib. 1. de Council. cap. 10. the other tom. 3.
d. 1. q. 2. p. 5. by which false and indirect dealing he does nothing in this
whole section but show himself to proceed in that by-way which his
progenitors Luther and Calvin have showed him in their corrupted writings.

Sec. 15.
In the 15. section Sir Humfrey affirms that Counsels give no support to the
Romish religion: In his former section he professed great reverence and respect
toward the authority of Counsels especially the four first, yet here he
spares not the very first General Council of those same four which he so
highly commended before, but at once he strikes at no less then 60. of the
80. Canons it is commonly held to contain, like a squinteyed waterman looking
one way and roweing another, just, as he did before in his feigned commendation
of traditions and Fathers. But let the reader mark what this man is to prove
and how preposterouslie he proves it, and he will presently judge him not to
be squinteyed only, but either stark blind or stark mad.

He is to prove as he says first that many general and particular Counsels
have erred in every age which yet are produced for the Roman religion, but how
does he prove this I pray? marie because the Council of Cayphas says he, is
confessed by Bellarmine to have perniciouslie erred when it adjudged Christ a
blasphemer, therefore by Bellarmines confession Counsels produced for the
Roman religion may err. Obstupescite caeli! O ye heavens stand ye astonished
to here this man's logike! and this being his first card judge what the rest
of his hand may be, and how like he is to conclude, who argues from Cayphas to
Christ, from the old law to the new, from a Council of false Jews to
Counsels of true Christians: Vid. Bell. de Conc. l. 2. cap. 8.
the reader may see Bellarmins anser to this parologisme, if any further anser
it deserves in his opinion, for in my judgment it needs no more but a loud
lafter, and thus I leave it.

He passes to the second age and says that the Council of Antioch is cited
by Gretzerus, by Turrian, by Baronius for the worship of images, and yet that
the first publishers of the Counsels never mentioned it. But what is this to
the purpose of proving that by the confessions of Romanists many decrees and
Canons of Counsels by them produced for the Roman religion are counterfeit or
devised to prove the Trent doctrine? does it follow that because some
publishers of Counsels did not find this Council or other such like in their
days, therefore they did confess them for spurious or Apochriphall or that
those who afterward have brought them to light as the authors above named
Baronius Turrian and Binnius have not as much authority to publish them for
authentical as you and your critical Cook to deny them or condemn them for
counterfeit; Censura Patr.
especially considering that those who allow this particular Council of which
we now speak, are all known to be of far greater knowledge in matters of
antiquity then those that collected Counsels before them, to wit Merlin and
Crabbe Surius and Nicolinus, who althou' they be one more in number then those
modern Romanists who allow this first Council of Antioch as found in the
library of ancient Origin, yet neither does the greater number contradict the
less, nor yet if they did have they so much authority as to prevail before
them.

In the third age the knight setts the Carthaginian Council celebrated by S.
Cyprian and his Colleagues, which Council, says the knight, may serve to prove
that some Counsels rightly called are dischareged by our adversaries, adding
that this Council is therefore rejected by the Romanists by reason that S.
Cyprian and the whole Council apposed the title of the Popes supremacy.

But in this proof Sir Humfrey commits diverse gross faults, first in
that he supposes falsely that a Council orderly conuocated ought not to be
rejected, which is a position that I am sure no Romanist, and as I think, no
sectary before Sir Humfrey ever defended: and the reason is for that it is not
the assembly, but the proceeding and concluding of a Council is that which
gives it decisiue authority, otherwise a Council without definitions
subscriptions and confirmation should necessarily be received, which is most
absurd.

Secondly the kinght tells his reader a manifest untruth, where he affirms
that the foresaid Council is therefore dischareged because S. Cyprian and the
whole Council apposed the title of the Popes supremacy; for that Council was
assembled only about rebaptization of those which had binne baptized by
heretics, neither is there any mention of the Popes authority either good or
bad: but only S. Cyprian by way of preface or prevention warns those Bishops
that were present that every one deliver his sentence or verditt freely without
judging one another, because says he, none of us does constitute himself
Bishop of Bishopps, and so what is this I pray to the Bishop of Rome or Popes
supremacy whom S. Cyprian so much respected that even in this occasion as S.
Hierome testifies, Dialog. aduers. Lucif.
he directed his sinod to Pope Stephan, which is an evident sign that he was
not contrary to the Popes supreme authority, but rather did disetely in that
his fact acknowledge the same. Thirdly Sir Humfrey deals falsely when for
conclusion of this point he says that this may serve for proof, that
Counsels rightly called are descharged by his adversaries, when they make
against the Trent faith, it being manifest that this Synod contains not any
one of those matters which he contemptuously terms the Tridentine faith. From
whence it appeeres that in steed of proofs the liberal kinght has given us
his own impostures: And thus it fares with him throu' all this section
captiously concluding universal propositions of particulars, as that some
Romanists do cite for the Popes supremacy one or two Counsels of whose
authority others make doubt, therefore the doctrine of the Popes supremacy is
wholely grounded upon uncertain Counsels: notobstanding he himself
acknowledges that besides these few doubt full authorities, there be many more
in number cited by Bellarmine and others that are undoubted: and with such
sophistical illations mingling diverse equivocations and false suppositions,
confounding general Counsels with particular and confounding truth with
falsity, yea and much falsity without any mixture of truth, he concludes his
section in such a fashion as it is easy for any that has his wits about him
to perceive he intends nothing else but to lead his reader into that same
by-way which he still labors to finish for himself and others of his own
profession.

Sec. 16.
In his sixteenth section the knight makes hot war against the Council of
Trent; and after he had in a couning and secret manner spit his poison at
diverse other Counsels of more ancient standing in the precedent section, he
singles this out alone as his most professed enemy, and most severe censurer of
his faults and crimes, using all his whole forces and art to diminish his
strength and power, and that not in hugger mugger but in plain and manifest
terms: affirming the same to be of small or no credit as being neither
lawfully called nor free, nor either general or generally received. He says
it was not lawfully called because it was assembled by the Popes usurped
authority and not by the Emperor: but this being the first part of he proof,
it is both false in it self and also left unproven otherwise then by his naked
affirmation, Serenissimo etiam Imperatori gratias agere, and gratulari iure
optimo debemus. -- ille de nostris his rebus pro sua eximia pietate sollicitus
mirifice fuit Orat. hab. ses. 9.
and so it needs no other confutation then denial; how beit so certain and
manifest it is that the Emperor consented un to that Council and approved
both the convocation and proceedings of it (as much as lay in his power) that I
am persuaded the sectaries them selves with all their audaciousnesse have not
the face to deny so plain a truth, and so plainly expressed in the oration
had in the last session of the sacred synod, in which great thanks ar rendered
unto him for his zeal and care therein employed.

The second part of the proof consists of a false supposition that no Council
can be legitimate except it be conuocated by the Emperor: but that this is
false it is clearer then the day, otherwise it would follow that those
Counsels which were celebrated before there were any Christian Emperor in the
world should have binne unlawfully called, as even that of the Apostles
themselves: Act. 15.
and more if that position of the nouellists were true, what truth or authority
can the Counsels of the pretensiue reformed Churches have, none of which as
yet had ever any Emperor of their religion (and as I hope in God never will
have) at least since the days of Luther even by their own confessions: which
poverty of their poor ragged flock it seems Sir Humfrey had quite forgotte
when he uttered that false maxim of the reformed doctrine. Secondly he says,
the Council of Trent was not free, Hi (nuncij) Aquilon is parts prope omnes
peragrarunt, rogarunt, obsecraru^t, obtestati sunt, tuta omnia, atque amica
promiseru^t. etc Orat. vt supra.
and yet he confesses in this same place that he denies not but that safe
conduct was promised as well to the Lutherans as to the Romanists, and yet as
it seems like cowardelie dastardes they feared danger, timuerunt vbi non
erattimor. And if they feared where there was no fear in whom I pray was the
fault? now for freedom of speech in proposing of matters and discussing them
Sir Humfrey cannot deny if he will stand to the testimony of his own Dudithius
cited by himself who plainly supposes freedom in that nature, in that he
affirms being a Protestant that the field had binne theirs if they had not
binne overcome by number.

Thirdly he affirms that it was not general, but how could it be more
general then by a general and amicable convocation of all Princes Prelates
and learned divines, which the Bull of indiction declares. And as for the
number of those who came unto it thou' the knight does use all his art for the
diminution of it, yet was it far greater then he vouchsafed to recount, as
the Catalogue prefixed to the Council does plainly declare, amounting to the
number of 255. Acclam. Patr in ^nc Conc.
of those who subscribed to the decrees; and the truth is, if more had come
more had binne admitted, and none rejected, which even of it self alone
excepting others is a sufficient note of Generallity.

Fourthly, he says it was not generally received, but in this he uses one of
his usual equivocations, for althou' in some places as yet it is not received
in matters of reformation and practice as in those places especially in which
it has never binne proclaimed. Nevertheless in matters of faith it is
generally received of all Roman Catholics where soever they be, far or
near, in Europe Asia, or America, or other foreign Countries converted to
the christian Catholic faith, and so the reader may see that this saying of
our adversaries which they perpetually buzze into the ears of the simple
people that the Council of Trent is not generally received by the Romanists
themselves, is mere cousenage and imposture maliciously invented to auert
their minds from the most wholesome doctrine and profitable precepts of the
same for the general reformation of the Church, which because the false
reformers plainly see it trenches to near upon their Copyhold, they join
heaven and hell together to infringe its authority. And here I advertise the
reader that our adversary uses the relations of Some histories touching the
proceeding of the Tridentine Council which are not admitted by the Romanists,
and particularly those passages of Thuanus, of whom I have received credible
information that dying a Roman Catholic he made a general retractation of all
such positions or relations as he had publishedlesse advisedly, or any way
dissonant to the doctrine, or practice of the Roman Church: and so all such
passages as Sir Humfrey produces out of his works, ar esteemed as void of
force for confirmation of any part of his doctrine.

The rest which Sir Humfrey utters in this section is nothing but certain
hereditarie untruths and impostures which he received from Calvin, Illiricus,
Tertium nonnulla, atque etia^ quartum discussa: summa saepe contentione
certatum etc. Orat. hab. ad finem Council.
and Sleidan and the counterfeit history of the Council of Trent published in
the English tongue in disgrace of that most renowned Synod, whose authority
will they nill they, they must suffer us to honor, embrace and obey at the
least till such time as they can show us one of their own of the like
generallitie, gravity, and authentical and exact proceeding which it has
used in discussion and determination of the most received doctrine of former
and present ages, which if they cannot perform, then let the^ confess they
have left the common and royal way of the ancient Church, and fallen into a
by-way of parlamentall, or pure consistoriall government in matters of faith,
not heard of in primitive ages: as neither, was their extrauagant form of
Conuenticles, truly general, national, or provincial, as appeeres in their
Pseudosinods of Gappe, Vide relat. Synod. Dordrecht
and Dort, in which the reformed Prelates carried themselves so zealouslie,
that as it is credibly reported they spent 2000. pounds in Renish wine to heat
their spirits before ever they had decreed any one point of their
controversies.

Sec. 17.
In his seventeenth section Sir Humfrey does nothing but foyst, babble, and
abuse Bellarmine and other Romanists about the Church as if they extolled her
above the scriptures and accusing here to have spoiled herself of them, and as
if it were uncertain among them whether the Roman Church is the true Church
because they teach it has diverse acceptions, which is all false and frivolous
matter; for that although the Church according to the heterogeniall parts and
diverse functions of the persons of which it consists, may admit several
denominations, as are the essential, representative, or virtuall Church, in
which point also peradventure there may be found some difference among the
Romanists in their manner of speech and speculations: yet in substance they all
agree that the visible Church to which the faithful must seek in their
doubts is the visiblie and perpetually succeeding Church from the time of
Christ till this day, which is the plain way in which etiam stulti ambulant,
even the most simple sort of people may easily find and walk in; all other
Churches especially the invisible Congregation of Sir Humfrey and his fellows
is but a blind diuerticle and by-way, fitter for wanderers and vagabonds then
for the true and honest people of God to walk in.

Sec. 18.
In the title of the 18. section, the knight pretends to prove that the Plea
which the Romanists draw from the infallible authority and title of the
Catholic Church is false vain and frivolous.

Althou' the name and authority of the Catholic Church has ever binne so
odious to all sorts of sectaries, that they made it a chief part of their
labors to impugn the same, of which, several instances might easily be
produced: yet this practice of theirs has never bin so much used or so
earnestly pursued as in these present times. For as it is well known that
their Captain and Antesignane Luther struck his first stroke at the Pope
and Churches power to grant indulgences, so is it also apparent by experience,
that all his followers continue the same battle with all their strenght and
stratagems. For proof of which we need go no further then to this our
adversary. Who throu' his whole works labors nothing more then to diminish
the luster, and power of the Catholic Roman Church; in so much that in this
very section he makes choice rather to lay violent hands upon the sacred
Bible, and shamefullie to corrupt three several places of the divine scripture
then fail of his purpose, or want color for his perverse intent, which to the
end the reader may more plainly understand I will particularly rehearse.

The first place therefore consists in diverse passages of the epistle to the
Romans especially in the first chapter, where that which the Apostle by way of
admonition speaks only to those particular Christians and members of the
Church which were then at Rome, exhorting them to be constant in their faith
and humble themselves least God cut them of for their sins as he did the
Jews; the knight does violently draw it to the who^ Roman Church, as if S.
Paul did intimate t^ ^t had a possibility of falling, and consequently was
but a particular Church, feygning also that saint Paul did therefore pray for
the continuance and stabilitie of the Roman faith, as if says Sir Humfrey he
had for seen by the spirit of prophecy they would glory in their own
merits: all which is quite repugnant to the meaning of the text, as the reader
may easily perceive. And the like abuse of the knight the reader may see in
other places which he cites to the same purpose viz. to prove that the Roman
Church is faileable as 1. Thessal. 8.2. Thessal. 3.1. Tim. 3.15. Ephesians. 3.14.
In all which places he uses much of his accustomed craft perverting the sense
most sacrilegiouslie in all those sacred texts, and in the first to the
Corinthians he falsifieth the words, putting thou for us, the particulars of
which I am sorry I cannot stand to examine, to the end his gross cousenage
might more cleerlie appear, and how under color of scriptures the sacred
word of God and truth is adulterated even by him who so much braggeth and
glories in it.

After this same fashion he eludeth two pregnant places of Fathers for the
authority of the Church the one is of Saint Cypr. lib. 1. epist. 3. the other
is of saint Augustine contra epist. fund. cap. 5. and to coulore his evasion
about the words of saint Augustine which are these, Praterea Ecclesia quae
nunc est in fide errare non potest ergo si credidarit aliquem librum esse
canonicum ex eius testimonio ^ loneum, firmum quo sumetur a Theologis
argumentur. Canon lib. 2. c. 7.
Euangelio non crederem nisi Ecclesiae Catholicae me commoueret authoritas, he
cites Canus lib. 2. cap. 8. as if this author did fauore his false
interpretation of saint Augustines meaning; who nevertheless (besides that
his words are not cited home by Sir Humfrey) he only affirms that saint
Augustine did not intend in that place to make the Church the formal reason
why an infidel or one lately converted beleiues the Gospel, but only the
necessary condition of his belief of the Canonical scriptures; which
doctrine of Canus makes nothing at all for our adversaries intent in this
place, which is to disprove the infallible authority of the Catholic Church,
which Canus does not deny, Lib. 7. de Canon. c. 10.
but professedlie maintayneth and particularly in the very precedent chapter
in other places in a most Catholic manner.

To this purpose the knight also cites Durand, Driedo, and Gerson, but
rehearses not their words which notobsta^ding I have seen cited by Chamier;
but if they be truly and sincerely understood, they convince nothing against
the infallible authority of the Church, as neither the words of saint Thomas
who only affirms that saint Augustine speaks of the Church as an
oueruling cause, but not as the foundation of faith, which no Romanists denies,
but all uniformly teach that their faith is founded upon the word of God,
whose only authority is the supreme rule of the same, but the Church the
proponent only.

In the rest of his section Sir Humfrey makes a diuersion to the universality
of the Church for which he only produces some impertinent reasons of no force
with the authorities of the Counsels of Ferrara and Basil, waldensis and
others, none of which proves any thing appertayning to the matter in treaty,
but only serve to patch up this part of his bypath, in which I leave him.

Sec. 19.
The 19. section following affirms that the Church is finally resolved into
the Pope, whom says the kinght the Romanists make the husband and the spouse,
the head, and the body of the Church. This man is so full of falsity and
untruth that it seems his whole living is by lyeing, I am persuaded he has
had his breeding in brazen faced College where impudency and untruth are the
chief lessons in the schools. And here the kinght has in a manner gone
beyond if not beside himself in that faculty. For I find no less then there
lies even with in the narrow limits of the title of his section: nay there is
not any one part or parcel of it true, by which alone althou' the reader might
make a strong conjecture of the rest, yet will I give him an instance or two in
particular which doubtless will quite convince his judgment of the authors
knauish dealing.

In his 502. page, now at last says he, they have made him (meaning the Pope)
the whole Church in so much that some are not ashamed to profess that the Pope
may dispense against the Apostles, yea against the new testament upon good
cause, and also against all the precepts of the old. This lie is so exorbitant
and monstrous, that it seems he who made it doubted it would not be taken
upon his own bare word, wherefore he fled to the authority of his friend Jewel
whom he quotes in the margent to make it more authentical, as if that famous
Father of false dealing could sufficiently supply all that which in that nature
is wanting in himself. But I hope the judicious reader will register them both
in one predicament and give no more credit to the one then the other, but send
them together to the whetstone.

Another instance I give the reader out of the 504. page, where the knight
charge Bellarmine to teach that if the Pope should so much err as to command
vices and forbid virtues, the Church were bound to believe that vices are good
and virtues evil, vnlesses she will sin against her conscience. It is true
the Cardinal has the same words which Sir Humfrey cites hitherto, but yet he
uses most dishonest and double dealing, in regare that if he had either
rehearsed the whole place entirely as it lies in Bellarmine, or else had
veiwed his recognition, he might easily have found the authors true meaning to
be, not that in general and every matter and all occasions, but only that in
doubtful cases and in things not necessarily good or ill of themselves, and in
matters indifferent, such obedience is to be given to the Pope, least otherwise
men should proceed against their consciences, and therefore says he, Si Papa,
If the Pope should command that which is clearly known to be a vice, or should
prohibit that which is clearly known to be a virtue, then we ought rather to
obey God then men. And so we see, that taking away the imposture and cousinage
of the kinght, there is nothing in Bellarmines doctrine that may either justly
offend the reader, or that makes for the purpose here intended of proving that
the Pope ought to be obeyed whether his doctrine be true or false, as our
adversary does falsely and calumniously affirm. All the rest which the knight
has in this section is only sophistical fopperies and crackes of his crazed
brain abusing the doctrine of diverse Romanists and framing such sense to their
words as comes neerste to his own purpose and is farthest from theirs, and
so falsely fathering it upon them, and confounding the faith of the whole
Church with matters disputable and in opinion, he concludes discourse of all
which let the reader consider whether the Romanists or he himself rather be not
in the by-way he has fallaciously framed for his adversaries.

Sec. 20.
In the section followeing which is the 20. in order, he affirms, that the
Church, which he says is resolved finally into the Pope, has neither
personal nor doctrinall succession, neither in matter of faith nor fact.

It appeeres by the knights proceedings in this whole section, that he has met
with his greatest enemy against whom he uses all his art and cunning hoping
to have the mastrie by striking most strongly at the head that is the Pope,
whom to make his bloue the fuller, he feignes to be the whole body, and like
a venomous spider gathering poison from the fraga^t flowers of the Roman
doctrine spits the very quitessence of it against his sacred person. Yet a
great part of his matter is but loathsome inculcations of that which he has a
hundred times repeated, and which have binne as often anseared by my self and
others. But because his importunity is so great, I will give the reader a
taste, thou' I confess it is most tedious unto me to eat so often of the same
Crambe.

The knights chief plot in this place is by confronting the doctrine of the
ancient Popes not only in matters of fact, but of faith also with the modern
doctrine of the Roman Churches and Popes, he begins with private Mass
sayeing that Pope Anacletus did decree that after consecration, all present
should communicate according as the Apostles set down, and the Roman Church
then observed. Now this Sir Humfrey compares with the doctrine of the late
Council of Trent, which determines, under pain of excommunication, that
Masses in which the Priests alone communicates are not unlawful or to be
abrogated; as if this decree were contrary to the other, which directly it is
not, for that althou' the words of Anaclet do show the common custom of his
time, yea and of the Church of his time (notwithstanding they also insinuate
that the contrary had binne practiced at the least in some places) to have
binne that all present at Mass did de facto communicate, yea and that those,
that did not should be put out: Yet in regard the Council of Trent does
neither deny nor dissallowe of that custom (nay rather expreslie desires the
continuation of it) but only defines that such Masses as are celebrated
without more communicants besides the Priest are not to be condemned and
abollishhed as the clamorous sectaries of our days do contend, it is more
then evident that there is no contrariety to be found between the one and
the other, nor more then if the same Council had defined, that those
Communions are not unlawful, or not to be condemned in which infants are not
admitted to receive the Sacrament, notobstanding the custom was in the
primitive Church to admit them. To omit that Sir Humfrey is very ignorant
in the doctrine of the Roman Church if he knows not that althou' in matters
of faith there can be no change, yet in matters of manners alteration may be
made; so that according to diversity of times, places, and persons, that which
once has binne practiced yea and commanded by one Pope and Council at one
time, may be otherwise practiced in another, and that without any prejudice,
but rather with great profit (in some cases) to the universal Church which
doctrine because the knight wants either wit or will to conceive it
rightly, he runs a madding throu' his whole section upon an erroneous
supposition proving nothing but his own spleen against the Pope, and want of
understanding, and judgment.

And in this same Frantic fashion he deals with saint Gregory in his 9.
epistle of the Register; and the Bull of Pius quartus concerning images,
equiuocating in the word adoration, which by reason holy S. Gregory takes it
for divine honor, he teaches with great reason, that althou' images may be
lawfully made and used with due reverence as he shows in another place, yet
they cannot be lawfully adored in the other sense. From whence Sir Humfrey
will needs collect that the modern Pope Pius contradicts that which his
famous predecessor did teach before him, in that he declares according to the
doctrine of the Tridentine Council, due honor and veneration is to be given
to the images of Christ and his sainres in which nevertheless there is no
contrariety at all, but rather great agreement and conformity not only in
the matter it self, but even in their manner of speech.

And by these two points which are the chief matter of moment which our
adversary has in this section, the reader may easily conjecture of the rest;
and if besides this, if he does but mark how deceitfully he deals with
Bellarmine in the conclusion of this section about the succession of the Popes
to S. Peter, I am persuaded he will never trust Puritan writer as long as he
lives. But note the impostors subtletie, that which Bellarmine says of the
immovable placing of the seat of saint Peter at Rome by Christ's appointment
which he affirms not to be a matter of faith or immutable precept of God, this
honest disputant applies it to the absolute being of saint Peter at Rome and
the seating of his chair there, and then upon this false and detorted
understanding of his doctrine, infers as from his own confession that
therefore at the best it can be but probable that the Pope should succeed Peter
in that Seat, and three is no necessity to believe it, for that Bellarmine
says it is no point of faith, and that if Christ gave any such precept, it
may be changed, thus the knight. And yet the truth is that in none of those
places the Cardinal speeches of the succession of the Pope to saint Peter,
but only of the certainty of the connection of the Apostolical seat with
the particular Roman Church, and whether the one is so strictly joined to the
other that it cannot be transferred to another place viz. to Antioch where
saint Peter did fitly for a time abide, or to some other Episcopal seat of
the Catholic Church, which Bellarmine affirms not to be a point of faith or
immutable divine precept: but of the infallibility of the succession of the
Pope in the seat of S. Peter he makes no doubt, but constantly defends it to
be a matter of faith and divine institution as is manifest by his own words
in the 12. chapter of his second book de Romans Pont: where he says expresselie
Successio Romani Pontificis in Pontificatu Petri ex institutione Christi est,
and a little after Si quis tamen petat an iure diuino Romanus Pontifex Pastor
sit and caput totius Ecclesiae, omnino id esse asserendum. And now by these
plain words of Bellarmine it manifestly appears he is so far from
standing upon probabilities in the point of succession of the Pope to saint
Peter, that all those places which the knight cites out of the second and
fourth book de Romans Pont. as that, non est improbabile Dominum iussisse vt
Petrus sedem suam Romae figeret. And, non est de fide diuina and immutabili
praecepto Romae sedem Petri esse constitutam; est tamen probabilissimum and pie
credendum. And those other words, forte non est de iure diuino Romanum
Pontificem Petro succedere. And those, Ius successionis Romanorum Pontificum in
eo fundatur quod Petrus Romae suam sedem fixerit. All those places of which the
knight makes a pray to deceive his reader, are spoken not of the succession,
but of the reason of the succession, of the Pope to the Apostle Saint Peter:
for Bellarmine does expresselie distinguish in the same place saying, aliud
esse successionem aliud rationem successionis: and the first which is the
succession, he teaches cleerlie to be by the institution of Christ, but the
manner of the same succession that is the reason wherefore the Bishop of Rome
rather then the Bishop of Antioch or any other does succeed S. Peter in that
Seat has it beginning from the fact of Peter: But Bellarmine neither in any
piace of those cited by Sir Humfrey nor in any other affirms that the right
of succession is founded in the fact of Peter: But this was the craft of our
subtle knight whereby he might infer that the fact of Peter being no matter
of faith, but at the most of moral certainty, the whole frame of the Roman
religion might therefore seem to be doubtful and uncertain. And to this end
he falselie applied to the succession it self that which by Bellarmine was
spoken only of the manner of the same succession. From which unjust
proceeding of Sir Humfrey we may gather by the way, that there is no dealing
with these people but at hand blows, I mean by producing of the books out of
which they make their allegations, otherwise if they can but escape without
examen, they will make no scruple to cosen their own Fathers as experience
has already taught us.

To conclude I assure the reader that the rest of the matter in this place is
but such loathsome stuff as this, mingled with so many impudent untruths
that I am not able to recount them severally: All which because I perceive the
more it is stirred the more it stinkes, I will leave it to himself to make the
best he can of it, and if by corruption and fraud he will needs build a
by-way for us Romanists, he does but labor in vain, since that he can no
sooner finish it, but that we can as soon return it upon himself and
fellows.

Sec. 21.
In the next section which is the 21. the knight treats of the Popes
judgment, which he says, is not yet certain and agreed upon among the
Romanists, notwith standing it is by them made the rule of faith.

In this section I find nothing meritorious of a scholars labor either in
reading it or ansering it, for it is but an idle continuation of the authors
former fooleries concerming the Popes authority in the determination of matters
of faith, which on the one side he will needs have it so that the Romanists
hold his judgment for an infallible rule of faith, and yet he himself cites
diverse Romanists which do not hold the Popes authority to be infallible, which
in my opinion is no less then plain dotage. For who is he, if he be not quite
deprived of judgment does not conceive that if there are Romanists which do
not defend the Popes authority to be infallible there most of necessity be also
some, yea and the same Romanists that hold his judgment not to be an infallible
rule of faith; from whence it does further necessarily issue that the
infallibitie of the Popes judgment in determining Controversies is no point of
faith among Romanists, how be it is commonly held for the most safe doctrine,
and consequently as the proposition of the title of this sectio^ is but a
fallacious paradox of the knights own inuenting, so are all the authorities
and proofs which he produces to show that there is uncertainty among the
Romanists of the Popes infallible judgment in the rule of faith in vain and of
no force, as tending to demonstrate that which is not denied by all Catholic
divines. And thus Sir Humfrey marches on in the by-way of his own deuious
francies even to the end of his section, never omitting to exercise himself by
the way in some part of impiety against the Popes, carping maliciously at the
evil life of some of them in particular: all which how true or false it is
(yet not doubting but that they have binne much calumniated by emulators and
heretics and ill advised persons as by the writers of their lives appears,
I cannot here stand to examine by reason I study and profess breuity, but
will only answer generally with pious S. Augustine in the like case of
objection touching the Popes which lived before and in his time, that although
some traitor had cript in to that order of Bishops which is deducted from Peter
himself to Anastasius, (I say to vrbanius) who does now sit in the same chair,
yet should he not prejudice the Church and the innocent Christians to whom our
poruident Lord said Do what they say, but do not what they do.

Sec. 22.
In the 22. section the knight affirms that the Church upon which the learned
Romanists ground their faith is only the Pope: but the Church upon which the
unlearned rely is no other then their parish preistes.

It is just so, why? because ipse dixit because Sir Humfrey said it. But how
does he know it to be so? by scripture or by tradition? if by scripture, let
him turn his Bible and produce the text: if by tradition, he is a traitor to
his own cause. One said plesantly, that the faith of a Puritan is resolved 1.
in Biblia 2. in spiritum 3. in carnem, first into the Bible, secondly into the
spirit, thirdly into the flesh; and here rests the last resolution of their
religion.

But now seriously to the matter, but indeed there is little matter except by
matter we understand corruption, and of this I am certain there is no want.
For to begin with the title of the sectio^, it has two parts and they both
false: the one is that the learned Romanists ground their faith upon no other
then the Pope; the other that the unlearned rely upon no other then their
parish prestes, neither of which is absolutely true as experience does teach.
And yet if it were true that the simple sort of people did rely wholly upon
their Parish preistes, what then? may not simple Romanists as safely rely upon
their Parish preistes as simple reformers upon their Parish ministers, who are
sometimes even as simple and ignorant in divinity as themselves, setting aside
that perhaps they are a little more expert in reading the text of the Bible in
English, or a misreformed homily. And touching the learned Romanists they do
not rely upon the Pope only, but chiefly upon the word of God as also the most
simple Romanists do thou' not interpred according to there own private sense
as the pretended reformers do, but expounded according to the consent and
commonly received sense of the universal visible Church.

To this I add a most odious and slanderous lie of the knight where he says
of the belief of the Romanists that if it be received with an affected
ignorance and a blind obedience, Page 573.
the party shall be saved by the fire of Purgatory, which is most palpably
false, and never asserted by any Romanist, but coined by his own froathie
brain, besides this and the like dishonest dealing he abuses Bellarmine in
diverse places, as lib. 1. de iustif. cap. 7. in which place whereas Bellarmine
produces S. Bernards exposition of those words of Job; the oxe^ did plowe and
labor, the asses did feed by them, to prove against sectaries, that
iustifieing faith consists not so much in knowledge as in assent, sayeing,
docet Bernardus, Bernard teaches that by the oxen are understood the learned
doctors of the Church, by the asses are meant the ignorant, which by their
simple belief rest satisfied in the understanding of their superiors: nimble
Sir Humfrey applyeing this (thou' very fondly and preposterously) to the
disprofe of the ignorant peoples relyeing upon their pastors in their faith by
changing the word dicit, he says, (meaning S. Bernard) in to these words the
Cardinal, says he makes his reader believe that the foresaid exposition is
Bellarmines own gloss, whereas yet he does but allege it out of S. Bernard
only to confirm his own doctrine touching the nature of the form of
justification.

Another place the knight corrupts in the same Bellarmine lib. 5. de Euchar.
cap. 5. concerning the doctrine of Peter Lombard, and S. Thomas, where the
Cardinal affirming that they were not careful of the question now in
controversy, to wit whether that which the Priest celebrateth daily be
properly a sacrifice, but supposed the affirmative part as a thing known to
all men; the crafty Cauallier relates the words of Bellarmine so transuersly
that the reader cannot but understand by them that the Cardinal affirms that
those two most famous divines cared not whether the Mass were a proper
sacrifice or no; but that they did only content themselves to hold that it is
a commemoratiue sacrifice only, as the reformers teach. And now let these
examples suffice to demonstrate the infidelity of our adversary in this
section: to omit much other impertinent false and captious matter and
allegations, diverse of which I have ansered in my censure, and are here
superfluously repeated by the knight toward the building of this part of his
crooked and blind by-way, which as you see by the matterialls of it, is so
foul and rugged that it is not fit for any person of reputation to appear in
it.

Sec. 23.
The next section is the 23. in number affirming that the visibilitie of the
Church is no certain note of the true Church but rather the contrary thus Sir
Humfrey; but he that should duly consider how far even by his own
confession he is engaged to the Jesuit his adversary to prove his own Church
to have binne visible in all former ages since the Apostles times till this
day, doubtless he would much wonder at this his title: although if contrarily
he ponder how slow the same Sir Humfrey has binne in the performance of his
anser to that challenge, then he would instantly cease to marvel, persuading
himself that the knight having better considered of the matter, he is resolved
upon a contrary course as it may now more then probably appear by the
contents of this present section in which he professes to impugn that same
visibilitie which so many days, months, and years ago, he solemnly
avouched to make good viz. the succession of his own Church. I for my part am
very sorry that the knight has so altered his design in regard I have long
since had a vehement desire to have a sight thou' it were only tanquam per
speculum in anigmate, as in a perspectiue or astronomicall glass, of those
fair faces which have lien in lauender so many hundredth years together; yet
now I perceive there is no remedy but patience, and so I will leave those
inordinate desires, and examine how soundly the author proceeds in the
impugnation of that which according to his promise he ought rather to defend
then confute.

Wherefore to the intent he may seem to have said some thing to the purpose,
he stateth the question in another sense the^ that in which it is disputed
betwixt the Romanists and the reformers, he puts the case in a conspicuous
and eminent visibilitie of the Church in all ages perpetually: And this
visibilitie I grant diverse of the testimonies which he produces do prove not
to be necessary to the true Church: Neither do I deny that the proofs our
adversary brings, if is suppositio^ of such a glorious visibilitie were
true, but this is out of the quire, for the question is only whither such
visibilitie is a certain note of the true Church as that in all times some at
the least true professors of it may be assigned and named: and this kind of
visibilitie of the true Church is not disproued by all, or any one of the
testimonies which are here alleged by the knight, but all of them are in
vain produced. But now as he himself does name Adam, Abel, Enoch, Noe,
Abraham, Lot, Tobias, Jeremy, Simeon, Anna, Joseph, Marie, Elizabeth, to which
diverse others might be added in every several age, I say as he could and did
name these visible professors of the old law, so do we demand of him to
show and name us in like manner some professors in every several age before
the days of Luther who have professed the same religion in all points which
is now professed in the pretensiuely reformed Churches. For this is the true
state of the question betwixt is, and this is that which we hold for a
necessary note of the true Church, and as we are ready at all times to
perform this, yea and some of us have already performed it long since in
proof of the visibilitie of the Roman Church, so do we expect the like from
the defenders of the reformed Church in proof of the visibilitie of the same.
And to deal plainly, till Sir Humfrey or some body for him performs this
task, and in this sense, what soever he or his companions either do or can
produce to impugn the visibilitie of our Church, we hold it for a mere by-way
invented only to avoid that difficulty which absolutely in their
understanding they judge insuperable, and impossible to be cleared.

Sec. 24.
In the next section which is the 24. the knight prosecuteth the same matter
that is the visibilitie of the Church in the new testament; but he walks quite
out of the true way from the beginning to the ending. He pretends to show that
the Church has not binne conspicuouslie visible but latent and obscure in all
ages, and yet to demonstrate this he produces nothing but such testimonies as
prove there have binne ever many heresies scismes, persecutions and people of
ill life, which have so much darkened the sple^dor of the true Church that it
was sometimes under clouds and mistes, proving with a multitude of testimonies
with great ostentation that which we Romanists do not deny: nay we all
ingenuouslie confess that the true Church must not of necessity be always
eminentlie and flowrishinglie visible, yet never so obscure and covered which
clouds, but that the professors of it may be found and named even in the
midst of her greatest mists, for we say with saint Ambrose, Li. 4. Hex. cap.
2.
videtur sicut luna deficere sed non deficit, She seems to fail like the
moon, but she does not fail, obumbrari potest, perire non potest, she may be
obscured but she cannot perish; so that in this section Sir Humfrey in steed of
an egg gives us a Scorpion, and in lieu of proving the Church, to have binne
so obscure and latent that none of her members can be found and named, he
only or cheeflie produces the errors and heresies of those who did most
impugn and obscure her: In so much, as both those who were called, and those
who where chosen by Christ, did err grievously both in manners and doctrine
etc. By-way page. 611.
nay it seems his passion did so much transport him, that rather then fail of
his purpose of impugning the absolute visibilitie of the Church in all ages, he
lays violent hands even upon the holy Apostles, accusing then that they
erred both in doctrine and manners as in his 611. page the reader may see in
plain terms, to omit that all or most of the authors which he cites are
either of his own profession, and obtruded in among the Romanists, as for
example Morney, Erasmus, Cassander, and other suppositious writers, or else
such pious Catholics, as out of their zeal have justly reprehended the
private errors, and abuses of particular persons (thou' in general terms as
the custom is) which have in several ages like darnell among corn sprung up
in the field of the visible Church; and this being the substance of the
contents of this section, I remitte it to the reader to judge whether the
knight has not run an extrauagant and by course for the building of this
parcel of his by way.

Sect. 25.
In the 25. section upon a supposition of the declination of faith and manners
in the Roman Church which he falsely supposes as proved in his former section,
our adversary proceeds to an application of certain places of scripture to
the same supposed declination of the Pope and Church, but so ridiculously and
corruptedly that on the one side a man of judgment that reads it will hardly
abstain from laughter: But on the contrary he will be sorry to see the divine
word of God so profaned and abused especially by those who so much bragg of
the scriptures that they will scarce voutsafe to read any other book but pure
Bible. And to the end the knights counterfeit proceeding in this particular may
appear, I will rehearse one instance or two that by them the reader may
consider of the rest. Page 670. how comes it to pass (says he) that the
number of the faithful are so few, that at all times, they cannot easily be
discerned? His ansere is, because it was foretold in the 18. of saint Luke,
that when the son of man comes he shall not find faith upon the earth:
mark the wisdom of this great Solomon and admire it. S. Luke as his words
do plainly testify, speaks and prophesies of the time of the coming of
our Savior to judge the world at the day of the general judgment, and yet Sir
Humfrey most absurdlie, abusedlie, and falselie applies them to that vast Caos
or large space of time, which has passed since the time of the Apostles to the
days of Luther; yea and as it seems by his discourse even to the time of
Christ's coming to judgment in the end of the world: as if according to his
reformed Logike this were a good consequence, when the son of man comes he
shall not find faith upon the earth, therefore the number of the faithful is
so small that at all times they cannot easily be discerned: o acute and subtle
Logician! and in my opinion much fitter for the carte the^ the school of
Dialect. Another example I give the reader in two places cited by the knight,
the one out of the 2. of Peter 2. chap. the other out of the 18. of the Revel.
3. verse which he applies to Indulgences and pardons saying in his page 671.
how comes it to pass that Indulgences and pardons are granted for money and
made the treasure of their Church? Because says he it was foretold there shall
be false teachers among you by whom the way of truth shall be ill spoken of
and throu' covetousness shall with feigned words make merchandise of you. Now it
is true the place out of saint Peter thou' falselie and fondly applied, and
might far more fitly be accommodated to the pretensiue reformed Puritanicall
Nouellists whose greatest part of schollership si to rail at the Pope and
Roman Church, yet it is not untruly rehearsed, but in the place quoted out of
the Apocalips, there is not one title to this purpose, excepting that the
Apostle once names the word merchants; which nevertheless, according to the
true sense of the text, makes no more to the matter in hand, then if he had
named the word minister.

The rest of the places of scripture which he cites according to the common and
current exposition of the Roman Church even at this present, are understood
partly of the precursors of Antichrist which are the heretics and persecutors
in general of all ages: and partly of that great Antichriste properly so
called, whose coming all true Catholics have ever expected only about the
end or consummation of the world: howbeit if a man were delighted in trifles
and tricks he might much more commodiously apply those same places to Luther
and his sequaces, as having their pedigree and descent from several heretics
of former times, then either to the Pope or Church of Rome, as may also plainly
appear by the 39. articles of the new Creed of England, of which excepting
those few that agree with the doctrine of the Catholic Church, there is
scarce any that have not binne defended by other heretics of more ancient
standing, as diverse learned Romanists have demonstrated in their several
treatises. By all which it does appear that althou' Sir Humfrey has used no
other proofs in this section then the pure text of scripture, yet has he made
so bad use of it that all the world may clearly perceive that he is entered much
further into his by-way then he was before.

Sec. 26.
The 26. followeing is the conclusion of the treatise, in which the author
laboreth to show the safety and certainty of his own way, and the uncertainty
of the Romish way; This is the whole drift and scope not of this section only
but of the whole work, as being a breife sum of the same.

I confess that if the Romanists were bound to give credit to Sir Humfrey
linds bare word in matters of faith and manners, then they ought of necessity to
yeald him the safe way and content themselves with the by: but they are
otherwise taught and instructed, they know that for the space of above 14.
hundred years together they had unquestionable possession of the safe way to
salvation, and may justly say with ancient Tertullian. Nos prius possedimus, we
had first possession, why then should we yeald unto you and take the by-way
which you have framed and invented of later years? nay why should we not
rather with the same Tertullian boldly demand of you who are, according to the
sayeing of another ancient father, prodigiously borne of your selves Quiestis
vos? vnde and quando venistis? vbi tamdiu latuistis? who are you? from whence
and when did you come? where have you layne hid so long time? and with S.
Hierome Quisquis es assector nouorum dogmatum queso vt parcas Romany auribus,
parcas fidei quae apostolico ore laudata est who soever thou art that art a
defender of new doctrine I beseech the spare the Roman ears, spare that faith
which is commended by the Apostles own mouth: and in another place. Cur post
400. annos docere nos niteris quod ante nesciuimus? why after 400. years (I
may say after 1400. years, do you go about to teach us that which before we
knew not? and with optatus, vestrae Cathedrae originem ostendite qui vobis
vultis sanctam Ecclesiam vendicare. Show the origin of your chair, you that
callenge to your selves the holy Church: wherefore if you under pretense of a
reformation will enter into possession of the safe way, if you will claim the
truth, and leave falsehood for us, it is not sufficient for you with a
plausible flourish of speech (as you use here Sir Humfrey) to say so it is,
but you most first prove your claim and convince your title, and that not by
accusation of us (that which you have only performed through both your books)
for, si accusasse sufficiat quis erit innocens? if to accuse be sufficient who
will be innocent? but by positive proofs of your own, which as yet neither
you, nor any of your copemates have ever performed. You pretend sole scripture
for your evidence, but in place of Gods word you obtrude unto us your own
glosses and captious illations and sophiticall inferences or deductions, and
you for your part Sir Humfrey, you know you are engaged by promise to ansere
the Jesuits challenge, which is not as you affirm (hoping so to escape the
brunt of the battle, to prove out of some good authors that the Protestant
Church (so you please to call it for matter of state, althou' yours, as I
suppose is not truly the Protestant, but the Puritan Church) was all ways
visible; which althou' I know I have made manifest that as yet you have not
performed that task neither, I am confident, ever will be able to perform the
same, yet that is not truly the Jesuits challendge, but that you produce some
which have professed your religion in every point, and in every age before the
days of Luther. This is the charge you have undertaken, and till you have
discharged your self of this, your honor still remains at the stake, and for
all your bragges your safe way is to the Romanists and all other of mature
judgment, but only a by-way, and serves only for a cowardly excuse of your
want of abillitie to perform your promise.

But now to return to the contents of this section in particular from which I
have in some sort digressed. I say it consists only in a recapitulation of
those several points of controversy which I have already examined, in
confirmation of which since the author has produced nothing which I have not
sufficiently confuted and convinced to be of no force, but all either false
equivocal or impertinent, it is most apparent that what soever he from hence
collecteth by way of conclusion is noe conclusion, nor of any more authority
then his own bare affirmations or negations, and consequently notobstanding
the vain knight will needs seem to have the victory and to have gained his
cause, yet I make no doubt but that the prudent reader will rather judge in
favor of the anserer then of the abiector, especially considering how far
more easy a matter it is for any man to impugn the doctrine of another then
to defend his own.

Wherefore I join issue with mine adversaries opposing the doctrine of the
Roman Church to those same positions of the pretended reformed Churches which
the knight has here set down, applying the same to the safe way and by-way
as he has done, by-way of antithesis or oppositiue comparison betwixt them
both in the manner followeing.

And first I say; The Romanists teach that not scripture only, but scripture
with divine and Apostolical traditions received for such by the universal
Church in all ages, the approved general Counsels, and the infallible
authority of the perpetually visible Church of God are the only certain
means and safe way to salvation. But Sir Humfrey with his accomplices teach that
scripture only interpreted otherwise them by authority of the most
universally flourishing Church according to perpetual tradition of the Fathers
and doctors of the same is sufficient to salvation, and this is a doubtful and
by way.

Secondly the Romanists teach that the scriptures are a most certain a most
safe and perfect rule of faith, yet in some places obscure and ambiguous as
even some of their adversaries confess, and therefore it is not sufficient
alone, but requires the authority of the true Church commended in the same
scripture as an infallible interpreter; and this is a safe way to salvation:
but the Reformers teach that the scripture with the interpretation and
conference of one place with another by every private man or woman that can
but read it, is a sure evident and perfect rule of faith, and this is an
uncertain and by-way.

Thirdly, the Romanists teach that traditions appertayning to faith or manners
received from Christ by his Apostles or from the Apostles themselves by
inspiration of the holy Ghost, and as such conserved in the Church by
continual succession, are to be embraced and reverenced with like pious
affection as the scriptures; and this is a safe way to salvation: but the
reformers teach that only those traditions concerning faith and manners that
can be proved by scriptures of which sort they deny any to be in the Church
notobstanding saint Paul in the scripture expresselie commands the
Thessalonians to hold his traditions delivered unto them by word of mouth or by
epistle. And this is an uncertain and by way.

Fourthly the Romanists teach that the uniform consent of undoubted Fathers is
to be followed in the interpretation of scriptures and some certain persons in
the Church as professors of divinity and some others for the avoiding of
novelty in doctrine, take an oath of the same: and moreover that where they
find that consent, they are to receive it as a certain rule for the true
expounding of the scriptures without contradiction or invention of other new
sense or glosses, and this is a safe way to salvation: but the reformers teach
that the uniform consent of undoubted Fathers is to be followed only so
far as according to their private spirit or judgment they agree with
scriptures, which is a captious and deceitful rule of expounding them: And
this is an uncertain and by-way.

Fifthly the Romanists teach that the Christian Catholic Church is a
congregation or company of people beleiuing and professing the true faith of
Christ under one chief head our Savior Jesus Christ and his vicar in earth
the Pope or Bishop of Rome as chief Pastor and visible governor of the same
under Christ, sayeing with all that the notes whereby the true Church is
known from all other heretical and scismaticall conuenticles are not only
and cheiflie exterior splendor, amplitude, and miracles, as our adversary
does deceitfullie insinuate; but principally the name Catholic, antiquity,
continual succession etc. And this is a certain and safe way: but the
reformers teach the Church is a Congregation of pastors and people with out
any certain and infallible authority and assigning for marks of the same
that which is common to all congregations even of heretics and schismatikes
according to their several opinions, as all and every one of them holding
they have the true word and Sacraments rightly preached and administered in
their conuenticles, which consequently can be no certain marks of the true
Church in particular, no more then the name of a Christian in general can be
an infallible note of a true beleiuer; and this is an uncertain and by-way.

Sixthly the Romanists teach that General Counsels by the Popes authority or
approbation conuocated and confirmed are not only of great use in the Church:
But also of certain and infallible power for the determination of all doubts
and controversies in religion which may arise in several times and occasions,
and this is a certain and safe way: But the Reformers teach that General
Counsels althou' they say they be of great use and authority in the Church to
determine controversies in religion, yet they hold them of uncertain
authority and subject to error both in faith and manners, and this is an
uncertain and by-way.

Seauenthly; the Romanists teach that the chief rock and angular stone upon
which the Church is built is Christ the Savior of the world, yet they say
with Christ himself that Peter is also in his kind a rock upon which he
promised to build his Church, and this is a certain and safe way: But the
reformers teach, that Christ alone is the only rock upon which he built his
Church which is repugnant to the express words of Christ in the scripture
sayeing to Peter, upon this rock will I build my Church: and this is a
diuerticle or by-way.

Eighthly, the Romanists teach that the operation and effect of the Sacraments
depend cheiflie and principally upon the institution of Christ, yet they say
withal, that both for the security of the consciences and comfort of the
receauers etc. The Priest must have a sincere intention to minister, the
Sacrament and not in jest as Luther and some other sectaries do teach and
this is a certain and safe way to salvation. But the Reformers teach that
only the instistitution of Christ is sufficient, and the Priests sincere
intention not required, and this is an uncertain and by-way.

Nintly the Romanists teach, that Christ is our only mediator of
redemption, and who only of himself and by his own power knows the secrets
of our hearts; yet withal they say that his Saints in heaven, who in and by
him do assuredly know the secrets of our hearts in such things especially
as concern the good of our souls, are our mediators of intercession, by
offering our unworthy prayers to God, and this is a certainty and safe way to
salvation: But the reformers call upon Christ only and exclude and neglect
his saints and servants whom nevertheless he himself does promise to honor
in heaven, condemning also for impious and sacrilegions the saints
intercession for sinners, which notwithstanding he does not condemn for such
in any part of holy scripture, and this is an uncertain and by-way.

Tenthly the Romanists teach we ought to adore Christ's body present in heaven
where he sits on the right hand of his divine Father, yet withal they say it
is lawful yea and we ought to adore him whersoeuer he is, and particularly in
the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, and this is a certain and safe way to
salvation: But the reformers teach that the body of Christ ought not to be
adored in the Eucharist but only in heaven, and this is an uncertain and
by-way.

Eleauenthly the Romanists as the word of God instructs them, confess
themselves to be unprofitable servants in regard neither they nor their
actions bring any profitte to God who has no need of any thing, and yet they
say withal that no man living can be justified by his own merits, that is
such merits as proceed purelie from his own natural forces and actions, and
more then this that all those who expect salvation must believe in Christ with
a lively faith and wholely rely upon his meritts and satisfaction as upon the
proper and principal cause of their salvation; yet they say besides this, that
although they may not rely upon their own merits or the satisfactions of the
saints alone, nevertheless they may use both the satisfaction of saints and
their own merits as a means to salvation, by virtue and application of the
merits and satisfaction of Christ's passion, and also that they can by the
grace and assistance of God observe his commandments, yea and by virtue of the
same divine grace perform some works of supererogation or not commanded by
precept of God but counseled by his advise, and this is a certain and safe
way to salvation: But the reformers teach they are unprofitable servants (which
I confess that in deed they are both to God and his Church as ever were any
in the world) and that no man's good works although they proceed from the
special grace of God can in any sort justify him before God, and that every
Christian must so wholly rely upon the merits of Christ, that he believe
also that no man can have any of his own even by the power and grace of God,
and that he is bound to expect and hope for salvation without any such works
or merits, meerlie by a sole and bare faith that his sins are remitted in
Jesus Christ, and this is an uncertain and by-way.

Here you see a plain confrontment of diverse particular points of
controversy betwixt the Romanists and the reformers by way of affirmation and
negation, and because I know that my adversary and I are not agreed of a
Judge of our cause, I for for my part remit my self to the indifferent reader
as our only vmpiere to determine of the matter not only for as much as
concerns the contents of this particular section, but also of the whole work,
who if he consider with due ponderation the proceedings of both parties, and
compare the sincere and plain dealing which I have used with the insincere and
double dealing of my adversary, who has so perseuered in his indirect courses
that even in the end and conclusion of his work he has practiced no small
partiallitie and fraud in the rehearsal of the doctrine of the Roman Church,
as particularly where he affirms that the Romanists teach that diverse
traditions of faith and manners whereof there is no ground nor evidence in the
scripture are to be reeeaued with equal reverence and respect with the
scriptures themselves: and that they rely partly upon their own merits and
satisfaction of Saints for their salvation and the like. I say if the
judicious and impartial reader duly ponder all the particulars, I doubt not
but he will easily discern the house of truth and safe way to salvation to be
where he finds honesty and plainenes, and in the contrary the house of
falsitie and the by-way where he finds tricks and cousinage. And therefore the
more to facilitate and rectify his judgment in the business I will reduce the
whole argument of the knights book to a form of sylogisme in this manner.

That Religion is a by-way leading the weak and unstable into dangerous paths
of error which is founded upon coulourable shows of Apochriphall scriptures,
unwritten traditious, doubt full Fathers ambiguous Counsels and pretended
Catholic Church.

But the religion of the Church of Rome is founded upon colorable shows of
apochriphal scriptures, unwritten traditions, doubtful fathers ambiguous
Councels and pretended Catholic Church.

Therefore the relgio^ of the Roman Church is a by-way leading the weak and
unstable in to the dangerous paths of error.

Now, the minor of this sylogisme in which the whole force of the conclusion,
and by consequence the whole scope and authority of the work depe^des, not
only having binne in the discourse of my anseere to every several section
disproued for false and counterfeit, but also more appear to be such ex ipsis
terminis even of it self by the terms and propositions of which it consists,
to all such as shall consider it with due attention: I persuade my self the
iuditious reader will presently perceive and determine with him self that the
author of the work has quite failed of his project, and that by composing a
by path with a sinister intention to father it Falsely upon his adversaries,
he has in stead of that, only framed an ingen for his own torment.

And thus having attained not only to an accomplishment of mine own desires
in finishing my labors, but also in some sort to a satisfaction of the
request of my adversary in regard that at the least in show (as I perceive by
the conclusion of his preface) he desires nothing more then in ansere to his
book; I now convert my speech unto him and tell him, that as now according to
his own petition I have impartially read his book, and clearly and
faithfully, yea and as moderately or more moderately then his own immoderate
proceedings require, discovered unto him not one or two but a multitude of
errors, untruths, and corruptions, and false applications both of scriptures
Counsels and particular authors as well ancient as modern: so do I in
contemplation of the same expect from him the retractation which he promises
upon condition his faults be shown unto him, which if he shall accordingly
perform I will not only as he professes with holy Job of the ansere of his
adversary, bind it as a Croune unto me, but also saying with the same
renowned saint, I will read it and pronounce it at every step I make, yea and
offer it to my understanding as a most princely present, earnestly praying in
the mean time with the same Job, vt desiderium meum audiat Omnipotens. That
the omnipotent may here my desire of his reclamation and reduction to the most
universally flourishing Catholic Roman faith.

A SVPPLIMENT OF ADDITIONS TO THE APPPENDIX.
I Have already noted diverse most foul corruptions and falsifications in Sir
Humfrey linds pretented safe way in so much that I am almost quite surfeted
with the multitude of them, yet in my opinion there is scarce any among all
those which comes near to the false dealing and cousinage which the same Sir
Humfrey uses in the 205. page of his Deuia, which if it were for noe other
reason, yet for this a lone it might most justly deserve the name, not as it
is falsely applied to the Romanists, but as it is his own proper work, which
if the reader will but please to have a little patience, I will plainly set
before his eyes.

Wherefore Sir Humfrey in the place now cyted undertaking to prove that
tra^ssubstantiation wants antiquity, universality, and succession, having
first cited some testimonies both out of Greek and Latin authors (which
nevertheless are either of noe force for his purpose, or else have been ansered
partly by Bellarmin and other Catholic divines, and partly by my self in
my Censure he stumbles last upon the late Patriarch of Cnnstantinople whom he
also produces to the same intent in the 10. and 13. chapters of his first
anser to the Germans, affirming that this author teaches what is meant by
that change or transmutation made in the Sacrament, saying, he tells us: the
body and blood of Christ are truly mysteries not that these, Metaballomena,
are changed in to humane flesh but we unto the^: thus Sir Humfrey so
confidently as if he had been Greek Professor in Oxford he coud have done no
more. And in deed I must needs confess that this passage of his is able to
make a great show especially bringing a Greek word in the midest of it.

But now when I came to examen the matter in the book it self and conferred
the Greek and the Latin together as I found it printed at witerberg a place
void of all suscipition on our side, I found first that the author speaks so
plainly of the real presence and transsubstantiation, that although he uses
not the very same word, yet does he use other words equivalent, as,
conversion, transmutation, or the like, at the least ten or a dozen times,
only in those very chapters. Nay and more then this, I find that where he
speaks of the conversion or transmutation he uses that very word Metauallo,
which the knight denies him to use, where he dinieth the change of the body
and blood in to humane flesh, which is a forceble argument a contrario that the
Patriarch speaks of a real change whersoeuer else in this matter he uses
that word.

Secondly. I find that those words which Sir Humfrey cytes are not spoken by
the Grecian Patriarch of the proper transmutation in the Sacrament, but of an
other transmutation which belong only to the use of the Sacrament to wit, he
says and that verre truly, that when a faithful person receives the
Sacrament, the body and blood which he receives are not changed in to humane
flesh, but the receivers in to them. Non quod haec (says the Patriarch) in
corpus humanum transmutentur sed nos in illa melioribus his praeualentibus: and
here it is that he uses the word Metaballomeua and denies it to be verifyed
in this kind of mutation, speaking according to that which an ancient Father
of the Church says to the same purpose: Non tu mutaberis in me, sed ego
mutabor in te. That is to say. O lord thou shall not be changed in to me, but
I in to thee. Which spiritual change or union the same Patriarch does
learnedly prosecute and declare with examples, not intending by that to exclude
the real presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament by
transsubstantiation (as Sir Humfrey would willingly persuade his simple reader
but supposing and includeing the same as in diverse of his passages in these
twoe chapters is most apparent, and particularly where he says not far
before, ac quamdiu panis positus iacet, nihil nisi panis est repositus tantum
Deo: postea verus panis fit and reuera transmutatur, cuius rei ratio and modus
nullo ingenio, nullo ore humano explicari potest. And page. 97. Honorabilia
haec dora in ipsum Dominicum transmutantur corpus quod haec omnia recepit,
scilicet quod crucifixum sit, quod resurrexit, quod in Caelos ascendit. Tbe
honorable gifts (he means the bread and wine) ar changed into the lords
body it self etc. and in the precedent page, qui operationis sanctorum
mysteriorum proprium hoc opus statuunt vt dona (intellige panem and vinum) in
diuinum Christi corpus and sanguinem, transmutentur, in finem hunc vt fideles
sanctificentur, peccatorumque remissionem, regni haeriditatem, and id genus
alia accipere credant, non tales beatos praedicamus?

Thus the Patriarch so perspicuously that he who either vndersta^des Greek or
Latin yea or English either, may evidently see that the Patriarch is cited by
our adversary evidently against himself, and quite contrary to his true
meaning.

Yet was not Sir Humfray content with that, but as a man running forward in
madness to his own confusion he cites the same author in his former tenth
chapter intending to prove out of him that it is not the real and substantial
flesh of Christ which is offered but the Sacrament of his flesh, he tells us
says the knight, that the flesh of Christ which he carried about him was not
given to his Apostles to be eaten, nor his blood to be drunk, neither does the
body of our lord descend from heaven for this were blasphemy, which words I
confess the Patriarch has (excepting these: in the Sacrament: Which are added
to the text by Sir Humfrey) but as he has them so has he others omitted by
our adversary the knight both before and after these, which clearly declare
his mind touthing the real presence. The precedent words are these: Dominus
enim illa nocte accepit panem gratias egit, fregit, and dixit, accipite and
comedite. non dixit hoc est azinum, aut typus corporis, sed hoc est corpus
meum, hic est sanguis meus: that is our lord that night took bread, gave
thanks, brake it, and said, take and eat. He said not this is vnleauined
bread, or this is the figure of my body, but this is my body, this is my
blood. And then immediately ensue the words cited by Sir Humfrey, after which
also immediately follows: Sed and tunc, and nunc inuocatione and gratia
omnipotentis illius sacrorum rituum Antistitis Spiritus sancti, sacrarum
precationum and diuinorum oraculoru^ interuentum panis quidem in ipsum Domini
corpus, vinum vero in ipsum Domini sanguinem conuertitur and transmutatur. But
both then and now by invocation and grace of that omnipotent Prelate of sacred
rities the holy Ghost, by interuention of sacred prayers, and divine oracles,
the bread truly is counuerted and changed into Christ's body it self, but the
wine into to his blood.

In which words the learned and prudent reader can not but see both the real
presence and the conversion or change of the elements of bread and wine (which
is nothing else but transsubstantiation) into the body and blood of Jesus
Christ most plainly specifyed. Which may abundantly serve to demonstrate the
truth of the Patriarchs meaning, and that no man living excepting such a lad of
metal as the coragious knight would have had the face to make use or rather
abuse of such a testimony as this, so quyte opposite to his purpose, multa
enim de illa (Caena) audiu^tur apud vas quae nobis displicent. Ierem. Patriarch^
especially the second place being taken out of that chapter in which the
author him self in the beginning of the same does expressly affirm, that there
are many things maintained by the lutherans in the supper of our lord which
displease the Grecians, one of which doubtless and not the least, is the point
of transsubstantiation which the Lutherans rejected in their remonstrance to
the Greek Church, and Ierimie the Patriarcke maintains in his anser to the
same. To all which may be added yet more express words of the same Patriarch
saying thus. Statuit igitur Catholica Ecclesia mutari conseeratione facta panem
quidem in ipsum corpus Christi, vinum vero in ipsum sanguinem eius per spiritum
sanctum etc. The Catholic Church therefore (says he) defins that the
consecration being made the bread is changed into the body of Christ but the
wine into his blood by the holy Ghost etc. And it is to be noted that he uses
the word Metauallomena in these places in which he speaks of the conversion
or transmutation of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ,
which does manifestly de monstrate the Grecian Patriarch to maintain that same
change of the bread and wine in the consecration of the Eucharist which the
Romanists in Latin call transsubsta^tiation which is sufficient to convince the
preposterousnes of the iniudicious knight in making use of this great Prelate
for his own contrary position.

Touching invocation of saints and their worship Sir Humfrey in the 232. page
of his deuious way alleges against the Romanists the confession of the Greek
Church quoting in the margen the same Patriarch of Constantinople and relating
his words in his anser to the German Doctors cap. 1. Where according to his
relation, the Patriarch says in the name of him self and fellows, that they
do not properly invoke saints but God, fot neither Peter nor Paul hear
any of those that invoke them, but the gift and grace that they have
according to the promise: I am with you till the consummation of the world.
Thus the knight rehearses that authors words but yet corruptedly, for first
the Patriarch has not those negative words: We do not properly invoke
saints, but this affirmative: invocation does proporly agree to God only, and
it does agree to him primarily and most immediately (which words Sir Humfrey
leaves out) but invocation made to saints is not properly invocation but
accidentally, and as if we should say by grace or favor: which latter words
also the knight partly mangled and partly omitted.

Secondly the Patriarch dot not say Peter and Paul do not hear their
inuocators but he says: they do not exaudire, that is they do not hear and
grant by their own power the petitions of those that invoke them. And there
is so much betwixt audire and exaudire, that his hearing and granting that
which is heard, that althou' the one vndoubledly agree to the saints both in
the doctrine of the Grecian Church and the Roman: yet of the exaudition or
hearing with a grant, doubt may be made even according to the doctrine of the
Roman Church whether it is proper to saints or not, in regard it may be
conceived that although the saints be truly intercessors between us and God,
yet have they not power to grant out requests but only to mediate for us by
way of impetration. And therefore the same author says that Peter and Paul do
not exaudire that is, not so hear us as they them selves grant our petition
which they hear but (...) that is according or by the favor they have by
virtue of the promise of our Savior: I will be with you till the end of the
world, as the Grecian Patriarch does sufficiently declare. And that the
Grecians do in general terms grant invocation of saints (which is that
which both agrees with the Roman doctrine and differs from the doctrine of the
pretented reformers) it is manifest not only out of this place but also out
of other places of the Patriarchs anser, as particularly in the 13. chapter page
102. where it is said by him: that in the sacrifice or mass, mentionem
beatissimae Virginis facimus, lauds eius praedicantes, intercessione sanctorum
omnium petentes, misericordiam Dei implorantes pro viuis mortuisque
supplicantes etc. And yet more plainly in the very 21. chapter cited by our
adversary, where the Patriarch has these words. Haec meditatio nunc in
Ecclesia fit and depraedicatur, and ad sanctos exclamamus, and ad dominam
nostram and ad sanctos Angelos: and ad dominam quidem nostram, tersancta domina
Deipara pro nobis intercede peccatoribus: ad sanctos autem Angelos, omnes
caelestes potestates sanctorum Angelorum, and Archangelorum orate pro nobis
etc. This meditation is now made and preached in the Church: we both cry aloud
to the saints and to our lady, and to the Angels: and to our lady truly,
thrice holy lady mother of God intercede for us sinners. But to the holy
Angeles all you, Celestial. Powers of holy Angels, and Algels pray for us etc.
Lo hear the very same form of prayer to saints which the Romanist use: so
that the reader may easily judge how preposteroussy Sir Humfrey has proceeded
in the citation of this auther. And howsoever it is that the Grecians will not
call this proper invocation of saints, yet that is but question de nomine, a
question only about the name or word invocation, which little importes
supposing that in reallitie and substance they disegree not from the Romanists,
but rather are most conformable unto them even in the manner of their
interpellation.

And besides this if we note the Lutherans words to the Patriarch, it will
even thence manifestly appear what the Grecians defend touching his point. For
say the Doctors: Non dubium est quin sit de sanctis reuerenter sentiendum, and
loquendum etc. non tamen sentimus eos esse inuocandos vt sint nostri mediatores
atque iutercedant apud Deum pro nobis qui iam mortui sunt. Which words of the
Lutherans being those which they directly oppose against the doctrine of the
Grecians in this particular, it is clearer then the leight of the sun that
the Grecians agree with us, and be contrary to the tenets of Sir Humfrey and
other sectaries of our times. And thus we see that although Sir Hu^frey both in
this and diverse other places of his books does much labor to persuade the
reader that the Grecian Church agrees with the pretented reformers and differ
from us in doctrine of controversy, nevertheless his work will not fadge, it
being manifest to them who have viewed the doctrine of their Patriarch in his
foresaid anser to the lutherans, that excepting the point of the Popes
supremacy (in which nevertheless the Grecians do not in every respect agree
with them) they do not fully join with the nouellists of our age in any one
of the questions in controversy betwixt us and them. And so I may conclude
that Sir Humfrey not obstanding all the frauds and diuises he has used in
laboring to make the Grecians seem to stand for his faction, he does but only
raze duste to molest and dasle his readers eyes.

More over the same Patriarch page 243. of his anser to the lutherans does
absolutely prnounce that saints are to be invocated for thus he says. Ad haec
nos open diuina respondemus inuocandos esse sauctos quod ipsi etiam auxiliari
pessint. And he adds after ward. Nec id faciunt solum viui sed etiam mortui.
And a little lower he subioyneth. Inuocatione sanctorum daemones abiguntur,
morbi fugantur, tentationes tolluntur etc. Also page 244. honorandi igitur sunt
sancti tanquam amici Dei.

In like manner touching the images of Saints he further adds. A nobis etiam
imaginibus ipsorum reuerentium exhiberi, aut adorari nemo reprehendit. etc.
That is, none of us reprehendeth that reverence, or adoration be exhibited to
their images. Meaning of the Saints. And in the page following he says in
this manner. At (inquit aliquis) Deus dixit. Deum tuum adorabis and illi soli
seruies: and non facies vllam similitudinem. He ansereth thus. Est vero ita;
sunt hoec lege diuina sancita, verumtamen qui hoc praecipit Deus, idem docet
nos in deuteronomio. Non adorabis ipsa, non seruies. And page 254. So he
speaks. Vt igitur qui non honorat filium (vt ait dominus) non honorat patrem:
sic qui non honorat imaginem nec illum quem imago refert honorat. And in the
same page. Qui non adorat Crucem, eum nequidem Dominum crucifixum adorare
iustum est. Non quidem certe naturam ligni etc. Sed memoriam and picturam
perpessorum etc.

Finally of merit he says thus. Haec and similia sunt ob quae homo regno
coelesti dignus habetur. That is these and the like ar these thing for which a
man is held worthy of the celestial kingdom, thus much touching the abuse of
the Grecian Patriarch by Sir Humfrey.

But one of the grossest errors that I find committed by our adversary in
the Doctrine of the latinists or Romanists, is in his page 234. where he has
these words. Others (as namely Antisiodorensis and Biel) teach that neither
the Saints pray for us, neither are we to pray to them. Thus Sir Humfrey,
further adding that he may safely conclude these and the like reasons
considered that invocation of Sains wants antiquity, universality, and
succession.

And yet I having examined the matter and taken a view of the 30. Lection of
Gabriel Biel which is the place the knight cites for his hallucination, I find
that author expressly teaches the affirmatiues of both those negatiues which
he falsely affirms him and Antisiodore to maintain.

Wherefore touching the first proposition, Biel in the place cited has these
words for his conclusion. Credendum est igitur and nullatenus dubitandum
sanctos in patria intercedere nobisque suffragari merito, ac prece, sieve voto.
And for proof of the same he adds thus. Quae veritas authoritate ostenditur
and ratione, authoritate vtriusque testamenti veteris and noui simul, and
sanctorum Patrum. And before his conclusion he says: fuit haeresis quorumdam,
nimia temeritate omnem sanctoru^ cultum penitus tollere volentium qui nullum
sanctis honorem impendi debere mussitabant, neque vllas ad eos preces dirigi,
nec eorum reliquias venerari. Huius author and haeresiarcha primus fuit
Jouinianus etc, Which words although they do sufficiently declare what this
author holds of the second part of this point, yet does he more expressly
utter the same toward the end of this lection saying: ex quibus patet preces
nostras spemque consequendae beatitudinis per mediatores sanctos in Coelo
inanes non esse sed ordine a Deo iustituto nos ad eorum auxilia confugere
debere and debita veneratione eos semper implorare. By all which words Biels
doctrine is foe plain for the Romanists, and so plain against Sir Humfrey
that I am verily persuaded he either never read this author touching this
particular, or if he read him, he did not understand him.

And the like I say of Antisiodore who being in the same place cited, I find
that he himself teaches quite contrary to that which the knight charge him
with. For whereas he is alleges by Sir Hu^frey in the 4. part of his sum
lib. 3. q. 6. to resolve that neither the saints do pray for us, neither are
we to pray to them: it is true Antisiodore relates the opinion of many who
say that neither are we to pray to the saints nor they pray for us but only
improperly, to wit because we pray God that the merits of his saints may help
us, whence it is consequent that their merits may help us: Nevertheless for
his own resolution of the question he puts the contrary proposition saying.
Concedimus quod oramus Sanctos proprie, and ipsi orant pro nobis proprie, vt
cum dicimus sancte Petre ora pro nobis, etc.

We grant says Antisiodore that we pray to the saints properly, and that
they pray for us properly as when we say: Saint Peter pray for us. And now lo
here how faithlessely the knight has proceeded in his allegation of the
testimonies of these twoe authors, who both so plainly conspire against him:
and let the reader also consider how little reason our adversary had to
conclude that invocation of saints has neither antiquity, universality nor
succession, supposing that he can conclude no other safety out of these and
the like premises then such as proceeds from his own forgerie and deceit.

And although Gabriel cites an opinion of many others that grant the Saints do
pray only improperly for us by mediation of their merits, yet do they not
exclude all prayer to saints, as Sir Humfrey and the rest of his pretensiue
reformed brothers do, who if they would but grant the same, the Roman Church
would not so much complain of them; neither is the difference of those
Romanists from others in the substance of this question in controversy, which
is whether the saints intercede and pray for faithful Christians living in
this world, and whether we may pray unto them and invoke them, in both which
parts of doctrine all Romanists agree, but these divines mentioned by Biel do
dissent from the rest only about the manner of intercession which saints do
use making a question whether they perform that charitable act by formal
prayer made unto God for us or by interposition of their merits by that means
to move his divine majesty to grant our requests, which manner of mediation
as it is not the chief question betwixt our adversary of these times and us,
so neither is it an argument of defect of antiquity, universality, or
succession in the Roman doctrine, nor any proof of the same notes to concur
in the tenets of the modern sectaries as Sir Humfrey does falsely suppose and
proves not, but only equiuocateth in the state of the question, or rather by
affected ignorance transuersteth the meaning of the foresaid divines touching
this point taking the manner for the substance of the matter, and so either
throu' affected ignorance or plain malice diludes his reader. To let pass
that although the foresaid authors do not grant that the saints use any
formal or proper form of prayer to God for us, yet do they not deuie our in
vocation unto them. Nay supposing these divines of whose doctrine the kinght
would feign take hold as if it were contrary to the universality of the
Roman faith: supposing I say as Sir Humfrey him self relates out of Gabriel
they defend the mediation of saints by their merits at the least, if he had had
is senses in readiness, he might easily have either inferred that those same
authors in like manner hold that we may invoke and pray unto them even
peoperly and formally: or at the least it is plain he neither ought nor could
deduce the non invocation of saints from the foresaid mediation, as
erroneously he does, and consequently he greatly abuses the maintainers of
that opinion in that he produces them against the universality, antiquity,
and continual succession of the Roman doctrine in this particular; seeing they
differ not a jot from other Catholic divines in it touching the substance of
faith: yea they are so far from this, that they expressly consent with them
both in the doctrine of mediation and merits, both which points nevertheless
the Nouellists do obstinately impugn, so that it appears as a manifest
truth that Sir Humfrey can not possible with all his art and devises scrape
any thing out of them for the antiquity, universality, and succession of his
pretensiue reformed congregation, but rather that which does quite destroy it
if he had his dies about him to perceive it.

To the words cited by Sir Humfrey page 263. concerning images; Biel
subioyneth these. Nec tamen propter haec imagines proijciendae sunt aut de
oratorijs eliminandae occasion idololatriae deuitandae, aut peregrinationes ad
certas imagines vel certa loca praesertim consecrata vel etiam consecranda
penitus reprehendenda, non enim vsque quaque negandu^ est quin in certis locis
singulariter reluceant beneficia and maiora crebrius quam in alijs vel propter
imagines sanctorum, reliquias ibi conditas, uel occulta ministeria (alias
mysteria) futuris temporibus ibi celebranda aut celebrata vel alias causas
nobis occultas propter quas Deus vnum locum elegit suo cultui, non alium,

Thus much Biel in can. missae sec. 49. Which words nevertheless are slily
omitted by Fir Humfrey, and his friend Cassander, which other wise are so
plain for the Catholic practice in this matter even at this day, that they
confound them both. And this is their false plot which they used to make this
most Catholic author seem to fauore their ill cause, whereas in reallitie he
is plainly against them.

Page 152. of the by-way, Canus is cited by Sir Humfrey lib. 3. cap. 3. And
falsely alleged as if he gave a reason wherefore traditions are above
scriptures. For he only affitmes that they are of greater force to convince
haeretikes then scriptures, that which in substance was taught long since by
ancient Tertullian and is no blemish unto the written word of God, which in
other respects both the same Canus and all other Romanists at the least
equalize yea prefer before the unwritten doctrine of the Church in general.

In his citation of Canus page 399. of his by way, Sir Humfrey puts the
objection as if it were the doctrine of the author who propounds and
ansereth the same in his last chapter of the first book, sharply reprehending
Pighius out of whose opinion the objection is framed by Canus and reproved.
Although he insinuates with all that the error of Pighius. Is not in matter of
faith and doctrine necessatie to salvation, which is that only which Canus
professes to maintain in the defense of the authority of Councels, Nos enim
in dogmate fidei and deeretis ad salutem fidelium necessarijs Conciliorum
authoritatem asserimus: in rerum gestarum iudicio and ordine non asserimus.
Canus de locis lib. 5. cap. vlt. ad sep. argumentum.

When Costerus page 44. of his Enchir. prefers traditions before the word of
God: he takes tradition as it is written in carnal tables of the heart by the
finger of the holy spirit: and on the contrary he takes the written word of
God precisely as it consists in letters and caracters which may perish or be
corrupted by the false construction of heretics, or otherwise. And therefore
Costerus calls the first internal, the second external scriptures in the
margen of the same page 44.

And when the same costerus citcd by Sir Humfrey page. 149. of his Deuia, in
the first chapter of his Euchyr. says these words. praestantia huius
scripturae etc. the excellency of this scripture does surpass the scriptures
multis partibus, in many respects or by many degrees those scriptures which
the Apostles left us in partchement, he does not speak of the unwritten
tradition of the Church, but of that scripture which (as afterward he
declares) Spiritus sanctus in cordibus imprimere dignatus est, that is which
the holy spirit does digne or voutsafe to imprinte in our hearts. Which as he
speaks before in the same chapter, is nothing else but the spirit of consent of
the Catholic Church in faith, and the concording doctrine of all faithful
Christians, not of those only which now live in the whole world, but those
also who by continual succession have propagated the faith of Christ from
the time of the Apostles which is that Scripture which the Apostle says 2.
cor. 3. is read by all men, and the unction. quaest. 2. Io. 2. docet nos de
omnibus etc. which teaches us all things, which as he further adds
afterward has all truth in it self and contains all faith and mysteries
of Christian religion, and resolves all doubts which may arise in matter of
faith, and so costerus compares not the unwritten word with the written
precisely but the internal with the external, which internal scripture is
justly preferred by him before the bare written word or caracter, because as
he takes it here it includes the true sense of both the one and the other: by
which it appears that the exceptions which Sir Humfrey takes at this authors
words ar captious and void of reason.

Vrspergensis is produced by Sir Humfrey page 400. of his deuia as a witness
that the second council of Nyce or seventh general synod assembled in the
year 788. was rejected in the council of Francford as utterly void and not
to be named the seventh. And yet having examined this passage in that author, I
find he speaks not a word of the Nycene council but of a cettaine council
of Constantinople which he affirms to have been called the seventh synod
general by the Emperatrice Irene and her son Constantine: his words are
these. Sinodus etiam qua ante paucos annos in Constantinopoli congregata sub
Irene and Constantino filio eius septima and vniuersalis ab ipsis appellata
est, vt nec septima nec aliquid diceretur quasi superuacua ab omnibus (nimirum
patribus Concilij Francfordiensis) abdicata est. Vrsperg. page 176. in which
words of what soever Council vrpergensis intended to speak, yet none of them
mention the Council of Nyce as all those who understand latin may easily
perceive. And if Sir Hunfrey will replye and say that though that author does not
mention the Nycene Council in words, yet does he sufficiently declare his
meaning to be of no other Council then the seeond Nycene Synod in regard he
affirms it to have been under Irenne and her son, and the same which was
condemned in the Council of Francford, I anser that by reason this author does
utter twoe things which seem to implye contradictio^ to wit that this Council
was assembled at Constantinople and yet that it is the same which was rejected
by the Council of Francford, it evidently follows that no certain argument
can be drawn from his words whatsoever his meaning was, and this is
sufficient to show that he is cited in vain by the knight.

Secondly I say not obstanding vspergensis hallucination, and suppose he did
truly mean that the Council of Nyce concerning the adoration of images was
reproved by the Synod of Francford, as some other authors admit in their
disputatio^s with the sectaries of our times, yet does this nothing avail our
adversaries cause both in respect the Synod of Francford is not accepted by the
Romanists for an authentical Council in this particular, as also for that
(as some opinate) it proceeded upon false information, and persuasion that the
foresaid Synod of Nyce had decreed that images were to be adored with divine
honor, and by this means the Fathers and doctors there assembled were deceived
and committed an error of fact. Which error nevertheless neither can nor ought
to prejudice that doctrine which was before established by an authentical
general Council as was the second Synod consisting of a happy conjunction of
both the latin and Grecian Church as of sune and moon. And the reader may see
that Sir Humfrey has both dealt some thing insincere in the allegatio^ of
Vspergensis, and also has proceeded preposterously in that he endeavored to
infringe the authority of the greater Council by the uncertain proceeding of
the less.

Page 261. of the same deuia he detortes the S. Irenaeus words contrary to
his meaning against Apostolical traditions. And yet S. Irenaeus even in the
words which are cited by him, speaks only against those who denied
absolutely that the truth is delivered by the Scriptures but only by
tradition, and so made them selves or their onwe traditions the rule of faith.
Of which number of hererikes says he were Valentinus Marcion, Cerinthus,
Basilides, of whom he uttered the words cited by Sir Humfrey, as affirming
that the truth could not be found by Scriptures by those who were ignorant of
traditions for say they: the truth was not delivered by writing but by word of
mouth, yet notobstanding this the same Irenaeus afterward speaks against
others who do not deny scriptures, or rather against such as follow
scriptures only and reject traditions received from the Apostles by succession
of priests and conserved or observed in the Church saying that they have found
the pure truth. (as the pretended reformers now commonly babble) of whom he
says that They neither consent to scriptures nor tradition, and against whom
(says the saint) we ought every way to resist. So that it is clear that he
disputes here only against such heretics as neither yealde to scriptures nor
traditions, and therefore he puts for the little of his chapter in this place
quod neque scripturis neque traditionibus obsequantur haretici: that heretics
neither obey scriptures nor traditions: both which S. Irenaeus does expressly
embrace.

And by this let the reader judge how intempestiuely the knigh does produce
this testimony against those (I mean the Romanists) who neither reject the
scriptures nor approved traditions but like twoe indiuided companions receive
them both: and let him also consider whether the doctrine of holy Irenaeus in
this place be not far more contrary to the tenet of the pretended reformers
then to the doctrine of the Roman Church: who make only scriptures expounded
according to their own sense the sole rule of faith. Especially considering
that the same ancient Father in the next ensuing chapter does expressly
receive Apostolical traditions saying in the very first words: traditionem
itaque Apostolicam in toto mundo manifestam in Ecclesia adest perspicere
omnibus qui vera volunt audire, and habemus annumerare eos qui ab Apostolis
instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesijs and successores eorum vsque ad nos qui
nihil tale docuerunt neque cognouerunt quale ab his deliratur. By which words
it is manifest that S. Irenaeus does confute his adversaries the heretics not
by scripture only, but also and cheefely by traditionarie authority of the
Bishops succeeding from the Apostles: which is directly opposite to the tenets
especially of the purer sort of nouellists who neither admit traditions nor
Episcopal authority but the only written word for absolute and sole Judge
of all Controversies and confutation of heresies.

Caietan in his Commentary upon the historian books of the old Testament (as
I am persuaded) does not plainly affirm (neither does Canus charge him with
that error) that the books of Machabies are not absolutely Canonical, as Sir
Humfrey alleges but he only reprehendeth him for using a vain distinction
of Canonical scriptures as if there were some Canonical only for instruction
of manners and not for matters of faith: against the infirmity or unsoundness
of which distinction Canus uses this reprehensiue conclusion saying. Cum sub
eodem contextu omnes illi libri nullo facto discrimine definiantur esse
Canonici (scilicet Ecclesiasticus. Sapientia, Tobias, Judith, Machabaeoru^
libri duo, and Baruch) ridiculum est vt partim in vna significatione partim in
alia libros Cenonicos habeamus. Ac si ha^c semel distinctionem admittimus
authoritate Conciliorum atque Pontificum nullus liber Sacer constare poterit.

And presently after Id quoniam absurdum omnino est, retineamus potius eam
rationem oportet quam Caietanus voluit evertere vir (vt saepe iam dixi) cum
primis eruditus and pius, sed qui in libris Canonicis constituendis Erasmi
nouitates ingeniumque secutus, dum alienis vestigijs voluit insistere propriam
gloriam maculauit. And so you see Canus does not confess that directly
Caietan maintained the Machabies not to be Canonical but only with that
distinction: neither did in deed Caietan more deny the authority of those
books then he did the Epistle to the Haebrewes, and that of S. James which
nevertheless he held absolutely for Canonical though not perhaps in the same
rigorous sense in which he judged all the rest of the books of scripture to be
in the Canon, by reason those, as also some other parts of scripture, have been by some ancient authors doubted of, in which doubt only he seems to
found his distinction.

Touching the Canonical books of the old Testament Sir Humfrey does most
falsely allege the authority of S. Isidore persuading his reader that he
rejects those same books which he and his companions in the new religion
condemn for Apochripha. Weras in deed that ancient author numbereth them all
in the Christian Canon. And to the end the knights impudency may more plainly
appear I will rehearse S. Isidores express words concerning the same who in
his 6. book of origenes or etymologies says thus. Quartus est apud nos ordo
veteris Testamenti eorum librorum qui in Canone Haebreo non sunt: quorum primus
sapientiae liber est. Secundus Ecclesiasticus. Tertius Tobias. Quartus Judith.
Quintus and Sextus Machaboeorum. Quos licet Haebraei inter Apochrypha separent,
Ecclesia tamen Christi inter diuinos libros and honorat and praedicat. By which
words it is so evident that this holy Father stands for the Romanists and
against the pretensiue reformers in this point; that I much marvel how Sir
Humfrey could have the face to produce him in favor of his cause. Nay more then
this out of the distinction which he makes between the the Hebrews and us
Christians in receiving the foresaid books for Canonical, I frame a firm
conjecture that either all or most of these ancient authors who seem to
exexclude them out of the Canon, do only intend to declare that they were not
included in it by the Jews as S. Hilarie. S. Hierome, and S. Epiphanius and
other authors: concerning which point the reader may please to read the same
S. Isidore in lib. Prooemiorum de libris veteris, and noui Testamenti.

In the 431. page of his by-way the kinght abuses Canus whom he there cites
lib. 12. cap. 13. For he foysteth in by a parenthesis of his own the word
real which neither Canus has, nor yet puts the force of his reprehension
of the bishop of Bitont in that he affirmed in the Council of Trent that
Christ did not offer his real body in his last supper, but because he
affirmed that Christ did not offer his own body absolutely, abstracting from
real or not real, the question not being in that passage of the real
presence, but of the Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood in the Eucharist,
which as it seems by Canus relation the foresaid Bishop in the discussion of
this point by way of proposition was of that private dictamen, how beit after
wards he willingly conformed him self to the rest of the Fathers and to the
decree of the Council. By which it is plain that this Bishop was not of any
firm and settled opinion which might favor Sir Humfreys doctrine in that
particular. Illud primum animaduerto iure Cornelium Episcopum Bitontinum in
Conelio apud Tridentinum a Patribus and Theologis vniuersis explosum qui
dixerit Christum in Coena non suum corpus and sanguinem obtulisse. Canus loco
citato.
And so you see this is one of Sir Humfreyes prittie petty tricks which
omong other greater will serve to replenish his pages.

The kinght also in his 157. page of his deuia corrupts the same author
cited in his third book and third chapter. Where for these words, in
sacrificio Eucharistiae simul cum corpore sanguinem sacerdotibus esse
conficiendum, and sumendum etc. Sacrae litterae nusquam forte tradiderunt: he
translates, the consecrating and receiving of ehe body, and blood of Christ by
the priest etc. Are nowhere happily to be found in scripture. In which passage
the attentive reader may easily see that the knight plaieth the iugler most
nimblely. For whereas Canus puts the force of his sentence in the words
simul together, or at once, and in the other word sumendum, making an
hipotheticall proposition of all his words joined together: our crafty
Circulator so ha^dleth the matter that his reader may imagine that Canus
affirmed that the consecration of the Eucharist according to the custom of the
Roman Church is not found in the bible. That which that author never dreamed,
but only intended to produce as an instance of Apostolical traditions that
copulative of the practice of the priests consecrating and actual receiving
both the body and blood at one and the same time in the use of the Eucharist,
which Canus supposes rather to be a tradition then expressly contained in the
text of scripture.

More over Sir Humfrey cites Gretzerus but only twice: first in his defense of
the tenth chapter of the third book of Bellarmin de verbo Dei page 15. And of
his own by way page 503. And secondly in the same Gretzers defense of the
first chapter of the first book of Bellarmine verbo Dei.

In the first place he abuses that author in that he produces him to prove
that the Church is finally resolved in to the Pope as head and body of the
same. And yet in the very same chapter page 1456. and next leaf Gretzer
plainly teaches that our faith is lastely resolved in to divine revelation,
or in to God reueiling or that which is the same in to the prime verity in
which our faith is founded. His words are these in latin. Nam sides nostra
vltima resoluitur in reuelationem diuinam seu in Deum reuelantem seu quod idem
est in primam veritatem qua and nititur fides nostra tanquam fundamento
paimario tametsi non inficior fidem quoque resolui in Ecclesiam seu Ecclesiae
propositionem, although I do nor deny that faith is resolved in to the Church,
or the proposition of the Church: etc. Immediately after this he says. Sed
haec resolutio non est omniuo vltima and in principium plane substantiale and
essentiale: sed tantum vt in fundamentum secundarium seu vt in conditionem sine
qua fides neque recipitur neque retinetur. And even in these words by the
knight, the Pope alone is not put by Gretzerus for the whole Church, but he
does only say, he denies not that the Romanists understand by the Pope the
Church in one acception, not absolutely. Which is manifest out of his words in
the precedent page where he says: Intelligimus etiam nomine Ecclesiae
Pontificem pro tempore viuentem quod ipse congregare and conuocare potest
Concilium, and hunc summi Pastoris and aliorum Praesulum caetum dicimus esse
immediatum and ordinarium and visibilem omnium Controuersiarum quae de
religione existunt Iudicem. By which words it is apparent that Gretzerus does
not take the Popes person alone for the head and body of the Church, but for
the head of the body of the Church. How be it I do not deny but that the
Pope as head and chief part of the whole Church may by a senecdoche be taken
for the whole Church as he is accepted both by Gretzer and other divines, but
yet this acception will nothing profit Sir Humfrey whose wise design in this
place is to persuade his simple reader that the Romanists take the Pope alone
without a general Council truly and properly for the whole Roman and
Catholic Church which is his own phamtasticall dream, not our doctrine.

In the other place Sir Humfrey plainly falsifyeth this author, for whereas
Gretzerus only redargueth his adversaries who falsely affirms that what
soever the devil suggesteth to this or that Pope in particular even against
manifest scripture, the Romanists receive it for Gods word, saying, that these
things be crepitacula nugantium Praedicantium, the clappers of prating
preachers, and that in truth we Romanists only receive and reverence for the
word of God that which the chief Bishop does by Cathedral definition propose
unto us as the supreme master and Judge of controversies: Sir Humfrey by
fraudulent displaceing of the word only and putting it before the word of
God, quyte peruertes the sense making his reader beleaue that Gretzer affirms,
that only to be the word of God which the Pope proposes, and as if they held
not the scripture it self to be Gods word; the contrary of which
nevertheless the Jesuit delivers immediately before in express terms saying
that, it (meaning the scripture) is had and reverenced by the Pontificians for
the word of God which is so well known that the impudency of the Predicants
can not deny it. And thus much touching the corruption and abuse of Gretzere
by the calumnious knight.

Moreover whereas Sir Humfrey cites Castro in his 12. book as affirming the
denial of Purgatory to be a most notorious and known error of the Grecia^s
and Armenia^s, that author is abused by him, for he means only of the modern
Grecians not of the ancient Grecian Fathers, as the knight gives his reader to
understand, falsely applying Canus words page 181. to the Greek Church of the
first ages, so that here is plain forgerie.

In like fashion in his 536. page of the Deuia, he falsifyes the same author
lib. 1. cap. 9. For where Castro says: quamuis enim teneamur ex fide credere
verum Petri successorem esse supremum totius Ecclesiae pastorem, for those
words quamuis teneamur that is, although we are bound, Sir Humfrey translates,
admit we are bound to believe that point, as if Castro had doubted of it, of
which nevertheless he makes not any question, but only says, men are not
obledged to believe by faith that this or that particular person is true Pope.
Neither yet does he deny that every Pope has infallibility in a reight line
of succession from S. Peter as the knight does falsely tax him: but he
affirms only that it is not a matter of faith so to believe of every Pope
in particular. And therefore he adds that although he were not to be accounted
an heretic that should deny obedience unto this or that particular Pope, to
wit Clement or Leo, yet should he not for doubt of his election sustract him
self from his obedience. And so we see that here his no other argument then
of want of honest dealing in our adversary.

And yet in his 21. section of the deuia page 551. he traduceth the same
Alfonsus as if he had scoffed at the Dominicans in general for that they were
wont to brag before the people that he that has once received their habit can
not err or fail in fairh. Where it is true that Castro reprehends sharply,
and not without reason, some particular religious men that used such speeches,
but he is so far from saying they are Dominicans, that he expressly adds
that least he should seem to tax the whole order he purposely conceiled the
name. Ne hoc toti ordini ac societati impressisse videar nomen ordinis ex
industria subticui. and this he did of Charity. But Sir Humfrey contrarily is
so far from the exercise of that great virtue that he will needs make Castro
to impose that upon a whole order which he meant only of some particular
person of persons. Which is a trick of a iuggler thou' a very pore one.
Neither can I conceive, except it were by revelation, how Sir Humfrey came to
know that Castro spoke of the Dominicans more then of any other religious
order, but let that pass for one of his great miracles.

Touching the marriage of priests cassander is corrupted by Sir Hu^frey in the
23. art. of his consult. p. 990. where for antiquae consuetudinis immutandae,
he puteth in English, the change of the law, and so leaving out the word
ancient as also the words prisci moris, which signifyes the custom of
celibate to have been no new law as he would falsely persuade her reader, but
established in ancient times. And more then this he foysteth in to his
translation the word necessary in steed of flagitare videntur, And thus like
a bungling boteher he patcheth together those uncertainties of Cassander to
make himself and others a deceitful safegarde of greater confort and benefit
for the soul which he erroneously supposes rather to be in his misreformed
faith them in the Romish. And now how unfaithful, weak, and pore proceeding
of Sir Humfrey this appears to be, let the indicious reader consider.

The knigh moreover traduceth Bellarmin in the preface to his book de Romano
Pont. translating in every place for Graeci, the Greek Fathers, as if the
Cardinal did confess that the ancient and most famous Greek Fathers to wit
S. Chrysostom, S. Basil Epiphanius and others did impugn and resist the
supremacy of the Bishop of Roman. Whereas it is plain Bellarmin means only
such Grecians as sat in the Council of Calcedon who frandulently defined in
absence of the Popes legates, that the Patriarch of Constantinople is so the
second after the Roman Bishop as that yet he has equal privileges, whence
Sir Humfrey will needs infer that the supremacy of the Pope wantes
succession: as if the Popes resistance to this attempt of usurpation in those
Grecians were sufficient to exstinguish a true and estblished succession of all
former times.

In his page 104. of the deuia touching Salmeron the knight falsely affirms
out of chamier that he speaks in the person of the Grecians when he utters
those words. For as much as the benedictton of the lord is not fuperfluous
etc. For Salmeron neither mentions Grecians nor Latinists but only argues for
the second opinion which he puts of those which seem to hold that Christ
did not consecrate his body and blood with those words. This is my body. But
whose soever those words be the matter is not great, yet certain it is that
Sir Humfrey deals falsely and deceitfully in that he produces them and
Salmeron to prove that the grand point of transsubstantiation (as he pleases
to term it) has neither foundation in the scriptures, nor certainty in the
Fathers, nor unity among the Romanists whenas neither those words of Salmeron
are spoken to prove that the grand point of transsubstantiation (as he pleases
to term it) has neither foundation in the scriptures, nor certainty in the
Fathers, nor unity among the Romanists. When as neither those words of
Salmeron are spoken to any other end but only to confirm the opinion of such
as hold that out Savior did not consecrate with those words: This is my
body. Howbeit, both he and they agree most uniformly in that how soever
Christ him self did whose power being infinite was not tied to any words at
all for the effecting that which he intended no more then he was in the
operation of miracles and particularly in the miraculous transsubstantiation of
water in to wine in the marriage feast of Cana: yet Priests who are but his
substitutes or instruments in that sacred action do undoubtedly consecrate
with those determinate words: This is my body, in which all Romanists yea and
Grecians (excepting some modern Grecians who add some other deprecatorie
words) do consent and unanimously accord. Where upon Salmeron before he comes
to rehearse opinions touching that point whether Christ him self did
consecrate with these formal words, says plainly. Illud igitur tanquam
certum and constitutum est apud omnes hanc fuisse nobis formam consecrationis
praescriptam, and iure diuino institutam ac nobis traditam. Which words
sufficiently declare that there is no incertaintie among the Romanists about
the foresaid words of consecration: Nay and if there were that incertaintie
among divines about the form of the Eucharist which Sir Humfrey pretends,
yet does it not follow that the Doctrine of transsubstantiation is uncertain
supposing that both Salmero^ and all the same divines agree that the bread and
wine are truly transsubstantiated or turned in to the body and blood of
Christ, and consequently this author is impertinently alleged as having
nothing for the knights purpose. Besides that part of the words which he
cites out of Salmeron whether they be the Grecians or not, they include
clearly the doctrine of transsubstantiation, to wit those in particular, when
he grave it transmutation was already made: and so the unwary knight has
allege this passage against him self. For if the change of the bread and wine
was made before Christ gave the Sacrament to his disciples, the Romanists have
their desire and intent, that Christ did truly transsubstantiate the elements,
it importing little to this question by what means he performed his action.

Page 547. of his deuia the kinght corrupts Salmeron by a mangled relation and
false construction of his words which he produces to prove that some
Romanists and particularly Salmeron hold the Popes judgment infallible. But
how soever it be that some Roman divines hold the Popes authority even
without a general Council infallible in determining controversies in matters
of faith, and others the contrary which as Bellarmin notes is no matter of
faith. Yet certain it is that Salmeron is here abused by Sir Humfrey for that
in this place cited (what soever he does in others) he rather attributes all
infallibility in resolving and declaring matters of controversy, cheefely to
the assistance and power of the holy spirit, then either to the Pope or Church.
His words are these. Neque haec sunt satis nisi accedat vnctio and eruditio
Spiritus Sancti quem Dominus mansurum nobiscum in aeternum, qui and in
generalibus synodis, and in Christi Vicario and Petri successore residens omnes
incidentes quaestiones and ortas de fide contronersias sua authoritate terminet
atque absoluat. Thus Salmeron prologom. 9. can. 1. Where the reader may perceive
that the kinght has either ignorantly or maliciously applied the relative qui
to the Pope, which nevertheless is referred by Salmeron to the holy Ghost. As
any Grammar boy that understands latin, may eassely perceive. And yet blind
Sir Humfrey who not being yet a perfect Gramarian, will needs play the Doctor
of divinity, englisheth and rehearses Salmerons words thus. The lord
promised his Spirit to Christ's Vicar and the successor of Peter and by his
authority the determins all matters of faith. Let the reader compare the
english with the latin and he will presently discover the fraud.

S. Isidor Pelusiota writ the Epistle cited by Sir Humfrey page 630. to a monk
named Zenon, complaining unto him of want of virtue and corruption of manners in
the Church in comparison of the primative times, all which that holy man
affirms to proceed from dissension and wickedness or malice of these who
govern especially of priests thou' not of all: but he has not a word of the
Pope, or of any defect, or of the latencie or inuisibilitie of the Church
which our adversary professes to prosecute in that his section.

And this which I say is made plain by the last clause or conclusion of the
epistle which is this. At tu o conspicue Ecclesiae alumne ne ad eos qui
naufragio pereunt animum attendas nec cum segnibus and ignauis teipsum
compares: verum scientiae lumen splendidius, subinde read per vitae probitatem
ac virtutem ipsum irrigans. Atque sponsum expecta ingressum quidem cum ijs qui
animis and corporihus virgins sunt. De ijs autem qui virginitatis and
sucerdotis dignitati per flagitia sua contumeliam intulerunt, supplicium
sumpturum. By which words it is plain here is nothing of any reformation in
Faith made or yet desired in those days which is that Sir Humfrey aymeth at.
Nor is there any word which favors luthers pretended reformation of the
Church. Nevertheless if Sir Humfrey and his consociates could but pick us out
one half dozen of such chaste and religious monks as these, out of all the
several Congregatio^s of their illuminate brothers since the days of Luther,
then would we most willingly give license unto them to reform the Church at
their pleasures.

Sir Humfrey in the 24. chapter of his deuia cites a great number of Romanists
with intention to prove the inuisibilitie of the Church: and the medium he
uses for his proof be the testimonies of those authors who acknowledge
abuses to have been in the Church in their several ages even till the days of
luther: and who signifye in their writings that they have desired reformation
of such abuses. Out of which holting premises Sir Humfrey infers this
crooked conclusion to wit that Luther was the man that made the so long wished
reformation. Which illation as the reader may easily perceive is as lame as her
parents, neithet is that consequens any more necessary then that Mahomet was
the reformer of the Church because at the same time and before he founded his
sect there were perhaps some things which wanted ame^dment. And yet much less
can any man imagine how out of those twoe propositions viz that diverse learned
and pious people complained of abuses and corruption of manners and desired
redress, therefore the Church was latent and obscure or invisible, or yet
further that that latent and obscure Church was the Church of the pretended
reformers, or that those zealous and godly persons who so complained in
several ages, were members of the same, and not rather virtuous and religious
Romanists as in deed they were, all which inferences because Sir Humfrey
neither does nor can possible prove to be sound and legitimate, therefore he
has spent much time in vain in that he makes a large rehearsal of the
speeches of such authors as have noted the common and public vices of their
days, which and the like sins and abuses no Romanist ever denied but they
may be even in the members of tree true visible Church.

Now to come to particulars to the end the folly of our adversary may more
plainly appear I will examen some passages which he cites out of Gerson
which being those which seem most plausible for his cause when the reader
shall see them declared and rectifyed, he will without any more exact
discussion be able to judge of others of less appearance and color.

I confess that Gerson was free in his speeches as being a zealous and plain
man, and a sharp represender of vices, nevertheless I find not in his
writings but that he was an humble acknowledger of the Popes authority yea and
an earnest defender of those points of doctrine which luther and the rest of
the pretended new reformants hold for errneous and false opinions, for
superstions and idolatry. As the use of images, prayer to saints, Purgatory,
the seven Sacraments, the real presence and the rest of the matters in
controversy between us and the^: de numero Sacramentoru^ sciendum quod septe^
sunt Gers. 2. part. Act. 26.
as his works printed at Strasburg in four parts or tomes declare, neither
did he ever desire any reformation in the substance of these particulars, how
be it I deny not but that as he might find some abuses in the practice of the
same, so might he also wish for amendment of them, but this is not contrary
to the doctrine and practice of the Romanists but most conformable to the same,
who as they confess that some things deserving correction may creep in to
the particular members of the Church yea and into the head and chief pastor
him self, so do they not only desire but also procure reformation of the
same by all direct and lawful means. And so whatsoever Gerson says in this
nature if it be not detorted to a sense contrary to the true meaning of the
author (as here it is by Sir Humfrey) the Romanists most willingly embrace it
as profitable to the souls of many and for the good of the universal Church.

It is true Gerson speaks something harshely and by excess when he says:
even as we see in like manner in some countries touching censures and laws
invented about particular obseruances or rules not necessary to salvation
which are often times preferred before the laws of God and of the Gospel, And
this same we see manifestely in the decrees and decretalls. whence it is that
some times a monk is more severely punished for going without his hood then
for committing adultring or sacrilege, and he that offendes against one of the
Popes commandments then he that sins against one of the commaundeme^ts of
God, and the Euangell, according to that reprehension of our Savior: you have
frustrated the commandments of God for the traditions of men.

In an other place the same Gerson complains of the abuses and sins of
friars, Nunns, and priests of the great variety of images which he bids the
reader consider whether they be not occasion of idolatry in the simple people:
of the canonization of new saints and religious orders, of which he says there
are to many already, and that the feasts of the new saints are more
religiously observed then the feasts of the Apostles, of Apocrypsall Scriptures
and prayers, superstitious opinions of obtaining remission of sins by saying
so many Pater nosters in such a Church before such an image. And in his
treatise de Council. Genesis vnius obedientiae he says thus: if the Church may not
be reformed according to the state in which it was in the time of Christ and
his Apostles, yet at least it should be brough to the state it was in the time
of Pope syluester.

In an other place Gerson as it were by way of complainte says in hac
tempestate (meaning in that season in which he lived) he did see, matters
standing as they did, that scarce any due determination or speedy and free
execution of justice was found in doctrine appertaining to faith, religion, to
good and hoalsome manners, unless it were by strong favor of the secular power.

This is that in substance which Sir Hu^frey alleges out of Gerson yea an
something more then he him self produces: And yet nevertheless as the reader
may easily understand there is nothing agreeable to the reformation of Luther
and Calvin. For Gerson only reprehends, and that justly, some particular
persons in some particular countries and in some particular observations, which
so exactely and rigorously observe theit rules and laws and so exorbitantly
estreeme of them that they often times by indiscreet zeal are more diligent in
performing them then they are in keeping the laws of God, and that they some
times punish more severely a religious person offending against one of those
monastical rules or statutes, or against one of the Popes preceps, or laws of
the decretalls, or others, then they punish him who commits adultery or
sacrilege. Where as those twoe false reformers Martin and John were not content
with this, and to procure a reformation in some particular persons, rules, and
statues, but they took away all monastical observations either of vow, rule,
or constitution, and extingnissed all Ecclesiastical laws both of the Pope
and Church as much as lay in their power violating, euerting, and razing the
very buildings of religious houses and consuming by fire the books of the
decretals and whole Canon laws, quyte destroying that and much more by rage
and fury which Gerson out of a pious and Christian zeal only wished to have
amended.

Gerson complained of the evil life of fryres and nuns with desire to have
them reformed and reduced to the observation of their ancient rules and
constitutions, only excepting against the multiplicie and variety of
religious orders: suntque per haec caelestia tonitruasublata prohibita and
damnata omnia istius generis vota penitissime. Lut. tom. 2. fol. 272.
But those companions in impiety Luther and Calvin would have all religious
and monastical discipline wholely extingnished as Sacrilegious damnable, and
contrary to the law of God using opprobrious speeches against all Religious
persons and their profession.

Gerson took to consideration whether the multitude and variety of images
might not be occasion of idolatry in the simple people yet did not he reprove
the due honor of them: But our new reformers or rather deformers either will
have no images at all in Churches as Caluinists, or at the least they will not
have them honored with religious reverence as Lutheranes, reproving all kind
of veneration or worship of them as superstitious and idolatrous.

Gerson only reprehended the excess (as he apprehended) in the canonization
of so many new saints and the more religious observation of there is feasts
then of the feasts of the Apostles by some particular persons or Churches: but
these twoe profane fellows allow not of any religious celebration of the
feasts of either ancient or modern saints neither of Apostles nor Evangelists,
neither of confessers nor martyrs, making account only of the sabbath day (as
they commonly call the sunday) in that nature: also houlding the canonization
of noe saints for either necessary, lawdable, or authentical desiring rather
their memories should be extingiushed rhen reverenced. Gerson likewise
comdemneth instely superstitions committed by particular persons in the worship
of saints, and vain observations, and over great credulity given by them to
every passage recounted in some inauthentichall legendes, yet admitting and
defending due and moderate honor of saints and the authentical and true
histories of their lives: But our pretended reformers reject all religious
honor of Saintcts and hold the relatio^s of their lives and miracles for
Apocriphall and fabelous at the least of modern saints.

Gerson defended the Roman doctrine of indulgences most Catholiquely as his
treatice of that matter does testifye, Indulgentiarum co^cessio non est parui
pendenda seu contemnenda sed amplecte^da deuote, and in fide spe and charitate
Domini nostri Jesus Christi qui potestatem lium clauium Ecclesiasticarum dedit
hominibus Gerson p. 2. act. 23.
and only taxed some particular pardons of sins as he relates, for saying
so many pater nosters in such a Church, before such an image, calling them
superstitious opinions and frivolous additions as having never ben approved by
the Roman Church: But our new doctors and masters Luther and Calvin utterly
condemn all sorts of Indulgence granted by the Pope yea and the power of the
Church to grant them.

Gerso^ speaking only of some vicious Ecclesiastical persons reprehendes
priests for that under the pretense of maids they keep co^cubines yet
plainly supposing the law of Celibate or single life of clergy to have been
in use in and before his times as a thing lawdable and fitting for their
vocation: and quonia^ assidue nostri sacerdotes sacris occupantur mysterijs
quid diuinius quam vt continua polleant castitate. Gers. 2. part. dialog. de
celib. Act. 4
But those twoe luxurious imps the one a professed friar, the other a vowed
priest, according to their new reformation teach it lawful and laudable for
priests not obstanding their vows of chastity, to change the state of
chastity in to the state of marriage they being the first that gave example of
that sacrilegious action and leading the dance them selves.

Gerson complains that Cathedral Churches are made dens of thieves, and
consecrated monasteries markets and Innes: But by the followers of Luther and
Calvin, those holy cloisters are not only made markets and Innes, but even
stables and hogstyes, and Cathedral Churches as it were common burses or
exchanges for relation of news and negotiations, in which manifould iniustices
and illicit contracts are plotted and accorded to the great profanation of the
house of God ordained for only prayer, service, and Sacrifyce, so that if
Gerson were now alive doubtless he would rather tax the pretended reformers
in this nature then those Catholic profaners of his own times.

Gerson bids inquiry to be made if there be not Apocryphal Scriptures, and
prayers introduced in the Church to the great prejudice of Christian faith, not
meaning of any Scriptures or prayers approved for Canonical, and pious by the
authority of the Roman Church as are the books of machibies, Sapience,
Ecclesiasticus, Tobie, and Judith and prayers to saints all which Gerson him
self did receive for such but he only reprehendes such false Scriptures or
prayers as some newfangled private persons had published and invented with out
warrant or authority of the prelates and governors of the Church: But Luther
Calvin and their scholars peremptoriely rejected and excluded out of the text
and canon of seripture the forosayde books and some others, as allsoe all
manner of prayers to sainrs, even those prayers and kookes of scripture which
had been most anciently approved and read in the service of the universal
Church at the least since the time of Innocent the first Pope of that name, and
so used in the days of S. Augustine and ever since till the late days of
Luther.

And now by this brief collation or co^parision which I have made the reader
may plainly view the great difference there is between the desired
reformation of Gerson and that of the pretended Innouators of our times, the
one being almost quite opposite to the other: the one intending only to
redress the Church in some particular accessorie defects, the other indeuoring
violently to destroy the whole frame and foundation of the visible Church and
to build a new one: and finaly the one being a reformation either wholely or
chiefly in the life and manners of some corrupted persons the other chiefly in
faith and doctrine and not regarding reformation of life but rather giving more
scope and liberty to licentiousness then ever was heard of in the Christian
world.

And although Gerson does insinuate the necessity of reformation even in matters
of faith and religion, yet does he not mean of the faith and teligion
maintained approved and practiced by the Roman Church, but he speaks only of
the errors of heretics and some abuses of other particular persons cropen
into the exercise of the true religion in which he desired reformation to the
end the state of the Church may remain and continue firm in her former
purity without stain of erroneous doctrine or corrupted manners. In all which
he wished the slownesse of the prelates might be hastened by the power of the
secular authority of kings and Princes, rather then lie vnamended, with danger
of the Roman faith and prejudice to the salvation of souls. Which pious zeal
of that renowned chanceler was highly to be commended as far different from
the proceedings of the authors of our new pretended reformation who to acquire
them selves a name of famous men under the color of reforming the Church made
a preye of the same with infinite loss of Christian souls and general damage
to virtue and religious life.

More over I am to aduertice the reader that in the citation of this author Sir
Humfrey has co^mirted twoe notable frauds. The first is in that he reherses a
great part of his words as if he had found them allogether and in one
continuated order or text, whereas the author has them in diverse places and to
diverse purposes. For example Sir Humfrey joins that which Gerson says of
remission of sins by so mainie Pater nosters, which he has in his treaty of
Indulgences, with that other passage of preferring the particular observations
of some countries before the law of God, which he has not in the same place,
but in an other treatise entitled de directione cordis.

Secondly I find those words of Gerson which all or most of them being
spoaken by him only of correction of manners, the kinght applies the^ to
matters of faith to persuade his reader that there were corruptions in the
Church even in matters of faith, and that the chancellor procured reformation of
them. An exemple of this fraud you have in the 650. page of the deuia, where
the knight says Gerso^ wished at the least a restoring of the ancient faith of
the Fathers time citing for this his treatice entitled, de Coucilio Generali
vnius obedientiae, and quoting these words in the margin. Ecclesia sinon ad
statum Christi and Apostolorum Saltem ad statum Syluestri restituenda. Which
words nevertheless Gerson speaks not of matters of faith, but only of the
provision and collation of benefices as both his whole discourse and especially
his precedent words do most clearly demonstrate. Which are these. Sed long
aliter imprimatiua dolatione donatione.
distribuebantur bona talia quam postmodum tempore praelatorum qui caeperunt
paulatim refrigescere a sanctitate priorum tandem abusi sunt collationibus been
ficiorum and ciusmodi administratione quod Papae ad se paulatim multa
reuocauerunt vsque adeo quod finaliter datis occasionibus and acceptis quas non
est hic opus recitare quasi tota iurisdictio and collatio talis paenes Papam
and eius curiam remanebant. And after theses words Gerson uttered those other
at which Sir Humfrey catched yet according to his inueterated custom related
not syncerily, which if otherwise he had truly reheharsed they would have
presently discovered the truth and of what matter they were delivered, for
Gerson says: vel redeundum esset ad statum Ecclesiae tempore syluestri and
Gregorij quando quilibet Praelatus dimittebatur in sua jurisdiction and
sollidudinis part. now let the reader confer all these words of Gerson with
the citation of Sir humfrey in the page above noted and he will presently
perceive how he has corrupted the^ both in tenor and sense, and how he has
foysted in the word Ecclesia where it is not to be found in the text of the
author.

As also in the place taken out of Gersons in his consolatorie tract of
rectifyind the heart, he transposeth and mangleth his words leaving out the
word particular: and for the words in aliquibus religionibus, translating, in
many conuents putting many in steed of some. And where the same Gerson in an
other place complaining of the imperfections and vices of the regular and
secular Clergy does explicate him self not to mean of all but of some
particular persons, Sir Humfrey guilefully omits his words which are these.
Sed nunquid hodie omnes Domini and Paelati in intedictis and post dicendis
culpabiles sunt malis? absit, reliquit enim Dominus sibi in Israel septem
millia virorum quorum genua non sunt curuata ante Baal. and where the author
speaking of disorders of the monasteries of nuns and fryres uses the word
quasi to give the reader advertisement that he speaks not absolutely but
only by way of comparison: In co^solat.
the malicious knight leaves it out, as if it were not to the purpose, as he
omits also the word no^nunqnam when the author speaks of the danger which
some times happens among the simple sort by reason of the multiplicitie of
such things as he there mentions.

In like manner in an other tract in whereas the Chancellor at the first making
some doubt of the obtaining of a certain Indulgence by saying so many Pater
nosters before an image of the Crucifix, yet afterward does moderate his own
speeches so that it plainly apppeares he does not condemn the same, the
fraudulent knight so relates the passage as if Gerson had not only taxed
that form of indulge^ce in particular but also had absolutely renou^ced the
Roman doctrine touching the lawfullnes of Indulge^ces in general: his words
are these Circa haec itaque and similia multum caute procedendum est and
prouidendum, ne opponatur firma vel pertinax credulitas propter erroris
periculum neque etiam oportet eiusmodi omnino and pertinaciter dissentire, nec
etiam penitus contemnere and improbare, est igitur ambulandum in his via media
etc. by which and other the like submissiue and temperate words which he has
afterward in the same place, the reader may see Gerson was as far from
being one of the new reformers as is the spirit of humility from the spirit
of pride and contempt, which is the only guide of all those who reject and
impugn the Roman doctrine in all points of controversy.

Finally in those words cited by Sir Hu^frey out of Gersons Apolotgeticall
dialog, whereas the author speaks in the case of scisme when the true Pope was
not certainly known, and cheefely of one particular point to wit of the
condemnation of that proposition, a tyranne may be lawfully killed by private
authority or by any private man. the deceitful knight so applies the words
as if Gerson had generally dispared of the reformation of the Church, and the
more easily to persuade his reader he omittes the words, hac tempestate and
those rebus vt sunt manentibus. Gersons words truly rehearsed are these. video
quod in doctrinis quae religionem, quae bonas and salubres recipient mores,
vix inuenietur in hac tempestate (rebus vt sunt manimentibus nec habito forti
fauore potentiae saecularis) terminatio debita vel expedita iustitia Which
words if the reader compares them with the words cited in English by the
knight he will easily spy more faults then I have noted. And then from hence,
and the rest which I have produced touching the whole allegation of Gerson he
will be able to judge both of the false deiling of our adversary and how small
reason he had to indeuore to make that famous and renowned Romanist one of the
blind brothers of his invisible Congregation. But now for conclusion and
plainer intellectio^ or understanding of that which I have said touching this
author, the reader must take noticie that Gerson lived in a time of a great
scisme rased by the erroneous election of diverse Popes by diverse parts of the
faction, by reason of which strife finding in his judgment no other means to
bring matters to a peaceable issue and attoneme^t then by giuinge greater
authority to a general Council then to the Pope, he preferred the power of a
Council before the authority of the Pope: which scisme also was the true
cause why he likewise seemed to dispare of the reformation of the Church, and
therefore he labored to have a general Council under one Pope by occasion of
which desire he writ his treaty entitled De Co^cilio vnius obedie^tiae to
deliberate the co^posing of the Ecclesiastical debate a and Papal dissentio^
all which is by himself clearly delivered in several places of his works
and particularly in his Apolageticall dialog fol. 75. saying. hoc vnum scio
quod zelus hahendae vnionis in scismate tam desperato tantique temporis, fecit
multa tolerari quae fuissent aliunde nec tolerabilia nec toleranda etc. And now
by this it is sufficiently clear that Gerson is not for the new reformation of
modern sectaries in any one point of doctrine or manners.

In his citation of Cusanus lib. 3. concod. Cath. cap 16. the kinght has in
his own page 378. 8. 9. of the by way notably corrupted him, for he reheareses
his words without any order, and also quite contrary to his sense and
meaning as that authors own words most evidently convince in his 17. chapter
following, where he has this plain clause Ecce quod de pertinentibus ad
religionem Imperator inter Episcopos iudicare non debet. Et in his 18. chapter
he says thus. Firmitas autem iudicij and omnium quae ita aguntur in concilio
per quoscunque ex consensu tantum, synodica dependent authoritate. Quare etsi
aliquando sententiasse iudices tales leguntur, ex cousensu and synodica
commissione vigor sententiae dependebat, and non ex imperiali co^missione,
cuius authoritas synodum virilem non praecellit. Thus much Cusanus touching
iudicatiue authority in general councels, which as is plain by these words
does not depend upon the Emperor. It is true Cusanus grauntes (I known not how
truly) that he fyndes the Emperor did always praesidere that is preced or
take the first place in the councels, but he does not say (as Sir Humfrey
feysteth in) primatum habuit, he had the primacie. But only grants the
Emperor and his Judges with the senate, local pre-eminence before the Pope or
at the most depending on the Pope, and council, as his whole discourse in
diverse chapters of the book cited by the kingth. manifestely declare.

And concerning the congregation or convocation of general Councels, it is
almost evident out of the precedent chapters of the same book that this author
grau^tes no Primacie to the Emperor, but cheefely to the Pope. For altou' in
the beginning of the 13. chapter he has these express words ex superioribus
habetur Imperatores sanctos congregationes synodales vniuersalis concilij
totius Ecclesiae se^per fecisse. Yet presently after explicaing him self
better he says. Breuiter dico quod ita se habet Imperator ad vniuersale^
Ecclesiae Catholicae synodum, sicut Rex ad universal Regni sui concilium, non
quad coactiue sed cohortatiue colligere debet. And yet more plainly presently
after. Vigilare dehet Imperator and fidei and pacis custos, and Romani
Pontificis primo synodi necessitatem insinuare, and eius consensum congregandi
concilij in definito loco requirere. By all which it does manifestly appear
how shamelessely the kinght abuses Cusanus, and how small reason he had to
produce his testimony for the Popes usurpation (as he terms it) both in
calling and assuming pre-eminence of place and dignity, in Councels, supposing
that author (as being Cardinal of the Popes creation) so professedly
maintains his authority both in the resolutorie assembling and co^firming of
general synods.

And if the reader desire greater satisfaction concerning the doctrine of this
author about the Popes authority in Councels, let him please to read his
epistle to Roderic, and he will easily perceive how plainly he purges
himself from all sinister imputation in that nature: and that if perhaps in his
immature age when he writ his Catholic concordance by reason of the great
fame which he conceived of the Council of Basil, he inconsiderately uttered
any thing which might seem to diminish the power of the Bishop of Rome in
respect of a general Council: yet afterward perceiving that those who
preferred the authority of Councels before the authority of the chief Bishop
and pastor the Church proceeded so far as to attempt the election of the
Antipope Foelix, against the true Pope Eugenius, then presently he repented him
self that he had so much extolled their schismatticall syond, imitating in
this both Cardinal Julian and Aeneas syluius, who both of them in the
beginning defended the Council of Basil against Eugenius the true Pope, yet in
the end retracting their action maintained most earnestly his authority
against the same synod. That which is sufficient to manifest the
inconsideration, ignorance and insynceritie of Sir Humfrey in his production of
this author who suppose he had delivered his mind less clearcly in one place
and occasion, yet did he amend the same in another more exact work of his own
hand and industry, and of his own accord, how be it althou' our adversary
takes him at the greatest advantage he can, yet reightly vnlierstanded and
alleged he does not a jot advantage his cause.

In his citation of the Rhemes Testament in the annotation upon the 6. of the
Epistle the Hebrews v. 16. the knight relates words in which the author of
the notes affirms that God should be iniust if he re^dered not heaven for
meritorious works, But to make the matter more odious he craftily omittes the
words of S. Hierome there cited for proof of the same lib. 2. contra
Iouinianum cap. 2. saying that in deed great were Gods injustice if he would
only punish sins and would not receive good works. And if that co^ditionall
of the Rhemists be not iustifyable, then may our adversary more justly tax,
S. Augustine who lib. de not, and Great cap. 2. And lib. 4. contra Iulianum cap.
3. gave then examples of that form of speech. Saying in the first place* non
est iniustus Deus qui instos fraudet mercede iustitiae, and in the second, per
quod vera iustitia per hoc and regnum Dei: Deus namque ipse, quod absit, erit
iniustus, si ad eius regnum non admittitur iustus. Wherefore except Sir Humfrey
will join in his accusation those two renound ancient Fathers, he can not in
reason accuse those learned doctors.

Althou I conceive it may seem unseasonable to my present purpose distinctly
to treat of any matter of doctrine in this place and occasion yet in regard
I have lately reflected that Sir Humfrey professes him self an enemy to
implicit or unexpressed faith, therefore I esteemed convenient for the
accomplishing of my work, to insert a compendious discourse touching that
point.

And to come to the purpose, I can not conceive or inuente any other motive in
our adversaries for their so obstinate denial of unexpressed faith, except it
is because every one of them confidently presumes to know the express
contents of Scriptures as well as him who made them, yet on the contrary I am
assuredly persuaded that in reallitie a very great part (if not all their
congregation) inioyes not this great extrauagant privilege what soever they
imagine, or conceive of them selves. For although it is true that the illuminate
brothers generally use to brag they are docibiles Dei, and admit noe other
schoolmaster in this matter then God almighty him self: yet is it certainly
known that some of them be so ignorant that they know not as much as their
Abcedarie, or Christ cross row. And now of these who can not read the Bible,
I question our adversaries thus, either these ignorants believe althings
contained in the whole scripture, or no? If they do not, then they are
heretics for refusing to believe the whole word of God. If they do believe
all, and every particular contained in the Scripture, then necessarily they
must have an implicit faith, in regard many particular truethes be there
included which they can not possibly know by reason they can neither have them
selves, nor receive a perfect knowledge from any other of every several
truth therein contained: and consequently, if any faith they have of those
particular verities contained in the Scripture which they know not, it is
only an implicit, unexpressed, or implied faith supposing this consists in
nothing esse but a general faith even of those particulars of which the
believers have no express knowledge, except only in a certain co^fuse or
general manner, or as they are contained in other general propositions, or
matters, which expressly and seuelally they know to be reueiled in the word
of God, and of which they have an explicit, express, or disinuolued faith. For
as he who eypressely grants, or assents to any general Principle or
proposition, for example, that all Angels ar incorporall, or without bodies, or
that all men ar reasonable creatures, does by necessary consequens assent
implicitly to all the particulars there included, viz, that S. Michael S.
Gabriel, and every other particular Angel is incorporal, and that S. Peter,
and Paul, and every other particular man is a reasonable creature although he
never had any particular knowledge of them: So in the very same manner those
who with an express act of faith believe all the Church proposes unto them in
that kind, or all the scripture conteines: do likewise necessarily believe
with an implicit or tacit faith every several matter included in those
general terms.

And this kind of implicit faith, our adversaries must either grant, or else
necessarily confess that every Mecanike has as much knowledge in the
Scripture as the most learned Minister, and every sheep as much as his pastor:
which nevertheless every rude rustic is able to judge for most absurd, and
void of truth. So thus we see that of the denial of an implicit faith either
the ignorant, and unlearned sort of people in the pretensiue reformed Churches
know as much in the Scripture as their greatest doctors: or that they are
plain heretics because they believe no more in the Bible but that only which
they expressly know.

And the same I say with proportion even of the learned sort them selves, in
regade they seldom, or never ar so conversant in Scriptures that they
explessely know every several proposition, or particular truth contained in
the text, and consequently even they who ar the greatest Rabbis in their
reformed flock, have no explicit, or express faith consisting in an assent to
all they expressly know in the text of scripture, but they must as well as
their brothers, be content with an implicit faith of those particulars they
expressly know not, or else they are to be accounted heretics for not
believing them, as I said before of the ruder sort In respect of both which
sorts of people I mean both the learned and unlearned believers in the
pretensiue reformed Churches, this same argument may yet farther be urged even
according to their own received doctrine by which they confess they have not
all their faith expressly in the scriptures, but part of it drawn by their
own consequences, or deductions from the text of scripture: of all which
illations or inferences of theirs it is manifest they could not possible have
any other faith of them then implicit or unexpressed, before they made them,
in regare that those supposed verities or truethes which they so deduce were
not otherwise contained in the text or delivered to the Church then in that
inclusiue or hidden manner as it most apparent in regard that if otherwise
they had been contained in the scripture that is clearly or expressly, then no
illation or deduction had been necessary for believers for the bnowledge and
establishing of their faith in those particulars, as both natural reason, and
even common sense convince: and consequently either the pretensiue reformers
had an implicit faith of all those objects which they now confess them selves
to believe according to that deductiue manner, or else they had noe faith at
all of them before they were deduced: whence it farther follows that ever
since they made their foresaid illations or consequences their faith is new
and quyte distinct from their own faith in former times: the absurdity of
which most necessary sequel I remit to the censure of the reasonable, and
judicious learned reader to determine.

By occasion of this I desire the reader to take yet more clear notice of the
great peruersitie of the proposterous Nouellists, who as they reueile their
violence in reproving the foresaid received doctrine of implicit or inexpressed
faith, so likewise they are no less peremptory in defending their own new
distinction of fundamental and not fundamental points in Religion, according to
which their position they obstinately maintain the Church can err in matters
of faith, that is in such points of faith as in their conceit are not
foundamentall.

But against the falsitie of this distinction I argue first upon their own
supposed principle to wit that nothing is to be believed in matters of faith
which is not found in scripture either explicitly and clearly, or by clear
and certain consequence wherefore this doctrinal distinction of theirs being a
matter of faith and yet not found in scripture in either of those two manners
related, plain it is that according to the pretended reformers doctrine, it
neither deserves faith nor credit. More over this distinction is so newely
coined by our adversaries and so far from having any foundation either in
scripture or ancient doctors that I never read any mention of it in the first
and chief establishers of the pretended reformation. Only Chamier who is in
deed a violent defender of Caluinisme in his book de natura Ecclesiae, Cap.
13. number. 11.
seems plainly to suppose the same distinction in substance affirming that
the Catholic Church can err, licet non in fundamento salutis: though not in
the foundation of salvation.

Yet Chamier haueing writ his Panstratia but of late years either our English
Nouellists received it from him, or invented it them selves not long before so
that the novelty of it a lone were sufficient to convince it of untruth and
vanity. And although I might justly take exceptions at the word it self for
the newness of it according to the Apostles counsel to Timomothie to avoid
profane novelties of words, in regard the word not fundamentals as it is
applied to matters of faith and thee errors of the Church there in by our
adversaries, it is a kind of profanation both of divine faith it self which
is truly fundamental in all respects, and also of the authority of the Church
which likewise is infallible as much in one matter as an other: Nevertheless
my chief intention is not to insiste in the reproof of words (which I grant
may upon occasion and for better declaration of a truth, be invented and used
by the Churches authority) but I only stand upon the sense or object of
them, directely conuinceing the matter signified by those words not
fundamental in faith to be repugnant both to scripture and, Fathers. That which
I prove by a second argument of the same nature to wit because the scripture
expressly teaches that 1. Tim. 3. Ecclesia est
the Church is a pallar or firmament of truth. And our Savior promisseth his
Father will give to his Apostles (and their successors) an other Paraclete the
spirit of truth to remain with them for ever, Joan. 14. Joan. 16.
which same divine Spirit (as he him self declares afterward in the 16.
chapter will teach them all truth, which universal term all, includes and
signifyes both fundamental and not fundamental truethes, and consequently it
expressly excludes this vain distinction of the nouellists. To which purpose
S. Cyrill upon the 10. chapter of the same Evangelist speaks most fittly and
appositly saying, that althou' in this life we know only in part as S. Paul
affirms, non manca tamen sed integra veritas in hac parua cognitione nobis
refulsit: yet not a meamed or imperfect, but an intyre true faith shined unto
us in this small knowledge. And the place now cited out of the first to Tim. 3.
is by all interpreters of scripture both ancient and modern expounded of the
firmenes and stabilitie which the Church has by the assistance of the holy
Ghost in her delivery of true doctrine to her particular members, conformable
to which sense Tertullian (to omit the rest for brevity) in the 28. of his
prescriptions has a most fine sentence as it were in derision of those who
teach the universal or Catholic Church can err in matters of faith. Could
not (says he) the holy Ghost have respected her so much as to have induced
her into all truth, he having ben sent by Christ to this end having ben
required by his Father to be the Doctor of truth, should villicus Christi
vicarius the steward, the vicar of Christ have neglected the office of God
suffering the Churches in the mean time to understand and believe otherwise
then he him self preached by the Apostles, Thus plainly, generally and
absolutely ancient Tertullian of the infallibility of the Catholic Church
in points of doctrine and faith.

And now farther supposing that al these passages both of the scripture and
their expositors ar absolute, general, and sans limitation, it is most apparent
they can admit no such distinction in their true sense and interpretation, but
that at the least the catholic Church can not teach or believe any error
at all in such things as ar contained within the total object of faith in which
there can not possible be any part or partial which is not fundamental by
reason that all kind of divine faith is the very foundation of Religion and
christian justice according to the saying of S. Augustine. Domus Dei fide
fundatur, the house of God is founded in faith: and if the foundation of the
house of God were faulty, it would doubtless fall to ruin, contrary to his
own promise or affiirmation viz. That the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it.

Neither is it available for our adversaries to say that the Church can not
err in the chief articles of her faith, as ar the Trinity, the Incarnation
of Christ, which are fundamentals: but in such points as are not fundamental, as
ar the real presence, justification, the true quantity, and sense of
Canonical scriptures, and other such like matters in controversy with us and
them, the Church may teach erroneous and false doctrine.

For their evasion I reply it is grounded not in invincible, but in vincible
and gross ignorance of the nature of true faith which being in it self one
simple, or single entitie or essence as according to the doctrine of the
Apostle, God and Baptism ar. Vna fides, vnum Baptisma, vnus Deus; how
different soever its object be, it is ever essentially one and the same in it
self clear from distinction, and clear from error, the contrary to which
nevertheless should necessarily be true if ei-faith were divided in to
fundamental and not fundamental faith, and the Church could err in her
proposition of the one and not of the other. And to this I add that one
property of the true Church is holiness: but now what sanctity, integrity, or
holiness can possible be in the Church if it be infected with errors in faith of
what nature so ever they be. For as the scripture affiirmes, sine fide (that
is true, pure, and intyre faith) impossible est placere Deo. True faith is the
form, fashion, and beauty of the Church which is the immaculate sponse of
Christ' not having spot or wrincle. In so much that if she be defaced thus
with errors she can not possible be the sponse of Christ as in the cided place,
and like wise in the Canticles she is described, all fair, or comely, but
rather she would be like a leaper, or most deformed creature.

Thirdly, I confess for my part I could never perfectly understand what the
Nouellists truly mean by fundamental and not fundamental points, by reason I
find the matter in none of their works sufficiently explicated, and I veriely
conceive they purposely anoyde the declaration of it, to the end the
absurdity may less appear. Nevertheless it seems in probability that by
fundamentals they mean all those points which according to their own
exposition ar contained in scriptures, and the three creedes. And by not
fundamentals the points of controversy betwixt us and the^: as is the number
of Canonical books, the infallible rule of interpretation of scriptures, the
real presence, transsubstantiation, iustification' etc.

This being supposed I argue thus. Either those points which our adversaries
call not fundamentals, ar matters of faith' and to be believed by all sorts of
Christians according to the diversity of their tenets, under pain of
damnation, or not to be believed. If they are thus necessarily to be believed by
faith, then doubtelesse they are included in those truths touching which, (as I
have declared and confirmed before by both scriptures and Fathers) Christ
promised to his Church the assistance of the divine Sprit to remain with it
eternally that is till the consummation of the world, and consequently the
Church can not commit any error in proposing them to the people as being no
less fundamental in that respect then any of the rest of the articles of
faith.

But if our adversaries on the contrary deny them to be necessarily believed
under pain of loss of Salvation, and hold the^ only as matters of
indifferency, and such as may either be believed or not be believed without
prejudice of faith: or ma^ners upon this supposition I grant the Church may
err in proposing the^ to her flock, but yet in this case that part of our
adversaries distinction affirming that the Church can err in not fu^dame^tal
matters of faith is still false and impertine^t in regard those particulars
above telated in which they teach the Church can err, ar so far from being
either fundamentals or not fundamentals in matter of faith, that according to
the former supposition they are not either one way or other with in the circuit
of faith: and consequently that part or member of our adversaries dinstinction
viz that the Church can err in not fundamentals is both false, nugatorie, and
impertinent in which sense soever they intend to maintain it.

Fourtly I prove directly that the affirmatiues even of those particulars
controuerted betwixt us and the professors of the English Religion, ar
fundamental points of faith, and by consequence that if the Church can err in
them that part of their new distinction is false according to which they
auerre the Church can not err in fundamental points of Religion: which I
convince in this form of argument.

That distinction is false and absurd according to which it necessarily
follows that the Church can err in matters the true faith of which is
necessary to salvation.

But according to the distinction of fundamental, and not fundamental matters
of faith it necessarily follows the Church can err in matters necessary to
salvation.

Ergo The distinction of fundamental, and not fundamental matters of faith, is
a false and absurd distinction.

The minor in which the total difficulty consists, I prove because according
to this distinction, the Church may err in these propositions. The Church has
the true complete Canon of scripture, The Church has the true interpretation
and sense of scripture. Christ's body and blood ar truly, really,
substantially, and not by only faith contained in the sacred Eucharist etc.
And yet the faith of these either affirmatively or negatiuely, is necessary to
salvation, as the adversaries the^ selves if they will not be occounted
obstinate in a matter so clear and manifest, can not deny. Therefore it is
hence concluded by forcible sequel that their distinction of fundamentals, and
not fundamentals in matters of faith is false and absurd.

Fiftely, I reason in this manner against the same distinction. If the
infallibility of the Churches authority consistes in fundamental points of
Religion only, and not in all that the true Church shall at any time declare
unto her members concerning their faith and Religion, then were not the
providence of Christ perfect toward his sponse, but more defective then God
was toward the synagog of the Jews, neither were this any other then to
imagine that Christ in deed did lay a sound foundation for his Church, but
left walls and roof exposed to be dejected or cast to ground with every
puff of wind which how repugnant to reason and his own inviolable promise
this is, the reader may easily consider, and censure.

Sixthly, I argue yet more positiuely against the distinction related because,
our adversaries frame it either in respect of the greater, or lesser dignity
of the objects of fundamental and not fundame^tal points of faith in them
selves, or in respect of the greater or less necessity of them to salvation
by reason of the necessity of faith which the members of the true Church have
of them all and every one in particular, Now if we respect only the material
objects in them selves, and the necessity of them to salvation precisely, so
I confess there ar some particular matters of faith which much surpass orhers,
and in that respect also the one may not vnaptely be termed fundamental in
comparision of the rest which have not that preheminencie. For example that
there is a God, and that God is a rewarder of works quod Deus est, and
remunerator sit. That he is one in three persons, that the second person in
Trinity became incarnate or took human nature upon him, was borne of the
Virgin Marie, suffered death for our dedemption etc. are matters both more
noble and dignifiable in them selves, then those: Christ fasted forty days,
and forty nights, an Angel appeared to him in his agony, Peter denied Christ,
and other such like truths, Yet this how true soever it be, it is nothing to
the purpose which here we treat, nor afordeth any ground or foundation for
the prenominated distinction of our adversaries, in regard that althou' there
be never so great difference among those and other points of Religion in the
dignity of the material objects, by reason of which in some sort the one may
be named fundamental, the other not fundamental: nevertheless because the
faith of the one is no less necessary to salvation then the faith of the
other, thence it is that absolutely the one is as much fundamental as the other
and consequently there ar no not fundamentals in matters of faith as the
distinction of out adversaries does falsely suppose.

And hence in like manner it farther insueth, that if the Church should err
but only in the definition, or proposition even of those matters of less
quality, the error would be directly against divine faith, and consequently
the Church in this case should truly be said to have erred eued in fundamental
points of faith, and in matters necessary to salvation, fundamental points, as
I have declared and often repeated, being no other then all those reuailed
truethes the faith of which is necessary in the members of the Church for the
obtaining of eternal life, not obstanding any difference which otherwise may
apppeare in the nature of the several objects or matters, supposing no one
part but the whole intyre faith of Christ and every part and partial of
those verities which he has reuailed to his Church, is the foundation of true
Christian, and Catholic Religion, it being as necessary to salvation for
every true Christian to believe truly and syncerely if it be proposed unto
him by the Church that the cock crowed at the time of S Peter's denial of
Christ, or that a soldier lanced our sauiors side with a spear, as that he
dyed upon the Cross for our redemption, and risse again for our justification.

But Finally, If peradventure our adversaries should say that within the
compass of true faith some things be necessary to salvation and others not
necessary, and that consequently some things be fundamental, but others not.

To this instance I replye, it is founded in a manifest equivocation. For
althou' it is true that their be some, things within the compass of says
which are not necessary for every member of the Church to know them
expressly, yet is it necessary to salvation for every faithful Christian
thou' never so simple or ignorant, to believe every part and partial of
those objects or matters which God has reuailed, if for such by the Church
they be proposed unto him, otherwise he should incur the censure of that
strict and fearful sentence of the most just and equal judge Christ our
Savior, qui vero non crediderit condemnabitur: and so the faith even of all
those things which every one by reason of his state or condition of life, or
for want of understanding is not obledged to know, is necessary to salvation,
and consequently all kind of faith of what matter soever it be that God has
reuailed, is as much fu^dame^tall as is faith of the greatest matter or
mystery of the whole Christian belief: whence it is that as S. Gregory
Nazianzen treating of the unity and integrity of faith in his 39. oration
about the end declares by example or similitude that faith is like unto a
goulden chain connected and compounded of diverse linkes, from which if you
take any one away, you loose your salvation as S. Ambrose in the end of her
sixth kooke upon the Euangell of S. Luke declares. By which it is manifest that
faith of every point or matter within the compass of faith, is necessary to
salvation and therefore fundamental absolutely, whether the object be great or
little, and no faith not fundame^tal, as the new distinction of the Nouellists
most falsely affirms: which there distinction doubtnesse was invented by them
to the end they might have a more plausible coulor to accuse the Roman Church
of errors committed in faith, (as also for excuse of there own) their malice
and irreligion being so great that like unconscionable taylers they chose
rather to cut out a Church for Christ of such corrupted stuff as this, then
to live or dye unrevenged of the Catholic Roman Church.

And for conclusion I add that since I have made manifest by these my reasons
that the faith even of those points of Religion which our adversaries term not
fundamental, is absolutely required to the salvation of every Christian soul,
if even in rhese particulars only the Church could err, none could assuredly
be persuaded that by making them selves members of it, they are in the certain
and infallible way to the obteining of eternal blessedness, but still should
remain in the like dangerous and desperate state they did before they were in
the Church of Christ, and consequently by reason of this uncertainty and
peril a general neglect of procuring to enter in to the true Church of Christ
would be caused in the minds of men, which inconvenience in regard it
proceeds by inauoiable consequence from this distinction broached and used by
our adversaries, it plainly appeeres the doctrine of it is in diverse respect
most pernicious and damnable as not tending in any sort to the reformation of
the Church, as is by them pretended, but directely to the ruin and destruction
of it. Deuia. sec. 3. page 45.


S. Augustine in the 23. chap. of the 13. book of his co^fessions affirming
that spiritual men must not judge of the scripture, is corrupted by Sir
Hu^frey, for he means not that spiritual men must not in any case judge of
the true sense of scripture for that were both false, yea and repugnant to the
doctrine and practice even of the pretensiue reformers them selves who as they
can not deny, whether they be spiritual or not spiritual use to read and
interpret scriptures much more commonly then the Romanists do: yea and give
liberty therein even to those of the feminine sex or gender. But the true and
obuious sense of that divine doctor in the cited place only is, that spiritual
men must not judge any thing contained in the scripture (as presently he
subioines) non rite veraciterque dictum esse, that is, not to be ritely and
truelly spoken, but submit their understanding, etiamsi quid ibi non lucet
altou' some thing be not clear, or perspicuous in it. This is the pure and
sincere sense of S. Augustine as his very words declare, And now let the
impartial reader decide whether it does not rather militate or war against
the manner of dealing with scriptures which the Nouelists practice, then
againsts the Romanists: how be it I syncerely confess it directly makes
neither against the one nor the other, but precisely against such as judge
those passages of scripture to be false, or not ritely delivered, which they are
not able to understand. Spirituales ergo sieve qui presunt, sieve qui
obtemperant, spiritualiter iudicant: non de spiritualibus cogitationibus quae
latent in firmamento. Non enim oportet de sublimi authoritate iudicare, neque
etiam de ipso libro tuo: etiam si quid ibi non lucet quoniam submittimus ei
nostrum intellectu^: certumque habemus etiam quod clausum est aspectibus
nostris recte veraciterque dictum esse. Sic enim homo licet iam spiritualis'
and renouatus in agnitionem Dei secundum imaginem eius qui creauit eum, factor
tamen legis debet esse, non index. These ar the words of S. Augustine syncerely
rehearsed in which as any understander of latin may easily perceive, there is
nothing found in favor of Sir Humfreys tenet in the place above cited, viz
that scripiure is the sole judge of controversies and interpreter of it self:
but rather is there some thing expressly repugnant to an other position of his
congregation defending that scriptures ar easy to be understood or
interpreted only by conferring one place with an other, the contrary of which
neuertelesse, is plainly insinuated by those words of S. Augustine, certumque
habemus etiam quod clausum est aspectibus nostris etc. And we are eertaine even
that which is shut from our eyes, is ritely and truly spoken. And yet our
corrupt adversary has corruptedly interrupted them conioyning the first part
to the last and omitting the very heart of the sentence, and for the latin
words spiritualibus cogitationibus, putting in English, spiritual knowledge,
for spiritual cogitateons: like wise inserting by a parentesis this his own
gloss upon the word firmament expounding it of the scriptures them selves I
know not by what other rule or authorite then by the dictamen of his own
private or familiar spirit: all which particulars I remit to the censure of the
judicious reader.

And by occasion of this passage I advertise the reader that whereas the author
for the greater credit of his work, and as it were to limme it with the
authority of that aureous Doctor S. Augustine has cyted him in his by-way
alone, at the least 60. several times: yet having diligently viewed and
discussed the places as they stand in the tomes, I indoubtedly assure him that
of those 60 sentences there are not 6. to the purpose for which they are
alleged, and yet those 6. either such as partly by diverse Romanists in their
several work, and partly by my self in this my censure, have sundry time
received their anser: the rest of the total number being some of quyte
impertinent others neither for our aduersauersarie nor against the Romanists,
others plainly against him, and for the Romanists: especially those which
prove the apparent and conspicuous visitabilitie of the Catholic Church;
others finally are not syncerily rehearsed, but mangled, cropped, or curtald with
abuse of the author and reader.

S. Chrysostom like wise, and S. Ambrose have their meaning detorted by the
knight in the same section the one in his 13. homily upon Genesis, in his 7.
homily upon the first epistle to the Thesalonians: the other in his 8. sermon
upon the 118. psalm. for. S. Chrysostom only treates in those places of twoe
particular cases, to wit in the Genesis he argues against some who denied the
terrestrial Paradise, and upon the foresaid Epistle of saint Paul, he
reprehendes some others who were of opinion that the soul is a particle of the
divine nature. And touching these two particular points S. Chrysostom affirms
that the sacred scripture expondes it self, and suffers not the reader to
err, but he said not that the scripture in all other places and in all other
matters does so interpret it self as Sir Humfrey falsely alleges.

Now S. Ambrose saying that the door shall be opened unto him who diligently
exame^s the difficult and obscure passages of scripture by no other but by the
word of God, he does not there mean by the word of God the scriptures them
selves, but the divine word that is Christ our savior the second person in
Trinity, and therefore he adds to the words cited by Sir Humfrey. de quo
legisti in Apocalipsi quod Agnus librum signatam aperuit, of which thou haest
read in the Apocalips. that the lamb opened the sealed book, which last
words of S. Ambrose because the knight perceived that by their plain
explication of the former, they discovered the whole sentence to be nothing for
his purpose, he deceitful smunthered and left them vnrehearsed by which his
palpable and gross abuse of these two grave and ancient authors does evidently
appear.

An much according to this fashion he proceeds with Pope Clement whom he cites
in the same place, and for the same purpose. Who nevertheless is so
repugnant to the tenet of the nouellists in making the sole scripture
interpreter of it self in all cases, that he expressly teaches that we must
not according to our own sense but, secundum traditionem patris, according to
the tradition of the Father, that is either according as the tradition of the
Pope him self as deliverer of the sense of scriptures unto us, or secundum
traditionem Patris, that is according to the tradition of the ancient Fathers:
and therefore he adds afterward. and ideo oportet ab eo intelligentiam
discere scripturam qui eum a maioribus secundum veritatem sibi traditam
reseruauit vt ipse possit ea quae recte suscepit cempetenter asserere. That is,
And therefore we ought to learn the intelligence or understanding of scriptures
of him who reserved it to him self according to the truth delivered unto him
by his ancetors to the end he might co^petently assert those things which he
ritely received.

But Sir Humfrey conceiled these words, as also the greater part of the
period out of which he cited those words he alleges, yet joined unto them the
rest of those which he rehearses, not obstanding they are part of an other
clause, also adding the word seeing which neither is in the authors text, nor
agrees with his sense and meaning, which is not that the scripture alone is an
intyre and firm rule of faith, but the scripture expounded according to the
sense received from the ancients, as immediately before he affirmed. But vain
Sir Humfrey was so desirous to seem to his reader to have a Pope for an a
better of his position, that he chused rather to prostitute his own honesty
in the evil use he made of his authority, then seem to want the testiminie
of so renowned a personage. And yet is the knight so far from obtaining his
purpose, that if the words were not so many that they can not with
conueniencie be intyrely related, they them selves would make it apparent how
much the author of them is abused by the false relater. The supplye of which I
remit to the more diligent reader as time and leisure shall give him occasion.

But I confess now I am quite tired with the examen of my adversaries
misalledged testimonies of the authors he produces in favor of his misremormed
doctrine and must needs draw my self to a conclusion of my labors, hoping I
need not doubt but by these few passages the reader will easily persuade him
self touching the rest they are all of the same nature and so be satisfied
with that implicit or general knowledge he will have of them by this means,
and his own discourse, althou perhaps by his own industry and inquisitio^ he
is not able in particular to discover the frauds and come to the true sense
and menning of the^ in any more express and declared manner. Yet if my
adversary him self will not be satisfied with this compendious course I have
used, but will farther require an cxacte anser to every particular allegation,
upon condition he will first iustifye his proceeding in these I have showed
defective, I promise with Gods assistance I will be ready both to maintain
so much as I have already done and said, and also to proceed farther in my
view and censure of those places which as yet I have not touched if God be
pleased to give me health and opportunity of books, these being the greatest
difficulties I have had im the performance of the work.

To omit the printe which is well known what a trouble in is unto those of our
Religion and nation, and how great an adua^tange our adversaries have of us in
these particulars, some of us being forced to pass the seaes for every small
matter we have to publish, besides the peril of importing the books into the
country, which is subject to immunerable casualities and dangers of
molestation for the same as experience does testifye, God almighty amend it
and restrore us to our ancient Catholic liberty and Religion.

And to return to thee proceeding of my adversary I say for a man some times
inculpably to err, or mystake either in words or sense especially in
intricate matters, I do not admire it, neither dare I iustifye my self in
that particular (I let pass the faults of the printer to which every one is
subject) but that one should err so frequently and grossly as Sir Humfrey
has erred in his citations of all sorts of authors both ancient and modern
in the whole discourse of his two books, and yet never in favor of his
adversaries, but ever in favor of his own cause, this I say is no way
excusable, and in my opinion it is such a fortune as chances to no creature
excepting him self, or some of his illuminate brothers.

That which I so much the more lament and deplore in regard he has not only
suffered his own proper judgment to be insotted with such inconsiderate
delusions but likewise, as I perceive by report of others, has by the same
prestigious sleightes delivered his own nearest and dearest friend his
ingenuous lady, whose otherwise well disposed and once Catholic judgment, if
yet he had convinced by sincere proceeding and honest use of scriptures.
Fathers, and other writers, it had been less intolerable, but to win her with
such false wares as these, is an action no way justifiable either before God or
men.

And if I might be admitted to your Counsel Sir Humfrey, I would advise you to
cease writing books in this nature, which is neither your profession neither
as I conceive, and am informed, are your able to perform any such work without
the assistance of tutors which must of necessity be chargeable unto you. A
dozen or sixteen of the Puritan Ministry will quickly make a great hole in
an ordinary knights estate, especially if they be assembled in such a place as
the wine office, which as the very sound of the word denotes, necessarily
implies much good fellowship and consequently great expense. Beware of that
black guard, they will haunte your house like so maine ill spirits, not so much
by night as by day: they are meridian spirits, they assault most in the midest
of the leight, thereby to dasle men's eyes more easily, about dinner time you
shall be sure to have them most busy about you.

For as a conceited Protestant reports. Where the meat is best there a Puritan
confutes most, for (says he) his arguing is but the efficacy of his eating,
and the Pope he best concludes against in plum broth. This consell proceeds
from a friend, wherefore if you please to make use of it, the profit will be
your own, the thanks due to me. This is now the third anser your first book
has received by men of three several professions, by a merchant, a priest, an
a clerk, triplex funis difficile rumpitur which cords I hope will tie your
judgment with in the bounds of reason. Fare you well Sir Humfrey in Christ
our Savior, and receive this as from him who desires nothing more then your
most happy reclamation, and sempiternal blessedness.

FINIS.

