AN ADVICE HOW TO PLANT TOBACCO IN ENGLAND: AND How to bring it to color and
perfection, to whom it may be profitable, and to whom harmfull.

The virtues of the Herb in general, as well in the outward application as
taken in FVME.

WITH THE DANGER OF THE SPANISH TOBACCO.

Written by C. T.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, and are to be sold by WALTER BVRRE. 1615.

AN ADVICE HOW TO PLANT TOBACCO IN ENGLAND, AND HOW TO BRING IT TO THE COLOVR
AND PERfection, to whom it may be profitable, and to whom harmefull.
I Have heard it reported, by men of good judgment, that there is paid out of
England and Ireland, near the value of two hundred thousand pounds every year
for Tobacco; and that the greatest part thereof is bought for ready money. Sure
I am, that when our Englishmen for these seven or eight years last past,
traded for it at Trinidado, or in Orenoque, that great store of Gold, Silver,
Coin, and plate was carried hence, and given to the Spaniard there in
exchange. For so greedy were our English of the Indian Tobacco; as where in the
beginning of our traffic there, some years since, the Spaniards (as in all
new plantations) were pressed with all sorts of wants; and had neither clothes
to cover them, nor shoes to tread on, nor bread to eat; and did therefore
exchange their Tobacco for Fish, Wine, Aqua-vitae, all sorts of lasting food,
for woollen stockins, hats, thread, hatchets, and the like: they became in a
short time so cloyd with all these commodities, as nothing (some Silks, and
Cloth of Silver and Gold excepted) but ready Money, and Silver plate could
content them.

This Trade therefore, where the Treasure of this land is vented for smoke,
cannot but greatly prejudice the Commonweal: which although it were in some
sort tolerable, by reason that many ships and Mariners were employed, and
that thereby we kept our knowledge of the West Indies, and bred many
sufficient Mariners: yet seeing the Spaniards have now utterly banished our
Merchants, and put all to the sword, or to a more cruel death, which they can
master, or betray in those parts: I have thought good, as well for the keeping
within the Land of the Treasure before spoken of, then carried into the Indies,
and now into Spain, as for other respects hereafter remembered; to instruct
those of our Nation how to sow, plant and perfect this drugge.

For besides the ill exchange made for this fantastical merchandise, and
besides, the extreme rate, and price of the Indian Tobacco; of which the
greatest part is sold for ten times the value of pepper, and the best of it,
weight for weight, for the finest silver; it is hard to find one pound weight
in five hundred, that is not sophisticate. The black color which it has, and
for which our Shoppe-keepers praise it, is Artificial: yea all the Tobacco
(the leaves of Hispaniola excepted, which we call Saint Domingo Tobacco) is
noynted and slubbered over with a kind of juice, or syrope, made of
Salt Water, of the dregs or filth of Sugar, called Malasses, or black honey,
Guiana pepper, and leeze of Wine; to which in some places they add a red berry
called Anotto, and other tawn^ Berries, with which the Indians paint their
bodies, and their beds. This they do to give it color and gloss, to make it
the more merchantable, and to give one and the same countenance to all their
rotten, withered, and ground-leaues, which they wrappe up in the middle of their
wreathes, covering them over on the outside with one that is good.

Of this Tobacco, painted with unwholesome Berries, there has been great store
brought into England of late, in which the redness and Art was manifest: so
has there been vented a kind of filthy leaf, sold by the Portugalles
residing in London, the same being made up in rolls of pounds and half
pounds.

By these Aditaments is the nature and operation of the Tobacco changed, and
the Herb made unhealthful, and extreme dangerous: for it is well known,
that how wholesome and medicinable soever hunnie it self may be, yet the water
of hunnie is stark poison; and although Indian Pepper, scumme of Sugar, or the
dregs or leeze of Wine, and the rest, may be wholesome enough some way used:
yet to take them into the head in fume, cannot but be greatly offensive and
prejudicial. But this is not the worst: for since the Spaniards have observed,
that the English respect but two things chiefly in Tobacco, to wit, the color,
and the biting in the nose, they have added poison to the painting, and
anointed the leaves of their Tobacco with common sublimate; by which, though
it do not work at the instant; yet may the one half of all the Gentlemen of
England, and many thousands of others be easily poisoned in one year.

For it is known to many that there has been Tobacco brought out of Spain,
with dissolved sublimate, which every man knows to be poison, and no way so
dangerously ministered without suspicion, as by fume.

The natural color of Tobacco is a deep yellow, or a light tawnie* and when
the Indians themselves sold it us for Knives, Hatchets, Beads, Belles, and like
merchandise, it had no other complexion, as all the Tobacco at this day has,
which is brought from the coast of Guiana, from Saint Vincents, from Saint
Lucia, from Dominica, and other places, where we buy it but of the natural
people; and all these sorts are clean, and so is that of St. Domingo, where
the Spaniards have not yet learned the Art of Sophistication.

There is also a sort of Caraccas Tobacco, which the Indians make up, and sell
to the Spaniards, which is wholesome enough; but there comes little of it into
England

Now besides these harmefull mixtures, if our English which delight in Indian
Tobacco, had seen how the Spanish slaves make it up, how they dress their
sores, and pockie ulcers, with the same unwashed hands with which they slubber
and annoint the Tobacco, and call it sauce Per los perros Luteranos, for
Lutheran dogs; they would not so often draw it into their heads and through
their noses as they do: yea many a filthy savor should they find therein, did
not the smell of the hunny master it; which smell every man may plainly
perceive that takes of the black role Tobacco, brought from Orenoque,
Trinidado, and elsewhere.

To the end therefore, as I have already said, that the treasures exchanged for
Tobacco, may be kept within the Land; that those that delight therein may have
it at a better rate, and to avoid the danger of the Spanish mixtures, I have
hereunder set down certain observations, by the help of which all that are
disposed to plant Tobacco in England, may assuredly bring the same to strength
and perfection: yea to strength exceeding all that is brought from the Indies.

Now the first thing that you are to take care for, must be the soil: of which
the ground naturally fertile, is the best, and that which has not borne any
other but grass: for if you sow your seed in ground enriched with dung,
except you stay two year at least, til the dung and the vapor thereof be
consumed, your Tobacco will retain the savor of it.

If you sow it where Cabbage and Turnips have been lately sown; those roots
will also infect your Tobacco with their smell. Nay you must take care that
your ground be not ouer-far: for the fattest grounds bring forth so thick and
so rugged a leaf, and so filled with moisture, as it will never be brought to
any color, never to any strength, nor never burn well in the pipe: A good
soil, neither too rich nor too poor, is the best, and the best help to
better the barren, is dung of sheep.

The seeds which you are to sow, are of two kinds, the male and female; the
male is the lesser leaf, and bears a yellow flower; of which kind is that of
Brasill, which the people of the land call Petun.

The female brings a very large leaf, and far larger and longer in England,
and in France, then in the Indies; by reason of their sandy grounds, and want
of rain there; and it bears a pale incarnate flower. If this latter kind
would ripen in England, in certainty it would yield far more profit to the
planters, it requires less labor in the gathering, withering, and making up:
and being ripe, it will come to a perfect tawny color, without any other Art
then the stouing: but the lesser leaf is generally the stronger, and subject
to less hazard then the greater.

In all the months between September and April you may cast your seed into
the ground: for as that seed which falls of it self in the end of September,
and lies as it falls uncovered, does grow and thrive as well as that which
is sown in January, February, or March: so does the last sowing in April
prosper as well, and grow as soon ripe as any of the rest. When it is sown it
must be covered but thinly with earth: for if you rake too much earth over it,
it will come up too late to ripen for that year.

If the Spring be dry, you must water it often to bring it out of the ground:
your water must be river or pond water; for that of wells is too cold, except
you set it all the day in the Sun.

After your seeds are grown up to a stalk of three inches high, you must
take them up and replant them, leaving two foot between each plant of the
lesser kind, and three foo^^ between each plant of the greater. If you leave
your plants so long on the ground ere you set them abroad, that the stalk have
six inches in length, then must you either bury in the ground four of the
six inches, or else they will hang the head, and be long ere they recover: and
having set them in so deep you bury that part of the stalk which would bring
out your fairest and strongest leaves: you must therefore replant as soon as
you have a stalk able to be set abroad.

You must also take care to water your plants once a day: in the morning, if
the Spring be cold; in the evening if it be warm; otherwise they will
wither, or stand long ere they recover.

After they are grown a foot high, or somewhat more, they will offer to knob,
and cast out little buttons for seed; which they will do the sooner if you
sow them in the increase of the Moon, which you must avoid. These knobbes you
must every day nippe off, so must you do all the by-branches that it casts
out, and all the stalks but one that shoots out of the same root: you must
leave but one stalk, and upon it not above 8 or 10 leaves. This pruning must
be continued from the time that your Tobacco begins to yield shuttes and
buttons for seed, even to the time that you gather it: which if you shall
neglect, coveting to have many stalks, because many leaves, your Tobacco will
be weak and worth nothing.

Your next and greatest care must be, your patience to attend the ripening:
for if you gather your leaves before they change color on the stalk, they
will be good for nothing. Your corn and all other fruits and grains may teach
you this, that nothing has any great virtue where nature is prevented. When
your leaves be toward ripening, they will be full of yellow spots, which you
shall best discern if you hold a leaf between you and the light.

And yet you must not so love your own as to take it green: for if when you
cut it and dry it, how strong soever it prove in the taking of it, the
greatness shows that either it wants ripeness or fermentation; it must look
yellow at the least, otherwise it may prove equally harmefull with that which
is sophisticate. I must also advise you, not to slubber your English with Mel
rosarum, and other trumpery, as many of our own Artificers do, thereby to bring
it to the Indian color: it is an impious practice to play with the health of
men, and to make profit by their destruction. Your English Tobacco if you give
it time to ripen, and time to ferment, will change color, and cast off all her
naughty and unwholesome moisture, and change her green garment for that which
is perfect yellow or tawny, without any art or addition.

When you have gathered the ripe leaves; for all will not be ripe at once, you
may lay them in the Sun for two or three hours, otherwise they will be so
brickle, as they will break in the stringing: and if the weather be cloudy,
then you may leave them in your baskets two or three days, and then string
them upon thread, and so hang them in a close room, where no wind enters, or
lay them on a clean boorded floor, till they wither and become yellowish,
which they will do in 10, 12, or 14 days, but you may not ouer-dry them; for
then they will not sweat and change color.

When they are thus withered, but not dried to crumble, you must stoue them in
heaps, in a heat somewhat stronger then a hot-house, and like unto the heat
of an Oven after the bread drawn: for if your heat be too great, it will
burn, if too little, it will require a long time in their sweating, or
fermentation, ere they be brought to perfection. But if you suffer your leaves
to be perfect ripe ere you gather them, then they will ferment in a short time,
and obtain a perfect Indian color, I mean the natural Indian color, though
not the artificial and black. He that wears cloth to the end it was
invented for, to wit, to defend him from cold, and wet, cares more for the
goodness then the color: howsoever it is better to accept of our own with
some little fault, then to use the India with a great deal of filthiness.

In the mean time, and until we have store of our own, I advise my
Contrymen to take the leaf of Saint Domingo, or the leaves of Dominica, and
of the Islands adjoining, or those Indian leaves that are of a deep yellow, or
slight tawny, which colors are natural, and forbear the black which is
foul, the dyed Tobacco, which is red, and the leaf brought in by the
Portugalles, and the like slubbered stuff.

The Tobacco which comes from the Barmuda is cast away either by neglecting to
prune it, or else because they nourish ouer-many leaves on one stalk, which
they do either out of Ignorance, or for that they cover to have the greater
quantity, or otherwise; because, as I hear, they imitate the Spaniards in
iuicing it: that place would otherwise give us that which is excellent, and so
would Virginia.

For the rest, after you have taken your Tobacco out of your stoue, you must
layit abroad some three or four days: for if you make it up too moist, it
will grow moldy.

For conclusion, because there has been much dispute about this herb,
whether it be wholesome or harmfull: I will let my Countrymen know, what by
long experience, and conference with others, I find.

It is taken in all America, even from Canada to the straights of Magellan, in
all Africa upon the coast, from Barbary to the Cape of good hope, and so till
you come to the mouth of the red sea; it is also used in most of all the
kingdoms of the East Indies.

The Spaniards and Indians of the West give us three principal reasons why
they use it: the first is because it opens the body, and lets out the heat by
the pores which is praeter naturam within them: the second is, the consumption
and avoiding of superfluous moisture wherewith they are filled by eating of
fruits abundantly, by drinking of water, and in all the Inland Countries for
want of salt: the third is, because it stays both hunger and thirst, and does
refresh them after great travail and toil: these be the general virtues and
known to all: but the Spanish Physicians, their Priests, and others that are
learned, find somewhat else, and of more importance in this herb: for they
use a confection of Tobacco in all Callentures or burning fevers, and they take
it in smoke to defend them in long nauigations from the scuruy, and they cure
with it all sores and ulcers: yea it is certain, that the juice of Tobacco,
mixed with a little seawater, does resist the venom of poisoned arrows,
wherewith the Spaniards (how slight soever the hurt be) are without such a
help wounded to death. The Brasilians say that it is cordial, and they also
take it to stay hunger and thirst when they travel and want sustenance. The
people of the South-parts of Virginia esteem it exceedingly, and so do the
rest: they say that God in the creation did first make a woman, then a man,
thirdly great maize, or Indian wheat, and fourthly, Tobacco: they use it for
the curing of wounds, and in smoke as we do; and they are superstitiously led
to believe that when they are in danger of drowning, in foul wether, that if
they cast Tobacco into the water, that the billow will fall, L. 1. Simplicium
medicament. ex nouo orb dilatorum.
and grow less. Monardus the Spaniard commends it in all pains of the head,
growing by defluctions or windy vapors, in the tooth-ake occasioned by cold
rume, in all diseases of the breast, old coughes, asmaticall passions, and the
like, in all pains of the joints, and swellings, if the leaves roasted under
imbers be often applied; which the Indian women administer to their children
for the coldness of their stomach, and windiness. The same Author affirms,
that in the suffocation of the matrix, it is a present remedy, if the leaves
made warm be applied to the navel or bottom of the belly; in all green
wounds and ulcers, and in the gangrene he prizeth it above all other
vegetables: yea he affirms that an experience was made in the presence of
King Philip the second of Spain, upon a dog poisoned. These be Monardus his
words, as I find them in Clusius, Rex ipse Catholicus, eius vires experiri
volens, Cani vulnus infligi iussit in gutture, and toxico quo ven^^atores
vtuntur, illini; and paulo post foliorum Tobacci succum satis copiose
instillari, and ipsa folia trita super vulnus ligari: liberatus est canis non
sine omnium admiratione. The Catholic King willing to make trial of the
virtue of it, caused a dog to have a wound made in his throat, and to be
anointed with poison which the hunters use; and a while after he made the juice
of Tobacco to be plentifully powered into it, and the bruised leaves to be bound
upon the wound, and the dog was healed, to the no small admiration of all that
were present. The same Author commends this herb for the cure of the Polypus,
and does avow that he himself has cured it with the juice of Tobacco.

Clusius in his experience affirms, Fol. 310.
that in all old ulcers putride, and of a malign quality, in the gangren, in
the scabbes, clouds in the eyes, etc. he has used the unguent of Tobacco with
happy success.

Mr Gerald in his history of plants, or great herball, tells us, that the
dropsy has been cured with the juice of Tobacco; and in the same book, Fol.
288.
he teaches the composition of an unguent made with the lesser or male
Tobacco: which book, because the poorer sort are not able to buy, and that the
said Gerald does so highly commend the use of this herb, I thought good to
take it out word for word, for the common good of all poor people needing such
a remedy, and these be his words. I do make hereof an excellent balsame to cure
deep wounds and punctures, etc. which balsame does bring up the flesh from the
bottom very speedily, and also heal simple cuts in the flesh, according to
the first intention, that is, to glue or soder the lips of the wound together,
not procuring matter or corruption unto it, as is commonly seen in the healing
of wounds. Take (says he) oil of roses, oil of Saint John's wort, of either
one pint, the leaves of Tobacco, stamped small in a stone mortar, two pound,
boil them together to the consumption of the juice, strain it, and put it to
the fire again, adding thereunto of Venice Turpentine two ounces, of Olibanum
and Mastic, of either half an ounce in most fine and subtle powder, which may
at all times make it into an unguent or salve, by putting thereunto wax and
rosin, to give unto it a stiff body. He further says, that the juice or
distilled water of the lesser leaf is very good against catharres, the
dizinesse of the head, and rhumes that fall down to the eyes, against the pain
called the Migrame, if either you apply it to the temples, or take one or two
green leaves, or the dry leaf moystened in wine, and warmed on Imbers, and
apply it. Many notable medicines are made hereof against the old and inueterate
cough, aagainst asthmatical and pectorall griefs, which if I should set down
at large, would require a peculiar volume. So far Gerald.

For the taking of it in smoke, if the Tobacco be clean, and not poisoned with
juices, and other Art, I know that it is an excellent remedy for the head-ake,
for the vertigo and dizines of the head, for moist and watery stomakes, it
prevails against the rumes and defluctions, and all the pains of the joints
thereby occasioned, and against all affections of the head, watering of the
eyes, and tooth-ake, that it keeps off the gout and sciatica, and takes away
the redness of the face, that at sea it preserves those that take it both
from the Calenture or burning Fever, and from the Scuruie, that it opens
obstructions, and is exceeding profitable in the falling sickness. The syrope
is a good vomit, and so is a draught of white or renish wine, wherein so much
of the leaf as weighs six pence has been steeped all night: the oil that
droppeth out of a foul pipe, kills Tetters, and all of that kind.

The Hearbalists and other Physicians make diverse kinds or species of this
Tobacco; they commend that which bears the great leaf, and pale incarnate
flower, and call it the true Tobacco, a second sort they call Petum, and a
third Nicosian.

Others (and think they speak learnedly) call our English of the lesser
leaf, yellow Henbane, or Hoscyamus Luteus, and the greater Hoscyamus
Peruuianus; yea they make a difference between the Tobacco of Paria and
Trinidado, and that of Peru; although I am well assured, that there was never
any one pound of Peru Tobacco seen in England or in Europe. But if the herb
which we call Sage, differ in kind from the same herb, because the French call
it Searge, and the Latins Saluia, and so all other herbs, which diverse
nations call diversely: then does the Petum, the Nicosian, and the Tobacco
differ; otherwise there is nothing between them: But the greatness and
littleness which we distinguish by male and female, as in many other herbs we
do the like: for the Spaniards which first found this plant in the Isle
Tobaque, did therefore call it after the name of that Island: and it is true,
that because there is no better soil in the world, and that it has rain and
heat sufficient, the Tobacco there growing is very large. Of this very kind
(found every where in America) it was that John Nicot, Clusius and Seres
Theuet. Cos. genesis
born in Nismes in Languedoc, and Ambassador in Portugal for Henry the 2d of
France, sent of the seed to Queen Katherine of Medicis, after called, Queen
Mother of France, whereupon it was by some called, Queen Mothers herb, by
others it was and is still called Nycosian, and yet Theuet vaunts that he sent
it into France 10 years before Nicots Embassage. Now as the Brasilians call
this Tobacco, Petum; so in the West Indies it is called Vicielt, says Monardus:
and Ouiedus. lib. 11 c. 5. says, that in Hispaniola it is called Perebecenut,
Simp. Medicam.
the Guianians call it Tamoi, other Nations Tekel, and the Virginians Opoak,
and it is every where, and in England it self, greater, according to the
soil: yea it diffe^s in taste, thickenesse, largeness, and goodness almost
in every Garden wherein it is planted.

True it is, notwithstanding that there are found manifest differences in the
male and female, or in the greater or the less, both in flower and largeness,
though both of one kind, the same being found in many Herbs, Plants, and
Trees besides.

Now for those that make Tobacco a kind of Hoscryamus, because it stupifieth
as Hoscryamus, or Henbane does, they may as well say that Opiu^ is also a kind
of Tobacco, or Tobacco a kind of Opium, or that Stramonium is of that species
which benummeth more then either Tobacco or Opium. For the rest, this is true,
that as it is usually taken in England, it has more of the ill then of the
good. For those that take Tobacco with wine, do absolutely alter the property
of it, and make it the Artificer of many ill accidents and diseases, I mean
all those that drink wine between meals, and presently after the taking of
it. For where God has given this herb for a remedy to those poor people
that want both wine, spice, and salt, that do often swim rivers, and diue
under water, that go naked, and are beaten with showers, that feed abundantly
upon fruits, that suffer hunger and thirst, that live in a region violently
hot: we in this part of the world use Wine of all sorts, and all sorts of
Spices, we eat salt with our meat, and powder our flesh and fish with it, and
thereby dry up, and suck out the corrupt and harmefull moisture that it has:
we that, besides Wine, have strong Beer, and strong Ale, that cover our bodies
with garments, and are pressed with cold for three parts of the year, do not
need any such drying fume at all.

It is true that those that have decaying bodies, those that are of years, and
oppressed with moisture and fleame, those that are subject to rhumes and the
cough, that have cold stomachs, and are inclined to the gout, or have it, or
that are subject to any of the imperfections before named, for those it is a
singular remedy. But it destroies all our youth that take it without cause, and
every hour of the day, it makes them tender and not able to endure the air,
it makes them dull and sleepy, brings them to the rhume and tooth-ake, marres
their teeth, except they cleanse them often, begets in them a drouth, and
consequently a desire to drink: yea and an entrance to drunkenness it self:
for many of them finding some little sickness in their stomachs when they
take strong Tobacco, do presently drink of the strongest Wines: the Tobacco
opens the body, and makes way, by which the wine inuadeth the liver, and dries
it up: yea taken in that manner with strong drinks it consumes the radical
moisture, and hastneth on old age: the Indians do therefore forbid it the
children, till they have taken wives and have had children, as we in England
were wont to forbid maids and young men the use of Wine: for though Tobacco
stir the appetite, yet is it no friend to generation, used with wine as
before remembered. He that desires further knowledge of this Herb, let him
read Oliver de Serres, L. of Pradel in his Agriculture, and Car. Stephanus
upon the same subject, lib. 2. c. 76.

FINIS.

