PEr legi Tractatum hunc De Templis, in quo nihil reperio sanae fidei, aut
bonis moribus contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate imprimatur.

Tho: Wykes R.P. Epis: Land: Cap: domest:
Ex aedibus Fulham: April: 13. 1638.
De Templis, A TREATISE OF TEMPLES: Wherein is discovered the Ancient manner of
Building, Consecrating, and Adorning of CHURCHES.

LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop, for Thomas Alchorn, at the Green Dragon in S.
Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

To the thrice noble and right pious Knights, Sir Paul Pindar, and Sir John
Wolstenholme.
Most Worthy Knights,
YOur loves to Churches is so great, that I presume this little Treatise, for
its arguments sake, will easily find your favorable acceptance. The which I
humbly present unto your view: together with my best service to your commands,

Your humble servant R. T.

The Contents of the Chapters.
Chap. 1. OF the word Temple, and why not used by the Primitive Christians. pa.
1 Chap. 2. Diverse names of the Temples of the Gentiles. 7 Chap. 3. Diverse names
of the Jewish Temples. 11 Chap. 4. Diverse names of Christian Temples. 16 Chap.
5. The definition of a Temple. 33 Chap. 6. Of the form or figure of Temples.
38 Chap. 7. Of the parts of Christian Temples. 50 Chap. 8. Of the situation of
Temples, and why Eastward? 59 Chap. 9. Of the Rites, and Ceremonies, used at
the Dedication of Heathen Temples. 73 Chap. 10. Of the Dedication of the Jews
Temples. 82 Chap. 11. Of the Consecration of Christian Temples. 89 Chap. 12.
Whether yearly Feasts observed upon the days of Dedication of Christian
Churches, be lawful? 98 Chap. 13. Of the ends, for which Temples were built.
108 Chap. 14. How the whole world may be said to be a Temple. 114 Chap. 15.
How every particular Christian may be said to be the Temple of God. 129 Chap.
16. How the Body of Christ, and how the Blessed Virgin Mother, may besaid to
be the Temples of God. 134 Chap. 17. Of the multitude, and splendor of
Heathen Temples. 139 Chap. 18. Of the Magnificence of the Jewish Temples. 157
Chap. 19. Of the Builders of Christian Temples. 169 Chap. 20. Of adorning
Christian Temples. 176 Chap. 21. A decent form of building and adorning a
Church. 183 Chap. 22. Of Burying in Churches. 204 Chap. 23. Of the Privileges
and Immunities of Temples. 214 Chap. 24. Of the right use of Temples, and how
they are abused. 220 Chap. 25. Of the rewards which such receive, who built and
adorn Churches. 229
ERRATA.
Page 3 for id est, r that is, p 17 r locus quo, etc. p 25 r donours p 53 r quo
conditur, and quo Ponitur. p 56 r n irn, p 76 r Capitolinus, p 96 r
celebrandas, 105 r in all times p 115 r erected, p 116 r opinion, p 120 r
which, p 207 and 213 r didaskaleon.

A TREATISE OF TEMPLES.
CHAP. I. Of the word Temple, and why not used by the Primitive Christians.
TEmpla dicta quasi tecta ampla, so Isidor: Great and ample buildings, are
called Temples: according with that of Arnobius, Templum est nescio quid
immane, atque amplum. For in old times, only those buildings which were of
great, and magnificent structure, were called Temples. So the Capitol at Rome,
the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, of Serapis at Alexandria, of Minerva at Athens,
were called Temples, being all huge, and stately buildings.

Rodulphus Agricola derives In 2. declam. Seneca.
the word; a templando, because the ancient heathens; before they began to
build, templabantur, id est, did curiously view, and observe the auguries of
the South-sayers, that they might more prosperously succeed in the erection.

Cornelius a Lapide, derives In 2. Cor. cap. 6. v. 16.
it a tuendo, and amplifies his derivation, from the double signification of
tueri, to see, and defend, Deus enim (says he) and tuetur and intuetur, God
has always an Eye upon his Church, and will surely defend it, from all its
enemies.

The Primitive Christians, are said not to call their Churches, Temples; and
Cardinal Lib. 3. de cultu Sanctor.
Bellarmine, gives this reason for it; because the Jewish sacrifices offered in
their Temple, were as yet fresh in memory, and might with the name seem still
to remain: as also because the Gentiles, called the places where they worshipped
their Idols by the same names. So that you shall not often find (if I mistake
not) in ancient Christian writers, the word Temple, unless signifying the
Temples of the heathen, until the time of Constantine the Great, by whose
munificent piety, stately, and beanteous Temples were every where erected, the
Temples of Idols destroyed, and the Christians enjoyed public liberty,
throughout the whole world, then also was the name Priest, more frequently
applied to the Christians, as appears in the writings of S. Hilarie, S.
Ambrose, S. Augustine, and others.

Laelius Bisciola is of opinion, Lib. 17. cap 19.
that the Primitive Christians had no Temples, their poverty was not able to
erect so stately, and glorious buildings, as were called Temples. Nor if they
had been able, would the Gentiles have suffered them, for we read in
Ecclesiasticque stories, that they pulled down their humble, and low
Oratories: Besides, it was not lawful, for any to build a Temple, unless the
ground were first hallowed by the Idolatrous, and superstitious ceremonies, of
the Augurs, which the Christians could by no means endure.

CHAP. II. Diverse names of the Temples of the Gentiles.
DElubra, were sacred structures of the Gentiles, so called (as Isidor says) a
diluendo, for they had fountains belonging to them, in the which they were
wont to wash, before they entered into them, for which reason (says he) well
might our Temples be called Delubra, at whose entrance stands the sacred Font, by
whose water, we are cleans'd in Baptism from our sins. But those Temples have
been so polluted, by the sacrilegious Idolatry of the heathens, that all
Christian writers, (unless the Poets for verse sake) abhor the very word.

Fana, were a kind of Temples, so called, a fando, says Festus, from certain
words uttered by the Priests, when the bounds of the ground whereon they stood
were first limited. Others think they were so called a Faunis, from their Gods
Fauni, to whom they were dedicated.

Saint Paul speaking of 1 Cor. 8. 10
the Temples of Idols, calls them Idolia, receptacles of vain Idols, and
feigned deities, in which they were kept, and worshipped, and in which they
kept feasts with the meat which was offered in sacrifice to the Idols, of which
kind of feastings, Herodotus speaks, and also Virgil. Lib 8. Aeneid.


The Turks have their Fana, some greater than others, all which in their
language are called Moschits or Mosquitas, the greatest of all, is that of
Sancta Sophia at Constantinople, of which more hereafter.

In Japan, the chiefest Temple (they say) of 13000. is called Denix, from the
name of their Idol Denichi, which they worship under the form of the Sun, the
Moon, and the Elements.

CHAP. III. Diverse names of the Jewish Temples.
THe Jews, before Salomons Temple was built, had their Tabernacle, which they
called the house of the Lord. So we read, how that Elcana brought 1 Samuel 1. 32.
Samuel to the house of the Lord in Silo, where is meant, the Tabernacle, for
the Temple was not then built. The word is a diminutive a Taberna, which
signifies any house, fit for habitation, a tabulis, because they were usually
enclosed with boards, but though built of other matter, custom still retained
the name.

The Jews Tabernacle had the form of a Temple, but was made as the Tents and
Tabernacles wherein the Jews dwelt at that time when Moses built it.

The first part of the Tabernacle, in which was the Candlestick, the Table,
etc. was called the Sanctuary, and into this first Tabernacle, all the Priests
might enter, and at all times, but into the second, which was called Sanctum
Sanctorum, might the high Priest only come, and that but once every year, not
without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the
people, as we read Hebrews 9. 2. A sanguine, from blood, says Isidor, comes
the word Sanctum, for the ancients accounted nothing holy, Nisi quod hostiae
sanguine esset consecratum, unless it were hallowed, with the blood of a
Sacrifice.

That most sacred place of the Tabernacle which was called Sanctum Sanctorum,
the holiest of holies, because it contained in it, the most holy things which
apperteined to the Jewish religion, was also called Oraculum, the Oracle, from
the Divine answers, which therein were uttered by the voice of an Angel.

The Jews had also, besides the Temple of Solomon, certain other edifices
dedicated to the worship of God, which were called Synagogues, from the Greek
word (...) to assemble or gather together, in these houses it was lawful to
pray, to preach, or dispute, but not to offer sacrifices. The Temple was as it
were the Cathedral Church, the Synagogues as petty parish Churches belonging
to it. The far distance of the Temple, was the first occasion of building
these Synagogues; to which those Jews that dwelt in remote places, might
repair in stead of the Temple, like to our Chapels of ease in great Parishes.

We often read in holy Scriptures the Temple called the house of God, the
house of the Lord: and our blessed Savior, from the chiefest service men do
in it, called it Domus Orationis, Mat. 21. 13.
the house of prayer.

CHAP. IV. Diverse names of Christian Temples.
AS Synagoga amongst the Jews, so the word Ecclesia, amongst Orthodox
Christian writers, signifies not only the Congregation of the people of God,
but the place also where the Assembly meets. Ecclesia dicitur (says Saint
Augustine) quo Ecclesia congregatur, the place where the Catholic Church meets
together, is called a Church.

Basilica, is often read in Saint Angustin, and other Fathers, for a Temple:
Bellarmin says, that Lib. 3. cap. 4. de cult. Sa^ctor.
the same place may be called a Temple, as it is destined to Gods worship, and
a Basilica, as it is the ornament of some Saints Sepulcher, and so, is both a
Temple to God, and a Tomb to his Martyrs. Kings Palaces, were of old called
Basilicae, from asileu, a King, and the sacred Temples, dedicated to the King
of Kings, may well be so called. Basilicae were also certain buildings
adjoining to Market places, where the Judges sat, and decided Law cases,
mentioned by Plinius secundus in one of his Epistles, Descendebam in Basilicam
Iulianam, sedebant Iudices. etc. I went into the Julian Basilica, where the
Judges sat. These Basilicae, says Baronius, were Martyrol. Ro^.
by a happy Metamorphosis, changed into Christian Churches, and still retained
their old name, as may be gathered by that of Ausonius In gratiaru^ action pro
consolatu.
to Gratian: Basilicae, olim negotiis plenae, nunc votis, votisque pro tua
salute susceptis: Those Basilicae, which erst while were throngd with public
negotiations, are now filled with prayers, and wishes, for your Majesty's
prosperity. And the agreement in form of the ancient Christian Churches, with
these Basilicae makes the opinion very probable; for the Basilicae were diverse
galleries or porticues, joined together, standing upon columns, equally
distant, as Vitruvius teaches.

Churches built in remembrance of some Saint or Martyr, were called Memoriae;
Saint Augustine uses this word often, in his book of the City of God, Memoria
Lib. 22. cap 8.
Martyrum ibi est Mediolanensium, Gervasii, and Protasii: There (says he) is
the Memorial of Gervase and Protase, both Martyrs of Millan. And elsewhere,
Nos Martyribus nostris, non Templa sicut Diis, sed Memorias, sicut hominibus
mortuis, quorum apud Deum, spiritus vivunt fabricamus: We erect not Temples to
our Martyrs, as if we thought them gods, but Memorials, as to men whose
souls, we are sure, live with God.

The same Temples which the Latins call Memoriae, the Greeks call Martyria,
which at first were only those Churches, in which the bodies of holy Martyrs
were interred. Afterward other Churches shared in the name, so that famous
Temple of the Resurrection of our Savior, at Jerusalem, (built by the singular
care, and piety of Eustace, a Priest of Constantinople, as Saint Hierome
writes) was called a Martyrie, because is was a Testimonial of our blessed
Saviors Resurrection.

Christian Churches are also called Tituli, so Prudentius, Part alia titulum
Pauli, etc. now the chief Churches only, which in Rome belong to the Lords
Cardinals, are called Tituli.

There are in Rome certain Churches called Diaconiae, Deaconries belonging to
the Cardinal Deacons.

They were at first, houses of public hospitality, having Oratories adjoining
to them, in which the Deacons ministered to the necessities of the poor
fatherless children, and widows.

Parochia or rather Paraeciae, (...).
are Parish Churches, ordained for a certain number of neighboring
inhabitants, who are to receive from the Parish Priest, the holy Sacraments,
and all things else, needful for the Salvation of souls.

A little place, ordained only for prayers, is called Oratorium, an Oratory,
in Greek, (...), or (...), a house of Prayer.

Oratories adjoining to Temples, are called Cubicula, Closets. Pope Leo is
reported by Anastasius, to have ordained diverse Clergy men, to be Cubicularii
Keepers, or Clerks of the Closet.

A Chaunterie so called a Cantando, is a Church or Chapel, endowed with
Lands, or other yearly revenues, for the maintenance of one or more Priests
daily, to sing Mass for the soul of the donour and such others as they did
appoint.

The heathens had certain sacred places, which they called Sacella, and those
little Churches, or rather parts of great Churches, which are divided from the
body of the Church, by iron bars, or latices, are by the Christians so called.

These Sacella are also called Capellae, Chapels, of which Honorius in his
Sermon of Saint Martin, says thus; Sancti Martini Capa, Francorum Regibus ad
bella euntibus, pro signo anteferebatur, and per eam hostibus victis, victoria
potiebatur, and Custodes illius Capae, usque hodie Capellani appellantur: The
French Kings (says he) had Saint Martins Cap carried before them to battle,
for an ensign; and those clergy men, who carried it, were called Capellani
Chaplains, and the place where it was kept, was called Capella.

The Greeks call their Temple (...), the holy place, they called it also
(...), because it is Gods house where he dwells, though some think rather from
the Hebrew word Naghan, which signifies beauty, since nothing ought to be so
beautiful, as the Temple, whence that of the Psalmist. That our daughters may
be as the corner stones polished after the similitude of a Temple.

We call our greatest Churches Cathedrals, because they belong ad Cathedram
Episcopi, to the Episcopal Seat; they are also called Ecclesiae Episcopales
and Baptismales, also Mother Churches. For in the primitive times (either in
imitation of Saint John's baptizing of Christ in the river Jordan, or rather
quia nondum Oratoria vel Lib. 2. cap. 14. Eccl. hi.
Baptistoria in ipso exordio nascentis Ecclesiae poterant aedificari; as
venerable Bede thinks, because they were unprovided of Fonts and Churches,
therefore) the rites of Baptism were performed in rivers and fountains; but
afterward, it was ordered that Baptisterials, or Fonts should be placed in the
great Church of every City, wherein the Bishop himself resided, and the right
of Baptism belonged to the Cathedral Church only, unless in case of
necessity. And these Churches were therefore called Mother Churches. Because
that as the people in their mothers womb were borne men, so in the Fonts of
Baptism as in the Churches womb, they were borne Christians. In after ages
(because of the far distances of the Cathedral Churches) the right of
Baptism was transferred to Parochial Churches; which Churches in regard of
the Chapels of ease, and private Oratories belonging to them, may now also be
called Baptismall and Mother Churches, to whom only belong the right of
Sepulture and Baptism.

We Englishmen, call the Temple the Church; in the North parts of England the
Kyrk, from the Greek word kuriakon, or kuriake, the Lords house: and Cedrenus
speaking of the Emperor Constantin, uses this very word, (...), he makes
Temples or Churches, to the honor of God. It is also used by the Laodicean
Counsel, (...). It is not fit to keep feasts in the Churches. And Saint
Hierom. often uses the Latin word, Dominicum, or Dominica for the Temple.

There are certain Churches called Minsters, quasi Monasters a Monasterio, as
some think, because the Canons in former times, lived a Monastique life, as
appears by their houses, and cloisters, and had all things in common, like as
the Primitive Christians had. And hitherto of the names of Temples.

CHAP. V. The definition of a Temple.
A Temple is by some thus defined, Templum est aedificium Deo consecratum, it
is an edifice, consecrated to God. And in this definition is contained the
whole nature of any Temple.

It is an edifice, whether made of wood, or of stone, as marble, Touch, etc. or
of metals, as brass, silver, gold, etc. the word signifies, as well poor, and
mean buildings, as great, and noble. Ara floribus redimita spelunca frondibus
inumbrata: an Altar (says one) decked with flowers or a cave, or grotto, made
of boughs, may be called a Temple.

It is reported of our own Ancestors the old Saxons, that they used to have
public prayers under a Cross, erected in the open fields, which place and
structure was to them a Temple. Mosest Saxonicae gentis quod in nonnullis
nobilium bonorumque hominum praediis Sanctae Crucis signum Domino dicatum, and
cum magno honor in altum erectum ad commodam diurnae orationis sedulitatem
solent habere. Hodaperic. Wilibaldi.

We read also how the holy Patriarch Jacob, erected Genesis 28. 17.
the stone on which he had slept, for a Temple, and with a seemly reverence
pouring oil upon it, said thus. Quam terribilis est locus iste, etc. How
terrible is this place, it is no other than the house of God, the gate of
heaven.

When we say, it is consecrated to God, we not only distinguish it from all
profane buildings, but also teach the end, for which it was built. And if by
God, we will understand the feigned deities, in this definition may also be
comprehended, the Fana and Delubra, of the heathens, as well as the Temples of
the Jews, and Christians, or any other, who ignorantly worship the true God;
for we read that Saint Paul found an Altar at Act. 17. 23.
Athens, with this inscription, Ignoto Deo, To the unknown God, which God
(Saint Paul says) they ignorantly worshipped. Finally, whether you consider the
matter, form, figure, situation, etc. of Temples, all are in this definition
comprised.

CHAP. VI. Of the form or figure of Temples.
THe form of a Temple, is twofold, either the external form, which is
obvious to every beholder, or the internal form, which bodily eyes, cannot
see. That consists in the figure, and outward workmanship: This in the
dedication. The external form, of which we intend to speak, depending almost
wholly on the fancy of the Architect, has ever been various, and uncertain.
The Gentiles commonly fitted their buildings to the nature of their Gods.
Jupiter Olympius's Temple, was built after the Dorique order, with columns
round about the outsides of it; and by Jupiter was signified the fire, as by
Juno the air, whose Temple they builded after the self-same order, and manner,
intending doubtless thereby, to signify, the great strength of the two
elements, of fire, and air; as also, the vicinity of the nature of air, in
its supreme region to the fire.

Vitruvius says, that the Dorique manner of Lib. 1. 3. 4.
building, being more strong, does best beseem the Temple of the more warlike
and robustious Gods, as Mars and Hercules, etc. But to Flora, Venus, the
Nymphs of the fountains, and the like delicate Godesses, if you build a
Temple, let it be after the Corinthian order, more slender and beautiful, the
Capitols and Freezes, graced with curious leaves and carved flowers. To Deities
of the middle sort, as Juno, Diana, Bacchus, etc. let the Temples be erected
after the Ionique building, which is the mean betwixt the severe grave Dorique
order, and the light slender and effeminate building of Corinth.

Many of the Temples of the Heathen, in the Apostles times, and in the time of
Constantine the great, were converted from Idols, to the worship of the true
God, yet still retained their old figure and shape, Alia falsorum Numinum
Templa, dirui, alia in meliorem Sermon. 3 de verb. Apost.
usum commutari consuevere* as Saint Augustine tells us.

Some Temples of the Heathens were converted to the service of the true God:
Others were quite demolished. We Eusebius. de vit. Constable. Lib. 3.
read, how that the wicked infidels had erected a Temple, in that very place
where our Saviors Sepulcher was, to their impure Goddess Venus, which
Constantin pulled down to the very foundation, commanding also that the stones,
timber, and rubbish of it, should be carried far from that ground.

Saint Greg. in an Epistle Lib. 9. Epist. 71
to Melitus an Abbot, gives command, that Augustine the Bishop (as I suppose)
of Canterbury, and he to whom England owes much for her conversion, should
destroy the Idols in England, but suffer their Temples still to stand: Nam Gens
illa verum Deum cognoscens (says he) ad loca quae consuevit familiarius
concurret, and a little after: Duris mentibus omnia abscindere, impossible
esse non dubium est. Qui locum summum ascendere nititur, gradibus vel passibus,
non saltibus elevatur, etc. And by this, we may guess at the figure of the
Churches, which the primitive Christians first used. The figure most affected
by the ancient heathen, was the round, imitating (as it were) thereby the
Heavens. Of this figure, was Vesta's Temple, built in Rome by Numa, of this
figure was also the famous Pantheon.

Indeed the Temples which the Christians erected from the very foundation, were
of other figure, yet some of them were of the round; such was that stately
Temple of Sancta Sophia builded by the Emperor Constantine, of which Phil:
Lonicerus has this Tom. 1. Chron. Turc. Par. 2. cap. 1.
description; The Temple of Sancta Sophia at Constantinople, excels all the
rest, the roof is vaulted and covered with lead: in figure not unlike the
Pantheon in Rome, but much greater, and higher. It stands upon stately Marble
and Porphyrie pillars, the doors of it are all covered with brass, one of
which is said, to have been made of the wood of Noah's Ark. This Temple (says
he) was built by Constantine the great, but now the Turks have thrown down
the Altars, paintings, and Images of the Christians, and cast their bells into
Ordnance.

Pet: Gregorius Tolozanus Lib. 12. de Rep. cap. 22.
says, that the Apostles themselves gave order, that the body of the Church
should be built long, after the figure of a ship, in which the Bishop should
sit as Pilot, the Deacons as Mariners: The Bishops seat should be placed in the
middle; on the one side, should sit the Priests, and Deacons; on the other side
the Lay men, and the women should be separated from the men, in a place by
themselves.

Constantine beautified the City Antioch, with a most spacious and saire
Church, whose inward part or quire, was of an octangular figure, for the
convenience of many private Oratories belonging to it.

Diverse Churches have many Isles, joined to the body of the Church, like so
many boats, or ships, compacted and tied together; and some think that by this
figure, the Christian builders did desire to express Saint Peter's boat,
warning us, that fail here in this world, amongst so many rocks, and dangers,
to be sure we commit ourselves, to a safe bottom, by whose help, we may at
last arive at our blessed haven, for want of which care, many daily make
shipwreck of their salvation.

We see many Churches built after the figure of a Cross, and without doubt,
the pious builders, did by that figure desire to resemble the Cross on which
CHRIST was Crucified.

CHAP. VII. Of the parts of Christian Temples.
BEllarmine observes Lib. 3. de cult. Sa^ctor. cap. 3.
, that Christian Temples are built with three parts, after the fashion of
Salomons Temple. First there is the portch, which the Greeks call (...), the
Latins Vestibulum. Secondly, there is the (...), the ship or body of the
Church. Thirdly, (...), the quire or Chancell, divided from the body of the
Church, by an ascent of steps and certain cancelli, latices, bars, or
hangings, which part belongs to the Priests only.

Durandus compares Lib. 1. Enchir. cap. 1.
the parts of the Church, to the parts of a man's body; the place where the
Altar stands, to the head, the Cross on either side, to his arms, the body of
the Church, to the rest of his body.

Baronius distinguishes Anno Christi 57. N. 103.
the Church into four parts. viz. the Portch, the Church it self, the
Chancell, and the place most sacred, where the Altar stands.

There is adjoining also to Churches a little house, or room, in which the
Priest prepares himself to do his holy office, called Aedicula Salutatoria,
and Sacrarium, the Sacrary, or Vestry.

Pope Clement is said to have commanded that on either side of Churches, should
be built Pastophoria, little chambers or rooms, into which the relics of the
holy Eucharist, were carried, and in them the sacred vessels, and vestments were
to be kept, Paulinus expresses the use of these places in this distick, Hic
locus est, venera^da penus Epi. 12.
qua conditur, and qua
Ponitur alma sacri pompa Ministerii.


The Greeks agree, much with the Latins, in the figure of their Churches, as
appears by that of Simeon Archbishop of Thessalonica, in his book De Templo.
Our Temples (says he) have three parts, viz. the place before the Temple,
which we call the Church portch, the Temple it self, and the Chancell. Which
threefold division, may put us in mind of the sacred mystery of the blessed
Trinity, as also of the threefold order of holy Angels; besides there is on
earth a threefold distinction of the elect people of God, who are either
Priests, or perfect believers, or public penitents: Further (says he) the
Church Portch, denotes Earth: the Church, Heaven; the Chancell, the things
above the Heavens.

There were in the Greek Churches five places, or stations assigned to the
penitents, which were not diverse parts of the Church, but had their
denominations from the diverse actions performed in them. The first was without
the Church doors, where the Penitents stood weeping and imploring the prayers
of those that went in, or out, called in Latin Fletus.

The second called Auditio, was within the Church doors, where they heard
divine service, and the Scriptures expounded.

The third, Subjectio or Substratio, which was within the body of the Church,
behind the seats, from whence they went forth of the (...). Chryso. Liturg.
Church, with the Catechumeni, when these words were uttered by the Deacon, Qui
Catechumeni sunt, exeant. You that are as yet learning the Principles of
Religion, and are not Baptized, go ye forth of the Church.

The fourth place, was called Consistentia; where having performed Canonical
penance, they stood with the rest of the Congregation, and prayed.

The fifth was Participatio; where with the rest of the faithful (having
brought forth fruits worthy of Repentance) they received the holy Communion.

And thus far of the parts of Christian Temples, which Bellarmine says, are
built after the fashion of Salomons Temple; and some people are so wise, as
they fear lest to build a Christian Church so like Salomons Temple, be
directly to bring in Judaisme. But wiser men than they, know that all which the
Jews did, was not Judaisme, Let them remember that for their comfort.

CHAP. VIII. Of the situation of Temples, and why Eastward?
THe situation of Temples, has respect either to the place on earth, or to the
climate of the Heavens. We read of Temples built in sundry places: Some on the
shore, to Venus and Neptune; some on the tops of Mountains, called in holy
writ, High Places; some in Valleys, others in Fields, in Cities, in dark
Groves, and some under the Earth. But where ever they were built, they all
looked toward the East, and received the light of the rising Sun, at their
upper end, as diverse Authors testify: Perchance the reason why the Gentiles
used this situation was, because they were wont to sing Hymns, and praises to
their Idols, at Sunne-rising. And Plato Lib. 10. de legib.
tells us, that as well Greeks, as Barbarians, at the rising, and setting, of
the Sun and Moon, used often prostrations and adorations. From which custom of
the heathens Clemens takes occasion to blame the laziness of 2 Consti. c. 64.
10
such Christians as came late to Church.

The same position and situation of Temples has ever been in use amongst the
Christians, as the testimony of ancient Authors, besides experience reach us:
Ecclesias Christianorum, Lib. con. Valent.
Orientem amare solitas, says Tertulian, Christian Temples have ever born a
love toward the East. Some write, that it was a tradition of the Apostles,
that in solemn Bellar. de cultu Sancto. lib. 3. cap. 3.
and public prayers, in the Church, all should turn their faces toward the
East, and for that reason, all Churches were built Eastward, unless some few,
which the inconvenience of the place would not permit to be so built, as that
at Antioch, of which Socrates takes special notice, whose Altar was Lib. 5.
cap. 21.
placed at the West.

Diverse other reasons are given for building Christian Temples Eastward, as
because of the early frequenting of Matins by the primitive Christians, which
Tertulian, Clemens, Philo, and Apol. c. 2. lib. de convit. Lib. 10 Epist. 97
Plinius secundus in one of his Epistles to Trajan, and others report, to have
been by them, most exactly and religiously observed. Who when the Sun began to
disperse his rays upon the earth, did then begin to pour forth their souls
to their God, the very situation of the Temple, as it were teaching them, with
what actions they were to begin the day, for no time is so fit to present our
prayers and devotions to the divine Majesty, no time so glorious, as the
morning, no time of the day so well agreeing with our infirmity.

Another reason, why rather to the East, than to any other region of the
Heavens, may be because it has ever been accounted the most excellent part of
the world, from thence the Heavens begin their motions. Thither therefore we
turn our faces, in our prayers, rising as it were from the night of sin, and
forsaking the works of darkness, we implore the Divine goodness, to show the
light of his countenance upon us.

Saint Augustine gives Tom. 4.
this reason, Cum oramus ad Orientem convertimur, non tanquam ibi sit Deus, and
quasi caeteras mundi parts deseruerit, qui Majestate potentiae, ubique
praesens est; sed ut admoneatur animus, ad excellentiorem se convertere, id est
ad Dominum, cum ipsum corpus, quod terrenum, ad corpus excellentius, scilicet
coeleste convertitur. We turn our faces (says he) toward the East, when we
pray, not as if we thought God were there only to be found, whose Majesty is
every where present, but when we turn our earthly bodies, to that glorious
part of the Heavens, our souls may consider the glorious Majesty of that
nature, to which we address our petitions.

Furthermore, God placed the Garden of Paradise in the East; for where the
vulgar translation reads, Plantaverat Deus Paradisum, a principio. Genesis 2.
The Septuagint better according to the original have it, kat natol, Eastward,
thither therefore we turn our faces, says Greg: Nyssen, Lib. 2. de Ora.
like banished men, toward our own Country.

Other reasons may be taken from our blessed Savior, who is called, Lux mundi,
and Sol Iustitiae, John 8.
The light of the world, the Sun of righteousness, Cujus nomen est Oriens,
Zach. 6. 12. S. Hier. transl.
the day spring from above, to him we direct our prayers, from him our souls
receive illumination, motion, life, and being, as the whole world from the
Eastern Sun, receives its light and heat.

The Sanctum Sanctorum of the Jewish Temple was built Westward, and when they
prayed, they turned their faces that way, Ezechiel 8. 16. Those who contrary to
the rites and custom of their Temple, prayed with their faces toward the
East, are said to be guilty of an exceeding great abomination. And indeed well
might their looks be toward the West, who still even to this day in vain,
expect the Messiah, that Sun of righteousness to arise: Well might their faces
be Westward, their Church, and Kingdom, being bending to its eternal night.
But we Christians, firmly believe that our Savior is risen from the dark
night of the grave, his Church shall for ever endure, of his Kingdom shall be
no end.

When our Redeemer hung dying on the Cross, it is very probable that his face
was Westward, and true Christians, says Damascen, Lib. 4. de fide cap. 13.
are drawn Eastward in their prayers (as the needle, by a secret magnetique
virtue, is drawn toward the North) as it were beholding the face of their
Savior.

Furthermore, Christ's Resurrection was in the blushing morning, when the
Angels, in stead of wakefull Cocks, saluted that bright following day.

Lastly, he ascended into Heaven in the East, and from thence we expect his
second coming, which as himself has fore*told us, shall be Mat. 24, 27.
as lightning from the East.

Surely, they do right piously, who observe this ceremony of turning Eastward,
when they pray, with the like devotion, it was first instituted, yet are not
Christans so strictly to observe it, in their Churches, as the Turks are bound
in their Mosques to turn South, toward their Meccha. It is (as Aquinas
teaches) Secunda secundae quest. 84 art. 3.
very much conducing, to the decency of public prayer, it is not required of
necessity, especially in private devotions, seeing there is no commandment for
it. And in public prayers also, in the Temple, if upon good reasons, we turn
any other way without contempt of Authority; or suppose the situation of the
Church be not Eastward, we may certainly be blameless. For Psalm. 145. 18
God alike in every place, is near to them that call upon him, to all that
call upon him in truth. But surely the former reasons, seriously pondered, may
serve to stir up in our souls more fervency and devotion in prayer.

CHAP. IX. Of the Rites, and Ceremonies, used at the Dedication of Heathen
Temples.
THe Dedication makes the edifice a Temple: many Palaces and profane buildings
have the like situation, and figure; yet are not Temples, because not
consecrated to God. That we Christians may learn even from the vain
superstition of the Heathen, with what reverence the places dedicated to the
true God are to be used, we intend first, to speak of the Dedication of Heathen
Temples.

Before they began to build, the limits and bounds of the ground, were
determined, and designed, and this they called effari Templum, Varro. Fest.
Pomp.
vel sistere Fanum, all which was most religiously, and carefully performed by
the supestitious ceremonies of the Augures. After this, they began to build,
and when the building was finished, the founders dedicated them to some God, to
whom by vow they had formerly bound themselfes to erect them. Lastly, followed
the Consecration, or Inauguration, by the Soothsayers, after whose auguries,
they were accounted most sacred; and unless all their rites and ceremonies had
passed, they were not called Temples, and this is the difference made of
Templum, and Aedes sacra, in Lib. 14. cap. 7.
Aulus Gellius.

Tacitus has this relation lib 4.
of Jupiter Capitolius Temple, when it was re-edified by Vespasian; The
Emperor (says he) committed the whole care of the business to Lucius
Vestinus, a Gentleman in Rome of great note. Vestinus diligently consults the
Augures, they command that all the rubbish of the former Temple, be first
carried into the marish grounds, then that the Temple be built in the
selfsame limits, in which it formerly had stood, for the Gods (say they) love
no new fashions: All this being done, on the eleventh of the Calends of July,
being a very fair day, the space of ground, whereon the Temple should stand,
was all bedecked, and adorned with garlands, and ribbins; and the Soldiers
whose names were accounted fortunate and lucky, entered in upon it, with green
boughs in their hands; Then followed the Vestall Nuns, with boys and
girls, whose fathers and mothers were then living, and all besprinckl'd the
ground with fair river waters: After these came Plautus Aelian, the high
Priest, (whom Helvidius Priscus the Praetor of the City, follwed) and he
Consecrated the ground, with Sacrifices of Bulls and Oxen, which he offered on
an Altar of green turf, imploring Jupiter, Juno, Pallas, and the other Gods,
which were presidents of the Empire, and Tutular of cheir City, that they would
please to prosper their beginnings, and by their divine help, assist the piety
of mortal men, in the erection of their own house; then took he a ribbin
into his hands, which was tied to a great stone, to which were also fastened
many ropes, which the Priests, the Magistrates, Senators, Gentlemen, and diverse
of the common people, laying hold on, with great joy, drew the first stone into
the foundation, after which they cast many great lumps of untried Gold and
Silver, for the Augures had stricktly commanded, that only the Primitiae
Metallorum, the oar of metals, which never came in the furnace, should be
cast in; lest the work should be profaned by any oblation which had formerly
been destined to any other use. Thus far Tacitus. Diverse other Authors
report the like solemnities at the Dedication of other Lib. 6. cap. 14. Lib. 19.
Temples, as Alexander ab Alexandro, Livie, and Dio Cass: who tells of Lib. 60
great feasting, when the Temple which Tiberius dedicated to Livia, was
Consecrated, Tiberius feasted all the Senators, Livia their wives, and other
matrons of Rome. We read also in holy Scripture, with what solemnity the
Golden Statue of Nebuchadnezzar Dan. 3.
was erected. Others speak of Masks and Plays, and other pompeous shows,
used by the Heathen, at the Consecration of their Temples. And they are said to
have been so strict and curious in observing the rites of Dedication, that
they would rather build the Temple anew, than any whit commit an error in the
observance of them.

CHAP. X. Of the Dedication of the Jews Temples.
THe solemnities used by the Jews, at the Dedication of their Altars, before
the written Law, are copiously set down in the sacred Scriptures. In them we
also read of the great gifts and oblations offered by the Hebrew Princes under
the Law, at the Dedication of their Tabernacle, when it was anointed all over
with an ointment of a most fragrant smell.

In them we read of Number. 7
the burnt offerings, and peace offerings, offered by David on the Altar, which
he built unto the Lord, in the threshing floor of Araunah the 2 Sa^. 24.
Jebusite. Of the great rejoicing that was at the Dedication of the Temple,
after it was reedified by Cyrus, how they kept the day holy, on which it was
dedicated, Macch. 4.
how they adorned the forefront of the Temple with golden Crowns and Shields,
and Judas and his brethren, and the rest of the Congregation ordained, that the
days of the Dedication of the Altar, should be kept in their season, from
year to year, for the space of eight days, with great mirth, and gladness,
which very solemnities were kept, and observed in our Saviors time, as
appears by Saint John's John 10. 22.
Gospel.

But above all, the rites and solemnities used by the Jews, those used by
Solomon, at the first Dedication of the Temple, are most remarkable. When the
building 1 Reg 8.
was quite finished, he first assembled the Elders of Israel, and all the heads
of the Tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, to bring the
Ark of the Covenant out of Sion, the City of David. Then the Priests took up
the Ark, and brought it, and the Tabernacle, and the holy vessels, into the
Temple, with all the religious pomp that might be, and placed the Arc of the
Covenant, in the most holy place of the Temple, called the Oracle: King Solomon
himself kneeling meekly on his knees, prays to God, before the Altar,
beseeching him to remember the word which he spoke to his servant David, that
he would dwell on earth with his people. And to hear in Heaven and to forgive
the sins of his people Israel, which should pray, and make supplications in
that house. After this, he rose up, and spreading forth his hands to Heaven,
he stood and blessed all the Congregation. Lastly, he offered, two and twenty
thousand Oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep. And God himself
crowned these religious solemnities, with his most sacred presence, in a
glorious Cloud. So that the Priest could not stand to minister, because of the
Cloud, for the glory of the LORD had filled the house, and this glorious
splendor all the people beheld, as Sermon. in lib. Reg. and Para. lib. 3.
Serrarius upon that place tells us.

CHAP. XI. Of the Consecration of Christian Temples.
AS for Christian Temples, it is most certain that the custom of consecrating
them, has been used ever since the Apostles times: Saint Clement Epist. 2.
in an Epistle to S. James the brother of our Lord, has these words, Ecclesias,
per congrna and utilia facite loca, quae divinis precibus sacrare oportet.
Build your Churches in decent and convenient places, and Consecrate them with
divine prayers.

Eusebius lib. 10. cap. 3. says, that no sooner was Constantine created
Emperor, but immediately the sacred Temples were from the foundations, raised
to an exceeding height. Then, says he, was that long wished for, and much
desired sight seen, the celebrating of the Dedication of Churches, The
Consecration of Oratories, The meeting together of Bishops, The uniting of the
members of Christ, into one Harmony, which had been severed into foreign
Countries.

Pope Sylvester, is said Ritual. Roman.
to have instituted these ceremonies of Consecration. First, he ordained that
a Cross should be erected to signify, that the place was destined for a
Church, and sacred to our blessed Savior, who was crucified for our sins.
Then, that it should be Consecrated by none but a Bishop, who first knocks at
the door, after opens it with his Crosiers staff, thereby signifying, that
power is given to the Priest, to knock at the doors of our hearts, by the
preaching of the Word, and by it to open them, for the receiving of Faith.
After that, the Bishop enters the Church and with his staff, on the pavement,
which is strewed with ashes for the same purpose, he writes the characters of
the Greek and Latin Alphabet, teaching thereby that our hearts being opened,
and prepared to receive faith, the Priest as it were writes in them, the
Elements and Principles of Christian Faith, and Religion: Next he besprinkles
the Church with a brush of Hysop, dipped in holy water, teaching thereby, that
when the grounds of Christian Religion, are perfectly learned, afterward
follows the Sacrament of Baptism. He also ordained that twelve Crosses,
should be painted on the wall, signifying the twelve Apostles, who valiantly
bare that banner, throughout the world: Twelve Lamps are also lighted, denoting
that by their preaching, the whole world was enlightened, which before sat in
darkness, and in the shadow of death. And as the liquour of oil, swimmes
above other liquours, so the office of Priesthood, is more sacred than other
worldly dignities. Lastly, when the solemnities of Consecration, are quite
ended, he ordained, that the rest of the day should be kept holy, with much
mirth and rejoicing, and that the mirth and joy of that day, should every
year, be celebrated afresh. Thereby teaching, that after this life, piously
ended, we shall certainly enter into the joys of Heaven, which are joys
without any sorrow, without any fear, without any end.

And this custom we see is still observed by the practice of Christians, in
our yearly feasts, and Wakes, and was also in ancient times, as may appear by
the Sermons of holy Fathers, made at the Anniversaries of the Dedication of
Churches. And thus the aforementioned Judas Macchabeus, celebrated the Dedication
of the Temple yearly. Which Feast John 10. 22.
Christ himself honored with his sacred presence, which gave occasion to
Felix Quartus, to write thus to the Bishops of sundry Provinces. Solennitates
Dedicationis Ecclesiarum, per singulos annos celebrandos esse ipso Domino
exemplum dante*qui ad Festum Dedicationis Templi, cum reliquis populis, eandem
Festivitatent celebraturus venit. Christ himself, gave us an example of
keeping yearly Feasts, who came himself, with the rest of the people, to
celebrate the yearly Feast of the Dedication of the Temple, at Jerusalem.

CHAP. XII. Whether yearly Feasts observed upon the days of Dedication of
Christian Churches, be lawful?
THere are in the World some people, who by no means will allow of these
anniversary Feasts, and rejoycings. Nor can the authorities before recited, any
more move them, than skillful Music can move a log. So constant are they to
their first thoughts, that they deem it impossible for them to think better.
They fear, they fear, lest they should be Jews, or Gentiles, or they know
not what, because the Jews, and the Gentiles used to rejoice, upon the like
occasion. But, Duo cum faciunt Ter. Adelph. act. 5. sc. 3.
idem, hoc licet impune facere huic, illi non licet. Two men may do the same
thing, the one may be guiltless, the other worthy of blame. The Gentiles and
the Christians, may both rejoice, the one at the Dedication of a Temple to
Idols, the other at the Consecration of a Church, to the true God; the one does
what is good, and just, the other commits an execrable thing, in the sight of
God. And it shall fare with eithers joy, as with the two women, of which Christ
speaks (at the Mill about one work both) the one shall be received for pious
and religious, the other shall be rejected, as profane, and idolatrous.

And for Judaisme let them know, that the Feast of Dedication, was none of the
ceremonies commanded that Nation to observe, but has its foundation in Nature.
Indeed the ceremonies which properly appertain to the Jews, are utterly
unlawful for us Christians, to use: As for example, if any man should
sacrifice the Paschall Lamb, (as was once commanded the Jews to do) he should
make a protestation of a false faith, and by this sacrifice, plainly profess,
that he believed not, that Jesus Christ our Savior was yet come into the
world, to save sinners, had not yet suffered death for our sins, nor risen
for our justification. But the mirth and anniversary solemn joy, for the
dedication of a Temple, is founded in Nature, and not of Gods immediate
institution; Solomon, Esdras, the Macchahees, by the instruction of Nature
deemed it to be meet, and fit, that when the Temple was finished, a public
joy should follow, as naturally all men rejoice at the end of any great work,
and so often as they remember it. And since every good subject will rejoice on
the birth day, and Coronation day of our Royal King: Why should a true
Christian fear to rejoice on that day, when a Temple, a public good was
brought forth, when a Church was Consecrated, and made holy.

But here they make another question, Whether the Church be more holy, than
another place? And truly if by holiness, they mean (as mehaps they do)
sanctity proceeding from divine grace, and the habit of Charity, etc. We
answer, that it is no holyer than another place. But if they think it is not
therefore holy, because it is Dedicated to the service of God, they are much
deceived.

We read in the books of Leviticus, how that all things which were Lev. c. ult.
dedicated to the service of God, are called holy to the Lord.

And that the Church is dedicated to God, has been all ready shown. If the
tithe of Bullocks and Sheep, Levit 27. 32. be holy to the Lord, because
separated from the use and injury of secular persons, and reserved for the
peculiar service of the Ministers of God, then certainly those buildings,
which by the public consent of all Nations, and in all things have been
accounted sacred, and are separated to the peculiar service of God himself,
are by us to be esteemed holy and the foppish impiety of those that persuade
the contrary, deserves rather severe punishment than pity.

Besides, the Church being a place in which God is after a more peculiar manner
present, may well be called holy, God himself said to Moses, The place where
Exodus 3
thou stand is holy ground, for God was in that place peculiarly present.

Further, well may the Church be called holy, it being the place of holy
things, in it are the holy Sacraments, to it the Saints on earth frequently
resort, and in it we believe that the holy Angels are present.

Lastly, by the Law of contraries, it will follow, that as the Temples of
Devils are to be accounted unholy and profane, as being polluted with the
service done in them: So the Temples of the true God are most sacred, and holy,
being sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer.

CHAP. XIII. Of the ends, for which Temples were built.
IT is most certain, that some Temples were built only to flatter great Kings,
with the vain conceit of a Deity. Wherefore Tiberius Caesar stricktly forbad,
any Temple to be erected to him.

Other Temples were built to the honor of some famous men, zealous error
mistaking them to be Gods. The ends for which they were erected to the true
God, may be four.

First, to offer Sacrifice in them.

Secondly, to be Sepulchers, and Repositories of the corpse of his blessed
Martyrs, until the general Resurrection.

Thirdly, to offer and present in them Prayers unto Almighty God.

Fourthly, that Christian people might meet together in one place, to hear the
Word of God, and receive the Sacraments. Some add to these a fifth, viz. that
the Divine Majesty might vouchsafe still to continue with us, and to dwell
amongst us. Not as if they thought that the infinite Divine Nature could be
contained within the narrow walls of a Church, but according with that which
Solomon said, 1 Kings 8. 13.
when he had finished the Temple; I have surely built thee a house to dwell in,
a steadfast place for thee to abide in for ever. God, we piously believe, to be
in every place, but we cannot say properly, that he dwells in any place, but in
his Temple. There, as in his Court and Palace he distributes his divine gifts
and graces, to the hearts of his faithful servants: there we more plainly
behold his glory and majesty, in the stateliness, and beauty of the building,
in the richness of the sacred vessels and ornaments, the numerous multituds
of his Servants, the various fruits of the blessed Sacraments, the dignity,
holiness, and sacred pomp of his Ministers.

Before the Temple was built by Solomon, God was not with his people in any one
fixed or settled place. Moses Tabernacle was portable, and carried from one
place to another, but when the Temple was built, and the Ark of God placed in
it, God began to rest, and dwell amongst them, whence that of the Psalmist,
Arise O God into thy rest, Psalm. 132. 8.
thou, and the Arc of thy strength.

Saint Hierome calls the Church, Hereditatem Dei, Gods portion, or inheritance;
nor shall any man escape his vengeance, that shall attempt to dispossess him
of it, nor shall their piety be unrewarded which has merited such an heir.

CHAP. XIV. How the whole world may be said to be a Temple.
HItherto of Temples built by men, as well Jews, and Gentiles, as Christians,
all which proclaim the Art, Magnificence, or Piety of the builders. There are
also Temples built by the powerful hand of the Almighty Creator, as the vast
and the great Universe, what is it, but a Temple, according to which pattern,
mortal men have corrected theirs, imitating its figure in their rotundaes,
before spoken of. Diogenes says plainly, Mundum Laert. in Vit. cjus
esse Dei Templum sanctissimum: The world is the sacred Temple of God.

And the Persians, who worshipped the Sun for their God, are reported not to
have built any Temple for it, saying, Mundum universum esse Strabo Lib. 15.
illi Templum; the whole Universe is his Temple.

The Bythinians, for the same reason offered Herodo. lib 1.
their sacrifices on tops of Mountains, instead of Altars.

And Tacitus writing of the Germans, says, Nec cohiberi parietibus Deos, ex
magnitudine Coelestium arbitrabantur. They were of opinions (considering the
hugeness of the Heavens) that God could not be contained, within the compass
of any walls.

The old Romans worshipped their God Terminus, and diverse other of their Gods In
Temples open roofed, supposing it unfit to streighten their fancied deities
within walls.

The Christians themselves have called the Universe, the Temple of Almighty
God, though never guilty of that error (into which some blind Schismatiques
and Heretics have stumbled) as to think that therefore no Churches ought to
be built, and had they power to their blind boldness, would soon pull them
down, and keep their conventicles and assemblies in shops and cellars. Melius
Graeci nostri, qui ut augurent Cicero. de legib.
pietatem in Deum, easdem illum quas nos Vrbes incolere voluerunt: Much better
did our forefathers, who for the increase of Piety and Religion, built Houses
for God to dwell amongst us. Alas! our memories (especially in good things) are
too too weak, nor can we (such is the course of our life here) worship God
decently, and duly enough, in every place.

The Primitive Christians, indeed called the Universe the Temple of God,
because the tyrannies of the Gentiles, would not permit them to enjoy any
other. Dei Templum est Vniversum, hoc quod cernitur vel quae latiores
complectitur ambitus men's humana, nec aliquod his dignius Templum Deo Opt: Max:
eirgi potest: The whole Universe (were they wont to say) is our Temple, or
rather the soul of every Christian, is the Temple of his God, which is of
larger capacity than the whole world: and more glorious Temples than these can
no where be builded, to our great and good God.

And well may the Universe be called a Temple, there has been nothing said of
Temples, but may very well be said of it; If they be called Temples, because
they be vast, and great structures, is any thing greater than the Universe,
which conteines all things in its vast capacity. If Basilicae, from their state
and majesty, how much better does that name fit the Universe, than with nothing
more royal, It has the Firmament for its roof, the Stars for tapers, the
Heaven for its Altar, Woods and Groves, instead of Tapestry hangings, and the
Earth for its pavement, which God himself besprinckles with the dew of Heaven.
If a Temple be rightly defined, Aedificium Deo consecratum: The whole World
was created for no other end, but for us, to serve and worship God in it. The
Universe, says Lessius, Lib. 4. de pers. div. ca. 4
is two ways conducing to our good, first it affords us dwelling, and all
things necessary for this life, and so it is like a well furnished, and a
spacious house, for man consisting of a body, needs a thousand corporeal
helps, to the sweet and pleasant leading of his life here.

Secondly, it is as a Temple to our souls, instructing them, in the knowledge
of their Maker, declaring his power, wisdom. beauty, goodness, and other
attributes: A humane soul, for whose sake all corporeal things were created,
is of the very lowest degree of intellectual creatures, and so weak of
understanding, that without the help of our senses we understand nothing,
wherefore it desires an union, and conjunction with our bodies, that by the
help of our senses understanding sensible things, it may from them by diligent
meditation, and serious discourse, come to understand its self, and its
Creator. And for this cause, God created not only things necessary for the
sustenance of humane life, but innumerable more things, by whose beauty, and
splendor, we may in some measure conceive, and know the excellency of our
maker, and knowing him, may love, worship, honor, and give thanks unto him.
The greatness of the Heavens, the vastness of the seas, and earth, show his
power and greatness; the glory and splendor of stars, and precious gems,
what do they to a considering soul, but set forth his beauty, and glory? The
curious subtilty in forming the limbs of each creature, declares his wisdom
and perfection. The sure order, in the Heavens course, and motion, teaches us
his providence. There is indeed nothing in the whole world that does not
mervellously instruct our minds in the knowledge of our Creator: So that
whatsoever could be naturally known of God, was certainly known by the
ancient Philosophers. For the invisible things of God, are made known unto us,
by the visible creatures, and by the means of studious and diligent
contemplation, as Saint Paul teaches: Invisibilia Romans 1
enim ipsius, a creatura Mundi, per ea quae facta sunt intellecta,
conspiciuntur.

For this end, therefore did God build this Temple, in it he dwells, Totamque
infusa per artus, men's agitat molem: he fills every part of it, and we are
continually in his presence. The whole World is a Temple, to those that want a
Temple; no man for want of a Church, is excused from serving of God. The holy
Hermits of old, spoken of by S. Hierom, viz. S. Anthony, Saint Paul, Hilarion,
etc. though they lived in rocks, caves, and solitary places, yet were they
never out of the Temple, still praising and worshipping God, and always adoring
his infinite Majesty.

When God had finished this Temple, for sign (as it were) of joy in the
perfection of it, he blessed the day next ensuing, and made it an holy day;
giving us an example of rejoicing, at the Dedication of ours, every creature
now began to worship God, in this Temple, so soon as it was made, only
wretched man profaned it.

CHAP. XV. How every particular Christian may be said to be the Temple of God.
CLemens Alexandrinus Lib 7. ^. Strom.
tells us, that every particular member of the Catholic Church, is a Temple of
God built upon the foundation of Faith, Hope and Charity, raised not upon
columns of marble, or stone walls, but on fleshy hearts, far excelling that of
Salomons, which was both made, and marred by the hands of mortal men.

Saint Angustin says, our hearts are Gods Altars, Lib. 10. cap. 4. de Civi.
Dei.
on which we offer to him bloody sacrifices, when for his truth we suffer
martyrdom: we offer sweet incenses to him, when our hearts are inflamed with
pure and holy love.

Whence is that of Lactantius, Quid opus est Lib. 1. cap. 20. Inst.
super vacuis extructionibus loca occupare, firmius and incorruptius templum
est cor humanum, hoc potius ornetur, hoc veris illis numinibus impleatur. Why
do ye (ye vain Gentiles) take such care in building Temples to your false
Gods, and neglect the internal virtues, which dight the soul; The soul of
man is a most firm, and incorruptible Temple, let that be beautified and
adorned with graces: to what purpose are these vast heaps of stone erected, and
no room left for God in your souls; these are the true Temples of the living
God, which he has purchased with his most precious blood. Know ye not, says
S. Paul, that ye 1 Cor. 3. 16. 9.
are the Temples of God, and God dwells in ye: and again, Dei aedificatio estis,
ye are Gods buildings.

Saint Bernard teaches Sermon. 1 de dedi.
at large, how the soul of every Christian may be said to be the Temple of
his God. It is dedicated and consecrated in Baptism, it is reedified by
Confirmation and the holy Eucharist, etc. all to teach us how careful we
ought to be, lest we pollute and profane it, it behooves us often to remember
Saint Paul's, Nescitis, quia Dei Templum estis, know ye not, that ye are the
Temples of God, and if any man defiles the Temple of God, him will God destroy;
But if there were no other punishment than this, this sure is full of horror,
that we expel the holy Spirit out of our hearts, and entertain the foul
spirit in his room.

CHAP. XVI. How the Body of Christ, and how the Blessed Virgin Mother, may be
said to be the Temples of God.
OF all Temples, these two are most transcendent, they are Christ's own words,
Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up again: John 2. 19.
21.
and he spoke this of his body. In Salomons Temple at Jerusalem, all the while
it was building, no saw, normallet was heard in it. And our Savior is called
the stone cut Dan. 2. 34.
from the rock without hands. Vere, says Saint Ambrose, vere Templum In Psa.
47.
Dei, est corpus Christi, in quo nostrorum est purificatio peccatorum, vere
Templum Dei, caro illa, in qua nullum peccati potuit esse contagium, sed ipsa
pro delicto totius Mundi fuit sacrificium. Vere Templum Dei, caro illa, in qua
Dei imago fulgebat, and corporaliter plenitudo Divinitatis habitabat: Well,
well, might the body of our Savior Christ, be called a Temple, by which we
are cleansed from our sins; well might it be called a Temple, which was
polluted with no sin, but was offered a Sacrifice for the sin of the whole
world: Well might it be called the Temple of God, in which the very image of
God shined so bright, nay in which the fullness of the Deity dwelt bodily.

The other Temple, which may also be truly called a Temple, dedicated to God,
is his most-chaste and immaculate Mother, the blessed Virgin Mary, of whose
structure God himself took such care, that some of the Roman Church hold
opinion, she was not polluted with any, no not Original sin. Surely this
Temple, was richly dect with all beauteous virtues, which God the Father from
all eternity elected, and prepared for himself, which was over-shaddowed with
the power of the Most-high, and in which for the space of nine months, the
body of our blessed Savior, really inhabited. And thus far of Temples built
by the divine Art of the most supreme Architect. Now let us return to Temples
built by mortal men: And first we will speak of them, whose founders might
have deserved high, and eternal praise, had their knowledge of the true God,
been equal to their Art and magnificence, but instead of Dedicating these
sumptuous buildings, to the honor of the true God, they most sacrilegiously
devoted them to Devils, Idols, Crocodiles, Leeks and Onyons, and other most
base and contemptible creatures.

CHAP. XVII. Of the multitude, and splendor of Heathen Temples.
ALl nations, from the beginning of the World, have been naturally inclined,
to build and adorn Temples, as if it were impossible for a humane life, to be
lead here upon earth, without them: Si terras obeas, invenire possis Vrbes,
Muris, Literis, Regibus, Opibus, numismate carentes: Gymnasiorum, and
Theatrorum nescias, Vrbem Templis, Diisque carentem, quae praecibus,
jurejurando, Oraculo non utatur, non bonorum causa sacrificet, non mala sacris
avertat, nemo unquam vidit: If you travail throughout the whole World, says
Plutarch, you may chance to come to some Cities, where there is no Learning, no
Coin, no Schools, or public Theaters, etc. but you shall never in all your
travailes see a City hat has no God to worship, no kind of Temples, to serve
him in: that offers no sacrifice to avert calamities, or thanksgiving for
prosperity. Amongst* all nations some kind of Temple has been used: The
barbarous Scythian is reported to have had a Temple dedicated to Mars, and in
it Herodo. lib. 4.
they stuck up a javelin, which they worshipped instead of his Image. Never any
writ of any Nations, but have been copious in describing their Temples, as who
shall read Herodotus, Atheneus, etc. shall find. Reisnerus reports above
Antiquit. Romans li. 1. cap. 13.
400. Temples to have stood in old Rome, besides Lararia, and private places,
in which they placed Images, sacred to their peculiar Gods. So that when
Pyrrhus asked his Ambassadors, what they thought of the City, they answered,
that Florus. lib. 1. 18
the whole City seemd to them to be but one Temple.

Japan is said to have 13000 Temples, 3800 of which were built by one King, and
50 in one grove.

In Grand Cayre, as Ratzvill Epist. 3. de sua peregrin Hierosoly.
reports, are 6800 fair and stately Mosques besides such as want turrets and
roofes, of which there is no small number. But passing by the number, let us
speak of their splendor and riches, to the confusion of such who envy the
cost bestowed on Christian Temples, when they shall see how far the
worshipers of Idols have exceeded our times in piety toward their false Gods.

The Egyptians are Herodo. lib 2. N* 4.
said to have been the first people in the world who had knowledge of the
Gods. From them the Assyrians had their learning, who built the Temple to
Hercules, in Tire, to Venus or Astarta in Phoenicia, both admirable pieces of
workmanship, but far exceeded by that at Hierapolis, sacred to the Syrian
goddess Juno, which as Lucian thinks, was built by Deucalion, immediately
after the flood; the walls of it were covered with gold, the roof was massy
gold, all glorious as the Sun: nor with less splendor were Temples built to
Jupiter, Herodotus says, that in his time there stood a Temple at Babylon,
Dedicated to Jupiter Belus, of figure Lib. 1. cap. 181.
square, each side containing the length of two furlongs, in the middle of it
arose a squaretower, the height of it one furlong, over it were built others
less, to the number of eight: They went upon the outsides by an ascent of
stairs, to the highest Turret, in which was a little Chapel, in it a bed
richly furnished, and a Table of pure gold.

Memorable also is the glory of that Temple, in one of the Atlantique Islands,
built of silver and gold, to the honor of Neptune and Clito. These feigned
deities, were thought worthy of gold and silver; but the true God, who gives
all beauty and luster to gold and precious stones is scarcely honored,
somewhere within stone walls.

Most admirable of all, was the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, it was accounted
one of the wonders of the World: All Asia was busied two hundred Plin. lib 36.
cap. 14.
and twenty years in building of it. It had its foundation laid in a marish
ground, the better to endure the injuries of earthquakes, and to make the
foundation firm, they first ramm'd into the ground great quantities of coals,
upon which they spread fleeces of wool. It was four hundred twenty five and
foot long, two hundred and twenty foot broad, it had a hundred and twenty
seven columns, every one of which was the cost of a several King; each column
was sixty foot high, thirty six of them were most exquisitely wrought and
engraven, whereof one was the handiwork of Scopas, that excellent graver. The
roof of it was of Cedar, the doors of Cyprus. This so stately and magnificent
edifice, was burnt down by one Herostratus, who was desirous to eternize
Strabo l. b. 14.
his name, by the infamy of his fact.

Amongst the Romans, the Capitol was famous, it was begun by Tarquinius Priscus
by reason of a vow, which he made in his wars against the Sabines, and
finished by Horatius Pulvillus the Cosul, when the government by Kings was
changed: the foundation of it was laid very deep, it was eight acres in
circuit, each side was two hundred foot long, and very near as broad, the
South Side was encompassed with three ranks of Columns, the other sides with
two; within it were three Chapels joined together by each the others walls,
all covered with the same roof, the one sacred to Jupiter, the other on each
side to Juno and Minerva: Whence that of Ausonius. Trina in Tarpeio fulgent
consortia Templo. This Temple was consumed by fire, in the Civil wars, which
were in Sulla's time, and after repaired by Vespasian, and Domitian; it was of
capacity to contain 8000 or 10000 men, 12000 talents were spent only in
guilding of it.

The Pantheon (though in time, yet) in workmanship, nothing inferior to the
Capitol, was built by Agrippa the son in law of Augustus, who had thrice been
Consul. It is yet standing in Rome, and though it be spoiled of its ancient
ornaments, yet is it highly honored, in being Dedicated to the true God, and
the memory of our blessed Lady, by Boniface the fourth. Such was the ancient
beauty of this Temple that Pline Lib. 25.
reckons it, inter pulcherima operum, amongst the most beautiful pieces in the
whole World. And Sebastian Serly, a man very skillful in Architecture, says,
it is the only choice piece of perfect workeman-ship, his eyes ever beheld. It
was equally as broad as high; In Trajans time it was fired by lightning, and
reedified by M. Aurelius Antonius.

We read of diverse other Temples amongst the Romans, of equal beauty and
stately structure.

The great superstitious Temple amongst the Turks, is that at Mecca, famous
for Mahomets Tomb, of which Temple they have this tale in their learning, viz.
Lonicer li. 1. ca. 17.
that God commanded Abraham to build it, and that whosoever should repair to
it, confessing, and bawailing their sins, should receive pardon: Abraham
straightway designed the plot of it, and drew the limits of its foundation. And
immediately the mountains, stones, timber, and all things necessary for the
building came together of their own accords, so that the draught and design
of it was all the trouble Abram was put to.

Ratzvill says, that Epist. 3.
he viewed all the chief Mosques in Grand Cair, but entered into none, there is
one (says he) which they call Giamalassar, much like the Cathedral Churches
of the Christians, there the Patriarch of the Turks and the Santons dwell, it
has eight courts, and is an Italian mile in compass. Masfeius lib 1. hist.


The Malabars a people of India, worship an Idol which they call Parabramma,
and say that he is the eldest God of all and that he has three sons, to
whose honor they we are three thrids tied about their necks, they worship also
diverse beasts, to whom they build statly Temples, not any whit inferior to (if
not exceeding) the magnificence of the ancient Romans. Amongst which there is
one dedicated to an Ape, and only Apes are sacrifised in it, for which purpose
they have adjoining to it, a Porticu of wondrous length, to keep Apes in for
sacrifice. It is supported by 700 marble Columns, equal in greatness to
those of Agrippa, in the Pautheon at Rome.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Magnificence of the Jewish Temples.
THe Pagans and Infidels were instructed by Nature, to build Temples, but the
Jews were commanded by God, and were not inferior to any Nation, in the glory
of their Temple. Solomon was a King so great and wise, as never any before him,
nor since him was like unto him. Well might he therefore build the most
excellent Temple in the World: It was a true Masterpiece, not made after the
manner of any before it, nor could posterity ever equal it. The situation of
it, was upon Mount Moria, an exceeding high Mountain, as Ezech. speaks, cha.
40. It had four Porches or Courts, into the first Court might any come, such
women only excepted who by their Law were accounted unclean. Into the second,
only the Jews might enter; into the third were such males admitted, as were
clean; And into the fourth came the Priests only. The structure of it was all
of square stone, yet no iron tools, as saw or hammar was heard in it all the
while it was in building. For the stones were all hewn, and perfectly fitted in
the quarries, before they were brought thither, so that no great noise could
be made, some noise though very small, was made in the joining and compacting
the stones together, as Vatablas Josephus Hu: Cardinal: Cajetan, and others
hold opinion. But that the tools were made of brass, and not of iron, is an
opinion fond and ridiculous.

Infinite sums of Gold and Silver were left by King David, besides materials
toward the building, eighty thousand Workmen, which were Proselites, wrought
daily in the quaries, seventy thousand Labourors carried the stones to
convenient places; thirty thousand Israelites Carpenters hewed wood in Libanas,
besides innumerable multitudes of Tyrians, and by these guess at the vast
greatness of this Temple. Yet the time came when this so glorious Temple, had
not one stone left upon another, but was quite destroyed, not according to the
ordinary course and miserable condition of other humane things, to the greatest
of which is denied eternity, but by the most just wrath of God upon that nation.

In Jerusalem were four hundred and eighty Synagogues besides the Temple. And
in other Cities and places also were many, for the Jews had a tradition, that
wherever ten men of Israel were, there ought to be built a Synagogue.

Josephus tells of another Bell. Iud. l. 7 cap. 30.
Temple, which the Jews had in Egypt, called Onion, from Onia the High Priest,
who in the time of Antiochus wars, fled to King Ptolomy, and obtained of him
eighty furlongs of ground, at Heliopolis, whereon he built this Temple, in
manner of a Castle, with fortifications and bulworks on every side, for defense
against the Schism of the other Jews, who dwelt at Jerusalem, and were much
offended at the building of this Temple, contrary to their Law. Although the
Prophecy of Isaiah was urged for it, viz. That a Temple should be built in
Egypt. But after the destruction of Jerusalem, this Egyptian Temple was shut up
by the Roman governor, and no man suffered to enter into it.

Not long after the reedifying of Salomons Temple, by Esdras, the Samaritans
built another Temple, in Mount Garizim, the chiefest Author in the erecting of
it, was Manasses, the brother of Jaddi the High Priest, who had married the
daughter of Sanaballet, the Prince of the Samaritans, and General of the
Persian Kings armies. He built it after the manner of the Temple at Jerusalem,
and challenged to himself the honor of a new Priesthood, to whom diverse
factious people joined themselves, Joseph. 11. ca. 28
many holding to the High Priest at Jerusalem, many to Manasses, whereupon grew
a great Schism amongst the Jews. The Samaritans polluted the true worship of
God with idolatry. This Temple was afterward demolished by John son of
Simeon, and nephew of Hircanius, who slew the Samaritans who offered sacrifice
in it.

We read of diverse other Temples built amongst the Jews, Solomon is said to
have built a Temple to the idol of 3 Reg. cap. 11.
Moab, on a Mountain right against Jerusalem; he built also a Temple to
Molech, the idol of the sons of Ammon; nay he built Temples for all his wives,
which were of other Nations.

In the books of the 1 Mac. i.
Macchabes, we read how Antiochus built Temples and Altars in Jerusalem to
idols, and many of the Jews consented to him; nay, they not only consented,
but plainly betrayed the most sacred Temple, to the gods, or rather devils of
the Nations, excluding the true God from amongst them, and thinking his only
Son, our blessed Savior, when he took flesh, and came amongst them, not only
unworthy of a Temple, but unworthy whom the earth should bear; for with their
grievous sins, they suffered grievous punishments, De bello Iudaico.
and the Temple in which they were wont to glory, was utterly destroyed, nor
could ever since be re-edified, though attempted by Julian the Apostata, in
dishonor and contempt Niceph. lib. 10. cap. 9. Antiqui
of JESUS CHRIST, Anno Christi 363. For fire burst out of the ground, and burnt
the work men and their tools, and earthquakes fulfilling Christ's prediction,
shattered the very foundation of it all to pieces.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Builders of Christian Temples.
SAint Ignatius, that Ancient Father, equal in time to the holy Apostles, tells
us, that Temples were erected by the Christians, at the very beginning of
Christian Religion; and we read in Eusebius, of many Edicts set forth by the
lib. 8.
Heathen Emperors, for the pulling them down, and till others could be built,
the Apostles and primative Christians, were contented with Dining-roomes, in
private houses, in stead of Temples.

Saint Cyrill says, that Catech. 16.
that place was a Church consecrated by the Apostles, in which they were
assembled, when the Holy Ghost descended upon them, in the shape of cloven
tongues.

And some think that Tursell. lib. 11. annal.
the house in which the blessed Virgin Mother dwelt at Nazareth, was made a
Temple, and consecrated by the Apostles: diverse other Temples were built by
other primitive Christians.

The Bishops of Rome, especially of old, having been chief men in maintaining,
and propagating Christian Religion, are known to have erected many. There is no
Province in the whole Christian World, in which Churches have not been built,
by their order and appointment, and by the care and diligence of those Priests
whom they sent thither to convert the Infidels.

And for other Bishops, though we know that all Temples receive their sanctity
from them, at the Consecration, and therefore must needs owe their better part
to them; For the Architect can make but the walls, and the Bishop only can
make the Temple. Yet it is most certain, that in old time, and now also many
pious Bishops, and Prelates of the Church, have from the very foundation at
their proper costs, and charges erected stately, and beauteous Temples, as
sacred Folds to enclose, and feed the flock, committed to their charge.

The liberality and munificence of Kings, and Princes, in such structures is
immense, and admirable, as of Constantine the Great, of Helen his mother, of
Caesar, Justinian, and others, who succeeded them, and have shown themselves
as well heirs of their virtues, and religion, as of their Crowns and Kingdoms,
in not only fairly adorning, but almost filling their Empires and Dominions,
with rich Bishoprics, stately Colleges, and most beautiful Temples.

And not only Kings and Princes, but others also, of more inferior rank, have
aspired to such great and sublime designs, and would not by any means be
dissuaded from it, well knowing, that they should not lose by it in this world,
and in the world to come, should shine like most glorious stars, as having
been means by which sinners have been converted unto God. They well
considered, that the vanity and splendor of this world, would shortly vanish
into nothing, wherefore they employed all their wealth, in such pious, and
religious works, and now they enjoy permanent riches, and true honors in
Heaven.

CHAP. XX. Of adorning Christian Temples.
AS Parents are not contented in the bare having of children, but they bestow
costs in clothing, and adorning them, lest their sordidnesse might be their
disgrace: Even so godly Princes and other pious Christians, have not thought
their liberal pieties extended far enough, when the Temples have been
brought up to the very roofes, unless they beautified them with all kind of
ornaments, that might add glory and grace unto them, as curious paintings,
hangings, guilding, sumptuous vestments, rich gifts in money, chalices, plate,
farms, lordships, besides great privileges and immunities.

Some men there are who envy the Ornaments of the Church, and grudg at any cost
bestowed upon it, yet we read in holy Scriptures, that God himself dictated
to Moses the ornaments of the Tabernacle, etc. And Saint Hierome reckons it
not amongst the least of Nepotians In Epitaph. Nepoliani. Epist 3. ad Heliod.
praises, that he was solicitous that the Altar shouldlook bright, the walls
should be without dust, or cobwebbes, the pavement clean swept, and strewed
with flowers, the Church porch bedecked with green boughs. Nepotian (says
he) was another Bezaliel, wondrous witty in contriving, what might be
graceful and beautiful to the Church. And surely if Wrastlers and Gladiators
have their Amphitheaters, and Palesters, if the Senators have their Courts and
Capitol, if the Philosophers their Lycea, if mortal Princes have their
Palaces, nay if every private man, has his dwelling house dressed and adorned,
with all the sweetness and beauty he can devise, what reason has any man to
think, that the Temples of the Eternal God, should be base and sordid, or why
should any man (like that traitor Judas) think all lost that is bestowed on
Mat. 26. 8.
him.

Herodotus tells of wondrous Lib. 1. 2. 8. etc.
rich gifts sent to the Temple at Delphos, by the Gentiles, but compared with
the oblations in Salomons Temple, they will seem nothing, for which as
Venerable Bede observes; there were in the Temple two Treasuries, the In 12.
Mat.
one like a Chest, wherein they put the moneys, which were offered for the uses
of the Temple, of which Saint Mark speaks, And Jesus sat Marc. 12. 41.
over against the Treasury and beheld how the people cast money into the
Treasury, and many that were rich, cast in much, etc. The other was built like
a great Hal, in the which, offerings of greater bulk were kept, and of this S.
John seems to speak; These words spoke JESUS John 8. 20.
in the Treasury in the Temple, etc. But neither Jews nor Gentiles have
exceeded the Christians in the Ornaments, and Treasure of their Temples;
nothing have ever been more glorious than their Altars, than their Vestments,
Chalices, and other Ornaments, as who shall read Anastasius, of the Anast. in
vit. Po. in Silvest.
almost prodigious munificence of Constantine the Great, will confess; and the
like incredible liberality of others toward the Church, may Niceph. 14. 2.
elsewhere be read.

CHAP. XXI. A decent form of building and adorning a Church.
OUr age is very forward to good works (let some men talk what they will to
the contrary) and for their piety in building repairing and adorning Churches,
may compare almost with any former times, in the memory of man: More Churches
have been built, and adorned, in the reign of our King Charles, than in the
reign of many Kings before.

But me thinks as in most of our other good works, so in this also the piety
and devotion of well disposed minds, do seem some times to have wanted better
directions. We have seen in some places, Churches newly erected, but the
parts, form, and situation, have been so uncouth, that there has scarce been
any resemblance of a Church, no Religion in the whole fabrique. We have seen
them painted, I cannot say beautified, but with such gaudy colors as can add
no ornament to so solemn and religious a place: For my part, I shall be ever
far from discouraging any, whose minds God has moved to so holy actions. I
intend only to set down what I conceive out of ancient Authors, and other
observations, to be most graceful and comely for such an Edifice, ever humbly
submitting to the judgment and censure of my betters and those whom it more
concerns.

For the situation Eastward, I shall need say no more, though even in that of
late days some have failed; I will only add, that it were very graceful,
that there should be an ascent of steps up to the Church. That famous Temple
of Saint Peter's in Rome, which Sebastian Serly calls a wonderful work, and the
fairest in the whole World; you ascend into it by many stairs. Those quindecem
Psalmi Graduales, which follow the 119 Psalm. are said to have bin sung by the
Levites, on the steps, as they ascended into the Temple, and thence had their
name. And we read, Acts 3. 1. that Saint Peter and John went up together into
the Temple at the ninth hour of Prayer.

For the figure we know that the Ancient Christians, had not always one, but
some times varied. Their rotundaes they borrowd from the Heathens, to whose
service it was most agreeable, for their Altars were placed in the middle of
their Temples, and at their Sacrifices they danced round about them, singing
Hymns, and Songs, in praise of their Gods, to whom they sacrificed. The men in
the sacrifices to Venus or Astarte, wearing women's garments, and the women at
Mars's feasts, putting on men's armor. And this kind of superstitious idolatry
was in use amongst the Nations, in Moses time, and was occasion of that Law,
Deuteronomy. 22. 5. The woman shall not we are that which pertains to the man,
neither shall man put on woman's raiment; as Aquinas 2. secundae quest. 102.
Art. 6. and Mr. Seldom, in his learned Tract de Diis Syris, excellently teaches
us: This figure, I say, of Temples, was received by the Christians, in case of
necessity, and was after, and may now very well be rejected, as not convenient
for our service. Our Communion Tables, being now placed at the East end, close
to the wall not to be danced about, as in former times.

The best and most received figure is the long, and though some may think the
broad square, the ovall, or round, more convenient (as being of more capacity)
to hear Sermons, and Lectures, yet surely the Majesty and reverence of the
place appears not so much in them. And the man who enters the West door from
far beholding the Altar where he seriously intends to offer his devotions to
his God and Savior, shall find his devout soul, more rapt with divine awe and
reverence, more inflamed with pure and holy zeal, in the delay and late
approach unto it, than if at first he had entered upon it.

Pillars in all other buildings, are very inconvenient in Churches, graceful,
stately and necessary, as well for supporting the roof, distinction of the Isles
from the body of the Church, and different from profane buildings; besides it
has been so received a manner of building, that to leave them out, savours too
much of noveltie.

The Chancell or Quire, must be higher than the body of the Church; and in
Cathedral Churches, it has been an ancient custom ever since Constantines
time, that vaults should be built under the Quire which were called Cryptae, in
remembrance of those vaults, caves, and secret places, under ground, where the
Christians in times of persecution, were wont to assemble to serve God; such is
St. Faiths under S. Paul's Church in London, which is now converted to a Parish
Church.

The Chancell being divided from the Church by grates of wood, curiously
carved, or of iron, or brass cast into comely works, is not only very
graceful, but according to the laws and orders of building observed by the
primitive Christians.

The place where the Communion Table stands, ought to be higher than the rest
of the Chancell, but all this and more we see duly observed in the structure of
Cathedral Churches: For Parish Churches, and private Chapels, it were very
meet that they should be built after the manner of Cathedrals, as near as with
convenience they may. When there are no Isles adjoining to the body of the
Church, Pilasters wrought into the wall, with well framed Capitals, would add
much beauty to the fabrique, and much strength to the walls, between which would
be convenient spaces to beautify the Church, with some excellent paintings of
Sacred stories, which may strike into the beholder, religious, and devout
Meditations.

Over the Capitals according to the common rules of Architecture, must run an
Architrave freeze, and Coronis, which every workman knows how to adorn with
leaves and flowers, etc. according to the order of building. Over these, let
the windoores be placed, which because they stand high differ more from profane
buildings, keep our thoughts from wandering abroad, whilst our eyes have nothing
but Heaven, and heavenly objects to behold, and besides cast an excellent light
for the paintings on the walls.

The number of windoores ought to observe the grace of the whole structure,
which if they be not of common glass, but painted, adorn the Church with a
glorious light, and moderate that bright light, which is a hinderance to
devotion. The Utopian Temples, says Sr T: More, were subobscura, some what
dark: Nec id aedificandi inscitia factum sed consilio Sacerdotum, quod immodica
lux cogitationes dispergit. For devotion requires collected spirits, which
light diffuses, as Sir H: Wotton seems to interpret him in his Elements of
Architecture. And we find it by experience, that in our light Churches, did not
we close our eyes, we could hardly keep our thoughts from distractions till
the end of a short collect. And I verily believe that the holy fervor of
devotion was more intense in the primitive Christians dark obscure vaults, than
has ever been in our lightsome Churches.

The roof if it be vaulted, is more agreeable to antiquity, than if flat, it
makes the voice more audible; you may adorn it with an azure color, and gilded
stars and then as in figure, so in color it resembles the Hemisphear of the
Heavens; which perhaps gave occasion to S. Chrysostom: to call the Church orann
pgeion, an earthly heaven.

The Chancel, as it has always been divided from the Church, so may the roof
of it be of a different height, and more richly adorned, and the windoores of a
differing fashion from the Church: That when we shall enter into this place,
more holy and divine thoughts may possess our minds, occasioned by the
differing structure, and more glorious ornaments.

But of all parts of the Chancell, that where the Communion Table stands, has
ever been accounted most sacred; In adorning that, no cost ought to be thought
too much. There we behold the mystery of our Redemption lively expressed. Nor
can we make public profession of our Christian faith, hope, and love, any way
so well, as being studious in adorning the sacred Altars, did we verily believe
Christ Jesus (...), to be truly present with us, so often as the blessed
Sacrament is celebrated (as the ancient Liturgi. Chryso.
Greek Church believed, and as he most certainly is, though the manner of his
being there, we know not) would Christians be so desperately irreligious, to
entertain him, as the Jewish host did at his first coming, within bare walls,
and on bare boards, or not rather in the most noble manner we could devise.

Hither bring your stateliest hangings, and adorn the walls; hither your
richest carpets, and bespred the ground; [hither the most glorious silks, and
finest linen, to cover the holy Table. The alacrity and ingenious piety of
former times, in adorning this sacred place, makes us seem dull, stupid, and
irreligious.

In the French Canon Law. li. 1. cap. 146. Priests were commanded to exhort the
women publicly in their Sermons, to bestow fine linen clothes on the Altar.
And truly if Ladies and Gentlewomen, were studious in working holy vestments,
etc. as it is probable, that the blessed woman Dorcas did, Acts 9. 39. how much
more acceptable would it be to God, than in wearing those curious needle
works, on their own backs? what an honor would it be to themselves? what
perfection to their art? and whilst they strived to excel each other, what a
godly contention, and happy emulation, would be soon stirred up in the whole
sex? and what a religious employment might they have, who now are feign to
visit each others, not knowing what else to do?

CHAP. XXII. Of Burying in Churches.
THere is in use amongst Christians, a custom of burying dead bodies within
the Churches, and erecting their stately Monuments for them, which is accounted
a pious and religious custom, but being better thought on, may perhaps seem by
the frequency and community of it, rather an abuse, and pollution of the sacred
place.

The time was, when the corpse of the dead were entombed in their private
houses, and thence sprung the religious observations of the Lares, and Penates,
amongst the heathen, but succeeding ages thought it to be consuetudinem foedam
atque tetram, a foul and filthy custom. Nor would they permit any to be
buried, so much as within the City walls; Ne sanctis Municipiorum jus polluatur,
says the Law of the 12. Tables. And surely if a Corporation may be polluted
by burials (either Physically, by the stench and loathsome vapors of the dead
carcases infecting the air, or Morally, by the the mixing Mortua Vivis:) any
man will easily think that a Temple may.

The Jews buried their dead without the City, unless their Kings and
Prophets, who were buried in the City of David, not in places of public
resort, but in private grots, and caves. And whereas we read 1 Samuel 25. 1. that
Samuel was buried in his own house at Ramah, the Geneva note tells us plainly
it is meant among his own kindred.

The old Romans and Greeks also, buried without their cities, and there erected
their Momuments before the City gates, (...), says S. Chrysostom (...) That
passengers might be put in mind of mortality; as also, that the Citizens might
with more enraged courage and alacrity, sally out upon their enemies, that
should injure or violate the monuments of their Ancestors.

No Nation so barbarous as to fill the places where they worshipped, but a
feigned divinity, with the carcases of their dead. The Turks are famous in all
histories, for keeping their Moschits, free from the least pollution. So free
are they from common burials, that it is not lawful, for the Grand Signour
himself, to be there interred.

Abraham buried the holy woman Sara in a field, and was there buried himself,
Genesis 25. 9. It was a Cave, where Lazarus was buried, whom Christ so loved, that
he wept when he drew near his grave, John 11. 38. The Widows son was
carrying out of the city to burial, Luke 7. 12. Our blessed Savior himself,
was entombed in a Garden, whose sacred corpse, what Temple might not have been
proud to have contained.

Many holy Councels have forbidden, Ne corpora defunctorum intra Ecclesiam
sepeliantur, that none should presume to bury within the Churches. But in
process of time, it was indulged to pious Emperors (men that had fought the
battles of the Church, and had well deserved of her) to be buried in the
Church porch. Afterward to holy Bishops, and to other Clergy men of eminent,
and remarkable sanctity, burial within the Church was permitted. After other
men, famous and renouned, who had given great revenues to the church, were also
buried in it. Lastly, all were suffered that would pay the fees. And S. Gregory
in his Dialogues lib. 4. ca. 50. favors the custom very much, supposing that
the kindred and friends of the deceased, seeing their Monuments, may be put in
mind to pray for their souls departed. And this truly may be a good reason
amongst the Papists. But why we, who call our Church the Reformed, and
renounce all the errors and superstitions of Rome, should still so frequently,
and for people of mean rank or little desert retain this, having no such
religious pretense for it, truly I know not: I verily believe, had not custom
so far already prevailed, our Church would not permit it. I am sure that
somewhere, great sees are demanded, only to stop the passage from the heady
and indiscreet multitude.

Some men surely, with an honest and good mind, have by this means desired to
testify to posterity, their certain hope of a joy full Resurrection; and that
as they lived in the unity, and faith of the Church; so neither in death were
they divided from her. Others, I fear are too too guilty of pride and vain
glory, who care not how much the Majesty of the sacred places suffer, so they
may have their Tombs, their Arms and their Banners, (Ensigns, of vanity and
pride) erected* S. Chrysostom calls the Church, (...), the school of
humility, and are not we mistaken, that think it, the only fit place to
display our pride.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Privileges and Immunities of Temples.
THe Privileges, and Immunities that Temples have enjoyed, have added much
honor, and ornament to them: amongst others, that they have been places of
refuge, which immunity consists in this (as Navar Navar. Man. 25. 17. Can. in
sum. juris. 3. tit. 42.
and Canisius teach) that any person guilty of any crime, and escaping to the
Temple, might not be halled from thence to punishment, or prison. Nay if the
offender were in the Officers hands, leading him to punishment, yet escaping to
so sacred a place, he might not be carried any further. Heretics, Pagans,
Jews, public robbers, and such as committed their offense within the Temple,
were not suffered to enjoy these privileges.

Nor were the Laytie only prohibited, but Clergy men also, by an ancient
Council, were forbidden to pollute the holy Temple, by taking their Servants
or Scholars from the Church, to which they flew, to escape punishment* Quod si
fecerit, says the Council, a loco cui honorem non dederit, segregetur, let
him be suspended, and cast out from that place, which he so lightly esteemed;
and indeed by this, and the like outrages of passionate men, the Majesty of the
Sacred Temple, is not alittle violated; this is (...), Acts 21. 28.
as the Scripture speaks, to he have your self in the Church no otherwise
than in a common and profane house. Other privileges which Almighty God has
honored his Church withal, far exceed these; he has pleased to grant to
penitent sinners, that come thither, confessing, and bewailing their sins,
forgiveness of them, though they come as black as Ravens, they shall return
as white as Doves. He has placed in it his holy Angels to be its guard, and at
the ministration of the holy Communion, no man doubts of their especial
attendance. Nay it has pleased God to honor his Temple with miracles. Gregory
Nazienzen tells of one wrought upon his own Orat. 2. in laude^ Sororis.
sister, who was a woman (says he) so holy as blessed souls departed; she
came into the Church, and leaning her head against the Altar, her eyes being
full of tears, uttered these words, with a sweet confidence in her God, I will
never depart one foot from this place, unless I be healed from my disease: and
she was immediately healed; thus he. But we must not therefore expect, the like
miracles to be wrought in ours, Divina In Epist. ad cler. Hipp.
voluntas, sicut hominibus, ita etiam and locis, pro suo libitu distribuit
sanctitates and gratias, says Saint Angustin; God works miracles, when, and
where he pleases. He has blessed our Temples, with what is greater than a
miracle; it is a harder thing to have the diseases of the soul, than of the
body, healed. Repentance is the greatest cure that can be wrought. It is a far
greater miracle, for a sinner to be converted, than for water to be turned
into wine.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the right use of Temples, and how they are abused.
THose men surely make right good use of the Church, who make it the object of
their bounty, and munificence in building, repairing, beautifying, or adding
any ornament unto it. And the like do they who often frequent it, confessing
and bewailing their sins, receive the holy Sacraments, hear the Word of God,
or do any other Christian, and religious duty in it: The ancient Christians,
when they came to any place, were wont first of all to visit the Churches, into
which they entered with all reverent, and decent behavior, humbly saluting the
God of the Temple, by some devout prayer.

The holy Fathers, held their Councels and Synods, in the Temples.

So we read, that the General Nicen Council was held in the chief Temple at
Nice, etc. Eusebius. de vit. Constable. lib. 3.


In them also Kings, and Emperors, receive their Crowns, as it were
acknowledging their honor to be immediately received from God.

But there is nothing so clean, that we have not polluted, nothing so holy
that our bold wickedness, has not violated: The sacred majesty of the Temple
has experience of this truth which is abused and profaned, even by those men
who by sacred office, are bound to reprove the abuses offered by others. Such
are they, who serve themselves, and not the Altar, who seek riches, honors,
ease, and pleasure in it, and not the glory of God, and the salvation of the
souls committed to their charge.

And those who whilst they seem to adorn Churches, do vilely deface them
with painting Lions, Unicorns, etc. in such uncivil and unseemely sort, that
chaste, and modest eyes, dare scarcely look on them: Mehaps the Homily that
speaks against outrageous decking of Churches means this.

And those also abuse the Temple, who suffer it to be foul and unclean, the
sacred vessels to be base and vile; who seldom come thither, as if it were
only built for Swallows, and Sparrows to inhabit; who do not seriously
confess their sins, and intend to lead a new life, but come to the Church like
men that enter into a bath, but wash not, returning fouler than they came,
being infected with the soil, and filth of others. Those also are guilty of
this sin, who come thither to show their rich and sumptuous apparel, and new
fashions, as it were presenting a show, in the theater: And those who behave
not themselves in it, with all lowly reverence, as the holiness and majesty of
the place requires, and the examples of blessed Saints teachs us: S. Elizabeth,
who was a kings daughter, is reported to have put off her Crown, when she
entered into the Temple, saying, it was not decent for her to wear a crown of
gold in that place, where her Savior was presented to her, with a crown of
thorns. We read of diverse, whom God has most severely punished for abusing
his Temple: S. Chrysostom Orat. in Gentil.
has this story of Julian, and Felix, who sometimes were Christians, but for the
favor of Julian the Emperor, forsook Christ. These men by the command of the
Emperor, entered the Temple built by Constantine at Antioch: Julian
contumeliously polluted the Altar, and with contempt sat down upon the sacred
vessels; Felix seeing the rich Ornaments of the Church, look ye (quoth he) with
what state Mary's Son is served; But Julians bowels shortly after rotted, and
his excrements came forth at his mouth, and Felix miserably died, streams of
blood issuing out of his blasphemous mouth. Many other lamentable stories might
be recited of others, who have wronged and abused the sacred Temples, or any
way violated them, by taking away their possessions. So true is that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. He that destroys the Temple, him will God destroy.

CHAP. XXV. Of the rewards which such receive, who build and adorn Churches.
IF that man that for Gods sake gives but a cup of cold water, shall receive a
reward; Lord! what reward shall they receive whose pious munificence has
erected or adorned a Temple? Whilst they live here great honors shall seek and
find them; and sacred History shall (for the joy and delight of all future
ages) embalme them with the precious ointment of a good name.

When the royal deeds of our dear Sovereigns blessed reign, shall be
delivered to posterity, his magnificent piety, his care and religious diligence
in building and adorning sacred Temples, must needs take up a great part in the
story.

Who knows whether this little Treatise, plus uno maneat perenne saeclo, (may
after a long and vile neglect) be again brought to light and perpetuate the
honorable acts and pious munificence of Sr Paul Pindar, at whose sole costs and
charges a great part of that ancient structure dedicated to the memory of S.
Paul in London, was repaired, the Quire beautified with guildings, and
paintings, and stately adorned with rich hangings. The parish Church where he
dwells, and other private Churches, greatly enriched by his bounty. Nor shall
the piety of Sr Jo: Wolstenholm, ever be forgotten, who at the pious request of
the young Knight his son, has adorned Stanmore, the place of his birth, with a
beautiful, and comely Church, erected from the very foundation, at his great
cost.

Little did that good Eusebius. 10. c. 4.
Bishop Paulinus, Bishop of Tire, by whose means and procurement, the famous
Temple at Tire in Phenicia was built; little, I say, did he think, that the
whole current of the Oration should be diverted to him, when in the solemn
assembly of many other Bishops, the Preacher began thus: O ye friends and
Priests of the most high God, which are beautified with holy robes, and the
heavenly crown of glory; And thou the ornament of the new and holy Temple, to
whom God himself has granted this great honor, that thou should on earth
build his house: well may we call thee another Beseleel chief builder of Gods
Tabernacle, a Solomon, a new Zerobabel, who have added greater glory to the
Temple than it had before, etc.

We read of memorable victories obtained by such men, as have been builders of
Temples. Justinian the Emperor (as is by some observed) recovered all Asia,
formerly lost by the Romans, shortly after he had dedicated a Church, to the
memory of our blessed Lady.

It may seem strange to some, that we should put riches among the rewards
which builders receive; for it has ever been a common opinion, that building
is the speediest way to wax poor, but it fares other wise, with such as
build Temples, themselves have confessed, that their riches have not decreased,
the more they dedicated to God, the richer still they grew.

The pious Lady Helena, mother to the Emperor Constantine, built many
Churches: Yea, even in her old age, she undertook a religious journey to the
holy Land for the same purpose, and there erected two Temples, to the honor of
God, the one at Bethlem, the other upon the Mount of Olives; and certainly God
rewarded her according to her works. She lived always in great happiness and
prosperity, to the age of 80 years, and then in the presence of her son, who
was the most potent Prince in the whole world; amidst her grandchildren sprung
from Royal blood, she expired her blessed soul in such a happy manner, that
it could not be esteemed a death, but rather a changing of a frail mutable
life, for eternal and celestial glory.

Many more rewards, do they receive in this world, as health of body, a quiet
and happy life, adorned with chastity, and all other virtues, and lastly, a
most blessed death, after which they do receive eternal and unspeakable joys.

THE END.

