RAPTA TATIO.

THE Mirror of his Majesty's present Government, tending to the Union of his
whole Island of Brittonie

Martial. Rumpatur quisquis rumpitur inuidia. AT LONDON, Printed by W. W. for
S. Waterson. 1604.

Ignibus vnionis arden S.


To the Right Honorable and famous Cities London and Edenborough, York in the
way not unsaluted; and to their Inhabitants, and Friends of all conditions.
BEcause in you (especially) be the newses of all Commonwealthes causes; I
choose you, to whom to dedicate the Discourses upon the Union debated. Of other
natures are other Records likewise interserted, as arguments modern in your
daily uses. Be you all strong Friends to this great good of your estates, and
no party shall be thought able to withstand you, and your followers. My self
beg nothing of you, nor seek to borrow upon credit; though I know you trust
much; and in so doing, give it when you are not paid: But if I once see
Bonfiers in you for this new Conjunction, yours will be the Chiefest benefit,
mine a share of the Comfort. That if it happen to be concluded, burn my Books
then, as part of Joys Fuel: If that miss good event, and mine affection
shall be suspected, or arguments neglected, a badde Birds ill Egg, I know,
will not have worse fortune. Howsoever my Zeal is such to you, and to this
Case, as I refer it and my self, humbly to your Censures: willing to make my
self better known, then when I shall be assured I can deserve well of you: till
which time come, gladdest if it were quickly, I rest.

Ever at your command, Your Countryman and a Britain.

The explanation of the Title, and application thereof.
WHEN the Romans for continuance of their people and commonwealth, made
Union with their Neighbors the Sabines and the rest, by taking their Daughters
(though against their wills at first) to wives, whom afterward proof
showed, they could not better have bestowed: the chiefest of the rest was
reserved for Tatius: The credit of whose name was of such authority, that not
the very enemies would make resistaunce. That if they then yielded to, for a
Noble man's fancy in his affection; let a general good now, be more powerful
for a Kings desire of a Commonweal.

Hoc tantum inspice qui nobis paratur,
An possit fieri vetus sodalis.
The Title.
RAPTA TATIO.

Haec facies testatur amorem. Anagram.

AT AT PATIOR.

Nec facies placet cui gelasinus abest. Upon both.

Praeda datur Tatio: mea miles vulnera porto: vt vere dicam dum potior patior.
Sed modicum patiar, quia nisus nomine tanto, et tanto fultus numine tutus ero.
Rapta Tatio.
Having (you great Cities and your friends and followers) since I saw all use
of my poor endeavors spared, or rather found disabilitie in them to afforde use
to the state, or person of my dread Sovereign, or of his royal Queen, or
ishew; sequestered my self from either saucy intrusions or shameless suites;
I thought I should so have been forgotten, and might also have been suffered
without offense to forget: But so full are all things every where of his
Majesty, as even in my retiredest priuatenesse, by Subjects who could not
judge of ought, but what the Subject enabled them to; neither take much joy in
any thing, but in Haruestes, Marriages, and Holidays; nor speak for much more,
then Nature and the Countries vocation gives direction for: I have been
assaulted with their welcome, yet vehement endeavors, of expressing their joys
for him; their comfortes in him; their hopes from him, their duties to him; in
deed their admiration, of not only what they see, but what they feel
themselves even warmed and comforted by, not to all men in able Judgment
visible, but every where by some virtue or other sensible: no less then they
profess his Majesty's Proclamations to their understandings notable; his
caryage and manage of himself and his judgment in treasons so little
deserved, by Subjects no whit justly agreeued, taken to mercy besides all law,
but that which his own heart and understanding inuentes and affoordes; not a
little rare, yet very royal. Above all it may be, (for being last in memory)
they seem full of a speech his Highness made in the beginning of the
Parliament: for place in such a session; for vtteraunce, so delivered; upon
further suite and need thereof so reitterated; the arguments, so gracious;
for use, so necessary; seen even before proof so judicial; as when they of
their kind could find understanding to commend, fullness to utter; it so
far set on fire my spirit, to give my self satisfaction about; as whether
scorn to be ouermatched by those in that argument, or new desire enflamed to
apprehend so glorious a world, gave the instigation I know not; up rose again
those spirits which had faithfully borne zeal (and that without fault
otherways) to his Highness, when community knew him not; in days when
Nobility treated but sparingly of him; and the time had kept him in breeding
in a country fit to make him wise and hardy, as any of his ancestors; less
soft and delicate then many of his progenitors. Pardonable then (I hope) it
shall be esteemed, if to join with the rest, or salute their gratulations to
him first, what came from him, comes for him: the meditation of Subjects
wishes, the understanding of many their senses, directed to acknowledge how
unworthy they are so gracious and so good a King, who publicly professes to
thank them for that, for which, God and he himself is to be thanked, in that
he was borne, and refuses not his end for which: who professes peace;
fears no war; stands stiffly to religion with a prudent discretion; seeks
unions for unity; gives his own for the Commonwealths cause the most, and
yet accomptes to it for what he gives: does all things as doubting which upon
trial are surely placed. And though my self be too unworthy to explain what
his Majesty's hidden provisions are, of those which have open show for his
Kingdoms good; and know how near flattery and gross adulation plain
delivery and truth comes: yet since they be good desires in others, none ill
in my self, which have stirred me up to this presumption; and Virtue may be as
confident to challenge her own, as Vice is apt to borrow of insinuation; I
ask leave that I repress not my thoughts in silence, neither spare to lay
them down so insufficiently, in so able an age. But yet daring no further, you
may be pleased, as Dionisius made Aristippus believe, that his ears were in
his feet, to hear with your heels: or if the work be not worthy to be taken
up, it can not be vile enough, if it shall not be otherwise censured, having
love and duty, zeal and care of country therein, to be trodden upon. And
here in what I shall discourse, as I have caught it by vulgar relations, and
remember it happily but vnfittingly for the use should be made of it: so, if
either I had had direction to write, instruction of occurrents, and priuitie to
have made right use; my pains should have been employed to have given that
satisfaction to this cause, which now I aim at: and but only for the
gladness of the popular duty to so gracious a Sovereign, I could not have
been thrust upon. And herein I will not deal with my love to them, as the
Sleeper did with the Coniurer, who having told him, that a dream of an Egg
signified treasure, sent him only of silver and gould (whereof he had found
some quantity) a portion of the silver, and put him to ask for news of the
Yolke numquid de vitello: for even all the substance in my Shell, is wholly
this arguments: and the more devoutly, since with Deiotarns our King is not
building of Cities at the thirteenth hour of the day: nor with Crassus, at
sixty years old, beginning to march against the Partheans: but even at his
first entrance, does so address himself to his government, as all are
proud at this instant, who spoke well before, and they who see him now, find
ability to speak for ever. It shall not be said of him, he bears his time
well, as if somewhat were to be allowed to his new enteraunce; but he uses his
time well. It was Damasippus fault to give Cicero so much advantage, having
bidden him to supper, as by having kept his Wine forty years in his house,
to be subject to his guestes censnre, that it bore the age well. This Kings
time came when it should be used, and is used when it is come: England allured
not him to it, till it sent to him for it. He has taken a state Captive, by
Gods providence, and his Majesty's good usage of his gifts; was not taken
prisoner, as Policrates was by Eurotes: Therefore he pertakes Gods blessings
not against the Fates, but by direction of the Heavens. Before his Highness is
treasure, in his coming hither: some (I hope) will find it behind him, if
God bless the golden Mines in Scotland.

Cefellius Bassus applauded Nero for being dear unto the Gods, as in whose
time only, Gold long time hid, came to light. There are (I cannot deny) who
are so unhappy, as to conjecture, that some that has seen light, is gone
that way to be hid: But neither shall fail the use of this Kingdom, if God
bless the ones finding, and grant means to the others returning, since now
the King has propounded, that an union may be confirmed* the only means to
draw al uses from thence, to the good of us here, without our loss in any
thing, which with the gain by this cause, will not be well requited; nor will
it be long to the appearance thereof, when his Majesty's subjects shall be all
conjoined, which are borne and inhabit within one continent, have, and long
may they have the same sovereign, suffer noe division, nor which ever did,
other then what the Devil drew on for the punishment of both; and it seems
Gods sacred ordinance, to move the Kings Majesty to affect the amends of,
for the good of either. They have reason to follow, where their King is; we
cause to embrace them, who come with him. The Country besides is honored in
his Highness, which bredde such a King, as lives to prove (has not a bare
testimony of a thing forgotten) more ability in him self, then Darius on his
Tomb was commended for: I was a f^iend to my friends, an horseman and bowman
excellent: I was best of Huntsmen, and in my person could do all things. And
shall not Cirus his counsel to Cambises his son, make us more assured, to
have a Scepter compacted of multitudes of Friends, then of quantity of Gold.
And how can we compact them, but to make them like Niobees Tomb, being the
Marble? This Tomhe has no dead body; this dead body has no Tomb: but the one
is the other, and either is each. And if friendship be as Senica says,
Negotiatio quae ad comodum accedit: The King has greatest cause (if their
ingratitude shall not give him cause to be weary of both) to join them in
strrct bands of all comfortable all entire and equal Loves betwixt them;
since the greatest profit which ever can come to either of them, must be in
seeing the welfare, and enjoying the life of him alone. Nor is it fit that
his friends should not be united (I presume to call his Subjects his
friends, as by a dear title, as well as humble); since better it is the King
were not of agreeing harmony in himself, then where his friends were naught,
the King himself were of good disposition. And if the difference were any, for
the exchange: some have said Procul a love et a fulmine; the conuersations of
Kings have ever been held like the nature of the Flames, warm further of,
and burning nearer. The King shall better repress further off in this form,
by this means give greater scope to the Subject nearer hand: by that course,
his further people shall be made more civil (I speak of the priuater of them),
these not so great flatterers, (I speak not much of the publicker of these)
whose so often kneelinges, his Majesty, it is said, has so much forbidden, as
if he had seen Tiberius the Emperor fall on his face, running away from a
fellow, who hung upon him kneeling.

A Woman did the like upon this our King at Royston, whose Husband, that he
might live disorderly with his Greyhound, against the Kings Proclamation, left
to live orderly with his wife according to the institution of Marriage. Yet as
for the one, I mean not altogether the men of the Lues; (part of whose
Country I had hoped, that ere this time, the battered Garrison of Barwicke
should have had) so I fear not much the other, who can only allege, Offa me
monet, the King having Subjects (of whom his Majesty's own note is, that they
were borne to haunt, shame, and starve himself) of able means to reform
them, by cutting off allowaunces.

The condition of those, I profess, to be more dangerous, who can amend
mistakinges: And to the question quid brachium can reply, illud dicere volui
femur, who can either turn an Argument of strength into lasciviousness; or
can alter with occasion, and flatter even vice, if they could here find it. But
while ill things ought not to be commended, ill men can be allowed no fit
praysers: Seneca in his Tractate of the honest life, says: We ought to be as
much ashamed to be commended of bad men, as if we were praised for ill
conditions. Reverend and Worthy men has the King to hear, as ever King was
served withal, both grave and wise: and wise and stout: such as of whom it
can not be said, that they have less of Eloquence then of Faith; being as
excellent speakers, as careful doers: neither less Honor, then may command
duty* being many by him self advanced, others better then always
confirmed, or more then before increased. They are they to whom the Law can not
be unpleasing, that Amasis King of Egypt made vti singuli apud praesides
prouinciae ostenderent vnde viuerent. That is in England on capital head of
many manifold vices, when men may live by what means they can, only
answearing unto public accusations; whereas how they get, what they spend;
how they spend, what they get; how they outface meaner Magistracy; how they
blind greater, in causes of danger how they find many, and the Commonwealth
few friends; how they shift causes, and the Judge never heates of them: for
these, how much God is angry; their courses how easy it is in beginngs to
prevent: if counsel of Counselors find other things more urgent to their
wisdoms, I remember what I wish the Commonwealth should have cause to thank
them for.

These people will go as near Justice and Laws, and escape them, as Domitian
could shoot near through by a Boys fingers, and miss them. This reverend
counsel, for having lived in Coutts, may they be more honored, then to be
reviled in Woods? So let them know their services rewarded in living; that
dead, they be not abused by the living: And if they may be amongst us, who
would be wise like them, let us not put them from amongst us, who have more
experience, and have had more priuitie then we.

Zenophones Colophonius, who was called Homeromastixe, in lamentation of his
poverty, told a King of Cecely, that he was scarce able to keep two
Servants: Yet quoth the King, he whom you rail upon, feeds 10000. being
dead: so are worthy men by mean ones defaced; so pratchantnesse knows not it
is saucy; so come faulty humors to be unpunished, because not seen; and not
seen, because not regarded.

In Rome it is written, Rutilius and Scaurus had petition for a Consulship, and
at last Rutilius gave way to Scaurus. Scaurus accused Rutilius of Canuace,
because in Rutilius his Tables was written A. F. P. R. which Scaurus did
interpret as signifying done by the faith of Publius Rutilius, actum fide
Publij Rutilij, as if Rutilius had corrupted the voices, and Scaurus could not
have been made Consul without Rutilius had renounced unto him: But Rutilius
made this interpretation, ante factum postea relatum, that first it was had,
afterward restored: as if Scaurus had by his name framed his Office, and he
had been but the pronouncer of his reputation. Caius Caninius a Roman Knight
being on the part of Rufus, notwithstanding held, that neither interpretation
was true upon those Letters, but that they imported Aemilius fecit plectitur
Rutilius, Aemilius did it, and Rutilius suffered for it; that was, took the
repulse. But I think both then: for neither are here now.

In that time, where was the courtesy passed betwixt Largius and Caelius, when
they two spent the day so in commending one another, either for others worth to
be elected Dictators, that scarce either of them could be appointed on the
second day of their choice?

Where was then that humanity which Pompey showed, who being appointed unto
Metellus his charge, because Metellus was elder and more noble in glory, would
not accept his preferment appointed unto him, unless Metellus would desire his
company in taking share of his care?

This case had much other pleading when it was, and howsoever Rutilius was
stuck unto, yet Cicero gave not all to that speaker; but in decision of the
cause, having iudicially delivered, turned his countenance upon a worthy man
of his favor, concluding directly in the behalf of Scaurus.

More did not Tully in any day show himself master of his ears, nor better
at any time command his tongue, to utter his judgment: Yet was that trial
only brought in to take experience of duty, fully necessary for greater
causes soon after to be propounded: This only being like Alcibiades Dog,
sent through the City of Athens with his tail cut off upon purpose. That as
it was to try what woonderors were there in that body, so this to discern
whether free tongues were walking, or not walking in your free Cities?

But howsoever, had Angustus his Judgment, been held as good as Claudius his
benefit, the decision had found authority, not the authority decision. Then
might the Soldier have come to Caesar to ask his reward of pleasuring him,
in a fitter time, then after he had lost one of his eyes at Munda.

But it may be in times foregoing, it has been thought, that clean observance
was more worth, then holy duty, to be honored rather skilfully, then devoutly
coli site quam sancte: Yet doubt I, that word Clean, had drunk too lately in
the Low Countries, and signified rather little in the site, then mannerly in
the obseruaunce. Or else as it befell, Martial would have his rule of loving
accept Familiarity, but admit no reverence. Tu vis coli Sexte volebam amore,
Sed si te colo Sexte non amabo. If otherwise, which I well believe, and you
great Cities may happily hear of that not want of particular duty, but care
of general good, makes refusal of that for the Countries cause, wherein a
Kings command had otherwise readely prevailed over his Subjects: while the
event of the ones desire, the others refusal stood upon uncertain successes;
and the fathers care might be thought impartial touching his own lawful
Children, though issued from diverse venters; what Vigil could not site
Virgill; what Watchman could not discern day then in view, then to follow his
colors with Nil desperandum Teucro duce et auspice Teucro? Nor could it be
said, O socij neque enim ignari sumus ante malorum, for of the contrary we
have had experience lamentable, of this which would have yielded comfort, such
has been our unhappiness, though the Histories can tell you how sought, never
occasion to any could we take.

Better directions then happy directions, men can not receive, such as either
are affected to be followed for love by hope, or men are won to embrace by
reason upon ground. Him examine by his own, remember his life past so
blessedly run through, so mischieffously attempted; take view of his estate
present, of our hopes of blessedness by him; and thereby frame conjecture how
fortunate his Highness may be in these his desires not withstood, but
submitted to, by those who must leese liberties as dear as life thereby.

And should you not take him Kingly, but Philosophically; the rule for his
condition fittes him, as his Scepter, for a King, becomes him.

A body strong, fortunes rich, the heart stout, and brains learned, Milesius
thought to be the seat of happiness.

Plato he platted five kinds of Felicities: good Counsel, good Health, good
Fortune, good Reputation, good and falsely esteemed, (but never before other
lovers of Wisdom, loved them better then Philosophers) above all Goods,
Goods.

I might add to make these goods better, as greater for their quality, makes
not their price more then their quantity aduaunceth their reputation, even
goods hanging upon Ropes.

Of which kind, to leave the Kings Maritine riches, in like whereof no Prince
in the world is known to equal him: I may truly say, as he is far from
taking advantages upon those from whose indiscreete and unworthy vsages, the
haynousnesse of their crimes have given their states and safeties away, so
might so much moderation in cause of just anger, have given true trial of none
over great violence in matter of affection.

And were it not for the good of either, since he has charge of both, it
would neither be the draught of the one to what they seek not, nor of the
other to what they like not, that would make either Fancies seem Faces, or
Reasons almost Treasons.

Nor can I guess whence no better satisfaction grows, unless Opinion may be
held of the highest estate, to be as Pliny writes of Fortune, that she is
the Goddess who in the whole world in all places, at all hours, with all
voices, alone is called out upon, alone is named, alone is accused: who has
the only guylt, the only estimation, the only praise, the only blame: and
with inuectiues is worshipped, with slander cherished, in inconstancy thought
constant: to whose charge is laid the maintayning the unworthiest, the account
of all expenses, the catalogue of all receites, and the filling up of each
Leaves either part in the blottes of all reckonings, and the setting upon all
Audits.

If not so, with reverence and love may I speak it to your Cittie-assemblies,
Tables as you may think private and secure, be too little provident; no less
was the Frenches confidence, who to show their not fearing Alexander, could
instaunce in nothing to give them doubt, but in the heuens falling.

Yet certainly as Abimelech being hurt by a Stone from the Castle, whereinto
the Israelites fled, thrown down by a Woman's hand, desired rather that a
Soldier would kill him, then that by so weak an hand he should perish: So is
it ever to be feared, that greatness can no where suffer contradiction with
content, where the cause is reasonable, and affection Royal, in the
understanding.

It may be nevertheless, that Pompilius thought a Circle scoared by a Rod,
could give lymits to consultation, as Intra hunc consule. The intendment of
such Circles, were to combine men's seats and endeavors by freedoms to assist
every one the most he could, not with liberties to forestall singular men
peremprorily, those propositions which come but newly into consultation, being
neither rashly, nor meanly commended. Those ends had no Celticke boldness
appointed to them; they were not to be joined with contempt of safety. There
was not intended that with the blood of Hanniball, should be made strong the
league with Rome. There was no Privilege to engadge that offense which no
memory could ever remit, if the after successes should accuse the then resolved
judgments. The Scottish in this age, nor in those to come, shall in this
Kingdom get the best offices alone, fear ye not; nor let others affright you
therewith. But as the Kings Majesty contendes to have the State general, and
public weal of the whole Island, to which he is equally by God appointed in
best order; so propounds he, that it may be free for the best man of those, who
are his native Subjects, borne and inhabiting within the same continent, and
none otherwise divided by Tweede, then others of his Subjects are by Trent,
may have place for his goodness to serve the Commonwealth in.

Such is his Majesty's royal disposition, to choose the best from the most, and
to get it enacted, that the left hand, though not so much heretofore used,
shall now be known to be a part of the same body, and receive the same
nourishment by the same passages, and do natural services, as none artificial
member. But why we should so much doubt them, see I not so much cause. In all
men now living is not the appetite of Diogenes deceased: he being asked what
kind of wine he would gladliest drink of; answered, of another man's: for of
those there are many will not change their own setlings, and too many who have
pensions elsewhere already, and some are going further for better profits: all
of whom great offices in this kingdom do not expect, nor would they ever be
suitors for them to sit about them. Yet do you think it better and less
dangerous to admit too great hopes at home, then safe for a common wealth to
permit too much certainty of engagement abroad.

This was it of which Horace said, that the horns had hey upon them, fly
those beasts, Foenum habet in cornu, long fuge. This Frenchman is black, Hunc
tu Brita^ne caueto. Nay, I may tell you that this nation is so well traueld,
has so much addiction to see further, as it will well ioin to draw your looser
abroad, by increase of strength; your richer home, with support of wealth. And
whether such dispositions are likely to hold, they who have traueiled can best
discern, who have seen us foraignly love and take part against all nations each
with other, when we lived domestickly scarce friends, and daily occasions given
why we should be more disjoined. Too much occasion has been given why secret
reme^brances might hold; some in act, some in fact: but so blessing of us is
God, so gracious to us is our King, so prouide^t are they ca^ forsee this, as
the storye modern may now be corrected as Martials epigrams might be amended,
which when many interlineations, many scorings, could not perfect, vna litura
potest, spongia sola potest: many apologies, many periuries, many simple
denials, many beings out of the way, many facings to the teeth, many
accusatio^s of his better subjects, many combinations of packes together,
though all these should be and many more, can never or not always hold all in,
or all men: only this asks pardon and says nothing, this takes revenge and
does good together. Now let us have none aliens, none attainders, be al free as
we may be, noble as we should be. Let the same hand, which endeavored hurt or
was mistaken, heal and be rightly understood. If there be impedime^ts outward,
remove them; if imward, advise them. Licurgus being demanded how the enemies
forces might be aba^doned; answered, if they would continue poor, which this
age yields no disposition to: and if they would lay by civil dissentio^s;
which is best done where singuralities are avoided, good only affected. But if
the best should come, to the eagerest satisfaction: and yet it is less value
to defend then assault: less hability to deny, then to prove: and that very to
do good is more suspected, then ill doing deemed faulty: the wisdom of
Pisistratus must yield to the wilfulness of his children, or else others must
take advantage by their debate. The story says that when as Pisistratus had
given right advise unto his children, and could not get their consent unto it,
and thereby was urged to stand in some question with them for their
disobedience; finding his enemies reioiced thereat, as hopeful that from that
disse^tion some alteration might grow, having called his citisens together, he
made the^ publikly know, that true it was he had bin a^gry with his children,
for that they had not agreed to their fathers desires: but afterward it seemd
good to his fatherly piety to desce^d into their opinion; therefore he would
have the city to take knowledge, that the issew of the king were accorda^t unto
the will of the father. So was that good Pisistratus driven rather to give away
his own interest, then to let others take aua^tage of their dissentio^.
Touching who^ if the father should have said as Diogenes answered the poticary,
how should he not believe that there were gods, when he knew him enemy to them.
Why it should not be feared that oppositio^ to greatness, in a cause
indifferent, might teach greatness how great it is in a cause that were just,
be you Judges quo iure quaque iniuria. But it may be in your great cities and
amongst your followers and friends, there are diversities of resolutio^s,
though not quot capita tot sensus. For it may be some cannot find means of
deliberation, unless their respites of judgment may be enlarged to quantum
diutius cogito. Others happily may fulfill you with so many reasons, as upon
some kind of indictment might hang a subject, had but half an one more ben
added; so fruitful they seem to be of co^ceits, though their revenues of
reasons, in this cause to be spent, would hardly maintain an army, to fight
with arguments an whole year in open battle against this union. But many had
those need to be, could refuse a nation so welcome, at an imbracement so
necessary. Why should we stick upon needless fears? Degeneres animos timor
arguit. Why should we, being grown into the peace of Ireland, say, that anguis
latet inter herbas odoriferas? An wholesome country breeds no serpent: no fraud
lurks in honest meaning. But these improuisions to this understanding are to be
attributed to late times foregoing: wherein the sex could not by any endeavor
meditate things so proper for the estate, as improper for their persons:
neither were their opportunities alike, whose fortunes suffered enemies to
their government, as are his who is offered friends for his own sake, for his
Queens blood, to his country now more respected. Yet let us admit the bounty of
Semiramis toombe, on which was in a written direction expressed that those who
wanted money might take there what they would: within notwithstanding was
opposed, that unless men were ill and insatiable of coin, they would never dig
up the coffins of dead persons for it: So keen they were in those days to
entice the world to take out this lesson, That affection should not always
adventure the uttermost, that liberty gives show to have given allowance for.
Yet let calumny be set apart in your cities, and the matter not reviled with
the infamy of the word, S. George shall not go so long on foot upon this
arraunt, that the most natural English man shall find him surbated in his
journey. Be not deceived ye cities and your friends: for these are but
sclender aids offered to any, when their assistaunces makes only the
furtheraunce, where the increase brought adds nothing to the strength settled.
Who speaks in you, either find your applause, or leave their arguments
helpelsse. Your pleasing countenances, having made the first speech seem sound,
the rest increase, as Hydraes heads multiplied. He, who sittes down amongst
you, happily has seriously thought upon what he delivers, and therinto has
wouen his affection and reason together: do not you approve it, till you have
adjudged the one, disseuered the other. One man happily the good sound of his
own words well placed, another the mirth of his jest well formed, has seduced
in their judgments of their own discourses, by whose errors should your
wisedo^es be undermined, it would be said happily you were either co^cordant by
clamor or allured for fancies. Shall you who have bo^fir'd and pagea^ted for a
king, are the glories of his state, now sca^t him his honor in appointing your
goods? Shall it be said of you, who have so well fashioned out this triu^ph
hitherto, that you can not maintain your selves out, as inco^stant, or for
disability must in extremo actu deficere? Then bring the honest young man, the
modest young maid together, let them woo, and their friends for them; let them
be made sure by a contract in form; let the cheer be made ready, the day
appointed, friends invited, fiddlers called, give and take you parents and
children on both sides; eat, drink, da^ce, court, and make more matches, til
day and half night be spent: then refuse your bridegroo^, for what marriage was
instituted. There are many devises to blind good mening in these ages; supposed
catholics may be attempted to be supposed puritanes; a faction in allia^ce may
make offer to arraigne an honest ma^s argument. With these be not you deceived:
but let your appetits be only your goods, your wills your weals. Think fit that
Soueraigns in their weldoings should be pleased; and not in their good
affections diseased. Know that a Monarch is but one as alone; the discourses
and arguments brought into you, many.

And will not you expect, that so many wisedoms, as inhabit and ride upon you,
shall draw one proposition, framed for your good, to the content of him to
whom the thanks is due? Shall not you like of a state framed to honor a King,
who brings a King a true honor to a state? Tell them who dislike most, they
shall have more ability, and be better defended, when you shall be all your
selves; then now, when a few prime men, either in parts or partaking, seem to
nicke up upon their opinions the judgments of so many grave and wise men as
are said to hold consort with them in their voyage. Can any men fear the King
of Englands place hereafter to be lost; and not enough care for the King of
Britains love now to be retained? That, though for his constancy he cannot
withdraw, for his place he may not; ought he not so to be regarded for it, as
it may be retained in him with his comfort? Is it feared that by this
appellatiue we shall be made fellows to the Brittons the thieves; rather are we
not doubly by this means instiled of France where dwell the canuascoats? I
call you to witness, we put not Stangatehole out of Huntington shire,
Shooters-hill out of Kent, nor other places of robberies out of English shires,
nor our selves leave to be called of that country if we had birth, or have
lands in them, notwithstanding the robberies done upon them, as odious as are
the robbers.

They who have hability to speak against this Union that it may not be;
cannot they (think you) defend it when it is? the inconueniency being all that
is pretended, or disproportion of affection, the dishonesty nothing, the
unlawfulness not otherwise discerned then known as little. The use of all
things is all: the reason applied to any thing proves, the affection loves,
the sight beholdes, and offices perform their functions, not always as order
leads, but sometimes best so used as occasion serves. (...) the greeks call
Punctum temporis: which who so hittes, if either he do it suddenly, O quantum
est subitis casibus ingenium! or necessarily, sapit, necessitati qui probe se
accommodat, et est rerum diuinarum atque humanarum conscius. Can any persuade
you who do the like honor to the King, how unlike soever this days garments
are to yesterdayes roabes, that the difference of an enstilement shall make him
lose the honor of his place, the reputation of his nation? True it is, where
persons were unknown, and kingdoms unheard of, Titles should have reputatio^s
as their words could signify: but then they must so begin, as weapons were
first found out, if you will believe Horace, which was when men went together
by the ears, first, vnguibus et pugnis, dein fustibus, atque it a porro
pugnabant armis quae post fabricauer at vsus. In this case where the kingdoms
account cannot be blemished, and almost the Kings wonder has been every
where even adored, in that age let those who like not to give him his due in a
session or otherwise, find then he knows what he is now: which god grant
always to send, may increase upon him. Slightly as I hear of arguments
tossed amongst you, so gladly desire I to settle you touching the^: leaving
with you my protestation of reverence humble, and love faithful, toward all
such as with understanding affection stand under any burden for the good and
honor of their mother earth, and her children. Against which, if for flattery
to the Scottish I shall seem to have written, let my brybe be judged of; some of
them having part of my living, others having torn in sunder my reputation: yet
since my bane came from the English, they trespassed not in wisdom to take
advantage thereof. And that mine hands may appear the cleaner, as yet my dread
Sovereigns have not don ought for me, of much I dare boldly yet prostrately
auow, I have well deserved, and both favor of laws of Court and Country would
assist me in right to. Yet doubt I not their royal natures, nor misdoubt mine
own patience, knowing it either well to become my duty to expect their princely
pleasures, or otherwise ready to credit their judgments, touching me, rather
then to give scope to mine own hopes of advancement, or good from my
Sovereigns. But all else set apart, and freely to deliver mine impartiality
in this cause, so safe I hold this for us to obey our King in; so comely to
welcome the nation with; so politic to close at this infolded embrace; as I
suspect not but all will be best being best used: and of the rest, let them
rather doubt, then we fear. Many men's turns have been already served, the
Kings own comfort is yet in petition: he joys not so much to be a King for
his pleasure, as to be a good King for the states weal. His Majesty takes now
the first opportunity, the flies are now not so busye: wholesome counsel has
poured balm upon opportunity in asking, magnificence in granting. Yet are
many the pretenses may draw Kings to be bou^tiful: of which if you have not
elsewhere taken good view, you may here judge of some, being part of many
thousa^ds. Kings somtims are even forced to grant, not so much for their desire
to bestow, as their shame to deny: Non tam studio quidem concedendi, quam
verecundia negandi. Some have used this argument, you know what my need
requires, Scis quid mihi opus sit: when there was more need of Hoc opus est
subito fias ut sidere mutus, that they had waited as dombe as the stars do on
the sun. Some said Regi hoc dare no^ conuenit, a royal King must make his gift
magnificent: When as Nec Cynios accipere de^ebat, Beggars should have been no
chusers. More suitors fall on upon Kings: one who for his wisdom, quia
rarissime: another for his conceit, quia iucundisime: a third who for his
attendance, quia tu^ pra^det et coenat cum Alexa^dro videtur, seek for gifts:
certain Calisthenesses advised by Aristotle. Others can often remember their
services, praying rewards to be bestowed for those causes, and for that in no
fortune they had been from the Kings person: Sylas from Agrippa. Some have
asked, as more learned then their fellows, for having given causes of things:
as why the lio^s devoured not Daniel. Some for limping if the king limped:
haukers and hu^ters, the fashion of the Ethiopes. Some for sitting late up by
him in the night, and praising his royal Children: Cato the younger from
Diotarus. Some must take, lest they should be uncivil in refusing: Zenocrates
from Alexander: And they must be given to, to try their good manners in
accepting. Some for their softnes must beg; having no fingers as may be supposed
on their hands, and therefore driven to wear their rings in their ears: the
servants of Penus in Penulus in Plaut. Some requited for their prese^ts: Siloson
with Samum from Darius. Some must buy, because they offer dear, multis
precibus, with much suite. Some must be given to, though naughty persons: Mores
miseratus non homine^, for pity not of the man but of his ma^ners. Some
bou^tifully dealt with, though not from a kings heart, no^ homini sed
humanitati, a gift bestowed upon courtesy not ma^hood.

Al must be granted by a king: for that he is as a god upon the earth. Dixi
quod dii estis, says the Psalmist, I have said ye are gods. And that is to
imitate god to be bountiful. Petitions were long since grown so usual, as
Seraphion would not strike the bal to Alexander in the Te^nis-court, unless he
begd it himself: Non praebes says Alexander; Immo no^ petis says Seraphio^.
Yet in some times the gifts were but such as Lupus gave to Martial, when as he
writ that he had a whole cu^try bestowed upon him, less then was one in the
bowpots in a corner of your neater Citizens windows: such a country, as in
which a Cabbage would make a whole wood, over which a Grasshoppers wings a tent,
which to an Ant was but a days feeding, and might be crowned with a Rose bud;
in which were two herbs only growing, wherein a Cucumber could not stand
upright, nor a Snake ly at ease: which one Mole could dig up in a day, one
Mouse destroy as fearfully as the Calidonian Boar; and has many other
descriptions in his epigram to Lupus expressed, concluding that he had rather
have had a dinner then no deneer, prandium quam praedium. Nam quo tempore mihi
praedium dedisti, mallem mihi prandium dedisses. In others, gifts had good
fortune: as when Aristippus said of Dyonisius the younger, That the king was
safely bountiful and magnificent, because he saw Plato send him back his gifts
again. In others they had good use: as when Fabius Maximus bestowed on Marsus,
a valiant soldier, no very great gifts, to keep in very great spirits. The
ancient boon of Leuidense none begs: which was a warm but light, yet common
garment Many now crave in many places; not so much for want of sufficient, as
because though they know some have more then enough, yet they would be loath
to have less then their fellows: striving as Otacilius did to equal
Torquatus: of whom it is written that as the ox burst the toade, so the one of
them would split in emulation of the other, vt bos ranam rumperat olim: sic
puto Torquatus rumpet Otacilium. Milesius was wont to say, there was no such
way to make a man quietly suffer adversity, as the knowledge that his enemy was
in worse prosperity: and think you, that emulatio^, in this, works not as much,
as, in the other, malice? For this cause did the brethren of Joseph sell the
son of Jacob unto the Arabian merchants. For the other, did Casselius find out,
that a Pyne tree nut was an apple, if it were to be thrown at Vatinius his
enemies head. Horace bestows much description upon those who would have none
so great as themselves and tells the tale of the toade, vituli pede pressus, who
told her dam, when she saw her swell to be as great as the calfe, Non si te
ruperis, inquit, Par eris. But though it were unfit in kings causes, Martials
counsel to Flaccus was unhappy, which advised to keep that to himself which
he had purposed amongst others; when as the offense of many, who should not
get, was dangerous, the bestowing upon al burdensome. Demeruisse duos votum est:
offendere plures vix tutum: Cunctis mittere dona grave. Our Sovereign, as his
goodness is great; so his rewards, his gifts, his aduancements have not bin
small. Tully had not so great cause to brag of his Quaestorship well discharged
in Sicily, when he came home to Rome; as some give show of our Soueraigns
bounty, who pass from one of you to another. Howsoever, it may truly be said,
it has rather bin a Royal king then an years Magistracy yet performed, has
advanced Tully to salute Room; so glorified from Sicily, so enuyed at home.
Take it not ill then (Tully) if no body at Room would talk to thee of thy
Quaestorship, of the news of thy carriage wherein thou thoughtst, to have found
all men full. And why should not such gifts, as they carry, be bestowed by him,
who having long stayed for power, ought now only to affect glory and good will?
Prius said Antigonus mihi opus erat potentia; nunc vero gloria et beneuolentia.
What other humane endeavor has this worthy king more seriously taken in hand,
then the benifiting of his and the countries friends, the reco^cileme^t and
agreement of the enemies of both? whereof the one, as they were made up,
partly by his love to his country, his desire to honor it, to advance her
fallen nobility, to requite such as had deserved best of her, to give many more
then their own, since the country had so gladly given him his own: partly by
those he brought with him, who had some of them bin rescuers of his life, some
extraordinary assistants of his estate, others such as he could not but reward
here, for services performed there, where memory was the reward he cold
properly give, and was all in their honors they would willingly take. So
enemies to kings do oftnest grow, either by want of what ambition made them
desire; or for lack of what expenses had drawn into waste: Else some sometimes
affect what blind zeal makes them think fit, or falls judgment rather false
hearts will not let them see pertinent and proper. But as his Majesty has, no
more then was fit, rewarded the first; unless they can say to him as the young
man says in Terence, Nescis quid mihi obtigerit, you cannot tell Sir what has
lighted upon me: So has he mercifully spared the other; insomuch that he has
neither co^fiscated them, as Tiberius the Emperor did the kings of Spain,
Sicily and Greece, ob leave impudensque calumniaru^ genus: for any light or
shameful kind of slander: nor fined them as Cassius did Sylla, and
Calphurnius: from one of whom he took quinquagies sestertiu^, and from the
other sexagies, Himself, being for any riot he is addicted unto, as free from
want either of ought belonging to himself, or for his covetousness from need of
any thing others possess. But either at pe titions of fair Ladies, none
offenders; or for some respects laid before him by his wiser Nobility; either
else for pure inclination unto mercy; has benefited Sylla, been steward of his
estate, kept others up, who would have kept others down. Thanks to so high
discerning, which found that when Sovereignty could not repress liberty,
benefits could more strictly then treason take it prisoner. Nor has he yet
inflicted so much as exile upon any of them, knowing it a banishment that they
forsook his justice. And that he detaineth them, is out of his mercy: for
boulder were they, and of better countenance could they be, when each had his
discontent; then now when they have proof in themselves, and the world sees it
appara^tly how unworthily they had placed it. Marcellus the Ciuilian, wrighting
upon a book of the Digestes, shows three kinds of banishment: either from
certain places; or from al places, besides certain; either else a co^fining to
some Island. And though all these be upon them, yet they had nothing of this
punishment, did not one certain place restrain them: and may they be confined
to an Ila^d, if further mercy shall deliver, and further occasion shall not
employ them, and that Island so prepared; the one by their Sovereigns grace,
the other in his prudence; they are not only like to be enlarged to a country,
but find their country enlarged to them. Touching whom pity is it they
rather were not free for this argument, then bound by the other offense. There
are of them, whose births, courages, bloods, experiences, and conditions, as
they were noble before they lost them; so nobly could they have spoken of this
argument, and I hope by this time have found much cause to be much forward
hereabout. Yet is there one of the^ would bring much grief unto me, (though I
wish him all good, in his weldoing) if he or his abettor, his Steward or
Protector, or his faction, so many as are of the old haunce for his cause
should be able to prejudice me more for compassion: then I could draw safeguard
to my self, by refraining evil desert, laboring good merit. But howsoever
these, some of them much unhappy before, in this estate at this time have all
tried the Kings Majesty's grace in their several particulars: in that
notwithstanding they have been absent from the true joys of their Country,
and from the affairs in hand, they may say as Demetrius Phalerius said, heu
inquieta negotia actionesque nostras quorum causa hactenus tantum viru^ nosse
non licuit. Well has he spent his time in this time who ere he was, and
worthily who wrote the tractate of the union, wherein he has performed his
task, and made his work prove his title. Many good laws has he given us to
tie the union by: For besides what he writes like a Philosopher lernedly, and
of the Kings goodness multipliciously, let the soul of his Commonwealth be
tried, and you may easily discern whether judgment can, or ought recommend
his work to a Parliament, to be made an Act of: yet since he will needs try
his own inference by his own applications, we will likewise examine his
whole work, by the rule of his own invention. And first what conscience can
believe, that he who could not be drawn to meddle with clannes in Scotland,
would be content to abet a faction in England? These factions were of heat;
and as they drew blood; so sooner tempted the blood made the motives more
strong, the partakers more passionate; whereas in factions cold discretion can
abide much pause, and the time given for respite gives it self a means for
determination of vprightnes. What conscience can believe that he who by the
English blood in a Grand mother got three kingdoms, will not as much love the
English as the Scottish, by who^ he had but preferme^t to one? what conscience
can persuade it self, that he who has ad ua^ced many here without desert
toward himself, will not continue his honors for daily services for his own
behoof performed? what reason can deny that the quiet we now enjoy, and riches
by that quiet, may not both be increased, when our kingdom shall be abroad more
fearful, and the more hands shall bring the greater profits into the land? what
reason can pierce into that no reason has diued into, to take Gods providence
away from continuing, what only by his providence he has settled. To a work
divine add not thoughts humane* what reason can discern that men long
combined, shall not rather hold together, the^ men near in oportunities held
off far, for slight seeming respects? And do any examples teach that richer
subjects are not more fearful of offending laws? teach any examples, that
men by nature, fight, language, condition, and occasion united, are vnunited by
vnio^? Or teach any examples that Monarchies well settled, cannot repress any
ils as they are growing? well has he there fore taught you to settle prevention,
where domestiquely ye govern not. France and Spain have their moments to be
considered, further the^ into this our own is to be looked. The one he tells
you has a custom, the other a pretext against England: and shall England
refuse aid against them and all others, when God ordinarily and
extraordinarily offers it not obscurely? The^ increase, none helps England; be
thou my country unthankful; care not if Scotland stand as Ireland fell;
disvnite Wales, as not needing it; seek abroad for friends, though they be
Turks; maintain others quarrels to preserve your own safeties; set up
gariso^s again; make new Lords of Marches; draw more from the rich, from the
poor what they only have; act or exact, as if it were the last act: live as
poor as Spain, yet have none Indies; as uncertain as Italy, but less
friended and fruitful; desire help one day, who may give helps now; cry out
then when your own have lost you, and they who are upon you, shall not know
your language. Then may you war like the Switzers, when other Countries, who
have embraced what you refused, shall enjoy with scorn of you, what you held,
and might have held before them, and them to either in dearenes, or at their
dear rate. My native country, I crave pardon for my boldness, zeal having
transported me as far into passion of after successes to be doubted, if this
stand thus doubtful; as I hope it is to their surmises event, who deem that
for want of issue in this Kings loyne, the two Countries may again be
separated, though this now be embraced. But let me be tried whether I persuade
honest things, and I hope my vehemence shall not be imputed faulty. Soon do
they break upon fit occasion, who are too soon repelled for no known cause.
Why should not we wish them so well as our Laws? why should we wish our selves
so ill, as their not being one with us? Many will be the marriages in time, to
make our Nations fully one: as many are the houses, they bring in with them of
our own. What was it made the Romans and the Sabines friends, but the Romans
getting to wives the Sabines daughters? they took them by violence, these have
opportunity for love: and think you we shall spare to go for marriages into
Scotland, when their daughters shall be rich to maintain us in England?
Think you many thousand occasions will not make us enterchange, if this one
occasion had but made the Kings road to the rest. Be of courage therefore
honorable Cities, and your friends of all qualities, and be what you are;
such an Island as were a world to you, knew you no part of the world besides. Be
what you are, and desire nothing rather to be Quod sis esse velis nihil que
malis: Know this rather to be done, then entreaty, finished above, not
imperfect beneath; all else howsoever seeming, more uncertain then this yet
not appeared. Let the honesty of this cause entice you, the honor move you,
the profit snatch you to it. Then gratitude know nothing better; the larger the
Island, the nobler the Nation; and who knows not that Concordia res paruae
crescunt, discordia maximae dilabuntur, leave not these faggot sticks out of
your band, these arrows out of your sheafe. Better is that borne a great deal
whereof men are ashamed, then that whereof they repent. If any should think it
a shame to loose the name, let him know their help lost would make us more
repent: The people to be called by the name of the Country is but Cognatum
vocabulum rei.

Now is this union on foot; much has been said therein; much written
thereupon; Our Kings affection is settled thereto. All these will do hurt, if
this now do not good. If any should* guess many the means which should debar
inconveniences to come, are now already taken from our good: he may happily fall
into their opinion, who have deemed either this should have begun with the
vnsetling of the rest; or with the settling of this only expedient, the other
have been unsettled hand in hand. They were only the Fpicures sect, who would
never enter into any other profeson of Philosophy: yet were the Stoikes, and
the Academickes both more learned and less vicious.

It is written of Alexander, that when it was told him, that an handsome man
had gotten his sister with child, he made answer, that it was to be
granted him to enjoy his kingdom too. This sister of Alexanders, is not
sought without leave; is not defiled without virtue; has her lover no less
comely in parts and features.

In Egypt it is written were great store of Crocodiles, there the dogs for
thirst driven to drink, did ever so lap in Nilus, as they were ever removing.
This jest was broken upon Anthony, after the Mu tine flight that he carried
himself like the dogs of Egypt. Shall we then have received this Nation with
applause? honored the^ in our high Counsel of the Kings estate, and of the
estate of the Kingdom? admitted them dignities? admitted them honors in
titles, in possessions? received them with love into our houses? crepte at
their knees in the English Court? have put our money into their pockets? put
them into our fortes, strengthes, and Castles, and shall we now make meu^ and
tun^, the Scottish and the English, our selves and themselves? Nay, rather let
us speak as heartily as the kind man did in Terence, Hos nisi mors nobis
adimet nemo; Let us in name and virtue be the same: let the good of both join
together, and the good of both put down the ill of either. Some who never
judged aright what it was to live so united, may rashly say they had rather dye
then be united.

He was but an young man in Terence, who used that persuasion for his affection
only, emori malim: but an old man gave this counsel out of long experience,
First learn what it is to live; if then that life displease, when thou know
it, thou may bestow this on thy self which thou now chusest.

Plato framed a definition of a man, that he was a living creature, going upon
two feet, and without feathers: which definition was mocked by show of a
Cock, his feathers pulled off: But the Author of the tractate of the union,
has given this man, if you will hence derive him, four legs to walk on.

So strongly therefore underset, he adventured that discourse, knowing belike,
that the persuasion of just things pleased the Gods; and that the people of
Athens would not kill Phocion, if they repented a little.

Mildly they yet proceed, for they call his judgment his wit rather giving a
backward commendation of his labor spent, then the cause, use of his arguments
in behalf thereof. Sure he was some great Councellor who gave the King that
advice, that he should not live out of his Country wherein he was borne, and
from it (that was not to let his Numen be felt in it) together.

What, though he has pleasured many of that Nation: ought the well doing of a
few be his only care? Is the rewarding of his servants, all that falls into a
Kings study? for his common wealths good? have we had so much benefit by
their coming, and shall we deny them share of that we enjoy by them? They have
bred us a King, they have brought him safe, they have brought him every way
perfect; of nature, good; learning great, virtues many; of issue fruitful; and
on his head a Crown, before he came here: Matched most royally for the
quality of her blood; gallantly for her person; and above all for the
goodness residing in her royal self, and her happiness in her sweet issue,
descended from her: And shall we now use Scotland as an old scabbard, or a
Kings cradle. Vmditius a bond -- slave in Rome, for preventing only by relation
unto a Co^sul, the treasons of the sons of Treuitelij, and of Brutus, was not
only made free; but a law made for the freedom of all bondslaues, called Lex
vindicia: by which ever afterward none of them could be taken by force, or
have violence offered to them by allowance: How much rather ought we to enact
some memorable record unto posterity, whereby this great blessing from that
Nation may be acknowledged unto it? the rather they having demeaned themselves
so honorably, as to give us just satisfaction of their valors: An excellent
cause now God will have us friends, why we should love entirely.

This is a course fitter for us to embrace, then our strengths refused by other
adversities, to hope of our succors. But now rather to speak a little in
behalf, and for use of our own commonwealth, then to persuade their
particular good in it. As our laws are the best, or we must say so of them,
who live under them, of all Nations, whereby our kingdom is governed; so the
civil laws being no such strangers unto them, somewhat would soon be
established; whereby we might get the benefit of theirs, by the assent of ours,
to the consent of both. Which while it is in endeavor, they by precise looking
into ours, will get reformed some abuses crept in by time, custom, or
misse-interpretation; such as my Lord Chancellor in his integrity showed
daily, and diverse of the grave Judges, and chiefly the chiefest of them, as
oportunities serve, for conscience sake, do amend as they apply them, and but
by such an occasion as this, will hardly ever be moted upon.

Of this argument, for agreement of both laws, (except I be deceived) a friend
of mine; and worthy to be yours, has very lately, very shortly written:
comparing the Grandes, the Titles, the rules, and right use of both, (as his
occasion led him) so learnedly, so fully, and so experiencedly together; as the
two common Wealths may soon be taught, that there is nothing disagreeing in
essence between them, nothing of the ones substance wanting to the other, (the
terms and practices only having given the show of difference hitherto.) But
I cannot judge whether he will be judged worthy any great employments,
since Hanno was but unthankfully dealt withal, who first tamed a Lion. It were
pity a Commonwealths man should have more encouragement in his travel, then
his conscience of well doing.

To return to my purpose; if for many seen benefits, which we cannot choose
but reap, besides the satisfaction of our Sovereign, no way were motive to a
hearty Subject, there should ingrowe any inconveniences; the Kings desire
standing in heed of the Act Trimolius the true Corinth, would take part
against his own brother, for the good of the Commonwealth. But these doubts
stands like the Mountains Anaxagoras was asked whether at the last they would
not be water; whose answer was, in time they would, Tempus edax rerum, etc.
Time does work what no man knows in the faithful Turtle Dove.

Martial was very angry with a fellow, who would needs know things upon
supposalles, as how he would behave himself if he were rich; and shutting
him off with this aunsweare; if men can foretell how things shall succeed,
how will thou behave thy self, if thou becommest a Lion? Quenquam posse putas,
etc. Isocrates was troubled with the uncertainty of the time, how he might
behave himself, when he might have a box on the ear; for then* and not else
he would wear a Helmet. This cause great Cities, and your friends from Story
writers flying away so wild, sits now as gently by us, as Tubero the Pretors
Pie did, which came strangely to his hand, and of which the Southsayers
foretold that much good would come with her, were she accepted; if otherwise,
much ill to the Praetor: her he pulled in pieces, but not without his own
mischief.

In Phrigia and Silenus was a great earthquake, which consumed many houses and
mortalles; The Oracle said, some rich thing must be thrown into it: Death of
a Kings Son only stopped the gaping of the earth in those places. Here is
no earthquake, but heavens shine: here is life and renown to our Kings Son,
our worthy Prince, ours and many more kingdoms hope. The Oracle says not, dye
son; but live all friendly together. Tully in the dream of Scipio says,
that all they who have saved their Country, have helped their Country, have
increased their country, have in heaven a place appointed them, where
everlastingly they shall joy. That was the cause why the Ambassadors of the
Carthagenians and the Sirenenses were contented to make the condition of being
buried quick, where they challengd their bounds: So great was their love to
the enlargement of their Country; a desire ever prosecuted, and never but
weakly by Darius in Quintus Curtius his time only gaine-said, that a kingdom
might be too great. On the other side remember but how Themistocles dealt with
Zerxes, for the overthrow of al Greece, because his country had ingratefully
respected him. And had not Artaxerxes hung up my Hamon, Mardocheus had been
betrayed in his own Country beyond the Kings disposition, but that did I
bear, though it cost me dear. As I forgive, so I forget, and return to this:
If the English have not general peace, which they shall not till they be
known generally strong (for yet forreiners may be suspected but to prye into
our state, to break or hold, resolving neither but by the first instructions)
they will ere long grow so unanswerable of Taskes and Subsidies, that the
Collectors shall find them, as in another commonwealth was seen, playing in
the streets, a shrewd sign, that they be no money keepers. But if they once
see our fortune sitting, they will then think she will so find the benefit of
her ease, as she will ever be known where to be found. Now is our ground
ready, what seed we sow, we shall reap. This cause talks nothing of
inconvenience, yet the man, though good, though just, though innocent, is
feared, vir bonus, iustus, innocens timetur, poverty is pretended, says
Martial. it is not poverty to have nothing. Non est paupertas Nestor habere
nihil. The fault sure is this, the poor seeks friendships unworthy
affections, quod colit ingratas pauper amicitias. Nay they have their peculiar
riches where they are, in as large a manner as we make account of ours here. But
this is to tennice freely, but not to denise kindly. Many I see know how to
counsel; few find I, who can tell how to make the Consul. The King should
have long hands, as far reaching as Kent and Kentile; and would you have the
King feed with one glove on, and another off? It would be said of him, Totus
and in toto per totum totus and omnis, Esse omnis du^ vis incipis esse tuus:
that he then begins to be his own, when he will be all, and in all, and by
all, and all every where. And though some pretend fables, how the Wolf, by at
the first getting an house to breed in, at the last having many litters, held
it by strength against the owner: Yet what can these things move in ordered
common wealths, where no more interest is attained, then the laws admit right
to: Tully in his pleading for Roscius, shows how many ways the laws punish
those, whose demaundes are greater then the laws do allow. The like does
Crassus in Tully. Our laws will maintain us in our own well enough; though
our conditions I hope will not make them pay so dear, as the English did when
they went to fetch the King and Queen from Scotland.

This may be given to the King for them; indeed, to them for us; the rest they
shall enjoy, as the law will, for what they buy, by the law they may call
their own. Demurre then no longer my great and dear friends, upon this
argument, but return this aunsweare, that Neptune did by the Raine-bowe Terram
esse communem. Which though he durst not defend against Jupiter; yet you have
Jupiter on your side, against whom to contend were madness, as with an equal
doubtful; with an inferior base. Seneca says of power, that if it inuit to
any thing, nay, if it entreat ought, it compelles it. Easy it is not to write
against him in his government, who can score a man out of his government: Non
facile est in eum scribere qui potest proscribere. Fauorinus the Philosopher,
admits Hadrian the better judgment, because he commanded thirty Legions.
The matter then being even, let us not contend unequally, for had not nature
seated this kingdom within you, you might well have held it, without you. Well
had Scipio Emilian discharged this Censorship, had the Quirites given him a
fellow Pretoorr not given him one. Think not upon what Cato says, that it is
not to be marueiled at, if what a man thinks an excellent good, he be loath to
share with another: But let Plutarch teach you to gain authority, and power
with expedition: so neither smoke shall make the fire unpleasant in the
kindling; nor envy lay snares to impeach glory by in the framing.

If longer you stay upon further deliberation, this business having been
determined by the Comittee in heaven, Scipio Emilian must needs tell the
Senate, that neither of the Consules is fit for the service of the
Commonwealth: For Seruius Sulpitius Galba was poor, and had nothing, and
Valerius could never think he had enough* Yet since the men on both sides are
serviceable, make their conditions as agreeing amongst themselves; so fit for
the Commonwealth: let the one enjoy more, the other covet less; so shall both
increase apace, and Rome be well served.

If any object their affections be unlike ours, that comes not out of nature,
but custom. As the Air is tempered, says Tully in his Divination; so are
the children spirited, their wits formed, their manners, their minds, their
bodies, and the actions of their life. Look in the English and Scotchmens
faces: see whether Caucasus have begot them upon hard rocks. Our climate is
the same; our temperatures alike; if any thing within our government make us
differ, it is but custom. They have not so many Cities as we; they follow
feeds which we do not; yet find I not, but we are prickers as well as they,
and if it be observed what store of Ritters we have got, it may be feared that
two Cheuallers, being not Castor and Pollux, may be driven to one Chiual, to
ride on besides the saddle. But let Herodotus write as much as he will of the
kingdom of custom: for though Darius could not get the Grecians to eat their
dead Fathers for any gold; nor the Indians to burn theirs for any iron;
because of the contrarieties of their uses in both: yet assure I my self, this
Nation honors the King with so much zeal; he is able to teach the^, with so
much skill; embrace us with so much affection, especially if we be once
united in indissoluble bounds; as I know not any custom may be fit for them
to leave, shall not be discontinued, nor any new law to be put in use, to
which the first day shall not find them accordant. Si fingere me putas, istud
salutemus. They do many of them understand what was Cyrus his counsel to leave
those mountains Countries, and descend into the plains, there with the times
to change the manners, as Tully writes to Atticus, where as the seeds are like
the plants, the lives of men are like the countries. There shall they best
learn to obey, where the King sits highest to rule: there shall they hear him
clearly, where Ille regit dictis animos and pector a mulcet. For this deed
done none shall need to look back into his conscience with affrightment. For
this name taken, none shall need to understand the Nation to be embased: For
this kingdom enlarged, none shall find their own states impaired. As
touching union with others and their abbetments, ye may there judge of your
aduices, among those who have learnedly and gravely refuted that fourth
question of the book entitled Vindictae contra tyrannos: Wherein is
discoursed, whether one Prince may join with the subjects of an other, who
take upon them arms for defense of defending religion. My purpose being to be
short, shall rather insinuate my zealous wish of home-combining then foreign
uses, the one natural and politic; the other politic alone if so much; I
ask your body but within your girdle; your head covered only with your hat;
your garment to be grauer then partie-coloured: and offer you France and
Spain for examples, limited by those bounds, nature her self has appointed
unto them, the Montes, Perrenaei, the Sea, the Alps, with the rest. Nor is it
constantly held, that our name of Britans should be derived of Brutus, rather
some hold we are called Prittons, of a word which signifies a Mart or Fair;
of stuff for which, this whole Island, as well al parts as any one part, Wales
and Cornwall, as England and Scotland, is in one kind or other replenished.
Nor ought that word of Mart seem to have less bounds then Ciuitas; which
(as Aristotle writes) signifies a whole Common- wealth. As for our private
goods, though I could answer Publica priuatis sunt anteponenda; yet let the
stories be but searched, how our forteine conquestes have been hindered by the
opportunities the Scots have taken in our absences; and how iealousies have
only made us diuersely combine our selves; they with France; we with the
house of Burgondie, they shall find how likely it is, that private men's
merchandise may be lost in the wrack of the general fleet. Other objections
should I go about to frame, such as pride or curiosity might suggest unto me;
as much as I have heard should I endeavor to answer, the necessary themes of
some men's seeming wise; I doubt much how I could swim from out their deluge.
Noah's Arc, or Chawcers Trough being unbuilt against such an inundation.
Steeples stand not up here as in the drowned countries of our low neighbors.
There are no sea-markes appearing to direct; no castles, no forts, no cities
to protect; hills and mountains are here overwhelmed, and the solutions of
these following, would be the dissolution of the time spent about them, and no
resolution of any thing for the applying of Gods blessings to our uses; Animo
volenti nihil difficile: while we say all will be subverted, the laws
overthrown, men's states taken away, the nations honor lost, and our dish well
served in, sliced into a gallemawfrey, ouerpeppered and salt buttered: we
spread fears, doubts, (God grant not hatreds largely) but discuss upon
inconveniences slowly. If to forward accordes the debate of this question
happen, you will find that neither the number of the Scottishmen, forreiners
from their country; nor the ambition of the Nobles, though by some thought to
challenge antiquity before ours; neither the customs of the Nation differing
from ours in whatsoever, will debar this proceeding, or not admit time and
will for fitness. The like said of our ancient statutes, of the stories
ancient, of us, of our reasonable affections as we now stand for our goods,
and I dare boldly say, either their intendme^ts less needful, or their
applications more profitable, or alterations more beneficial, will make us more
enjoy this mornings breakfast, then all last weeks diet. For neither does the
King affect other then our goods; or is himself unable to judge of them; nor
doubts but that there ought much deliberation to be taken in a cause so
important, much circumspection touching the proportioning out the particulars.
These reasons have moved me seeing that the King is to be defended in his
desire as a good father of the Commonwealth; has spared the blood of our good
countrymen, turned ill; has encouraged the services of the well deserving,
shows himself wise in his government; loving in his affection, and
industriously careful of the weal public; to take upon me this license in
writing, this zeal to my country in persuading. Which if it happen to minds
affected to let Lucilii pecus esse liberum and qua velit pasci, I hope with
them mine endeavor shall find favor: for the rest, as it no ways becomes me
to be uncivil, as Democrates was to Philip: so if they shall think it rather
an impotencie in me, not to spare mine affection to this argument; then in
themselves to afflict me by whatsoever means: their wisdoms are of force to
give themselves content; and this being out and past from me, and dislikte,
shall make me not like to pass out more to be submitted to censure. To
conclude, long live ye right honorable Cities, keeping peace in you, fires
from you, and traffic with you; so may you build your houses fair, keep
them neat, have good store of money and bonds in your chestes; your Prentices
grow free, your liueries Aldermand, your wives Ladies, your children made
Gentlefolkes, and your City commodities be exchanged into the Courtiers
revenues; as at this marriage if you will dance, you make the contract sure,
and till death depart: For though they and you lie in one an other of your
houses; nay should they and you lie with one an other of your wives and
daughters; believe me non concubitus sed consensus facit Matrimonium, say the
Ciuilians; Marry them and make the bond holy and unviolable, or expect no
security that the grandchildren in time to come, shall always prove
comfortable to the old folks.

Catullus. Hymen o Hymenaee Hymen adest o Hymenaee. Sir Philip Sidney. God
Hymen long your coupled joys maintain. FINIS.

