GODFREY OF BVLLOIGNE, OR The Recovery of HIERVSALEM. An Heroical poem
written in Italian by Seig. Torquato Tasso, and translated into English by R.
C. Esquire: And now the first part containing five Cantos, Imprinted in both
Languages.

LONDON Imprinted by John Windet for Thomas Man dwelling in Pater noster-Row.

To the Reader.
GEntlemen, let it be lawful for me with your leaves to trouble you a little:
It was my good hap of late to get into my hands an English translated Copy of
Seig. Tasso's Jerusalem, done (as I was informed) by a Gentleman of good sort
and quallitie, and many ways commended unto me for a work of singular worth,
and ezcellencie: whereupon, by the advice, or rather at the instance of some of
my best friends, I determined to send it to the Press: Wherein if my forwardnes
have fore-ranne the Gentleman's good liking; Yet let me win you to make me
happy with the sweet possession of your favors, for whose sakes I have done
whatsoever herein is done. When first I sent it to the Printer, I did not
certainly know whose work it was, and so rested deprived of al means to
gain his assent and good liking thereunto, and yet notwithstanding the
persuasions of some that would feign have prevailed with me: I resolved (at the
motion, no doubt of some rare excellent spirit, that knew and foresaw this to
be the readiest means to draw him to publish some of his many most excellent
labors) to go on with what I had begun, ever assuring my self, and never
doubting, but that you would like of it your selves, and intertaine it with
such dear affection as it does worthily merit: Now if it shall not in each
part lively resemble the absolute perfection of the doer thereof, yet is he
blameless, and the fault as it is mine, so I will acknowledge it for mine: for
by my haste it proves his untimely birth, and doubtless miserably wants of
that glorious beauty wherewith it otherwise would, and hereafter happily may
be richly honored withal. Now whereas I thought you should have had all
together, I must pray you to accept of the five first Songs: For it has
pleased the excellent doer of them (for certain causes to him self best
known) to command a stay of the rest till the summer. In that which is done,
I have caused the Italian to be Printed together with the English, for the
delight and benefit of those Gentlemen, that love that most lively language.
And thereby the learned Reader shall see to how strict a course the translator
has tied himself in the whole work, usurping as little liberty as any
whatsoever, that ever wrote with any commendations. Thus (as in duty I ought)
I have presented unto your views the course of my whole proceedings herein,
humbly praying you to censure of the work with such respectfull consideration
as shall be meet, and to amend with patience such faults as are unwillingly
escaped in the Printing. And so you shall do what shall well beseem you, and
give him his right that will never wrong you.

From Exceter the last of February, 1594. Yours C. H.

THE RECOVERIE OF HIERVSALEM OF Sr. TORQVATO TASSO, The first Song.
I Sing the godly arms, and that Chieftaine,
Who great Sepulcher of our Lord did free,
Much with his hand, much wrought he with his brain:
Much in his glorious conquest suffered he:
And hell in vain hit self opposde, in vain
The mixed troops Asian and Libick flee
To arms, for heaven him favored, and he drew
To sacred ensigns his straid mates a new.
O Muse, thou that thy head not compassest,
With fading bays, which Helicon does bear:
But boue in skies, amids the Quyers blessed,
Do golden crown of stars immortal wear,
Celestial flames breath thou into my breast,
Enlighten thou my Song, and pardon where,
I fainings weaue with truth, and verse with art,
Of pleasings decked, wherein thou have no part.
Thou know, where luring Parnase most poures out
His sweetness, all the world does after run,
And that truth seasoned with smoth verse, from doubt,
The waywardst (flocking) to believe has won,
So cup, his brimmes erst liquorisht about
With sweet, we give to our diseased Son.
Beguilde he drinks some bitter juice the while,
And does his life receive from such a guile.
Thou noble minded Alfonse, who do save
From Fortunes fury, and to port do steare
Me wandering pilgrim, midst of many a wave,
And many a rock betost, and drencht welneare,
My verse with friendly grace t'accept vouchsaue,
Which as in vow, sacred to thee I bear.
One day perhaps, my pen forehalsening,
Will dare, what now of thee it is purposing.
If ever Christians to agreement grow,
And with their Navy, and their force by land,
A pray so great and wrong, from Turkish foe
Seek to regaine, dew reason does command,
That of that soil the Scepter they bestow,
Or of those seas, if so thy pleasure stand,
On thee, thou Godfreys countermate, my rhyme
Attend, and arms provide in this mean time.
Since Christian camp for high exploit to The East
Had past, the last of six years on now ran,
And Nice by force, and Antioch not least
Of power, by warlike policy they wanne.
Wheregainst when Persians passing number preast,
In battle bold they hit defended thanne.
And Tortose gat, which done, to winters reign
They yield, and stay the coming year again.
The season, by his kind enclinde to weat,
Which lays up arms, we^nie his course now ends,
When Sire eternal from his lofty seat,
Which in the purest part of heaven extends,
And from the lowest hell, what space is great
To stars, so far above the stars ascends,
Looks down, and in one blinck, and in one view,
Comprizeth all what so the world can show.
Each thing he viewes, and then he fixed his eye
On Syria, where Christian Princes stay,
And with that sight, which percingly can spy,
What closest up human affections lay,
He Godfrey sees, who Panims lewd to fly
From sacred City would enforce away.
And full of faith, and full of zeal in heart,
All worldly wealth, rule, glory, lays apart.
But he in Baldwyn sees a greedy vain,
Which bent to human greatness high aspires,
He Tancred sees, his life hold in disdain,
So much a fond love him afflicting fires,
And Boemund he sees, for his new reign,
Of Antioch, foundations deep desires
To ground, and laws enacts, and orders layth,
And arts brings in, and plants the Christen faith.
And in this course he entered is so far,
That ought but that, hit seems of naught he weyes,
He skryes Rinaldos mind, addict to war,
And working spirits, much abhorring ease,
No lust of gold in him, no thoughts there are
Of rule, but great and much enflamed of praise,
He skryes, that at the mouth he hangs of Gwelfe:
And old examples rare frames to himself.
When inmost sense of these and other sprights,
The King of all the world had unfold:
He calls him to, of the Angelicke lights,
Him that among first, the second rank does hold.
A faithful Truchman, Gabriell that hights,
A Nuntio glad, twixt Souls of better mould,
And God to us down heavens decrees who shoes,
And up to heaven who with men's prayers goes.
God to his Nuntio said, seek Godfrey out,
And tell him in my name, why stands he still?
The wars again why goes he not about?
Jerusalem oppressed to free from ill:
Captains to counsel let him call, and rout
Of sluggards raise, that he be chief I will:
I here him choose, and those below that are
Tofore his mates, shall be his men of war.
So spoke he: Gabriel himself addressed,
Swift to perform the things in charge he takes,
His shape unseen, with air he does inuest,
And unto mortal sense hit subject makes,
Man's lims, man's look, t'apparence he possessed,
Which yet celestial majesty pertakes:
Twixt youth and childhood bounded seem his days,
His golden locks he does adorn with rays.
He puts on silver wings, yfrendg'de with gold,
Wearilesse nymble, of most plyant sway,
With these he parts the winds, and clouds, and hold
Does flight with these aloft the earth and sea:
Attyred thus, to worlds lower mould,
This messenger of skies directes his way:
On Liban mountain hou'ring first he stayed,
And twixt his egall wings himself he wayd.
There hence again, to pastures of Tortose,
Plump down directly leuels he his flight.
From eastern coast the new sun then arose,
Part up, but of morepart waves hid the sight:
And early Godfrey that mornetide bestows
In prayre to God, as aye his usage hight.
When like the Sun, but far and far more clear
Th'Angell to him does from the East appear.
And thus bespake, Godfrey, now season tides,
That best with warriors service does agree:
Why thwart you lingering then, while fast it slides*
And not Jerusalem from thraldo me free?
Do thou to counsel call the peoples guides,
Do thou the slow their work to finish see.
God for their Chiefetaine thee has deemed fit,
And glad at once they shall themselves submit.
God me this message sent, and I reveal
To thee his mind in his own name, how great
A hope of victory to have? a zeal
How great, of host thy charge hooues thee to heat?
He ceast, and vanished flew to th'vpper deal,
And purest portion of the heavenly seat.
Godfrey those words, and that his shining bright
Daz'led in eyes, and did in heart affright.
But fright once gone, and having well bethought,
Who came, who sent, and what to him was said:
Of erst he wished, he now a fire has cought
To end the war whose charge God on him laid.
Not for the heavens him sole this honor brought,
Ambitious wind puffing his stomach swaid:
But all his will did more in will inflame,
Of his dear Lord, as spark becomes a flame.
Then his Heroicke mates dispersed about,
But not far off, t'assemble he inuites:
Letter to letter, message on message out
He sendes, advice with prayer he unites.
What so may slocke or prick a courage stout,
What skill dull virtue to awake endites:
Seems all he finds, with efficacy such,
As he enforces, yet contenteth much.
The leaders came, the rest ensew'd also
Boemund alone does from this meeting stay:
Part campt abroad, part them in circuit stowe,
Another part within Tortosa lay.
The nobles of the camp to counsel go,
(A glorious Senate) on a solemn day.
Then godly Godfrey thus makes silence breach,
Goodly of countnance, and as shrill of speech.
Champions of God chosen by king of sky,
Of his true faith the damage to restore,
Whom midst of arms, and midst of guiles, safely
He rul'de and guided both at sea and shore:
So as of rebel realms many and many
In so few years through us him now adore.
And among the Nations vanquished and subdew'd,
His ensigns are aduanst, his name renewed.
We have not left our pledges sweet, nor neast
Native to us (if I believe aright)
Nor sold our lives to trustlesse seas beheast,
And to the peril of far distant fight,
To gain of fames short blast the vulgar feast,
Or that Barbarians land, we claim our right.
For our deseigns in straight bounds the^ were pent,
Slender our hire against souls or blood yspent.
But utmost purpose which our thoughts did bear,
Was Sions noble walls by force to gain:
And Christen brothers to enfranchize there,
From yoke unworthy of their thralled pain,
In Palestine a kingdom new to rear,
Where safely plast, might godliness sustain.
That holy Pilgrims far from dread of way,
That great Tomb might adore, and vowings pay.
Our deeds till this, for peril have been great,
For travel more then great, for honor small,
For our mayn purpose naught, if we as yeat
Make stop, or bent of arms elsewhere do call.
What boots it out of Europe to have fett
Fuel of force, and Asia fire withal?
When as at last of these huge sturres we wend,
Not kingdoms raised, but ruined are the end.
He builds not, who so his sovereignty
On worldly ground-plots up to raise has care:
Where midst unnumbered troops of Paganie,
Strangers in faith, few of his Country are,
Where of the Greeks he hopes no loyalty,
And western succors can ariue so spare.
But ruynes he procures, with which oppressed,
Sole for himself a Sepulcher he dressed.
Turks, Persians, Antioch, noble matters be,
In name magnificent, and in effect:
Yet works not ours, but heavens largess we
Them deem: Conquests of wonder vnexpect.
Now if the giver them wrong turned see,
And misemployed from their course direct:
I fear he will reaue them quite, and honor past
So great, will wax the peoples scorn at last.
Ah be there none (for love of God) that gifts
So pleasing, to bad uses turn and spill,
To web of these so high attempting drifts,
Let thread and end of work be suited still:
Now that the season to our service shifts,
Now that each passage we have free at will,
Why to the City run we not? that's set
Our conquests bound: who is it that can us let?
My Lords I do protest, and that which I
Do thus protest, the present world shall hear,
And that to come shall hear, and Saints on hie
Do hear, the time long since did ripe appear:
And yet fits our exploit, but lie you still,
And it will most doubtful fall that now is clear.
I prophecy if our course be delayde,
The Palestine from Egypt shall have aid.
He spoke, his speech a muttring short befell,
Next after solitary Peter rose,
Though private, among the princes at counsel,
As he from whom that voyage chiefly groes,
What Godfrey does exhort, I say as well,
No doubt here falls, the truth so certain shoes,
It skryes hit self, he plain demonstrance gave,
Th'allowance longs to you, sole t'adde I have.
If I remember well the brawles and shame,
As it were of purpose by you made and borne,
Your froward counsels and proceedings lame,
Which midst of working made your works forlorn,
I guess that from another head there came
The cause of all these stops, and concord torn,
Namely the authority in many wits,
And many men that equal peyzed sits.
Where only one does not command, from whom
Judgment of pains and prices may depend:
From whom may offices and charges come,
There still the rule to either side will bend:
Ah of these members friendly joined, in some
One body make, and make a head to wend
And guide the rest, let one the Scepter bear,
And let him rule as King and Prince he wear.
The old man silenst here. What thoughts? what breasts?
Are shut from thee breath sacred! heat divine!
Thou in the Hermit do enspire these heasts,
And in the knights hearts thou the same do shrine,
Th'ingraft, th'inborne affections thou outwrests
Of rule, of liberty, of honors sign.
So as both Gwelfe and Guillam chief in place,
Did Godfrey first with name of Chieftaine grace.
The rest allowance gave, henceforth must be
Their part t'aduise, the others to direct:
Conditions to the conquered grant shall he,
War, peace, when, where he please elect,
The rest now brought to beck, erst equal free,
The charge of his commandments are to effect.
This so agreed, the fame out flies, and wide
Spreading it self through tongs of men does glide.
To Soldiers then he goes, him worthy they
Deem of the high estate, that given they have,
And greetings glad, and warlick showts they pay,
Which he receives with countnance mildly grave:
Thus when to shows of minds humble t'obay,
And dear in love, he sitting answer gave:
He points in field of scope muster to take,
To th'ensewing day what force the camp can make.
The sun from out the east returned again
So bright, and fairly lightsome, as but seeld:
When with the new days beams came forth the train,
And under Ensigns splayd their weapons weeld,
At Bullions hands each seeking praise to gain,
Beyond his mates, whil'string they cast in feeld:
Both horse and foot marshald in warlicke bands,
Before him on do march, where firm he stands.
Thou mind, of years and of oblivion foe,
Of what so is, guardaine and steward true:
Afford thy reasons help that I may show
This camps each Captain, and each band to view:
Let their old fame new sound, and ample grow,
On which late years the veil of silence drew:
Adorn my speech from out thy store to fet,
What every age may hear, and none forget.
The Franckes did muster first, of whom tofore
Hugo had charge, a brother to their king.
From I Will of France issewd this warlicke store,
A soil fair, large, on four streams bordering.
When Hue deceast, th'ensigne that Lilies bore
Of gold, Clotared still them conducting
They followed, who Captain great in fame,
That naught might want, possessed a royal name.
Of complet armed they are hundreds ten,
So many more of horse next them advance,
So like the first, as twixt them none may ken,
In ordring, nature, arms, a variance:
Normands they be, and Robert leads the men,
Their native prince borne and bred up in France.
Their squadrons next William and Ademere,
Two Pastors of the people mustred there.
The tone and the other of them who but late
An holy office in Gods service bear,
Now playted locks pressing with cap of plate,
Have manly use of arms fallen to their share.
Orange City and confines of that state,
Four hundred warriors to the first do spare.
The second those of Poggio does guide,
Equal in tale, nor less in value tried.
Then Baldwyn makes his muster next in feeld,
With Bulleyners tofore his brothers band,
For his good brother them contents to yield:
Now he on Captains Captain does command:
Th'ensewing room The Earl of Carnute held,
Mighty in counsel, valiant of hand.
Four hundred with him march, a treble force
Under his Cornet Baldwyn leads of horse.
Gwelfe occupies the bordring circuit, one
Whose merit his high fortune egalleth,
By Latin Sire, of Estine graundsires gone,
A bedroll long and true he reckons:
But he unto the great house of Gwelfon,
Germayn in name, and Lordship succeeds.
Corinthia he rules, and near the streams
Of Rhine and Isther, Sweue and Rhetian realms.
To this liuelode that from his mother came,
Conquests he winned, glorious and great:
Thence brought he me^, who made (he bidding) game
To march where death they were assured to geat:
They winters cold by stooues to temper frame,
And with inuitings glad partake their meat.
Five thousand came from home, but hardly tho
He could the thirds (the Persians relics) show.
White skins, and yealow locks next people have,
Twixt Francks and Germans and the Sea bestowde,
Where bancks oreflow does Mose and Rhenish wave,
Land that of grain and beasts, bears fruitful lode:
Eke Island men, whom Oceans swellings brave,
Against which they force up rampires high and broad.
Ocean that not on wares alone has power
And ships, but towns and kingdoms does devour.
These that a thousand are and other are,
Under another Robert make one band,
A greater squadron is the British far,
Committed by their king, to Williams hand,
His younger son, their bows these English bare,
And people bring the pole that nearer stand.
Whom Ireland placed at the worlds end,
Does from his wildwoods with locks shaggy send.
Then Tancred comes, there is none amongst the rout
(Regnald except) a brauer warrier,
Nor of a stomach noble more or stout*
Nor countnance and conditions more fair,
If cloud of blame wrapped his deserts about
Them dim, loves folly sole the fault must bear,
Above twixt battles borne, bred of short sight,
Fed with afflictions, still accreeuing might.
Fame tells what day the Francks with glory great,
The Persian troops discomfited in fight,
After that Tancred in victorious heat
Chasing those runawayes, was tir'de outright,
Some cooly easefull place he sought to geat,
For his scorcht lips, and lims deuoide of might,
And drew whereas inuiting him to shade,
Closde with green banks, a fresh spring issue made.
Unthought of there appears to him a Dame,
All save her face in complet armor dight:
She was a Painim, and she also came
Like rest to gain in like betyred plight:
Her feature he beheld, he held the same
Most fair, he likes, his liking fire does light.
Of love, O wonder! love then scarcely bred
Grew great, and flew and in arms triumphed.
On goes her helm, and she th'assaylers part
Had played, save others there by chance arrive:
The haughty Dame does from her thrall depart,
Who of sole force becomes afugitiue:
But he her warlike image far in heart
Preserved so as hit presents alive.
The chance, the place, how, where she came in view,
In restless thought still feeding flame a new.
His look was look that did his folk to ware
In letters large, he burned of hope deuoyd,
So full of sighs he went, and so he bare
His eyelids vayled down and sadly cloyd:
The Eighth hundred horse which underwent his care,
Campanias pleasant fields tofore enjoyed,
Dame natures greatest pomp, and hills that lay
Mellow, fertile, wood by the Tirhene Sea.
Two hundred followed of the Greekish tongue,
Who iron armor none in manner bring,
Their hooked swords upon the tone side hong,
Their bows and quiuers at their backs do ring,
Their light horse service does to gallop long,
For travail tough, spare in their dyeting,
Ready t'assayle and to retire at will,
Disordred, scattred, fled, yet fight they still.
Latin that Cornet led, and only he
Of Greece the Latin arms accompanide.
O shame! O foul misdeede! and had not ye
O Greeks! these wars even sticking in your side?
Yet (as at games) sluggards you sit to see
What issue will to these great acts betide:
Now if a slave thou serve, this thy bondage
(Do not complain) is justice, not outrage.
A squadron next there comes in order last,
But first for honor, valor and for art:
Inuict Heroic ventrers here are plaste,
Asias terror, and Mars thunder dart:
Cease Argos, Arther cease, vain shootes you waste,
Knights sailors, and knights errants acts t'impart,
For old exployts comparde with these are wind.
Where shall we then for them fit Chieftaine find.
Dudon of Consa is their head, because
Hard it was of blood and virtue doom to geeue,
They all agree to under go his laws,
Who did of all know most, and most atcheeue,
And grave of manlines and ripe of sawes:
He shows in hoarie locks of strength the preeue.
He shows of wounds not foul the printed skarres,
The worthy steps of honor won in wars.
Eustace is next amongst the chief, whose own
Praise makes him great, but brother Boglion more,
From stock of Norway kings eke Gernand grown,
On Scepters, titles, crowns, him proud he bore:
Roger of Balnauil among best is known:
Old fame, and Eugerlan do there him score.
Eke with the brauest they solemnize do
One Genton, one Rambald, and Gerards too.
Vbald also, and Rosomond is praysd
Of Duchy great of Lancaster the heir,
Nor can Obize the Tuscane down be peyzd
By him that memories away does bear,
Nor Lombard brothers three will be disseyzd,
Achilles, Sforza, Palamede, of their
Clear fame, nor Otto strong that won the shield
Where Serpents mouth sends forth a naked child.
Nor Guasco, nor Rudolfo left behind,
Nor the one nor the other Guido, famous both,
Nor Eurard, nor Gernier must slip my mind,
To pass in gratelesse silence more then loath,
Whither do you lovers and spouses kind?
Gildip and Edward hale him, now that grow'th
Of numbering weary? O consorts in war!
Though dead, disioynd you never shall be far.
What can there not be learnd in schools of love?
There was she taught to wax a warrie bold,
To his dear side still cleaues she, and above
One destiny, his and her life does hold:
No blow that hurts but one, they ever prove,
But each wounds smart encreast is doublefold,
And often the one is hit the other playnes,
Tone bleedes at soul, the the other at the veins.
But youth Rinaldo far surpasses these,
And passes all that to the muster went,
Most sweetly fierce, up should you see him raise
His royal look and all looks on it spent:
He hope oregoes, he ouergrowes his days,
When bud was thought but bloome, out fruit he sent:
To such as arms him thundering saw embrace,
Mars he did seem: Love, if he showed his face.
Him on the banck of Adige forth brought
Sofia to Bertold, Sofia the fair,
To Bertold the puissant when newly rought
From mothers teat, and yet vnwayn'd welneare,
Maued would him have, and nursed him, and him tought
In princely skils, and kept him still with her,
Until his youthly mind plight his beheast,
T'ensew the trump that sounded from the East.
Then he thrice five of years could scantly skore,
Yet fled alone and walked through uncouth ways,
He past the Egean Sea and Greekish shore,
And at the camp arriues, where far hit stays,
Most noble flight, well worthy that once more,
Some Nephew chiualrous make like assayes:
Three years are spent, and he in wars when now
His chyns soft down, could scarce a beard auow.
The horsemen past, the muster next does grow
Of men on foot, and Reymond leads the way,
Toulouse he ruled, and brought his soldiers fro
Mount Piren, Garon stream, and Ocean Sea,
Of thousands four, well armed, well trayn'd, a show
He makes, whom toil or want could not affray:
Tall were the men, and led they could not be
By one more strong, or better skilled then he.
But thousands five does Stephen from Amboise
And Blois and Tours unto the service bring:
Though sorted bright in arms and weapons choice,
For strength or pain not worth the valewing:
The soil is tender, light, shapte to rejoice,
And like it self his dwellers fostering:
In battle first they give an onsett bold,
But soon waxt faint, and in their courage cold.
Alcasto comes third (as Thebes by
Was Capaneus once) of visage grim:
Six thousand Swizzers commons, fierce, hardy,
From Alpine castles leuide come with him,
Who iron wont to plowes and clots t'apply,
To new shapes now and worthier uses trim.
And with the hand that kept the ragged heard,
Seems kingdoms to defy, are not afeard.
He after saw the lofty Standard splayd,
With Peter's Diadem and with his keys,
These thousands seven does good Camillus lead,
Footmen in armor bright, and huge of peyze,
He glad the heavens so great a charge obeyed,
There to renew his graundsires ancient praise,
Or show at least that to valor Latin,
Or nothing lackes, or only discipline.
But now the squadrons all in musters fair,
Were marching on, and this of all the last,
When Godfrey calls the greatest Captains near,
And by his words gave of his meaning taste:
To morrow when the dawning shall appear,
I will that light and pressed the host do haste,
So as unto the sacred City we
May come unlooked, as much as much may be.
Prepare you all both to the journey than,
And to the fight, and to the victory,
This hardy speech of so discreet a man
Gave each one care, and vaunst his courage hie,
All pressed march on, when the first ray began
To sprout, loath them broad day should there deskry,
But Bollion provident wants not his fear,
Though close conceald it in his breast he bear.
For he by news, for certain understood
The Egyptian king was now upon his way
To Gaza ward, a foretresse strong and good,
Which frontier-wise to Sirian kingdoms lay,
Nor could he think a man of restless mood,
In high exploits, would trifle time away,
But him sharp foe attends: and says this
To Henryck a true messenger of his.
Unto some Frigate light get thee aboard,
And toward Greekish soil no failing slake,
There shall you meet (so have I written word,
From one who news of lies will never make)
A royal youth, none brauer guirt with sword,
That part with us in war pretends to take:
He is the Prince of Danes, and leads a band
From where the Pole is Zenith to the land.
But for the Greekish Emperor fraught with guile,
With him perhaps will use his wonted art,
To turn him back or bend his course the while,
Far off from us unto some foreign part:
My messenger and counsler true as style,
Do thou in my behalf dispose his heart,
To our and his own good, and bid him speed,
For stay were now his most unseemly deed.
Come not with him thy self, but tarry there
With Greekish king so to procure us aid,
Which more then once he has us promisde fair,
And by our league thus ought not be delayde,
So speaks he, so informs, and gives to bear
Letters, the which with greetings credence prayed.
Henryck for speed, a present congey takes,
And with his thoughts a truce time Godfrey makes.
Th'ensewing day when of the lightsome east,
The gates are opned to the Suns approach,
The Drums and Trumpets gave the ear no rest,
Exhorting warriors on the way t'encroch,
Thunder in heat is no such welcome guest,
Which hope of nere shower to the world does broch.
As all the hardy soldiers pleasing found,
Of warlicke instruments this shrilly sound.
Straightway each one pricked with great desire,
Clothed his lims with his oft-worne spoils,
Straightway each one musters in complet tire,
Straightway each one to his chieftaine recoyles,
And the well-marshald army joined nyre
His ensigns all displayes to Eols broils.
And the Imperial Standard stately-large,
A cross triumphant over all does charge.
This while the Sun, which in the heavenly ground
Still vauntage winnes, and up ascends hie,
On th'armour beats and flashes makes rebound,
And quaking lightnings clear, which bleare the eye:
The air with sparckles seems enflamed round,
And shines like burning fire that up does fly:
And with the neighings fierce accordes the noise
Of clashing armor and the fields accloyes.
The general, who from the enemies snares,
Desires his troops in safety may remain,
Store of light horse from the maine army pares,
And round to scour the coast employes their pain,
And Pioners to send before he cares*
So for his camp an easy march to gain,
The pits to fill, the cragges away to take,
And passages foreclosde wide open to make.
There are no Painim forces leauide yet,
No walls environed with trenches steep,
No river broad, no combrous hill to get,
No forest thick their voyage back to keep,
Even so the king of streams on priding set,
When as he grows past measure high and deep:
Beyond his banckes abroad all wrackfull goes,
And naught is found that dare it self oppose.
Only the King of Trypoli, who kept
Within well guarded walls, coin, men and arms,
Athwart the Frankish army might have stepped,
Yet durst he not by war to stir up harms:
But he by presents to their favor crept,
And by his fires at home them gladly warmes.
And such conditions of a peace does take
As virtuous Godfrey likes with him to make.
There from Mount Seyr which vplifted hie,
Near to the City stands on eastern side
Of true believing wights a company,
Mingled in age and Sex down slocking hide,
And Christens presents brought for victory,
And glad them view, and with them talking bide,
Admiring uncouth arms, and to Godfrey
They proved true faithful guides to show the way.
He ever butting on the salt-sea wave,
By ways directest does conduct his host,
Well weeting that th'associat shipping have,
Resolved to sail still hard aboard the coast,
Which course unto his army plenty gave
Of vittaile, and what else was needful most:
For him each I Will of Greece their harvest rept,
And Creete and rocky Scio vintage kept.
The bordering Sea under the weight did groan
Of the tall ships, and of the lightest pines,
So as safe passage there was open none
In Midland Sea to any Saracines:
For mand out not from Marck and George alone,
In the Venetian and the Gene confines
Came fleetes: But England, France, and Holland some
Do send, and some from fruitful Sicil come.
And these which now together are combinde
With soundest knot of love in one consent,
At diverse shores had laden in each kind
What by the Camp should needfully be spent.
So when the frontire coast they freed find
From enemies shipping, which are close up pent:
With canvas spread at full they thither go,
Where Christ for mortal men bare mortal woe.
But fame foreran', the ready carrier
Of true reports, and rumors fraught with lies,
That safe is joined the army conqueror,
And now sets forth and all delaying flies,
She of each band, makes a particular,
She shows their names whose praise does highest rise,
She shows their vaunts, and terrible of face
Sions usurpers ceasles does menace.
And ill looked for perhaps brings greater ill,
Then self ill does, when it is present, bear,
On each uncertain breath of rumor still
Doubtful hangs every mind, and every ear,
Muttring confusde, within, without does fill
The fields, and doleful City all with fear.
But th'aged King near peril of such loss,
Counsels savage in doubtful heart does toss.
Aladine is his name who of that realm
New Sovereign lived in continual thought:
A man erst cruel, but that mood extreme
His riper age part had to mildness wrought:
He that conceau'd whereat the Latins aim,
Who of his town the walls to batter sought.
To ancient fear adioyneth new suspectes,
And dreads his foes, and dreadeth his subjects.
For in one City mingled dwellings fall,
Of people contrary in faith, the less
And weaker part on Christ their Savior call:
The great and stronger Mahomet profess.
But when the king first conquered Sion wall,
And there his seat to stablish did address,
From common taskes the Painims he set free,
And double lodes the Christians misery.
The thought of this his native savage mood,
Which couched lay, and languisht cold with years,
Angring eneigres and it makes new wood,
That thirst of blood now more then aye appears,
So gentle seemd a while, the Snakish brood,
That to his fierceness turns as Summer neares.
And so the tamed Lion takes again
His native fury, if he wrong sustain.
I see, says he, of new conceived joy,
Undoubted signs in this unfaithful race:
What their sole good that proves our chief annoy,
Sole they do laugh in this our common case
Of woe and now perhaps their wits employ
To guile and treason, and discourse apace,
How me to slay, or to consorted mates,
Mine enemies, how they may d'ope the gates.
But soft not so, I will prevent (I trow)
Their wicked purposes, I Will glut my will,
I Will hew them down, I Will sharp examples show,
I Will sucklings in their mothers bosoms kill,
I Will fire in each their house and temples throw,
Such funerals shall their death rights fulfill:
I Will offer on that Sepulcher of theirs,
Their Priests for sacrifice amid their Preyrs.
So did this tyrant reason in his mind,
But thought so ill conceived took no success:
Yet if these innocents a pardon find,
Base heart, not pity does him thereto press.
For if one fear to cruelty him tinde,
Another greater doubt bridles no less.
He dreads all ways of concord to debar,
And arms of conquering foes t'incense too far.
This fellon then his mad rage tempereth,
Or rather seeks elsewhere the same to wrake,
The country houses down he ruyneth,
And places well manured, a pray does make
To flames: Naught leaves he whole or sound uneath,
Where any Franck may food or lodging take:
The springs and brooks he soyles and waters sound,
With deadly poisons he does all confound.
He spiteful wary is, ne ought foreslackes
Jerusalem with new force to supply,
On three sides strong before no help it lackes,
Only the North part least assured does lie,
But from his first suspect the same he backs,
On that his weaker flancke with rampires hye,
And numbers great of Soldiers cul'd in haste,
Hirelings and subjects by him there are plaste.
The end of this first Song.
GIERVSALEMME LIBERATA DEL SIG TORQVATO TASSO. CANTO PRIMO.
CANTO l'Armi pietose, e'l Capitano,
Che'l gran Sepolcro libero di CHRISTO.
Molto egli opro col senno, e con la mano:
Molto soffri nel glorioso acquisto:
E in van l'Inferno a lui s'oppose: e in vano
S'armo d'Asia, e di Libia il popol misto:
Che'l Ciel gli die fauore, e sotto a i santi
Segni ridusse i suoi compagni erranti.
O Musa, tu, che di caduchi Allori
Non circondi la front in Helicona;
Ma su nel Cielo infra i beati Chori
Hai di stelle immortali aurea Corona;
Tu spira al petto mio celesti ardori,
Tu rischiara il mio canto: e tu perdona,
S'intesso fregi al ver, s'adorno in part
D'altri diletti, che de'tuoi le carte.
Sai, chela corre il Mondo, oue piu versi
Di sue dolcezze il lusinghier Parnaso:
E che'l vero condito inmolli versi
I piu schiui allettando ha persuaso.
Cosi a l'egro Fanciul porgiamo aspersi
Di soaui licor gli orli del vaso;
Succhi amari, ingannato, intanto ei beue,
E da l'inganno suo vita receue.
Tu Magnanimo ALFONSO, il qualritogli
Al furor di Fortuna, e guidi in porto
Me Peregrino errante infragli scogli,
Einfra l'onde agitato, e quasi absorto;
Queste mie carte in lieta front accogli,
Che quasiin uoto a te sacrate i porto.
Forfe undi fia, che la presaga Penna
Osi scriuer di tequel, c'hor n'accenna.
E'benragion, s'egli auuerra, che'n pace
Il buon popol di CHRISTO unquasi ueda:
Econ Naui, ecaualli al fero Trace
Cerchi ritor la grande ingiusta preda;
Ch'ate lo scet tro in Terra, o se ti piace
L'alto Imperio de'mari altri conceda.
Emulo di Goffredo, i nostri carni
In tanto ascolta, e t'apparecchia a l'armi.
Gia'l sesto anno uolgea, che'n Orient
Passo il campo Christiano al'alta impresa:
E Nicea per assalto, e la potente
Antiochia con art hauea gia presa.
L'hauea poscia in battaglia incontra gente
Di Persia innumerabile difesa:
E Tortosa espugnata. indi a larea
Stagion die loco, e'lnouo Anno attende^.
E'l fine homai di quel piouoso Verno,
Chief l'arme cessar, lunge non era;
Quando da l'alto Soglio il Padre eterno,
Ch'e ne la part piu del Ciel sincera:
E, quanto e da le stelle al basso Inferno,
Tanto e piu in su de la stellata spera;
Gli occhi in giu uolse, e in un sol punto, e in una
Vista miro cio, che'n se il Mondo aduna.
Miro tutte le cose, and in Soria
S' affiso poi ne' Principi Christiani:
E con quel guardo suo, ch'a dentro spia
Nel piu secreto lor gli affetti humani;
Vede Goffredo, che scacciar desia
Da la Santa Citta gli empi Pagani:
E pien di fe, di zelo ogni mortale
Gloria, Imperio, tesor met in non cale.
Ma uede in Baldouin cupido ingegno,
Ch' a l'humane grandezze intento aspira.
Vede Tancredi hauer la vita a sdegno:
Tanto un suo uano amor l'ange, e martira:
E fondar Boemondo al nouo Regno
Suo d'Antiochia alti principij mira:
E leggi imporre, and introdur costume,
Et arti, e culto di uerace Nume.
E cotanto internar si in talpensiero,
Ch' altra impresa non par, che piu rammenti.
Scorge in Rinaldo and animo guerriero,
E spirti di riposo impatienti.
Non cupidigia in lui d'oro, o d'Impero,
Ma d'honor brame immoderate, ardenti.
Scorge, che da la bocca intento pende
Di Guelfo, ei chiari antichi essempi apprende.
Ma poi, c'hebbe di questi, e d'altri cori
Scorti gl'intimi sensi il Redel Mondo;
Chiama a se dagli Angelici splendori
Gabriel, che ne'primi era secondo.
E' tra DIO questi, e l'anime migliori
Interpret fedel, Nuntio giocondo:
Giu i decreti del Ciel porta, and al Cielo
Riporta de'mortali i preghi, e'l zelo.
Disse al suo Nuntio DIO. Goffredo troua,
E in mio nome di lui; perch si cessa?
Perchela guerra homai non si rinoua
A liberar Gierusalemme oppressa?
Chiami i Duci a consiglio, e i tardi moua
A l'alta impresa: ei Capitan sia d'essa.
Io qui l'eleggo, e'lfarangli altri in Terra,
Gia suoi compagni, hor suoi ministri in guerra.
Cosi parlogli: e Gabriel s'accinse
Veloce ad essequir l'imposte cose.
La sua forma inuisibil d'aria cinse,
Et al senso mortal la sottopose.
Humane membra, aspetto human si finse;
Ma di celeste maesta il compose.
Tragiouene, efanciullo eta confine
Prese, and orno di raggi il biondo crine.
Ali bianche vesti, c'han d'or le cime,
Infaticabilmente agili, e priest.
Fend i venti, e le nubi, e va sublime
Sourala terra, e soura il mar con queste.
Cosivestito indirizzossi a l'ime
Parti del Mondo il Messaggier celeste.
Pria sul Libano monte ei siritenne,
E si libro su l'adeguate pen.
E ver le piaggie di Tortosa poi
Drizzo precipitando il volo in giuso.
Sorgeua il nouo Sol da i lidi Eoi,
Part gia fuor; ma'l piu ne l'onde chiuso:
E porgea matutini i preghi suoi
Goffredo a Dio, come egli hauea per vso;
Quando a paro col Sol, ma piu lucente
L'Angelo gli appari da l'Oriente.
Egli disse. Goffredo, ecco opportuna
Gia la stagion, ch'al guerreggiar s'aspetta.
Perch dunque trapor dimora alcuna
A liberar Gierusalem soggetta?
Tu i Principi a consiglio homai raguna:
Tu al fin de l'opra i neghittosi affretta.
Dio per lor Duce gia t'elegge: and essi
Sopporran volontari a te se stessi.
Dio messaggier mi manda: io ti riuelo
La sua mente in suo nome. o quanta spene
Hauer d'alta vittoria: o quanto zelo
De l'hoste a tecommessa hor ti conuiene.
T acque, esparito riuolo del Cielo
A le parti piu eccelse, e piu serene.
Resta Goffredo a idetti, a lo splendore
D'occhi abbagliato, attonito di core.
Ma poi che si riscote, e che discorre,
Chivenne, chi mando, che gli fu detto;
Se gia bramaua, hortutto arde d'imporre
Fine a la guerra, ond'egli e Duce eletto.
Non che'l vedersi a gli altri in Ciel preporre
D'aura d'ambition gli gonfi il petto;
Ma il suo voler piunel voler s'infiamma
Del suo Signor, come fauillain fiamma.
Dunque gli Heroi compagni, i quai non lunge
Erano sparsi, a ragunarsi inuita.
Lettere a lettre, e messi a messi aggiunge:
Sempre al consiglio e la preghiera vnita.
Cio, ch' Alma generosa alletta, e punge:
Cio, che puo risuegliar virtu sopita,
Tutto par, che ritroui: e in efficace
Modo l'adorna si, che sforza, e piace.
Vennero i Duci, e gli altri anco seguiro:
E Boemondo sol qui non conuenne.
Part fuor s'attendo: part nel giro,
E tra gli alberghi suoi Tortosa ten.
I grandi de l'Essercito s'vniro
(Glorioso Senato) in di solenne.
Qui il pio Goffredo incomincio tra loro
Augusto in volto, and in sermon sonoro.
Guerrier di Dio, ch'a ristor are i danni
De la sua feed il Re del Cielo elesse:
E securi fra l'arme, e fra gl'inganni
Dela Terra, and del Mar vi scorse, e resse;
Si c'habbiam tante, e tante in si pochi anni
Ribellanti Prouincie a lui sommesse:
E fra le genti debellate, e dome
Stese l'insegne sue vittrici, e'l nome.
Gia non lasciammo i dolci pegni, e l'nido
Natiuo noi (se'l creder mio non erra)
Ne la vita esponemmo al mar infido,
Et a i perigli di lontana guerra;
Per acquistar di breue suono un grido
Vulgar, e posseder barbara Terra:
Che proposto ci hauremmo angusto, e fcarso
Premio e in damno de l'alme il sangue sparso.
Ma fu de'pensier nostri vltimo segno
Espugnar di Sion le nobil mura:
E sottrarre i Christiani al giogo indegne
Di seruitu cosi spiacente, e dura:
Fondando in Palestina un nouo Regno,
Ou' habbia la pieta sede secura:
Ne sia chineghi al Peregrin deuoto
D'adorar la gran Tomba, e sciorre il uoto.
Dunque il fatto sin'hora al rischio e molto,
Piu che molto al trauaglio, a l'honor poco,
Nulla al disegno; oue o si fermi, o uolto
Sia l'impeto del'arme in altro loco.
Che giouera l'hauer d'Europa accolto
Si grande sforzo, e posto in Asia ilfoco,
Quando sia poi di si gran moti il fine,
Non fabriche di Regni, ma ruin?
Non edifica quel, cheuuol gl'Imperi
Su fondamenti fabricar mondani:
Oue ha pochi di patria, e fe stranieri,
Fra gl'infiniti popoli Pagani:
Oue ne'Greci non conuien, che speri,
E i favor d'Occidente ha si lontani.
Ma ben move ruin, ond'egli oppresso
Sol construtto un sepolcro habbia a se stesso.
Turchi, Persi, Antiochia (illustre suono,
E di nome magnifico, e di cose)
Opre nostre non gia; ma del Ciel dono
Furo, euittorie in uer mer auigliose.
Hor, sedanoi riuolte, e torte sono
Contra quel fin, che'l donator dispose;
T emoce'n priui: e fauola a le genti
Quel si chiaro rimbombo al fin diuenti.
Ah non sia alcun, per DIO, che si graditi
Doni in uso si reo perda, e diffonda.
A quei, che sono alti principij or diti
Di tutta l'opra il filo, e'l sin risponda.
Hora, che i passi liberi, e spediti,
Hora, che la stagione habbiam seconda,
Che non corriamo a la Citta, ch'e meta
D'ogni nostra uittoria: e che piu'l uieta?
Principi, io ui protesto (i miei protesti
Vdra il Mondo present, udra il futuro:
L'odono hor su nel Cielo anco i celesti)
Il tempo de l'impresa e gia maturo.
Men diuien opportun, piu che si resti:
Incertissimo fia quel, che e securo.
Presago son, s'e lento il nostro cor so,
C'haura d'Egitto il Palestin soccorso.
Disse: e a i detti segui breue bisbiglio,
Ma sorse poscia il solitario Piero:
Che priuato fra Principi a consiglio
Sedea, del gran passaggio author primiero.
Cio, ch'essorta Goffredo, and io consiglio:
Ne loco a dubbio u'ha, si certo e il uero,
E per se noto: ei dimostrollo a lungo,
Voil'approuate, io questo fol u'aggiungo.
Se ben raccolgo le discordie, el'onte,
Quasi a proua da uoi fat, e patite,
I ritrosi pareri, e le non pronte,
E in mezo a l'esseguire opre impedite;
Reco ad un'alta originaria font
La cagion d'ogni indugio, e d'ogni lite:
A quella autorita, che in molti, e uari
D'opinion, quasi librata, e pari.
Oue un sol non impera, onde i giudici
Pendono poi de'premi, e de le pene:
Onde fian compartite opre, and uffici;
Iui errante il gouerno esser conuiene.
Deh fate un corpo sol di membri amici:
Fate un Capo, che gli altri indrizzi, e frene:
Date ad un sol lo scettro, e la possanza:
E sostenga di Reuece, e sembianza.
Qui tacque il veglio. Hor quai pensier, quai petti
Son chiusi a te, sant' Aura, e diuo Ardore?
Inspiri tu de l'Heremita idetti:
E tu gl'imprimi a i Caualier nel core.
Sgombri gl'inserti, anzi gl'innati affetti
Disourastar, di liberta, d'honore:
Si che Guglielmo, e Guelfo, i piu sublimi,
Chiamar Goffredo per lor Ducei primi.
L'approuar gli altri. Esser sue parti denno
Deliberare, e comandar altrui.
Imponga a i uinti leg egli a suo senno:
Porti la guerra e quando uuole, e a cui.
Cli altri, gia pari, ubidienti al cenno
Siano hor ministri de gl'imperij sui.
Concluso cio, fama neuola, e grande
Per le lingue de gli huomini si spande.
Ei si mostra a i soldati; e ben lor pare
Degno del'alto grado, oue l'hanposto:
Ericeue i saluti, e'l militare
Applausoin uolto placido, e composto.
Poi ch'a le dimostranze humili, e care
D'amor, d'ubidienza hehbe risposto;
Impon, ch'l di seguente in un gran campo
Tutto si morsti a lui schierato il Campo.
Facea ne l'Oriente il Sol ritorno
Sereno, e luminoso oltre l'usato;
Quando co'raggi i sci del nouo giorno
Sotto l'insegne ogni Guerriero armato:
E si mostro quanto pote piu adorno
Al pio Buglion, girando il largo prato.
S'era egli fermo, e si uedea dauanti
Passar distinti i Cauallieri, e i Fanti.
Mente, de gli anni, e de l'oblio nemica,
De le cose custode, e dispensiera,
Vagliami tua virtu si, ch'io ridica
Di quel campo ogni Duce, and ogni schiera.
Suoni, e risplenda la lor fama antica,
Fatta da gli anni homai tacita, e nera:
Tolto da'tuoi tesori orni mia lingua
Cio, ch'a scolti ogni eta, nulla l'estingua.
Prima i Franchi mostrarsi: il Duce loro
Vgone esser solea del Re fratello.
Ne l'Isola di Francia eletti foro
Fra quattro fiumi, ampio paese, e bello.
Poscia ch'Vgon mori, de'Gigli d'oro
Segui l'usata insegna il fire drappello
Sotto Clotareo Capitano egregio,
A cui, se nulla manca, e il sangue regio.
Mill sin di grauissima armatura:
Sono altrettanti i Caualier seguenti,
Di disciplina a i primi, e di natura,
E d'arme, e di sembianza indiferenti;
Normandi tutti: egli ha Robertoin cura,
Che Principe natiuo e de le genti.
Poi duo Pastor di popoli spiegaro
Le squadre lor Guglielmo, and Ademaro.
L'vno, el'altro di lor, che ne'diuini
Vffici gia tratto pio ministero,
Sotto l'elmo premendoi lunghi crini,
Essercita de l'arme hor l'vsofero.
Da la Citta d'Orange, e da i confini
Quattrocento guerrier scelse il primiero.
Ma guida quei di Poggio in guerra l'altro:
Numero egual, ne men ne l'arme scaltro.
Baldouin poscia in mostra addur si vede
Co'Bolognesi suoi quei del Germano:
Che le sue genti il pio fratel gli cede
Hor, ch'ei de'Capitani e Capitano.
Il Conte de Carnuti indi succeed,
Potente di consiglio, e pro di mano.
Van con lui quattrocento: e triplicati
Conduce Baldouino in sella armati.
Occupa Guelfo il campo a lor vicino,
Huon, ch'a l'alto fortuna agguaglia il merte.
Conta costui per Genitor Latino
De gli Aui ESTENSI un lungo ordine, e cer to.
Ma German di cognome, e di Domino,
Ne la gran casa de'Guelfoni e inserto.
Regge Carinthia, e presso l'Istro, e'l Reno
Cio, che i prischi Sueui, e i Reti hauieno.
A'questo, che retaggio era materno,
Acquisti ei giunse gloriosi, e grandi.
Quindi gente trahea, che prende a scherno
D'andar contra la morte, ou'ei comandi:
Vsa a temprar ne'caldi alberghi il verno,
E celebrar con lieti inuitii prandi.
Fur cinquemila a la partenza; a pena
(De'Persi auanzo) il terzo hor qui ne mena.
Seguia la gente poi candida, e bionda,
Che tra i Fra^chi, e i Germani, e'l mar si giace:
Oue la Mosa, and oue il Reno inonda,
Terra di biade, e d'animai ferace.
Egli Insulani lor, che d'alta sponda
Riparo fansi a l'Ocean vorace:
L'Ocean, che non pur le merci, e i legni;
Ma intere inghiotte le Cittadi, e i Regni.
Gli vni, e gli altri son mill: e tutti vanno
Sotto vn'altro Roberto insieme a stuolo.
Maggior'alquanto e lo squadron Britanno:
Guglielmo il regge al Re minor figliuolo.
Sono gl'Inglesi sagittari, and hanno
Gente con lor, ch'e piu vicina al Polo.
Questi de l'alte selue hirsuti manda
La diuisa dal Mondo vltima Irlanda.
Vien Poi Tancredi: e non e alcun fra tanti
(Tranne Rinaldo) o feritor maggiore,
O piu bell di maniere, e di sembianti,
OF piu eccelso, and intrepido di core.
S' alcun ombra di colpa i suoi gran vanti
Rende men chiari, e sol follia d'Amore:
Nato fra l'arme Amor di breue vista,
Che si nutre d'affanni, e forza acquista.
E' fama, che quel di, che glorioso
Fela rotta de'Persi al popol Franco,
Poi che Tancredi al fin vittorioso
I fuggitiui di seguir fu stanco;
Cerco di rifrigerio, e di riposo
A l'arse labra, al trauagliato fianco:
E trasse, oue inuitollo al rezo estiuo
Cinto di verdi seggi un font viuo.
Quiui a lui d'improuiso vna Donzella
Tutta, fuor che la front, armata app arse.
Era Pagana, e la venuta anch'ella
Per l'istessa cagion di ristorarse.
Eg li mirolla, and ammiro la bella
Sembianza, e d'essa si compiacque, en'arse.
O merauiglia; Amor ch'a pena e nato,
Gia grande vola, e gia trionfa armato.
Ella d'elmo coprissi, e se non era,
Ch'altri quiui arriuar, ben l'assaliua.
Parti dal uinto suo la Donna altera,
Ch'e per necessita sol fuggitiua;
Ma l'imagine sua bella, e guerriera
Tale ei serbo nel cor, qual essa e uiua:
E sempre ha nel pensiero e l'atto, e'l loco,
In che la uide, esca continua al foco.
E ben nel uolto suo la gente accorta
Legger potria* questi arde, e fuor di spene:
Cosi uien sospiroso, e cosi porta
Basse le ciglia, e di mestitia piene.
Gli ottocento a cauallo, a cui sa scorta,
Lasciar le piaggie di Campagna amene,
Pompa maggior de la Natura, e i colli,
Che uagheggia il Tirren fertili, e molli.
Venian dietro ducento in Grecia nati,
Che son quasi di ferro in tutto scarchi:
Pendon spade ritorte a l'unde'lati:
Suonano al tergo lor faretre, and archi:
A sciutti hannoi caualli, al corso usati,
A'la fatica inuitti, al cibo parchi:
Ne l'assalir son pronti, e nel ritrarsi:
E combat ton fuggendo erranti, e sparsi.
Tatin regge la schiera: esol fu questi,
Che Greco accompagno l'armi Latin.
O uergogna, o misfatto; hor non hauesti
Tu Grecia quelle guerre a te uicine?
E pur quasi a spettacolo sedesti,
Lenta aspettando de'grand'atti il fine:
Hor se tu se uil serua, e il tuo seruaggio
(Non ti lagnar) guistitia, e non oltraggio.
Squadra d'ordine estrema, ecco uien poi;
Ma d'honor prima, e di ualore, e d'arte.
Son qui gli Auuenturieri inuitti Heroi,
Terror de l'Asia, e folgori di Mart.
Taccia Argo i Mini, e tacota Artu que'suoi
Erranti, che di sogni empion le carte:
Ch'ogni antica memoria appo costoro
Perde. hor qual Duce fia degno di ^oro?
Dudon di Consa e il Duce. e, perch duro
Fu il giudicar di sangue, e di uirtute;
Gli altri sopporsi a lui concordi furo,
C'hauea piu cose fat, e piu uedute.
Ei di uirilita grave, ematuro
Mostra in fresco uigor chiome canute.
Mostra, quasi d'honor uestigi degni,
Di non brutte ferite impressi segni.
Hustatio e poi fra' primi: e i propri pregi
Illustre il fanno, epiu il fratel Buglione.
Gernando u'e, nato di Re Noruegi,
Che scettri uanta, e titoli, e corone.
Ruggier di Balnauilli infra gli egregi
Lauecchia fama, and Engerlan ripone.
E celebrati son fra'piugagliardi
Un Gentonio, un Rambaldo, e duo Gherardi.
Son fralodati Vbaldo anco, e Rosmondo
Del gran Ducato di Lincastro herede.
Non fia, ch'Obizo il Tosco aggraui al fondo
Chi fa de le memory auare prede:
Ne i tree frati Lombardi al chiaro Mondo
Inuoli, Achille, Sforza, e Palamede:
O'l forte Otton, che conquisto lo scudo,
In cui da l'Angue esce il fanciullo ignudo.
Ne Guasco, ne Ridolfo adietro lasso:
Ne l'un, ne l'altro Guido, ambo famosi.
Non Eberardo, e non Gernier trapasso,
Sotto silentio ingratamente ascosi.
Oue uoi me, di numer ar gia lasso,
Gildippe, and Odoardo amanti, e sposi
Rapite? ^ne la guerra anco consorti,
Non sarete disgiunti, ancor che morti.
Ne le scole d'Amor, che non s'apprende?
Iui si fe costei Guerriera ardita.
Va sempre affissa al caro fianco, e pende
Da un fato solo l'una, e l'altra uita.
Colpo, ch'ad un sol noccia, unqua non scende:
Ma indiuiso e il dolor d'ogni ferita.
Espesso e l'un ferito, e l'altro langue:
E uersa l'Alma quel, se questa il sangue.
Ma il fanciullo Rinaldo e suor a questi,
E soura quanti in mostra er an condutti,
D olcemente feroce alzar vedresti
La regal front, e in lui mirar sol tutti.
L'eta precorse, e la speranza: e presti
Pareano i fior, quando n'usciro i frutti.
Se'l miri fulminar ne l'arme auuolto
Mart lo stimi: Amor, se scopre il uo lto.
Lui ne la riua d'Adige produsse
A Bertoldo Sofia: Sofia la bella,
A Bertoldo il possente: e pria, che fusse
Tolto quasi il Bambin da la mammella,
Matilda il uolse, e nutricollo, e instrusse
Ne l'artiregie: e sempre ei fu con ella,
Sin ch'inuaghi la giouenetta mente
La Tromba, che s'udia da l'Oriente.
All'hor (nepur tree lustri hauea forniti)
Fuggi solletto, e corse strade ignote:
Varco l'Egeo, passo di Grecia i liti,
Giun se nel campo in region remote.
Nobilissima fuga, e che l'imiti:
Ben degnaalcun magnanimo Nipote.
Tree anni son, ch'e in guerra: e intempestiua
Molle piuma del mento a pena useiua.
Passatii Cauallieri, in mostra uiene
La gente a piedi, and e Raimondo auanti.
Regea Tolosa, e scelse infra Pirene,
E fra Garona, e l'Ocean suoi fanti.
Son quattromila, e ben' armati, ebene
Instrutti, usi al disagio, e toleranti.
Buona e la gente, e non puo da piu dotta,
O'da piu forte guida esser condotta.
Ma cinquemila Stefano d'Ambuosa
E di Bless, e di Turs in guerra adduce.
Non e gente robusta, o faticosa,
Se ben tutta di ferro ella riluce.
Laterra molle, e lieta, e dilettosa
Simili a se gli habitator produce.
Impetofan ne le battaglie prime;
Ma di leggier pio langue, e si reprime.
Alcasto il terzo uien, qual presso a Tebe
Gia Capaneo, con minaccioso uolto.
Sei mila Eluetij audace, e fera plebe,
Da gli Alpini castelli hauea raccolto:
Che'l ferrouso a far solchi, a franger glebe,
In noue form, e in piu degne opre ha uolto:
E con laman, che guardo rozi armenti
Par, ch'i Regisfidar nulla pauenti.
Vedi appresso spiegar l'alto uessillo
Co'l diadema di Piero, e con le chiaui.
Qui settemila aduna il buon Camillo
Pedoni d'arme rilucenti, e graui:
Lieto, ch'a tanta impresa il ciel sortillo,
Ouerinoui il prisco honor de gli Aui:
O'mostri almen, ch'a la uirtu Latina,
O'nulla manca, osol la disciplina.
Ma gia tutte le squadre er an con bella
Mostra passate, e l'ultima fu questa;
Quando Goffredo i maggior Duci appella,
E la sua mente lorfa manifesta.
Come appaia diman l'Alba nouella
Vuo, che l'Hoste s'inuij leggiera, e presta:
Si ch'ella giunga a la Citta sacrata,
Quanto e possibil piu, meno aspettata.
Preparateui dunque, and al uiaggio
Et a la pugna, e a la uittoria ancora.
Questo ardito parlar d'huom cosi saggie
Sollecita ciascuno, e l'auualora.
Tutti d'andar son pronti al nouo raggio,
E impatienti in aspettar l'Aurora.
Ma'l prouido Buglion senza ogni tema
Non e pero, benche nel cor la prema.
Perch' egli hauea certe nouelle intese,
Che s'e d'Egitto il Re gia posto in uia
In uerso Gaza, bello, e forte arnese
Da fronteggiarei Regni di Soria.
Ne creder puo, che l'huomo, a fere imprese
A uezzo sempre, hor lento in otio stia;
Ma d'hauerlo aspettando aspro nemico,
Parla al Fedel suo messaggiero Henrico.
Soura vna lieue Saettia tragitto
Vuo, che tu facciane la Greca Terra.
Iui giunger deuea (cosi m'ha fcritto,
Chi may per vso in auisar non erra)
Un Giouene regal, d'animo inuitto,
Ch'a farsi vien nostro compagno in guerra:
Prence e de'Dani, e mena un grandestuolo
Sin da i Paesi sottoposti al Polo.
Ma perche'l Greco Imperator fallace
Seco forse vsera le solite arti,
Per far, ch'o torni indietro, o'l corso audace
Torca in altre da noi lontane parti;
Tu, Nuntio mio, tu, Consiglier verace,
In mio nome il disponi a cio, che parti
Nostro, e suo been: e di, che tosto vegna:
Che di lui fora ogni tar danza indegna.
Non venir seco tu; ma resta appresso
Al Re de'Greci a procurar l'aiuto:
Che gia piu d'vna volta a noi promesso,
E'per ragion di patto anco douuto.
Cosi parla, e l'informa: e poi che'l Messo
Le lettre ha di credenza, e di saluto;
Toglie, affrettando il suo partir, congedo:
E tregua fa co'suoi pensier Goffredo.
Il di seguente all'hor, ch'aperte sono
Del lucido Orient al Sol le port;
Di trombe vdissi, e di tamburi un suono,
Ond'al camino ogni guerrier s'essorte.
Non e si grato a i caldi giorni il tuono,
Che speranza di pioggia al mondo apporte;
Come fu caro a le feroci genti
L'altero suon de'bellici instrumenti.
Tosto ciasun, da gran desio compunto,
Vest le membra de l'vsate spoglie:
E tosto appar di tutte l'arme in punto:
Tosto sottoi suoi Duciogn'huom s'accoglie.
E l'ordinato Essercito congiunto
Tutte le sue bandiere al vento scioglie;
E nel vessillo Imperiale, e grande
La trionfante CROCE al Ciel si spande.
Intanto il Sol, che de'celesti campi
Va piu sempre auanzando, e in alto ascend,
L'armipercote, e ne trahe fiamme, elampi
Tremuli, e chiari, onde le viste offend.
L'aria par di fauille intorno auampi,
E quasi d'alto incendio in forma splende:
E co'feri nitriti il suono accorda
Del ferro scosso, e le campaign assorda.
Il Capitan, che da'nemici aguati
Le schiere sue d'assecurar desia;
Molti a cauallo leggiermente armati
A'scoprir il paese intorno inuia.
E inanzii Guastatori hauea mandati,
Da cui si debbia ageuolar la via,
E i voti luoghi empire, e spianar gli erti:
E da cui siano i chiusi passi aperti.
Non e gente Pagana insieme accolta,
Non muro cinto di profonda fossa,
Non grantorrente, o monte alpestre, o folta
Selua, che'l lor viaggio arrestar possa.
Cosi de gli altri fiumiil Re tal uolta,
Quando superbo oltra misura ingrossa,
Soura le sponde ruinoso scorre:
Ne cosa e may, che gli s'ardisca opporre.
Sol di Tripoli il Re, che'n ben guardate
Mura, genti, tesori, and arm serra;
Forse le schiere Franche hauria tardate;
Ma non oso di prouocarle in guerra.
Lor con messi, e con doni anco placate
Ricetto volontario entro la Terra:
E riceue condition di pace,
Si come imporle al pio Goffredo piace.
Qui del Monte Seir, ch'alto, e sourano
Da l'Oriente a la Cittade e presso,
Gran turba scese di Fedelial piane,
D'ogni eta mescolata, e d'ogni sesso.
Porto suoi doni al vincitor Christiano:
Godea in mirarlo, e in ragionar con esso:
Stupia del'armi peregrine: e guida
Hebbe da lor Goffredo amica, e fida.
Conduce eisempre a le maritime onde
Vicino il campo per diritte strade;
Sapendo ben, che le propinque sponde
L'amica Armata costeggiando rade.
Laqual puo far, che tutto il Campo abonde
De'necessari arnesi; e che le biade
Ogni I sola de'Greci a lui sol mieta:
E Scio pietrosa gli vindemini, e Certa.
Geme il vicino mar sotto l'incarco
De l'alte naui, e de'piu leui pini:
Si che non s'apre homai securo uarco
Nel Mar Mediterraneo a i Saracini.
Ch'oltra quei, c'ha Georgio armati, e Marco
Ne'Vinitiani, e Liguri confini;
Altri Inghilterra, e Francia, and altri Ole^da,
E la fertile Sicilia altri ne manda.
E questi, che son tutti insieme uniti
Con saldissimi lacci in un uolere;
S'eran carchi, e prouisti in uari liti
Di cio, ch'e d'uopo a le terrestri schiere:
Le quai trouando liberi, e sforniti
I passi de'nemici a le frrontiere;
In corso uelocissimo se'n uanno
La, ue CHRISTO soffri mortale affanno.
Ma precorsa e la Fama apportatrice
De'ueraci romori, e de'bugiardi:
Dh'unito e il Campo uincitor felice:
Che gia s'e mosso: e che non e chi'l tradi.
Quante, e quai sian le squadre ella ridice:
Narra il nome, e'lualor de'piu gagliar di:
Narra i lor uanti, e con terribil faccia
Gli usurpatori di Sion minaccia.
E l'aspettar del male e'mal peggiore
Forse, che non parrebbeil mal present.
Pende ad ogn'aura incerta di romore
Ogni orecchia sospesa, and ogni minte:
E un confuso bisbiglio entro, e di fuore
Trascorre i campi, e la Citta dolente.
Ma il uecchio Re ne'gia uicin perigli
Volge nel dubbio cor feri consigli.
Aladin detto e il Re, che di quel Regno
Nouo Signor, uiue in continua cura.
Huom gia crudel; ma'lsuo feroce ingegno
Pur mitigato hauea l'eta matura.
Egli, che de'Latini udi il disegno,
C'han d'assalir di sua Citta le mura;
Giunge al uec chio timor noui sospetti:
E de'nemici paue, e de'soggetti.
Pero, che dentro a una Citta commisto
Popolo alberga di contraria feed.
La debil part, e la minore in CHRISTO:
La grande, e forte in Macometto creed.
Ma quando il Re fe di Sion l'acquisto,
Eui cerco di stabilir la sede;
Scemo i publici pesi a'suoi Pagani;
Ma piu grauonne i miseri Christiani.
Questo pensier la ferita natiua,
Che dagli anni sopita, e fredda langue,
Irritando inasprisce, e la rauuiua
Si, ch'assetata e piu chemai di sangue.
T al fero torna a la stagione estiua
Quel, che parue nel gel piaceuo l'Angue.
Cosi Leon domestico riprende
L'innato suo furor, s'altri l'offende.
Veggio (dicea) de la letitia noua
Veraci segniin questa turba infida.
Il danno uniuersal solo a lei gioua:
Sol nel pianto comun par, ch'ella rida.
E forse insidie, e tradimenti hor coua,
Riuolgendo fra se come m'uccida:
O come al mio nemico, e suo consorte
Popolo occultamente apra le port.
Ma no'l fara; preueniro questo empi
Disegni loro, e sfogherommi a pieno.
Gli uccidero: faronne acerbi scempi:
Suenero i figli a le lor madri in seno:
Ardero loro alberghi, e insieme i Tempi.
Questi i debiti roghi a i morti fieno,
E su quellor sepolcro in mezoa i uoti,
Vittime pria faro de'Sacerdoti.
Cosi l'iniquo fra suo cor ragiona;
Pur non segue pensier si mal concetto.
Ma s'a quegli innocenti egli perdona,
E'di uilta, non di pietade effetto.
Che s'un timor'a incrudelir lo sprona,
Il ritien piu potente altro sospetto:
Troncar le uie d'accordo, e de'nemici:
Troppoteme irritar l'arme uittrici.
Tempra dunque il fellon la rabbia insana:
Anzi altroue pur cerca, oue la sfoghi.
I rustici edifici abbatte, e spiana:
E da in preda a le fiamme i culti luoghi,
Part alcuna non lascia integra, o sana,
Onde il Franco si pasca, oue s'alloghi:
Turba le fonti, e i riui, e le pure onde
Di ueneni mortiferi confonde.
Spietatamente e cauto: e non oblia
Di rinforzar Gierusalem fra tanto.
Da tree lati fortissima era pria:
Sol uerso Barea e men secura alquanto.
Ma da'primi sospetti ei le munia
D'altri ripari il suo men forte canto:
Eu'accogliea gran quantitade in fretta
Di gente mercenaria, e di soggetta.
Il fine del Primo Canto
THE SECOND SONG OF THE RECOVERIE OF HIERVSALEM.
WHile thus the Tyrant does provide to arm,
Ismen one day comes to him all alone,
Ismen that from the Tombs can draw, and warm
Life, breath, and sense give corpse whence they were gone:
Ismen that by the sound of mumbled charm,
Can Pluto in his Court cast fear upon:
And all his Devils employ in charges bad,
And bind, and looze, as if them slaves he had.
Mahound he serves, that once did Christ profess,
Yet former rites wholly can not forgo,
But often to use of foulest wickedness,
Confounds both laws, though well he neither know:
And now from caves where far off common press,
He wonts in hidden arts his time bestow:
He comes, in public peril of his Lord,
To wicked king a Counsler more abhord.
My Liege (he says) the Camp does hither speed
His march, that conquering has so dismayed:
But let us do what us to do may steed,
The skies, the world, will give the hardy aid.
It Is well that Kings, and Captains store at need
You have, and for all wants foreorder laid.
If that all other ply their charges so,
This land for Sepulcher shall serve your foe.
As for my self I come my help t'impart,
Compagnion both of peril, and of pain,
What counsel best lies stored in aged heart,
What Magic skill I promise every grain.
I will constrain to bear of toil their part,
The Angels erst banished from the heavenly rain.
But how I mean these my enchantments frame,
And by what means, now will I show the same.
An altar hid in Christian Temple lies,
Low under ground and her carved picture there,
On whom as Goddess vulgar sort relyes,
And mother that their buried God did bear,
Wrapped in a veil it is, nor ever dies,
The Lamp that shines before the image clear.
A long in ranks there hang hit round about,
The offered vows of credulous devout.
This Image now from them bereft away,
I will that you transport with your own hand,
And in your great Meschita safe vplay,
Then I by charm will shape so sure a band,
That whiles it there does dewly guarded stay,
By it each gate shall fatal fenced stand,
Your Empire so twixt walls impregnable,
This rare new secret shall make durable.
He said, and swayd: then with impatience
The King unto the house of God him hyes,
And forced the Priests, and void of reverence,
On that chaste picture seyz'd in rau'ning wise,
And bare hit to that Church, whereof offense
Of fond and wicked rites prouokes the skies:
On sacred image in that place profane,
Th'enchaunter whispered his blasphemous bane.
But when new dawning peered in the sky,
The Sexten who this Temple (most vncleene)
Received in guard, the image cannot spy,
Nor where he sought, nor where it plast had been:
Straight he enformes the king, whom egerly
This so unwelcome news incenst with teene:
And took conceit it was stolen by some of those,
Who Christ professed, and now conceal it close.
Were it the deed of some believing wight,
Or wear't the heaven that here his power displayed:
And for his Queen, and Goddess took despite,
In so vile place to see her image laid:
(For fame as yet uncertain does endight,
Where this, or man's, or Gods work may be said)
Godly it is that zeal and godliness,
Of man give place, and hit heavens deed confess.
The King does cause with search importunest,
Each house, each Church, viewed and reviewed to be,
And him that hides, or makes manifest
The thief, or theft, proffers great pain, and fee:
Th'enchaunter gives to all his arts no rest,
To hunt the truth, but all in vain hunts he,
From where from heaven or earth the practice came,
Heaven close it kept, to this Enchaunters shame.
But when the cruel king saw vnespyde,
That which he deemed the faithfuls only feat,
Against them a fellon hate he took, and fryde
In wrath, and rage immoderate and great,
Respect he quite forgets, what so betyde,
Vengeance he will take, and quench his furies heat:
Th'vnknowen thief (says he) shall yet be slain
In common wrack, nor my wrath taken in vain.
So that the guilty be not saved, let die
The just and innocent, but which is just?
Each blame deserves, nor among them all see I
So much as one, whom we as friend may trust:
If some with this new fault have none ally,
It serves old faults abuy new penance must.
Up up my loyals, up in hand go take
Both fire and sword, burn, and huge slaughter make.
So he his folk bespake, when forth each where,
Straightwayes this fame amongst the faithful flies,
Who grew astonished, so does them the fear
Of death in eye now present quite surpryze,
Nor is there one that dew excuse, or preyre,
Or just defense, or flight, once dares or tryes.
But these so faint, and vnresolu'd of mind,
Where least they hoped, did their safety find.
Amongst them was a maid of maidenhed
To ripeness grown, of high and noble thought:
Of beauty rare, but beauty valewed,
Or naught or sole, for it to virtue brought
Account, most prized because straight cabyned,
Twixt walls her prices great to hide she sought.
And of her wooers vnbepranct and sole,
Both from the laud, and from the looks she stole.
But guard is none that wholly can conceal,
Beauty of worth likt and admirde to be,
Nor love consent will give, but it reveal
Unto a young man's hot desires does he,
Love that now blind, now Argos, now with veil
Do blind thine eyes, now open wide do see,
Thou through a thousand watchers into chaste
Maids lodgings others sight conveyed have.
Sofronia she, Olindo he has name,
One City both, and one faith both they have,
For modest he, for fair she carries fame,
Desire much, little hope, naught he does crave*
Nor can it show, or dares not do the same,
And she or scorns, or sees not, or gave
No semblance, so till then par thrall he peakt,
Or not seen, or ill known, or smally reakt.
This while runs out the bruit, how there is pressed
A wretched slaughter of this seely flock,
She that is equal noble and honest,
Bethinkes what way to shield them from the shocke,
Valiance her great mind moves, shame it arrest,
And maidens modesty does thwart a block.
Valiance orecomes, rather accordes, whiles she
Shamefast her self, shame valiant makes to be.
This maid alone through preace of vulgar went,
Bewty she couers not, nor sets to sight,
Shadowed her eyes, in veil her body pent,
With manner coy, yet coy in noble plight,
I note where car'de, or careless ornament,
Where chance, or art her fairest countnance dight.
Friended by heavens, by nature, and by love,
Her mere neglects most artificial prove.
Looked on by each the stately Lady goes,
But looks on none, and to the King she came,
Nor for he angry seems, one step she slowes,
But his grim sight fearelesse endures the Dame.
I come my Lord, says she, (your wrath for close
The while I pray, and your people reclame)
I come to show, and to you bound to gieue
The wight you seek, and did you so aggrieue.
At t'honest boldness, at the vnforethought
Glympes of her beauty, stately, and divine,
As if confusde, as conquered he were cought,
He bridles rage, and stern look does incline,
Had he a mind; or she a countnance brought
Ought less severe, love had him snared in line.
But wayward beauty, wayward heart to move
Serves far unfit, kindness is bait of love.
It Was stonishment, it was rareness, it was delight,
If it were not love that stirred his villain heart:
Declare (says he) the whole, no farther smite
Shall any sword to Christen peoples smart:
Then she here stands the guilty of thy spite,
This hand (O King) did play this theeuish part,
The Image I took away, and I am she,
That so thou seekst, and punished ought to be.
Thus to the public fate her hautie head
She offered, and sole on her it took,
Most noble lie, when so embellished,
As thee t'exceede, can truth self ever look?
Suspenst a while and not so sudden led
To wrath, this Tyrant fierce patience forsook,
Then he reioyns thereto, I will thou show,
Who did advise, and who did help bestow.
Of this my glory I would not partake
One only myte to any else (she said)
My self I sole did hereto privy make,
My self sole counsel gave, sole gave I aid:
Then on thee sole (he out replying brake)
Shall all the wrath of my revenge be laid:
It Is just (quoth she) to me it so pertaynes,
At honor sole, sole will I be in pains.
Fresh rage in Tyrant then begins accrue,
And asks her: where is the image hid?
Not hid (quoth she) but I in fire it threw,
To fire the same most praysefull deem I did:
For so at least, that myscreants hands a new
Might work it farther wrong, all fear I rid.
Seek you the thief, or seek you (Sir) the theft,
Her here you see, that aye from sight is reft.
Albe nor mine is theft, nor thief am I,
It Is just regayn'd, that wrongfully was got,
The hearing this does force the Tyrant gry,
With threatfull sound, and raynes to wrath allot,
Noble visage, heart shamefast, stomach hye,
Now out may hope of finding pardon blot:
And love in vain against so cruel wrake,
Of deintie beauty seeks a shield to make.
Arrested, and condemned is that fair
Dame, by that fellon King, in flames to die,
And now her veil and mantle chaste they tear
Away, and with hard wythes arms tender tie,
She silent stands, and still stout heart does bear,
No whit dismayed, though somewhat moved thereby,
And her fair face is taynted with a hew,
That does not palenesse, but a witness show.
Now this great case is known, and thither packt
Huge preace of people, and Olindo came,
The person doubtful is, certain the fact,
He came as deeming it might be his Dame,
When as the prisner fair he found in act
Not of accusde, but cast to be the same.
And Sergeants busy bout hard office spide,
Therewith he headlong shooues the press aside.
And cries (O King) she is not guilty, she
Not of this theft, through folly vaunts she it,
She thought it not, she durst it not, who see
Did e're lone woman, and vnskild commit
Such act? could watch by her beguiled be?
Had she to steal the sacred image wit?
If yes, tell how? my Lord, my self it was,
So love not loving loved he alas.
He added then, I there where air, and day,
Your stately builded Meschite in does let,
By night up clammer'd, and each uncouth way
Assaying, through that narrow hole did get,
Mine only is this praise, me only slay
You ought, nor she usurp my penal det,
Mine are these chains, for me you are too light,
These flames, this pile, is nones but mine of right.
Sofronia mildely lifting up her sight,
With eyes of pity looks him upon,
Whereto come thou, O wretched guiltles wight?
What counsel, or what fury leads thee on?
Or draws thee forth? without thee want I might,
To bear the weight of human wrath alone?
I eke have heart that thinks for once to die,
It self can serve and craves no company.
She lover so bespake, but not dispose
Him can, t'vnsay his words, or change his mind,
Oh rare example where contention grows
Twixt noble virtue, and a love as kind,
Where winners only price is life to lose,
And harm of vanquished is safety to find,
But feller waxt the king that she and he,
Each to condemn themselves so constant be.
He thinks himself scorned by them to see,
Who for despiting him, despise the pains:
Believe we both (he says) both I agree,
Shall win, but conquest such as best pertaynes:
To Sergeants then he beckes, that ready be
The youth to bind with their prepared chains.
Both to one stake they tie, and so them place,
As back to back is turned, not face to face.
Then was the pile framed up about them round,
And now the bellows kindle ginnes the flame,
When as the youth to lays of doleful sound
Brake, and bespake his fellow tied Dame,
Is this the cord I hoped should have bound
Us two copemates of life? and is this same
The fire I deemed should in each our heart,
An equal heat of equal flames impart?
Flames other, other knots love promised,
But diffrent much, our hard lot does prepare,
Far, ah too far, it erst us sundered,
And bitter now conioynes in dying care,
It likes me yet since I am destyned,
So strange a death, this stake with thee to share:
That bed I did not, thy fate sorrow I,
And not mine own, since by thy side I die.
And oh most happy death that could betide!
Oh fortunate these sweetest torments mine!
If I obtain that breast to breast allyde,
My soul breath out into that mouth of thine,
And thee with me, so deaths self instant guide,
As thy last sighs thou into me resign,
So said he playning, she again replies
Sweetly, and with these words does him advise.
Friend other thoughts, and plaints of other kind,
For cause more urgent this time does require,
Bethink you of your sins, and call to mind
What God he is, who good gives ample hire,
Suffer for him, so pains sweet shall you find,
And glad to the supernall seat aspire:
Behold how fair heaven shows, the sun behold
You seems t'inuite, and comforts to unfold.
The Painims lift their playning voice aloft,
And faithful plain, but in lower sound,
I wot nere what unused erst, and soft,
To kings hard heart, seems has a passage found,
Him it foretells, and scorns, nor will be broft
To bend, but turns his eyes, and left the ground,
Thou sole Sofronia do not partake
This common dole, nor plaint do playned make.
In such their plight a Knight comes ryding lo,
(For so they guess) of goodly worth and port,
Whom stranger by the arms and tire they tro,
That from far parts, now thither made resort:
The Tygre which on helm for crest does show,
Draws on each eye, as badge of rare report,
A badge in battle by Clorinda used,
They think it is she, nor is their thought abusde.
Of women's fashions and their usual guise,
Even from her greenest years she takes disdain,
Proud hand does with Arachnes work despise,
With Spindle, or with needle it self to stain:
Gay clothing, and close cabbanes eke she flies,
For goodness even in fields may safe remain:
She arms with pride her look, and holds a bent,
Stern it to make, yet stern it does content.
Tender as yet with dainty hand she strains,
And slips the raines unto some courser brave,
She handles spear, and sword in arms she trains,
Enduring breath, and lims enured to have:
Then through the wildest woods, and on mountains
Chase to the Lions fierce, and Bears she gave,
She war ensewes, in which, and in forreasts,
Men savage her, man her deem savage beasts.
From Persian Realms she hither iourneyed,
That Christens to her power resist she may,
Albe tofore their members scattered
She had in fields, and mixed their blood with sea,
Now here arrived, first sight was offered
Of those, who debt to death were pressed to pay,
Willing to see, and know what fault did force
Them to such end, she forward spurs her horse.
The preace gives place, she does some stay pretend,
The tied pair more nearly to suruay:
She marks the one silent, the other sighs out send,
And sex less strong more courage to display:
She sees him wayle, as one that pity bends,
Not dole, or dole not for himself does sway.
And silent her, with eyes so fixed on sky,
As parted hence, she seems before she die.
Clorinda moody grew, and grief does take
For both their sakes, and tears her visage taint,
Yet more bemones her that no moan does make,
The silence moves her more, less the complaint:
Without long stay a man she thus bespake,
Whose hair old age did with new color paint,
Ah tell me what are these, and to this death
What fate, or fault of theirs them conducteth?
So him she prayed, and he short answered,
But full expressed what she to learn was bent,
She wonders much, and soon imagined,
That both these wights were equal innocent*
Straight to forbid their death she purposed,
So far as prayre, or force could make extent,
She nyres the flame, she bids take it away,
(That fast approcht) and does to Sergeants say:
Not one amongst you once so hardy be,
This office hard, yet harder to pursew,
Till with the King I speak, and trust you me,
This lingering shall none your annoyance brew,
The Sergeants yield, as moved much to see,
That her so stately port, and royal hew,
Then to the king she goes, and met him there
Midway, he going likewise toward her.
I am (quoth she) Clorinda, you my name
Perhaps have heard, and for defense
Of our belief, and of your raygne I came
Like pressed for each exploit, do you dispense
What I shall undertake, I neither shame
The base, nor dread of highest daunts my sense,
Will you in open field, or will you use
My service closde in walls? I none refuse.
She peac'd, what land so wide, the king replies,
From Asia stands, or from the course of Sun,
Where (glorious maid) thy honor great not flies,
Or where thy fame has not arrival won?
Now that thy sword his edge with mine allies,
My fear is past, and comfort is begun,
Not if an army great my part should take,
My hope more sured could that army make.
Now now, me seems, Godfrey beyond his dew
Protractes the time, and where you please, demand
Employed to be, sole fit I deem for you
Exploytes, where hazard has most honor pawnd,
To you the charge of all my martial crew
I here assign: it is law what you command,
So spoke the king, she courteous money pays,
Of thanks for praise, and then thus farther says.
A strange case may it seem to each ones sense,
That service vnperform'd should guerdon have:
Your bounty yet me cheeres, for recompense
Of service meant, those two condemned I crave:
Though if the fault do want sure evidence,
It Was cruel reason that such judgment gave:
But this I silence, and I silence signs
Express, through which their innocence shines.
I only say each one holds vain to doubt,
That Christians have this image stolen away,
But from you I dissent, ne am without
Sound reason, whereon this my gheasse I stay:
Th'enchanter, who this practice went about,
A pranke vnreu'rend against our law did play,
It not beseemes to make our Church a neast
For Idols, and for others Idols least.
To Mahound rather I impute above
This straungy miracle, and he it wrought,
To show into his temples did behooue,
No new defilde religion be brought:
Let Ismen his enchauntments utmost prove,
He that in stead of arms with charms has fought:
To handle steel is of us Knights the scope,
This is our trade, this is our only hope.
This said, she ceast, and though an irefull heart
To pity hardly can be drawn, yet would
The King her gratify, and reason part
Persuades, part sway of her entreaty could
Him move, have they of life, and freedom mart,
(Quoth he) no nay, find such an asker should.
Be it pardon, or be it justice dew,
Guiltless I quit, guilty I give them you.
So were they looz'd of all haps happiest,
The fate was certes, that Olinda proved:
What act could show that in a noble breast,
Love in the end another love has moved?
From stake to wedding goes he, Spowse addressed,
Of one condemned, not sole of lover loved:
He would with her have did, her will does give,
Since with her he did not, with him to live.
But this suspicious King does parlous judge,
So great united virtuous neighbour-hed:
And gives straight charge that both to exile trudge,
Beyond the bounds that Jury lymited:
Then following his erst resolved grudge,
Some faithful he confines, some banished:
Oh! how the ancient syres, surpryz'd with woe,
Their tender younglings, and sweet beds forgo?
(A seu'rance hard) he drives them sole away,
That strong of body, and are stout of mind,
But pawnd as hostages, does force to stay
The milder Sex, and weaker years behind:
Many went wandering, some the rebels play,
Who^ more then fear could quench, anger does tind.
These joined with Frankes, and them encountered,
Self day when they Emaus entered.
Emaus is a City, which small space
Does from royal Jerusalem deprive,
And he that for his pleasure walks soft pace,
Parting at morn, may there at nine arrive:
Oh! how to Frankes this news seems full of grace,
Oh! how their longing does to hasting drive?
But for the Sun was now from South declinde,
The Captain there to pitch his tents assignde.
And pitched they were, and Phoebus fostring light,
From Ocean was removed but little space,
When two great Barons in strange vesture dight,
And of a port as strange approach in place:
Their fashions framed to a peaceful plight,
Witness of Captains friends they bear a face:
Ambassadors from great Egyptian king,
They come, and store of Squires, and Pages bring.
Aletes is the one, from worthles rabble
Among basest commons dregs who up did spring:
Yet him to kingdoms highest honors able,
Did these: a speech, sly, current, carrying
Fashions pliant, demeanure variable,
In faining prompt, skillful in cousening:
A biter at the back by such quaint ways,
As when he carpeth most, he seems to praise.
The the other is Circassian Argant called,
Who stranger first, did court of Egypt haunt,
But now is among the imperial nobles stald,
And may of martial chief preferments vaunt:
Untreatable, impatient, vnappald,
In arms linelesse, and peerless valiant:
Despiser of each God, alike as one
That law and right sets in his sword alone.
These craving audience, straight unto the sight
Of famous Godfrey, by admittance drew,
Whom on low seat, and in mean vesture dight,
Sitting amidst his Coronets they view:
But very valor, though in recklesse plight,
Does to it self sufficing grace accrue.
Argant a sign but slight of honor sparde,
As one of great estate, and small reguarde.
But right hand laid Aletes on his breast,
And bowed his head, and cast to ground his eyes,
And honored him in every sort at best,
As of his nation can import the guise,
Then he began, and from his mouth sweetest
Rivers of eloquence flow hony-wise.
And for the Frankes, now Sirian speech had learnd,
That which he said, was perfectly discernd.
O worthy sole, whom deigne may to obey
This famous troup of each Heroicke Knight,
Who conquests past, and Realms that now they sway,
Knowledge as your, and your aduices right,
Within Alcides bounds your name to stay
Brooks not, but even among us takes farther flight,
And fame has through each part of Egypt spread
The tidings clear of your great manlihed.
Nor of so many any one not lent,
(As men to maruailes use) has listening ear,
But them, my king, not with astonishment
Alone, but with like great delight does hear,
And glad in their report often time has spent,
Loving in you, what they envy and fear.
He loves your valor, and does free elect
With you to join in love, if not in sect.
So fair occasion him does onward guide,
With you of friendship and of peace to treat,
And that each sure may rest to other tide,
If faith cannot, let virtue work it yeat:
But for he learnes, you force of arms provide,
His friend to chase from out his royal seat.
He chose ere any farther harm might grow,
We should you make his mind at full to know.
His mind is this, if pleased you will remain,
With what the war already yours has made,
Nor Jury seek, nor the other parts t'obtaine,
Which he with favor of his reign does shade:
He promise plights you to assure again,
Your yet not settled rule, if double blade
Of yours be ioynde, the hope is out of date,
For Turks of Persians to regaine estate.
My Lord, great things in small space have you wrought
Which in oblivion longage cannot cast,
Armies, Cities vanquished, destroyed to naught,
Ways erst vntrode, distresses ouerpast:
So by your fame to fright, and stoyning brought
Are Realms about, both far and nearly plast.
And though more kingdoms rest as yet to gain,
To gain more glory you aspire in vain.
Your glory highest top has won, it is dew
Henceforth you fly of war the doubtful chance,
By winning you can only state accrue,
But no way more your glory ought advance,
Where all is lost that erst you did subdew,
And honor too, if Fortune look askaunce:
It Is game of Fortune, fond and bold away,
Against small uncertain, certain much to play.
But somes advice, whom it perhaps imports,
That others farther conquests theirs assure,
And end to each attempt that lucky sorts,
And that instinct which fervent does enure,
High flaming hearts to more and more efforts,
Whereby thral'd people may their yoke endure:
Will (peradventure) make you fly as far
From having peace, as others do the war.
They will exhort you to ensew the way,
That is by fate so largely opened,
And not aside this famous sword to lay,
Whose edge has conquest still ascertained,
Till Mahounds sect be brought to full decay,
Till Asia be quite abandoned:
Sweet things to hear, entrappings very sweet,
Which yet not feel'd extremest damage meet.
But if that courage blindfold not your sight,
Nor in you darken reasons clearest ray,
You shall perceive in making choice to fight,
Well fear of much, but little hope you may:
For Fortune here below often changes plight,
While haps now good, now bad do joy or fray,
And those who over high and hasty fly,
To steepest downefals come the sooner nigh.
Tell me if to thy damage Egypt rise,
In gold, in arms, in counsel great of might,
If Persian, Turk, Cassans son likewise
Conspirde in one, hap to renew the fight,
What force against such a fury can suffize?
What place give escape to such a parlous plight?
May be you on the Greeks lewd king affie,
Whom sacred league of cou'nants does allie.
Who knows not in Greeks what faith there raines?
Yet by one treason guess the residew,
Nay by a thousand, for with thousand trains
Brewd has your bane, that myser faithless crew,
Then who to stop your passage erst took pains,
Prepares he now his life to spend for you?
Who bare high ways common to all that live,
Denide, will he his proper blood you give?
May be you placed have your hope alone
In bands, of which this circuit makes show,
And whom dispersed you vanquished, knit in one,
Now eke as soon to overcome you trow,
Though of your troops that store is scald and gone
Through wars and want, your self do see and know*
And though new foes against you still increase,
Egyptians, Persians, Turks, a hugy prease.
But as thing fatal grant we this pretense,
That never weapon shall your force subdew,
Grant that the heavens thereof give evidence,
And as your self expound, so be it true,
Yet famine shall you vanquish: what defense?
What refuge against this ill (for God) have you?
Against this set your lance in rest, go try
Your sword, and feign your self the victory.
The fields about burnt and destroyed to naught,
Has the inhabitants foreseeing hand,
And to closde walls, and to high turrets rought,
And stowd their fruits ere you approcht the land,
Now you that (hardy) have them hither brought,
Whence hope you feed, each foot and horsed band?
You Will say our Navy shall us vittailes send,
And does your living then on winds depend?
And does your fortune then command the winds?
And bind and looze them, as you best may please?
The Sea whom each at plaints, and prayers finds,
Still deaf, sole here is it you? sole you obeyes?
Or when a league the Turk, or Persian binds
With warlicke force of ours, then cannot these
Assembly make of such a mighty fleet,
As is to oppose against your Navy meet?
My Lord, a double victory you need,
If you expect the honor of this war,
Whereas one only loss will doubtless breed
Great shame to you, but damage greater far,
For if then yours; our Navy better speed,
Forthwith in Camp you hunger-starued are:
And if your loss light on the land, in vain
Your shipping shall a fruitless conquest gain.
Now if in this estate you yet refuse
A peace and truce with great Egyptian King,
(Pardon the truth) to other your virtues
This your counsel is no way answering:
But heavens vouchsafe that newer thoughts you choose
If old liktwarre, and diverse end they bring,
That Asias waylments so take breath at last,
And of your conquests you the fruit may taste.
Nor you, who of the peril and the pains,
And of the glory are with him consort,
Be not so far misled by fortunes trains,
That to new wars she powerful you exhort,
But like the Pilot, who from sea, where reigns
Mis-hap, has brought his ship to wished port:
So strike you now the sails you hoysed hie,
And do no more in ruthlesse floods affie.
Aletes peac'd, his speech does straight ensew,
A murmur soft of that Heroicke race,
And well their actions disdainefull show,
How much against their bent his tale did trace,
The general about him castes his view,
And his looks thrice or fouretimes in the face,
And then his eye on tothers countnance stayed,
Who answer did attend, and thus he said.
Your Kings message sweetly you have expressed,
Part with a mild, and part with threatfull grace,
If I in love, or deeds in price do rest
With him, it is kind, and I his love embrace:
But where (Ambassador) you do protest
United war of Painims in this case,
I answer will, as still mine use affordes,
Frank senses in as single meaning words.
Know that till now, thus much we suffered
At sea, on land, by day, and in the night,
Only a way to have recovered,
To sacred walls of most respected sight,
That merit might with God be favored,
Of freeing them from such hard thralled plight:
Nor can he grievous seem for so good end,
This worldly honor, life, and reign to spend.
For no ambitious bent or couetise
To this exployt edgde on, or us addressed,
Purge from our breasts, O father of the skies,
So dismal plague if it in any nest,
Ne suffer it may spread infecting wise
Sweet venom, which bids death, as pleasures ghuest,
But let his hand that hardest hearts gently
Does pierce, them both vnstone and mollify.
This hand us raysd, this has us forward led,
From perils us, from us removing stays,
This playnes the hills, and dries each rivers bed,
The Summers heat and Winters cold allayes,
Calmes floods of Sea, with tempests billowed,
This fast and loose with winds in Lybume plays:
From it are highest walls pierst and reuerst,
From it the armed ranks slain and dispersed.
Courage from it, from it our hope does breed,
Not from our forces, frail and tired out,
Not from our Navy, nor from those, whom feed
Does Greece, nor from the arms of Frankish rout,
Let that not fail, nor us forsake at need,
All other wants we less then nothing doubt,
Who knows how this defends, and how it strikes,
Like this no succor for his peril likes.
But if through secret judgment he deny,
Or for our sins the aid from him we crave,
Who is it of us will there a burial fly?
Where erst our God his body laid in grave?
Die will we, nor the living ought envy,
Die will we, nor our death vnuenged have,
Nor Asia shall at our mischance rejoice,
Nor ours our death, moan with one wailing voice.
Think not that we fly far from peaceful ease,
As mortal warre-men fled and feared see:
Much would the friendship of your king us please,
Nor with him to ally ought grievous be,
But where or no, Jury his rule obeyes,
You know, why then thereof such care has he?
Strange Realm es to win let him us not gainesay,
And his safe, glad, in peace long mote he sway.
So answered he, and this his answer known,
Pearst Argants heart with pricking furious,
Nor it conceald he, but with lips up blown,
Forth to the Captain steps, replying thus:
Who list not peace, war take he as his own,
For store of brawles was never penurous*
And well you show that far from peace you fly,
Since our first speech you cannot pacify.
Then by the edge he does his mantle take,
He bows it, plaites it, reaches toward him
The plait, and to these farther speeches brake,
More then tofore, of visage spiteful grim,
O thou that scorn of hardest brunts do make!
I peace and war bring in this plaited brim,
Thine be the choice, thy self well counsel now,
And stailesse take, which thou do best allow.
At this fierce act, and speech they all betook
Themselves to call for war, conioyn'd in cry,
Nor stay could for their noble Chiefetaine brook,
That Godfrey in his own words might reply:
He fell unfolds the plait, and mantle shook,
And said, to mortal war I you desye:
He said it in so fierce and fellon sort,
That seemed he opened Ianus Temple port.
Seemed he the plait opening, thence haled came
Besotted rage, and discord cruellest,
And in his skowling eyes big torches flame,
Of hags Alecto and Megera rest,
That Giant erst, who raysd that lofty frame
Of error against the heavens, may such be ghest:
And in such semblant him saw Babel great
Vaunce up his forehead, and the stars to threat.
Godfrey adioynes, now to your King resort,
And bid him come, and bid him have a pace,
For we except your threatened wars effort,
And if he come not, look he in short space
For us at Nyle, in mild and grateful sort,
Them license give, and with choice gifts them grace
He does, Aletes has a helm of price,
Which among the booty he had won at Nice.
A sword he Argant gives of gold and stone,
The hilts and pommell wrought so curiously
By workmans skill, that value there is none
In that rich substance, if with form it try,
When his long busy sight had skand upon
The temper, richness, trymming thoroughly,
Argant to Bolleyn said, soon shall you news
Hear, how your gift I have the skill to use.
Then leave received he to his fellow spoke,
Now will we each of us a diverse way,
I to Jerusalem, you to Egypt take,
You with new Sun, I with the nightly ray,
My letter or my presence nothing make,
Ought needful whither you are faring may:
Bear you the answer back, hence I depart
Will not where is of arms proclaymd a mart.
Thus of a messenger he grows a foe,
Be it a timelesse, or a ripened have,
Where law of Nations he offend or no,
Or old use break, no doubts he list to cast,
Answer not reakt, friended by silence so
Of twinkling stars, to those high walls he past,
Brooking no stop, the the other eke that stayed,
What ere might linger, makes as ill apayd.
Now was it night, when in deep rest en rold
Are waves and winds, and mute the world does show,
Weari'd the beasts, and those that bottom hold,
Of billow'd Sea, and of moist streams that flow,
And who are lodgde in cave, or pend in fold,
And painted flyers in oblivion low,
Under their secret horrors silenced,
Stilled their cares, and their hearts suppelled.
But neither faithfuls Camp, nor Francks Chieftaine
Betake themselves to sleep, nor t'ease apply,
So much they long to see once shine again
The expected gladsome dawning in the sky:
That it may show the way, and guide the train
To town, where does of their great passage lie
The bound, now and now prying if there peer
One ray, or dark of night begin to clear.
The end of the second Song.
CANTO SECONDO DI GIERVSALEMME LIBERATA.
MEANT RE il Tiranno s'apparecchia a l'armi,
Soletto Ismeno un di gli s'appresenta,
Ismen, che trar di sotto a i chiusi marmi
Puo corpo estinto, efar, che spiri, e senta:
Ismen, che al suon de'mormorati carmi
Sin ne la Reggia sua Pluton spauenta,
E i suoi Demon ne gli empi vffici impiega,
Pur come Serui, e glidiscioglie, e lega.
Questi hor Macone adora, e fu Christiano,
May primi riti anco lasciar non puote.
Anzi souente in vso empio, e profano
Confonde le due leggi a se mal note.
Et hor da le spelonche, oue lontano
Dal vulgo essercitar, suol l'arti ignote,
Vien nel publico rischio al suo Signore:
A Re maluaggio Consiglier peggiore.
Signor (dicea) senza tardar se'n viene
Il vincitor Essercito temuto.
Ma facciam noi, cio che a noi far conuiene;
Dara il Ciel, dara il Mondo a i forti aiuto.
Ben tu di Re, di Duce hai tutte piene
Le parti, e lunge hai visto, e proueduto.
S'empie in tal guisa ogn'altro i propri vffici,
Tombo fia questa terra a'tuoi nemici.
Io quanto ame ne vengo e del periglio,
F del'opre compagno ad aitarte.
Cio, che puo dar di vecchia eta consiglio,
Tutto prometto, e cio, che Magica art.
Gli Angeli, che dal Ciel hebbero essiglio;
Constringero de le fatiche a part.
Ma dond'io voglia incominciar gl'incanti,
E conquai modi, hor narrerotti auanti.
Nel Tempio de' Christiani occulto giace
Un sotterraneo Altar; e quiui eil volto
Di colci, che sua Diua, e Madre face
Quel vulgo del suo Dio nato, e sepolto,
Dinanzial Simulacro accesa face
Continua splende: egli e in un velo auuolto;
Pendono intorno in lungo ordine i voti,
Che vi portaro i creduli Deuoti.
Hor questa Effigy lor di la rapita
Voglio, che tu di propria man trasporte,
E la riponga entro la tua Meschita:
Io poscia incanto ado prero si sorto,
Ch'ogni hor, mentre ella qui fia custodita,
Sara fatal custodia a queste port,
Tra mura inespugnabili il tuo Impero
Securo fia per nouo alto Mistero.
Si disse, e'l persuase: e impatiente
Il Re se'n corse a la Magion di Dio:
E sforzo i Sacerdoti, e irreuerente
Il casto Simulacro indi rapio:
E portollo a quel Tempio, oue fouente
S'irrita il Ciel colfolle culto, e rio.
Nel profan loco, e su la sacra Imago
Susurro poile sue bestemmie il Mago.
Ma come apparse in Ciel l'alba nouella,
Quel, cuil' immondo Te^pio in guardia e dato;
Non riuide l' Imagine, dou'ella
Fu posta, e in van cerconne in altro lato.
Tosto n'auisa il Re, ch'a la nouella
Ver lui si mostra fire amente irato.
Et imagina ben, ch'alcun Fedele
Habbia fatto quel furto, e che se'l cele.
O'fu di man Fedele opra furtiua,
O pur'il Ciel qui sua potenza adopra:
Che di colei, ch'e sua Regina, e Diua,
S degna, che loco vil l'imagin copra:
Ch'incerta fama e'ancor, se cio, s'ascriua
Ad art humana, od a mirabil opra.
Ben e pieta, che la pietade, e'l zelo
Human cedendo; author se'u creda il Cielo.
Il Re ne fa con importuna inchiesta
Ri^car ogni Chiesa, ogni Magione:
Et a chi gli nasconde, o manifesta
Il furto, o il Reo, gran pene, e premi impone.
E'l Mago di spiarne anco non resta
Con tutte l'arti il ver; ma non s'appone:
Che'l Cielo (opra sua fosse, o fosse altrui)
Celolla ad onta de gl'incanti a lui.
Ma poi che'l Re crudel vide occultarse
Quel, che peccato de'Fedeli ei pensa;
Tutto in lor d'odio infellonissi, and arse
D'ira, e di rabbia immoderata immensa.
Ogni rispetto oblia: vuol vendicarse,
Segua che puote, e sfogar l'Alma accensa:
Morra (dicea) non andra l'ira a voto,
Ne la strage comune il Ladro ignoto.
Purche'l Reo non si salui il Giusto pera,
El'Innocente, ma qual giusto Io dico?
E'colpeuol ciascun: ne in loro schiera
Huom fu giamai del nostro nome amico,
S'anima v'e nel nouo error sincera,
Basti a nouella pena un fallo antico.
Su su, fedeli miei, su via prendete
Lefiamme, e'l ferro: ardete, and vccidete.
Cosi parla a le turbe: e se n'intese
Lafama tra'Fedeli immantinente,
Ch'attoniti restar, si gli sorprese
Il timor de la morte homai present.
E non e chi la fuga, o le difese
Lo scusare, o'l pregare ardisca e tente.
Ma le timide Genti, e irre solute,
Donde meno speraro hebber salute.
Vergine era fra lor di gia matura
Virginita, d'alti pensieri, e regi:
D'alta belta; ma sua belta non cura,
O'tanto sol, quant'honesta sen'fregi.
E'il suo pregio maggior, che tra le mura
D'angusta casa asconde i suoi gran pregi:
E de'vagheggiatori illa s'inuola
A'le lodi, a gli sguardi inculta, e sola.
Pur guardia esser non puo, che'n tutto celi
Belta degna, ch'appaia, e che s'ammiri:
Ne tu il consenti Amor; ma lariueli
D'vn Giouenetto a i cupidi desiri.
Amor, c'hor cieco, hor Argo, hora ne veli
Di benda gli occhi, hora ce gli apri, e giri,
Tu per mill custody entro a i piu casti
Verginei alberghi il guardo altrui portasti.
Cole i Sofronia, Olindo egli s'appella,
D'vna Cittate entrambi, and d'vna Feed
Ei che modesto e si, com'essa e bella,
Brama assai, poco spera, e nulla chiede:
Ne sa scoprirsi, o non ardisce: and ella
O'lo sprezza, o no'l vede, o non s'auuede.
Co si fin'hora il misero ha seruito
O'non visto, o mal noto, o mal gradito.
S'ode l'annuntio in tanto, e che s'appresta
Miserabile strage al popol loro.
A lei che generosa e quanto honesta,
Viene in pensier come saluar costoro.
Move fortezza il gran pensier: l'arresta
Poi la vergogna, e'l virg inal decoro.
Vince fortezza, anzi s'accorda, e face
Severgognosa, ela vergogna audace.
La vergine tra'l vulgo vsci soletta:
Non copri sue bellezze, e non l'espose:
Raccolse gli occhi: ando nel vel ristretta,
Con ischiue maniere, e generose.
Non sai ben dir, s'adorna, o se negletta:
Se caso, od art il bell volto compose.
Di Natura, d'Amor, de'Cieli amici
Le negligenze sue sono artifici.
Mirata da eiascun passa, enon mira
L'altera Donna, einnanzi al Re se'n viene.
Ne, perch irato il veggia, il pie ritira,
Ma il fero aspetto intrepida sostiene.
Vengo, Signor (gli disse) e'n tanto l'ira
Prego sospenda e'l tuo popolo affrene:
Vengo a scoprirti, evengo a darti preso
Quel Reo, che cerchi: onde sei tanto offeso.
Al'honesta baldanza, a l'improuiso
Folgorar di bellezze altere, e sante,
Quasi confuso il Re, quasi conquiso
Freno lo sdegno, placo il fire sembiante.
S'egli erad'alma, o se costei di viso
Seuera manco, ei diueniane Amante;
Ma ritrosa belta ritroso core
Non prende: e sono i vezzi esca d'Amore.
Fustupor, fu vaghezza, e fu diletto,
S'Amor nonfu, che moss il cor villano.
Narra (ei le dice) il tutto: ecco io commetto,
Che non s'offenda il popol tuo Christiano.
Ed ella. il reo si troua al tuo cospetto:
Opra e il furto, Signor, di questa mano:
Io l'magine tolsi: ioson colei,
Che tu ricerchi, e me punir tu dei.
Cosi al publico fato ilcapo altero
Offerse, e'l volse in se sola raccorre.
Magnanima menzogna; hor quando e il vero
Si bello, che si possa a te preporre?
Riman sospeso, e non si tosto il fero
Tiranno a l'ira, come suol, trascorre.
Poi la richiede. Io vuo, che tu mi scopra.
Chi die consiglio, e chi fu insieme a l'opra.
Non volsi far de la mia gloria altrui
Ne pur minima part (ella gli dice)
Sol di me stessa io consapeuol fui,
Sol consigliera, e sola essecutrice.
Dunque in te sola (ripiglio colui)
Cadera l'ira mia vendicatrice.
Disse ella. e giusto: esser'a me conuiene,
Se fui sola a l'honor, sola a le pene.
Qui comincia il Tiranno a risdegnarsi:
Pur le dimanda. ou'hai l'imago ascosa?
Non la nascosi (a lui risponde) io l'arsi:
E l'arderla stimai laudabil cosa.
Cosi almen non potra piu violarsi
Per man di miscredenti ingiuriosa.
Signore, o chiedi il furto, o'l ladro chiedi;
Quel no'l vedrai in eterno, e questo il vedi.
Benche ne furto e il mio, ne ladra i sono:
Giusto e ritor cio, ch'a gran torto e tolto.
Hor, questo vdendo, in minaccieuol suono
Freme il Tiranno: e'l fren de l'ira e sciolto.
Non speri piu di ritrouar perdono
Cor pudico, alta mente, o nobil volto:
E'n darno Amor contra lo sdegno crudo
Di sua vaga bellezza a leifa scudo.
Pre sa e la bella Donna, e incrudelito
Il Re la danna entro vn'incendio a morte*
Gia'l velo, e'l castomanto a lei rapito,
Stringon le molli braccia aspre ritorte.
Ella si tace, e in lei non sbigottito;
Ma pur commosso alquanto e il petto forte;
E smarrisce il bell volto in un color,
Che non e pallidezza, ma candore.
Diuulgossi il gran caso, e quiui tratto
Gia'l popol s'era: Olindo anco u'accorse,
Che dubbia la persona, e certo il fatto,
Venia, che fosse la sua Donna in forse.
Come la bella prigioniera in atto
Non pur di rea, ma di dannata ei scorse;
Come i ministri al duro ufficio intenti
Vide; precipitoso, urto le genti.
Al Re grido. Non e, non e gia rea
Costei del furto, e per follia se'n vanta.
Non penso: non ardi: ne far potea
Donna sola, e inesperta opra cotanta.
Come inganno i custodi? e de la Dea
Con qual'arti inuolo l'imagin santa?
Se'l fece, il narri. Io l'ho, Signor, furata.
Ahi tanto amo la non Amante amata.
Soggiunse poscia. Io la, donde riceue
L'alta vostra Meschita e l'aura, e'l die,
Di notte as cesi: e trapassai per breue
Foro tentando inaccessibil vie.
A mel'honor, la morte a me si deue:
Non vsurpi costei le pene mie.
Mie son quelle catene, e per me questa
Fiamma s'accende, e'l rogo a me s'appresta.
Alza Sofronia il viso, e humanamente
Con occhi die pietatein lui rimira.
A che ne vieni, o misero innocente?
Qual consiglio, o furor tiguida, o tira?
Non son'io dunque senza te possente
Afostener cio, che d'vn huom puo l'ira?
Ho petto anch'io, ch'ad vna morte creed
Di bastar solo, e compagnia non chiede.
Cosi parla a l'Amante, e no'l dispone
Si ch'egli si disdica, e pensier mute.
O spettacolo grande, oue a tenzone
Sono Amore, e magnanima virtute:
O ue lamorte al vincitor si pone
In premio: e'l mal del vinto e la salute.
Ma piu s'irrita il Re quant'ella, and esso
E'piu costante in incolpar se stesso.
Pargli, che vilipeso egli ne resti:
E che'n disprezzo suo sprezzin le pene.
Credasi (dice) ad ambo: quella, e questi
Vinca, a la palma sia, qual si conuiene.
Indi accenna a i Sergenti: i quai son presti
A legar il Garzon di lor catene.
Sono ambo stretti al palo stesso, e volto
E'il tergo al tergo, e'l volto ascoso al volto.
Composto e lor d'intorno il rogo homai:
E giale fiamme il mantice u'incita;
Quando il Fanciullo in dolorosilai
Proruppe, e disse a lei, ch'e seco vnita.
Questo dunque e quel laccio, ond'io sperai
Teco accoppiarmi in compagnia di vita?
Questo e quel foco, ch'io credea, che i cori
Ne douesse infiammar d'eguali ardori?
Altre fiamme, altri nodi Amor promise:
Altrice n'apparecchia iniqua sort.
Troppo, ahi ben troppo, ella gia noi divise:
Ma duramente hor ne congiunge in morte.
Piacemialmen, poi che'n si stranie guise
Morir pur dei, del rogo esser consorte,
Se del letto non fui: duolmi il tuo fato,
Il mio non gia, poi ch'io timoro a lato.
Et, o mia morte auuenturosa a pieno:
O fortunati miei dolci martiri;
S'impetrero, che, giunto seno a seno
L'anima mia ne la tua bocca io spiri:
E venendo tu meco a un tempo meno,
In me fuor mandi gli vltimi sospiri.
Cosi dice piangendo. ella il ripiglia
Soauemente, e in tai detti il consiglia.
Amico, altri pensieri, altrilamenti
Per piu alta cagioneil tempo chiede.
Che non pensi a tue colpe? e non rammenti
Qual Dio permetta a i buoni ampia mercede?
Soffri in suo nome, e fian dolci i tormenti,
E lieto aspira a la superna sede,
Mira il Ciel com'e bello, e mira il Sole,
Ch'a se par, che n'inuiti, e ne console.
Qui il vulgo de'Pagani il pianto estolle:
Piange il Fedel, ma in voci assai piu basse.
Un non so che d'inusitato, e molle
Par, che nel duro petto al Re trapasse.
Ei presentillo, esi sdegno, ne uolle
Piegarsi, e gli occhitorse, e si ritrasse.
Tu sola il duol comun non accompagni,
Sofronia, e pianta da ciascun non piagni.
Mentre sono in tal rischio, ecco un Guerriero
(Che tal parea) d'alta sembianza, e degna:
E mostra d'arme, e d'habito straniero,
Che di lontan peregrinando vegna.
La Tigre, che su l'elmo ha per cimiero,
Tutti gli occhi a se trahe, famosa insegna,
Insegna usata da Clorinda in guerra:
Onde la credon lei, ne'l creder'erra.
Costei gl'ingegni feminili, e gli vsi
Tulti sprezzo sin da l'eta pui acerba:
A i lauori d'Aracne, a l'ago, a i fusi
Inchinar non degno la man superba:
Fuggi gli habiti molli, e i lochi chiusi:
Che ne'campi honestate anco siserba:
Armo d'orgoglio il volto, e si compiacque
Rigido farlo, e pur rigido piacque.
Tenera ancor con pargoletta destra
Strinse, e lento d'un corridore il morso:
Tratto l'hasta, e la spada: and in palestra
Induro imembri, and allenogli al corso:
Poscia, o per via montana, o per siluestra
L'orme segui difier Leone, e d'Orso:
Segui le guerre, e'n quelle, e fra le selue
Fera a gli huomini parue, huomo a le belue.
Viene hor costei da le cantrade Perse,
Perch a i Christiani a suo poter resista:
Bench'altre volte ha di lor membra asperse
Lepiaggie, e l'onda di lor sangue ha mista.
Hor quinci in arriuando a lei s'offerse
L'apparato di morte a prima vista.
Di mirar vaga, e di saper, qual fallo
Condanni i rei, sospinge oltre il cauallo.
Cedon le turbe, e i duo legati insieme
Ella si ferma a riguardar da presso.
Mira, chel'vna tace, el'altrogeme:
E piu vigor mostra il men forte fesso.
Pianger lui vede in guisa d'huom, cui preme
Pie ta, non doglia, o duolnon disestesse:
E tacer lei con gli occhi al Ciel si fisa,
Ch'anzi'l morir par di qua giu diuisa.
Clorinda intenerissi, e si condolse
D'ambeduo loro, e lacrimonne alquanto.
Pur maggior sent il duol per chi non duolse,
Piu la move il silentio, e meno il pianto.
Senza troppo indugiare ella si volse
Ad vn'huom, che canuto hauea da canto.
Deh dimmi, chi son questi? and al martoro
Qual gli conduce, o sort, o colpa loro?
Cosi pregollo: e da colui risposto
Breue, ma pieno a le dimande fue.
Stupissi vdendo, e imagino ben tosto,
Ch'egualmente innocenti eran que' due.
Gia di vietar lor morte ha in se proposto,
Quanto potranno i preghi, o l'armi sue.
Pronta accorre a la fiamma, e fa ritrarla,
Che gia s'appressa; and a i ministri parla.
Alcun non sia di voi, che'n questo duro
Vfficio oltra seguire habbia baldanza,
Sin ch'io non parlial Re: ben v'assecuro,
Ch'ei non v'accusera de la tardanza.
Vbidiro i Sergenti, e mossi furo
Da quella grande sua Regal, sembianza.
Poi verso il Re si moss, e lui tra via
Ella trouo, che'n contra lei venia.
Io son Clorinda (disse) hai forse intesa
Tal'hor nomarmi: e qui, Signor, ne vegno,
Per ritrouarmi teco alla difesa
De la Feed comune, e del tuo Regno.
Son pronta (imponi pure) ad ogni impresa:
L'alte non temo, e l'humili non sdegno.
Voglimiin campo aperto, o pur tra'l chiuso
De le mura impiegar, nulla ricuso.
Tacque, e rispose il Re. qual si disgiunta
Terra e da l'Asia, o dal camin del Sole,
Vergine gloriosa, oue non giunta
Sia la tua fama, el'honor tuo non vole?
Hor, che s'e la tua spada a me congiunta,
D'ogni timor m'affidi, e mi console.
Non, s'essercito grande vnito insieme
Fosse in mio scampo, haurei piu certa speme.
Gia gia mi par, ch'a giunger qui Goffredo
Oltra il deuer indugi. hor tu dimandi,
Ch'impieghi io te: sol di te degne credo
L'imprese malageuoli, e le grandi.
Soura i nostri guerrieri a te concedo
Loscettro, e leg sia quel, che comandi.
Cosi parlaua. ella rendea cortese
Gratie per lodi: indiil parlar riprese.
Noua cosa parer deura per certo,
Che preceda a i seruigi guider done;
Ma tua bonta m'affida. io vuo, che'n merto
Del futuro seruir que'rei mi done.
In don gli cheggio, e pur (se'l fallo e incerto)
Gli danna inclementissima ragione.
Ma taccio questo, e taccio i segni espressi,
Ond'argomento l'innocentia in essi.
E diro sol, ch'e qui comun sentanza,
Che i Christiani togliessero l'Imago;
Ma discord'io da voi; ne pero senza
Alta ragion del mio parer m'appago.
Fu de le nostre leggi irreuerenza
Quell'opra far, che parsuase il Mago:
Che non conuien ne'nostri Tempi a nui
Gl'Idoli hauere, e men gl'Idoli altrui
Dunque suso a Macon recar mi gioua
Il miracol de l'opra: and ei la face,
Per dimostrar, chei Tempi suoi con noua
Religion contaminar non lece.
Faccia Ismeno incantando ogni sua proua:
Egli, a cui le malie son d'arme in vece;
Trattiamo il ferro pur noi Caualieri:
Quest'arte e nostra, e'n questa sol si speri.
Tacque cio detto: e'l Re, bench a pietade
L'irato cor difficilmente pieghi,
Pur compiacer la volle: e'l persuade
Ragione, e'l move autorita di preghi.
Habbian vita (rispose) elibertade:
E nulla a tanto intercessor si neghi.
Siasi questa o giustitia, over perdono,
Innocenti gli assoluo, e rei gli dono.
Cosi furon disciolti. Auuenturoso
Ben veramente fu d'Olindo il fato,
Ch'attopote mostrar, che'n generoso
Petto al fine ha d'amore amor destato.
Va dal Rogo a le nozze, and e gia sposo
Fatto direo, non pur d'Amante amato.
Volse con lei morire: ella non schiua,
Poi che seco non muor, che seco viua.
Ma il sospettoso Re stimo periglio
Tanta virtu congiunta hauer vicina:
Onde (com'egli volse) ambo in essiglio
Oltra i termini andar di Palestina.
Ei, pur seguendo il suo crudel consiglio,
Bandisce altri Fedeli, altri confina.
O come lascian mesti i pargoletti
Figli, e gli antichi Padri, e i dolci letti.
(Dura division) scacciasol quelli
Di forte corpo, e e diferoce ingegno;
Ma il mansueto sesso, e gli anni imbelli
Seco ritien, si come ostaggi, in pegno.
Molti n'andaro errando: altri rubelli
Fersi, e piu, che'l timor, pote lo sdegno.
Questi vnirsi co'Franchi, e gli in contraro
A ponto il di, che'n Emaus entraro.
Emaus e Citta, cui breue strada
Da la regal Gierusalem disgiunge:
Et huom, che lento a suo diporto vada,
Se part matutino, a nona giunge.
O qua^to intender questo a i Franchi aggrada:
O quanto piu'l desio gli affretta, e punge.
Ma perch'oltra il meriggio il Sol gia scende,
Qui fa spiegare il Capitan le tend.
L'hauean gia tese, e poco era remota
L'alma luce del Sol dal' Oceano;
Quando duo gran Baroni in vest ignota
Venir son visti, e'n portamento estrano.
Ogni atto lor pacifico dinota,
Che vengon come amici al Capitano.
Del gran Re de l'Egitto eran messaggi:
E molti intorno hauean scudieri, e paggi.
Alete e, l'vn che da principio indegno
Tra le brutture de la plebe e sorto;
Ma l'innalzaro a i primi honor del Regno
Parlar facondo, e lusinghiero, e scorto,
Piegheuoli costumi, e vario ingegno,
Al finger pronto, al'ingannare accorto:
Gran fabro di calunnie, adorn in modi
Noui, che sono accuse, e paion lodi.
L'altro eil Circasso argante, huom, che straniero
Se'n venne a laregal Corte d'Egitto;
Ma de'Satrapi fatto e de l'Impero,
E in sommi gradi a la militia ascritto:
Impatiente, innessorabil, fero,
Ne l'arme infaticabile, and inuitto,
D'ogni Dio sprezzator, e che ripone
Ne la spada sua leg, e sua ragione.
Chieser questi vdienza, and al cospetto
Del famoso Goffredo ammessi entraro:
E in humil segio, e in vestire schietto,
Fra suoi Duci sedendo il ritrouaro:
Ma uerace ualor, benche negletto,
E'di se stesso a se fregio assai chiaro.
Pieciol segno d'honor gli fece Argante,
In guisa pur d'huom grande, e non curante.
Ma la destra si pose Alete al seno,
E chino il capo, e piego a terra i lumi:
E l'honoro con ogni modo a pieno,
Che di sua gente portino i costumi.
Comincio poscia; e di sua bocca uscieno
Piu che mel dolci, d'eloquenza i fiumi.
E perch i Franchi ham giail sermon appreso
De la Soria, fu cio, ch'ei disse inteso.
O degno sol, cui d'ubidire hor degni
Questa adunanza di famosi Heroi:
Che per l'adietro ancor le palm, e i Regni
Da te conobbe, e da i consigli tuoi;
Il nome tuo, che non riman tra i segni
D'Alcide, homai risuona anco franoi:
Ela fama d'Egitto in ogniparte
Del tuo ualor chiare nouelle hasparte.
Ne u'e fra tanti alcun, che non le ascolte,
Come egli suol le me rauiglie estreme.
Ma dal mio Re con istupore accolte
Sono non sol, ma condiletto insieme.
E s'appaga in narrarle anco piu uolte,
Amando in te cio, ch'altri inuidia, e teme:
Ama il ualore, e uolontario elegge
Teco unirsi d'amor, se non di leg.
Da si bella cagion dunque sospinto
L'amicitia, e la pace a te richiede:
E'l mezo, onde l'un resti a l'altro auuinto,
Sia la uirtu, s'esser non puo la feed.
Ma, perch inteso hauea, che t'eri accinto
Per iscacciar l'amico suo di sede;
Volse, pria ch'altro male indi seguisse,
Ch'a te la mente sua per noi s'apprisse.
Ela sua mente e tal; che s'appagarti
Vorrai di quanto hai fatto in guerra tuo,
Ne Giudea molestar, ne l'altre parti,
Che ricopre il favor del regno suo;
Ei promette a l'incontro assecurarti
Il non ben fermo tato. e se uoi duo
Sarete uniti, hor quando i Turchi, e i Persi
Portranno unqua sperar di rihauersi?
Signor, gran cose in picciol tempo hai fat,
Che lunga et a porre in oblio non puote,
Esserciti, Citta, uinti, disfatte,
Superati disagi, e strade ignote:
Si ch'al grido o smarrite, o stupefatte
Son le prouincie intorno, e le remote,
E, se ben'acquistar puoi noui Imperi,
Acquistar noua gloria indarno speri.
Giunta e tua gloria al sommo, e per l'innanzi
Fuggir'le dubbie guerre a te conuiene:
Ch'oue tu uinca, sol di stato auanzi:
Ne tua gloria maggior quinci diuiene.
Ma l'Imperio acquistato, e preso dianzi,
E l'honor perdi, se'l contrario auuiene.
Ben gioco e di Fortuna audace, e stolto
Por contra il poco, e incerto il certo, e'l molto.
Ma il consiglio di tal, cui forse pesa,
Ch'altrigli acquisti a lungo andar conserve,
El'hauer sempre unito in ogni impresa,
E quella uoglia natural, che ferue,
E sempre e piu ne'cor piu grandi accesa,
D'hauer le genti tributarie, e serve;
Faran per auuentura ate la pace
Fuggir, piu che la guerra altri nonface.
T'essorteranno a seguitar, la strada,
Che t'e del-Fato largamente aperta:
A non depor questa famosa spada,
Al cui ualore ogni uittoria e certa,
Sin che la leg di Macon non cada:
Sin che l'Asia per te non sia deserta.
Dolci cose ad udire, e dolci inganni,
Ond' esconpoi souente estremi danni.
Ma s'animosita gli occhi non benda,
Ne il lume of cura in te de la ragione;
Scorgerai, ch'oue tu la guerra prenda,
Hai di temer, non di sperar cagione:
Che Fortuna qua giu uaria, a uicenda
Mandandoci uenture hor triste, hor buone,
Et a'uoli troppo alti, e repentini
Sogliono i precipitij esser uicini.
Dimmi, s'a danni tuoi l'Egitto move,
D'oro, d'armi potente, e di consiglio:
E s'auuien, che la guerra anco rinoue
Il Person, e'l Turco, e di Cassano il figlio;
Quai forze opporre a si gran furia, o dove
Ritrouar potrai scampo al tuo periglio?
T'affida forse il Re maluagio Greco,
Il qual da i sacri patti unito e teco?
La feed Greca a chi non e palese?
Tuda un sol tradimento ogn'altro impara:
Anzi da mill: perch mill ha tese
Insidie a uoi la gente infida, auara.
Dunque chi dianzi al passo a uoi contese,
Per uoi la uita esporre hor si prepara?
Chi le uie, che comuni a tutti sono,
Nego, del proprio sangue hor fara dono?
Ma forse hai turiposta ogni tua speme
In queste squadre, and hora cinto siedi.
Quei, che sparsi uincesti, uniti insieme
Di uincer anco ageuolmente credi:
Se ben son le tue schiere hor molto sceme,
Tra le guerre, e i disagi, e tu te'luedi:
Se ben nouo nemico a te s'accresce,
E co' Persi, eco'Turchi Egitij mesce.
Hor, quando pur estimi esser fatale,
Che non ti possa il ferro uincer may;
Siati concesso: esiatia punto tale
Il decreto del Ciel, qual tu te'l sai;
Vincer atti la fame: a questo male
Che rifugio, per Dio, che schermo haurai*
Vibra contra costei la lancia, e stringi
La spada, ela uittoria anco ti fingi.
Ogni campo d'intorno arso, e distrutto
Ha la prouida man de gli habitanti:
E'n chiuse mura, e'n alte torri il frutto
Riposto al tuo uenir piu giorni auanti.
Tu, ch'ardito sin qui ti sei condutto,
Onde speri nutrir caualli, e Fanti?
Dirai; l'armata in mar cura ne prende.
Da'Venti dunque il uiuer tuo depend?
Comanda forse tua Fortuna a i Venti,
E gli auincea sua uoglia, e gli dislega?
Ilmar, ch'a i preghi e sordo, and a i lamenti,
Te solo udendo al tuo uoler si piega?
O non potranno pur le nostre genti,
E le Perse, e le Turche unite in lega
Cosi potente armata in un raccorre,
Ch'a questi legni tuoi si possa opporre?
Doppia uittoria a te, Signor, bisogna,
S'hai de l'impresa a riportar l'honore.
Vna perdita sola alta uergogna
Puo cagionarti, e danno anco maggiore:
Ch'oue la nostra armata in rotta ponga
La tua, qui poi di fame il campo more:
E, se tu sei perdente, indarno poi
Saran uittoriosi i legni tuoi.
Hora, se in tale stato anco rifiuti
Colgran Re de l'Egitto e pace, e tregua;
(Diasi licenza al uer) l'altre uirtuti
Questo consiglio tuo non been adegna.
Ma uoglia il Ciel, che'l tuo pensier si muti,
S'a guerra e uolto, e che'l contrario segua;
Si che l'Asia respiri homai da i lutti,
E goda tu de la uittoria i frutti.
Neuoi, che del periglio, e de gli affanni,
E de la gloria a lui sete consorti,
Il favor di Fortuna hor tanto inganni,
Che noue guerre a prouocar u'essorti,
Ma qual Nocchier, che da i marini inganni,
Ridutti ha i legni a i desiati porti,
Raccor deureste homai le sparse uele,
Ne fidarui di nouo al mar crudele.
Qui tacque Alete: e'l suo parlar seguiro
Con basso mormorar que' sorti Heroi.
E ben ne gli atti disdegnosi apriro,
Quanto ciascun quella proposta annoi.
Il Capitan riuolse gli occhi in giro
Tree uolte, e quattro, e miro in front i suoi:
E poinel uolto di colui gli affisse,
Ch'attendea la risposta, e cosi disse.
Messaggier, dolcemente a noi sponesti
Hor minaccioso, and hor cortese inuito.
Se'l tuo Re m'ama, e loda i nostrigesti,
E'sua mercede, e m'e l'amor gradito.
A quella part poi, dove protesti
La guerra a noi del Paganesmo unito;
Rispondero, come da me si suole,
Liberi sensi in semplici parole.
Sappi, che tanto habbiam sin'hor sofferto
In mare, e in terra, a l'aria chiara, e scura,
Solo accio che ne fosse il call aperto
A'quelle sacre, e uenerabil mura:
Per acquistarci appo Dio gratia, e merto,
Togliendo lor di seruitu si dura:
Ne may grave ne fia, per fin si degno
Esporre honor mondano, e uita, e Regno.
Che non ambitiosi, auari affetti
Ne spronaro a l'impresa, ene fur guida:
Sgombri il Padre del Ciel da i nostri petti
Peste si rea, s'in alcun pur s'annida:
Ne soffra, che l'asperga, e che l'infetti
Di venen dolce, che piacendo ancida;
Ma la sua man, che i duri cor penetra
Soauemente, e gli ammollisce, e spetra.
Questa ha noi mossi, e questa ha noi condutti,
Tratti d'ogni periglio, e d'ogni impaccio:
Questa fa i piani i monti, e i fiumi asciutti:
L'ardor toglie a la state, al verno il ghiaccio:
Placa del mare i tempestosi flutti:
Stringe, e rallenta questa a i venti il laccio:
Quindi son l'alte mura aperte, and arse:
Quindi l'armate schiere vccise, e sparse.
Quindi l'ardir, quindi la speme nasce,
Non da le frali nostre forze, e stanche,
Non da l'armata, e non da quante pasce
Genti la Grecia, enon da l'armi Franche.
Pur ch'ella may non ci abbandoni, e lasce,
Poco debbiam curar, ch'altri ci manche.
Chi sa come difende, e come fere,
Soccorso a i suoi perigli altro non chere.
Ma quando di sua aita ella ne priui
Per gli error nostri, o per giuditij occulti;
Chi fia di noi, ch'esser sepulto schiui,
Oue i membri di Dio furgia sepulti?
Noi morirem, ne inuidia hauremo a i viui:
Noi morirem, ma non morremo inulti:
Ne l'Asia ridera di nostra sort:
Ne pianta fia da noi la nstra morte.
Non creder gia, che noi fuggiam la pace,
Come guerra mortal si fugge, e paue:
Che l'amicitia del tuo Re ne piace,
Ne l'vnirci con lui ne sara grave.
Ma, s'al suo Impero la Giudea soggiace,
Tu'l sai: per che tal cura ei dunque n'haue?
De' Regni altrui l'acquisto ei non ci vieti,
E regga in pace i suoi tranquilli, e lieti.
Cosi rispose, e di pungente rabbia
La risposta ad Argante il cor trafisse:
Ne'l celo gia, ma con enfiata labbia
Si trasse auanti al Capitano, e disse,
Chi la pace non vuol, la guerra s'habbia:
Che penuria giamai non fu di risse:
E ben la pace ricusar tu mostri,
Se non t'acqueti a i primi detti nostri.
Indi il suo manto per lo lembo prese,
Curuollo, e fenne un seno, e'l seno sporto,
Cosi pur anco a ragionar riprese,
Via piu, che prima dispettoso, e torto.
O'sprezzator de le piu dubbie imprese,
E guerra, e pace in questo sen t'apporto:
Tua sia l'elettione; hor ti consiglia
Senz'altro indugio, e qual piu vuoi, ti piglia.
L'atto fero, e'l parlar tutti commosse
A chiamar guerra in un concord grido,
Non attendendo, che risposto fosse
Dal magnanimo lor Duce Goffrido.
Spiego quel crudo il seno, e'lmanto scosse,
Et a guerra mortal, disse, vi sfido.
E'l disse in atto si feroce, and empio,
Che parue aprir di Giano il chiuso Tempio.
Parue, ch'aprendo il seno indi trahesse
Il Furor pazzo, e la Discordia fera:
E che ne gli occhi horribili gli ardesse
La gran face d'Aletto, e di Megera.
Quel grandegia, che in contra il Cielo eresse
L'alta mole d'error, forse tal'era:
E in cotal'atto il rimiro Babelle
Alzar la front, e minacciar le stelle.
Soggiunse all'hor Goffredo. Hor riportate
Al vostro Re, che venga, e che s'ffretti;
Che la guerra accettiam, che minacciate:
E, s'ei non vien, fra'l Nilo suo n'aspetti.
Accommiato lor poscia in dolci, e grate
Maniere, e gli honoro di doni eletti.
Ricchissimo ad Alete vn'elmo diede,
Ch' a Nicea conquesto fra l'altre prede.
Hebbe Argante vna spada, e'l fabro egregio
L'else, e'l pomo le fe gemmato, e d'oro,
Con magisterio tal, che prede il pregio
De la ricca materia appo il lauoro.
Poi che la tempra, e la ricchezza, e'l fregio
Sottilmente da lui mirati foro,
Disse Argante al Buglion. vedrai ben tosto,
Come da me il tuo dono in vso e posto.
Indi tolto congedo, e da lui ditto
Al suo compagno. hor ce n'andremo homai
Io a Gerusalem, tu verso Egitto,
Tu col Sol nouo, io co'notturni rai.
Ch'uopo o di mia presenza, o di mio scritto
Esser non puo cala, dove tu vai.
Reca tu la risposta, io dilung armi
Quinci non voglio, oue si trattan l'armi.
Cosi di Messagier fatto e nemico.
Sia fretta intempestiua, o sia matura:
La ragion de le genti, e l'vso antico
S'offenda, o no; ne'l pensa egli, ne'l cura.
Senza risposta hauer va per l'amico
Silentio de le stelle a l'alte mura,
D'indugio impatiente: and a chi resta
Gia non men la dimora anco e molesta.
Era la notte all' hor, ch'alto riposo
Han l'onde, e i venti, e parea muto il Mondo.
Gli animai lassi, e quei, che'l mare ondoso,
O de'liquidi laghi alberga ilfondo,
E chi si giace in Tana, o in Mandra ascoso,
E i pinti Angelli ne l'oblio profondo
Sotto il silentio de' secreti horrori
Sopian gli affanni, eraddolciano i cori.
Ma ne'l Campo Fedel, ne'l franca Duca
Si discioglie nel son, opur s'accheta:
Tanta in lor cupidigia e, che riluca
Homai nel Ciel l'alba aspettata, e lieta:
Perch il camin lor mostri, e gli conduca
A'la Citta, ch'al gran passaggio e meta.
Mirano ad hor ad hor, seraggio alcuno
Spunti, o rischiari de la notte il bruno.
Il Fine del Secondo Canto.
THE THIRD SONG.
DAwnyng th'Embassadresse was ris'ne from bed,
Tidings to bear, how now gray morn annies,
The whiles she trimmes her self, and golden head
Beflowres with Roses culd in Paradize,
When from the Camp to arms which buskelled,
Does voice of murmur shrill and lofty rise,
And Trumpets blast preuents, Tru^pets now found
Then erst, more cherefull and more clear of sound.
Th'aduised Chieftaine with a gentle bit
Guides, and seconds their so bent desire,
To turn the course more easy seems hit,
Of winding wave that rouls Caribdis nire,
Or Boreas when at Sea he ships does slit,
Or scoures Mount Peuine back to make retire.
He rancks them, leads them, and alone them swayes
Swiftly, but swiftnes such as order stays.
Wings to each heart, wings to each heel are tide,
Nor his so speedy march the Soldier knows,
But when the Sun with glowing beams had fride
The chapped fields, and now to height arose:
Behold Jerusalem t'appeare is spide,
Behold Jerusalem each finger shows,
Behold in one a thousand voices meet,
And all Jerusalem are heard to greet.
So hardy ging of Mariners forth blown,
In venture to deskry some straungy shore,
Who in wild Seas, and under Pole unknown,
Prove waves deceitful, and winds faithles more:
If eye at last the coast desirde can own,
With glad showt gre'th it, their approach tofore,
And the one to the other shows it, and forgets
Old noise, the while and all orepassed lets.
To pleasure great which sight thus first affixt,
Did breath most sweetly into every breast,
Succeedes a deep contrition, that does mixed
With fearful, reverend affection rest,
Scarce dare they look up now and then betwixt,
To town which Christ as his choice bower possessed.
Where he deceast, where he was buried,
Where he with limes himself new parrelled.
Low accents, silent words, broken sobbings,
And fearful sighings of this warlike rout,
Mingling at once both joys and sorrowings,
A murmur make whirle in the air about,
As in thick forests heard are soft whistlings,
When through the bows the wind breathes calmely out:
Or as amongst the rocks, or near the shore,
The driven wave does hiss and hoarsely rore.
Bare footed each, him to the way addressed,
For Dukes example mooues the residew:
Trimming of silk or gold, proud plume, or crest,
Not one there is, who not from head withdrew:
All do their hearts of stately thoughts deuest,
And cheeks with skalding tears devout embrew:
Yet as to plaint foreclosed were the way,
Each against himself does this accusall lay.
Then where thou with a thousand streams, O Lord,
Bloody did leave the earth besprinckelled,
Of bitter plaints at so grievous record,
Least wise two quicke-springs now can I not shed,
O frozen heart! these eyes that have not gord,
And into drops of tears thy self melted!
Hard heart of mine why splintst? why breakst not thou?
Wayle motst thou aye, if thou wail nothing now.
This while one in the City, who descries
Both hills and plains, an high Tower guarding there
Marks from below, a dust upward to rise,
So as it seems great cloud to print in aere,
It seems that cloud lightens and burns in guise,
As flames and flashes it did childing bear,
Then he the shining of the metal clear
Discernes, and tryes both men and horse appear.
And loud he cries, O what a dust I view,
Spread in the air! Oh how it seems bright!
Arm, arm to your defense you City crew,
Each speed to arms, and to the walls you dight,
The en'my comes, and then he cries anew,
Each one make haste, each furnished be to fight:
The en'my (see) is come, the dust behold,
Under yon horrid cloud the sky to fold.
Then seely children, and unarmed old,
And women's rout of fear ypaled hew,
To strike or fend, who can no weapons hold,
Sad and suppliant to each Meschite drew:
The rest more firm of lims and stomach bold,
Tofore on back hasty their armor threw:
Some run to gates, and some unto the wall,
King goes about, and sees and carkes for all.
He order gives, and then retires them fro,
Where twixt two gates a Turret does arise:
So near he is at need, and thence more low,
The playnes and mountains round about he skries,
With him he would there should Erminia go:
Erminia fair, whom he in courteous wise
Received to Court, when Chistian squadrons gain
Did Antioch, and King her Sire was slain.
This while Clorinda against the Frankes is hide,
Store with her goes, and she before them all,
But at a posterne gate on the other side,
Argant for reskons stands at ready call:
The noble Dame her followers affide,
With words and with a look that scornd to pall:
By some brave onset, us behooues (quoth she)
This day the hope of Asia founded be.
While she her men bespake, not far she spies
A band of Frankes their rusticke prays driving,
Who coast for booty skourde (as is the guyse)
Were now to Camp with flocks and herds turning*
She toward them, and toward her there hyes
Their Captain, who her saw to him coming:
Guard is the Captain named, a mighty man,
But might not such as her resist he can.
This fierce encounter Gardo overthrows
In sight of Frankes, and Painims on the plain,
Who all one outcry made, so lucky shows
This token of the war, yet proved vain,
Then with the rest in spurring gins she close,
Her hand the price from thousand hands does gain,
Her men her follow, by the way she made
Plain with her shockes, and open with her blade.
Soon from the prayer she does pray retake,
The troop of Frankes now step by step retire,
Till on the top of hill a stand they make,
Where place to arms, new forces began acquire:
Then as a tempest does resolving crake,
And from the clouds down falls the airy fire:
Good Tancred so at Godfreys bidding pressed,
His Squadron moves, and maine yard does arrest.
So strong great lance he bears, and in such guyse
This youth comes on, both fierce and fair in sight:
That King who from aloft his port descryes,
Him deemes amongst the best a chosen Knight,
And says to her, who in next seat him nyes,
And now her heart feels in a panting plight:
Through so long use you may to me declare
Each Christen, though in arms they closed are.
What then is he that does so seemly frame
Himself to just, and so fierce semblance bear,
Unto the Lady for an answer came,
On lips a sigh, and in her eyes a tear,
But breath and weeping back she does reclame,
Though so as yet they make some muster theare,
For her swollen eyes, a purple circle fair,
Tainted and hoarse half sight brake forth to air.
Then since she contriues, and seeks to hide
Another longinge under cloak of hate,
Alas I know him well, cause does betide,
Why among a thousand I should know his state:
For often the fields, and often deep dikes I skride,
Him fill with blood of vassals mine of late:
Ah how in striking fell he is? to wound
He gives in herbs, or spells no help is found.
The Prince Tancred it is, ah once that he
My prisner were, but yet alive, not sleine
I would him have, that fierce desire in me
Of sweet revenge might so some comfort geine:
This said she, and her words by hearers be
Wrong turned from right sense, as she did mean.
And this last speech a mingled sigh out brought,
Which to suppress, but all in vain she sought.
Tancreds assault this while Clorinda plyes
T'encounter, and in rest her Lance bestows:
Each to others beauer hits, the splints to skies
Up start, and she in part disarmed shows:
For buckles broke, forthwith the Helmet flies
From off her head, (a blow whence wonder grows)
And golden locks unto the wind displayed,
She midst the field appears a youthly maid.
Her eyes do flash, her looks do lighten bright,
Sweet even in wrath, in laughter then what grace
They hold? Tancred whereon think thou? thy sight
Where bendst thou? know thou not this noble face?
This is that visage fair whence thou in light
Flames burnst, thy heart (her pictures shrine) the case
Can show, this same is she whom quenching thirst
At solitary spring thou saw first.
He that of painted shield, and of her crest
Took erst no keep, now seeing her does grow
A stone, she bared head couers, as best
She may, and him assayles, he gets her fro,
And fell blade whirling makes against the rest,
Yet at her hand peace cannot purchase so:
But threatfull him pursewes, and turn she cries,
And to deaths twain at once she him defies.
Stricken this Knight, no strokes again replies,
Nor so from sword himself to guard attends,
As to regard her cheeks and fairest eyes,
From whence his bow, love vneschewed bends,
T'himselfe he says, each blow vnharmefull dies,
Which force of her right hand (though armed) lends,
But never blow from her fair naked face
Falls vain, but in my heart finds lighting place.
Last he resolves, though pity hope he none,
As lover hid, not silent to decease,
That she her prisner strikes, to her make known
He will, trembling, unarmed, sewing for peace,
And says, O thou, that for thy foe alone
Seem me to take among so great a preace:
Let us forsake this thrust, so may aside
My force with thine, thy force with mine be tried.
So better shall be seen if my prowess
Thine counteruaile, she th'offer not gainsaid,
And as she were of wanted helm recklesse,
Forth bold she goes, on follows he dismayed:
Now to the combat had this warriouresse
Plighted her self, and on some blows now laid,
When he says stay, and of the fight lets make
The cou'nants, ere we us to fight betake.
The stops and him of fearful erst, hardy
Now makes, a love converted to despair:
The cou'nants are (quoth he) since so you fly,
All peace with me that out my heart you tear,
My heart, no longer mine which glad will die,
If of his farther life dislike you bear:
Long time it has been yours, now time is fit
The same you reaue, forbid I may not it.
Behold mine arms down held you I present,
Fencelesse my breast, why stay you it to cleave?
Will you dispatch the work? now, now content
Of curets go, if corpse that bare I leave,
You bid Tancred with threedes of more lament,
His woe (poor wretch) perhaps preparde to weaue:
But press untimely that still fast arrived,
Some his, some Painims farther time deprived.
The Palestines by Christens chaced, began
Give ground, were it for guile, or were it fear,
When of the chacers an unmanly man
Wau'd by the wind, skrying her sparckled hear,
Lifts up his hand as at her back he ran,
And where she naked showed, stroke at her there:
But Tancred cried out thereof aware,
And with his sword that great blow off he bare.
Yet all in vain not lights, but on the bound
Her hitt, twixt whitest neck and fairest head,
And her beguiled locks this slightest wound,
With some few drops, such wise betainted red,
As gold grows ruddie, which (some rubyes ground
By skillful workman set) does sparkles shed:
But furious grew this Prince, and onward made
Against this villain, and drew out his blade.
The Other avoides, and wrath enkindled he
Pursewes, they go through air as arrow-fares,
Suspenst, she stays a while and both does see,
Now parted far, nor them to follow cares:
But back retires with those of hers that flee,
And now shows face, nor Frankes t'assaile she spares,
Now turns she, now returns, now fight, now flight
She makes, nor chased, nor chacer termed aright.
Right so fierce Bull sometimes in market place,
If horns to dogs he turn, from whence he fled,
They there retire, and if to flight he pace,
Each makes return to chase emboldened:
At back Clorinda (whiles she flight does trace)
High holds her shield, and guards thereby her head:
Defenced in Monseo pastimes so,
From balls against them thrown, the flyers go.
While these pursew, and those pursewed fly
To the high walls, they now approaching drew,
When on the sudden with a ghastly cry
Vpraysde, back on them comes the Painim crew:
First wheeling far aloof, then turning ny,
At back and sides returned they fight renew:
Mean space Argante down the mountain led,
His band t'assault them also on the head.
The fierce Circassian from the troup out went,
That his blow first the enemy might gall:
And whom he struck he topsie-turuie hent
To ground, in plumpe both man and horse withal:
And ere his lance was into shiuers rent,
Many claimed fellowship in the others fall:
Then draws his sword, and where it home does come,
Still killes or felles, or leastwise wounds some.
Clorind his countermate of life reaued
Ardelio strong, who far in years did creep,
But of old age, as yet vnmastered,
And fenst by two big sons, who safe him keep
Could not, for from his fathers care sundred
Th'eldest Alcandro was, by wound full deep,
And Poliferno who near him abid,
Could scarce and scarce himself from peril rid.
But Tancred when he could not ouer-get
That villain, who his horse had swifter paced,
Looked back and saw his hardy men had fet
Too far a course, while sole headlong they chased:
He saw them hemd, he spurs to courser set,
Turning the raynes, and thither speedes in haste:
Nor he alone brought succor to his band,
But eke that troop which made for need a stand.
That troup aduenturer which Dudon led,
Heroicke flower, the Camps sinews and might,
Regnold shapt fairest, noblest couraged,
Fore-runnes them all, lightning takes slower flight,
Erminia soon his port, soon th'azured
Shield had deskryde with silver Eagle dight:
And says to King that on him fixed his eye,
There Is he that bears on brauest masterye.
For trenchant blade he has of equal prize,
Or few or none, yet but a child in age,
If but such six were among our enemies,
Ere now had Syria stoupt to seruiceage,
Ere now had neighbour-realmes, where Sun does rise,
And Realms that South most lie, endured bondage:
And Nile perhaps in vain, from yoke should hide
His head far distant, nor as yet deskride.
Regnold he is called, and his wrathful hand
More then all engines force the walls do fear,
Now turn your eyes where I am pointing, and
Mark him whose arms green with gold mixed bear,
That Is Dudon, and by him is led this band,
This band which has to name th'Aduenturer:
A warrior who well borne and well expert,
Exceedes in years, nor wants in desert.
That great one seen with black becouered so,
Gernand he hight, brother to Norway King,
A prouder man the whole earth cannot shoe,
This sole the price of his acts shadowing,
Those two, who thus in one conjoined go,
And parrell white, white have their furnishing,
Gildip and Edward loves, and spouses are
In loyalty, and martial prowess rare.
So spoke she, and they saw down on the plain,
How slaughter still increases more and more,
For Tancred and Reynold brake through the train,
That thick of men and arms enringde tofore,
And then the band which Dudon led, amain
Comes in, and on them likewise charge sore.
Argant, Argant himself at shocke such wise,
Reynold orethrew that scant he could arise.
Nor had he ris'ne perhaps, save that the horse
Of Bertolds son, that instant took a fall,
And having vnder-caught his foot, did force
For plucking it thereout some stay withal:
The Painim troop this while seeks to endorce,
Defeated, flying, chased the City wall:
Sole Argant and Clorinda bancke and bar,
Against fury that at back orefloweth, are.
Last rank they guard, and brunt at heels some space,
Upon them makes a stay, and is represt,
So as those folk with less endaunger'd case
Might fly, who first to flight themselves addressed:
Dudon fiery through victory gives chase
To flyers, and the fierce Tygran oppressed,
With shocke of horses and then with drawn blade,
His body headless kiss the ground he made.
Nor Algazzar good of tough Corslet took,
Nor mighty Corban of his strong Helmet,
For in the nape and back them he so struck,
That wound to face and breast did passage get:
And by his hand eke their sweet lodge forsook,
The souls of Amurate and Mehemet,
And of fell Almansor, nor great Circasse,
One step by him can vnannoyed pass.
Argant frets to himself, and eft he makes
A stand, and turns, and then retires again,
At last so sudden turned, to him he rakes,
And rought his side with a reuerse so maine,
That deep the blade it bathes therein, and takes
Life by that blow from Frankish Captain:
He falls, and eyes that scarce could open look,
An iron sleep, and hardest quiet took.
Thrice he them opens, and the heavens sweet rays
Sought to enjoy, and on his arm arose,
And thrice he fell, and his eyne ouer-layes
A darkesome veil: in the end weari'd they close,
His limbs dissolve, dead, cold, a sweat displayes,
And sensibly a senseless stifnes grows,
Upon the corpse (now dead) no longer stay
Fierce Argant brooks, but hies forth on his way.
Yet for all that though going keep no stay,
He turned to Frankes, and (O ye Knights) he cride,
This bloody sword is that, with which the day
Last past your Lord in gift me gratifide:
Tell him how now thereof I took assay,
For glad he would this news be certifide:
And dear must take it that his Present fair
Is known by proof, so great a worth to bear.
Tell him henceforth account he looking make,
In his own guts the same more sure to prove,
And if t'assaile no over speed he take,
I Will come unlooked, be he the ground above:
The Christians angered at so fell a crake,
From all sides with all hands against him move,
But among the rest he was too safety run,
And for his guard had wall befriending won.
The guarders busy, straight themselves address,
To hail down stones aloft from garrets so,
And with such fast supply the numberless
Quiuers with arrows stuffed every bow,
That to retrait forced is of Frankes the press,
And Saracins into the City go.
But Reynold now from groueling horses side,
His foot out having plucked, was thither hide.
He came on the Barbarian homicide,
A sharp revenge for Dudons death to take,
And being come to his, aloud he cride,
What look you for? what lingering is it you make?
Since slaughtred lies the Knight that was our guide,
Why running haste we not his death to wrake?
In so great cause of just displeasure can
A brittle wall thwart us a stoppage than?
No not if double ire or Adamant,
This walling high not to be pierced were,
From higher prowess yours, that fierce Argant
With begged safety should him neastle there:
Go we unto the assault, and self instant,
Before the rest (so said) first does he steare,
For his undaunted courage ought affright,
Nor arrows shower, nor storm all stony might.
He tossing his stout head lifts up his face,
Full of so terrible an hardiment,
That to the hearts of those, who guard the place,
An ycy cold of fear unwonted went:
Whiles some he cheeres, and some he does menace,
In comes one, who slakes his eger bent:
For Godfrey to them sent the good Sigiere,
Of his grave charges messenger severe.
Who in his name their ouer-hardinesse
Vncries, and straight to turn does straight impose,
Return he says, for to your wrathfulnesse
Nor place serves fit, nor season tidie grows,
Godfrey commands it you this word express,
Regnold now raines, who erst was spur to those:
Though inward much he frets, and out reueald
More signs then one of anger ill conceald.
Back turn the bands, nor their return at all
Was by the counterwayting foe distressed,
Nor Dudons corpse of his last funeral,
In any portion did defrauded rest:
Upon their kindest arms his friends loyal
Him bear, a burden dear and nobellest,
Bulleyn the while viewes from an higher part,
Of that strong City both the site and art.
Jerusalem upon two hills is set,
Of height uneven, and turnde front to frount,
His middle part a lowly vale does fret,
Which it deuides and the one from the other mount,
Three sides are coasted with a combrous let,
Fourth easy way, nor to ascend they count:
But with high raised walls it self defends,
The playner part which against the North extends.
Within the City sundry Cesterns are,
Rain to receive, and brooks and living springs:
Without the earth about of grass is bare,
Fountains or lakes (barraine) none forth it brings:
Nor is it seen gladsome, or proud to fare
With trees; nor yields against Suns rays shadowings:
Save where some six miles off a wood vpgrowes
With noisome bugbears, that dark ghastly shows.
That side where rising first appears the day,
The noble wave of happy Jordan flanks,
And on the western part of Midland Sea,
It buts upon the sandy strowed banks,
The North Betel (to golden calfe, where they
An alter raysd) and eke Samaria ranks:
Bethlem is plast where South brings showry cloud,
Whose hap was erst in lap great birth to shroud.
While Godfrey now both of the town, and land
The lofty rampires, and the site surueyes,
And him bethinkes where best his camp may stand,
And where foes weakest wall t'assaile with ease,
Erminia skryes him, and with stretched hand
Him points to Painim King, and farther says:
That Godfrey is, who clad in purple pall,
Bears port so king-like and maiesticall.
He (certes) borne seems a Sovereign,
So th'arts to rule, and to command he knows:
Nor is he meaner Knight then Captain,
But all the points of double valor owes,
Nor man more warlike this so great a train
Among all then him, nor more advised shows:
In counsel Raymond sole, and sole in war
Reynold and Tancred his coegals are.
The Painym King replies, him well I bear
In mind, as erst seen at great Court of France,
When I Egyptian messenger was there,
In noble iusts I saw him ply his lance,
And though his years, which then young springing were,
No tire of down did on his cheeks advance:
Yet both his words, and works, and semblant brave
Of greatest hopes even then foretoken gave.
Foretoken ah too true, with that troubled
Ey-lids down clines he, then them reares anew,
And says, tell me; what is he coat-armoured,
Whom wear, and to others match to march we view,
Oh how by this he is resembelled!
Though seems to want a part of stature dew,
That's Baldwyn answered she, to him shows he,
Brother by face, but more by facts to be.
Next mark the man on the other side in guize,
That stands of one who counsel does endite,
He Reymond hights, whom I to you for wise,
Did so commend, a man all hoary white,
Skild to contriue more warlicke policies,
There Is neither Frankish nor Italian sprite,
But he that with guilt-helme does farther stand,
Good William is, Kings son of British land.
With him is Gwelfe and equal strives to go,
In brave deeds, in great blood, in high calling,
Full well by those square shoulders him I know,
And by that breast whole cheasted up rising,
But among these squadrons mine own greatest foe
(Though wide I look) to sight I cannot bring:
I mean that Boemund, that murderer,
Of my blood royal cruel rauiner.
So talked they, the whiles the Captain,
When he the walls had viewd, to his descends,
And for he deemes the City should in vain
Assault receive, where steepness most ascends:
Against the Northern gate, he on the plain,
That with it ioynes, his pitched tents extends:
And thence proceeding near the tower below*
Called Angolar, the rest he does bestow.
The circuit of the Camp might near comprize
The Cities third part, or but little less,
For to enclose it round the same suffize
At full could not, such was her hugynesse:
But all the ways (at least) which might supplies
Afford, Godfrey to stop began him address:
And causes to be seized each passage fit,
That served to come, and go too and from it.
A charge he gives his Tents should fortefide
With diches deep, and with strong trenches be:
Which it from Townesmens sallyes on th'oneside,
And strange assaults might on the the other free:
Then after these dew works to end were hide,
Dudons carcass he took a mind to see,
And thither went where that good Captain ded,
With sad and tearefull troop was compassed.
His faithful friends adorned his great Bear
With noble pomp, where plast aloft he lies:
When Godfrey enters, and the people rear
More doleful playning and more tatling cries,
But with a look nor troubled nor yet clear,
Good Bulleyn bridles his affects, and ties
His tongue, then when his sight on him had stayed,
Fixed in muse somewhile at last he said.
To thee nor plaint, nor dole are dew, for death,
If world thee sent, heaven gives thee birth again,
And here where off thou threwest thy mortal sheath,
Steps of thy glory printed deep remain:
Thou liu'dst as Champion of the Christen faith,
And so thou did, now ioyest thou, and feign
In God do feed thine eyes, O soul of bliss,
And crowned, and palmd thy well deserving is.
Blessed live thou for our condition,
Not thy mis-hap inuites these tears to fall:
Since at thy parting parts a portion
Of us, most worthy and most strong withal:
But if from us an earthly aid is gone,
Deprived by that, which death the vulgar call:
An heavenly aid for us thy suit may gain,
For among the elect thee heaven does entertain.
And as we saw for our advantage thee,
Erst mortal man, these mortal arms to weeld,
So (sprite divine) our hope assures to see,
With fatal arms of heaven thou will us sheeld:
Learn now the prayers to receive which we
Thee send, and succor to our evils yield:
Thence conquest I denounce, devout we will
Triumphant vows at Church to thee fulfill.
So spoke he, and by this the Evening dark
Had quenched all the rays of lightsome day,
And with oblivion of each noisome carke,
Did truce on tears, and on lamentings lay:
But Godfrey warlicke engines want does mark,
Which vnsupplide, it were vain the walls t'assay:
He casts where beams to get, and how to make
The engines frames, and small rest can he take.
Up with the Sun he rose, and follow will
Himself the pomp of solemn funeral,
To Dudon at the foot of rising hill,
A Sepulcher of Cipresse sweet they stall,
Their Barricados near, and highest spill
Of Palm tree, with his boughs orespreads it all:
There was he laid, the whiles the Priestly throng,
Rest to his soul do pray for in their song.
Amongst the boughs, where hanged up here and there
Ensigns, and prisond arms of diverse sort,
From Syrians and Persians that were
Erst won by him, with better sped effort:
The arms and curets which he used to wear,
Did cloth the tronke, and tronke did them support:
Where after was ygrau'd: Here lies Dudon,
Yield honors dew to this brave Champion.
But godly Bulleyn having brought to end
This work so dolorous and so devout,
The Carpenters of all the Camp does send,
With soldiers conuoy to the forest out:
It lies twixt valleys hidden, and a friend
Of Syria made it known to Frankish rout:
March thither they to cut down engines take,
Against which the City no defense may make.
Each on his mate to fell the plants does call,
And against the wood to work vnusde outrage,
Hewne by the yrons piercing edge, down fall
The sacred Palme-trees, and th'Ashes savage,
The Maples, Pines, the Cipresse funeral,
High Firres, Beeches, and Holmes of thick bowage:
The husband Elmes, to which the vine sometimes
Leanes, and with wrythed foot to heaven climes.
Somes strokes in Ewes, somes are in Oaks enchac'd,
Which have a thousand times their locks renewd,
And thousand times (at each encounter fast)
The wrath of winds repulsed and subdewd:
And some on rattling wheels the burdens placed,
Of Ornes and Ceders with sweet sent imbewd:
At sound of arms, at diverse cry the beasts,
And birds forsake their caves, and fly their neasts.
The end of the third Song.
CANTO TERZO
GI A' l'aura Messaggiera erasi desta
A'nuntiar, che se ne vien l'Aurora:
Ella in tanto s'adorna, e l'aurea testa
Di rose colte in Paradiso infiora;
Quando il Campo, ch'a l'arme homai s'appresta,
In voce mormoraua alta, esonora,
E preuenia le trombe: e queste poi
Dier piu lieti, e canori i segni suoi.
Il saggio Capitan con dolce morso
I desiderij lor guida, e seconda:
Che piu facil saria suolger il corso
Presso Cariddi a la volubil'onda
OF tardar Borea all'hor, che scote il dorso
Del' Apennino, e i legni in mare affonda.
Gli ordina, gl'incamina, e'n suon gli regge
Rapido si, ma rapido con leg.
Ali ha ciascuno al core, and ali al piede:
Ne del suo ratto andar pero s'accorge.
Ma, quando il Solgli aridi Campi fiede
Conraggi assai feruenti, e in alto sorge;
Ecco apparir Gierusalem si vede:
Ecco additar Gierusalem si scorge:
Ecco da mill voci vnitamente
Gierusalemme salutar si sent.
Cosi di Nauiganti audace stuolo,
Che moua a ricercar estranio lido:
E in Mar dubbioso, e sotto ignoto Polo
Proui l'onde fallaci, e'l vento infido;
S'al fin discopre il desiato suolo,
Il saluta da lunge in lieto grido:
E l'vno a l'altro il mostra, e in tanto oblia
La noia, e'l mal de la passata via.
Al gran piacer, che quella prima vista
Dolcemente spiro ne l'altrui petto,
Alta contrition success, mista
Di timoroso, ereuerente affetto.
O sano a pena dinnalzar la vista
Ver la Citta, di CHRISTO albergo e letto:
Dove mori: dove sepulto fue:
Dove poi riuesti le membra sue.
Sommessi accenti, e tacit parole,
Rotti singulti, e flebili sospiri
De la gente, che'n un s'allegra, e duole,
Fan, che per l'aria un mormorio s'aggiri,
Qual ne le folte selue vdir si suole,
S'auuien che tra le frondi il vento spiri:
O quale infra gli scogli, o presso a i lidi
Sibila il mar percosso in rauchi stridi.
Nudo ciascuno il pie calca il sentiero:
Che l'essempio de' Duci ogn'altro move.
Serico fregio, e d'or piuma, o cimiero
Superbo dal suo capo ogn' un rimoue:
Et insieme del cor l'habito altero
Depone, e calde, e pie lagrime pioue.
Pur, quasi al pianto habbia la uia rinchiusa,
Cosi parlando ogn'unse stesso accusa.
Dunque, oue tu, Signor, di milleriui
Sanguinosi il terren lasciasti asperso,
D'amaro pianto almen duo fonti uiui
In si acerba memoria hoggi io non uerso?
Agghiacciato mio cor, che non deriui
Per gli occhi, e stilli in lagrime conuerso?
Duro mio cor, che non ti spetri, e frangi?
Pianger ben merti ogn'hor, s'hora non piangi.
Dala Cittade intanto Un, ch'a la guarda
Sta d' alta Torre, escopre i monti, e i campi,
Cola giuso la polue alzarsi guarda,
Si che par, che gran nube in aria stampi:
Par, che baleni quella nube, and arda,
Come di fiamme grauida, e di lampi:
Poi lo splendour de' lucidimetalli
Distingue escerne gli huomini, e i caulli
All'hor gridaua, o qual per l'Aria stesa
Poluere i veggio: o come par, che splenda.
Su, suso, o Cittadini: a la difesa
S'armi ciascun veloce, e i muri ascenda:
Gia present e il nemico. e poi ri presa
La voce. Ogn'un s'affretti, e l'arme prenda;
Ecco il nemico e qui: mira la polue,
Che sotto horrida nebbia il Cielo inuolue.
I sempli ei fanciulli, e i vecchi inermi,
E'l vulgo de le Done sbigottite,
Che non sanno ferir, ne fare schermi,
Trahean supplici, e mesti a le Meschite.
Cli altri di membra, e d'animo piufermi
Gia frettolosi l'arme hauean rapite.
Accorre altri a leporte, altri a le mura:
Il Reva intorno, e'ltutto vede, e cura.
Gliordini diede, e poscia ei si ritrasse,
Oue sorge vna Torre infra due port,
Si ch'e presso al bisogno: e son piu basse
Quindi le piaggie, e le montagne scorte.
Volle, che quiui seco Erminia andasse:
Erminia bella, ch'ei raccolse in Corte,
Poi ch'a lei fu da le Christian squadre
Presa Antiochia, e morto il Re suo padre.
Clorinda intanto in contra a i franchi e gita:
Molti uan seco, and ella a tutti e auante.
Ma in altra part, ond'e secreta uscita,
Sta preparato a le riscosse Argante.
La generosa i suoi seguaci incita
Co'detti, e con l'intrepido sembiante.
Ben con alto principio a noi conuiene,
(Dicea) fondar de l'Asia hoggi la spene.
Mentre ragiona a' suoi, non lunge scorse
Un Franco stuolo addur rustiche prede:
Che (come e l'vso) a depredar precorse;
Hor con greggie, and armenti al Campo riede,
Ella uer loro, e uerso lei se'n corse
Il Ducelor, ch'a se uenir la vede.
Gardo il Duce e nomato, huom d igran possa,
Ma non gia tal, ch'a lei resister possa.
Gardo a quel fero scontro e spinto a terra
In su gli occhi de'Franchi, e de'Pagani:
Ch'all' hortutti gridar, di quella guerra
Lieti auguri prendendo, i quai fur vani,
Spronando adosso a gli altri ella si serra,
E val la destra sua per cento mani.
Seguirla i suoi guerrier per quella strada,
Che spianar gli urti, e che s'apri la spada.
Tosto la preda al predator ritoglie:
Cede lo stuol de'Franchi a poco, a poco;
Tanto che'n cima a un colle ei si raccoglie,
Oue aiutate son l'arme dal loco.
All'hor si come turbine si scioglie,
E cade da le nubi aereo foco,
Il buon Tancredi, a cui Goffredo acenna,
Sua squadra moss, and arresto l'antenna.
Porta si salda la gran lancia, e in guisa
Vien feroce, e leggia dro il Giouenetto;
Che ueggendolo d'alto il Re, s'auuisa,
Che sia guerriero infra gli scelti eletto.
Onde dice a colei, ch'e seco assisa,
E che gia sent palpitarsi il petto.
Ben conoscer dei tu per si lungo vso
Ogni Christian, ben che ne l'arme chiuso.
Chi e dunque costui, che cosi been
S'adatta in giostra, e fero in uista e tanto?
A quella, in uece di risposta, uiene
Su le labra un sospir, su gli occhi il pianto.
Pur gli spirti, e le lagrimeritene;
Ma non cosi, che lor non mostri alquanto:
Che gli occhi pregni un bell purpureo giro
Tinse, e roco spunto mezo il sospiro.
Poi gli dice infing euole, enasconde
Sotto il manto de l'odio altro desio.
Ohime been il conosco, and ho ben donde
Fra mill riconoscerlo deggia io:
Che spesso il uidi i campi, e le profonde
Fosse del sangue empir del Popolmio.
Ahi quanto e crudo nel ferire: a piaga,
Ch'ei faccia, herba non gioua, od art maga.
Egli e il Prence Tancredi. o Prigioniero
Mio fosse un giorno, e no'luorrei giamorto:
Viuo il uorrei, perche'n me desse al fero
Desio dolce uendetta alcun conforto.
Cosi parlaua: e de'suoi detti il uero
Da chi l'udiua in altro senso e torto;
E fuor n'usci con le sue uoci estreme
Misto un sospir, che'n darno ella gia preme.
Clorinda in tanto ad incontrar l'assalto
Va di Tancredi, e pon la Lancia in resta.
Ferirsi a le uisiere, ei tronchi in alto
Volaro, e part nuda ella ne resta:
Che, rotti i lacci al'elmo suo, d'un salto
(Mirabil colpo) ei le balzo di testa:
E le chiome dorate al uento sparse,
Giouane donna in mezo'l Campo apparse.
Lampeggiar gli occhi, e folgorar gli sguardi,
Dolci ne l'ira, hor che sarian nel riso?
Tancredi, a che pur pensi? a che pur guardi?
Non riconoscitu l'amato uiso?
Quest'e pur, quel bell uolto, onde tutt' ardi:
Tuo core il dica, ou'e il suo essempio inciso.
Questa e colei, che rinfrescar la front
Vedesti gia uel solitario font.
Ei, ch'al cimiero, and al dipinto scudo
Non bado prima, hor lei ueggendo impetra:
Ella, quanto puo meglio, il capo ignudo
Si ricopre, e l'assale: and ei s'arretra.
Va contra gli altri, erota il ferro crudo;
Ma pero da lei pace non impetra:
Che minacciosa il segue, e; uolgi, grida:
E di due morti in un punto lo sfida.
Percosso il Caualier non ripercote:
Ne si dal ferror a riguardarsi attend,
Come a guardar i begliocchi, ele got,
Ond' Amor l'arco ineuitabil tend.
Fra se dicea. uan le percosse uote
Tal'hor, che la sua destra armata stende:
Ma colpo may del bello ignudo uolto
Non cade in fallo, e sempre il cor m'e colto.
Risolue al fin, ben che pieta non spear,
Di non morir tacendo occulto Amante.
Vuol, ch'ella sappia, ch'un prigion suo fere,
Gia inerme, e supplicheuole, e tremante.
Onde le dice. O tu, che mostri hauere
Per nemico me sol fra turbe tante;
Vsciam di questa mischia: and in disparte
I potro teco, etu meco prouarte.
Cosi me'si uedra, s'al tuo s'agguaglia
Il mio ualore. ella accetto l'inuito:
E, come esser senz'elmo a lei non caglia,
Gia baldanzosa, and ei seguia smarrito.
Recata s'era in atto di battaglia
Gia la Guerriera, e gia l'hauea ferito;
Quand' egli; hor ferma, disse: e siano fatti
Anzi la pugna de la pugna i patti.
Fermossi, e lue di pauroso audace
Rende in quel punto disperato amore.
I patti sian (dicea), poi che tu pace
Meco non uuoi, che tu mi tragga il core.
Il mio cor, non piu mio, s'a te dispiace,
Ch'egli piu uiua, uolontario more.
E'tuo gran tempo: e tempo e ben, che trarlo
Homai tu debbia, e non debb'io uietarlo.
Ecco io inchino le braccia, e t'appresento
Senza dife sa il petto. hor che no'l fiedi?
Vuoi ch'ageuoli l'opra? i son contento
Trami l'vsbergo hor hor, se nudo il chiedi.
Distinguea forse in piu duro lamento
I suoi dolori il misero Tancredi;
Ma calca l'impedisce intempestiua
De'Pagani, e de'suoi, che soprarriua.
Cedean cacciati da lo stuol Christiano
I Palestini, o sia temenza, od'arte.
Un de'persecutori, huomo inhumano,
Vide le suentolar le chiome sparte:
Eda tergo in passando alzo la mano,
Per ferir lei ne la sua ignuda part;
Ma Tancredo grido, che se n' accorse,
E con la spada a quel gran colpo occorse.
Tur non gi tutto in vano, e ne' confini
Del bianco collo il bell capo ferille.
Fu leuissima piaga, e i biondi crini
Rosseg giaron cosi d'alquante stille,
Come rosseg gia l'or, che di rubini
Per man d'illustre artefice sfauille.
Ma il Prence infuriato, all'hor si spinse
Adosso a quel villano, e'l ferro strinse.
Quel si dilegua, e questi acceso d'ira
Ilsegue: e uan, come per l'aria strale.
Ella riman sospesa, and ambo mira
Lontani molto, ne seguir le cale:
Ma co'suoi fuggitiui si ritira.
Tal'hor mostra la front, ei Franchi assale:
Hor si uolge, hor riuolge, hor fugge, hor fuga:
Ne si puo dir la sua caccia, ne fuga.
Tal gran Tauro tal'hor ne l'ampio Agone,
Se uolge il corno a i cani, ond' e seguito,
S'arretran'essi: e s'a fuggir si pone,
Ciascun ritorna a seguitarlo ardito.
Clorinda nel fuggir da tergo oppone
Alto lo scudo, e'l capo e custodito.
Cosi coperti uan ne'giochi mori
Da le palle lanciate i fuggitori.
Gia questi seguitando, e quei fuggendo
S'eran a l'alte mura auuicinati;
Quando alzaro i Pagani un grido horrendo
E in dietro si fur subito uoltati:
E fecero un gran giro, e poi uolgendo
Ritornaro a ferir le spalle, e i lati.
E in tanto Argante giu mouea dal monte
La schiera sua per assalirgli a front.
Il feroce Circasso usci di stuolo:
Che'esser uols'egli il feritor primiero.
E quegli, in eui feri, fu steso al suolo,
E sossopra in un fascio il suo destriero.
E, pria che l'hasta in tronchi andasse auolo,
Molti cadendo compagnia glifero.
Poi stringe il ferro: e quando giunge a pieno
Sempreuccide, od abbatte, o piaga almeno.
Clorinda emula sua tolse di uita
Il forte Ardelio, huom gia d'eta matura;
Ma diuecchiezza indomita, e munita
Di duo gran figli, e pur non fu secura.
Ch'Alcandro il maggior siglio aspra ferita
Rimosso hauea dalla paterna cura:
E Poliferno, che restogli appresso,
A gran pena saluar pote se stesso.
Ma Tancredi, dapoi ch'egli non giunge
Quel uillan, che destriero ha piu corrente,
Si mira a dietro, e uede ben, che lunge
Troppo e trascorsa la sua audace gente.
Vedela intorniata, e'lcorsier punge
Volgendo il freno; e la s'inuia repent:
Ned egli soloi suoi guerrier soccorre;
Ma quello stuol, ch'a tutti rischi accorre.
Quel di Dudon auuenturier drappello,
Fior degli Heroi, nerbo, e uigor del Campo.
Rinaldo il piu magnanimo, e'l piu bello
Tutti precorre: and e menratto il lampo.
Ben tosto il portamento, e'l bianco augello
Conosce Erminia nel celeste campo:
E dice al Re, che'n lui fisa lo sguardo
Eccoti il domator d'ogni gagliardo.
Questi ha nel pregio de la spada eguali
Pochi, o nessuno, and e fanciullo ancora.
Se fosser tra'nemici altri sei tali,
Gia Soria tutta uinta, e serua fora:
E gia domi sarebbono i piu Australi
Regni, e i Regni piu prossimi a l'Aurora:
E forse il Nilo occulterebbe in uano
Dal giogo il capo in cognito, e lontano
Rinaldo ha nome: e la sua destra irata
Temon piu d'ogni machina lemura.
Hor uolgi gli occhi, ou'io ti mostro, e guata
Colui, che d'oro, e uerde ha l'armatura.
Quegli e Dudone: and e da luiguidata
Questa schiera, che schiera e di uentura.
E guerrier d'alto sangue, emolto esperto:
Che d'eta uince, e non cede di merto.
Mira quel grande, ch'e coperto a bruno:
E Gernando il fratel del Re Noruegio.
Non ha la Terra huom piu superbo alcuno:
Questo sol de'suoi fatti oscura il pregio.
E son que'duo, che uan si giunti in uno,
Et han bianco il uestir, bianco ogni fregio,
Gildippe, and Odoardo Amanti, esposi,
In ualor d'arme, e in lealta famosi.
Cosi parlaua: e gia uedean la sotto,
Come la strage piu, e piu s'ingrosse
Che Tancredi, e Rinaldo il cerchio han rotto,
Benche d'huomini denso, e d'armi fosse.
E poi lo stuol, ch'e da Dudon condotto,
Vi giunse, and aspramente anco il percosse.
Argante, Argante stesso, ad un grand'urto
Di Rinaldo abbattuto, a pena e surto.
Ne sorgea forse; ma in quel punto stesso
Al figliuol di Bertoldo il destrier cade:
E restandogli sotto il piede oppresso
Conuien, ch'indi a ritrarlo alquanto bade.
Lo stuol Pagan fra tanto in rotta messo
Si ripara fuggendo a la Cittade.
Soli Argante, e Clorinda argine, e sponda
Sono al furor, che lor da tergo inonda.
Vltimi uanno, el'impeto seguente
In lor s'arresta alquanto, e si reprime:
Si, che potean men periglio samente
Quelle genti fuggir, che fuggian prime.
Segue Dudon ne lauittoria ardente
I fuggitiui, e'l fer Tigrane opprime
Con l'urto del cauallo: e con la spada
Fa, che scemo del capo a terra cada.
Ne gioua ad Algazarre il fino usbergo,
Ned a Corban robusto il forte elmetto:
Che'n guisa lor feri la nuca, e'l tergo,
Che ne passo la piaga al uiso, al petto.
E per sua mano ancor del dolce albergo
L'alma usci d'Amurate, e di Meemetto,
E del Crudo Almansor: ne'l gran Circasso
Puo securo da lui mouer un passo.
Freme in se stesso Argante', e pur taluolta
Si ferma, e uolge, e poi cede pur' anco.
Al sin cosi improuiso a lui si uolta,
E di tanto rouescio il coglie al fianco;
Che dentro al ferro ui s'immerge, e tolta
E dal colpo la uita al Duce Franco;
Cade, e gli occhi, ch'a pena aprir si ponno,
Dura quiet preme, e ferreo sonno.
Gli apri tree uolte, e i dolci rai del Cielo
Cerco fruire, e soura un braccio alzarsi:
E tree uolte ricadde, e fosco uelo
Gli occhi adombro, che stanchi al fin serrarsi.
Si dissoluono i membri, e'l mortal gelo
Irrigiditi, e di sudor gli ha sparsi.
Soura il corpo gia morto il fero Argante
Punto non bada, euia trascorre auante.
Con tutto cio, se ben d'andar non cessa,
Si uolge a i Franchi, e grida. o Caualieri,
Questa sanguigna spada e quella stessa,
Che'l Signor uostro mi dono pur hieri.
Ditegli, come in vso hoggi l'ho messa:
Ch'udir a la nouella ei uolentieri.
E caro esser gli dee, che'l suo bell dono
Sia conosciuto al paragon si buono.
Ditegli, che uederne homai s'aspetti
Ne le uiscere sue piu certa proua.
E quando d'assalirne ei non s'affretti,
Verro non aspettato, ou'ei si troua.
Irritati i Christiani a i feri detti
Tutti uer lui gia si moueano a proua;
Ma congli altri esso e gia corso in securo
Sotto la guardia de l'amico muro.
I difensori a grandinar le pietre
Da l'alte mura in guisa incominciaro:
E quasi innumer abili faretre
Tante saette a gli archi ministraro;
Che sorza epur, che' l Franco stuol s'arretre:
E i Saracin ne la Cittade entraro.
Ma gia Rinaldo, hauendo il pie sottratto
Al giacente destrier, s'era qui tratto.
Venia per far nel Barbaro homicida
De l'estinto Dudone aspra uendetta:
E fra'suoi giunto alter amente grida:
Hor qual indugio e questo? e che s'aspetta?
Poi ch'e mortoil Signor, che nefu guida,
Che non corriamo a uendicarlo in fretta?
Dunque in si grave occasion di sdegno
Esser puo fragil muro a noiritegno?
Non, se di ferro doppio, o d'adamante
Questa muraglia impenetrabil fosse,
Cola dentro securo il fero Argante
S'appiatteria da le uostr'alte posse.
Andiam pure a l'assalto, and egli auante
A tutti gli altri in questo dir si moss:
Che nulla teme la secura testa
O di sassi, o di strai nembo, o tempesta.
Ei crollando il gran capo alza la faccia,
Piena di si terribile ardimento,
Che sin dentro ale mura i cori agghiaccia
A i difensor d'insolito spauento.
Mentre egli altri rincora, altri minaccia,
Soprauien chi reprime il suo talento:
Che Goffredo lor manda il buon Sigiero,
De'graui Imperij suoi Nuntio seuero.
Questi sgrida in suo nome il troppo ardire,
E incontinente il ritornar impone.
Tornatene (dicea) ch'a le vostr'ire
Non e il loco opportuno, o la stagione.
Goffredo il vicomanda. A questo dire
Rinaldo si freno, ch'altrui fu sprone:
Benche dentro ne frema, e in piu d'vnsegno
Dimostri fuore il malcelato sdegno.
Tornar le schiere indietro, e da i nemici
Non fu il ritorno lor punto turbato:
Ne in part alcuna de gli estremi vffici
Il corpo di Dudon resto fraudato.
Su le pietose braccia i fidi amici
Portarlo, caro peso, and honorato.
Mira intanto il Buglion d'eccelsa part
De la forte Cittade il sito, e l'arte.
Gierusalem soura duo colli e posta
D'impari altezza, e volti front a front.
Va per lo mezo suo valle interposta,
Che lei distingue, e l'un da l'altro monte.
Fuor da tree lati ha malageuol costa:
Per l'altro vassi, enon par, che si monte.
Ma d'altissimemura e piu disesa
La part piana, e'n contra Borea stesa.
La Citta dentro ha lochi, in cui si serba
L'Acqua, che pioue, e laghi, e fonti viui.
Ma fuor la terra intorno e nuda d'herba,
E di Fontane sterile, e di riui.
Ne si vede fiorir lieta, e superba
D'alberi, e fare schermo a i raggi estiui:
Se non se in quanto oltra sei miglia un bosco
Sorge d'ombre nocenti horrido, e fosco.
Ha da quel lato, dondeil giorno appare,
Del felice Giordan le nobil'onde.
E da la part occidental del mare
Mediterraneo l'arenose sponde.
Verso Borea e Betel, ch'alzo l'altare
Al bue de l'oro, e la Samaria; e donde
Austro portar le suol piouoso nembo,
Bethelem, che'l gran parto accolse in grembo.
Hor mentre guarda el'altemura, e'l sito
De la Citta Goffredo, e del paese:
E pensa, oue s'accampi, onde assalito
Sia il muro hostil piu facile a l'offese;
Erminia il vide, e dimostrollo a dito
Al Re pagano, e cosi a dir riprese.
Goffredo e quel, che nel purpureo ammanto
Ha di regio, e d'augusto in se cotanto.
Veramente e costui nato a l'Impero,
Si del regnar, del comandar sa l'arti.
E non minor, che Duce, e Caualiero;
Ma del doppio valor tutte hale parti.
Ne fra turba si grande huom piu guerriero,
O piu saggio di lui potrei mostrarti.
Sol Raimondo in consiglio, and in battaglia
Sol Rinaldo, e Tancredi a lui s'agguaglia.
Risponde il Re pagan. ben ho di lui
Contezza, e'lvidi la gran Corte in Francia,
Quand'io d'Egitto messaggier vi fui:
E'l vidi in nobil giostra oprar la lancia.
E se ben gli anni giouenetti sui
Non gli vestian di piume ancor la guancia,
Pur daua a i detti, a l'opre, a le sembianze
Presagio homai'altissime speranze.
Presagio, ahi troppo vero. e qui le ciglia
Turbate inchina, c poi l'innalza, e chiede.
Dimmi, chi sia colui, c'ha pur vermiglia
La soprauesta, e seco a par si vede,
O quanto di sembianti a lui simiglia,
Se ben alquanto distatura cede.
E Baldouin (risponde,) e ben si scopre
Nel volto a lui Fratel, ma piu ne l'opre.
Hor rimira colui, che quasi in modo
D'huom, che consigli, sta da l'altro fianco.
Que gli e Raimondo, ilqual tanto ti lodo
D'accorgimento, huom gia canuto, e bianco.
Non e, chi tesser me'bellico frodo
Di lui sapesse, o sia Latino, o Franco.
Ma quell'altro piu in la, ch'orato ha l'elmo
Del Re Britanno e il buon figliuol Guglielmo.
V'e Guelfo seco, e gli e d'opre leggiadre
Emulo, e d'alto sangue, e d'alto stato.
Ben il conosco ale sue spalle quadre,
Et a quel petto colmo, e rileuato.
M'a'l gran nemico mio tra queste squadre
Gia riueder non posso, e pur viguato.
I'dico il Boemondo il micidiale,
Distruggitor del sangue mio reale.
Cosi parlauan questi. e'l Capitano,
Poi ch'intorno ha mirato, a i suoi discende.
E perch creed, che la terra in vano
S'oppugneria, dove il piu erto ascend,
Contra la porta Aquilonar nel piano,
Che non lei si congiunge, alza le tend:
E quinci procedendo in fin la Torre,
Che chiamano Angolar, gli altri fa porre*
Da quel giro del Campo e contenuto
Da la Cittade ilterzo, o poco meno:
Che d'ogn'intorno non hauria potuto
(Cotanto ella volgea) cingerla a pieno.
Ma le vie tutte, ond'hauer puote aiuto,
Tenta Goffredo d'impedirle almeno:
Et occupar fa gli opportuni passi,
Onde da lei si viene, and a lei vassi.
Impon, che sian letende indi munite
E di fosse profonde, e di trinciere:
Che d'vnaparte a Cittadine vscite,
Dal'altra oppone a correrie straniere.
Ma, poi che fur quest'opere fornite,
Vols'egli il corpo di Dudon vedere:
E cola trasse, oue il buon Duce estinto
Da mesta turba, e lagrimosa e cinto.
Di nobil pompa i fidi amici ornaro
Il gran Feretro, oue sublime ei giace.
Quando Goffredo entro, le turbe alzaro
Lavoce, assai piu flebile, e loquace.
Ma con uolto ne torbido, ne chiaro
Frena il suo affetto ilpio Buglione, etace.
E poi, che'n lui pensando alquanto fisse
Le luci hebbe tenute, al fin si disse.
Gia non si deue a te doglia, ne pianto;
Che, se mori nel mondo, in Ciel rinasci,
E qui, dove ti spogli il mortalmanto,
Di gloria impresse alte vestigia lasci.
Viuesti qual guerrier Christiano, e santo;
E come tal sei morto; hor godi, e pasci
In Dio gli occhi bramosi, o felice Alma,
Et hai del been oprar corona, e palma.
Viui beata pur, che nostra sort,
Non tua suentura a lagrimar n'inuita;
Poscia ch'al tuo partir si degna, e forte
Part di noi fa co'l tuo pie partita.
Ma, se questa, che'l vulgo appella morte,
Priuati ha noi d'vna terrena aita,
Celeste aita hora impetrar ne puoi,
Che'l Ciel t'accoglie infra gli eletti suoi.
E come a nostro pro veduto habbiamo,
Ch'vsaui, huom gia mortal, l'arme mortali;
Cosi vederti oprare anco speriamo,
Spirto divine, l'arme del Ciel fatali.
Impara i voti homai, ch'a te porgiamo,
Raccorre, e dar soccorso a i nostri mali:
Tu di vittoria annuntio: a te deuoti
Soluerem trionfando al Tempio i voti.
Cosi diss'egli: egia la notte oscura
Hauea tutti del giorno i raggi spenti:
E con l'oblio d'ogni noiosa cura
Ponea tregua a le lagrime, a i lamenti.
Ma il Capitan, ch'espugnar may le mura
Non creed senza i bellici tormenti,
Pensa ond'habbia le traui and in quai form
Le machine componga, e poco dorme.
Sorse a pari co'l Sole, and egli stesso
Seguir la pompa funeral poi uolle.
A Dudon d'odorifero Cipresso
Composto hanno il sepolcro a pie d'un colle.
Non lunge a gli steccati: e soura ad esso
Vn'altissima Palma i rami estolle.
Hor qui fuposto, ei Sacerdoti in tanto
Quiet a l'alma gli pregar co'l canto.
Quinci, e quindi fra irami erano appese
Insegne, e prigioniere arm diverse,
Gia da lui tolte in piu felici imprese
A le genti di Siria, and a le Perse.
De la corazza sua, de l'altro arnese
In mezo il grosso tronco si coperse.
Qui (vi fu scritto poi) giace Dudone:
Honorate l'altissimo Campione.
Ma il pietoso Buglion, poi che daquesta
Opra si tolse dolorosa, epia;
Tutti i Fabri del campo a la foresta
Con buonascorta di soldati inuia.
Ella e tra ualli ascosa, e manifesta
L'hauea fatta a i Francesi huom di Soria.
Qui per troncar le machine n'andaro,
A Cui non habbia la Citta riparo.
L'vn l'altro essorta, che le piante atterri,
E faccia al bosco inusitati oltraggi.
Caggion recise da'taglienti ferri,
Le sacre Palm, e i Frassini seluaggi,
I funebri Cipressi, e i Pini, e i Cerri.
L'Elci frondose, e gli alti Abeti, e i Faggi,
Gli Olmi mariti, a cui tal'hor s'appoggia
La Vite, e con pie torto al Ciel se'n poggia.
Altri i Tassi, e le Quercie altri percote,
Che mill volte rinouar le chiome:
E mill uolte ad ogni incontro immote
L'ire de'venti han rintuzzate, e dome.
Et altri impone a le stridenti rote
D'Orni, e di Ce dri l'odorate some.
Lasciano al suon de l'arme, al uario grido
E le Fere, e gli Augei la tana, e'l nido.
Il Fine del Terzo Canto.
THE FOVRTH SONG.
WHilst on so fair exploytes they bend their mind,
Which to effect use may employ with haste,
He that graund foe was aie to human kind,
His wannish eyes does on the Christians cast:
Whom for they joyful and contented find,
Both lips through rage he champs, and gnaweth fast:
And his fell grief, as some begoared Bull,
Roaring and sighing, out he belkes at full.
Then having tossed each devise in brain,
Which might the Christians wrap in wretched case,
He gives command that gathred be his train:
(A ghastly Senate) to his royal place,
As it were, O fool, attempt of easy pain,
Against the will divine to oppose thy face:
Fool, that compares with heavens, and forgeates
How Gods incenst right hand does thu^der threats.
The dwellers of the eternal shades he calls,
By hellish trumpet of hoarse iarring sound,
At such a dynne the wide dark vaulted walls,
All quake the misty thick air began rebound:
Nor whistling so the flash down ever falls
From upper regions of the sky to ground,
Nor shogged earth so ever bideth throws,
When big in womb she does the vapors close.
The Deities of the deep from all about,
In diverse troops soon meet at t'haughty gates,
How strangy shapes them (oh) how ugly clout?
What dread, what death in their fell eyes amates?
With savage insteps some the soil bestrout,
With locks of wrythed snakes some tire their pates:
A Dragging hugy tail their croupper binds,
Which as a rod often foldes and often vnwindes.
There thousands unclean Harpyes might you view,
And thousands Centaures, Sphinges, Gorgons pale,
And gulffy Scillaes an huge barcking crew:
There Serpents hiss, and Hidras whistle bale,
And sootie sparckles up Chimeras spew:
Eke Gerions, Poliphems an ugly tale*
And in new monsters not erst heard or seen,
Confusde and mixed in one hewes sundry been.
Part on the right, part on the left this band
Siedgeth it self, their wreakfull king before,
Pluto sits in the mids, and with right hand
His rusty weighty Scepter up he bore,
Not rock in sea so much, nor cragge at land,
Nor Calp or Atlas great high vaunceth more:
Yea matched with him they but as hillockes shoe,
So his great front, so his great horns up go.
In his fierce look an horred majesty
Increases terror, and more proud it makes,
Ruddy his eyes and plaguefull venomy:
His countenance as lucklesse Comete flakes,
A beard big, bushy, knotted gristelly:
From wrapped muzzle down his rough bosom strakes,
And as a gulf where bottom none is vewd,
He yawnes his jaws with clottie blood embrewd.
Like as the sulphur fumes encroaching flame,
And stink, and thunder up from Etna steeme,
From his fell mouth such blacky belches came,
And such the sent, and such the sparckles seem,
The helhounds barcking (while he spoke) became
Silent, his voice mute made men Hidra deem,
Cocytus flowed back the deepes appall,
When his loud roarings to these speeches fall.
You hellish powers, whose birthright should advance,
High boue the Sun your there deserved troane,
And whom from realms so blessed that great mischance
Erst to this ghastly den with me has thrown:
Both others old suspects and fierce vengeance,
And our brave onset over well are known,
At pleasure now on stars empyreth he,
And we as rebel souls condemned be.
And in the liew of fair and clearest day
Of gold-bright Sun, and of the faring stars,
In this dark depth he us confines to stay,
And from aspiring to erst honor bars,
Then (ah this thought how heavy does it way:
This it is which sharply wounds a new my skarres)
To those fair heavenly seats he man has cauld,
Vile man from vilest dirt on earth ycrauld.
Nor this suffizde, but did his Son betake
In pray to death to work our greater skath,
He came, and down the infernal gates he brake,
And in our kingdoms durst new tread a path,
And fetched the souls which lot our own did make,
And so rich spoils to sky conveyed has,
Triumphant victour, and us to upbraid
Of vanquished hell, th'ensignes he there displayed.
But why do I by speech revive my woe?
Who has not erst told of our wrongs the skore?
Where was the place? or who the time can shoe?
When ever he his used prankes forbore:
Our thoughts no longer back to the old must go,
But cast to cure more then one present sore:
Ah! see you not hither his drifts to fall,
That every Nation on his name may call?
Shall we still sluggards then waste day and hour?
Nor any worthy carke our courage wake?
And shall we brook that hourly greater power
His faithful people may in Asia take?
That Jury he subdew? that his honor,
And that his name more large and great he make?
That other tongs it sound? that other verse
It write? new brass and marble it rehearse?
That all our Idols down to the earth be thrown?
To him our alters by the world turned?
To him the vows vp-hangd? to him alone
All incense burnt? gold and mirrhe offered?
That where to us erst closde was temple none,
Now to our arts no way rest opened?
That of so many souls the wonted pay
Ceast? and an empty Realm Dan Pluto sway?
Ah be it far, of that first worth as yet
In you the sprites quite are not under brought,
When round with steel, and haughty flames beset,
Against celestial empire erst we fought,
We could (I not deny) no conquest get,
Yet valor did adorn so great a thought:
Be what it will that victory him gave,
Of hearts inuict we yet the glory have.
But why thus linger I? oh you my crew!
Go trusty on. oh you my power and might!
Go hasty on, and these caitiues subdew,
Ere their stoupt forces rise to higher flight,
Ere whole consumed be the Realm Hebrew,
Of this encroaching flame quench out the light:
Amongst them preace, and to their utter harm,
Now heds with wiles, now hands with forces arm.
My will shall dest'ny be dispersed, let some
A wandering walk, let slaughter some vprake,
Let some with carkes of fond love overcome,
A sweet glance, a coy smile, their Idol make,
Let weapons some against their leader clomme,
Let them grow mutinous, and parties take:
Let Camp with loss, and ruin be accloyd,
And even his marks rest with it self destroyed.
Gods rebel souls stay could no longer bar,
That these last words might sort unto an end,
But flying forth a new to view each star,
From their deep plunged might abroad they wend,
Much like the storms of broylly whistling jar,
Whom native caves forth from their intrayls send,
To dark the welkin and a war to band,
Against the great Realms, both of sea and land.
Full soon to sundry coasts with wings displaide,
These thorough the world made their diverse starts,
And of entrappings strange, and new they laid,
Sly framed plots, and began apply their arts:
But of their first annoyes (O Muse) me aid,
To show how source they took, and from what parts,
Thou wotst it well, fame brings thus far uneath,
Of so great works to us a feeble breath.
A famous noble wisard Hidraote
Ruled Damascus, and the Cities near,
Who from his youth to arts of uncouth note
Addict, did day by day them more endeere*
But whereto booted this, if they ne mote
Of these uncertain broils the issue clear?
Nor of the fixed or wandering stars th'aspect?
Nor hels swart cunning could to truth direct?
His judgment led, ah blindest human mind!
How vain and wrested wrong thy judgments are?
That to the Camp of western arms combinde
The sky sole death, and ruins did prepare,
So deeming Palm for this attempt assignde,
Should in the end fall to the Egyptians share:
He sought a portion on his people might,
Of victory and gains, and glory light.
But for Frankes valor high he holds in price,
And harms of bloody victory does fear,
He casts his penworths by some queint device,
The Christians force peecemeale-wise to impair,
So as them down more easly at a trice,
His and the Egyptians arms unite may bear:
In this conceit the Angel black him neeres,
And more him pricks, and more him onward steeres.
He counsel lends, and affords the means,
Which may to this exploit give easy pass,
There dwelt a wench whose peereles bewty steines
Each eastern Lady, and his Neice she was:
The cunningst spells, and fardest fetched treines,
Of witch or woman's skill well couth the less:
He her does call, he her of counsel makes,
And unto her the whole charge he betakes.
My dear he says, who under golden hair,
And with a look so delicate in show,
Do aged wit, and manly stomach bear:
And in mine own skils far my self outgo,
Thy seconding my huge conceived affeyre,
Will to our hopes cause glad successes flow.
Weaue thou the web begun by my device,
Of wary age as bold executrice.
Go to the enemies Camp, and there employ
Each woman's wile, which love may serve to slocke,
Let plants with prayres bedewd bear sweet alloy,
Let broken words with deep sighs entershocke,
Let doleful bewties pityed annoy,
Win to thy will even hearts of stiffest block:
Thy too much boldness shadow under shame,
And cloak of truth unto thy leazings frame.
Catch (if it may be) Godfrey with the train
Of thy sweet looks, and of thy speeches fair,
That war begun, the man's besotted brain
May loath, and it divert some other where:
If this fail others of the greatst enchaine,
And lead where all return they may despeire:
Then he his counsels sorts, and ends thus,
For faith and country naught misseemeth us.
The fair Armida priding in her hew,
And in th'endowments of her sex and age,
This charge takes on her, and as eu'ning drew,
Does part, and to close ways her steps engage:
Stout hearts she hopes, and armed hands to subdew
With her tresses, and wenches equippage:
But of her parting diverse tales are spread
By set device, t'amuze the peoples bed.
Within few days this Dame her journey ends,
There where the Frankes their large pauillions spread,
Whose beauty rare at his appearance lends:
Babbling to tongues and eyes a gazing led,
As when some Star or Comete strange ascends,
And in clear day through sky his beams does shed:
They flock in plumps this pilgrim fair to view,
And to be wizde what cause her thither drew.
Not Argos, Cyprus, Delos ere present,
Paternes of shape, or beauty could so dear,
Gold are her locks, which in white shadow pent,
Eft do but glimpse, eft all disclosde appear,
As when new clensde we see the element,
Sometimes the Sun shines through white cloud vncleere,
Sometimes from cloud out gone his rays more bright
He sheads abroad, dubling of day the light.
The wind new crisples makes in her loose hair,
Which nature self to waves recrispelled,
Her sparing look a coy regard does bear,
And loves treasures, and hers up wympelled,
Sweet Roses color in that visage fair,
With yuorie is sperst and mingelled,
But in her mouth whence breath of love out goes,
Ruddy alone and single bloomes the Rose.
Her bosom fair musters his naked snow,
Whence fire of love is nourisht and reuiues,
Her pappes bitter unripe in part do show,
And part th'enuious weed from sight depriues:
Envious, but though it close passage so
To eyes, loves thought unstaid yet farther strives:
Which outward bewty taking not for pay,
Even to his secrets hid endeeres a way.
As through water or Crystal sound the ray
Passes, and it deuides or parts not,
So piercing through her closed robe a way,
His daring thought to part forbodden got,
It roameth there, there true it does furuay,
Of so great maruailes part by part the plot:
Then to desire it tells, and it descriues,
And in his breast the flames more quick reuiues.
Eyed and praysd Armida past the while
Through the desirefull troops, and wist it well,
But makes no show, though in her heart she smile,
And there deseignes of spoils and conquests swell,
As thus some guide she craves with doubtful style,
For her safe conduct to the Coronel:
Eustace her meets, who claymes a brother-hed
In him, that chief those armed forces led.
As Fly at flame, so he about turned
At the brightness of this beauty divine,
And near those lights to view he covered,
Whom modest fashion sweetly can incline,
And cought great flame, and close it fostered,
As neered tinder does the sparckle shrine:
And to her said: for heart and hardiment
The heat of years, and love unto him lent.
Lady, if you at least so base a name
Beseem, who nothing earthly represent,
Nor ever skies on daughter of Adame,
Of their fair light so large a treasure spent.
What is it you seek? whence is it that you came?
What fortune yours, or ours you hither bent?
Make me know who you are, make me not miss
To yield you right, and do what reason is.
Your praise too lofty mounts, she answering says,
Nor to such height our merit can arrive:
You see one Sir, not subject sole to death,
But dead to joy, only to woe alive:
My hard mis-hap me hither carries,
A pilgrim maiden poor and fugitive:
I seek good Godfrey, and in him affy,
Such fame about does of his bounty fly.
Do you to Captain mine access obtain,
If kind and courteous (as you seem) you be,
That to the one the the other brothers pain
You guide, and him entreat it is meet, quoth he,
Fair maid you have not made recourse in vain,
Nor in the meanest grace he holds me:
At your best liking all is yours to spend,
What so his Scepter, or my sword my friend.
He ends and guides her where good Bulleyn stald
Twixt Worthies great, stolen from the vulgar was,
Lowly she bends, and with shame appald,
No word from out her lips could win a pass:
But those blushings the Champion recald
To boldness, and from fear assurde the less;
So as conceived harms she vnfoldes at last,
With tune which senses in sweet fetters cast:
Victorious Prince (she said) whose greatest name
With so rich furniture adorned flies,
That Kings and Countries, whom subdew and tame
Thou do in war it as their glory praise:
Well is thy valor known, and as the same
Is loved and praysd even by thine enemies:
So it affies, and them inuites again
Aid at thy hands to beg and to obtain.
And I borne in a faith so wide from thine,
As it thou quaylst, and now seek'st to oppress;
Yet hope by thee that noble seat of mine;
And parents royal mace to repossesse:
And where kynnes, and others to crave incline
Against strangers fury, which works their distress:
I, since in them dew pity bears no stroke,
Against my blood mine enemies arms inuoke.
On thee I call, in thee I hope alone,
In height (whence I was thrown) thou can me place
Nor ought thy right hand show it self less prone,
Me to vp-rayse, then others to abase,
Nor yet less praise does vaunt of pity own,
Then when triumphant thou gieu'st en'my chase:
And as thou could their realms from many rend,
So mine restord will equal glory lend.
But if our diverse faith perhaps thee move
Mine honest prayre to scorn, let faith professed
Sole on thy pity to rely approve
My suit, twere hard it should deluded rest,
Witness (O God) like good to all above,
Your iuster aid to none was ever pressed:
But that the whole may in your knowledge fall,
Here my mis-haps, and others frauds withal.
I daughter am to Arbylan, that raygn'd
On fair Damascus, though of meanly race:
But he Cariclia fair to spowse obtained,
And she him graced with the imperial mace:
On her fell death well near the mastry gained,
Ere I had birth, for she did it embrace,
As I forsook her womb, one fatal day
Does death to her, and me to life convey.
But the fifth year had scarce fulfild his date,
From time that she her mortal veil off threw,
When as my father yielding unto fate,
In heaven perhaps with her allyde anew,
Leaving the charge of me, and of the state
To brother, whom he bare a love so true:
As if goodness in mortal breast remain,
He might be sure of his true faith again.
He then thus to my government ordaynd,
Of my well-doing mustred such a care;
As price and praise he wanne of faith vnstaynd,
And of a fathers love and kindness rare;
Weart that his inward thought with malice staynd,
Then under other cloak conceyld he bare;
Or that his will as yet just meaning led,
Because he meant me with his son to wed.
I grew, and his son grew, but never ought
Of knightly parts, or noble arts he reakes,
Nothing that's rare, no gentleman like thought
Buside his head, nor too much wit it breaks,
Under deformed shape he a mind of naught,
And proud heart bare, addict to gluttish freakes,
In clownish acts, and fashions such an elfe,
As sole for vices he could match himself.
Now my good guardein, with so brave a mate
In wedlockes bonds resolves me fast to knit,
And him of bed, and of my royal state
Consort to make, and often he told me it:
He used his tongue, and trains he used his pate,
That wished effect might to his purpose fit:
Yet could he never me to promise sway,
But sour still held my peace, or gave a nay.
At last he parts with look dark clouded so,
As clear there through his fellon heart shined,
And well the story of my future woe,
In his forehead (me seemed) I written red,
Then were my night rests, when to couch I go,
With strange dreams still and bugbeares troubelled,
And in my soul a fat all horror pight,
Was of my harms a halsner over right.
My mothers ghoast did often it self present,
A paly image, and of doleful plight,
Alas! how far from that hew different?
Which elsewhere purtrayd erst had pleased my sight:
Fly daughter, fly thy now, now imminent
And cruel death, (she said) make speedy flight:
I see (lo poison) to thy wrack preparde
By the fell tyrant, and his weapon barde.
But what auaylde it; ah! that such presage
Of neering peril warning gave my mind,
If that surprizde with fear my tender age,
All unresolved could no nothing bind,
My flight to wilful exile to engage;
And naked leave my native Realm behind:
So grievous seemed as less I reckoned
Eyes there to close, where first I opened.
Alas! I feared death, and yet (who ere
Wist of the like) had not the heart to fly?
A frayd I was even to disclose my fear,
Least haste might life sooner to death affy;
So restless and turmoyld my days out wear
In never ceasing martyrdom did I,
Like him that looks each stond with bared neck,
When cruel axe shall his lives warrant check:
In such my state, were it my friendly hap,
Or that for worse, me on my destny led,
One, whom in Court, even from his mothers lap,
In near service my father up had bred,
To me bewrayes that of my fatal clap
Approcht the time, by tyrant limited,
And that self day he promisde had the beast
By poisoning me to complish his beheast.
And farther adds, that of my running days,
I only could prolong the course by flight:
And since I hopte for aid none other ways,
Prompt his own pains unto my help he plight,
Whose comforts so my drooping courage raise,
As bit of fear lost his restrayning might:
And I resolved that night with him to go,
Flying mine Uncle and my Country fro.
Vprose the night more dark then wonted was,
Whose well befriending shadows us protect,
So safely forth with damsels twain I pass,
For my down fallen fortune mates elect,
But back to Country walls mine eyes, alas!
Bayned with tears, I turning often direct:
Nor ever of my native soil the sight,
Me thoroughly satisfy at parting might.
The eye and thought both walked back that way,
The foot much against his liking forward went,
Like ship from loved shore, where safe it lay,
Which some fierce sudden storm has wrackful rent,
That night we farde, and all th'ensewing day,
Through couerts where step erst was never bent:
And to a Castle we arrived at last;
Upon the confines of my kingdom plast.
Aront the Castle ownd, Aront his name
Was, who me drew and kept this peril fro:
But when the traitor saw the deadly frame
Of his wiles fallen, and me escaped so,
Kindled with rage his own deserved blame,
On our two backs he labors back to throw:
And us to charge with that mis-doing sought,
Which he himself against me would have wrought.
He says how Aront I with gifts did bribe,
To spice his cup with juice enuenomed,
That he once gone, none might thenceforth prescribe
A law, or rain my will vnbridelled;
And then would hoyting wanton to a tribe
Of loves my body have abandoned;
Ah! first let flame from sky on me descend,
Sacred virtue, ere I thy laws offend.
That hungry teene of gold, and thirst withal
Of mine vnharmefull blood her fell has cought,
It sorely grieves, yet more my heart does gall,
That my clear honor he to blemish sought,
The wretch whom fears of peoples brunt appall,
With such embellishment his leasings wrought,
That doubtful of the troth, and in suspense,
The town rose not in arms for my defense.
Nor for he now is stalled in my seat,
And on his crown my royal Crown does shine,
An end unto my shame and harms so great,
His still on pricking fiercenes will assign:
But Aront in his fort to burn does threat,
Unless in prison up himself he shrine;
And to my consorts, and poor soul to me,
Not war, but wracks, and deaths denounces he.
This he pretends to do, as if he thought,
So from his face to wash away the shame;
And to restore dew place, whence I it rought,
To th'onour of my blood and princely name:
But fear it causde, least Scepter might be cought,
Him fro, I being true heir to the same:
For only if I fall, a settled stay
Plant on my ruins for his rain he may.
And even such end will iump with fell desire,
Whereto the tyrants mind is fully bent,
And by my blood shall quenched be his ire,
Which at my tears would never yet relent:
If thou let not, to thee I fly (O Sire)
A wench, a wretch, orphane, and innocent:
Let this plaint, which mine eyes shed at thy feet,
Veil me that blood from veins not also fleet.
By these legs which the proud and lewd down tread,
By this hand which assisteth aie the right,
By thine high victories, and by the aid,
Thou have, and do those holy temples plight,
Do thou my suit, that sole art able, stead;
Let both to life, and Realm thy pity dight:
One help for all yet void let pity be;
If right and reason also move not thee.
Thou whom the sky granted, and gave in fate
To will what is just, and what thou will t'obtaine,
May save my life, and win thy self a state,
For thine it shall be, if it I regaine,
Ten only Champions of the brauest rate,
I seek to cull amidst so great a train:
For with my fathers friends and subjects true,
The'yll serve to roost me in my nest a new.
Yea more one of the chief, whose loyaltee
With guard is trusted of a secret port:
It promises by night to d'ope, and me
Into his palace let, and does exhort
That only some small aid I beg of thee;
And thereon more rely for sound comfort:
Then if I had huge troup of other freakes,
So much thine ensign, and sole name he reakes.
This said, she peac'd, and his answer attends,
In act which silent does both speak and pray:
Godfrey his doubtful mind tossing suspends
Twixt diverse thoughts, ne wots which side to sway;
He dreads Barbarians wiles, and well comprends;
Man finds no faith where God receives a nay:
But the other side a mild ruth him awakes,
Which in a worthy mind sleep never takes:
Nor sole his native pity used tofore,
Wills that her of helpefull grace he deygne,
But profit moves him eke for profit store,
It Will bring that in Damascus such do reygne,
As may on him depend, and open the door,
And plain the path to every his deseigne:
And men may minister, and arms, and gold
Against the Egyptians* and his party hold.
Whilst doubtful thus his look on ground he bends,
And in deep thought reuolues, and tosseth carkes,
The Dames fixed eye on his countnance depends,
And all his acts observes, and heedy marks,
And for delay time past her deeming spends,
With fears and sighs she for his answer harkes:
At last the craved grace he her denies,
But th'answere gave in kind and gentle wise.
If in Gods service, who us thereto chose,
Our swords were not employed here to be;
On them you safely might your hope repose,
And you not pity sole, but aid would we:
But till that these his flocks, and till that those
Oppressed walls we turn to liberty,
It is not just that forces sent away,
On course of victory we thwart a stay.
I promise, yet do you my faith receive
As noble pawn, and safe thereon rely;
If ever we may yoke unworthy reaue
From those walls sacred, and most dear to sky,
As pity bids us we no care will leave,
To win again your forlorn sovereignty:
But pity now my piety would blot,
If first his right to God I render not.
At this speech down the Lady cast, and stayed
Her eyes on the earth, and stood unmoved a space,
Then them bedewed, up she lifts, and said,
Accompaning her plaint with ruefull grace,
Ah wretch on whom has sky else ever laid
A life so grievous, and vnchangde to trace?
That others nature rather change, and mind,
Then my hard fortune should a changing find.
No farther hope is left, I wayle in vain,
In human breast prayers have no longer force:
How may I think the tyrant fell my pain
Will rue, which could in thee work no remorse?
Yet will I not of thy hard heart complain,
Which from my help does this small aid divorce:
But plaint against heaven my harms cause address,
Which makes in thee even pity pitilesse.
Not you my Lord, not such is your bounty,
But it is my dest'ny, which me aie denies;
Dest'ny dismal, fell fatal destiny,
Yield eke my hated life to death a prize:
Was it (aye me) a slender injury,
To close in youths flower my dear parents eyes?
That thou must also see my kingdom rest?
And thrald to th'axe as sacrifice me left?
For since of virtues, law the dew respect
Brooks not, that here I trifle longer stay,
Where shall I fly the while? who shall protect?
What ah yield refuge against the tyrant may?
No place is under sky so closely decked,
Which gold not opes: then why do I delay?
Death preast I see, which since to fly is vain,
This hand shall go, and fetch and entertain.
There silenced she, and seemed a disdain
Royal, and noble flamed in her face:
Then turning steps, she shows to part again,
With port all framde to sad despiteous grace,
Her ceaselesse moan in such a tune does plain,
As is begot when wrath and woe embrace*
And her newborn tears for they to see,
Against sunny rays, Crystal and pearl be.
Her cheeks with those life humors sprinckelled,
Which trickling dropped down on her vestures hemme,
Seemed entermingled roses white and red;
If so a dewy cloud do water them,
When to calm breath their closed lap they spread,
What time first peered dawning takes his stem,
And morn which them beholds and in them joys,
Proud with their ornament her locks accoyes.
But that clear humor which embellisheth
Her bosom and fair cheeks with drops so thick,
Works the effect of fire, and close creeps
Into a thousand breasts, and there does stick:
O miracle of love! which sparckes draws
From tears, and hearts in water kindles quick
With flames, past nature still his power extends,
But in her virtue boue it self ascends.
This fained sorrow drew from many a freake
True tears, and hearts vnstoand most hardened,
Each with her walls, and to himself does speak,
By Godfreys ruth if thy suit be not sped,
His nurse some raging Tygre was, and eake
On rugged Alps some hideous cragge him bred;
Or some sea wave which breaks, and froth vpcastes,
Fell man that broils, and such a beauty wastes.
But Eustace gallant youth, whom fiery brand
Of pity and of love, more fervent fride;
Whiles each else mutters, or does silent stand,
Steps forth, and tongue to these bold words allide,
My Lord and brother, with too straight a band
Your stiff mind is to your first purpose tide,
If joint consent, which does entreat and pray,
To plyant bent, it somewhat cannot sway.
I say not that the Princes, who their care
Owe to these troops, as they to them their awe,
Should from this siedge with steps backe-turned fare,
Or from their duty their regard withdraw:
But among our selves, who Knights aduentrous are,
Deuoyde of proper charge, nor bent to law,
That others underly you safely might
Cull out some ten to patronize her right.
For from Gods service not bereft is he,
Who does a Virgin innocent defend,
And dear those spoils unto the heavens be,
Which of a slaughtred Tyrant any send:
If then to this attempt the profit me
Not swayd, which thence assured we attend:
Yet duty would me move by duties right,
Our order does our aid to Ladies plight.
Ah be it far (for-god) that any say,
In France or where-so else reigns courtesy,
That for a cause, which on a ground does stay
So just, and good, peril or pain we fly,
My self here down my helm and curets lay;
Here I my sword vngird, nor more will I
My Courser manage, nor bear arms in fight,
Nor ear henceforth usurp the name of Knight.
So spoke he, and with him his fellows all,
Concording iangle in a shrilly sound,
And his advice bootfull and good they call,
And Captain press with prayers, and around
I yield, then said he, me vanquish shall
So manies concourse, so together bound:
Grant we her boon, if so your will incline,
But be it your advice, and none of mine.
But if that Godfreys credit ought you prize,
Some measure yet on your affections place:
This sole he spoke, and this can them suffize,
For what he granted, each began soon embrace:
Now what work not a fair Dames pewling eyes?
And in tongue amarous words honey grace?
From her sweet lips issues a golden chain,
Which souls does captive, and at pleasure rain.
Eustace her calls back, and cease (he says)
Lady of beauty, this your drooping cheer,
For we will yield such, and within few days,
As for your fear shall more then just appear:
Armida then vnshrowdes her cloudie rays,
And countnance does with such a smile endeere,
As her beauty enamoureth the skies,
Whilst with her precious veil she wipes her eyes*
Her self then yeeldes she in notes dearly sweet,
Grateful for so large graces they bestow,
Which printed in her heart thence never fleet;
But them for ever shall the world know:
And what the tongue to express appears unmeet,
Dumb eloquence does in her gestures show,
And close she hides under borow'd look,
That thought whereof no one suspicion took.
Then seeing fortune favor with a smile
The great beginning of her fraudfull parts,
Ere her conceit be forced to vary style,
This wicked work she will end, and more then th'arts
Of Circe or Medea could beguile:
Her sweet shows and fair looks shall beizle hearts,
And with well tuned voice of Sirens kind,
A slumber cast on the most wakefull mind.
The wench each art employes so to infold
Some new-come lover with out-spreaded net,
Nor always, nor withal self look does hold,
But changde on face, and grace in season set,
Sometimes her basht eye seems by shame controld,
Sometimes with wishfull roules abroad to iet,
With these the rod, with those she plyes the bit,
As for their swift or slow love seems fit.
When any soul she from her love espies
Retire, and thoughts to bridle by despeires,
To him kind smile she opes, to him her eyes
Sweet blinck, loves message clear and cheery bears,
The dastard sluggardly desires thus wise
She spurs, and doubtful hope t'affiance reares,
And kindling flames in wills enamored,
Thaweth the ice by frozen fear ybred.
Again to some who hardly ouergo
Dew bounds, led by their Chieftaine rash and blind,
Sweet looks and lovely words more sparely flow,
Whilst fear to reu'rence does them prentise bind,
Yet when disdain her countnance changed so,
Glimpsing therethrough some ray of pity shind,
That fear they may, but not despair they need,
And she more longing does more stately breed.
Somewhile she gets her self elsewhere a part,
And fashions frames, and does a visage feign,
As woe begun, and from her eyes out-start
Forced tears full often, which in she draws again,
The whiles to weep in deed by such her art,
A thousand simple souls she does constrain,
And shafts of love seasons in pities fire,
That arms so strong may heart give death to hire.
Then as she would stealing away beguile
Those thoughts, and new hope did awake her mind,
Toward her lovers bent she steps and style,
And in joys seemly weed her face she shrinde,
And her bright hew and fair celestial smile,
Seemed as a double Sun, that gleaming shinde,
On thick and mystie clouds of sorrow sad,
Which bout their breasts tofore it gathred had.
But whiles she sweetly speaks, and laughes sweetly,
And with this twofold sweetness luls the sense,
Well near she makes the soul from body fly,
As against so rare delites void of defense,
Ah cruel love that slayth us equally,
Where wormwood thou, or honey do dispense,
And equal deadly at all seasons be
Mischiefs and medcines, which proceed of thee.
Twixt tempers crossing thus in frost and flame,
In plaint and laughter, and midst hope and fear,
The wily wench them makes her gleefull game,
And more her state does to assurance rear,
And if some one dare tongue all trembling frame,
With hoarse voice witness of his pains to bear,
She faines as one vnskild in lovers trade,
Not see the mind whose words it ouert made.
Or she her shamefast, and down clyned eyes
With tire and taint of honesty embowres,
So as her gayest verdure vayled lies
Under the Rose, which her fair face beflowres,
As at first birth we see the morning rise,
In his fresh blooming, and betimely hours,
And blush of scorn fellowd with that of shame,
Forth both at once, mixed and confused came.
But if she any by his fashions spy,
Bent to reueile his hearts in burning pain,
Now steal and fly him fro, now means supply
Of speech she does, and straight them reaues again,
So tyrde and skornd all day he treads awry,
And at the last his hope she chops a twain,
Like hunter that at eu'ning leeseth view
Of Dear, whom long in chase he did pursew.
These were the arts, with which she could surprise
A thousand thousand souls by theeuish trade,
Rather the arms with which in robbing wise,
To force of love them humble slaves she made;
What marvel then if fierce Achilles lies,
Or Hercules or Theseus to blade,
Of love a pray, if who for Christ it draw;
The naughtie-packe sometimes do catch in paw.
The end of the fourth Song.
CANTO QARTO
MENTRE fan questi i bellici stromenti
Perch debbiano tosto in vso porse,
Il gran Nemico de l'humane genti,
Contra i Christiani i liuidi occhi torse:
E lor veggendo a le bell' opre intenti,
Ambo le labra per furor si morse:
E, qual Tauro ferito, il suo dolor
Verso mugghiando, e sospirando fuore.
Quinci hauendo pur tutto il pensier volto
Arecar ne'Christiani vltima doglia,
Che sia, comanda, il popol suo raccolto
(Concilio horrendo) entro la regia soglia:
Quasi che sia leggiera impresa (ahi stolto)
Il repugnare a la diuina uoglia:
Stolto, ch'a Dio s'agguaglia, e in oblio pone,
Come di Dio la destra irata tuone.
Chiama gli habitator de l'ombre eterne
Il rauco suon de la tartarea tromba.
Treman le spatiose atre cauerne,
Et l'aer cieco a quel romor rimbomba.
Ne stridendo cosi da le superne
Regioni del Cielo il folgor piomba:
Ne si scossa giamai trema la Terra,
Quando i vapori in sen grauida serra.
Tosto gli Dei d'Abisso in vary torme
Concorron d'ogn'intorno a l'alte port.
O come strane, o come horribil form:
Quant'e ne gli occhi lor terrore, e morte.
Stampano alcuni il suol di ferine orme,
E'n fro^te humana han chiome d'angui attorte,
E lor s'aggira dietro immensa coda,
Che quasi sferza si ripiega, e snoda.
Qui mill immonde Arpie vedresti, e mill
Centauri, e Sfingi, e pallide Gorgoni:
Molte, e molte latrar voraci Scille,
E fischiar Hidre, e sibilar Pitoni:
E vomitar Chimere atre fauille,
E Polifemi horrendi, e Gerioni:
E in noui mostri, e non piu intesi, o visti
Diuersi aspetti in un confusi, e misti.
D'essi part a sinistra, e part a destra
A seder vanno al crudo Re douante.
Siede Pluton nel mezo, e non la destra
Sostien lo scettro ruuido, e pesante.
Ne tanto scoglio in mar, ne rupe alpestra,
Ne pur Calpe s'innalza, o'l magno Atlante,
Ch'anzi lui non paresse un picciol colle,
Si la gran front, e le gran corna estolle.
Horrida maesta nel fero aspetto
Terrore accresce, e piu superbo il rende.
Rosseggian gli occhi, e di veneno infetto,
Come infausta Cometa, il guardo splende*
Gli inuolue il mento, e su l'irsuto petto
Hispida, e folta la gran barba scende:
E, in guisa di voragine profonda,
S'apre la bocca, d'atro sangue immonda.
Qual' i fumi sulfurei, and infiammati
Escon di Mongibello, e'l puzzo, e'l tuono;
Tal de la fera bocca i negri fiati,
Tale il fetore, e le fauille sono.
Mentre ei parlaua, Cer bero i latrati
Ripresse, e l'Hidra si fe muta al suono:
Resto Cocito, e ne tremar gli Abissi:
E in questi detti il gran rimbombo udissi.
Tartarei Numi, di seder piu degni
La soura il Sole, ond'e l'origin vostra,
Che meco gia da i piu felici Regni
Spinse il gran caso in questa horribil chiostra;
Gli antichi altrui sospetti, e i fieri sdegni
Noti son troppo, e l'alta impresa nostra.
Hor colui regge a suo uoler le stelle,
E noi si am giudicate Alme rubelle.
Et in uece del di sereno, e puro,
De l'aureo Sol, de gli stellati giri,
N ha qui rinchiusi in questo abisso oscuro,
Ne uuol, ch'al primo honor per noi s'aspiri.
E poscia (ahi quanto a ricordarlo e duro,
Questo e quel che piu inaspra i miei martiri)
Ne bei seggi celesti ha l'huom chiamato:
L'huom uile, edi uil fango in terra nato.
Ne cio gli parue assai: ma in preda a Morte,
Sol per farne piu danno, il figlio diede.
Ei uenne, e ruppe le Tartaree port,
E porre oso ne'Regni nostri il piede,
E trarne l'alme a noi deuute in sort,
E riportarne al Ciel si ricche prede
Vincitor trionfando: e in nostro scherno
L'insegne iui spiegar del uinto Inferno.
Ma, che rinouo i miei dolor par lando?
Chi non ha gia le ingiurie nostre intese?
Et in qual part si trouo, ne quando,
Ch'egli cessasse da l'usate imprese?
Mon piu dessi a l'antiche andar pensando,
Pensar debbiamo a le presenti offese.
Deh non uedete homai, come egli tenti
Tutte al suo culto richiamar le genti?
Noi trarrem neghittosi i giorni, e l'hore,
Ne degna cura fia, che'l corn'accenda:
E soffrirem, che forza ogn'hor maggiore
Il suo popol Fedele in Asia prenda?
E che Giudea soggioghi, e che'l suo honor,
Che'l nome suo piu si dilati, estenda?
Che suoni in altre lingue, e in altri carmi
Si scriua, e incida in noui bronzi, e in marmi?
Che sian gl'Idoli nostri a terra sparsi?
Che i nostri altari il Mondo a lui conuerta?
Ch'a lui sospesi i uoti, a lui sol' arsi
Siano gl'Incensi, and Auro, e Mirra offerta?
Ch'oue a noi Tempio non solea serrarsi,
Hor uia non resti a l'arti nostre aperta?
Che di tant' Alme il solito tributo
Ne manchi, e in uoto Regno alberghi Pluto?
Ah non fia uer, che non sono anco estinti
Gli spirti in uoi di quel ualor primiero,
Quando di ferro, e d'alte fiamme cinti
Pugnammo gia contra il celeste Impero.
Fummo (io no'l nego) in quel conflitto uinti:
Pur non manco uirtute al gran pensiero.
Die de che che si fosse a lui uittoria:
Rimase a noi d'inuitto ardir la gloria.
Ma perch piu u'indugio? Itene, o miei
Fidi consorti, o mia potenza, e forze,
Ite ueloci, and opprimete i rei,
Prima che'l lor poter piu si rinforze,
Priache tutt'arda il Regno de gli Hebrei,
Questa fiamma crescete homai s'ammorze.
Fra loro entrate, e in ultimo lor danno
Hor la forza s'adopri, and hor l'inganno.
Sia destin cio, ch'io uoglio. altridisperso
Se'n uada errando: altri rimanga ucciso:
Altri in cure d'Amor lasciue immerso
Idol si faccia un dolce sguardo, e un riso:
Sia'l ferro incontro al suo Rettor conuerso
Da lo stuol ribellante, e'nse diuiso:
Pera il Campo, e ruini, eresti in tutto
Ogni uestigio suo con lui distrutto.
Non aspettar gia l'alme a Dio rubelle,
Che fosser queste voci al fin condotte;
Ma fuor volando, a riueder le stelle
Gia se n'vscian da la profonda notte,
Come sonanti, e torbide procelle,
Che uengan fuor de le natie lor grotte
Ad oscurar il Cielo, a portar guerra
A igran Regni del mare, e de la terra.
Tosto, spiegando in vari lati i vanni,
Si furon questi per lo Mondo sparti:
E'n cominciaro a fabricar inganni
Diuersi e noui, and ad vsar lor arti.
Ma di tu Musa, come i primi danni
Mandassero a i Christiani, e di quai parti,
Tu'l sai, e di tant'opra a noisi lunge.
Debil'aura di fama a pena giunge.
Reggea Damosco, e le Citta vicine
Hidraote famoso, e nobil Mago:
Che sin da'suoi prim'anni a l'indouine
Arti si diede, e ne fu ogn'hor piu vago.
Ma che giouar, se non pote del fine
Di quella incerta guerra esser presago?
Ned aspetto di stelle erranti, o fisse,
Ne risposta d'Inferno il ver predisse.
Giudico questi (Ahi cieca humana mente
Come i giudicij tuoi son vani, e torti)
Ch'a l'essercito inuitto d'Occidente
Apparecchiasse il Ciel ruin, e morti:
Pero, credendo, che l'Egittia gente
La palma de l'impresa al fin riporti,
Desia, che'l popol suo ne la vittoria
Sia de l'acquisto a part, e de la gloria.
Ma, perch ilualor Franco ha in grande stima
Di sanguigna vittoria i danniteme:
E va pensando, con qual' art in prima
Il poter de'Christiani in part sceme:
Si, che piu ageuolmente indi s'opprima
Da le sue genti, e da l'Egittie insieme.
In questo suo pensier il sour agiunge
L'Angelo iniquo, e piu l'instiga, e punge.
Esso il consiglia, e gli ministra i modi,
Onde l'impresa ageuolar si puote.
Donna, a cui di belta le prime lodi
Concedea l'Oriente, e sua Nepote.
Gli accorgimenti, e le piu occulte frodi,
Ch'usi o femina, o Maga, a lei son note.
Questa a se chiama, e seco i suoi consigli
Comparte, e uuol, che cur a ella ne pigli.
Dice. o diletta mia, che sotto biondi
Capelli, e fra si tenere sembianze
Canuto senno, e cor uirile ascondi,
Egia ne l'arti mie me stesso auanze;
Gran pensier uolgo, e se tu lui secondi,
Seguir anno gli effetti a le speranze:
Tessi la tela, ch io ti mostro ordita,
Di cauto vecchio essecutrice ardita.
Vanne al Campo nemico: iui s'impieghi
Ogn'arte feminil, ch'Amore alletti.
Bagna di pianto, e fa melati preghi:
Tronca, e confondi co'sospiri i detti.
Belta dolente, e miserabil pieghi
Al tuo uolerei piu ostinati petti:
Vela il souerchio ardir con la uergogna,
Of a manto del uero a la menzogna.
Prendi (s'esser potra) Goffredo a l'esca
De'dolci sguardi, e de'bei detti adorni:
Si ch'al'huomo inuaghito homai rincresca
L'incominciata guerra, e la distorni.
Se cio non puoi, gli altri piu grandi adesca:
Menagli in part, on d'alcun may non torni.
Poi distingue i consigli: al fin le dice.
Per la Fe, per la Patria il tutto lice.
Labella Armida di sua forma altera,
E de'doni del sesso, e de l'etate,
L'impresa prende: e in su la prima sera
Par^e, e tiene soluie chiuse, e celate:
L'n treccia, e'n gonna faminile spera
Vincer popoli inuitti, e schiere armate.
Ma son del suo partir tra'l uulgo ad art
Diverse uoci poi diffuse, e sparte.
Dopo non molti di uien la donzella,
Dove spiegate i Franchi hauean le tend.
A l'apparir de la belta nouella
Nasce un bisbiglio, e'l sguardo ogn'un u'in tend
Si come la, dove Cometa, o Stella,
Non piu uista di giorno in Ciel risplende:
E traggon tutti per ueder chi sia
Si bella peregrina, e chi l'inuia.
Argo non may, non uide Cipro, o Delo
D'habito, o di belta form si care.
D'auro ha la chioma, and hor dal bianco uelo
Traluce inuolta, hor discoperta appare.
Cosi qual'hor si rasserena il Cielo,
Hor da candida nube il Sol traspare;
Hor da la nube uscendo, i raggi intorno
Piu chiari spiega, e ne raddoppia il giorno.
Fa noue crespe l'aura al crin disciolto,
Che Natura per se rincrespa in onde,
Stassi l'auaro sguardo in se raccolto,
Ei tesori d'Amore, ei suoi nasconde.
Dolce color dirose in quel bell uolto
Fra l'auorio si sparge, e si confonde:
Ma ne la bocca, ond'esce aura amorosa,
Sola rosseggia, e semplice la rosa.
Mostra il bell petto le sue neui ignude,
Onde il foco d'Amor si nutre, e desta.
Part appar de le mamme acerbe, e crude,
Part altrui ne ricopre inuida uesta.
Inuida, ma, s'a gli occhi il uarco chiude,
L'amoroso pensier gia non arresta:
Che non ben pago di bellezza esterna.
Ne gli occulti secreti anco s'interna.
Come per acqua, o per cristallo intero
Trapassa il raggio, e no'l divide, o part;
Per entro il chiuso manto osa il pensiero
Si penetrar ne la uietata part.
Iui si spatia, iui contempla iluero
Di tante merauiglie a part, a part:
Posci al desio le narra, e le descriue,
E ne fa le sue fiamme in lui piu uiue.
Lodata passa, e uagheggiata Armida
Fra le cupide turbe, se n'auuede.
No'l mostra gia, benche in suo cor ne rida,
E ne disegni alte vittorie, e prede.
Mentre sospesa alquanto alcuna guida,
Che la conduca al Capitan, richiede;
Eustatio occorse a lei, che del sourano
Principe de le squadre era germano.
Come al lume Farfalla, ei si riuolse
A lo splendour de la belta diuina:
E rimirar da presso i lumi volse,
Che dolcemente atto modesto inchina:
E ne trasse gran fiamma, e la raccolse,
Come da foco suolse esca vicina:
E disse verso lei, ch'audace, e baldo
Il fea de gli anni, e de l'amore il caldo.
Donna, se pur tal nome a te conuiensi:
Che non simigli tu cosa terrena:
Nev'e figlia d'Adamo, in cui dispensi
Cotanto il Ciel di sua luce serena;
Che da te si ricerca? and onde viensi?
Qual tua uentura, o nostra, hor qui ti mena?
Fa, ch'io sappia, chi sei: fa, ch'ia non erri
Ne l'honorarti, e s'e ragion, m'atterri.
Risponde. il tuo lodar troppo alto sale:
Ne tanto in suso il merto nostro arriua.
Cosa vedi Signor, non pur mortale,
Ma gia morta a i diletti, al duol sol viua.
Mia sciagura mi spinge in loco tale
Vergine peregrina, e fuggitiua.
Ricorro alpio Goffredo, e in lui confido,
Talua di sua bontate intorno il grido.
Tu l'adito m'impetra al Capitano,
S'hai, come pare, alma cortese, e pia.
Et egli. e ben ragion, ch'a l'vn germano
L'altro ti guidi, e intercessor ti sia,
Vergine bella, non ricorri in vano:
Non e vile appe lui la gratia mia.
Spender tutto potrai, come t'aggrada,
Cio, che vaglia il suo scettro, o la mia spada.
Tace, e la guida, oue trai grandi Heroi
All'hor dal vulgo ilpio Buglion s'inuola.
Essa in chinollo riuerente, e poi
Vergognosetta non facea parola;
Ma quei rossor, ^a quei timori suoi
Rassecura il Guerriero, e riconsola,
Si che i pensati inganni al fine spiega
In suon, che di dolcezza i sensi lega.
Principe inuitto (disse) il cui gran nome
Se'n vola adorno di si chiarifregi,
Che l'esser date vinte, e in guerra dome.
Recansi a gloriale Prouincie, e i Regi.
Noto per tutto e iltuo valor, e come
Sin da i nemici auuien, che s'ami, e pregi,
Cosi anco i tuoi nemici affida, e inuita
Di ricercarti, e d'impetrarne aita.
Et io, che nacqui in si diuersa feed,
Che tu abbassasti, e c'hor d'opprimer tenti,
Per te spero acquistar la nobil sede,
E lo scettro regal de miei parenti.
E s'altri aita a i suoi congiunti chiede
Contra il furor de le straniere genti;
Io, poi che'n lor non ha pieta piu loco,
Contra il mio sangue il ferro hostile inuoco,
Te chiamo, and in te spero re in quell' altezza
Puoi tu sol pormi, onde sospinta io fui.
Ne la tua destra esser dee meno auuezza
Di solleuar, che d'atterrar' altrui:
Nemeno il vanto di pieta si prezza,
Che'l trionfar de gli auuersari sui;
E s'hai potuto a molti il Regno torre,
Fia gloria egual nel Regno hor me riporre.
Ma se la nostra Fe variati move
A disprezzar forse i miei preghi honesti,
Lafe, c'ho certa in tua pieta, mi gioue:
Ne dritto par, ch'ella delusa resti.
Testimone e quel DIO, ch'a tutti e Gioue,
Ch'altrui piu giusta aita vnqua non desti.
Ma perch il tutto apieno intenda, hor odi
Le mie suenture insieme, e l'altrui frodi.
Figlia i son d'Arbilan, che'l freno ten
Del bell Damaso, e in minor sort nacque,
Ma la bella Cariclia in sposa ottenne,
Cui farlo hercde del suo Regno piacque.
Costei co'l suo morir quasi peruenne
Il nascer mio, che'n tempo estinta giacque,
Ch'io fuori vscia de l'aluo: e fu ilfatale
Giorno, ch'a lei die morte, a me natale.
Ma il primo lustro a pena era varcato
Dal di, ch'ella spogliossi il mortal velo;
Quando il mio Genitor, cedendo al Fato*
Forse con lei si ricongiunse in Cielo:
Di me cura lassando, e de lo stato
A fratel, ch'egli amo con tanto zelo,
Che, se in petto mortal pieta risiede,
Essar certo deuea de la sua feed.
Preso dunque di me questi il gouerno
Vago d'ogni mio ben si mostro tanto,
Che d'incorrottafe, d'amor paterno,
E d'immensa pietade ottenne il vanto.
O che'l maligno suo pensiero interno
Celasse all'hor sotto contrario manto;
O che sincere hauesse ancor le voglie,
Perch'al figliuol mi destinaua in moglie.
Io crebbi e crebbe il figlio, e may ne style
Di caualier, ne nobil'arte apprese,
Nulla di pellegrino, o di gentile
Gli piacque may, ne may troppo alto intese:
Sotto diforme aspetto animo vile,
E in cor superbo auare voglie accese;
Ruuido in atti, and in costumitale,
Ch'e sol ne'vitij a se medesmo eguale.
Hora il mio buon custode ad huom si degno
Vnirmi in matrimonio in se prefisse,
E farlo nel mio letto, e del mio Regno
Consorte: e chiaro a me piu uolte il disse.
Vso la lingua, e l'arte, vso l'ingegno,
Perche'l bramato effetto indi seguisse:
Ma promessa da me non trasse may;
Anzi ritrosa ogn'hor tacqui, o negai.
Partissial fin con un sembiante oscuro,
Onde l'empio suo cor chiaro trasparue.
E ben l'historia del mio mal futuro
Leggerg liscritta in front all'hor mi parue.
Quinci i notturni miei riposi furo
Turbati ogn'hor da strani sogni, e larue:
Et un fattale horror ne l'alma impresso
M' era presagio de'miei danni espresso.
Spesso l'ombra materna a me s'offria,
Pallida imago, e dolorosa in atto.
Quanto diuersa, ohime, da quel, che pria
Visto altroue il suo volto hauea ritratto.
Fuggi, figlia (dicea) morte si ria,
Che ti sourasta homai, partiti ratto:
Gia veggio il tosco, e'l ferro in tuosol danno
Apparecchiur dal perfido Tiranno.
Ma che giouaua (ohime) che del periglio
Vicino homai fosse presago il core,
S'irresoluta in ritrouar consiglio
Lamia tenera eta rendea il timore?
Pranderfuggendo uolontario essiglio,
E ignuda vscir del patrio Regno fuore
Grave era si, ch'io fea minore stima
Di chiuder gli occhi, oue gli apersi in prima.
Temea, lassa, la morte, e non hauea
(Chi'l crederia?) poi di fuggirla ardire:
E scoprir la mia tema anco temea,
Per non affrettar l'hore almio morire.
Cosi inquieta, e torbida trahea
La vita in un continouo martire,
Qual'huom, ch'aspetti, che su'l collo ignudo
Ad hor ad horgli caggia il ferro crudo.
In tal mio stato, o fosse amica sort,
O, ch'a peggio miserbi il mio deftino,
Un de'ministri de la Regia corte,
Che'l Re mio padre s'alleuo bambino,
Mi scoperse, che'l tempo a lamia morte
Dal Tiranno prescritto era uicino:
E ch'egli a quel crudele hauea promesso
Di porgermi il uelen quel giorno stesso.
E mi soggiunse poi, ch'a la mia uita
Sol fuggendo allungar poteua il corso:
E, poi ch'altronde io non speraua aita,
Pronto offrise me desmo al mio soccorso:
E confortando mirende si ardita,
Che del timor non mi ritenne il morso*
Si ch'io non disponessi, a l'aer cieco,
La Patria, e'l Zio fuggendo, andarne seco.
Sorse la notte, oltra l'usato oscura,
Che sotto l'ombre amiche ne coperse,
Tal che con du e donzelleuscij secura,
Compagne elette a le fortune auuerse.
Ma pure indietro a le mie patrie mura
Le luci io riuolgea di pianto asperse:
Ne de la uista del natio terreno
Potea partendo satiarle a pieno.
Fea l'istesso camin l'^^chio, e'l pensiero:
E mal suo grado ilpiede inanzi giua,
Si comenaue, ch'improuiso, e fero
Turbine scioglia da l'amata riua.
La notte andammo, e'l di feguente intero
Per lochi ou'orma altruinon appariua
Ciricour ammo in un Castello al fine,
Che siede del mio Regno in su'l confine.
E d'Aronte il Castle: ch'Aronte fue
Quel, che mi trasse di periglio, e scorse.
Ma, poi che me fuggito hauer le sue
Mortali insidie il traditor s'accorse;
Aceeso di furor contr' ambidue
Lesue colpe medesme in noi ritorse:
Et ambo fece rei di quell' eccesso,
Che commetter in me uolse egli stesso.
Disse, ch'Aronte i hauea con doni spinto
Frasue beuande a mescolar ueneno;
Per non hauer, poi ch'egli fosse estinto,
Chi leg mi prescriua, o tenga afreno:
E ch'io, seguendo un mio lasciuo instinto,
Volea raccormi a mill Amanti in seno,
Ahi, che fiamma dal Cielo anzi in me scenda,
Santa Honesta, ch'io le tue leggi offenda.
Ch'auara fama d'oro, c sete insieme
Delmio sangue innocente il crudo hauesse,
Grave m'e si; ma via piu il cor mi preme,
Che'l mio candido honor macchiar uolesse.
L'empio, che i popolari impeti teme,
Cosi le sue menzogne adorna, e tesse,
Che la Citta del ver dubbia, e sospesa
Solleuata non s'arma a mia difesa.
Ne per c'hor sieda nel mio seggio, e'n front
Gia gli risplenda la regal corona,
Pone alcun fine a'miei gran danni, al'onte:
Si la sua feritate oltra lo sprona.
Arder minaccia entro'l Castello Aronte,
Se di proprio voler non s'imprigiona:
Et a me (lassa) e'nsieme a'miei consorti
Guerra annutia non pur, ma stratij, e morti.
Cio dice egli di far, perch dal volto
Cosi lauarsi la vergogna creed:
E ritornar nel grado, ond'io l'ho tolto;
L'honor del sangue, e de la regia sede.
Ma il timor n'e cagion, che non ritolto
Gli sia lo scettro, ond'io son vera herede:
Che sol, s'io caggio, por fermo sostegno
Con le ruin mie puote al suo Regno.
E ben quel fine haura, l'empio desire,
Che gia il Tiranno ha stabilito inmente:
E saran nel mio sangue estinte l'ire,
Che dal mio lagrimar non fiano spente;
Se tu no'l vieti a te rifuggo, o Sire,
Io misera fanciulla, orba, innocente:
E questo pianto, on'ho i tuoi piedi aspersi
Vagliami si, che'l sangueio poinon versi.
Per questi piedi, onde i superbi, e gli empi
Calchi: per questa man, che'l dritto aita:
Per l'alte tue vittorie: e per que'Tempi
Sacri, cui desti, e cui dar cerchi aita;
Il mio desir tu, che puoi solo, adempi:
E in un col Regno, a me serbi la vita
La tua pieta; ma pieta nulla gioue,
S'anco te il dritto, e la ragion non move.
Tu, cui concesse il Cielo, e dielti in fato
Voler'il giusto, e poter cio, chevuoi,
A'me saluar la vita, a te lo Stato
(Che tuo fia, s'io'l ricouro) acquistar puoi.
Fra numero si grande a me sia dato
Diece condur de'tuoi piu forti Heroi:
C'hauendo i padri amici, e'l popol fido
Bastan questi a ripormi entro al mio nido.
Anzi un de'primi, a la cuife commessa
E la custodia di secreta porta,
Promette aprirla, e ne la Regia stessa
Porci di notte tempo: e sol m'essorta,
Bh'io da te cerchi alcuna aita, e in essa
Per picciola, che sia, si riconforta
Piu, che s'altronde hauesse un grande stuolo:
Tanto l'insegne estima, e'lnome solo.
Cio detto tace, e la risposta attend
Con atto, che'n silentio ha voce, e preghi.
Goffredo il dubbio cor volue, e sospende
Fra pensier vari, e non sa dove il pieghi.
Teme ibarbari ingannie ben comprende,
Che non e feed in huom, ch'a DIO la neghi.
Ma d'altra part in luipietoso affetto
Si desta, che non dorme in nobil petto.
Ne pur l'usata sua pietanatia
Vuol, che costei de la sua gratia degni;
Ma il move vtile ancor: ch'vtil glifia.
Che ne l'Imperio di Damasco regni
Chi da lui dipendendo apra la via,
Et ageuoli il corso a i suoi disegni,
Egenti, and arm gli ministri, and oro
Contra gli Egitij, e chi sara con loro.
Mentre ei cosi dubbioso a terra volto
Lo sguardo tiene, e'l pensier volue, e gira,
La Donna in lui s'affisa, e dal suo uolto
Intenta pende, e gli atti osserua, e mira:
Eperche tarda oltra'lsuo creder molto
Larisposta, ne teme, e ne sospira.
Quegli la chiesta gratia al fin negolle;
Ma die risposta assai cortese, e molle.
Se in seruigio di DIO, ch'a cio n'elesse,
Non s'impiegasser qui le nostre spade;
Ben tua speme fondar potresti in esse,
Esoccorso trouar, non che pietade.
Ma se queste sue greggie, e queste oppress
Mura non torniam primain libertade,
Giusto non e, con iscemar le genti,
Che di nostra uittoria il corso allenti.
Ben ti prometto, e tu per nobil pegno
Mia fene prendi, e uiui in lei secura;
Che se may sottrarremo al giogo indegno
Queste sacre, e dal Ciel dilette mura;
Di ritornarti al tuo perduto Regno;
Come pieta n'essorta, haurem poi cura.
Hor mi farebbe la pieta men pio,
S'anzi il suo dritto io non rendessi a DIO.
A quel parlar chino la Danno, e fisse
Le luci a terra, e stette immota alquanto:
Poi solleuolle rugiadose, e disse
Accompagnando i flebil' atti al pianto.
Misera, and a qual' altrail Ciel prescrisse
Vita may grave, and immutabil tanto;
Che si cangia in altrui mente, e natura
Pria, che si cangi in me sort si dura.
Nulla speme piu resta: in uan mi doglio:
Non han piu forza in human petto i preghi
Forse lece sperar, che'l mio cordoglio,
Che te non moss, il reo Tiranno pieghi?
Ne giate d'inclemenza accusar uoglio,
Perche'l picciol soccorso a me si neghi,
Ma il Cielo accuso, onde il mio mal discende,
Che'n te pietate inessor abil rende.
Non tu, Signor, ne tua bontade e tale;
Ma'l mio destino e, che mi nega aita.
Crudo destino, empio destin fatale
Vccidi homai questa odiosa uita.
L'hauermi priua (ohime) fupicciol male
De'dolci padri in loro eta fiorita,
Se non mi uedi ancor del Regno priua,
Qual uittima al coltello andar cattiua:
Che, poi che leg d'honestate, e zelo
Non uuol, che qui si lung amente indugi,
A cui ricorro in tanto? oue mi celo?
O quai contra il Tiranno hauro rifugi?
Nessun loco si chiuso e sotto il Cielo,
Ch'all'hor no^ s'apra; hor perch tanti indugi?
Veggio la Morte, e se'lfuggir la e uano,
Incotro a lei n'andro conquesta mano.
Qui tacque, e parue, ch'un regale sdegno,
E generoso l'accendesse in uista:
E'l pie uolgendo di partir fea segno,
Tutta ne gli atti dispettosa, etrista.
Il pianto si spargea senza ritegno,
Com'ira suol produrlo a dolor mista:
E le nascenti lagrime a uederle
Erano a i raidel Sol cristallo, e perle.
Le guancie asperse di que' uiui humori;
Che giu cadean sin de la ueste al lembo,
Parean uermigli insieme, e bianchi fiori.
Se pur gli irriga un rugiadoso nembo;
Quando su l'apparir de'primi albori
Spiegano a l'aure liete il chiuso grembo:
El'Alba, che gli mira, e se n'appaga
D'adornarsene il crin diuenta uaga.
Ma il chiaro humor, che di si spesse stille
Le belle got, e'l seno adorno rende,
Opra effetto di foco, il qual'in mill
Petti serpe celato, e ui s'apprende.
O miracol d'Amor, che le fauille
Tragge del pianto, e i corn l'acqua accende.
Sempre soura Natura egli hapossanza;
Ma in uirtu di costei se stesso auanza.
Questo fin to dolor da molti elice
Lagrime uere, e i cor piu duri spettra.
Ciascun non lei s'afflige, e fra se dice.
Se merce da Goffredo hor non impetra,
Ben fu rabbiosa Tigre a lui nutrice,
E'l produsse in aspr'alpe horrida pietra,
O l'onda, che nel Mar si frange, e spuma:
Crudel, che tal belta turba, e consuma.
Ma, il giouenetto Eustatio, in cui la face
Di pietade, e d'Amore e piu feruente;
Mentre bisbiglia ciascun'altro, e tace,
Si tragge auanti, e parla audacemente.
O Germano, e Signor, troppo tenace
Del suo primo proposto e la tua mente,
s'al consenso comun, che brama, e prega,
Arrendeuole alquanto hor non si piega.
Non dico io gia, che i Principi, che a cura:
Si stanno qui de'Popoli soggetti,
Torcano il pie da l'oppugnate mura:
E siangli uffici lor da lor negletti.
Ma fra noi, che guerrier si am di uentura,
Senz'alcun proprio peso, e meno astretti
A le leggi de gli altri, elegger diece
Disensori del giusto a te ben lece.
Ch'al seruigio di DIO gia non si toglie
L'huom, ch'innocente Vergine difende.
Et assai care al Ciel son quelle spoglie,
Che d'ucciso Tiranno altri gli appende.
Quando dunque a l'impresa hor no^ m'inuoglie
Quell'util certo, che da lei s'attende,
Mi ci move il deuer, ch'a dar tenuto
E l'ordin nostro a le Donzelle aiuto.
Ah non sia uer, per DIO, che si ridica
In Francia, o dove in pregio e cortesia,
Che si fugga da noi rischio, o fatica
Per cagion cosi giusta, e cosi pia.
Io per me qui depongo elmo, e lorica:
Qui mi scingo la spada: e piu non fia,
Ch'adopri indegnamente arm, o destriero,
O'lnome usurpi may di Caualiero.
Cosi fauella, e seco in chiaro suono
Tutto l'ordine suo concord freme:
E chiamando il consiglio utile, e buono,
Co'preghi il Capitan circonda, e preme.
Cedo (egli disse all'hora) e uinto sono
Al concorso di tanti uniti insieme,
Habbia, se parui, il chiesto don costei,
Da i nostri, si non da i consigli miei.
Ma se Goffredo di credenza alquanto
Pur troua in uoi, temprate i nostri affetti.
Tanto sol disse: e basta lor ben tan to,
Perch ciascun quel, ch'ei concede, accetti.
Hor che non puo di bella Donna il pianto,
Et in lingua amorosa i dolci detti?
Esce da uaghe labra aurea catena,
Che l'alme a suo uoler prende, and affrena.
Eustatio lei richiama, e dice. homai
Cessi uaga Donzella il tuo dolor:
Che tal da noi soccorso in breue haurai,
Qual par, che piu richeggia il tuo timore.
Sereno all'hora i nubilosi rai
Armida, es i ridente apparue fuore,
Ch'innamoro di sue bellezze il Cielo,
Asciug andosi gli occhi co'l bell uelo.
Rende lor poscia in dolci, e care note
Gratie per l'alte gratie a lei concesse,
Mostrando, che sariano al mondo note
May sempre, e sempre nel suo core impresse:
E cio, che lingua esprimer ben non puote,
Muta eloquenza ne'suoi gesti espresse:
E celo si sotto mentito aspetto
Il suo pensier, ch'altrui non die sospetto.
Quinci uedendo, che Fortuna arriso
Al gran principio di sue frodi hauea,
Prima che'l suo pensier le sia preciso,
Dispon di trarre al fin opra si rea:
E far con gli atti dolci, e co'l bell uiso
Piu, che con l'arci lor Circe, o Medea:
E in uoce di Sirena a i suoi concenti
Ad dormentar le piu suegliate menti.
Vsa ogn'arte la Donna, onde sia colto
Ne la sua rete alcun nouello Amante;
Ne con tutti, ne sempre un stesso uolto
Serba; ma cangia a tempo atti, e sembiante.
Hor tien pudica il guardo in se raccolto,
Hor lo riuolge cupido, e uagante.
La sferza in quegli, il freno adopra in questi,
Come lor uede in amar lenti, o presti.
Se scorge alcun, che dal suo amor ritiri
L'Alma, a i pensier per diffidenza affrene;
Gli apre un benigno riso, e in dolci giri
Volge le luci in lui liete, e serene:
E cosi i pigri, and timidi desiri
Sprona, and affida la dubbiosa spene:
Et infiammando l'amorose uoglie
Sgombra a quel gel, che la paura accoglie.
Ad altri poi, ch'audace il segno uarca,
Scorto da cieco, e temerario Duce,
De'cari detti, de'begli occhi e parca,
E in lui timore, e riuerenza induce.
Ma fra lo sdegno, onde la front e carca,
Pur anco un raggio di pieta riluce,
Si ch'altri teme ben, ma non dispera:
E piu s'inuoglia, quanto appar piu altera.
Stassi tal uolta ella in disparte alquanto,
E'l uolto, egli atti suoi compone, e finge
Quasi dogliosa: e in fin su gli occhi il pianto
Tragge souente, e poi dentro il respinge.
E con quest'arti a lagrimar'intanto
Seco mill'alme semplicette astringe:
E in foco di pieta strali d'Amore
Tempra, onde pera a si fort'arme il core.
Poi si come ella a quei pensier s'inuole,
E nouella speranza in lei si deste,
Ver gli Amanti il pie drizza, e le parole,
E di gioia la front adorna, e ueste:
E lampeggiar fa, quasi un doppio Sole,
Il chiaro sguardo, e'l bell riso celeste
Su le nebbie del duolo oscure, e folte,
C'hauea lor prima intorno al petto accolte.
Ma mentre dolce parla, e dolce ride,
E di doppia dolcezza inebria i sensi;
Quasi dal petto lor l'alma divide.
Non prima usata a quei diletti immensi.
Ahi crudo Amor, ch'egualmente n'ancide
L'assentio, e'l mel, che tu fra noi dispensi;
E dogni tempo egualmente mortali
Vengon da te le medicine, e i mali.
Fra si contrary tempre in ghiaccio, e in foco,
In riso, e inpianto, e fra paura, e spene
Inforsa ogni suo stato, e di lor gioco
L'ingannatrice Donna a prender uiene.
E s'alcun may con suon tremante, e fioco
Osa parlando d'accennar sue pene,
Finge, quasi in amor roza, e inesperta,
Non ueder l'alma ne'suoi detti aperta.
O pur le luci uergognose, e chine
Tenendo, d'honesta s'orna, e colora:
Si che uiene a celar le fresche brine
Sotto le rose, onde il bell uiso infiora;
Qual ne l'hore piu fresche, e matutine
Del primo nascer sno ueggiam l'Aurora:
E'l rossor de lo sdegno insieme n'esce
Con la uergogna, e si confonde, e mesce.
Ma, se prima ne gli atti ella s'accorge
D'huom, che tenti scoprir l'accese uoglie,
Hor gli s'inuola, e fugge, and hor gli porge
Modo, onde parli, e in un temporitoglie.
Cosi il di tutto in uano error lo scorge
Stanco, e deluso poi di speme il toglie.
Ei si riman, qual cacciator, ch'a sera
Per da al fin l'orma di seguita fera.
Queste fur l'arti, onde mill'Alme, e mill
Prender furtiuamente ella poteo;
Anzi pur furon l'arme, onde rapille,
Et a forza d'Amor serve le feo.
Qual merauiglia hor fia, se'l fero Achille
D'Amor su preda, and Hercole, e Theseo,
S'ancor chi per GIESV la spada cinge
L'empio ne'lacci suoi tal'hora stringe?
Il Fine del Quarto Canto.
THE FIFTH SONG.
WHile as Armida treacherous, thus-wise
The Knight entyceth her loves maze to tread,
Nor on the promisde ten alone relyes,
But trusts her stealth should more a gadding lead:
On whom to charge this daung'rous enterprise,
Which she must guide, Godfrey wist not a read:
For ventrers store, and worth in general
Breeds doubt, nor less their bent in special.
At last he orders with well-ware foresight,
That choice of one from out themselves they take,
Who should succeed to noble Dudons right,
And this election at his pleasure make,
That so no one with just exception might
Complain, or he their causefull wrath awake:
And show withal, how this most worthy band
With him, in price does of high value stand.
Then he them to him calls, and began to say,
You have already understood my mind,
Which for the Damsels aid gave not a nay,
But to a riper season it assignde,
This I propound a new, and well it may
A dew assent of your opinions find:
For in the world light and chaungeable,
It Is constance often t'ensew thoughts variable.
But if yet still you deem it foully stain
This your degree, such perils to refuse,
And if your noble courage seem disdain,
What so a counsel ouersafe ensewes,
I will you not against your wills retain,
Nor calling back my grant, my faith abuse:
But with you be it, as to be is right,
The bridle of our rule gentle and light.
To go then or to stay, content I rest,
That on your pleasure freely it depend,
Yet will, that first you make to Duke decest
New successor, who may your charge attend,
And among you ten out-cull, as likes him best,
But take of ten expirde the choice shall end:
For herein I reserve my sou'raignty,
In all else, frank be his authority.
So Godfrey spoke, and th'answere to impart,
Each ones consent upon his brother threw:
Like as (O Captain) this far seeing art
Of lingering virtue best beseems you,
So vigor of the hand and of the heart
Of us is looked, as debet by us dew:
And that ripe firmness, which in others case
Is providence, in us were vilety base.
And since light harms, which from this peril grow,
Weyd with the profit, make the balance rise:
Your liking had, the chosen ten shall go
With this Damsel to that brave enterprise:
Thus he concludes, and with guile tired so,
Seeks close to veil the mind, which inly fries
With colored zeal; honors desire did move
The rest (as seemed) but it was desire of love.
But youngest Bulleyn with repining eye
Upon the Son, who of Sophia leeres,
Whose virtue he admires enuiously,
Which in fine feature more it self endeeres,
His mateship nould, and subtle iealously,
Wary conceits up in his fancy steeres,
Whence he his counterstriuer drawn apart,
Arraisons him with this besmoothing art.
O of great Sire, thou greater Son that art!
Who young in price of arms bearst highest fame
Of this brave band, whereof we make a part,
Who shall be graced with commanders name?
I that to famous Dudon, scarce my heart
Sole for the honor of his age could frame
To Obey, I Godfreys brother cannot see,
Whom I should yield to, save alone to thee.
Thee whose high lynage egals all the rest,
Whose glory me, and merit has out-gon,
Nor less himself, in price of martial quest
To hold, disdaynes the greater Boglion:
Thee I for Captain crave, if in thee nest
No will to be this Squadrons Champion,
Ne think I thou will for that honor carke,
Which may proceed from deeds obscure and dark.
Nor here wants place where you may beautify
Your haughty valor with fames brighter ray,
Now I Will procure (if you it not deny)
This chief honor, the rest on you shall lay,
But for I wot not well, what way to ply
My heart, which plants in doubts his fickle stay:
Let me obtain that Armide at my will
I follow may, or with thee tarry still.
Here Eustace held his peace, nor uttered
These later accents without blushing face,
And his hot burning thoughts ill covered
The Other well spide, and smiled at the case:
But for loves slower strokes, scarcely perced
The utter rind, which did his breast embrace,
Nor at a countermate he takes offense,
Nor to pursew the wench he makes pretense.
But deeply grau'd in holdfast thought abides
Dudons sharp death, whom long to ouer-liue,
That it audacious Argant so betides,
He counts will blemish of dishonor give,
And part into his ears with pleasing slides
This speech, which him does to dew honor drive:
And his young courage joys and well appayes,
In the sweet sound of his true tuned praise.
Whence thus he answered, I hold more desire,
Chief places to deserve then to obtain,
And if I may to virtues height aspire,
Envy I need not others haughty reign,
Yet to this honor, as my fitting hire,
If you me call, I will not curchy strain,
But dear repute, that you so plain a sign
Express, how your good wills to me incline.
Thus I it not desire, nor yet refuse,
And I made Duke, you shall be of the elect,
So Eustace leaves him, and gins travail use,
This with his mates good liking to effect:
But for self room Prince Gernand hotly sewes,
Whom though Armidas poisned shafts enfect,
Yet in proud heart, less Ladies love preuailes,
Then thirst of honor, which more sharp assailes.
From Norway great Kings Gernand came of yore,
Who many Realms swayd with Imperial blade;
Which store of Crowns, and royal Scepters store
Of Sire and Graundsires, him much haughty made:
The Other on his own worth him haughty bore,
More then on acts of elders noble trade,
Albe of hundred years many a leace,
They were renownd in war, and known in peace.
But the Barbarian Lord, who measur'de sole,
So far as gold and rule can stretch the line,
And deemed each virtue dark as quenched cole,
Wherein some royal title did not shine,
In no wise brooks that to the craved gole,
The Knights like merit should their course combine*
And grows so teasty, that by teeny spite,
Past reasons bounds he is transported quite.
So as the sprite malignant of the deep,
Who open in him saw this largy gate,
Into him began with covert silent creep,
And at the helm of his thoughts fleeing sat,
And there his wrath ginnes more in hate to steep,
And more his heart to prick, and more to grate,
And works so that in his soul still sounds
A voice, which reasons such to him propounds.
Does Reynold just with thee? bears his vain rank
Of elder worthies such Nobility?
Then let him show (since thee he mates so cranke)
The Nations thralled to his sovereignty,
Show he his Realms, his dead ones let him flank,
With thine that live in royal dignity,
Ah how this Lord presumes of worthless rate!
Lord borne in Italy of thrall estate!
Win he or leese he, he is victor yet,
Even since he was thy countermate at first,
What will the world say (and saying set
His praise a flaunt) with Gernand match he durst,
That room to thee some fame and credit get
Well might, which noble Dudons glory nursed:
But yet thy self would it no less a grace,
Where he by craving it, does it abase.
And if they, who no longer breath or speak,
To our affairs their knowing thoughts apply,
Into what noble flame of wrath out break
Does good old Dudon (think you) boue in sky?
Whiles he advises this, our copy freake,
And on his saucy boldness bends his eye,
Who even with him (scorning his worth and age)
Dares to compare fond ouer-weening Page.
Yea dares, and it attempts, and bears away
In liew of chasticement, honor and laud,
And some there are, who for him do and say,
(O common shame) and unto him applaud:
But if Godfrey it see, and pleased appay,
That of what is thy dew he thee defraud,
Bear't not, nor it to bear it is thy part,
But show him what thou can, and who thou art.
At such a speeches sound vpflames disdain,
And as a tossed brand in him it grows,
Nor stuffed and swollen heart it can contain,
But out through eyes, and at the tongue it goes,
What so blamefull, vndew, he deemes may stain
Rinaldos honor, he does all disclose.
Him proud and vain he faines, and his manhood
He terms by name of rashness, fond and wood.
And what so of a great and haughty heart,
Of lofty, and of noble, in him shinde,
All this (shading the truth with evil art)
He blames, as it were vice, and fault does find:
And prateth so, as fame it began impart
To counter-knight by vulgars blabbing wind:
Nor yet his wrath he slakte, or bridelled
The blindfold bent, which should to death him wed.
For that lewd feend, who moving ruled his tongue,
In steed of breath and all his words did frame,
Him made renew each his outrageous wrong,
Still beeting fuel to his bosomd flame,
Wide place there was in Camp, where seemly throng
Of choicest persons ever flocking came:
Where joined in wrestling and in turneyment,
More vigor, and more skill, their lims they bent.
Now there what time thickest encreast the preace,
He (as his dest'ny gave) Reynold accusde,
And like keen shaft, against him began address
His tongue, in venom of Auerne infusde,
And of his speech Reynold was my witness,
Nor longer could restrain his wrath vnusde,
But cries thou lie, and on him sets amain,
And in right hand does naked weapon strain.
His voice a thunder seemd, lightning his blade,
Which tidings brings of the falling flash,
He quakes, nor sees how fly, or how euade
He may deaths present vneschewed lash,
Yet since the whole Camp witness stood, he made
Semblant, as naught him could dismay or bash:
And his great foe attends, and weapon barde
(Close settled for defense) he lies at ward.
Seen fiery swords wel-neere a thousand are
That time at once to flame, for there around
In flockt, and shoou'd, and pressed of folk unware
A diverse troop, and through the air rebound
And whirle of voices that uncertain fare,
And of confused accents does the sound:
As at sea shore is heard when wind and wave,
Murmures diverse in one confounded have.
But not a whit for others voices flakes,
The Offended warrior either brunt or ire*
Fences and cries he scorns, or what so brakes
A stop, and to revenge does whole aspire:
And through the men, and through their arms he rakes,
And whirles about his sword of flashy fire:
So as to thousand guarders shame all lets
Away he thrusts, and on Gernando sets.
And with a hand, even angry skild in fight,
A thousand blows quartring on him he lays,
Now in the breast, now in the head, now right,
Now left side, busy he to wound assayes:
And his right hand so wimble was and wight,
That eyes and art came short of his sly ways:
So as unseen, and vnaduisde it lights,
And strikes, and foines, where least his fear affrights.
Nor ever ceast, till in his breast plunged,
Once and again he had his fierce Morglay,
The wretch falls groueling on his wound, and shed
Forth soul and spirits, by that dubble way:
The vanquisher his sword yet sprinckelled
With blood, vpsheathes, nor there brooks longer stay:
But turns elsewhere, and casts off withal
His cruel mood, and his incensed gall.
Good Godfrey to this tumult drawn the while,
Finds dismal sight of unexpected case,
Gernand out stretched his hair, and mantle vile,
And moist with blood, and full of death his face:
He hears the sighs and plaints, and diverse style
Of moanes, for warrior slaughtred in the place:
Stonisht he queres, here where it is most forbid,
Who is it that so much durst, and so much did?
Arnalt one dearest to the Prince deceast,
The case tells, and it telling began augment,
How Reynold slew him, and how thereto pressed
He was, by slight cause of a braine-sicke bent:
And how the sword which guirded was to quest
Of Christi against Christen Champions now he hent,
And how he scornde his rule, and fore-restraint,
And how herewith all did themselves acquaint.
And that death to his guilt by law is dew,
And ought (as was proclaimde) be punished,
Both for the fault self bears a heinous hew,
As for in such a place it happened,
For if his error such pardon accrue,
More by his sample will be couraged,
And that the wronged will to vengeance band
Themselves, which now th'attend at Judges hand.
Which discord will beget, and bring forth blows,
Twixt such as part with tone and the other take,
The dead man's merits up he rips and shows,
What so may pity or disdain awake,
But Tancred it denies, and does oppose
Himself, and skusing forth accused spoke:
Godfrey listneth, and with a face seueare,
Small cause affords of hope, but more of fear.
Tancred then adds, my wise Lord, please it you,
What and who Reynold is, in mind to call,
What honor in his own regard is dew,
Both for his stock renowned, and royal,
And for his Uncle Guelfe, nor ought ensew,
From rulers doom, on each a pain equal:
In diverse callings, one offense appeeres
Diverse, and eu'nesse sole is just with pheeres.
The lower shall (answered the Captain) learn,
By sample of the higher to obey,
Tancred, you counsel ill, and ill discern
To think, I Will bear with greats unruly sway,
What were my rule, if sole with vulgar stern,
On none but base, and vile command I may?
A powerless Scepter, a charge full of shame,
If such law gave it, I renounce the same.
But frank and awful it was given me,
Nor this authority shall any bate,
And well I know, where, and when ought to be
Now price and pains, imposde of diverse rate,
Now keeping tenor of equalitee,
Not lowest seuer'd from the highest state:
So spoke he, the other answer none affords,
As vanquished by the reu'rence of his words.
Raymond a follower of the severe,
And stern antiquity, his speech commends,
With these arts (says he) who so well does bear
His rule, the subjects to his reu'rence bends:
For discipline is never soundest, where
The guilty pardon more then pain attends:
Down falls each Realm, each mercy ruineth,
Which on the base of fear not fasteneth.
So spoke he, and Tancred did well advise
These words, nor there time longer spent,
But to Rinaldo-ward forthwith him hies
On steed, who seemed winged as he went:
Reynold, when from fierce foe he had thus wise
Reft, pride and soul returned to his tent:
There Tancred found him, and makes full report,
What said and answered was, in every sort.
Then he adioynes, albe no outward show,
As faithful witness of the heart I prize,
For in too inward part, and too hollow
The thought of mortal wights conceiled lies:
Yet dare I vouch by that on sight I know,
In the Chieftaine (nor it he whole denies)
That to the common law for guilt ordaind,
He Will have you thrald, and in his power restrainde.
Rinaldo somewhat smilde, and with a face,
In which twixt laughter, flashed a disdain,
Let him (quoth he) in bonds go plead his case,
That's bond, and fit for bondage has a grain,
I free was borne, and live, and free in place
Will die, ere base cord hand or foot astraine:
Used to my sword, and used Palms to bear,
Is this right hand, and scorns vile gyues to wear.
But if for my deserts such recompense
Godfrey will yield, and me in prison cast,
As I of vulgar were, and bear pretense
In common fetters to vptie me fast,
Then let him come or send, I will not hence:
Twixt us shall chance, and arms be Judges plast,
I Will of a dismal Tragedy the shoe
Present for pastime to our foreign foe.
This said, he calls for arms, and head and breast,
In steel of finest choice most seemly shrines,
And with his weighty shield his arm he pressed,
And fatal blade unto his side combines,
And with a semblant brave and nobellest,
(As lightning wonts) he in his armor shines,
Mars he resembles thee, when from fifth heaven
Thou comst down guirt with ire and ghastly leau'n.
Tancred this while his fierce sprites does procure,
And heart vpswolne with pride to mollify:
Inuict young man (he says) to your valor,
I know, each hard and tough attempt will plie
With ease, I know, that ever most secure
Midst arms and terror stands your virtue hie:
But God forbid you make it such appear,
So cruelly to our annoyance here.
Tell me, what mean you do? will you go stain
Your yet clean hands in blood of civil war?
And with Christens unworthy wounds, again
Pierce Christ, of whom we part and members are?
And shall respects of fading honor vain?
(Which like sea waves soon flow, and ebb as far)
Work more with you, then either faith or zeal?
Which glory bring of heavens endless weal?
Ah no (for God) conquer your self, and kill
This fierceness of your over haughty mind,
Give place, it is no fear but holy will:
For Palm is to your giving place assignde,
And in my years of young vnripened skill,
If any may sutewoorth example find,
I also was prouokt, yet never grew
Against faithful fierce, but did my self subdew.
For when Cilicia Realm, by mine effort
I wanne, and Christen Ensigns there addressed,
Baldwyn comes on, and in unworthy sort
It straightwayes seizd, and made a base conquest:
Whilst bearing of a friend each way the port,
At his so greedy bent I never ghest,
Yet seek thereof recovery by fight
I nould, though it perhaps perform I might.
And if you also prisonment refuse,
And fetters fly, as weight vnmoble fro,
And th'uses rather and th'opinions choose,
On which men name of honors laws bestow,
Let me alone, I Will you to Captain skuse,
Do you to Boemund at Antioch go,
That he you out in this first brunt may bear,
So against his sentence safe bide shall you theare.
Soon will it hap, if the Egyptian state,
Or other Painim troop against us war,
That clearer much your valor of high rate
Will shine, while that from hence it bideth far,
And Camp will seem (you wanting) out of date,
As corpse whose arm and hand off chopped are,
Here Guelfe comes in, and does this speech approve,
And wills that thence he speedily remove.
To their aduises the disdainefull heart,
Of this audacious youth, beturning plies,
So as forthwith from thence aside to start,
To such well-willers he no more denies,
Friends store (the while) flock in from every part,
And with him crave to go in earnest wise,
He thanks them all, and for attendants chose
Two only Squires, and so to horse he goes.
He parts, and of high glory a large bent
Pertakes, the spur and rod of noble sprite:
His heart all vowed t'exploits magnificent,
Does none but works of rarest price endite,
Midst foes (as champion of the faith) he meant,
That Palm or Cypress should his pains acquit:
He Will Egypt scour, and pierce even to the hole,
Where from his uncouth spring Nile does outrole.
But Guelfe, when as the fierce young man thus wise,
Pressed to depart, had bid them all adieu:
There brooks no longer stay, but speedy hies,
Where guess might Godfrey soonest yield to view,
Who spying him, with voice of higher size,
Said (Guelfe) this very time I wished for you,
And sent but late to sundry where is about,
Some of our Herhaults to enquire you out.
Then makes all else withdraw, and turning low,
Begins with him a grave speech to contriue,
Your Nephew verily (my friend Guelfo)
To headlong runs, where heats his courage drive,
And of his deed (I deem) can hardly show
Some cause, that may to just pretense arrive:
Dear would I hold that so it might befall,
But Godfrey stands an equal Duke withal.
And will, of what so lawful is and right,
In each case guardeine and defender be,
Preserving still from tyrant passions might,
His vnsubdewed heart in judging free,
Now if that Reynold by constraint him dight,
To wrong th'edict, and sacred maiestee
Of discipline, as some allege, behooues
He can, and take our doom, and make his proves.
Come he to his restraint in liberty,
What may be to his merits I consent,
But if he this disdain, and stand stiffely,
(Well wot I his untamed hardiment)
Do you to bring him your best care apply,
Least he force one of slow and gentle bent,
Severe auenger be of his Empire,
And of the laws, as reason does require.
So did he speak, and Guelfe replied thus,
No mind that shames what justly may defame,
Can speeches hear of scorn injurious,
And not repulse them back from whence they came,
If wrongers slaughter then the wrong discuss,
Who is it that bounds can to just fury frame?
Who can his blows, and what to fault is dew,
In heat of bickring wey, and measure true?
But that the youth should come in, and obey
Your sovereign judgment, as you now require,
Me greeues, it cannot be, for far away
He straight his steps did from the host retire,
Yet this right hand a gage of proof I lay,
Against him that blew this false accusals fire,
Or who so else bears like malicious head,
That shame unjust, he justly punished.
I say, with reason he Gernando hault,
Down forced the horns of his stout pride to bend,
Your broken charge (if any) was his fault,
This sole I sorrow, nor will it commend:
He peac'd, let him (quoth Godfrey) fetch his sault,
And brawles bear other where, nor I intend,
That you more seed here of new quarrels sow,
Ah no (for-God) let old strifes also go.
This while her proffred succor to procure,
The lewd deceitful wench no time forslowes,
All day she spends in prayres, and puts in ure,
What help from art, or wit, or beauty grows,
But when the night spreading her robe obscure,
The day light in the West began up to close,
Twixt her two Knights, and matrons twain aside,
Where her pauilion pitched was, she hide.
But though for art of wiles the price she bare,
And kind her port were, and her manners quent,
And she so fair as never greater share
The heavens tofore on any woman spent,
So as in Camp most of the Champions rare,
She with a strong and holdfast pleasure hent,
Yet on the bayt of any her delight,
No tycing could good Godfrey win to bite.
In vain she sought to slocke, or with mortal
Sweetnings t'enroll him in Cupidos pay:
For as a gorged Hawke stoupes not at call.
Of Faulkners lure, upon his train to pray;
So he full of the world, frail pleasures all
Scorns, and mounts to the sky by uncouth way:
And what so snares, unfaithful love contriues,
Against his fair flight he of effect depriues.
Nor any let could make his steps retrace
From path, which God points holy thoughts t'ensew,
With him a thousand arts she tryes, and face
Of thousand forms him shows (as Prote new)
Well might her gestures sweet, and seemly grace
Wake love, where cold sleep did it most imbew:
But here (mercy the Lord) each proffer vain
Proved, ne boots it to begin again.
The fair Dame who to kindle did suppose
Each chasest heart with only blincke of eye:
O how she haultnes (now) and pride forgoes!
How this her spite with marvel began ally,
At last, where less doubt of gainestriuing shoes,
She new resolves her forces to apply,
Like tired Captain, who leaves siedge of fort
Impregnable, and makes elsewhere resort.
But against this wenches arms his heart no less
Inuict to be, Tancredi will approve,
For other longings his whole breast possess,
Nor any new heat may the old remove,
For as one venom uses to repress
The tothers force, so tone does the other love,
These sole, not much or little could she gain,
Each else, her fairest fire enflamde amain.
She though it grieved, that not a through sway,
Fortune allowd her purpose and her art,
Yet of so many Champions a pray
So noble, somedeale comfort her heart:
And ere some one her frauds discover may,
Thinks to conduct them to a safer part:
Where them she will in other chains enfold
Then those, where with the^ thral she now does hold
So when the term was present come, that dayd
The Captain had, some succor her to yield,
Before him reu'rent she appears, and said,
Time out does date (Sir) of your promise weeld,
And if fell Tirant learn, that under aid.
Of these your arms, I seek my self to sheeld,
He will prepare his forces for defense,
Nor we shall easly compass our pretense.
Then ere the news hereof, some certain spy
Him bear, or flying flames uncertain wind:
Let of your valiantst men by your pity,
Some few with me to march be straight assignde:
For if the heavens view not with froward eye
Men's works, nor innocence cast out of mind,
I shall my Realm regaine, and Town and field,
In peace and war shall you still tribute yield.
So said she, and the Captain to her words
Grants what could not be denyde,
Though whiles to parture she no stay affoordes,
He sees himself to this election tide,
But of the ten, each one the number boordes,
And with strange instance to be chosen plyde:
And emulation, which in them awakes,
More in the suit importunate them makes,
She, that in them wide open sees the heart,
It having seen, takes a new argument,
And iealousies grim fear lasheth a part
On their haunches, as scourge of dire torment:
Well weeting that at last without such art,
Love waxes old and slow, and slaketh bent,
Much like a Steed who never gallops swift,
Unless some after, some tofore him shift.
And in such wise she can her words allot,
And her entycing look and lovely smile,
That none there is, who the other enuies not,
Nor so they fear, but that they hope the while,
Thus the fond, rout of each inamourd sot,
Spurd on by show of hew all shapte to guile,
Unbridled runs, nor shame restraines them ought,
And Captain back to rain them vainly sought.
He that to please each party does aspire,
With equal bent, and leanes to neither side,
Though somewhat now with shame, and now with ire,
At these his Knights such peeuishnes he fride:
Yet since so obstinate grew their desire,
On a new fetch (t'accord them) he relide,
Write you your names, and in a vessel place
Me them, (quoth he) and lots shall try the case.
Forthwith then each ones name is papered,
And in small pitcher cast, and all too shook,
And drawn by hap, and first that issued,
Artemedoro was, Earl of Pembrooke,
Next Gherards name filled ears that listened,
And passage after these Wincelay took,
Wincelay who so grave and sage tofore,
Now old is lover, and a princox hoar.
O how these three that first were chosen, have
Their countnance merry, and their eyes with child
Of joy, which does from brinefull heart out-waue,
Fortune (loves friend) speed every plot they build,
The rest whose names the pitcher held in grave,
Showd doubt, and jealousy were not exilde,
And at his mouth they hang, whose hand forth drew
The opned briefes, and red the residew.
Guasco the fourth came forth, to whom succeedes
Ridolfo, and to Ridolfe, Olderick,
Then of Ronciglio he Gulielmo reeds,
And Eurard the Bauier, and Francke Henrick,
Rambaldo was the last, who changing creedes,
Made choice against Jesus damned foe to kick,
Even so much love could do, tennes number he
There closed up, the rest excluded be.
Which rest with wrath, envy and iealousy
Enflamde, fortune unjust, and brothell call,
And blame thee love that did her not deny,
Within thy Realm her judgment throne to stall:
But for engraffed in mankind we try,
That most forbidden, most we covet all:
In spite of fortune many them dispose,
To follow her when dark the welkin grows.
They will her follow still, in Sun and shade,
And for her (fighting) hazard life and soul,
She spares some becks, and with chopped words that wade
Halfe-way, and with sweet sighs them on does toule:
And that them left, her parture must be made,
With tone and the other eft she began condoule:
Buskled in arms this while, them ready make
The ten Knights, and of Godfrey congey take.
This wise man each one monisheth a part,
How Painims faith uncertain is and light,
And ill assured pledge, and by what art
Men snares may shun, and haps of heavy plight:
But with the wind his words away do start,
Nor love brooks counsel of advised wight,
At last he gives them license, and the Dame
Stays not her parting till the morrow came.
The conqueresse departs, and her before,
Those riuals she in Triumph marshalled,
As prisoners, and to harms hugy store,
The rest of all her loves abandoned,
But under wings, when night out issew'd, bore
Silence, and sweums roaming idlehed,
Then secretly (as love them counsel lent)
Tracing Armidas steps, full many went.
Eustace her follows first, who scarce abide
Could, till nights shadow daylight had yshrinde,
But hasty hyes where him best pleased to guide,
Through blind darkness, a Chieftaine all as blind:
That fair cool night his wandering way he plide,
But when the joyous light appearing shinde,
Armide appeared likewise with her troop,
Where a burgage had been their lodging coope.
To her-ward fast he fares, and by his crest
Rambaldo soon him knows, and asking cryde,
Why there he came, and what he had in quest:
I come to follow (answered he) Armide,
Nor (if vnscornd) less shall mine aid be pressed,
Nor less my faith be in her service tryde:
The Other replies, so great honor to prove,
Who has thee chosne? and he reioyned, love.
Love chused me, thee Fortune, now decree
Who choicest right, from iustest chuser has
Quoth Rambalt then, nothing avails thee,
This title false, these arts are way to skath,
Nor among her lawful Champions, may thou be
Allowed to trace this royal Virgins path,
Servant of lawless rate, and who (replies
The youth now waxes hot) it me denies?
I it forfend, then answered he again,
And with that word against him marching went,
And holding will of equalling disdain,
The Other him moves with equal hardiment,
But here her hand out stretched a twixt them twain,
Steps their souls Tyrant midst their furious bent,
And says to the one, ah this your grudging cease,
That you compagnion I a champion crease.
If you my safety love, why me deprive,
In such need, do you, of this new supply?
Then says to him, you fit and thankt arrive,
On whose defense my fame, my life, rely,
No reason would that I should packing drive
So welcome and so noble company,
Thus talking, whiles on way they vantage win,
Some new come Champion hourly droppeth in.
Some come from thence, and some from hence, ne knows
Tone of the the other, but each looks a skance,
She glad them entertaines, and all she shows,
For such their coming, mirth and iouyssance,
But when the dimmy air now cleerer grows,
Godfrey gate of their parture cognizance,
And his mind (which their damage did foregeeue)
At some their future ill, seemed to aggreeue.
Whilst more hereon he casts, there does appear
A messenger, dusty, panting, with grace
All sad, and port, which news of heavy cheer
Brings, and bears sorrow written in his face,
My Lord (quoth he) there will at sea appear
The Egyptian great fleet within little space:
William (to whom the Gene ships subject be)
This fresh aduiso sends you by me.
He adds, whiles a conuoy was conducted
Of vittailes to the Campe-ward from the fleet:
Their horse and Camels heavy burdened,
Amids the way a grievous cumber meet:
So as guarders all slau'd, or slaughtered
In fight, none could his fellows safety greet,
And that the Arabian thieves, at front and back,
Them in a vale assayling, wrought this wrack.
And how the mad rage and licentiousness
Of those Barbarian rogues, so greatly grow,
That like a hugy flood past all redress,
Around they spread, and each place ouer-flow:
Whence needs (to the end some awe may the^ repress*
A band of men against them be sent to go:
Who from the sands of Palestina sea,
Scowring, may to the Camp assure the way.
From one to the other language straight the fame
Hereof passes, and soon extends wide,
And common Soldier to himself does frame
Great fear of famine, which will soon betide,
The General discreet, who finds now lame
The haughty courage wont in them to bide,
Does by this cheerful look and words, procure
Their drooping to revive and reassure.
Oh you that with me past have here and there
A thousand perils, and a thousand woes,
Champions of God, whom his faith to repair
Even from your birth, dear Christians he chose,
You that Greek guiles, and Persian arms each where
Vanquished, and hills, and seas, and winter throws,
And thirst, and pinching famines hard distress,
Shall daunting fear your spirits now possess?
Can then the Lord, who you does stir and guide,
Well known erst in often more grievous case,
Not now assure you? as if turned aside
His hand of mercy were, or holy face?
One day it will joy to think what harms betide
Us did, and vows to pay to th'eauenly grace,
Now hold courageous on, and keep I pray,
Your selves to fortune of a better day.
With these words he their minds, tofore dismaide
Comforts, and with a clear and cheerful look,
But yet amid his breast, in heaps vplaide
A thousand sad sharp cares their lodging took,
How he so many men may feed and aid,
Twixt want and dearth his thoughtfull mind it shook*
How he may fleet at Sea withstand, and how
The Arabian robbers he may break or bow.
FINIS.
CANTO QVINTO
MENTRE in tal guisa i Caualieri alletta
Ne l'amor suo l'insidiosa Armida:
Ne solo i diece a lei promessi aspetta,
Ma di furto menarne altri confida;
Volge tra se Goffredo a cui commetta
La dubbia impresa, ou'ella esser dee guida:
Che de gli Auuenturier la copia, e'l merto,
E'l desir di ciascuno il fanno incerto.
Ma con prouido auiso al fin dispone,
Ch'essi un di loro scelgano a sua voglia,
Che succeda al magnanimo Dudone,
E quella elettion soura se toglia.
Cosi non auuerra, ch'ei dia cagione
Ad alcun d'essi, che di lui si doglia:
E insieme mostrera d'hauer nel pregio,
In cui deue a ragion, lo stuolo egregio.
A se dunque gli chiama, e lor fauella.
Stata e da voi la mia sentenza vdita:
Ch'era, non di negare a la Donzella,
Ma di darle in stagion matura aita.
Di nouo hor la propongo, e ben puote ella
Esser dal parer vostro anco seguita:
Che nel Mondo mutabile, e leggiero,
Costanza e spesso il variar pensiero.
Ma, se stimate ancor, che mal conuegna
Al vostro grado ilrifiutar periglio:
E se pur generoso ardire sdegna
Quel, che troppo gli par^cauto consiglio;
Non fia ch'inuolontarij io vi ritegna,
Ne quel, che gia vi diedi, hor mi ripiglio;
Ma sia con esso uoi, com'esser deue,
Il fren del nostro Imperio lento, e leave.
Dunque lo starne, e'l girne i son contento,
Che dal vostro piacer libero penda:
Ben vuo, che pria facciate al Duce spento
Successor nouo, e di uoi cura ei prenda:
E tra voi scelga i diece a suo talento,
Non gia di diece il numero trascenda;
Ch'in questo il sommo Imperio a meriseruo.
Non fia l'arbitrio suo per altro seruo.
Cosi disse Goffredo, e'l suo Germano,
Confentendo ciascun, risposta diede.
Si come a te conuiensi, o Capitano,
Questa lenta virtu, che lunge vede;
Cosi il vigor del core, e de la mano,
Quasi debito a noi, da noi si chiede:
E saria la matura tarditate.
Che'n altri e prouidenza, in noi uiltate.
E poi che'l rischio e di si lieue danno
Posto in lance co'l pro, che'l contrapesa,
Te permettente, i dieci eletti andranno
Con la Donzella a l'honorata impresa.
Cosi conclude, e con si adorno inganno
Cerca di ricoprir la mente accesa
Sotto altro zelo: e gli altri anco d'honore
Fingon desio quel ch'e desio d'amore.
Ma il piu giouin Buglione, il qual rimira
Con geloso occhio il figlio di Sofia:
La cui uirtute inuidiando ammira,
Che'n si bell corpo piu cara venia;
No'l vorrebbe compagno; e al cor gli inspira
Cauti pensier l'astuta gelosia,
Onde, tratto il riuale a se in disparte,
Ragiona a lui con lusingheuol'arte.
O di gran Genitor maggior figliuolo,
Che'l sommo pregio in arm hai giouenetto;
Hor chi sara del valoroso stuolo,
Di cui part noi siamo, in Duce eletto?
Io, ch'a Dudon famoso a pena, e solo
Per l'honor de l'eta, viuea soggetto:
Io, fratel di Goffredo, a chi piu deggio
Cedere homai? se tu non sei, no'l veggio.
Te, la cui nobilta tutt'altre agguaglia,
Gloria, e merito d'opre a me prepone:
Ne sdegnerebbe in pregio di battaglia
Minor chiamarsi aneo il maggior Buglione.
Te dunque in Duce bramo, oue non caglia
A te di questa Sira esser campione.
Ne gia cred'io, che quell'honor tu curi,
Che da' fatti verra notturni, e scuri.
Ne manchera qui loco, oue s'impieghi
Con piu lucida fama il tuo ualore.
Hor io procurero, se tu no'l neghi,
Ch'a te concedan gli altri il sommo honor.
Ma perch non so ben, dove si pieghi
L'irresoluto mio dubbioso core,
Impetro hor' io date, ch'a uoglia mia
O seg^a p^scia Armida, o teco stia.
Qui tacque Eustatio, e questi estremi accenti
Non proferi senza arrossarsi in viso:
E i mal celati suoi pensieri ardenti
L'altro ben uide, e moss ad un sorriso.
Ma perch'a lui colpi d'amor piu lenti
Non hanno il pe^to oltra la scorza inciso;
Ne molto impatiente e di riuale,
Ne la Donzella di seguir gli cale.
Ben altamente ha nel pensier tenace
L'acerba morte di Dudon scolpita:
E si reca a disnor, ch'Argante audace
Gli soprastia lunga stagion'in vita:
E part di sentire anco gli piace
Quel parlar, ch'al deuuto honor l'inuita:
E'l giouenetto cor s'appaga, e good
Del dolce suon de la verace lode.
Onde cosi rispose: i gradi primi
Piu meritar, che conseguir desio:
Ne pur, che me la mia uirtu sublimi,
Di scettri altezza inuidiar degg'io.
Ma, s'al'honor mi chiami, e che lo stimi
Debito a me, non ci verro restio:
E caro esser mi dee, che mi sia mostro,
Si bell segno da uoi del ualor nostro.
Dunque io no'l chiedo, e no'lrifiuto: e quando
Duce io pur sia, sarai tu de gli eletti.
All'hora il lascia Eustatio, e ua piegando
De'suoi compagni al suo voler gli affetti.
Ma chiede a proua il Principe Gernando
Quel grado, e ben ch'Armida in lui saetti,
Men puo nelcor superbo amor di donna,
Ch'auidita d'honor, che se n'indonna.
Sceso Gernando e da'gran Re Noruegi,
Che di molte prouincie hebber l'Impero;
E le tante corone, e scettri regi
E del Padre e de gli Aui il fanno altero*
Altero e l'altro de'suoi proprij pregi
Piu, che de l'opre, che i passati fero;
Ancor che gli Aui suoi cento, e piu lustri
Stati sian chiariin pace, e'n guerra illustri.
Ma il Barbaro Signor, che sol misura,
Quanto l'oro, o'ldomino oltre si stenda:
E per se stima ogni virtute oscura,
Cui titolo regal chiara non renda;
Non puo soffrir, che'n cio, ch'egli procura
Seco di merto il Caualier contenda:
E se ne cruccia si, ch'oltra ogni segno
Di ragione il trasporta ira, e disdegno:
Tal che'l maligno Spirito d'Auerno,
Che'n lui strada si larga aprir si vede,
Tacito in sen gli serpe, and algouerno
De'suoi pensieri lusingando siede:
E qui piu sempre l'ira, e l'odio interno
Inacerbisce, e'l cor stimola, e fiede:
E fa, che'n mezo a l'alma ogn'hor risuoni
Vna voce, ch'a lui cosi ragioni.
Teco giostra Rinaldo: hor tanto vale
Quel suo numero van d'antichi Heroi?
Narri costui, ch'a te vuol farsi eguale,
Le genti serve, ei tributarij suoi:
Mostri gli scettri, e in dignita regale
Paragoni i suoi morti a i uiui tuoi.
Ah, quanto osa un Signor d'indegno stato:
Signor, che ne la serua Italia e nato.
Vinca egli, o perda homai, fu vincitore
Sin da quel di, ch'emulo tuo diuenne:
Che dira il mondo, (e cio fia sommo honor)
Questi gia con Gernando in gara venne.
Poteua a te recar gloria, e splendore
Il nobil grado, che Dudon pria ten;
Ma gia non meno esso da te n'attese:
Costuiscemo suo pregio all'hor, che'l chiese.
E, se poi ch'altri piu non parla, o spira,
De'nostri affari alcuna cosa sent;
Come credi, che'n Ciel nobil'ira
Il buon vecchio Dudon si mostri ardente?
Mentre in questo superbo i lumi gira:
Et al suo temerario ardir pon mente:
Che seco ancor, l'e ta sprezzando, e'l merto,
Fanciullo osa agguagliarsi, and inesperto.
E l'osa pure, e'l tenta, e ne riporta
In vece di castigo honor, e laud:
Eu'e chi ne'l consiglia, and nel'essorta,
(O vergogna comune) e chi gli applaude.
Mase Goffredo il vede, e gli comporta,
Che di cio, ch'a te dessi, egli ti fraud;
No'^ soffrir tu: ne gia soffrir lo dei;
Ma cio, che puoi dimostra, e cio che sei.
Alsuon di queste uoci arde lo sdegno,
E cresce in lui, quasi commossa face:
Ne capendo nel cor gonfiato, e pregno
Per gli occhi n'esce, e per la lingua audace.
Cio, che di riprensibile, e d'indegno
Creed in Rinaldo, a suo disnor non tace,
Superbo, euano il finge, e'l suo ualore
Chiama temerita pazza, e furore.
E quanto di magnanimo, e d'altero,
E d'eccelso, d'illustre in lui risplende,
Tutto (adombrando con mal arti il uero)
Pur come uitio sia biasma, e riprende:
E ne ragiona si, che'l Caualliero
Emulo suo publico il suon n'intende.
Non pero sfoga l'ira, o si raffrena
Quel cieco impeto in lui, ch'a morte il mena.
Che'l reo Demon, che la sua lingua move
Di spirto in uece, e forma ogni suo detto,
Fa, che gli ingiusti oltraggi ogn'hor rinoue,
Esca aggiungendo a l'infiammato petto.
Loco e nel Campio assai capace, dove
aduna sempre un bell drappello eletto:
E quiui insieme in torneamenti, e in lotte
Rendon le membra uigorose, e dotte.
Hor quiui all'hor, che u'e turba piu folta,
Pur, com'e suo destin, Rinaldo accusa:
E quasi acuto strale in lui riuolta
La lingua del uenen d'Auerno infusa:
E uicino e Rinaldo, e i detti ascolta:
Ne puote l'ira homai tener piu chiusa;
Ma grida; menti* e adosso a lui si spinge,
E nudo ne la destra il ferro stringe.
Parue un tuono la uoce, e'l ferro un lampo,
Che di folgor cadente annuntio apporte,
Tremo colui, ne uide fuga, o scampo
Da la present irreparabil Morte.
Pur, tutto ossendo testimonio il Campo,
Fa sembianti d'intrepido, e di forte;
E'l gran Nimico attend, e'l ferro tratto
Fermo si reca di difesa in atto.
Quasi in quel punto mill spade ardenti
Furon vedute fiammeggiar insieme:
Che uaria turba di mal caute genti
D'ogn'intorni v'accorne, e s'vrta, e preme.
D'incerte voci, e di confusi accenti
Un suon per l' aria si raggira, e freme,
Qual s'ode in riua al mare, oue confonda
Il vento i suoi co'mormorij de l'onda.
Ma per le voci altrui gia non s'allenta
Ne l'offeso Guerrier l'impeto, e l'ira
Sprezza i gridi, e i ripari, e cio, che tenta
Chiudergli il varco, and a vendetta aspira:
E fra gli huomini, e l'arme oltre s'auuenta,
E la fulminea sp^da in cerchio gira:
Si che le vie si sgombra, e solo and onta
Di mill Difensor Gernando affronta.
E con la man ne l'ira anco maestra
Mill colpi uer lui drizza, e comparte.
Hor al petto, hor al capo, hor'a la destra
Tenta ferirlo, hora a la manca part;
E impetuosa, e rapida la destra
E'in guisa tal, che gli occhi inganna, e l'arte:
Tal ch'improuisa, e inaspettata giunge,
Oue manco si teme, e fere, e punge.
Ne cesso may, sin che nel seno immersa
Gli hebbe vna volta, e due la fera spada.
Cade il meschin sula ferita, e uersa
Gli spiriti, e l'alma fuor per doppia strada.
L'arma ripone ancor di sangue aspersa
Il uincitor, ne soura lui piu bada;
Ma si riuolge altroue, e insieme spoglia
L'animo crudo, e l'adirata voglia.
Tratto al tumulto il pio Goffredo intanto
Vede fero spettacolo improuiso:
Steso Gernando il crin di sangue, e'l mante
Sordido, e molle, e pien di morte il viso.
Ode i sospiri, e le querele, e'l pianto,
Che molti fan soura il Guerriero ucciso,
Stupido chiede. Hor qui, dove men lece,
Chi fu, ch'ardi contanto, e tanto fece?
Arnaldo vnde'piu cari al Prence estinto
Narra, e'l caso in narrando aggraua molto:
Che Rinaldo l'uccise, e che fu spinto
Da leggiera cagion d'impeto stolto.
E che quel ferro, che per CHRISTO e cinto,
Ne'campioni di CHRISTO hauea riuolto:
E sprezzato il suo impero, e quel diuieto,
Che fe pur dianzi, e che non e secreto.
E che per leg e reo di morte, e deue,
Come l'editto impone, esser punito:
Si perche'l fallo in se medesmo e grieve,
Si perche'n loco tale egli e seguito:
Che se de l'error suo perdon riceue
Fia ciascun'altro per l'essempio ardito:
E che gli offesi poi quella vendetta
Vorranno far ch'a i Giudici s'aspetta.
Onde per tal cagion discordie, e risse
Germoglier an fra quella part, e questa.
Rammento i merti del'estinto, e disse
Tutto cio, ch'o pietate, o sdegno desta.
Ma s'oppose Tancredi, e contradisse,
E la causa del Reo dipinse honesta.
Goffredo ascolta, e in rigida sembianza
Porge piu di timor, che disperanza.
Soggiunse all'hor Tancredi. hor ti souuegna
Soggio Signor, chi sia Rinaldo, e quale:
Qual per se stesso honor gli si conuegna,
E per la stirpe sua chiara, e regale,
E per Guelfo suo Zio. non dee chi regna
Nel castigo con tutti esser' eguale.
Vario e l'istesso error ne'gradi vari:
E sol l'egualita giusta e co' pari.
Risponde il Capitan. da i piu sublimi
Ad vbidire imparino i piu bassi.
Mal, Tancredi, consigli, e male stimi,
Se vuoi, che i grandi in sua licenza io lassi.
Qual fora Imperio il mio, s'a vils, and imi
Sol Duce de la plebe io comandassi?
Scettro impotente, e vergognoso Impero:
Se con tal leg e dato, io piu no'l chero,
Ma libero fu dato, e venerando:
Ne vuo, ch'alcun d'autorita lo scemi.
Eso ben'io, come si deggia, e quando
Hora diverse impor le pene, e i premi,
Hora, tenor d'egualita serbando,
Non se parar da gli infimi i supremi.
Cosi dicea, ne rispondea colui,
Vinto da riuerenza, ai detti sui.
Raimondo, imitator de la seuera
Rigida antichica, lodaua i detti.
Con quest'arti (dicea) chi been impera
Si rende venerabile a i soggetti:
Che gia non e la disciplina intera,
Ou'huom perdono, e non castigo aspetti.
Cade ogni regno, e ruinosa e senza
La base del timor ogni clemenza.
Tal ei parlaua: e le parole accolse
Tancredi, e piufra lor non si ritenne;
Ma uer Rinaldo immantinente volse
Un suo destrier, che parue hauer le pen.
Rinaldo, poi ch'al fire nemico tolse
L'or goglio, e l'alma, al padiglion se'n venne.
Qui Tancredi trouollo, e de le cose
Debt, e risposte a pien la somma espose.
Soggiunse poi, bench'io sembianza esterna
Del cor non stimi testimon verace:
Che'n part troppo cupa, e troppo interna
Il pensier de'mortali occulto giace;
Pur'ardisco affermar', a quel, ch'io scerna
Nel Capitan, che'n tutto anco no'l tace,
Ch'egli ti voglia a l'obligo soggetto
De'rei comune, e in suo poter ristretto.
Sorrise all'hor Rinaldo, e con un volto,
In cui tra'l riso lampeggio lo sdegno;
Difenda sua ragion ne'ceppi inuolto
Chi seruo e, disse, o d'esser seruo e degno.
Libero i nacqui, e vissi, e morro sciolto
Pria che man porga, o piede a laccio indegno:
Vsa a la spada e questa destra, and vsa
A le Palm, e vil nodo ella ricusa.
Ma, s'a'meriti miei questa mercede
Goffredo rende, e uuole imprigionarme,
Pur com'io fossiue'huom del uulgo, e creed
A carcere plebeo legato trarme;
Venga egli, o mandi: io terro fermo il piede.
Giudici fian tra noi la sort, e l'arme:
Fera Tragedia uuol, che s'appresenti
Per lor diporto a le nemiche genti.
Cio, detto l'armi chiede, e'l capo, e'l busto
Di finissimo acciaio adorno rende:
E fa del grande scudo il braccio onusto,
E la fatale spada fianco appende:
E in sembiante magnanimo, and augusto,
Come folgore suol, ne l'armi splende.
Mart, e'rassembrate, quel'hor dal quinto
Cielo di ferro scendi, e d'horror cinto.
Tancredi in tanto i feri spirti, e'l core
In superbito d'ammollir procura.
Giouene inuitto (dice) al tuo ualore
So, che fia piana ogni erta impresa, e dura:
So, che fra l'armi sempre, e fra'l terrore
La tua eccelsa uirtute e piu secura.
Ma non consenta DIO, ch'ella si mostri
Hoggi si crudelmente a danni nostri.
Dimmi, che pensi far? vorrai le mani
Del civil sangue tu dunque bruttarte?
E con le piaghe indegne de'Christiani
Trafiger CHRISTO, ond'ei son me^bra, e part.
Di transitorio honor rispetti uani,
Che, qual'onda di mar se'n uiene, e part,
Potranno in te piu, che la feed, e'l zelo
Di quella gloria, che n'eterna in Cielo?
Ah, non per DIO: uinci te stesso, espoglia
Questa feroce tua mente superba.
Cedi: non fia timor, ma santa uoglia,
Ch'a questo ceder tuo palma si serba.
E se pur degna, ond'altri essempio toglia,
E la mia giouenetta etate acerba;
Anch'io fui prouocato, e pur non uenni
Co'Fedeli in contesa, e mi contenni.
C'hauendoio person di Cilicia il Regno,
E l insegne spiegateui di CHRISTO;
Baldouin sopragiunse e con indegno
Modo occupollo, e ne fe uile acquisto:
Che, mostrando si amico ad ogni segno,
Del suo auaro pensier non m'era auuisto;
Ma con l'arme pero di ricourarlo
Non tentai poscia, e forse i potea farlo.
E se pur ancola prigion ricusi,
Ei lacci schiui quasi ignobil pondo:
E seguir uuoi l'opinioni, e gli vsi,
Che perleggi d'honore approuail Mondo;
Lascia quime, ch'al Capitan ti scusi:
Tu in Antiochia vanne a Boemondo:
Che ne sopporti in questo impeto primo
A suoi giuditij assai securo stimo.
Ben tosto fia, se pur qui contra hauremo
L'arme d'Egitto, od altro stuol Pagano
Ch'assaipiu chiaro il tuo ualor estremo
N'apparira, mentre starai lontano.
E senza te parranne il Campo scemo,
Quasi corpo, cui tronco e braccio, o mano.
Qui Guelfo sopragiunge, e i detti approua:
E uuol, che senza indugio indi si moua.
A i lor consigli la sdegnosa mente
De l'audace Garzon si uolge, e piega:
Tal ch'egli di partirsi immantinente
Fuor di quell'hoste a i fidi suoi non nega.
Molta intanto e concorsa amica gente:
E seco andarne ogn'un procura, e prega.
Egli tutti ringratia, e seco prende
Sol duo scudieri, e su'l cauallo ascend.
Part, e porta un desio d'eterna, and alma
Gloria, ch'a nobil core e sferza, e sprone.
A magnanime imprese intenta ha l'alma,
Et insolite cose oprar dispone.
Gir fra' nemici: iui o Cipresso, o Palma
Acquistar per la Feed, ond'e campione:
Scorrer l'Egitto, e penetrar sin dove
Fuor d'incognito font il Nilo move.
Ma Guelfo, poi che'l Giouene feroce
Affrettato al partir preso ha congedo;
Quiui non bada, e se ne ua ueloce,
Oue egli stima ritrouar Goffredo.
Il qual, come lui uede, alza la uoce;
Guelfo, dicendo, a punto hor te richiedo:
E mandato ho pur hora in uarie parti
Alcun de'nostri Araldi a ricercarti.
Poi fa ritrarre ogn'altro, e in basse note
Ricomincia con lui grave sermon.
Veracemente, o Guelfo, il tuo Nepote
Troppo trascorre, ou'ira il cor gli sprone:
E male addursi a mia credenza hor puote
Di questo fatto suo giusta cagione.
Ben caro hauro che la ci rechi tale;
Ma Goffredo con tutti e Duce eguale.
E sara del legitimo, e del dritto
Custode in ogni caso, e difensore,
Serbando sempre al giudicare inuitto
Da le tiranne passioni il core.
Hor, se Rinaldo a uiolar l'editto,
E de la disciplina il sacro honor
Costretto fu, come alcun dice; a i nostri
Giuditij uenga ad inchinarsi, e'l mostri.
A sua ritention libero uegna:
Questo, ch'io posso, a i merti suoi consento.
Ma s'egli sta ritroso, e se ne sdegna,
(Conosco quel suo indomito ardimento)
Tu di condurlo, e proueder t'ingegna,
Ch'ei non isforzi huom mansueto, e lento
Ad esser de le leggi, e de l'impero
Vendicator, quanto e ragion, seuero.
Cosi disse egli: e Guelfo a lui rispose.
Anima non potea d'infamia schiua
Voci sentir di scorno ingiuriose,
E non farne repulsa, oue l'udiua.
E se l'oltraggiatore a morte ei pose,
Chi e, chi meta a giust'ir aprescriua?
Chi contra i colpi, la deuuta offesa,
Mentre arde la tenzon, misura, e pesa?
Ma quel, che chiedi tu, ch'al tuo soprano
Arbitrio il Garzon venga a sottoporse,
Duolmi, ch'esser non puo: ch'egli lontano
Dal'Hoste immantinente il passo torse.
Ben m'offro io di prouar con questa mano
A lui, ch'a torto in falsa accusa il morse,
O s'altri v'e di si maligno dente;
Ch'ei puni l'onta iniusta giustamente.
A ragion, dico, al tumido Gernando
Fiacco le corna del superbo orgoglio.
Sol, s'egli erro, fu nel oblio del bando;
Cio ben mi pesa, and a lodar no'l toglio.
Tacque, e disse Goffredo. hor vada errando,
E porti risse altroue: io qui non voglio,
Che sparga seem tu di noue liti.
Deh, per Dio, si an gli sdegni anco forniti.
Di procurare il suo soccorso intanto
Non cesso may l'ingannatrice rea.
Pregaua il giorno, e ponea in vso quanto
L'arte, e l'ingegno, e la bella potea.
Ma poi, quando stendendo il fosco manto
La notte in occidente il di chiudea;
Fra duo suoi Caualieri, e due matrone
Ricouraua in disparte al padiglione.
Ma ben che sia mastra d'inganni, ei suoi
Modi gentili, e le parole accorte,
E bella si, che'l Ciel prima, ne poi
Altrui non die maggior bellezza in sort:
Tal, che del Campo i piu famosi Heroi
Ha presi d'vn piacer tenace, e forte;
Non e pero, ch'a l'esca de'diletti
Il pio Goffredo lusingando alletti.
In van cerca inuaghirlo, e con mortali
Dolcezze attrarlo a l'amorosa vita:
Che qual saturo augel, che non si cali
Oue il cibo mostrando altri l'inuita;
Tal ei, satio del mondo, i piacer frali
Sprezza, e se'n poggia al Ciel per via romiat:
E quante insidie al suo bell volto tend
L'infido Amor, tutte fallaci rende.
Ne impedimento alcun torcer da l'orme
Puote, che Dio ne segna, i pensier santi.
Tento ella mill'arti, e in mill form,
Quasi Proteo nouel, gli apparue auanti:
E desto Amor, dove piu freddo ei dorme
Haurian gli atti dolcissimi, e i sembianti;
Ma qui (gratie Divine) ogni sua proua
Vana riesce, e ritentar non gioua.
La bella Donna, ch'ogni cor piu casto
Arder credeua ad un girar di ciglia,
O come perde hor l'alterezza, e'l fasto:
E quale ha di cio sdegno, e merauiglia.
Riuolger le sue forze, oue contrasto
Men duro troui, al fin fi riconsiglia:
Qual Capitan, ch'inespugnabil Terra
Stanco abbandoni, e porti altroue guerra.
Ma contra l'arme di costei non meno
Si mostro di Tancredi inuitto il core;
Pero ch'altro desio gli ingombra il seno,
Ne ui puo loco hauer nouello ardore.
Che si come da l'un l'altro veleno
Guardar ne suol, tal l'un da l'altro amore.
Questi soli non vinse: o molto, o poco
A uampo ciascun'altro al suo belfoco.
Ella, se ben si duol, che non succeda
Si pienamente il suo disegno, e l'arte;
Pur fatto hauendo cosi nobil preda
Di tanti Heroi, si riconsola in part.
E pria, che di sue frodi altri s'auueda,
Pensa condurgli in piu secura part:
Oue gli stringa poi d'altre catene,
Che non son quelle, ond'hor presi gli tiene.
Essendo giunto il termine, che fisse
Il Capitano a darle alcun soccorso,
A lui se'n venne riuerente, e disse.
Sire, il di stabilito e gia trascorso.
E se per sort il reo Tiranno vdisse,
Ch'i habbia fatto a l'arme tue ricorso,
Prepareria sue forze a la difesa:
Ne cosi ageuol poi fora l'impresa.
Dunque, prima ch'a lui tal noua apporti
Voce incerta di fama, o certa spia,
Scelga la tua pieta fra'tuoi piu forti
Alcuni pochi, e meco hor hor gli inuia:
Che, se non mira il Ciel con occhi torti
L'opre mortali, o l'innocenza oblia;
Saro riposta in Regno, e la mia Terra
Sempre haurai tributaria in pace, ein guerra.
Cosi diceua: e'l Capitano a i detti
Quel, che negar non si potea, concede:
Se ben, ou'ella il suo partir affretti,
In se tornar l'elettion ne vede.
Ma nel numero ogn'vn de'diece eletti
Con insolita instanza esser richiede:
E l'emulation, che'n lor si desta,
Piu importuni gli fa ne la richiesta.
Ella, che'n essi mira aperto il core,
Prende vedendo cio noua argomento:
E su'l lor fianco adopra il rio timore
Di gelosia per ferza; e per tormento;
Sapendo ben, ch'al fin s'inuecchia Amore
Senza quest'arti, e diuien pigro, e lento,
Quasi destrier, che men veloce corra,
Se non ha chi lui segua, o chi'l precora.
E in tal modo comparte i detti sui,
E'l guardo lusinghiero, e'l dolce riso,
Ch'alcun non e, che non inuidij altrui:
Ne il timor de la speme e in lor diuiso,
La folle turba de gli Amanti, a cui
Stimolo e l'arte a'un fallaceuiso,
Senza fren corre, e non gli tien vergogna:
E loro indarno il Capitanrampogna.
Ei, ch'egualmente satisfar desira
Ciascuna de le parti, e in nulla pende:
Se ben alquanto hor di vergogna, hor d'ira
Al vaneggiar de'Caualier s'accende;
Poi ch'ostinati in quel desio gli mira,
Nouo consiglio in accordarli prende.
Scriuansi i vostri nomi, and in un vaso
Pongansi (disse) e sia giudice il caso.
Subito il nome di ciascun si scrisse,
E in picciol'vrna posti, e scossi foro,
E tratti a sort: e'l primo, che n'uscisse,
Fu il Conte di Pembrotia Artemidoro.
Legger poi di Gherardo il nome vdisse:
Et vsci Vincilao dopo costoro:
Vincilao, che si grave, e saggio auante,
Canuto bor pargoleggia, e vecchio Amante.
O come il uolto han lieto, e gli occhi pregni
Di quel piacer, che dal cor pieno inonda,
Questi tree primi eletti, i cui disegni
La Fortuna in amor destra seconda.
D'incerto cor, di gelosia dan segni
Gli altri, il cui nome auuien, che l'vrna asconda:
E da la bocca pendon di colui,
Che spiega i breui, e leg i nomi altrui.
Guasco quarto fuor venne, a cui success
Ridolfo, and a Ridolfo indi Olderico:
Quinci Guglielmo Ronciglion si less,
E'l Bauaro Eberardo, e'l Franco Henrico.
Rambaldo vltimo fu, che far si elesse
Poi, fe cangiando, di GIESV nemico,
Tanto puote amor dunque? e questi chiuse
Il numero de'diece, e gli altri escluse.
D'ira, di gelosia, d'inuidia ardenti
Chiaman gli altri Fortuna ingiusta, e ria:
E te accusano Amor, che le consenti,
Che ne l'Imperio tuo giudice sia.
Ma perch instinto e da l'humane menti,
Che cio, che piu vieta, huom piu desia;
Dispongon molti ad onta di Fortuna
Seguir la Donna, come il Ciel s'imbruna.
Voglion sempre seguirla al'ombra, al Sole,
E per lei combattendo espor la vita.
Ella fan alcun motto, e con parole
Tronche, e dolci sospiri a cio gli inuita:
Et hor con questo, and hor con quel si duole,
Che far conuienle senza lui partita.
S'erano armati intanto, e da Goffredo
Toglieano i diece Caualier congedo.
Gli ammonisce quel saggio a part, a part,
Come la fe Pagana a incerta, e leave,
E mal securo pegno: e con qual'arte
L'insidie, e i casi auuersi huom fuggir deue.
Mason le sue parole al uento sparte:
Ne consiglio d'huom sano Amor riceue.
Lor da commiato al fine, ela Donzella
Non aspetta al partir l'Alba nouella.
Part la uincitrice, e que'riuali,
Quasi prigioni al suo trionfo auanti,
Seco n'adduce, e tra infinitimali
Lascia la turba poi de gli altri amanti.
Ma, come usci la notte, e sotto l'ali
Meno il silentio, e i lieui sogni erranti:
Secretamente, com'Amor gli'informa,
Molti d'Armida seguitaron l'orma.
Segue Eustatio il primiero, e puote a pena
Aspettar l'ombre, che la notte adduce.
Vassene frettoloso, oue ne'l mena
Per le tenebre cieche un cieco Duce.
Erro la notte tepida, e serena;
Ma poi ne l'apparir de l'alma luce
Gli apparse insieme Armida, e'l suo drappello.
Dove un borgo lor fu notturno hostello.
Ratto ei uer lei si move, and a l'insegna
Tosto Rambaldo il riconosce, e grida;
Che ricerchi fra loro, e perch uegna.
Vengo (risponde) a seguitarne Armida:
Ned ella haura da me, se non la sdegna,
Men pronta aita, o seruitu men fida.
Replica l'altro. and a cotanto honor
Di, chi t'elesse? egli soggiunge. Amore.
Me scelse Amor, te la Fortuna: hor quale
Da piu giusto elettore eletto parti?
Dice Rambaldo all'hor, nulla ti uale
Titolo falso, and usi inutil' arti:
Ne potrai de la uergine regale
Fra i campioni legitimi meschiarti
Illegitimo seruo e chi (riprende
Cruccioso il Giouenetto) ame il contend?
Io te'l difendero, colui rispose:
E feglisi a l'in contro in questo dire.
E con uoglie egualmentein lui sdegnose
L'altro si moss, e con eguale ardite.
Ma qui stese la mano, e si frapose
La Tiranna de l'Alme in mezo a l'ire:
Et a l'uno dicea. deh non t'incresca,
Ch'a te compagno, a me Campion s'accresca.
S'ami, che salua i sia, perch mi priui
In si grand'uopo de la noua aita?
Dice a l'altro. opportuno, e grato arriui
Difensor di mia fama, e di mia uita.
Ne uuol ragion ne fara may, ch'io schiui
Compagnia nobil tanto, e si gradita.
Cosi parlando, ad hor ad hor trauia
Alcun nouo Campion le soruenia.
Chi di la giunge, e chi di qua, ne l'uno
Sapea de l'altro, e'l mira bieco, e torto.
Essa lieta gli accoglie, and a ciascuno
Mostra del suo uenir gioia, e conforto.
Ma gia ne lo schiarir de l'aer bruno
S'era del lor partir Goffredo accorto:
E la mente indouina de'lor danni
D'alcun futuro mal par, che s'affanni,
Mentre a cio pur ripensa, un messo appare,
Polueroso anhelante, in uista afflitto,
In atto d'huom, ch'altrui nouelle amare
Porti, e mostri il dolor infronte scritto.
Disse costui. Signor, tosto nelmare
La grande armata apparira d'Egitto:
E l'auiso Guglielmo, il qual comanda
A i Liguri nauigli, ate ne manda.
Soggiunse a questo poi, che da le naui
Sendo condotta uettouaglia al Campo,
I Caualli, ei Cameli onusti, e graui
Trouato haueano a meza strada inciampo:
E che i lor difensori uccisi, o schiaui
Restar pugnando, e nessunfece scampo,
D'ladroni d'Arabia in vna valle
Assaliti a la front, and a le spalle.
E che l'insano ardire, e la licenza
Di que'barbari erranti e homai si grande,
Che'n guisa d'vn diluuio intorno senza
Alcun contrasto si dilata, e spande:
Onde conuien, ch'a porre in lor temenza
Alcuna squadra di guerrier si mande,
Ch'assecuri la via, che da l'arene
Del mar di Palestina al Campo viene.
D'vna in vn'altra lingua in un momento
Ne trapassa la Fama, e si distende:
E'l vulgo de'Soldati alto spauento
Ha de la fame, che vicina attend.
Il saggio Capitan, cbe l'ardimento
Solito loro in essi hor non comprende:
Cerca con lieto volto, e con parole,
Come gli rassecuri, e riconsole.
O per mill perigli, e mill affanni
Meco passati in quelle parti, e in queste,
Compion di DIO, ch'a restorare i danni
De la Christiana sua feed nasceste;
Voi, che l'arme di Persia, ei Greci inganni,
E i monti, e i mari, e'l verno, ele tempeste,
De la fame i disagi, edela sete
Superaste; voi dunque hora temete?
Dunque il Signor, che n'indirizza, e move,
Gia conosciuto in caso assai piu rio,
Non v'assecura? quasi hor volga altroue
La man de la clemenza, e' l guardo pio.
Tosto un di fia, che rimembrar ui gioue
Gli scorsi affanni, e sciorre i voti a DIO.
Hor durate magnanimi, e voi stessi
Serbate, prego, a i prosperi successi.
Con questi detti le smarrite menti
Consola, e con sereno, e lieto aspetto;
Ma preme mill cure egre, e dolenti
Altamente riposte in mezo al petto.
Come possa nutrir si uarie genti
Pensa fra la penuria, e fra'l difetto:
Come a l'armata in mar s'opponga, e come
Gli Arabi predatori affreni, e dome.
FINIS.

