Anno foelicissimi Regni Augustae Reginae nostrae ELIZABETH Quadragesimo primo,
fauste iam incepto.
Psalm. terseptimus: Domine in virtute tua.
THIS Sallm blessed David did make for himself and hiz people too reioys at Gods
allmighty poour and mercy against hiz enimyez, unto whoom in fervency of sprite
did he zeloously voow here sum dreadful rewards for their mallis meet: eending
hiz dittee with hearty prayer for continuauns of the same divine poour. But (az
in du conferens it well appeerz) hoow near the fortunez and digniteez of that
Godly Prins and oour sacred Sooverain do ioyn: He King of Iuri, Her highness
Queen of England: He the seventh soon of Isai, She (by name) the seventh of
my God. Thus (as it were) a certain alliauns between them: and matter of the
Sallm so aptly serving, in Ebru meter long a go compoounded, here noow reduced
intoo seven English Septenariez have we also thearby too yield God all
dutiful thanks for oour Queenz singular prudent goovernauns, eeve^ too this
prezent Annual Seaventeenth of November, the happy day of entrauns intoo her
gracious Rein, and also with all true affection we pray Gods mercy too bless
her with many such yearly daiz' whearby with all felicitee' her highness in her
vnmatchabl and gracioous good Regiment long over us too Rein.

Ex Versione 10. Campensis.
1 DOmine in fortitudine tua,
Rex vt laetatur?
Et in salute tua, vt exvlrat
Praeter modum?
2 Desyderium cordis dedisti ei, et petita labiorum non negavisti.
3 Nam bonorum liberalitate etiam praevertisti eum, et capiti eius auream
Coronam imposuisti.
4 Vitam petijt a te, etdedisti ei longaevam aetatem in sempiternum et vltra.
5 Immensa est gloria eius, sed per tuam opitulationem, honorem et splendorem
posuisti super eum.
6 Sed et perpetua felicitate donabis eum, laetificabis eum laetitia vultus tui.
7 Rex enim sperat in Dominum et in altissimi bonitatem: hinc fit vt labi non
possit.
8 Sentiant manum tua^ omnes hosts tui, experiantur dexteram tuam Inimici tui.
9 Incende eos velut clibanum in tempore indignationis tuae:
Domine in ira tua deglutiat ac devoret eos ignis.
10 Germen eorum de terra perde, et semen eorum ex hominum numero.
11 Quoniam moliuntur adversum te malum,
Cogitant facihus quod non possunt.
12 Sed tu in fugam convertes eos, et nervo tuo in vultus eorum collima bis.
13 Evehere Domine cum fortitudine tua.
Vt canamus et celebremus potentiam tuam.
I.
1 O Lord thy Queen rebollving in her mind
Thy poour surinoountyng all oother poour so far
Her self thearwith hoow joyful does she find?
But at thy Healy so vanquisshaunt in war
Triumph she does, lifts it az hy az star:
2 Her hearts dezyre thoow gyvest her joyfully,
Her prayerz eak thoow do not her deny.
II.
3 Lord of thy boountyoous liberalitee,
That have her set in Sooveraintee supreme,
Blessed her with thy gyfts of Principalitee,
Made her the Queen of this thynobl Ream,
Croound her with a Monarchall diadeam:
4 Life has she askt' which Thoow most gracioously,
Have granted her in perpetuity.
III.
5 Greatiz the glory of her hy estate,
But az thoow have of mere benignitee,
Aboove so mighty Kings her elevate,
In honor brightness and famoous dignitee,
6 So shall thoow make her blessed for too be,
With happiness still in continuauns,
And gladness of thy joyful coountinauns.
IIII.
7 Oour Queen trusts in God and in the great boounty
Of Thee most hy, Thoou Lord of Sea and Land:
Thearfore slip can she not, but certainly
8 Thy foez and herz, shall feel and understand,
The mighty poour and strength of Thy right hand:
They thearby forced (even mawgree of their heart)
Too be more quiet or else be made too smart.
V.
9 Heat thoow them hot az furnessiz by fire,
In time of thy most dreadful indignacion,
Quell them with torments of thy wrathful Ire,
In vengeauns Lord withoout commizeracion,
Flamez them devoour and spoil in cruel facion
10 Their plants from earth shallt root up, and again,
Destroy their offpring for ever amoong men.
VI.
11 Against Thee and Her in damnabl dezire,
One prank (amoong the rest) most execrabl
Assayd they in mallis, mischeef, sword and fire, 1588
Which yet too acheeve (alas) they wear vnabl:
What gat they by that practis detestabl?
But slaughter and flight and most infamoous shame,
With a freating corzey perpetual too their name.
VII.
12 Tiz thoow that make them run awey apace,
Thy bowstring iz it, that in a full despite,
Terribly shall flyrt them at their very face:
13 Avauns thy self O Lord God in thy might,
So shall we sing all cheerful in delight,
Thy praiz, thy glory, and celebrate with all,
Thy puissant poour that Reinz and ever shall.

