Anno Domini. 1592. A brief Treatise for the ready use of the Sphere: Lately
made and finished in most ample large manner.

By Robert Tanner Gentleman, Practicioner in Astronomy and Physic.

In the which Globe or Sphere, there is added many strange Conclusions, as well
Celestial as Terrestiall, the like heretofore never devised by any.
Necessary not only to those that follwe the Art of Navigations: But also to
the furtherance of such as be desirous to have skill in the Mathematical
Disciplines.

Thou O Lord in the beginning have laid the foundations of the earth: and the
heavens are the works of thy hands. Psalm. 102. ver. 25. To the most high,
mighty and renowned Princess, and most dread redoubted Sovereign Lady
ELIZABETH, by the grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland,
Defendresse of the faith.
MOST Excellent, gracious, and sacred Sovereign, I was moved to take in hand
to compyle out unto your Highness (so well as my simple learning would serve me)
a brief Treatise for the ready use of the Sphere or Globe: A work, by your
poor obedient subject, with great pains, labor, and study, made and
invented: with sundry additions and forms, not heretofore devised by any:
no less pleasant than profitable for the benefit of your Highness Commonweal,
to the studious in the Mathematical Sciences, and to the furtheraunce of
Travelers in the Art of Navigations, and to all other your Highness subjects
that are desirous of the knowledge of the beautiful frame of the Celestial
Orbs with their quantities, d^stances, courses, and strange intricate
miraculous motions of the resplendant Globes of the Sun, Moon, Planets, and
Stars fixed. And where it is a thing grafted in Nature, and natural through
custom (right renowned Princess) by manifold sundry means, either by the
faculties of the mind, the qualities of the body, or the gifts of fortune, for
men that are led on by inward affection, to seek the friendship of those whom
they affectionate, or rather inwardly love: wherein every man is so liberal,
as the gifts of the mind, body, or fortune will afford him. Wherein,
although I am not so far endued with any of them, that thereby I may deserve
any thing at all: and although the gifts of my mind are imperfect, if they
be placed against such an object, (as without assentation be it spoken) your
Majesty's Royal self is; yet weighing with my self, the bountiful goodness
of your Highness nature to resemble a royal and fruitful Tree, which the more
it is laden, the more it declineth: and the natural gentleness and royal
clemency of your Majesty's courtesy, wherewith your Highness is wont to
receive favorably, to conceive and judge royally, of whatsoever your Majesty
perceives, either to be ouer-slipt by negligence, let pass by infirmity, or
inserted by ignorance. And considering likewise the Proverb: Candidae Musarum
ianuae, the doors of the learned are free from envy: I purposed by these
small fruits of my skill, to make attempt if I could win any favorable
acceptance, within the clemency of your Highness favorable protection.
Persuading my self, that I might safely commit my rude work to the presence of
your Royal Majesty, who will wisely wink at my wants, and honorably construe
the good meaning of my mind. And the more willing was I led on to seal it,
and as my faithful allegiance binds me like a dutiful and obedient
subject, to chose out your Highness most royal worthiness above all other
Princes, under the Orbs of the Heavens, to present this small work of mine:
because your Majesty can learnedlie judge of that which the ignorant can not
comprehend. The only name of your Highness royal sacred Majesty, shall be
unto me a sure target of steel, to beat back the glauncing strokes of
unskillful tongues: who when they can not find out, by natural reason, the
quantity and quality of superior bodies, will utterly condemn the rules of
Arts, and quite overthrow al evident demonstrations: against whom (because they
deny principles) there is no reasoning nor disputing at all.

If I should stand upon terms of Art, and go about to unlock the closet of
Astronomy unto your Highness, whom I know sufficient of your royal self to
wade through the deepest floods and swiftest streams contained in the
Mathematikes: your Majesty might justly say, Sus docet Mineruam; and I might
rather discover that I want, than your Highness want that which I set down. It
is better therefore for me to be silent, considering with what a wise,
learned, royal Princess I have to deal, than by needless words to open mine
own defects: humbly craving pardon of your Majesty for this my bold
enterprise hoping that your Highness will not mislike this simple signifying of
my bounden duty. For like as the myte of the poor widdowe mentioned in the
holy Scriptures, which she gave in all her penury, is accounted a greater
gift than those huge sums that great men laid out of their great store: So
this my rude Edition of my simple h^ndy work, if it may be accepted into your
Highness tution, it shall encourage me hereafter to practice works of greater
importance; and (as it is my bounden duty) always to pray to the Almighty
God to bless and keep your Majesty in health, tranquillity and peace, So my
daily prayer is to the same God, to bless and defend your Highness from all
your enemies, and to reign and live over us Nestors years.

Your Majesty's most humble subject, Robert Tanner.

And now to begin how to erect the Sphere or Globe. But first, the difinition
what a Sphere is, with his parts, are to be known and found out.
A Sphere is a massy body, enclosed with one platform; and in the middle of
it there is a prick: from which, all lines drawn to the said platform, are
equal each to other, and that prick is the Center of the Globe, and so says
Enclid.

The Axeltree is a right line (which moves not) and passes through the
Center of the Globe, at which ends are imagined the Poles of the world; one is
named the North Pole, the other the South.

The North Pole is called, Pole Artick and the other Pole in the the South,
Antarticke: the South Pole is never seen of us in this our Country, but is
evermore under our Horizonte. The North Pole is always seen of us whereas we
dwell, and these stars be opposed the one right against the other.

The Meridian is a great Circle passing over our heads, in which Circle when
the Sun is, he makes the middle of the day and the middle of the night. And
also, in this Circle is showed the Latitudes of all places, by the height of
the Poles, in every several Latitude.

The Horizont what it is.
The Horizonte is a Circle, which goes a-long by the edge of the ground, and
parts the part of the world which we see, from that part which we see not;
and when the Sun rises, then he is in our Horizonte, and so is he when he is
going down as low as we can see him.

Also it deuideth the whole Sphere of the world into two equal parts, in such
sort, that half of the Sphere is ever above the ground, and half always
under the earth. This Circle has great use in the heavenly motions, that by it
we judge the rysings and settings of the Sun and Moon, and all other
Stars; And in this Horizonte you shall find noted, the names of the winds,
which the Mariners uses, by the 32. points of the Compass.

The next Circle is noted, the degrees which every day in the month does
contayn: that is to say, the first day one degree; the second day two degrees;
and so forth as they succeed in order, to a point like a little star, where
the last day of every month ends.

The next Circle shows, what day of the month the Sun enters into any of
the twelve signs, telling every day one degree, to thirty degrees, and so
they succeed through ever one of the twelve signs, monethlie.

This Horizonte is divided into four quarters, East, West, South, and North,
every quarter of the world contains 90. degrees: and the whole compass
thereof, is 360. degrees.

The next Circle is Motus trepedationis, a starry firmament, whose motion is
slow, from the West to the East, that every hundredth year (by the observation
of diverse Astronomers) moves but one degree.

The Zodiac, is a great broad and slope or shoring Circle, in the which are
depictured the twelve signs and fixed stars, in the midst whereof, is the
Eclipticke line, from which the Sun never swarueth.

Then follows the two Colluers, and the Equinoctial Circle, parting the
Sphere in the very midst, betwixt the two Poles: by reason whereof, there
are two Latitudes, the one is North and the other South.

The North Latitude is contained betwixt the Equinoctial and the North Pole;
the South Latitude, is betwixt the Equinoctial and the South Pole: either of
these two spaces contains in breadth 90. degrees.

A Degree is one part of a Circle being divided into 360. parts, and 360.
degrees, is the very Longitude of the Earth: and at the furthest Meridian in
the West, beginning with one degree, and so proceed Eastward, unto 180.
degrees of the Equinoctial, and from thence go forward to the West, where you
come again to 360. degrees, which is the last degree of Longitude.

Next follows the two tropicall Cyrcles.
That is to say, the North trop^ke is Cancer, and is the return of the the
Sun in Summer declyning, back again toward the Equinoctial, the days
being then at the longest, and the nights at the shortest with us, and then
begins the days to shorten again.

The Winter Tropicke (says Proclus) is the most Southerliest Circle of all
them that the Sun does describe, by the revolution of the world, in the
which when the Sun is, he makes his winterlie turn, and then is the longest
night in all the year and shortest day with us.

Paralels.
The Parallel lines are described by the wyers in the Globe, and a Parallel of
the longest day, is a space of the Earth: by this is known the increase of the
day to be a quarter of an hour, going from the Equinoctial toward any of the
Pole stars.

A Clymate contains two Paralels, in which spaces the day increases by half
an hour: Of these Paralels are made 24. Climates, between the Equinoctial
and the tropicke of Cancer.

Then follows the Artick Circle, and the Antartick Cyrcle.
The Artick Circle is the North Circle: and the contrary Circle in the South,
is called the Antartick Circle: by the which Greek composition, as you would
say, contrary or against the Articke Circle, and it well may be called the
South Circle. But now here how Proclus defines them.

The Articke Circle is the greatest of all those Circles which do always
appear, and touches the Horizonte in one only point, and is altogether above
the Earth, and all the stars that be within this Circle neither rise nor set,
but are seen to run round about the Pole all the night.

The Antarticke Circle is equal and equidistant to the Artick Circle and
touches the Horizonte in one only point,' and is all under the ground, and
all the stars that be in it, are evermore out of our sight.

Then is there two other smaller Circles, called Poller Circles, or Pole
Circles: in this Circle about the Antartick Pole, is divided certain degrees
to take the Altitude of the North star, this star is in the extremity, or
end of the tail of the less Bear, being a constellation, commonly called the
Horn: for this North star (of the most notablest stars above the Pole) is
nearest unto it, and shall therefore show a less Circle than any other, and
so shall his Altitude differ little from the Altitude of the Pole.

This star has declination 85. degrees, and 51. minutes, and the complement
of nintie (which are four degrees and nine minutes) is his distance from the
Pole. And although the Mariners hold opinion, that it is not distant more than
three degrees and a half, yet to the judgment of those persons that has
knoweledge in Astronomy, more credit ought to be given to the Astronomer than
to the Mariner, for as much as the Astronomer does know the place of the
stars, with their Longitudes, Latitudes, declinations, and right ascentions,
more perfectly and precisely than does the Mariners: for they account not
only by degrees, but also by minutes and seconds; therefore whosoever will
precisely know it, let him take the highest Altitude of the North star, which
is his being over the Pole, and the less Altitude, which is his being under
the Pole: then take away the less from the more, and the half of that
remains, shall be the distance of that star, from the Pole of the world. And
likewise by this experience may be known the Altitude of the Pole, and what all
the other stars that go not down under the Horizonte, be distant from it,
joining the greater Altitude with the less: and that shall amount thereof,
divided by the half, shall be the Altitude of the Pole; and taking away this
Altitude of the Pole, from the greater Altitude of the Star, or the less
from the Altitude of the Pole, the rest that remains, shall be the distance of
the star from the Pole. And as the Pole is invisible, it can not be seen or
known when the North star is higher and lower, except it be by the mean of
some other mark. And for this is considered, the position of the former
Guardes or Watch, being one of the two stars called the Guardes, which are
in the mouth of the Horn: the Mariners have noted eight positions, from the
former Guard star to the North star, which answers to the eight
principal winds; and as the Guarde is to the North star, according to the
placing of these positions, so it shall be higher and lower from the Pole.

Let us here put the common Rules which the Mariners use, to compile with
those that are of opinion of three degrees and a half.

And for the opinion of Astronomers, (which is the distance of 4. degrees and
9. minutes) I have in my Sphere or Globe annexed to my Dial in the North end,
a Circuler or Figure with a moveable Horn; Upon the uttermost Margent of the
Dial, is noted the eight winds of the eight positions, and also the other
points belonging to the Mariners Compass, and putting the Guardes and the North
star in every of the Winds, it shall be the distance that the North star
is higher and lower than the Pole, as by the third appears in the cutting of
the degrees in the Pole Circle, when the Horn is moved too and fro.

Commmon Rules after the Mariners acompt, but not after the Astronomers
acompt, as may appear in the Rules next before.
THE former Guarde being in the East, the North star is one degree and a
half under the Pole.

The Guard being in the North-east, the North star is three degrees and a
half under the Pole.

The Guarde being in the North, the star is three degrees under the Pole.

The Guard being in the North-west, the star is half a degree under the Pole.

The Guarde in the West, the star is one degree and a half above the Pole.

The Guarde in the South-west, the star is three degrees and a half above
the Pole.

The Guarde in the South-east, the said North star is half a degree above
the Pole.

And thus in the Dyall and the Circle about the same, may you see the North
star, in what part it is of the degrees, high or low, from the Pole: not
only by the Mariners Rule, but also by the Astronomers Rule.

And being thus known, how much the North star is under and above the Pole,
let us take the Altitude thereof.

And that of it that is under the Pole, let us join to his height, and as much
of it as is above, let us take away, and that shall rise thereof, shall be the
Altitude of the Pole above the Horizonte.

Thus much for brevity sake, I have borrowed and collected out of Martine
Cortese, and other good Authors, these few notes, for the use of the Guardes,
fixed in the North end of my Sphere or Globe. And now I am to entreat of the
inward part of the Celestial Globe, and also of the Terrestiall Globe; and
to begin with the lowest first.

The Terrestiall Globe has depictured upon it, a Map or Cart of the
description of all the Earth, and the chiefest Regions, Cities, and Towns
under Europe, Africa, Asia, and America: And in this Globe is contained two
Elements, that is to say, Earth and Water. The Earth is lowest of all Elements,
black, ponderous, round, environed and enclosed with the other three; she is
called the Mother of fruits, the root of all plants, the nourse of living
Creatures, the foundation of buildings, the Sepulcher of the dead, the Center
of the beautiful frame of the world, the matter and substance of man's body,
and the Receptackle of heavenly influence: she is also garnished with fragrant
flowers, with beautiful colors of Man, Beast, and Foul, inhabited, and
comfortably quickened by the nourishing beams of the Sun, Moon, Plannets,
and fixed stars.

The Earth in comparison to the whole world, is but a prick or mote, the whole
compass thereof, is 360. degrees, and every degree is 60. miles: and ye
multiply 360. degrees by 60. it yields 21600. miles about the same.

The next Cyrcle above the Terrestiall Globe, is the Element of Air: and the
next Region above the Air, is the Element of Fire: and there are the four
Elements, described in this Sphere or Globe.

Then ensues the Spheres of the 7. Plannets: that is to say, the first is the
Sphere of the Moon: the second is the Sphere of Mercury: the third is the
Sphere of Venus: the fourth is the Sphere of Soll: the fifth is the Sphere of
Mars: the sixth is the Sphere of Jupiter: the seventh is the Sphere of
Saturnus: the eight is the Sphere of the starrie Firmament; and every one of
these Spheres does carry his sign and Caracter upon him.

And according to the common account, the Earth is 39. times so much as the
Moon. But the Sphere of the Moon is far bigger than the Globe of the Moon,
and the semidiamiter of her Sphere, is 33. times. longer than the Earthes
semidiamiter, and the miles of the semidiamiter of her Sphere is 115278. and
the miles of her Sphere in compass, contains 724604. 4/7.

The semidiamiter of the Sphere of Mercury, is 64. times so long as the Earthes
semidiamiter: the miles of the semidiamiter, contains 220500. 2/33. And the
miles of his Sphere in compass, contains 1386000. 4/231.

The semidiamiter of the Sphere of Venus, is 167. times so long as the Earthes
semidiamiter: the miles of the semidiamiter, contains 573872. 3/11. the miles
of the Sphere in compass, contains 3607200.

The semidiamiter of the Sphere of the Sun, is 1120. times so long as the
Earthes semidiamiter: the miles of the semidiamiter, contains 3848367. 3/12
the miles of his Sphere in compass, contains 34189737. 1/7.

The semidiamiter of the Sphere of Mars, is 1220. times so long as the Earthes
semidiamiter: the miles of the semidiamiter, contains 4192363. 7/11. the
miles of the Sphere in compass, contains 26352000.

The semidiamiter of the Sphere of Jupiter, is 8876. times as long as the
Earths semidiamiter: the miles that the semidiamiter contains, is 30501163.
7/11. the miles of the Sphere in compass, contains 191721600.

The semidiamiter of the Sphere of Saturn, is 14405. times so long as the
Earthes semidiamiter: the miles that this semidiamiter contains, is 4950318.
2/11. the miles of this Sphere in compass, contains 311148000.

The semidiamiter of the eight Sphere, is 20110. times so long as the Earthes
semidiamiter: the miles that this semidiamiter contains, is 69105272. 11/8:
the miles of this Sphere in compass, contains 434376000.

In this Armill or Ring Sphere, are wonderful conclusions to be learned, very
strange and marvelous to the simple and ignorant persons, void of this
knowledge, no less profitable than commendable to them, and to the skillful
and wise; for the use thereof is very apt and ready in teaching, and is more
easy for young learners, than the Sollid or Massy Globe. And this is a
marvelous excellency in knowledge, to be able so certainly to judge of
things absent, as if they were present, to be able to tell what hour of the day
it is in all parts of the Earth, and when the Sun ryseth and sets in all
places under heaven: for the hours of the day are diverse in diverse Regions; so
is the shadows that the Sun causes in their Dyalls, and all other
shadows does disagree many ways, not only from our shadows, but also, one
of them from another. Again, the times of the year are not a-lyke through all
the world, but when it is Summer to us, it is winter to some other, and when it
is Spring-tyme with us, it is Summer in another Country; and when it is
Harvest with us, other people have Summer: so when it is winter with us, some
Nations have Summer, yea, when Spring time begins with us, it is Harvest in
some Countries, and in other Countries it is Midsommer at the same time: but
when it is Midsommer with us, it is Harvest no where in the world, but middle
Winter it is then in two diverse parts of the world.

And those people whose Zenith is within 23. degrees and a half of any of the
Poles, have their shadows running round about them: and the nearer they dwell
under the Pole, the longer is their day, and therefore does their shadows
run the oftener about them; for where the day is but 24. hours long, there the
shadows runs but once about: and where it is half a year long, there it
runs about 103. times, and in all other mean places accordingly; so that
those people that have these shadows thus running about them, under the North
Pole. Then they that dwell under the South Pole have no shadows at all, for
it is continual darkness with them: and yet do they not want light although
they lack the Sun, but only half a month together, when the Moon is in
that half of the Zodiake which is out of their Horizont. And though the Sun
and Moon be out of their sight, ye see with us, that we have a light before
Sun rising, and after the Sun setting: so have they such a light by the
beams of the Sun, 50. days continually, after they have lost the sight of
the Sun, and so have they like light 50. days together before the Sun
does rise to them. And when the Sun is at the highest with us, it is at the
lowest with diverse other Nations, namely, to all them that dwell under the
Equinoctial directly, or South from it; And therefore all those Nations have
Mid-winter when we have Midsommer.

Now follows, how to erect the Sphere.
First, for the use of the same, you must place and set your Sphere leuill,
that it may stand upright, and by the needle in the compass in the foot
thereof, let it be placed due North and South, then shall the Articke Circle
stand North and the Antarticke South.

The next Rule, is to find out the elevation of the Pole of the heaven, in that
place where you mind to observe the Sphere for, and this being known, then
turn your Meridian Circle, and rectify the Pole of the Sphere, so many
degrees above his Horizont, as the Pole of the heaven is elevated, in the place
where you will observe the same. Then mark the degree of any sign that the
Sun is in that day, whose quantity you desire to know: set that degree just
in the Horizonte toward the East, and mark what degree of the Equinoctial is
in the Horizonte at the same time: then turn the Sphere Westward, till the
degree of the Sun be just in the Horizonte again in the West part, and
mark then what degree of the Equinoctial does light on the Horizont in the
East part, accompting truly how many degrees be betwixt those two degrees,
which you have marked, and that Arc of the Equinoctial, is called the Arc of
that day: which you may easily turn into hours, accompting 15. degrees to an
hour, and for every degree less than 15. accompting 4. minutes of an hour.

Example.
I set the Globe to the elevation of 52. degrees, and consider the place of the
Sun, the 14. day of August, and find it to be by the Ephemerides, in the
first beginning of Virgo, therefore do I set the beginning of Virgo in the
very Horizonte, and then do I see with it, the 137. degree of Equinoctial in
the same Horizonte, which I do mark; afterward I turn the Sphere til the
place of the Sun, be in the Horizont on the West part, and the^ in the East
part I mark the place of the Equinoctial, which is 347. degrees, now abating
137. out of 347. there rests the whole day Arc, which is 210. degrees, which
makes 14. hours: wherefore I conclude, that the night is but 10. hours, and
both those times makes just 24. hours.

An other way to find the same, more easier. Example.
For London, the Pole of heaven being raised there, 51. degrees and 34. minutes.

Turn your Meridian Circle 51. degrees and 34. minutes, the^ the Pole of your
Sphere is elevated to the Latitude of London, thus being finished.

The next Rule, to know the day of the month you will practice on.

That is to be found out in the Horizonte Circle of the Sphere, where you shall
find also, what degree the Sun occupies in the sign that day. Then turn
the Circle of the Sun, that the middle body of the Sun be brought right
against the said degree, in the Zodiake: then turn the whole Globe about
Westward, till the body of the Sun be right under the Meridian Circle, and
there let him stay, till you have removed the index of the howerly Circle or
Dial, precisely on 12. of the clock at noone: then turn and bring the Globe
back again, to the East part of the Horizonte, where you first found out what
degree of the sign the Sun was in that day; Then look upon the Dyall, on
the North part of the Sphere or Globe, and ye shall find what hour the Sun
ryseth: this being done, bring him back again Westward, toward the Meridian
Circle, and it notes the place of the elevation of the Sun every hour, till
he be at his full height under the Meridian Circle, then it is said to be in
the very noone steed, for that place where you use the Sphere for, then turn
the Globe or Sphere from the Meridian Circle, westward, and it shows the
number of hours which he falls from the Meridian height, till the time that
he sets under the Horizonte, and the index in the Dyall, will tell you the
hour that he sets under the Horizonte that day.

So thus having regard to the former instructions, will tell you the time of
the length of the days and nights, in all places of the world, throughout the
whole year; Provided always, that ye erect and set the degrees of the
Meridian Circle, to the Latitude of the said place, where you mean to make
your observation.

Yet by the way, I will give you a Rule touching the Suns motion, in his
Excentrick Circle.

The Excentrick Circle in the Sphere or Globe, being narrower on the one side
than on the other, and has his Center distant or divided from the Center of
the world, and is described in the heaven of the Sun, imagining a line from
the Center of the Excentricke to the Center of the Sun, making a complet
revolution at the proper motion of the Sun.

In the other heavens, imagining a line from the Center of his Excentrick, to
the Center of the Epicicle.

The Epicicle, is a Circle or little Roundle, fixed in the depth of the
Excentrick: in which, the Plannet is fixed, and near to his Center is moved
Circulerlie.

The Auge, is a point in the circumference of the Excentrick, nearest unto the
Firmament: or it may be said, that the Auge is a point farthest distant from
the Earth.

Aux, in the Greek tongue is as much to say, as the greatest Longitude or
greatest elevation from the Earth.

The opposite of the Auge, is an other point in the circumference of the
Excentrick, nearest unto the Earth, and farthest distant from the Firmament.

And you must here note and understand, the Sun is not moved Regularly in
the Zodiake, making so much by his proper motion in one day, as in the other,
because his Reguler motion is in respect of the Center of his own proper
Sphere, or orb wherein he is moved, whose Center is distant without the
Center of the world, toward the parts of Cancer: so that the greater part of
his orb Excentrick, is toward the septentrionall part, where the Sun passing
by the septentrionall signs, is more distant from the Earth, and has more to
go of his orb Excentricke, than being in the South signs: for, passing by
the North signs, he tarryeth 9. days more, to describe the half of the
Zodiake, than the other half toward the South part.

And for this cause, the Sun is more swifter in his motion (in the Zodiake)
one time, than another: for his motion in one day in the South signs, shall
be greater than it is in one day in the North signs.

And further it follows, that the said unequal moving of the Sun obliquite
of the Zodiake, certain days of winter, with their nights, are longer, than
certain other of Summer, with their nights: that is to say, that the day
natural in the winter, does surmount that in the Summer, because the right
ascension which answers to one days motion of the Sun, being in the
South, is greater than the ascension for one days moving, being in the North
signs.

Next follows the placing of the other six Plannets, in their true order in
the Sphere.
These six Plannets, having each of them several Spheres, and their motions
also several, and unlike in time to any other: and therefore they are called
wandering stars. These are carried round about the world, by the vyolence of
the first mouer, in 24. hours, that is, every day once; yet they keep their
places in their Sphere, and have their proper motions from West toward East.

The Moon, with her heaven or Sphere, by her proper motion, gives her turn
from the West to the East, in 27. days and 7. hours, with 45. minutes.

Venus, Mercury, and the Sun, in a year, which is the space of 365. days,
with 5. hours and 49. minutes.

Mars, in two years. Jupiter, in 12. years. Saturn, in 30. years.

The eight heaven, which is the Firmament or starry heaven, by his own proper
motion is moved by the ninth heaven, upon the beginning of Aries and Libra, and
upon these two points, accomplisheth his Revolution in seven thousand years.

This motion is called Motus trepedationis, (that is to say) the trembling
motion, of Access or recess.

To rectify the 6. Plannets, to go in their due courses about the Sphere.
Example.
Saturn, who is the slowest in motion of all the 7. Plannets, the 30. day of
June, 1592. he is found by the Ephemerides at noone, in his middle motion, to
occupy the 16. degree, and 36. minutes of Cancer: then I turn the Sphere of
Saturn, that the body or middle part of his star or Caracter, be just under
the same degree in the sign noted in the Zodiake, then moving or turning the
whole Globe about, from East to the West, shows not only the hours of his
rising and setting, with his Longitudes and Latitudes, but also, what part of
the heavens he occupyeth, every hour of the day and night, as by the Dial it
appears in the Globe, if it be set according to the true place of the Sun.

Likewise, Jupiter is to be sought out, what degree of the sign he occupyeth
the same day at noone, and observe his Sphere in the same order.

Mars, the like; The Sun, I have showed you the order before. Then Venus
follows, and Mercury, to be ordered and set each of them in their several
Spheres, then shall appear every one of them in their several courses, every
moment of the day: as by the example of Saturn before is showed.

Now to the Sphere of the Moon, whose motion in her Sphere is nearest to the
Earth; the observation of her, follows.

The Moon, swifter in course than any of the other Plannets, makes her
revolution through the twelve signs, twelve times in a year oftener than the
Sun. And she is to be placed in like wise, according to the former Rules, in
the sign she is in at noone, that day and hour which you will observe the
Globe or Sphere for, and for every hour after, add to her 30. minutes: and
(without any great error) she notes unto you, her rising and setting, the
hour and place of the heaven, every day and hour where she is: the change,
quarters, and full Moon, the ebbes and floods, every hour throughout all the
whole day and month: and so consequently throughout the whole year, without
any great error; Also, the depriving of her light by the Earth, in time of her
Eclipses.

To find out by the Instrument in the Dyall, the age of the Moon, with her
change, quarters, and full: her aspects with the Sun: the ebbes and floods,
and other necessary Rules, appertayning to the Art of Navigations. etc.
Mark at the Conjunction of the Sun and Moon, (it is said) the change of
the Moon, is when the Sun and she meets together, and then the Moon
takes her light of the Sun: and when she is run in her course, 24. hours
after the change, it is said that she is a day old; then turn the index of
the Moon to the figure of 1. And when she is two days old, turn the index of
the Moon to the figure of 2. and so proceed, till she come to the figure of
7. and then it is said to be in the first quarter of the Moon: then at the
figure of 15. she is in opposition with the Sun, then it is said to be a
full Moon: then she gathers every day in her decrease, toward the Sun.
And when she is 7. days past the full, then she has lost half her roundnes of
her light, and is said to be last quarter; and so gathers every day, nearer
and nearer the Sun, till she be depryued quite from her light, and then it is
said to be at change again, and a new Moon: and after her change, then her
light begins to increase again, every 24. hours, 48. minutes; which yields
in 15. days, 12 hours. And so much she is just of the Sun, at the time of
the full Moon. And if you will mark the distances, betwixt the index of the
Sun, which points the hours in the Dyall, and in the index of the Moon: you
shall find always what distance the Sun and Moon are a sunder; this is
called amongst the Marrines, the shifting of the Sun and the Moon, and
hereby they shall know their ebbes and floods, as appears in the uttermost
part of the Dyall: and also, the 32. points of the Compass shows the same.

Another Rule for the hour of the two stars afore-sayde, called the Guardes,
and of some, called Charles Wayne, or Charles Carte: likning four stars to
four wheels, and the other three stars to three Oxen.

And the first stars I take for my purpose, and declare at every months
end, at what hour they are full West, and the hours that they are West and by
North, and North-west, and North-west and by North, and full North; and so
round about 24. hours.

Example.
JANVARY.
From the 2. day of January, to the 17. they are North-east, at 5. at night: so
you must turn the former Guarde, that the third going from the same to the
North star, may fall just upon the North North-east point of the Compass, at
5. of the clock at night: and then turn the Globe round about, and it notes
every hour, and every point in the Compass, that coast where they are situated,
and also, what hour they rise and set under the Pole. And by this example put,
you may proceed throughout every month in the year, according to the times
of their being, and every hour in the same. As at 6. of the clock at night,
they are North-east and by North.

at 7. North-east. at 8. East and by North. at 9. Full East. at 10. East and by
South. at 11. South-east. at midnight, South-east and by South. at 1.
South-east. at 2. South-east and by South. at 3. Full South. at 4. South-west
and by South. at 5. South-west. at 6. South-west and by South. at 7.
South-west.
From the 17. to the last, they are North-east and by North at 5. at night.

at 6. North-east. at 7. East and by North, at 8. Full East. at 9. East and by
South. at 10. South-east at 11. South-east and by South at midnight, South
South-east at 1. South-east and by South at 2. Full South at 3. South-west and
by South at 4. South-west, at 5. South-west and by South at 6. South-west at 7.
West and by South.
From the last to the 15. of February, they are North-east at 5. at after noone.

at 6. East and by North at 7. Full East. at 8. East and by South at 9.
South-east at 10. South-east and by South at 11. South-east at midnight, South
South-east and by South. at 1. Full South at 2. South South-west and by South.
at 3. South-west at 4. South-west and by South at 5. South-west at 6. West and
by South at 7. Full West
FEBRVARY. The hours of the two stars of Charles Wayne.
From the 15. to the 1. of March, they are full East, at 6. at after noone.

at 7. East and by South. at 8. South-east at 9. South-east and by south at 10.
South-east at 11. South-east and by south at midnight, full South at 1.
South-west and by south at 2. South-west at 3. South-west and by south at 4.
South-west at 5. West and by South at 6. Full West.
From the 1. of March to the 16. of March, they are East and by South, at 6. at
after noone.

at 7. South-east at 8. South-east and by south at 9. South-east at 10.
South-east and by south at 11. Full South at midnight, South south-west and by
south. at 1. South south-west at 2. South-west and by south at 3. South-west at
4. West and by South at 5. Full West at 6. West and by North
MARCH. The hours of the two stars of Charles Wayne.
From the 16. to the 1. of April, they are South-east and by south,

at 7. at after noone. at 8. South South-east at 9. South south-east and by
south at 10. Full South at 11. South southwest and by south at midnight,
Southwest at 1. South-west and by south at 2. South-west at 3. West and by
South at 4. Full West at 5. West and by North
From the 1. of April, to the 16. they are South South-east, at 7. at after
noone.

at 8. South south-east and by south at 9. Full South. at 10. South southwest
and by south at 11. South south-west at 12. South-west and by south at 1.
South-west at 2. West and by south at 3. Full West at 4. West and by North at
5. North-west
APRIL. The hours of the two stars of Charles Wayne.
From the 16. of April to the 2. of May, they are full South, at 8. at after
noone.

at 9. South southwest and by south at 10. South south-west at 11. South-west
and by south at midnight, South-west. at 1. West and by South at 2. Full West.
at 3. West and by North at 4. North-west
From the 2. of May to the 18. they are South South-west and by South, at 8. at
after noone.

at 9. South South-west at 10. South-west and by South at 11. South-west at
midnight, West and by South at 1. Full West. at 2. West and by North at 3.
North-west at 4. North-west and by North.
MAY. The hours of the two stars of Charles Wayne.
From the 18. of May to the 2. of June. they are South-west and by South, at 9.
at after noone.

at 10. South-west at 11. West and by South at midnight, Full West at 1. West
and by North at 2. North-west at 3. North-west and by North
From the 2. day of June, to the 18. they are South-west, at nine at after
noone.

at 10. West and by south at 11. Full West at 12. West and by north at 1.
North-west at 2. North-west and by north at 3. North-west
JUNE. The hours of the two stars of Charles Wayne.
From the 18. of June, to the 4. of July, they are West and by South, at

at 9. at after noone. at 10. Full West at 11. West and by north at midnight,
North-west at 1. North-west and by north at 2. North north-west at 3. North
northwest and by north
From the 4. of July to the 20. they are full West at 9. at after noone.

at 10. West and by north at 11. North-west at midnight, North-west and by
north. at 1. North north-west at 2. North north-west and by north. at 3. Full
North
JVLY. The hours of the two stars of Charles Wayne.
From the 20. of July, to the 4. of August, they are full West, at 8. at night.

at 9. West and by north at 10. North-west at 11. North-west and by north at
midnight, North-west at 1. North north-west and by north. at 2. Full North at
3. North northeast and by north
From the 4. of August to the 20. they are West and by north, at 8. at after
noone.

at 9. North-west at 10. North-west and by north at 11. North-west at midnight,
North-west and by north. at 1. Full North at 2. North north-east and by north.
at 3. North north-east at 4. North-east and by north
AUGUST. The hours of the two stars of Charles Wayne.
From the 20. of August, to the 4. of September, they are North-west,

at 8. at after noone. at 9. North-west and by north at 10. North north-west at
11. North north-west and by north. at midnight, full north at 1. North
northeast and by north at 2. North north-east at 3. North-east and by north at
4. North-east
From the 4. of September to the 19. they are North-west at 8. at after noone.

at 9. North north-west at 10. North north-vvest and by north. at 11. Full
north at midnight, North north-east and by north at 1. North north-east at 2.
North-east and by north at 3. North-east at 4. East and by north
SEPTEMBER. The hours of the two flarres of Charles Wayne.
From the 19. of September to the 5. of October, they are North-west and by
north, at 7. at after noone.

at 8. North north-west at 9. North northwest and by north at 10. Full north at
11. North northeast and by north at midnight, North-east at 1. North-east and
by north at 2. North-east at 3. East and by north at 4. Full East at 5. East
and by South
From the 5. of October to the 20. they are North north-west, at 7. at after
noone.

at 8. North north-vvest and by north. at 9. Full north at 10. North northeast
and by north at 11. North north-east at midnight, north-east and by north at 1.
North-east at 2. East and by north at 3. Full East at 4. East and by South at
5. South-east
OCTOBER. The hours of the two stars of Charles Wayne.
From the 20 of October, to the 3. of November, they are North north west at 6
at after noone.

at 7. North north-vvest and by north at 8. Full north at 9, North northeast
and by north at 10, North north-east at 11, Northeast and by north at midnight,
north-east at 1, East and by north at 2, Full East at 3, East and by South at
4, South-east at 5, South-east and by south at 6, South south-east
From the 3* of November, to the 18, they are North northwest and by north, at
6, at after noone.

at 7, Full North at 8, North northeast and by north at 9, North north east at
10, North east and by north at 11, North-east at midnight, East and by north at
1, Full East at 2, East and by South at 3, South-east at 4, South-east and by
south at 5. South-east at 6, South south-east and by south
NOVEMBER. The hours of the two stars of Charles Wayne.
From the 18. to the 3, of December, they are full North, at 6, at after noone.

at 7, North northeast and by north at 8, North north-east at 9, North-east and
by north at 10. North-east at 11. East and by North, at midnight, Full East. at
1. East and by South. at 2. South-east at 3. South-east and by South at 4.
South-east at 5. South South-east and by South. at 6. Full South at 7. South
South-vvest and by South
From the 3. of December, to the 17, they are full North, at 5, at after noone.

at 6. North north-east and by north at 7. North north-east. at 8. North-east
and by north at 9. North-east at 10. East and by North. at 11. Full East. at
midnight, East and by South. at 1. South-east. at 2. South-east and by South.
at 3. South South-east. at 4. South Southeast and by south at 5. Full South at
6. South southwest and by south at 7. South South-west
DECEMBER. The hours of the two stars of Charles Wayne.
From the 17. of Decmber, to the 1. of January, they are full North,

at 4. at night. at 5. North northeast and by north at 6. North north-east at
7. North-east and by north at 8. North-east at 9. East and by North at 10. Full
East. at 11. East and by South at midnight, South-east at 1. South-east and by
south at 2. South South-east at 3. South south-east and by south at 4. Full
South. at 5. South Southwest and by south at 6. South south-west at 7.
South-west and by South
From the 1. of January to the 16. they are North North-east at 5. at after
noone.

at 6. North-east and by north at 7. North-east at 8. East and by north at 9.
Full East at 10. East and by South. at 11. South-east at midnight, Southeast
and by south at 1. South South-east at 2. South south-east and by south at 3.
Full South at 4. South South-vvest and by South. at 5. South South-west at 6.
South-west and by south at 7. South-west.
A ready note in few words, for the difference of hours, according to the
distan^^ miles, from East to West under the Equinoctial.
FIRST, you shall understand, that 15. miles difference from East toward West,
does make the Sun rising, the noonesteed, and Sun setting, to be later by
one minute of an hour: and so 30. miles, 2. minutes: 120. miles, 8. minutes:
225. miles, 15. minutes: which is a quarter of an hour. And he that is ready
in account of Arithmatique, may find it out by the Rule of proportion. As for
Example.

London has Latitude 51, degree and 30. minutes, or there abouts, I travail
East-wards from London 2000. miles; My desire is, to know the difference of
their Longitudes, and the time of their noone steeds, for when it is 12. of the
clock with us at London, 2000. miles Eastward from London, is then but 2. of
the clock and 13. minutes at after noone. And 2000. miles West from London, it
was then with them, but 10. of the clock and 13. minutes in the fore noone: the
difference of these 3. places, one from the other, is to be found by the
Rules in Arithmatique, as follows.

If 15. miles in Longitude, Eastward from London give one minute of time, what
gives 2000. miles.

miles, 15. 1. minute of time. miles, 2000 133. (5.

I work it in this manner, dividing 2000 miles by 15 miles, and it yields
133. times 15. miles, and 1. third part of 15. miles, to be divided into 15
parts. Now, allow to every 15. miles, one minute of time, (as you have heard me
say before) and reduce them into hours, in this manner as follows.

60. minutes makes a degree of the Equinoctial; so then divide 133. by 60.
minutes of time, and the Cotient will be 2. and 13. will remain: that is, 2.
hours and 13. minutes difference, between that place and London. And in this
wise may you work by the Rules in Arithmatique, to find the West Longitude
from London.

There be some persons that make a great obscurity, in finding out the
Longitudes in sailing East and West; a thing once known, and of no great
importance, as ready to be found out as the Latitudes. A little Brief
(therefore) I will give you, to understand the same skill.

Let the Mariner, Sayler, or other persons, provide him a perfect Watch, or
Clock, arteficially made by a Clock-maker. Let him set the same by the hour of
the day in that place you are in, and to come by the true place of the Sun,
your Astrolob quadrant cross staff, or other Instrument, will serve you to
take the height of the Sun, and to find out the true hour in every several
Latitude, with the help of the Rules before. And the true hour being found
of the day in this manner, set your Clock or Watch. Then travel either by
Sea or Land, and when you are 40. miles, or 60. more or less, distant of the
place you went from, then look to your Clock or Watch, how many hours have
passed since you set on your journey: then take your Quadrant or orther
Instrument, and take the height of the Sun in that place you are in; and if
the time of the day taken with your Instrument, do agree with your clock, be
you sure your place is North or South, from the place you came from, and
therefore have the same Longitude and Meridian line; But if the time differ,
substract the one out of the other, and the difference turn in degrees and
minutes of the Equinoctial: and 15. minutes of the Equinoctial, makes one
minute of time, according unto the Rules going before, you may thus know the
Longitudes, difference of hours, and times, betwixt any two places East or
West ward. The Latitudes are easily found out by the Altitudes of the North or
South Poles, and also, by the Meridian height of the Sun at noone.

Example.
I find the Sun to possess the 1. minute of Geminie: his height in the
Meridian line at noone with us here at London, is 54, degrees and 10, minutes,
and his declination is 15, degrees and 40, minutes: now I substract the
declination out of the Suns height, and there remains 39, degrees and 30,
minutes, this I take from 90, degrees, and I find the place in height 51,
degrees and 30, minutes; And this you must bear in memory, that if the Sun
have South declinatio^, you must add it to the said Altitude: then adding or
substracting that number from 90, degrees, there shall remain the true
elevation of the Pole.

Always bear this in memory, if the Sun be on the South side of the
Equinoctial line, it is called South declination; if on the North side, North
delination; And this has a most singular use in the Art of Navigations, and by
it you may find out the height of the Pole in all places where you travel.

Here follows the Degrees, called Putei, Fortune, Lucidi, Tenebrosi, Vacui,
Masculini, and Feminei, Fumosi and Azamene, in all the 12. Signs of the
Zodiake. By this letter p. is meant Putie: for. signifies Fortune: and a.
Azamene: this letter l. berokeneth Lucidi: t. Tenebrosi: this letter v. notes
Vacui: and m. Masculini: this letter f. signifies Feminei: and this syllable
fu. notes Fumosi.
Aries. Degrees,
1, t. m. 2, t. m. 3, t. m. 4, l. m. 5, l. m. p. 6, l. m. 7, l. m. 8, l. m. 9,
t. f. 10, t. f. 11, t. m. p. 12, t. m. 13, t. m. 14, t. m. 15, t. m. 16, t. f.
p. 17, l. f. 18, l. f. 19, l. f. for. 20, l. f. 21, v. f. 22, v. f. 23, v. m.
p. 24, v. m. 25, l. m. 26, l. m. 27, l. m. 28, l. m. 29, l. m. p. 30, v. m.


Taurus Degrees,
1, f. t. 2, f. t. 3, f. t. for. 4, f. l. 5, f. l. p. 6, m. l. a. 7, m. l. a.
8, m. v. a. 9, m. v. a. 10, m. v. a. 11, m. v. 12, f. v. p. 13, f. l. 14, f. l
15, f. l. for 16, v. f. 17, v. f. 18, v. m 19, v. m 20, v. m 21, l. m. 22, l. f
23, l. f 24, l. f. p 25, l. m. p 26, l. m 27, l. m. for 28, l. m 29, t. m 30,
t. m


Gemini, Degrees,
1, l. f. 2, l. f. p 3, l. f 4, l. f 5, t. f 6, t. m 7, t. m 8, l. m 9, l. m
10, l. m 11, l. m. for 12, l. m. p 13, v. m 14, v. m 15, v. m 16, v. m. 17, l.
f. p 18, l. f. 19, l. f 20, l. f. 21, l. f. 22, l. f, 23, t. m 24, t. m. 25, t.
m. 26, t. m. p 27, t. m 28, v. f 29, v. f 30, v. f. p


Cancer. Degrees,
1, l. m. for. 2, l. m. for 3, l. f. for 4, l. f. for 5, l. f 6, l. f 7, l. f
8, l. f 9, l. m. a 10, l. m. a 11, l. f. a. 12, l. f. a. p 13, t. m. a 14, t.
m. a 15, v. m. a. for 16, v. m 17, v. m. p 18, v. m 19, fu. m 20, fu. m 21, l.
m. 22, l. m 23, l. m. p 24, l. f. 25, l. f 26, l. f. p 27, l. f. 28, l. f 29,
t. v 30, t. v. p


Leo. Degrees,
1, t. m. 2, t. m. for 3, t. m 4, t. m 5, t. m. for 6, t. m. p 7, t. f. for 8,
t. f 9, t. m 10, t. m 11, fu. m 12, fu. m. 13, fu. m. p 14, fu. m 15, fu. m. p
16, fu. f. 17. fu. f 18, fu. f. a 19, fu. f. for 20, v. f. fu. 21, v. f. 22, v.
f. p 23, v. f. p 24, v. m 25, v. m. a 26, v. m. a 27, l. m. 28, l. m. p 29, l.
m 30, l. m


Virgo, Degrees
1, f. t. 2, f. t. 3, f. t. for 4. f. t 5, f. t. 6, f. t 7, f. l 8, f. l. p 9,
m. v 10, m. v 11, m. l 12, m. l 13, f. l. p 14, f. l. for 15, f. l 16, f. l. p
17, f. fu 18, f. fu. 19, f. fu. 20, fu. for 21, m. fu. p 22, m. fu 23, m. v 24,
m. v 25, m. v. p 26, m. v 27, m. v 28, m. t. 29, m. t 30, m. t


Libra, Degrees
1, l. m. p* 2, l. m. p 3, l, m. for 4, l. m 5, l. m. for 6, t. f 7, t. f. p 8,
t. f 9, t. f 10, t. f 11, l. f 12, l. f 13, l. f 14, l. f 15, l. f 16, l. m.
17, l. m 18, l. m 19, t. m 20, t. m. p 21, t. f. for 22, l. f. 23, l. f 24, l.
f 25, l. f 26, l. f 27, l. f 28, v. m 29, v. m 30, v. m. p


Scorpio, Degrees,
1, t. m. 2, t. m 3, t. m 4, l. m 5, l. f. for 6, l. a. f 7, l. f. for 8, l. f.
9, v. f. p 10, v, f. p 11, v. f 12, v. f 13, v. f 14, v. f 15, l. m 16, l. m
17, l. m 18, l. f. for 19, l. a f 20, l. f. for 21, fu. f 22, fu. f. p 23, v.
f. p 24, v. f 25, v. m 26, v. m 27, v. m. p 28, t. m 29, t. a. m 30, t. m.


Sagitarius Degrees,
1, l. m. a 2, l. m 3, l. f 4, l. f 5, l. f 6, l. m 7, l. m. a p 8, l. m. a 9,
l. m 10, t. m 11, t. m 12, t. m. p 13, l. f. for 14, l. f 15, l. f. p 16, l. f
17, l. f 18, l. f. a 19, l. f. a 20, fu. f. for 21, fu. f. 22, fu* f 23, fu. f
24, l. f. p 25, l. m 26, l. m 27, l. m. p 28, l. m 29, l. m 30, l. m. p


Capricor. Degrees,
1, t. m 2, t. m. p 3, t. m 4, t. m 5, t. m 6, t. m 7, t. m 8, l. m 9, l. m 10,
l m 11, fu. m. 12, fu. f. for 13, fu. f. for 14, fu. f. for 15, fu. f 16, l. f
17, l. f. p 18, l. f 19 l. f 20, t. m. for 21, t. m 22, t. m. p 23, v. m 24, v.
m. p 25, v. m 26, t. m. a 27, t m. a 28, t. m. a p 29* t. m. a^ 30, t. m


Aquary. Degrees
1, fu. m. p 2, fu. m 3, fu. m 4, fu. m 5, l. m 6, l. f 7, l. f. for 8, l. f 9,
l. f 10, t. f 11, t. f 12, t. f. p 13, t. f 14, l. f 15, l. f 16, l, m. for 17,
l. m. for 18, l. m. a 19, l. m. a 20, l. m. for 21, l. m 22, l. f. p. v 23, v.
f 24, v. f. p 25, v. f 26, l. m 27, l. m 28, l. f 29, l. f. p 30, l. f


Pisces. Degrees
1, t. m 2, t. m 3, t. m 4, t. m. p 5, t. m 6, t. m 7, l. m 8, l. m 9, l. m. p
10, l. m 11, l. f 12, l. f 13, t. f. for 14, t. f 15, t. f 16, t. f. 17, t. f
18, t. f 19, l. f 20, l. f. for 21, l. m 22, l. m 23, v. m 24, v. f. p. 25, v.
f 26, l. f 27, l. f. for. p 28, l. f. p 29* t. m. 30. t. m.


To know the place of the Sun, by the Rule of memory: And to know in what
degree the Sun is, without respect of minutes.
Bear in memory these numbers that heere-after follows. 11. 10. 11. 10. 11.
12. 13. 14. 13. 14. 12. 12.

The first 10. stands for January, the second for February, with their
signs, and so the rest; And to know in what degree the Sun is, you shall take
away the days that are applied to every month, according to the said numbers
of the days, for the which you desire to know the place of the Sun, and in
them that remayn, in so many degrees is the Sun, of the sign into which it
enters that month. And if the days pass of the month, shall be less then
the days applied to the same month, you shall join 30. with those days past
of the month, and of the Sun that amounts, you shall take away the days
applied to the said month, and the rest shall be the degrees, in the which
the Sun shall be, of the sign of the month past. As for example.

Month, Degrees, Signs. Ia. 11. Aquarius Fe. 10. Pisces. Ma. 11. Aries Ap.
10. Taurus May. 11. Gemini June. 12. Cancer July. 13. Leo Au. 14. Virgo Sep.
13. Libra October. 14. Scorpio No. 12. Sagitarius De. 12. Capricornus

The 12 day of October, taking away 14, that were applied, remains 28.
degrees of Scorpio, where the Sun is.

Another Example.
The sixth of December, which are lesser then 12. which is applied unto it, if
we ioyn 6. to 30. which are the days of the month next before, they make 36.
and from them we take away the 12. and there rest 24. degrees is the Sun of
the month before, which is Sagitarius.

A Rule to know when the Sun enters into every of the 12. Signs.
And that we may in the years to come, know the day, hour, and minute, in
the which the Sun enters into every sign, we will follow this order; upon the
day, hours, and minutes, that the Sun enters into every sign, the year
1545. we must add for every year 5. hours and 49. minutes, which with the
365. days which every year contains, shall be the time in the which the Sun
accomplisheth his revolution. And because that in the year of the Bebysextile
or Leap-yere, is added to February, 1. day more to his 28, which we have once
in 4. years, from 6. to 6. hours; if we shall take from the Computation, that
we have given turning one day backward, as shall be in the year 1548. and
upon that remains: shall return in the year following of 1549 to add 5,
hours 49. minutes, and as much more every other year following shall be a
certain Rule for ever.

And it is to be noted, that the degrees and minutes which we have touched
before, are properly for the city of Cadiz. And if we desire to apply the^ for
other cities or places more Eastward, the^ for every 15 degrees that they are
distant from Cadiz, in Longitude, we must add one hour, And if for the Cities
or places more westward in like manner, for every 15. degrees, we must take
away one hour, by reason of the course of the Sun, by his Rapte moving from
the East to the West. For it is certain, that when with us in Cadiz it is 12.
hours of the clock to them that are 15. degrees Eastwarde from us, it is one
of the clock: and to them that are from us 15. degrees toward the West, it is
11. of the clock. And thus may you apply it to every several Longitude East or
West, gyuing to every 15. miles, one minute of time according to the other
Rules in Arithmatique specified.

FINIS.
AT LONDON Printed by John Charlwood.


