The ready Path to the pleasant Pasture of delitesome, and eternal Paradyse,
so called, because herein is declared how, and by what means, we shall easily
obtain the surpassing pleasures of heavenly felicity.

Scene and allowed according to the order appointed.

Joel. 2. Omnis qui inuocauerit nomen Domini, saluus erit.

Every one that shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be safe.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, for John Iudson.

To the Reader.
ALBEIT THE WHOLE world be miserably plunged, and daungerously drowned in the
terrible seas of Gods heavy wrath, and sore displeasure, yet (most dear
christians) such are the unspeakable riches, and incomparable treasures of his
heavenly mercy, that be will not disdain to relieve us, to save us, to help
us, to hold us, to heal us, and to harbor us, in the most pleasant, and
comfortable rest of his most gracious, and eternal favor, if with humble
minds, with sorrowful, and repentaunt hearts, with a constaunt, and lively
faith, we will prostrate our selves before the everlasting throne of his
immortal Majesty, hoping to be mercyfullye, patiently, and graciouslye
received, only for the merits of Christ Jesus, our only triumphant, and
mighty Savior. But because men now in these our days are in heart hardened,
in life lycentious, in love lascivious, in manners miserable, in words wylfull,
in sense unsavory, in doings disordered, in talk intemperate, in wit wild,
in reason retchlesse, in rage unreasonable, in folly forward, in fancy
froward, in vice venomous, in vylanie vaunting, in soul sinful, in charity
cold, in fury flaming, in faith fruitless, and to conclude, in governing
themselves graceless, and godless: it is necessary before they can have
access to God in mercy through Christ Jesus, before they can pass to the
most pleasant habitation of Gods everlasting, and immortal kingdom, before
they can be enfraunchised CytiZens in heavenly Jerusalem, that they expel
pride, banishe arrogancy, expel hypocrisy, detest all impiety, cleanse away
the dregs of stinking Popery, wash out the spots of disobedient
adultery, and wype out the blemish of all blasphemous ydolatrie, which by none
other means can more conveniently be brought to pass, then by consideration
of the terrible threats of God against obstinate, hard hearted, and
rebellious adversaries, against stifnecked, ungracious, and disobedient
servant, against unnatural, unthankful, and graceless children, against
them, which contemptuouslye despise his commandments, which spitefully
neglect his fatherly counsel, which wylfully transgress his holy laws,
which disobediently refuse to give ear to his advise and censure, which
voluntarily cast themselves headlong, into the perilous puddle, and gaping
goulfe of all abominable uncleanness, unlawful wickedness, and extreme
misery. I have therefore (dear christian) in this my short treatise, wherein
my principal, and especial purpose is to bring men to the most necessary,
profitable, and wholesome exercise of godly prayer, first declared the horrible
estate, and second death of such, who do not, and will not practice earnest,
and hearty prayer, now whilst God does lend them leisure, and give them
opportunity, to reform their looseness of life, to return unto him with hope
of mercy, to escape the vengeance ready to be poured out upon stifneckned
sinners. I have (I say) first declared, and manifestly proved, that such,
unless they repent, shall have none other end, but eternal condemnation in
the bottomless pit of hell fire in most bitter ^nguish and immortal misery.
Secondarily I have plainly set forth with certain proof, the most happy
end, the blisfull estate, the good condition of those, who with hearty mind,
and earnest affection, and pure Zeal embrace the godly practice of perfect
prayer. By the first part, the terror of Gods intolerable vengeance may
batter down the strong walls of proud, and unbroken hearts, by the second,
the bruised consciences of the sorrowful christians, may be happily repaired,
and raised up again. By the first, sleepy security may holesomely be banished,
by the second, godly certainetie of salvation may easily be procured, through
the first, man's heart may be wounded, through the second, it may be salued, by
the first man's mind is, as it were, launched, by the second, healed, by the
first, roughly scoured, by the second freshely bewtified, by the first, opened,
by the second cleansed, by the first, cut out, and framed, by the second,
polished, by the first, half delivered from the bonds of cruel Satan, by
the second, safely brought into the gracious favor of our immortal Savior.
Thirdly, least something should seem to be wanting, for the better
instruction of the simple Christians, I have brieflye given certain rules, and
precepts, wherewith if always our prayers be well ordered, we shall
undoubtedly obtain our good requests at the hands of God, which thing
assuredly as it is profitable at all times, so in these our most miserable, and
woeful days, it is most necessary. For when our enemies do invade us, it is
then time to prepare to battle. When vice reigns, then it is necessary to
see, that virtue be succored. When Satan triumphs, then it is high time to
pray, that he may be displaced. When true humility once is defaced, then it is
time for hypocrysie to be suppressed, and now when rebels rage, sometime in
inward cogitations, sometimes in outward irruptio^s, it is necessary for the
health, and safegarde of good christians with earnest and hearty minds, to
desire God, that all their enimious wicked enterprises may be confounded,
their endeavors ouerturned, their deuillish purposes altogether disappointed,
and that the princely estate of our most gracious, and godly sovereign Lady,
Queen EliZabeth, may for ever be mightily preserved, worthily maintained, and
most prosperously confirmed, which I beseech God in the bowels of Christ Jesus
mercyfullye to grant. For prayer in what estate soever we be, is either our
only stay, comfort, refuge, and consolation, or else our principal defense,
and safegarde. There withal the subtle assaults of crafty Satan are easily
escaped, his sleightes avoided, his rage refrayned, his fury brideled, and all
his endeavors utterly disturbed. And contrariwise, by prayer especially the
mercies of God are liberally granted, his grace obtained, his favor found,
his love allured, and his gracious goodness bountyfully bestowed. Wherefore
let us embrace the godly practice of hearty prayer, as the sure seal of our
eternal salvation, as the pledge of our redemption, as the certain token of
our blessed election, and so undoubtedly we shall at the last reign for ever,
and ever with Christ in all felicity in his glorious, and immortal kingdom,
which he grant for the merits of his most precious passion, to whom with the
father, and the holy ghost, be all honor, praise, and glory, world without
end. Amen.

God save our Noble Queen ElyZabeth, and send continual peace amongst her
loving subjects.
I. T.

The ready path to the pleasant pasture of delitesome, and eternal Paradise.
etc.
How gracious, favorable, and merciful God is to his creature man, and of his
first fall, and the decay of his successors or posterity. The first Chapter.
ALthough the grievous abomination of our poisoned, and spiteful hearts, the
most execrable ends of our malicious, and deuilishe endeavors, the blasphemous
villainies of our disdainefull, deadly, and desperate impiety, do deserve most
terrible torments, most heavy plagues, most bitter, and eternal anguishe, in
the bottomless pit of perdition, without redemption: yet the merciful
goodness, and unspeakable kindness of God, our tender father, our careful
keeper, our holy savior, does not only cast us headlong (which we deserve)
into that dangerous darkness, and gaping goulfe, which burns with fire and
brimstone, where is continual weeping and gnashing of teeth: but also most
gently calls us again unto him, that we may taste of his mercies, most
pitifully bewayleth our wickedness, most heartilye forgets our iniquities,
most carefully cutteth off our corruption, most readily repayreth our empaired
and depraved nature, most willingly wincketh at our detected enormities, most
graciously covers our shameful nakedness, most mightily maintayneth our
cause against our open adversary the Devil, most earnestly desires our
health and salvation, most attentively wayteth for our godly reformation, most
largely promises us a glorious crown and eternal kingdom, with free
deliverance, and present pardon, if with pure heart and true zeal we shall
call upon his holy name, and seek succor in Jesus Christ, of his immortal
majesty. For when he of his infinite goodness, and exceeding mercy, did first
frame and form our father Adam, and raised him up out of the slimie bowels
of the fruitful earth, when he had breathed into him the spirit of life, when
he had endued his reasonable soul with the bright beams of most perfect
knowledge, and had bestowed upon him the blasing lights of most excellent and
approved virtues, when he had given him the sovereign science both of
celestial, earthly, heavenly, mortal, and immortal things, when he had given
him power over all the creatures, which were under the cope of heaven, and had
for this only cause builded the wide world, that man his most noble and
surpassing creature, might with all manner of delight, enjoy the commodities of
the same, and at the last, when he had placed him in Paradise, being a place of
pleasure, a pasture of delites, a most sweet, pleasant, and fruitful garden,
and licenced him to taste of all the fruits and pleasures of the same, wherein
he might for ever have led a most happy life, and never have felt the bitter
pangues of extreme dolor, wherewith now he is compassed and beset of every side
(only charging him to abstain from the tree of knowledge of good and evil,
enioyning thereunto a severe punishment the more to restrain him: than this
wilful, stubburne, and unthankful man, not contented with this heavenly
state, but aspiring against the just and express commandment of his loving
father, and immortal creator to such dangerous and deuilish knowledge,
whereby was wrought his utter destruction and miserable confusion; gave ear to
the contagious council and pestilent persuasion of enchaunted and bewitched
Eua, who by the sugared tunes of the cursed Satan, received the impoysoned bayt
which was covered with false, fair, and feigned promises, whereby they were
both so fowlye spotted, and so miserablye deformed, that where before they had
the similitude of God engraffed in their hearts, now they were plain
patterns and express images of the hellish serpent: where before they were
shining stars illuminate with the wholesome light of the heavenly spirit, now
they were dark and mistie clouds, destitute of all clerenesse, and clad with
most horrible impiety: where before they were decked and adorned with singular
integrity, justice, and purity, now they were beastly blemished with the
filthy spots of wretched villainy, pride, and impuritie: where before they
were chief inhabitaunts, and principal possessors of perelesse and pleasant
Paradise, now they were become exiled strangers, expelled vagaboundes, and
beggars banished from all felicity: where before they were obedient servants
now they were rebellious enemies: before friends of God, now ^endes of hell:
before in blessefull estate, now in damnable and extreme misery: before
almost equal with Angels, now worse than Devils: before better than all
earthly creatures, now more abominable than brute beasts: before the loving
sons of a tender father, now the open adversaries of a severe Judge: before
cherished and beloved children, now false and forsworn fellons: before blessed
and immortal creatures, now cursed and mortal mysers: before without trouble
and anguishe, now oppressed with calamity, grief, and sorrow: before without
contagion, now subject to sickness: before ever joyful, now for ever
sorrowful: before never comfortless, now always in themselves hopeless and
helpelesse: before puyssant Princes, now pelting peasants: before pollished
and precious paragons of virtue, now peevish and polluted Pagans: before
partakers of eternal happiness, now meet firebrandes of terrible torments:
before sacred Temples of the holy ghost, now defiled and stinking channels of
all sinful vilanie, retchlesse, crooked, crabbed, and blasphemous impiety.
And, alas, into this so pitious a plight, so miserable a case, so grievous a
danger, and so present perdition, we poor wretches, which be their unhappy
sons, their damned offspring, their wicked progeny, are by their heinous
offense, and our own corruption fallen and entrapped, from the which we
through our own selves, or our own strength, can never be delivered, but do
daily more and more by vain cogitations, by disdainful dealings, by cursed
hypocrisy, by abominable obstinacy, by swelling pride, by loathsome hate, by
cankerd contempt, by deuilishe envy, by sleepie security, by negligence in
prayer, by diligence in evil doing, by outrageous oppression of the poor, by
defrauding of the simple, by spoiling widows, by deceyuing orphans, by
traitorously neglecting and nothing regarding our bounden duties, do provoke
to wrath the almighty God, and compel him to pour down his heavy plagues
and grievous indignation upon us, to our utter ruin and confusion.

The promise of Christ the Redemer of man, and his conquest to deliver him out
of thraldom, and our duty contrary. The second Chapter.
BUt in this our damnable estate and condition, when we could see nothing but
deadlye desperation, and the monstrous mouth of the burning pit of hell
ready to receive us, then our exceeding good, gracious, and gentle God, whom
before we had so unthankfully forsaken, so daungerously despised, so
villainously contemned, so lewdly displeased, so maliciously provoked, so
wilfully cast off and rejected, that we had rather to follow the song of
Satan, the lure of the Devil, than the sage advise, and wholesome council of
so merciful a maker, he (I say) than did open the deep and hid treasures of
his manifold mercies, and did yet once again show us the gracious favor of
his loving countenance, promising even then at the fall of our old father
Adam, that his only son Christ Jesus should descend from his celestial
throne and seat of majesty, and take the nature of a man upon him, and should
break the head of the Serpent, that is, he should daunt the power of the
Devil, valiauntly vanquishe the host of Satan, puyssantly conquer the camp
and company of our enemies, overthrow the kingdom of bloody Beelzebub, break
down the gates of the nethermost hell, and beat down the walls of the
Devil his defensed Castle, and deliver us poor afflicted people from the
cruel rage, and violent clause and tearing teeth of our devouring enimye.
This was performed at the fullness of time, in the latter days, when God sent
his Angel to the most happy, holy, sacred, and pure Virgin, who being
ouershadowed with the spirit of the most highest, brought forth Christ Jesus,
our only Savior, our only redeemer, our only succor, safegarde, and
defense, our sure and steadfast rock, our stable and constant hope, the rampire
and castle of our health, the sovereign salve of our heavy and sorrowful
hearts, the sole and singular, and most wholesome remedy for all our diseases.
In this case therefore, we must do our diligent endeavor, that we may apply
this plaster to our grievous wound, and so fruitfully enjoy the commodities
of the same. For like as a great and infinite treasure, lying hid in the
earth, will not enrich us, unless with labor, care, and diligence we dig up
the same, and like as a great, swift, and courageous courser, will nothing
profit us in flying from our enemies, unless we learn how to sit fast upon
him, and so to escape, and as the surpassing knowledge, cunning, and science of
a learned, and well experienced physician, will not help to cure our malady
and sickness, or procure our health and safety, unless we open our disease
unto him, and desire his aid, comfort, and assistaunce: even so the meruellous
mercies, the manifold merits, and incomparable deserts, the everlasting
goodness, and bountious liberality, the riches and excellent greatness of
the inestimable grace of God, through our sweet Savior granted unto us, will
not cure our disease, will not enlarge the bounds of our liberty, will not
deliver us from the bonds and chains of Satan, wherewith we are clogged,
will not enrich us with the glorious gifts, and precious pearls of justice,
holiness, eternal life, and purity, unless we with humble hearts, with
thankful minds, with heavy cheer, with heart oppressed, with grievous
groans, lamenting our former iniquities, confessing our manifold misdeedes,
detesting all impiety, craving pardon for our committed blasphemy, and
heartily sorowing for our accustomed idolatrye, stubburnesse, and wilful
disobedience, do display our misery, and open before him our shameful
nakedness, and in the bowelles of Jesus Christ, in whom he is well pleased,
desire him with constaunt faith, with certain hope, with earnest and
continual prayer, to have mercy upon us, to illuminate our hearts with the
spirit of knowledge, to scour away the clouds of ignorance, to wash away
the spots of sinful disobedience, to kindle in us a fervent, heavenly, true,
burning, and godly charity, and to work in our hearts a continual desire
always to fulfill his most blessed will, and therewith all to give us the
power of his holy spirit to perform the same, to the glory of his eternal
majesty, the comfort of the godly, the fruitful edification of our brethren,
and the salvation of our own selves, and souls for ever and ever, in his
glorious and immortal kingdom.

The mean, and way how to come to our heavenly father, with a promise of the
Author to entreat of prayer, and a division of his work. The third Chapter.
IF we will therefore be the sons of God, if we will be pertakers of those
infinite and celestial commodities, which were gotten and purchased by the
most pure blood of the immaculate Lamb, if we will be healed by the sweet
salve of his bloody wounds, we must not slack to run unto God our heavenly
father, with continual and hearty prayer. Which prayer because it is a thing
so necessary for christians, that without ye same we cannot attain to the
grace of God, and merits of our savior Christ, and seeing that daily
experience does apparauntly, but pitifully teach us, that in these our days
it is an exercise that is nothing at all, or very lightly used of many which
bear the name of Christ, but in deed are not christians. I mean and mind by
the assistance of almighty God, and aid of his holy spirit, The purpose of
the Author.
to entreat something of the same, I say, of prayer: that the proud contempt
of the disdainful Epicures, which pass not for prayer, may be something
abated and diminished, that the licentious life of beastly belly Gods, which
take al their delight in worldly filthiness, may by the terror of Gods
judgment, be corrected and amended, that the rarelesse concupisence of worldly
wicked men, which wallow in wealth and worldly banities, may by the knowledge
of the bounden duties be cut off, and contemned, that such as be deceived by
simplicity may be reformed, that such as know not how to pray so, that they
may mercifully be heard, may charitably be instructed, that such as are
already forward in the same, may thereunto be the more incensed. Tomo. 5. lib.
De precatione.
For Saint Chrysostom says that prayer is as the root and foundation of al
virtues. For as the foundation does make a ship or house to be strong, and
holds it, that it may not be dissolved: so the exercise of prayer does hold
our life, and makes it strong on all parts, and so, that without this no good
can happen unto us, nor any thing, which belongs to our health. I will
therefore that I may the more orderly proceed, divide my whole talk into
three principal parts, and first duty we should perform. Then when by
continual fear, of grievous plagues and punishments, we are driven from
former negligence, to needful and healthful diligence, when by terror of
severe justice, the rain of our lose liberty is drawn in more straightlye,
so that we may not run like roysting rouers at random, to the heavy
displeasure of our almighty judge, as willingly we would, and unwisely were
wont, it may he, that the constaunt hope of so bountiful a reward, so
princely pearls, and surpassing a benifite, as is eternal salvation, may
provoke and entise our appetite to show some earnest zeal, and hearty desire
to please and serve our maker. Afterward least some simple, rude, and
ignorant people, as many there be (the more it is to be lamented) should
persuade themselves, that they serve God well by prayer, when they deface his
glory by some of their own superstitious inventions, or popish Ipocrisie, it
will not be far from our purpose, briefly to prosecute the nature of true
prayer.

That such as neglect prayer, be in danger of hell fire, the first part of the
Authors division, which is continued unto the.18. Chapter. The fourth Chapter.
But first I have to prove, that such, as neglect the exercise of prayer, are
in danger of hell fire. And that plainly appears, because they flatly
break the commandment of god, and wickedlye contemn the council of Christ
our savior. They deprive God of his honor, and worship, they are trees, which
bear no fruit, they are void of faith, hope, and trust in Gods mercy. That
they contemptuously despise the commandment of God and Christ our savior, it
is evident. For the princely Prophet in the person of God says, and flatlye
commands on this sort: Inuoca me in die tribulationis, and eruam te, and
glorificabis me, that is, call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, And Christ our savior charge us on
this manner: O rate ne intretis in tentationem. And saint Paul replenished
with the holy ghost, writes thus. Instate deprecatione, vigilantes in ea cum
gratiarum action. Pray earnestly, and continually watching there with all, and
giving thanks. And again, Christ says. Petite, and accipietis, quaerite, and
inuenietis, pulsate, and aperietur vobis. Ask, and you shall receive, seek,
and you shall find, knock, and it shall be opened unto you. And I will
destroy (says the Lord in the first of Sophonie) the men that have not sought
after the Lord of Jacob. Such infinite places there are to be found in the
scriptures, which plainly testify unto us, that God straightlye commands
us to call upon him, and threatens destruction to such as seek him not. Now
therefore such as do not take this means, which God has provided to come
unto him, must needs incur the displeasure of him. And alas how are we able
to withstand the severe judgment of so mighty a god? why do we not tremble
and quake to see our selves in so great a grievous danger* for as Paul says,
it is a terrible thing, to fall into the hands of the living Lord. Who shall
deliver us from the torments, that he shall cruciate, and torment us withal?
Who shall save us, if he condemn us? Who shall bless us, if he curse us? Who
shall restore us to any life, if he do lay upon us most bitter death?
Desperate is the estate of such, as will not call upon him, and they
undoubtedly can look for nothing else, but extreme, and cruel punishment.
For even as a Prince here upon earth, if he take a fellone, which has
transgressed the laws, disturbed the commonwealth, disquieted good and godly
subjects, violated his faith, despised magistrates, and vilanously committed
treason against his liege, and sovereign Lord, if to such a one, he of his
free goodness, gentle moderation, and mercy, do grant so much favor, that if
he give up a supplication unto his majesty, he will grant him pardon, for his
committed crimes, and heinous offenses, and then the rebellious transgressour
of the laws, either through negligence or contempt, do refuse so gentle an
offer, will never let him escape without grievous, horrible, and dreadful
torments: so God, prince of all princes, and Lord of Lords, whose mighty
majesty we unthankful creatures have not duly reverenced, whose name
worthily we have not glorified, whose glorious praise we have not magnified,
whose justice, we have not feared, whose fatherly mercies we have not embraced,
whose commandments we have contemned, whose fearful judgments we have
not regarded, whose decrees, and ordinances, we have neglected, whose counsels
we have cast off, and vngratfully refused, whose burning wrath, and hot
indignation, we have deserved, if we do reject his fatherly goodness, and
tender care wherewith he does call us unto him again by prayer, and
supplication, through his derely beloved son, Christ Jesus, our savior, and
still continue wilful, and obstinate in our old cankred, and hateful
disobedience, will undoubtedly cast us headlong into utter darckenesse, and
painful pangues and bitter anguish, with the Devil and his cursed Angels.
For as he is gentle, so is he just, as he is amiable, so is he terrible, as he
is merciful, so is he wrathful, to the humble, and penitente, he is a mild,
and favorable comforter, to the stifnecked, and disobedient, he is an yrefull
revenger, to the true christians, a present relief in danger, to disdainefull
hypocrites, a consuming fire, to poor afflicted, and oppressed Abels, a
cheerful, and faithful friend, to persecuting Cainites, an open enemy, to
his seely sheep, a careful shephearde, to ravening Wolves, a ramping Lion, to
simple souls, a courageous captain, to disceitfull Devils, a perpetual
torment, to faithful people, a sure defense, to tering Tigres, a devouring
adversary. For in his wrath, he will consume his enemies, and in his fury,
will confound all his rebellious adversaries. Therefore David says, Psalm. 2.
serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto him with reverence. Kiss the
son, least he be angrye, and so ye perish from the right way. If his wrath be
kindled, yea, but a little, blessed are al they, yt put their trust in him.

The dreadful end of them, against whom Gods wrath is kindled, and the
danger of the contempt of gods grace. The fifth Chapter.
THe Prophet here knew the dreadful end of those against whom the wrath of
God is incensed, and their of God inflamed, he, I say, knew to what pitious
estate, what lamentable, and miserable end, what horrible condition they
should come to at the last. Therefore, he accounts them blessed, holy,
heavenly, happy, that put their trust in the Lord, that serve him with fear,
that worship him, that obey the commandments of his divine majesty, with
just reverence. Number. 16.
For in the sixtene of numbers, we may some thing perceive how God will punish
contemptuous persons, and rebellious despisers of his will and commandment,
where he makes the earth to open her mouth, and to swallowe up Core, Dathan,
and Abiram, with their tents, wives, and children, in the sight of all the
people of Israel, because they refused to come at the call of Moses, being a
man as we are. What therefore shall he do unto us, if we despise the
commandment given us of himself, so often repeated in the scriptures of
purpose by the holy ghost, so constantlye confirmed by godly Prophets, so
manifestly declared by Christ himself, his dearly beloved son, perfect God
and man, which came down from heaven to teach us this lesson: Quisquis
inuocauerit nomen domini, saluus erit: whosoever shall call upon the name of ye
Lord, he shall be safe. What shall he, I say, do unto us in this case, if in
that case, he commanded the earth to swallowe them up quick, and carry them to
hell? We may assuredly, unless with repentaunt hearts we call upon him, look
for nothing else but utter ruin, and confusion, but eternal damnation, and
immortal misery, but for the terrible troubles, of tormented devils, and most
cruel strokes of most heavy plagues. Let the desperate estate of cruel and
cursed Cain make us beware, who would not after his heinous and bloody fact,
come to the throne of Gods mercy with tears, and lamentation, to bewail his
wickedness, but mistrusting the infinite goodness, and marvelous riches of
the grace, and favor of our mighty maker, and tender father, became
abominable before the face of God, and a terrible example to all such, as
contemn the great mercies of God, laid open to all them, that with humble,
and ready minds, will thankfullye by prayer receive them. Let the consideration
of unjust Judas, who after he had betrayed Christ, the holy one of Israel, and
unspotted lamb, which takes away the sins of the world, did hunge
himself, and would not take hold of the promises of God, but desperately
dispaired of the goodness of him, among the company of whose Apostles before
he was numbered, stir us more fervently to run to God in Christ our savior
withal diligence, with all continuance, withal certain hope, and pure
faith, in supplication, in prayer, and thanks gyuing. For if we do, as did
these miserable men, not look to be profred mercy, but refuse the same, we
shall be accounted breakers of the commandments of God, dispisers of his
word, wicked workers of iniquity, and consequentlye, worthy of the same most
unhappy reuengement, and just judgment, which they were afflicted withal.

An answer to a captious cauillation, that might be laid to the Author. The
sixth Chapter.
BUt some perchance will say, that these two last examples do not so much
belong to negligence in prayer, as to an horrible terror in their own
conscience, conceived for the cruel factes, they had committed. I answer,
that herein both may plainelye be perceived. For that which in this place is
most for my purpose, in these examples, we see the justice of God executed
against them, that did violate his commandment, by treason, murder, and
falshoode. Therefore death, and hell fire, is the guardon, and reward of such
as despise the will of God, and the will of God is, that we should glorify
his name by pouring out our prayers unto him. Again, we may easily see, that
not only desperation, but also a will to commit these horrible crimes came
through lack of feruentnesse, and by a cold negligence in prayer, wherein
they should have desired in all there doings, the direction of Gods holy
spirit, which if they had done, they had assuredly been free, both from the
terror of desperation, and also from the guiltiness of so mischievous
vilanies. For saint Chrysostom says: Sieve quis virginitatis amore tenetur,
sieve quis studet amplecti honorabilem coniugij castimoniam, sieve quis meditatur
inijcere fraenum iracundiae, and cum mansuetudine familiaritatem habere, sieve
quis putet ab inuidentiae lue purus esse, denique si quis aliud quippiam facere
studet, quod ad recte vniendum pertinet, duce precatione commodum, and facilem
habiturus est pietatis cursum. Whether a man be in love with virginity, whether
he endeavor to embrace honorable, and chaste matrimony, whether he couite to
bridle anger, and to be gentle or courtious, whether he wish to be clean and
pure from the pestilent, and foul spot of envy, or to conclude, if he desire
to do any thing, whatsoever it be, that pertayneth to good and godly life, by
prayer he shall easily, and commodiously attain unto it. The lack therefore
of feruentnesse, and the dangerous negligence in prayer, does bring all
wickedness, uncleanness, desperation, murder, and all impiety. This
therefore is the cause undoubtedly, why in these most miserable days of ours,
both here, in the Realm of England, and almost throughout all the places of
the whole world, men run hedlong into the pit of ignorance, and error, that
they swarm together to stir up wilful, and witless warfare, that they
swarne away from the straight path of christian righteousness, that they
ryfle in rancor, hatred, and abominable enmity, that they swel with the venomous
poison of pride and presumption, that they with all endeavor pluck down the
golden pillars of godly peace, and unity, that violently they break the bands
of heavenly concord, yt they root out the stamp of true religion, that they
impugn the state of wholesome verity, that they darcken the bright, and
shyning beams of christian knowledge, and clogge themselves with the filthy
fetters, of all abominable outrage and iniquity. But what? Do we think,
that the God of Jacob, and Lord of Israel now at the last sleeps? Or do we
think that he which neither slumbreth, nor sleeps, now winketh at our
wickedness and will not see it? Or do we think, that he, which destroyed before
time the people, that wrought wickedness before his face, has now changed
his nature, and is no more displeased with blasphemous behavior? Or do we
think, that we are of ability to withstand his fury, when he shall rise up
to take vengeance upon us for our horrible vices daily more and more
increasing amongst us? Or do we think that we have a special privilege, and
prerogative to do what seems good in our foolish fantasies, and idle
brains, without correction more than other have had before? Or do we think
that the power is either dau^ted, or his arm abridged, or his might impaired?
Or do we think, that he loves us more than he did his chosen charge, and
peculiar people of Israel? Or can we think so blasphemously, that now he
takes delight in our filthy doings, in wanton wills, and proud pranckes, and
cursed hypocrisy? No no. Let us not flatter our selves, nor dally with God,
but let us wisely consider, and justly ponder our loose, and lewd lives,
whereby we deserve most sharp plagues, and punishments, most heavy, and hasty
reuengement, most severe, and rigorous judgment, and let us know, that the
passing patience, and gentle sufferaunce of God, our heavenly Father, does
allure us to speedy repentance, to continual care, yea to hearecloth, and
ashe^, that so we may yield unto his majesty for a pleasant, and sweet
sacrifice, the bewtifull buddes of dutiful obedience. And let us well consider
the mighty wrath of God now long ago set on fire against us, and therewithal
know that he sleeps not, although he sustain us, that he wincketh not,
although he woontedly do warn us, and that he is not pleased, although to
prove us by gentleness, his plagues be something ceased, nor that we can abide
his displeasure bursting out, like a devouring tempest, although he for his
mercy sake do abide patiently for our return, nor that we be privileged, or
authorized to use the works of darkness, which only belong to the sons of
eternal darkness, although we by long sufferaunce be mercifully borne
withal, nor that the stretched out arm of God is any thing abridged, although
the violent force of his valiant power be nothing in punishing as yet
extended, or exercised, nor that he deliteth in our disordred appetites,
although as yet he do not pour present destruction upon our heads, nor that
he holds us more dear, than he did his chosen people, and proper possession,
the house of Israel, although he more severely did execute judgment upon them
than upon us.

That if God spared not the Jews, his peculiar people, he will not spare us,
bastardely engraffed in him. The seventh Chapter.
FOr how is it possible that we which are but the branches of wild Olives,
should receive more favor, force, or nourishement, of the true, and natural
Olyue tree, than the natural sprowtes, buddes, and branches of ye same? the
Israelites were, as though it were engraffed in the sweet graces, and tender
mercies of almighty God, watered with the wholesome showers of heavenly
clemency, nourished with the fruitful fatness of the soil, wherein they were
planted, yt is, of Christ Jesus. They were a nation even by the choice of God
himself, separated from all foreine, and strange people, for whose sake he
showed many wonderful, and mighty miracles in the land of Egypt, and
afterward they were fed miraculouslye with the food of Angels, they
received to their comfort the clear streams of most fresh and wholesome
waters, flowing from the flintie stones, and craggy rocks in the dangerous
desert, with many such like things, which did argue most manifestly the riches
of Gods mercy toward them. Yet for all this, when they rebelliously did
murmr against God in the wilderness, when they despised his servant Moses,
and grudged at his commandments, he ouerthrewe them in the desert, he plagued
them most horriblye, sending fiery Serpents amongst them, he persecuted them
unto the death, and pyttifully destroyed them. How much more therefore shall he
put us out of the book of life, and cut us from the stock, upon the which we
were contrary to nature, as wild Olives, set, and planted, if we do not
prevent his fury with hearty, sincere, and humble contrition, if we do not
appeal to his mercy seat by constant, certain, and trusty faith, if we do
not speedily return unto him with a faithful endeavor, never again to revolt
from him by lewd conversation, or unchristian cogitation? How can it be, that
he which is the Fountain of all justice, should any longer protect the
deuillish impes of Antichrist, spotted, and defiled with all injustice, yt he,
which cannot be pleased with any thing, which sauoureth of any corruption,
should any longer cover our cursed abomination, and execrable impiety? O the
deep dangers, wherewith we are compassed. O the piteous, estate through which
we are endaungered. O the profounde pit of perdition, whereunto we are
plunged. If thus we most miserable, and woeful wretches, wickedly continue
without remorse of conscience, if we thus ragingly do run forward into
vice, and vilanie without recourse, if we thus obstinately do persist in our
peeuishe purposes, and pestiferous inventions, without remembrance of our
estate and calling, death shall devour us, horror shall hold us, terror shall
confound us, confusion shall ouerwhelme us, bitter anguishe shall oppress us,
sin shall subvert us, sorrow shall shake us, the justice, and judgment of God
shall consume us, cruel enemies shall invade us, shame shall shadow us,
terrible torments shall entrap us, ye fire of Gods vengeance shall burn us up
in the twinkling of an eye, and the pains of hell shall plunge us into most
desperate, and deadly dolors. In time therefore dearly beloved Christians, and
natural Country men, consider that the long suffering of God calls us unto
repentance. For God would not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should
turn from his wickedness and live. He is a God, that deliteth in mercy, that
deals friendly with the friendlesse, that succoureth the simple, that wishes
the wealth of the wounded, that comfort the clogged conscience, that breaks
ye bonds of the imprisoned soul, and heavy mind a sunder, that favors the
fettred feet of his chosen servants, that plucketh out the poor out of the
pit of penury, and places them in the pleasant pasture of delitesome
Paradise.

A repeating of the purpose of the fourth Chapter, that is, of the danger of
them that neglect prayer. The eight Chapter.
But let us return to our former purpose, and prove that they be in danger of
eternal damnation, that despise and neglect the godly exercise of prayer,
which hereby is proved, that thereby they deprive God of his due honor and
worship. For the worship of God, is nothing else, but a religious work
commanded of God, and offered of us by faith to him to the setting forth, and
celebration of his glorious, and renowned majesty. And as it appears by my
former discourse, God has commanded this kind of adoration, when he says.
Inuoca me in die tribulationis: call upon me in the day of trouble. And
again, when Christ says: petite, pulsate, quaerite, ask, knock, seek, and,
orate ne intretis in tentationem: pray least you fall into temptation. And
oftentimes we hear the like spoken to the same purpose. It is a work therefore
by him commanded. And moreover, we may well perceive that nothing can more
pertain to the glorious praise of God almighty, than to look down from the
throne of his heavenly majesty upon poor afflicted people, hanging only
upon the hope of his infinite goodness, and accustomed mercy, and to relieve
them, that have nothing else to stick unto, as aid, and comfort, but his
gracious, good, and gentle favor, whereby they may be delivered from the
tirannous rage, and more than beastly cruelty, of their savage, and sworn
enemies. For what made the glorious name of the God of Jacob so much to be
redoubted amongst all nations, as did his unspeakable mercy, wherewith he
visited the children of Israel, when they were oppressed of the tyrannous
Egyptians. He heard their groans, their hearty prayers pierced the mistie
clouds, and came before his presence, they ascended into the ears of his
mighty majesty, their heavy griefs, and bitter sorrows were not hid from
his knowledge, but obtained most just reuengement against the blind, and
obstinate Egyptians, whereby his name was most manifestly glorified. For many
times he plagued with most sharp punishment the whole land of Egypt for their
sakes, with Frogs, Grasshoppers, Caterpillars, death, and destruction of the
first borne, and such like, and at the last overwhelmed all their chivalry
with the blustering storms, and roaring rage of the red Sea. The due
consideration, and circumspect animaduersion of this only history will
doubtless to every christian man, led with the spirit of God, and numbered
amongst the elect vessels of salvation, sufficiently express the notable
efficacy of prayer, on both parts, first both to understand the force in
preuayling with God, and also the glorious renoume of the Lord his eternal
majesty, through granting the request of his poor people. For when his
people, the children of Israel, were after much affliction, trouble, and
torment, delivered out of the land of Egypt, and was going into the
wilderness to serve the Lord their God, Pharao, and all his host, persecuted
them in all haste, to bring them again into bondage, which would have been
more grievous, and sorrowful, than present death unto them. And when they were
in such case that presently before their faces was the red foming, and roaring
Seas, upon their right hands high, steep, and craggie mountains, upon the
which they could not ascend, and escape, upon their left hand no refuge, but
dangerous, and deadly perilles, behind their backs, their cruel,
disdainefull, wicked, and horrible enemies, threatening death, torments, and
perpetual misery: then they cried unto the Lord in their misery, and he
delivered them out of their distress, Exodus 14.
they poured out their complaints before him, and he glorified himself by
their deliverance, they humbly sought for his gracious assistaunce, and he
mercifullye granted the request of their earnest prayers, they feared bondage,
he gave them liberty, they were compassed with grievous dangers, he gave them
sure, are safe passage, they were ready to be devoured of the sword, he
overthrew their enemies, they were almost persecuted unto death, he brought to
pass that they saw the death, and destruction of there persecuting tyrannes.
But how did he deliver them? Certes he commanded the wild waters to stay
their course, to lose their swiftness, to change their nature. He made the
waltring waves to be turned into strong walls, the surging seas into the use
of sturdy stones, the flickring floods into a steady bridge, so that his people
passed over with ease, and safety. But when the Egyptians were so bold, to
enter into the same passage, they were overwhelmed in the waters, the walls
turning, and changing themselves into their woonted nature. Thus was his
glory magnified, his name glorified, his power known, his mercy specified,
his terror taught, his love enlarged, his might multiplied, his goodness
graffed in the hearts of his people, that afterward they loved him as a
careful father, they feared him as a mighty revenger, they honored him, as a
peerless Prince, they reverenced him, as a severe judge, they glorified him,
as their only deliverer, they sanctified him as their holy profectour, they
followed him, as a well experienced Captain, they obeyed his will, as their
only guide, and defender. For his name to them was favorable, to other
nations, and people terrible, to them comfortable, to gentiles fearful, to
them peaceable, to others dreadful, to them it brought quietness and safety,
to others confusion, to them tranquillity, to others misery, to them
plenteousnesse of all things, to other penury of things necessary, to them
solace, to foreign kingdoms ruin, and overthrow, to them pleasure, to other
plagues, to them a joyful expectation of mercy, to others an horrible terror
of extreme judgment.

Nothing apperteyneth more to the glory of God than prayer. The ninth Chapter.
WHat therefore can more belong to the establishing of his praise, to his
royal pomp, to the blast of his magnificence, through all the earth, to the
publishing of his glorious name, than with humble, and hearty prayers
continually to be called upon, of his afflicted people, that he may stretche
out his arm, and declare his power, and bend his bow, and valiauntly
overthrow his enemies? Verily nothing. For thus he loses the simple captyues,
and binds the bloody Balaamites, he saves his siely soldiers, and spoyleth
the boasting bloudsuckers, he protecteth his poor people, and racketh unruly
ribaldes, he mightilye beyond all hope helps the miserable, and
contrariwise, debaseth, subuerteth, and confounds the bragging boldness of ye
proud disdainefull, and swelling tirannes. Seeing therefore that it is a
religious work commanded by God himself, enjoined to us by Christ our only
savior, taught by the Apostles, and Prophets, tending to the celebration, and
propagation of his eternal glory, renown, and reverence, as nothing more by
subduyng the stubborn, sinful, and malicious people, and by releeuing,
helping, and succouring, his afflicted, humble, and sily flock, it must needs
follow, that they which despise the use of prayer, and negligently, nay rather,
obstinately, and deuilishly contemn the commandments, and promises of God,
our heavenly father, and nothing regard his gentle admonition, calling them by
patience to hearty repentance, and amendment of wicked life, that they, I
say, deprive God of his due honor, spoil him of his worship, rob him of his
reverence, and consequently, fall into the danger of eternal damnation. For
4. Johan. Pater tales quaerit, qui adorant illum. The father seeks such, as
worship him, not such as renounce his laws, and reject his commandments.
And his not seeking is nothing else, but misery, grief, anguish, and
condemnation. Again, they are trees which bear no fruit. For they which are
not possessed with the spirit of God, which are not directed with his holy
hand, which are not illuminate with the light of heaven, which are not assisted
with the help of the highest, nor stirred up with the motion of the holy
ghost, nor plentifullye enriched with the graces of Christ our savior, cannot
because of their weakness, will not because of their wilful wickedness,
neither do couite because of their frail, and cursed corruption, either to
deliver themselves from the chain of Satan, wherewith they are bound and
tied, or to replenish themselves with the sweet, and well sauering flowers of
virtues, that they may be purified, to the proof whereof, Christ says. John.
15. Quia sine me nihil potestis facere, because without me ye can do nothing.
And Math. 15. Omnis plantatio, quam non plantauit pater meus caelestis,
eradicabitur, every planting, which my heavenly father has not planted, shall
be rooted out. And John. 15. Si quis in me non manserit, eiectus est for as,
sicut palms. etc. If any man does not abide in me, he is cast out, as a
branch, and withers, and they gather it, and cast it into the fire, and
burn it. Here we may perceive that (...) are not directed with the spirit of
God, are not the sons of God, but impes of Antichrist, not the friends of
God, but the limbs of the Devil, not swallowers of salvation, but heirs of
eternal condemnation. And saint Paul says. Filij dei sunt, qui spirit
u^de^^guntur. They are the sons of God, which are driven by the spirit of
God. And Christ says in the, 15. of John. Ques meae vocem meam audiunt. My
sheep hear my voice, and his voice is. Luc. 15 Quod oportet semper orare, nec
defatigari. That we must always pray, and never be weary. And in ye sirt of
Matthew he prescribes form of prayer, saying. Ad hunc ergo modum orate vos.
Pator noster. etc. Pray ye after this manner. Our father, and so forth. But
they which contemn prayer, will neither always pray, which Christ
commands, nor use the form of prayer, which Christ prescribes, nor leave
the lewdenesse, which God abhors. How therefore can they be any thing else
but trees without fruit, clouds without water, rotten roots without life,
barren ground without corn, ^^^les without curnels, and unprofitable bark
without sap, or savor. For like as the vine branch can bring forth no
fruit, unless it remain still in the vine, even so we can bring forth no
goodness, unless we abide in Christ. And how is it possible, that they which
hear Christ command, and will not obey, that hear the shepchearde of their
souls call, and will not follow, that hear the savior of the world counsel
them for there safety, health, and welfeare, and will not attend, that they
should receive any commodity, joy, solace, or comfort, to refreshe their
lingering, and languishing souls, almost, or else altogether pined away for
lack of good nourishement?

That God respects them, that call upon him, and rejects the contrary,
with the discommodities thereof. The tenth Chapter.
EVerye good, and perfect gift, comes from above from the father of light,
who bestows his heavenly treasure without sparing restraint, upon all them,
that with continual, and humble, and hearty request shall desire in the name
of Jesus Christ, his grace, favor, and everlasting goodness. But from such,
as before Gods goodness prefer there foolish fantasies, and seek rather to
please themselves in worldly delites, then to pleasure themselves with the
word of life, he worthily takes away his grace, forsakes them utterly,
leaves them destitute, will no more see unto them, in so much, that through his
absence, and departure, there miserable mind is overwhelmed with pernicious
errors, their senses darkened, their understanding obscured, their reason
oppressed, their will imprisoned, their hearts encombred, their heads enraged,
their devises ouerturned, their purposes disapoynted, their endeavors hindered,
their intentes disordred, their trouble augmented, their anguish exasperate,
their sorrow doubled, their grief more bitterly sharpened, their strength
banished, their life almost devoured, then spirits scattered, their dolours
ro^^ewed, their wit wasted, their wisdom confounded, their learning subverted,
their policy disturbed, their counselles abolished, their bodies weakened;
their souls endaungered, their thoughts defiled, their faith poluted, their
piety defaced, their rage unbridled, their fury enflamed, their wrath
incensed, and all vicious, and detestable impiety, slander, and vylanie
beyond measure increased. For the corruption of our mortal, frail, and
inconstaunt nature, is ready without reason to revenge injury, unless
religion do restrain it. The raging storms of our fleshly minds are wont
to burst out into dangerous attempts, unless the wholesome counsel of the
sacred scriptures be received. The waton will of a waywarde vessel of
iniquity may lightly be tossed into the perilous floudes of yrefull
indignation, and daily displeasure, unless it sail in the safe ship, and
unbroken Barcke of Gods infinite grace, and mercy. The old, and festering
wound of cruel hate, and horrible easy, will, as it is woonted, eat up, and
consume the sound parts of patience, unless it be salued with the sweet
Oil of Gods holy spirit, ye filthy rust of popish ignorance will disgrace,
and deface the truth of sincere religion, unless it be scoured away with the
light of the gracious gospel, the deadly dregs of humane traditions will
daungerously corrupt the virtuous medicine of ecclesiastical doctrine, unless
by the good advise of some careful, and skillful Physician they be removed,
and cast out, the contagious infection of noisome, and vnhelthfull humore will
in the mind of many men be causes of most grievous, and bitter sickness,
unless they by the circumspect consideration, and diligent advise of some
godly, learned, and well instructed christian be avoided, purged, and wisely
displaced, the pestilent invasion of the creeping cancer of humane confidence,
will maliciously infect the whole body of ye apparent, and visible church of
Christ, unless the plaster of Gods direction be fitly applied, to the
contynuall motions of man's ^^^nesse, and briefly, godliness, and all goodness
will suffer most lamentable shipwreck in the troublesome waves, and surging
seas of vain fantasies through the blustering winds, and terrible tempests of
deuilishe desires, and raging appetites, unless Christ rise up, and command
the waters to be still, the tempests to cease, the winds to be calm, the
weather to be clear, and the ship to be safe. Seeing therefore that such is the
estate of men, which esteem not, neither regard the goodness of God, that of
themselves they can not help themselves, nor by other means be preserved in
safety, because nothing can succor him, whom God forsakes, seeing that
nothing proceeds out of the heart of man, unless it be sauced with his mercy,
grace, and bounty, but it is abominable, and wicked before the face of
almighty God, seeing that the ffincking weeds, and noisome darnell of vices,
wickedness, and ungodliness, do burst out suddenly, and in a moment when
the seed of Gods holy word is not sowed in the heart of man, and watered with
the sweet showers of heavenly mercy, seeing that when God does not extend his
power, grace, and favor, nothing is pleasant, fruitful, or acceptable, but
al things are ordered with unruly rage, with bloody beastlynesse, with
disordered confusion, and horrible tempest of wicked, and witless
abomination, and again, seeing that they, which resist ye faithful exercise of
prayer, can not ^e directed by the finger, hand, or spirit of God, because
they are not Gods children, because they despise his commandments, and
counsel, because they refuse to hear his voice, when he calls them to
continual prayer, and earnest repentance of their former lives, it must
needs follow, that they are unfruitful trees, that is, rotten stocks, that
bring forth no good, and pleasant fruit, but withered, and infectious leaves,
impoysoned with venomous, and filthy contagion, and therefore shall be cast
into hell fire, and condemned to eternal, bitter, and most horrible plagues,
and punishments. For now the axe is laid to the root of the tree, and
every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be cut down, and cast
into the fire.

What virtues they be void of, that pray not The.xi. Chapter.
Moreover they lack faith, hope, and constant trust, in the most precious
blood of our savior Jesus Christ, and therefore are in desperate estate. For
Christ says: No man comes to my father but by me, meaning that unless they
put off their own corruption, and shake off their sinful hypocrisy, cut away
clean from them the confidence in themselves, or of other Idols, unless they
confess themselves to be of themselves wicked, disceitful, weak, unable,
mischievous, and damnable creatures, and surely believe that Christ came from
his throne in heaven, and took the nature of man upon him, to work their
righteousness, to appease his fathers wrath, which was enflamed against all
sinful, ungodly people, to deliver them from the servitude, and bondage of the
Devil, under whom they were subject, and to set them at liberty with the
ransom, and price of his most sacred, and blessed blood, which was poured out
upon the Cross, by cruel, and unthankful Jews, meaning, I say, that
unless he believe this with steadfast faith, and in consideration of the same
present himself before the face of God, firmly trusting that for Christ's
sake he shall be accepted, and mercifullye received, no man can come unto the
father of heaven, or enjoy the gracious aspect of the mighty God of Jacob, but
is utterly destitute of the glory of God, and is a firebrande of hell, and
heir of eternal misery. And Paul says: Without faith it is impossible to
please God. And again: Whatsoever comes not of faith, is sin, and it is
faith that makes a man to be saved. For Christ says to a woman, that came
unto him. Fides tua te saluam fecit. Thy faith has made thee hole, which is to
be understood, not only of bodily health, but also of heavenly safety. And
again, qui non credit (...) dicatus est. He that does not believe, is already
judged, or condemned. Therefore they, which do despise, reject, or contemn
prayer, if they be unfaithful, are in most certain peril, and danger of hell
fire. But that they are unfaithful, it shall, by the assistance of almighty
God, be declared by the force, fruits, and effects of faith. which because
they are innumerable, and infinite, it is requisite, that we speak of a few
only, which will sufficiently show unto us, how far they abhor from ye
excellent gift, wherewith the darts of the devils be quenched, the host of
Antichrist ouercommed, and the fiery flames of Hell extinguished.

That they lack love, and obedience, the special fruits of faith, which
exercise not prayer. The.xij. Chapter.
FAith, whersoeuer it be, does bring forth, or engender repentance, does
apprehende the spirit of god, does work in man's heart love, and obedience,
which fruits, and effects, if they necessarilye porceede of faith, as
hereafter it shall appear, see that by no means they may be separated, and
contrarilye, if they can never be found in any of them, which despise prayer,
as it shall be declared, it must needs of necessity follow, they have no
faith, but are dry, dead, unfruitful, and faithless people. But first let us
see whether repentance proceed of faith, or no, and then, whither such men
can be repentant. Faith when it is given from heaven, and placed in the heart
of man, then it does, as it were, rule, and govern all the motions of the
mind, it tries, and proves, and sercheth all the corners of his
cogitations, it seeks, and swepeth, scoureth, and cleanses away, the filth,
the rust, the dross, the dregs of all impiety. For God, in the first of
Esaias says, if your sins be as red as scarlet, I will make them as white as
snow, which comes only by (...) on, through which we appear righteous
before the throne of our mighty God, and justification comes only through
faith in the most precious blood of our only savior Jesus Christ. For Paul
says in the third chapter to the Romans: The righteousness, or
justification no boubt, which is good before God, comes by the faith of Jesus
Christ unto all, and upon all, that believe. There is no difference. For all
have sinned, and lack the praise, that is of valor before God: but are
justified freelye by his grace, through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus,
whom God has made a seat of mercy through faith in his blood, to show the
righteousness, which before him is of valor, in that he forgyueth the sins,
that are passed, which God did suffer, to show at this time the
righteousness, that is allowed of him, that he might be accounted just, and
iustifier of him, that believes in Jesus. Hitherto Paul. But unless the
sharp salve of hearty repentance be laid unto the festred wounds of our
sinful hearts, it is ^mpossible that they should be purified, cleansed, or
healed. For therefore the scripture calls us so often to repentance.
Conuertimini ad me and saluieritis. Turn unto me (says the Lord) and ye
shall be safe, and again: Si conuersus fuerit impius. etc. If the wicked shall
turn from his evil way, and nolo mortem peccatoris, I will not the death of a
sinner, but that he repent and live, and resipiscite, and credit euangelio,
repent, and believe the gospel, and non veni vocare iustos, sed peccatores ad
penitentiam, I came not to call the just, but sinners to repentance. So that
here we see plainly, that first is se^ conversion to God, and repentance,
then health, or life, or safety, whereby we may well perceive, that unless
repentance do launch, and cut, and rent our hearts, we can not come to the
perfection of obedient christians. And again: An humble, and contrite heart is
an acceptable sacrifice to the Lord, to whom nothing is acceptable, that
proceeds not of faith. For the Apostle says: Whatsoever is not of faith, is
sin, and with sin how can God be pleased? It remains the ^^^re that
repentance, whereby the soul is sorrowfully charged, but therewithal after
shall cheerfully be discharged, is engendered, and brought forth by faith. For
like as in a field, or garden, sweet, pleasant, or delectable flowers, can
not grow freshly, and abundantly, before that weeds, and stones, and thorns
be rased up, and cast out, even so the most delitesome fruit of dame virtues
grace, can not plentifully replenishe the field, or garden of man's heart,
unless first the briers of vices, and stones of wicked abomination be by
repentance cast out, and exiled.

Zachaeus an example of an hearty repenter, and that repentance is the salve to
recure the wounds of wicked life. The.xiij. Chapter.
THerefore Zacheus, the prince of Publicanes in the.19. of Luke, when he had
received the faith of Christ, burst out into these words and said. Ecce
Domine, dimidium bonorum meorum do pauperibus. etc. Behold Lord, the half of
my goods I give to the poor, and if I have defrauded any man of any thing, I
render to him four fold, which words undoubtedly do give a most certain
token of hearty repentance. For he did so much detest his former iniquity,
so much lament his old enormities, so willinglye condemn his practiced
prankes, and deceitful dealinges, that he not only did purpose in time to
come to avoid the like, but also did with most ready mind, recompense them
four fold, whom he had before deceived, or oppressed. And in the second of
the Acts, when diverse at the preaching of Peter began to believe, they being
pricked in conscience, exclamed on this sort. Ye men and brethren what shall
we do? here they knowing by the sermons of the Apostle, that they had a long
time erred from the truth, and served rather their own inventions, than the
true God, and therefore perceiving that they were in danger of the
displeasure, and terrible hate of the Lord hosts desired earnestlye to know by
what means they might escape ye vengeance, being ready to fall on their
heads, and sorowfully lamented their dangerous ignorance. And Peter answers
with these words. Delictorum paenitentia^ agite. etc. Repent your offenses.
Here we see yt the salve, wherewith their heavy hearts, wounded with wickedness,
were first refreshed, was hearty repentance, after they came to the faith of
Christ Jesus. The Niniuits. 3. Ionae, believed God, and commanded a general
fasting, which did well declare their remorse of conscience for their former
contempt of Gods commandment, and refusal of his mercies, and tormenting of
his Prophets, whereby they turned away at the last the wrath of the Lord from
themselves, and their city, all which do prove, that where faith is, there is
repentance. Now let us consider a while whether true repentance may be found
in them, that continue the use of prayer or no.

^^scription of repentance, and the parts thereof, and the example of the
saved thief. The.xiiij. Chapter.
REpentaunc^ is a true grief, and sorrow for the offense committed against
GOD, wherewith the mind is oppressed, the sorrowful heart most miserably
tormented the senses troubled, the understanding overwhelmed, the life
afflicted, the woonted wanton joys altogether banished, but so yt the valiant
force of a lively faith does again revive the languishing spirit, with an
earnest desire, and constant assurance, hoping for free pardon for the merits
of Christ his passion, whereby is ingendered a full purpose never more to haunt
the brothell houses of sin, and iniquity, but always to live in pure
conversation, and sincere piety. Herein be principal, and especial parts,
due contrition, and constant faith. Contrition makes a man to tremble, and
quake, to consider the violent (...) ^he o^ God, incensed against sin,
wherewith he is brought into extreme fear, terror, and anguishe, and for that
detesteth the horrible filthynesse, and deformity of the same. And in such
case is it possible to stand, and not to desire pardon? To require mercy? To
crave deliverance? To complain our estate? To lament our miseries? To seek a
salve? To procure an wholesome medicine, whereby we may be restored to our
health? No no, and especially, seeing faith, instilled into our hearts by the
spirit of God, does persuade us, that we shall obtain, if we call, that we
shall be raunsomed, if we require it, that we shall be healed, if humbly with
hearty prayers we repair to the good Physician of the soul, Christ Jesus our
Lord and savior. What madness were it to think, that any man, being sure of
most miserable torments, if he hold his peace, and is already plunged into
the desperate consideration of the same, and feeling their extreme bitterness,
and cruel sharpness, if on the contrary part, he were sure to escape so
great a daung^r, so apparent a peril, so mischievous a misery, by opening his
mouth, and desiring mercy, that he would not with ready mind, with
cheerful heart, with all speedy have, prostrate himself before the judge,
and in most lowly wise, and careful humility beseech him of his gracious
goodness, and desired bounty, to deliver him? The thief which was hanged
with Christ on his right hand, when he had received the boldness of faith,
and therewith was brought to godly repentance, did desire Christ most humbly
to remember him, when he came to his glorious, and everlasting kingdom. Ye he
did not refuse to call upon him, but by calling was delivered from the power of
Satan, from the mouth of hell, from the anguish of the soul, from the death
eternal, to which he had surely been condemned, if he had despised, or not
regarded the profit of faithful prayer.

The things that hinder the fruiteful exercise of prayer, desperation, and the
contrary thereof, that is, security. The.xv. Chapter.
WHat is it therefore, that hinders a man, so that he does not use the
fruitful exercise of prayers* Surely, either desperatio^, or else security.
Desperation drowneth a man in deadly sorrows, in bitterness of soul, in the
furious floudes of most deep and despitefull dolours. Therefore wheresoever it
is found, it shuts out clean the force of faith. But security makes a
man careless, hardneth his heart, indureth his stony spirits, and causes to
cry, peace, peace, when destruction hangs over his head. This also, when
contrition is absent, has no part or portion in a faithful heart. Whereof it
follows, that true repentance, whereby the hearts of christians are
regenerated, their wills changed, their minds framed a new, their desires
reformed, their lives amended, their cogitations cle^sed, their thoughts
purified, their spirit sanctified, cannot be found in those, that do not
continually burst out in most hearty prayers, desiring grace, goodness,
pardon, and amendment, and consequently, that such are not faithful, but
faithless, not fruitful, but fruitless, not gracious, but graceless
persons. Secondly, faith does apprehend the spirit of God. For Christ says.
John. 7. If any man thirst, let him come to me, and drink. He that believes in
me, as the scripture says, shall have floudes of water of life flowing from
his bellye, and this he spoke of the spirit, which they, that believe him,
should receive. And ad Ephesios. 1. Paul says: In whom (speaking of Christ)
also ye after that, you had heard the word of truth, I mean the gospel of
your salvation, wherein you believe, were sealed with the holy spirit of
promise, which is the earnest pledge of our inheritance, to redeem the
purchased possession, and that unto the lawde and glory of God. The spirit of
God therefore does possess the hearts of the faithful. But let us now
consequently consider, whither i^ may be found in such, that will not fear
God, which saint Paul seems to deny, Romans. 8. By these words. Non enim
accepistis spiritu^ seruitutis in timore, sed accepistis spiritu^ adoptionis
filioru^ dei, in quo clamamus, Abba pater. etc. For ye have not again received
ye spirit of bondage in fear, but ye have received the spirit of adoption of
the sons of god, whereby we cry, Abba father. For that spirit does testify
to our spirit, that we are the sons of God, and in the fourth to the
Galathians, because you are the sons of God, God has sent the spirit of his
son into your hearts, crying, Abba father. Here in these places, Paul does
manifestly show, that the spirit of God, when it rests in the hearts of the
faithful, does so mollify man's stony mind, so break down the brazen walls
of sleepie security, so confound the pernicious, and pestilent purposes of
negligent impiety, and again so comfort the sorrowful soul, so
refreshes the weary will, so repaireth, and heals the broken heart, that
ney^her by contempt of Gods wrath is proud^ed, neither by lack of trust, and
confidence, health is together banished, but contynuall prayer is poured out to
God, as to a father, that with natural, yea more then natural affection, does
tender his adopted children, his chosen vessels, his loving friends, which
appears by crying in faith Abba father. It is therefore proved, that they
which cry not with hearty affection unto God our heavenly father, have not
the spirit of God, and consequently, that they are rejected from the number of
the saints, and sons of God. Thirdly faith works in man's heart love, and
obedience. For that does most perfitely paint out the tender mercies, the great
good will, the gracious favor, the loving kindness of God the father to man in
creating him, of God the son in raunsoming him, of God the holy ghost in
directing him, in creating him, by making him of nothing a noble creature, in
redeeming him, by making of a bond servant to the Devil an adopted son to
himself, in directing him, by restrayning him from most abominable impiety,
whether he would run, and cast himself headlong into present danger, and
keeping him in the favor of his tender father, and creator. These with
innumerable, and infinite commodities more, will move almost a senseless heart
to contend with all endeavor to love, to please, to follow, to praise, to obey,
to reverence, to worship, and honor him by whom they are bestowed, and given,
and undeservedly, freely, bountifully, without respect of the receyuer his
worthynesse, and only for the giuers mercy.

The effects of faith in Mari of Bethania, which is Marie Magdalene, with an
enumeration of causes, why they be condemned, which reject prayer. The.xvi.
Chapter.
MArie of Bethania, after she had received faith, so loved Christ, that she
not only was wylling to do that which was commanded in the law of God, but
also exercised an extraordinary means, whereby she did show forth her
burning, and fervent love toward Christ. For when he was set at meat in a
Pharyseis house, she brought an Alablaster box of ointment, and she stood at
his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did
wipe them with the hears of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them
with ointment, and Christ testifies in the same place, the seventh of Luke,
that she loved much. Christ also says in the fourteenth of John. If any man
love me, he will keep my saying, and again, qui non diligit me, sermones
meos non seruat, he that does not love me, keeps not my saying, whereby it
appears that faith is not without the love of God. The love of God is not
without obedience, obedience is not, where prayer is not exercised, as it is
proved before. Therefore they which contemn, or neglect, or do not use
contynuall prayer, are unfaithful and disobedient rebels against God and his
anointed. Now therefore seeing that for such lack of duty on our parts,
the holy, and heavenly will of our eternal God is nothing regarded, the
sweet, and wholesome counsel of Christ Jesus, our merciful, and mighty
mediator, wilfully condemned the proffered, and promised mercy by the holy
ghost, in scripture plentifullye declared, wickedly refused, seeing that God is
spoiled of his reverence, deprived of his honor, robbed of his glory, praise,
and of our dutiful obedience, seeing that they, which do not exercise
continual prayer, are trees bearing no fruit, which are good for nothing, but
to be cut down, and cast into the fire, seeing that they are faythlesse,
desperate, secure, fruitless, and hard hearted hypocrites, trusting more to
the fond illusions of their vain fantasies, than the riches of Gods eternal
mercies, bathing themselves in the sincke of sin, and foul puddle of
blasphemous iniquity, it must needs of necessity follow, that they are burning
firebrandes of hell, sons of the Devil, and heirs of eternal damnation.
For as the Prophet Nahum says, ye first Chapter. Deus emulator, and vlciscens
dominus, vlciscens dominus, and habens furorem, vlciscens dominus in hosts
suos, and irascens ipse suis inimicis. God is a zealous, and a revenging Lord,
a revenging Lord, and wrathful, a revenging Lord against his enemies, and
angry against his adversaries. Ante faciem indignationis eius quis stabit, and
quis resistet in ira furoris eius? Who shall stand before his face when his
indignation is hot, and in the day of his wrath, who shall be able to resist?
For when he is angrye, the heavens shake for fear, the earth quiuereth, the
rocks do break a sunder, the mountains ship, the Lions rore, the Tigers
tremble, and all the inhabitauntes of the world are ready to desire the
hills to cover them. Such is the terror of his majesty, such is the horror
of his displeasure, such is the burning fire of his hot indignation. He will
not therefore spare those which traitorously spoil him of his glory, bereave
him of his due honor and reverence, deprive him of his worship, who may for the
same cause, look for nothing else, but eternal death, and extreme, horrible,
and deadly damnation. For seeing he is ielous, and a revenging Lord, seeing he
is a most mighty, terrible, and fearful judge, seeing he is a God that has
all power, dominion, and rule at his commandment, seeing nothing is able to
withstand his will, seeing neither place in heaven, neither habitation in
earth, nor house in Hell is hidden from his presence: and again, seeing on the
otherside, he is so justly provoked, so yrefully inflamed, so wrathfully
moved, against such as rob him of his reverence, it is most certain, and so
sure as the Lord lives, that they shall come to utter, and extreme, and most
miserable confusion.

The second part of the authors division, that is, that they be most certain
of the inheritance of heaven which do exercise prayers comprising the.vii.
Chapters following. The.xvij. Chapter.
But now let us leave to speak of those, and convert our talk to the state of
such, as do with earnest, humble, and hearty desire, embrace the most godly
exercise of prayer. They asuredlye are most certain to be enheritours of
everlasting, and most blisfull salvation, for ever and ever eternally. For
Christ says John. 14. Quicquid petieritis nomine meo, hoc faciam vt
glorificetur pater per filium. Si quid petieritis per nomen meum, ego faciam.
First whatsoever you shall require in my name, that I will bring to pass, that
the father may be glorified by his son. If you shall require any thing in my
name I will do it. Here Christ promises unto us, that we shall obtain
whatsoever we shall require in his name. If therefore we shall require
everlasting life in glory, and all felicity with him, and his, Angels he
will gladly, willingly, and readily grant it unto us. For here he is not
constrained to promise it. Therefore he is willing to grant it, and again, he
does not promise more, then he is able to perform, because he is GOD
omnipotent, equal with the father in all power, godhead, and divinity. For he
says of him self. My father and I are all one, it remains then that of his
siguler grace, and incredible goodness, wherewith he favors imbraceth,
loves, and tendereth us, he will for asking bestow upon us such infinite and
exceeding commodites, whose greatness, and excellency can neither by though of
man be conceived, nor by force of words expressed. Moreover he repeateth the
same in one place, and at one time as it appears, the more to confirm us, to
encourage us, to strengthen us, to increase our desire, to pray unto him, that
neither doubtfulnesse in asking, neither lack of hope in receiving, might
hinder our endeavors. In the.15. of John, likewise he says. Si manseritis in
me et verba mea in vobis manserint quicquid volueritis, petetis and fiet vobis.
If you abide in me, and my words abide in you, whatsoever you will have, you
shall ask, and it shall be done, and then he conteyneth these words in this,
my father is glorified, that you bring forth good fruit plentifully, and be
made my disciples, so that by praying unto him, we shall glorify his name,
because yt by that means we shall be made fresh, and fruitful gardens, fullye
replenished with the flourishing flowers of most excellent virtues, which will
yield so sweet a savor to God, and Christ our savior, that we shall be most
acceptable sacrifices, and pleasant offeringes unto him. He subuerteth also
these words, which contain incredible comfort to the solace of siely souls:
Even as my father has loved me, so I have loved you: What more joy and
pleasure? What so much comfort can we conceive? What earnest love of Christ
Jesus toward us may we gather of this, that he loves us, as his father has
loved him? His father to show his love toward him, spoke on this sort out
of a cloud: This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. Him he
raised from death to life, from earth to heaven, from cruel cross, and
affliction, to an eternal crown of glory immortal, and has set him on his
right hand in all power, and dominion, and has made his enemies his
footestoole, all which do well declare his love, he bears toward him. Nay
he loves him, as he loves his own substance, or his own self. For he is
God of the same substance, that his father is. Let us therefore be sure that if
we call upon him with fervent, and humble, and heartye prayer, he will hear
us, he will sanctify us, he will direct us, he will lead us in all
holiness, and pureness of life, and he will preserve our souls, and bodies
to everlasting felicity. For so he loves us, as his father has loved him.
And Christ says in an other place. Beati pauperes spiritu, quoniam illorum est
regnum coelorum. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven. And to be poor in spirit, is nothing else, but to humble himself
before the face of God, to put away all confidence in himself, to crave
mercy for his committed wickedness, to pour out his complaint before his
only redeemer, to acknowledge his own unworthiness, to confess his
weakness, not to bost of his merits, not to brag with boldness, his own
ability, not to trust in his own deseruings, but to lie prostrate before the
judgment seat of God, to wait for the cru^mes of mercy, that fall from the
Lords table, to call, and cry for grace, and bounty, through Christ Jesus his
death, and passion, by whom alone he seeks for relief, health, and comfort
in all humylitie. Again, we have a sure promise of Christ himself, saying
unto us. 16 of. John. Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you shall
require my father in my name, he will give it you. Ask, and you shall receive.
If then we shall desire God the father, in the merits of his most dearelye
beloved son Christ Jesus, to water our hearts with the dew of his heavenly
grace, and to refresh our hungry souls, with the food of his holy word, and
still to preserve, protect, and govern our heavy hearts, with the wisdom of
his heavenly spirit, he will no doubt assist us, help us, heal us, direct
us, shadow us with the wings of his mercy, and at the last, when our soul is
dissolved from the prison of the body, will place it in eternal paradise. For
Christ is the truth, and therefore cannot lie, and he has promised faithfully
to fulfill all our godly desires.

The comparison of God unto the unrighteous Judge, which is overcome with
continual, and importune suit. The.xviij. Chapter.
ANd he the more to encourage us, does make a comparison. Luke. 18. betwixt his
father, and an unrighteous Judge, on this manner. There was a Judge in a
certain City, says he, who neither feared God, nor esteemed man. There was
also a widow in the same city, and came unto him, saying: Revenge me of mine
adversary, and for a while he would not. But at the last he said within
himself: Although I neither fear God, nor care for man, yet because this
widow still troubles me, I will revenge her of her enemy, least at the last
the come, and reprove me. And the Lord said, hear what the unrighteous judge
says. And shall not God revenge his elect people, that cry unto him night and
day, although he differ it? I say unto you, that he shall revenge them
quickly. Here Christ does express, and paynt out in lively colors, the force
of earnest, and hearty prayer. For that Judge, that was of so rough, and
rigorous a nature, of so fierce, and austere conditions, of so ungentle, and
cruel disposition, that he dispysed the complaints of the poor, regarded not
the requests of the miserable, refused to give ear to the cries of Orphans,
contemned the lamentations of the oppressed people, cared not for thretnings,
set religion at naught, considered not the terrible strokes of Gods vengeance,
lightly looked upon his duty, gave himself to vain pleasure, and was in
words unkind, in wit wilye; in countenance terrible, in iesture fearful,
in life tirannicall, in manners monstrous, in conversation savage, in dealings
dreadful, in heart spiteful, in will a wolf, in thoughts outrageous, in
office cruel, in menacing more than manful, and beyond measure full of al
iniquity, by the continual calling upon of this woman, by her pitious
complaints, was reformed, and brought to mercy, was contented to deliver her
from her oppressing enemy, was persuaded to leave of his old severity, or
rather careless cruelty in that case, and was ready to fulfill her will, to
grant her request, and to agree to her desire, and then Christ transferreth it
to his father, who is our tender favorer, to show how much more he would be
glad to have us pour forth our prayers unto him that he might satisfy our
wills, and show mercy unto thousands, that call upon him. For he does of his
infinite, and exceeding goodness with fair, and faithful promises allure us,
with bonntiful rewards endeavor to entise us, with offered, and proffred benifits
to bind us, with mercy to move us, with kindness to constrain us, with
courtesy to call us, with pity to provoke us, with gifts to gratify us,
with ready mind to redress, with reason to reform us, with good wills to
win us, with love to lead us, with care to cure us, with solace to salute
us, with charity to chasten us, with duty to drive us, with compassion, as it
were, to compel us to come unto him. For toward us his affection is earnest,
and zealous, his love large, and lively, his care incomparable, his good will
gracious, his benevolence bountiful, his mercy marvelous. If therefore ye
judge, that was savage, unjust, and terrible, in whom their scarce appeared
any spark of pity, could by a simple woman be entreated, how much more
shall so loving a Lord, so naturally affectioned a father, so merciful a God,
as this the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob is, be ready to receive us?

That the devils impression is not suffered of God to prevail, where prayer is
in place, with the remedies of sins. The xix. Chapter.
AT the last, our savior Christ concludes, that God will here the prayers of
his elect, that cry unto him, day and night, and will revenge them quickly.
Where we have to consider, that if the Devil go about, either by force to
overthrow us, or by pollicye, to plague us, or by sleightes to conquer us, or
by strength to overcome us, by pleasure to allure us, or by pain to compel
us, by trenchynges to undermine us, or by ignorance to lead us, by folly to
force us, or by fondenesse to feed us, by riches to enrage us, or by power to
constrain us, by villainy to wrest us, or by pleasure to entrappe us, or by
what means so ever he mind to be victor over us, we may by calling for help
at the merciful hands of almighty God confound his devises, ouertourne his
endeavors, and become valiant conquerers in all temptations. For if pride do
prick us, we may call for humility with humble obedience, if sloth, and
idleness, do creep into our bodies, minds, or members, we may pray for
agilitie, love of labor, and diligence, if the insatiable thirst of
corruptible treasure do couetously consume us, we may request the gracious
virtue of lovely liberty, free gentleness, and bounty, if graceless
glottonie do greedily devour us, we may wait for the assured stay of trusty
temperance, if the burning fever of wicked, and wanton lust do miserably vex
us, we may desire the cold, and comfortable relief of right reason, and ruly
religion, if the venomous poison of bitter envy do daungerouslye infect us, we
may require the wholesome medicine of godly charity, if the love of licentious
liberty do lead us, we may with supplication ask for moderation, and
meekness, if churlishe, and currishe, and carelishe doggednesse has odiously
affected us, we may wish for gentle, and courteous, and cheerful humanity,
to possess us, if contempt of Gods word has any time estraunged us from our
bounden duties, we may beseech him to bestow upon us for his mercies sake
the love of his laws, and regard of our office toward him, and he
assuredlye for his promise sake for the merits, and deserts of Christ Jesus,
our Savior, for his honor, and glory, for the maintenance of our estate,
the increase of our comfort, for the health of our souls, which he greatly
tendereth, will give us all these virtues with floudes of his grace, and
streams of his mercy, to the drowning of sin and to the confirmation,
establishing, and erection of al goodness, godliness, and true faith, and
perfect charity.

The applying of the Prodigal son unto the repentaunt sinner by prayer.
The.xx. Chapter.
FOr he requires or desires nothing more than our conversion unto him, our
health, and safety, our joy, solace, and commodity, our life and liberty, as
it appears by the lost son in the. 15. of Luke, who after he received his
portion of substance, went into a strange country, and there riotously spent
all, insomuch, that at the last, he by the force of pinching poverty, hard
fortune, and needful necessity, was constrained to feed hogs, and
desir^^^ be nouryshed with such prouendour, as the swine were filled, and
fatted withal, but no man gave any unto him, at length when he was almost
sterued for lack of necessary sustinaunce, and in such pityous plight, and
miserable estate, that life was almost ready to forsake his careful carcass,
he thought this within himself. Many hired servants in my fathers house
have plenty of vittayles, and I perish for hunger. I will rise and go to my
father, and will say unto him: Father I have sinned against heaven, and before
thee, now I am not worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired
servant. And he rose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a far
off, his father saw him, and being moved with mercy came running toward him,
and fell upon his neck, and kissed him. See how his love is not changed, his
good affection is not moved, his tender favor is not diminished, yea rather
his joy in him is now increased, his gracious goodness maruellously enlarged,
his pity more plentifully provoked toward his lost son, although before he
had wilfully disobeyed his father, contemptiously refused to tarry with him,
disobediently wandered into foreign countries, riotously roysted, and raunged
in strange lands, wantonly wasted his proper portion of substance,
letherously lauished his store upon strumpets, prodigallye poured out his just
inheritance amongst vagabonds, yea, although he was now in such a case, that
his estate was succourlesse, his purse penylesse, his heart hopeless, his
skin discolored, his flesh withered, his beauty deformed, his comeliness
defaced, his body weried, his wealth wasted, his strength weakened, his force
vanished, his life sorrowful, his mind mournful, his desperate degree
miserably scornful, his plight pitiful, and his person slaunderouslye spoken
off, and ignominious, see for all this how lovingly he entertayneth him, how
graciously he receives him, how gently he kisseth him, how readily he runs
to meet him, to salute him, to welcome him home again, and then the son
seeing his father so to favor him, repents him of his former disobedience,
bewayleth his ungracious dealing, and is heartily sorry for his former behauour,
and speaks on such manner, as he had before determined: Father I have sinned
against heaven, and against thee, and am unworthy hereafter to he called thy
son. But his father said to his servants. Bring forth the best garment, and
put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet, and bring
hither the fat calfe, and kill him, and let us eat, and be merry. For this my
son was dead, and is alive again, he was lost, and is now found, and they
began to be merry. This Father, that the Parable speaks off, is God our
Creator, our heavenly father, our mighty maker, that placed man in Paradyse,
who like a lewd, and dissolute son went a wandering from the sweet fields
of virtues, into the unknown woods, and dangerous marshes of wicked
disobedience, and returning unto his Father, driven thereunto by necessity,
was joyfully received, opening, and humbly confessing, and therewithal
lamenting his former wickedness, only cleaves unto the mercies of God, and
deserts of our Savior Christ Jesus. Thus therefore he loves us so fervently,
that he remembers no our former wickedness, when once we shall call upon
him, but will with joy grant, and give unto us a wedding garment, that is,
constant faith, righteousness, justification through Christ Jesus, that with
the same we being apparelled, may be present at the kings feast without shame,
or confusion. Thus by prayers poured out unto God, we shall with the five wise
Virgins have Oil sufficient in our Lamps to maintain the light, and shall
enter into the Palace of the bridegroom with joy, and gladness, and all
felicity. Thus we shall enter into the kingdom, which God has prepared for
himself, and his Angels, there to inioye the crown of immortal glory.

The example of the thief hanging on the right hand of Christ, applied to the
efficacy of prayer. The.xxi. Chapter.
HEre I might with examples, declare the force, and effect of prayer, but for
brevity sake, I will only set before your eyes the example of the thief,
which was hanged upon the right hand of Christ at his passion. He, after that
he had passed his life in such sort, that there appeared no way, but eternal
damnation, unless by mere mercy he had been received, called upon Christ
for grace, and mercy, desiring him with heavy, penitent, and oppressed heart,
with hearty contrition, with earnest repentance, with constaunt, lively, and
steadfast faith, to remember him when he came to his kingdom, to deliver him
from the power of the devil, who was ready to receive him, to purge him from
his uncleanness, wherewith he before had defaced the similitude of God, that
was placed in his own breast, and had, as it were, desperately thrown himself
in the most cruel, and horrible bondage of curssed Satan. But by calling for
the loving mercies, and incredible goodness of Christ Jesus, then hanging upon
the cross for the redemption of him and all mankind, miserably plunged in^o a
Sea of miseries, was by the ransom of his most precious blood most happily
delivered. For after he had poured out his humble, and hearty prayers, his
pityous complaints, his woeful wretchedness, his sorrowful sighs, his
repentaunt tears* he heard this comfortable answer. This day thou shall be
with me in Paradise. Lo the readiness of Christ Jesus in receiving our
prayers, in granting ou^ peticions, in wyping away our woeful weeping, in
rewarding them, that turn unto him, in comforting them, that sorowfully do
seek him, and in exalting, crowning, and glorifying them, that faithfully do
follow him in works, in will, in truth, in trust, in obedience, and earnest
charity. This thief was, as it may be gathered in his young, and tender age,
lewdely, losely, and dissolutely brought up, wickedly nurtered, unadvisedly
instructed, lightly regarded, trained up in evil company, fostered in all
abomination, rapine, robbing, stealing, spoiling, and such like, never
respecting the severe justice, or gentle dealing, the rigorous severity, or
loving mercies of God almighty, the judge of all men, until his last end
approached, and then being terrified with remorse of conscience, and driven into
extreme agony with the remembrance of his wicked life, knowing that he could
not escape most terrible vengeance, unless he should fly to the present
comfort of Gods mere mercy, then relented, and charitably rebuked his fellow
thief for despysing, and reuyling Christ Jesus, and then faithfully calling
upon Christ, was patiently, ioyfullye, and readilye received, and as Christ
promised, was that same day brought up into the most pleasant region of
heavenly delites ever to enjoy an immortal crown of eternal felicity. O
most blysful estate obtained by prayer. O the marvelous mercies of Christ our
savior. O the most happy hope of a repentaunt heart. He is crowned with
immortal glory, which has worthily deserved extreme misery. He is
accoumpted worthy of eternal salvation, which for his deserts should rather
be condemned with deadly damnation. He is delivered from the power, bondage,
and cruelty of Satan, which all his life time for the most part has vowed,
and yielded his service to all impiety, going to warfare under the banner of
the devil, a tormenting tyrant. This miraculous effect, and incomparable work
was brought to pass by pouring out of his pensive heart, most woeful
complaints, with hope in Gods mercies through the manifold merits of Christ
Jesus, our only redeemer, to be delivered from present danger of his damnable
deserts. If therefore we think that Christ is able to perform that, which he
has promised, if we think that his arm is not abridged, if we think him not
to be inconstant, if we believe his faithful promises, if we give credit to
his revealed word, and holy gospel, if we doubt not of his infinite mercies,
if we think that his most precious blood, poured out most plentifully upon the
altar of the cross, have still his force for our justification, we must also
necessarily know, yt with the poor widow, we shall obtain our request, through
earnest prayer at God his hand, that through him we shall be able to daunt the
power of the Devil, that with the lost son we shall of our father be
ioyfullye received, that with the repentant thief we shall reign in Paradise
for ever and ever in all felicity. For hearty prayer cannot be without
steadfast faith. 1. Jacob. Postulet in fide, nihil hesitans, let him pray in
faith nothing doubting at all. And Paul says. Quomodo inuocabunt eum, in quem
non crediderunt, how shall they call upon him, in whom they have not
believed? Faith brings a surety of eternal happiness. For. 3. John, so God
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son for this purpose, that
every one, which believes on him, should not perish, but have life
everlasting. And again, in the end of the same Chapter, it is written. He
that believes the words, which the son of God speaks, has life
everlasting. And in the fifth Chapter, it is said. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, he that hears my words, and believes in him, that sent me, has
eternal life. And in the sixth Chapter we read. Haec est voluntas patris mei.
etc. This is the will of my father, which sent me, that every one, that sees
the son, and believes on him, should have eternal life. Also in the same
place: Verily I say unto you, he that believes me, has everlasting life. And
John also in the.xx. chapter has these words: Haec aute^ scripta sunt. etc.
These things are written, that you may believe that Jesus is Christ, the son
of God, and that believing, you may have life through his name. And another
says, laetabuntur omnes, qui sperant in te, in aeternum exultabunt, all shall
rejoice, that trust in thee (O Lord) they shall for ever be most glad, and
joyful. It is therefore evident, that all those, which with constant hope, and
sure faith, and contrite heart, and humble mind, call upon God in his son
Jesus Christ, shall be delivered from the deceites of the Devil, and shall
enjoy for ever an incorruptible crown of immortal glory.

The conclusion of the second part of the Authors division, with notable
testimonies thereof out of the scriptures. The.xxij. Chapter.
But what has so bewitched our minds, or benumbed our senses, or bereaved us
of our right understanding, that we so sluggishely, nay unreasonably do
neglect our duties to God, not regarding our own commodity, wealth, happy
estate, and felicity, but rather voluntarily running into wickedness, do
deserve most deep dangers, and deadly miseries, and doleful damnation?
Christ commands us carefullye, faithfully, continually to call upon him with
hearty prayers, and we refuse to follow him. That open enemy of mankind,
Satan, charge us to live in sleepie, sinful, and slothful security, and
we readily conform our selves to his cursed commandment. Christ came down
from his celestial throne (...) glorious, and immortal majesty to seek us
which were lost, and wandering, and wayward sheep, driven from the fold, by
the crafty conueyaunce of the subtle Serpent, and we ungratefully refuse the
exceeding gentleness, and mere mercy of him, that seeks our salvation.
Satan, when we were in the favor of God, subtly deceived us, and miserably
plunged us into the terrible seas of Gods heavy vengeance, and displeasure,
yet him we freely do follow in all our attemptes and endeavors. Christ
promyseth us eternal life in heavenly joy, solace, and all felicity, if we
will keep his commandments, and call upon him, yet we wilfully despise him.
Satan will perform, that we shall live, or rather die in terrible flames of
hell fire, in all dolor, grief, and miserable anguish, if we frame our lives
according to his deuilishe desire, and yet we delight to live in his obedience.
O strange manner of outrageous madness. Shall bitter sorrows, for ever to
endure, be preferred before incomparable joys, which never have end? Shall
Satan be satisfied, and our ever living, and almighty God be wrathfully
displeased? Shall we love a devouring enemy, and leave our loving Lord? God
forbid. Let us now prostrate our selves before the judgment seat of God, let
us lament our misery, let us cry for grace, and mercy, with continual
prayer, that we may for all our sins obtain remission, that we may not be
ashamed in the day of the Lord, when the hidden thoughts of our secret
minds, shall openly be declared, and for the same, most just judgment
severely pronounced. Let us no more lie groueling upon the ground with the
hateful serpent, but let us set our thoughts, and hearts a lofte with the
chaste turtle dove, that is, let us forsake earthly, fond, and deuilish delites,
let us not set our hearts upon worldly treasure, let us not feed upon vain
pleasures, and fading fantasies, but let us lodge with Christ Jesus in heaven,
or rather let us have him lodging in our breasts, and possessing our hearts, and
directing our thoughts which we shall easily obtain, if with repentaunt hearts
we offer unto him the sacrifice of prayer, and thanksgiving. For seeing that he
did vouchsafe to come down from heaven, to cleanse us, when we were deformed,
and depraved with the foul spots, and blemishes of deadly sin, he will now
much more, if we humbly, and heartily request the same, make us meet vessels to
receive the most wholesome, and comfortable blessing of the holy ghost, that we
may continue, in his most gracious favor. But this is sufficient for the godly
minded members of Christ, and to them especially does belong the sure hope of
eternal happiness. Those I call the members of Christ, which have always a
clear conscience before the face of God, and men, and also those (for of the
former sort there are very few) which although they have been polluted with
the filthiness of wicked, and abominable impiety, yet now at the last, are
returned from the same ungodliness, and with all diligence, love, and
obedience, do embrace the Gospel, abhor hypocrisy, detest their former
vilanie, and sequester themselves from blind security. Such I say, shall be
sure by prayer, to obtain eternal salvation. For before God they are counted
just through the merits of Christ Jesus, and Saint James says, that the
prayer of the just man preuayleth much.

The third part of the Authors division, that is, the way how to be heard
in our prayer, with a definition of it, comprysing two Chapters. The.xxiij.
Chapter.
NOw I will (by the favor of god) speak a word or two of the last point,
that is, how we may so pray, that we may be heard, and obtain our request.
Here I think, that it be most necessary for me to use in this matter, such
brevity, as is most meet for those, to whom I direct this my talk. I speak
only of those, which be rude, and ignorant in this case, and that have been
through mere simplicity blinded by the veil of cursed popery, and not to
such, as obstinately harden their hearts and shut their eyes, and stop their
ears, that they may not be healed. To such as these, simple, ignorant, and
seely souls be, brief notes, without large discourse, is undoubtedly most
commodious. I will therefore in a short difinition, first show what prayer is,
and then will adioyne those properties as it were, which are necessarily
required to faithful, and true prayer. For by this means they may the soonest
learn the manner of true prayer, and bear it in memory. Subtly to dispute of
ye diverse kinds of prayer, and such like, rather belongs to curious
schoolmen in universities, than to ye simple christians in their private
houses, or common churches. Prayer therefore is a religious declaration of ye
mind before God, wherein we desire with earnest affection, either to be preserved
from danger of disco^modity spiritual, or temporal, either to enjoy some
desired benifit belonging to soul, or body, either else wherein we yield most
hearty thanks for some received benifite. Because here be mentioned diverse
kinds of benifites to be desired, as necessity (...) Gods hands, we must
know tha^ they are not without difference all to be requested after one sort^*
For those things, which belong to the body, are always to be requested with a
condition, that is, if they be not hurtful for the soul, if it be Gods good
pleasure to grant them, if it be for the glory of God to condiscende to our
request. But such things, as tend to the safegarde of the soul to heavenly
felicity, to godly charity, with such like, are to be desired symply without
condition of bodily wealth, or worldly safety. These things well considered, we
must observe these rules following, if we will obtain our request.

The six rules, which must be observed to obtain our requests wythall.
The.xxiiij. Chapter.
FFirst we must direct our prayers to God alone, our heavenly father, and not
to Angels, dead saints, Devils, stocks, stones, or such like. For it is
written, thou shall worship the ^or^ (...) God, and him only shall you serne.
Deuteronomy. 6. Math. 4.
A^^^e, God says in Esaias, the.43. Ego sum, ego sum. etc. I am, I am, and
without me there is no savior. And.45. Chapter. A just and saving God, there
is none but I. And such places there are to be found a great number, which for
brevity sake I of purpose do omit, partly because of the rude, and simple
peoples sake, that they may the better remember these rules, and partly because
there is a notable treatise, against the worshipping, and invocation of
saints, now extaunt, wherein this question is fullye debated, by John Veron, a
worthy member of the Church of Christ.

2 Secondly, we must pour out our supplications before God, in all humility,
trusting favorably to be accepted only for the merits, and passion of Jesus
Christ, who is our only satisfaction, justification, and righteousness before
the Lord, and not for the worthiness of our own works. For Christ Jesus,
when we were accursed came down from heaven to deliver us from ye curse
whereunto al we were subject, and was (...) ^^crifice for our sins. Wherevpo^
(...) ^^^h, Ephe.
ye are saved by grace through ^^th, and that not of our selves, for it is the
gift of God, and comes not of works, least any man should boast.

3 Thirdely, they which present themselves before God to request any thing of
him, must cast of all cruelty, violence, and oppression toward other. For in
Esaias. 1. we read: When you shall stretch out your hands, I will turn mine
eyes from you, and when you shall multiply your prayers, I will not hear you,
says the Lord. For your hands be full of blood. Wash your selves, and be
clean. They must put all unmercifulness out of their minds. For in the.xxj.
of the Proverbs, it is written: He that stops his ear at the cry of the
poor, shall cry himself, and not be heard. This is plain by the example of
Lazarus, and the rich Glutton. They must pluck out of their hearts all envy,
hatred, malice, and dissension, Mar. 11.
they must forgive the faults of their brethren. For Christ says: When ye
stand to pray forgive your brothe^ (...) have anything against him (...) sixth
of Matthew. If you for^ (...) even from the bottom of your heart, neither shall
your father which is in heaven forgive you. They must be humble, and banishe
away all pride, or disdain, out of the closet of their mind. For Psalm. 51:
An humble and contrite heart, God will not despise. And Peter says: God
resists ye proud, and gives grace to the humble. 1. Petr. 5.
Examples hereof be the proud Pharisey, and poor Publicane, in the gospel.
They must be sure, steadfast, and constaunt in faith. For it is said: Let him
ask in faith, doubting nothing. Jacob. 10. They must with hearty, sincere, and
true repentance, bewail their sinful wickedness, and wicked wilfulness,
and have an earnest desire to set forth the glory of God, to live in due
obedience to God, and his gospel, to subvert the raging affections of the
corrupt flesh unto the heavenly, pure, and angelical motions of the spirit,
they must be enflamed with a feruencie of spirit, joined to continuance in
supplication, and not come (...) ^art, and a babbling (...) ^or challenge the
heart (...), and also ^^ou ^^ard apperance, ^^^le^se both have and mouth agree
ze^^^ly in one kind of worship, it cannot he pleasant unto God nor Christ.
Where^^^ is said of some, this people honoreth me with their lips, but their
heart is far from me. Such God will spue out of his mouth, and utterly refuse
them. Briefly these rules may be thus concluded. They, which mind to obtain
their requests, when they yield up their supplications, must direct the same
to God, in the name of Christ Jesus, but so that they themselves be in mind
merciful, in manners mild, in love charitable, in affection amyable, in faith
constant, in life obedient, in spirit fervent, and in heart repentaunt. Now
moreover, there be other circumstances, which are to be annexed, as when,
where, for whom, for what things, with what iesture, after what manner we ought
to pray.

The circumstances, ^^^h ought to be observed in prayer, beside the six rules.
The.xxv. Chapter.
FOr the first it is written, indesinenter orat^, pray continually, that is,
whenever you shall be assaulted with temptation, either in prosperity, or in
adversity, call upon God, not that at all times without ceasing, or
intermission we should only be occupied in prayer, but that we should as godly
men have done before time, appoint certain times to pour out our complaints
before God, and also at other times in what thing soever we be occupied, in
spirit, in truth, in sighs, in thought, in work, in will, call upon God for
the help of his grace, and access of his mercy. As the Ploughman at his
labor, the Merchant at his occupying, the Scholar at his study, and so
forth, ought not only at certain hours give himself to prayer, but also
when he is most occupied, ought in he (...) with God through prayer in ^^^^es,
but especially in ye church, in the congregation of christians. For when many
together in one spirit yield up their prayers, then are they most acceptable
to God, and gracious to Christ, our Savior.

3 For the third, we ought to pray for the good, and prosperous estate of
godly Princes, and magistrates, and principallye, it belongs to our bounden
duties, to beseech God in the bowels of mercy to preserve for the glory of
his holy name our good, and gracious sovereign, Lady Queen Elizabeth, in
these troublesome times from all danger in most happy estate, and felicity,
which I beseech him to do for Jesus Christ his sake, in whom he is well
pleased, to the subversion of her enemies, the mayntenaunce of true relygion,
and confusion of cursed Satan. Then we ought to pray, for the good estate of
Gods holy Ministers, for our selves, for (...) ^hey (...) flesh, but (...) ^^e
they be (...) out of the prison of the body. For (...) ^^ther they reign with
Christ, or dye wy^h Deuilles, where there is no redemption.

4 For the fourth, we may pray for things pertaining to the necessity of the
body, and of the soul, and for eternal salvation in Jesus Christ, always in
all prayers having respect to our own selves, and to the will of God, that we
ask nothing, which either is not competent for our estate, or not agreeable to
the glory of God.

5 For the fifte, we may use any comely iesture, either kneeling, or standing,
or sitting, as present occasion shall move us, so that we have an humble mind,
and contrite heart, in all our prayers.

6 For the sixth, we may use the form of prayer, that Christ has taught us, or
any other, not repugnaunt to the same, or use such words as the present estate
will give occasion unto, as Christ did in the (...) ^s, not always ne^ (...)
^^ng ^recisely that prayer (...) ^^mn^ only called the lords pray^^ (...) or
things, as certain circum^^^^es considered, let us now search out the effect
of prayer, which may easily be perceived by examples taken out of scripture.
Iosuae. 10. By prayer the Sun stood in the middle of heaven, the space of a
whole day. Moses by prayer wrought meruellous effects. Samson, Samuel, Elias,
David, Ezechias, Salamon, Anna, Cornelius, Paul, and Silas, wonderfullye
prevailed by force of prayer, as in scriptures manifestly is declared. But of
these things no man meanly conversant in scriptures can be ignorant. Therefore
without longer discourse, I will make an end. And here I beseech thee (good
reader (to call to mind the threats of God against obstinate sinners, the
plagues of God executed against rebellious persons, the dangerous, and
miserable estate of hard hearted christians, and so perhaps thou shall be
touched with fear of anguishe, and extreme misery. Then ponder in thy mind
wha^ (...) hearty prayer, wh^ (...) has provided for them (...) ^ble suire to
him in I^^^ (...) eternal felicity thou shall enjoy, (...) earnest
supplication, thou crave (...) ^^nde his grace, and mercy. And last of all, in
consideration of these things, let prayer be thy continual exercise, and daily
practice. For prayer is the quietness of them, which be tormoyled, the rest of
them, that are molested, the haven of them, which suffer shipwreck, the
comfort of the sorrowful, the salve of the sinful, the shield of the
fearful, the hope of the helpelesse, the hold of the harbourlesse, the help
of the hopeless, the solace of the comfortless. Prayer is in wealth a
safegarde, in health a preservative, in grief a gracious comfort, in war a
sword, in peace a garden of delites, in bondage liberty, in sorrow sweetness,
in death life, in penury a storehouse of all things necessary. And to
conclude, prayer is the ready path, to the pleasant pasture, of eternal
Paradise.

FINIS.
^
^
(...) great,
(...) ^^pe,
(...) are,
(...) ^^las princely (...)
^^de what foyzen fertyle springs,
(...) from the learned skill:
^f those that travel earnestly,
to clyme Parnassus hill.
Behold what youthful years can do,
through great study, and pain:
Behold what knowledge tender age,
by labor can attain.
This little book so well compact,
deserves worthy praise:
Which the Author has published,
a mirror in these days.
A mirror? yea, a looking glass,
for so I may him name:
Because by sacred scripture he
his first attempt does frame.
The style of some is praised much,
that feigned stories write:
Collected out of Poets works,
for that they do delight,
And please (...)
who (...)
Some (...)
that (...) some (...)
Then wa^ does (...) for due reward
deserve, that virtuously
Does use his tallent, which he has
obtained painefully?
Eternal praise, as I do judge,
and fame that aye shall dure:
For vain delites do vanishe all,
when virtue shines pure.
The word of God, man's soul does feed,
the scripture brings light:
But fond, and foolish tales are naught.
Therefore as wills right,
The Authors enterprise commend,
conceive his good intent:
Commend his travel, which he has
in sacred scripture spent.
Then truly shall you stir him up,
as now he has begone:
So to proceed, and faithfully,
this kind of race to run.
FINIS

