THE FANCIES THEATER.

BY JOHN TATHAM Gent.

HORAT Quod si me Lyricis vatibus inseris,
Sublimi feriam sidera vertice.
LONDON, Printed by JOHN NORTON, for RICHARD BEST, and are to be sold at his
Shop near Grayes-Innegate in Holborne. 1640.

TO THE HONORABLE AND THE MOST WORTHY MECAENAS, SIR John Winter Knight,
Secretary of State, and Master of Requests to the Queens most excellent
Majesty.
HONORED SIR,
THe confidence I have of your Native goodness (of which the World is
sufficient Dilater) has prompt me to this audacious presumption, which with
some would have been held a crime insufferable. But I know your Honor is so
far from a Censurer, that you had rather cherish endeavors then destroy 'em:
Besides, there is a certain Sect of selfe-affecters, that will (unless some
judicious Patron be fixed to the fronts-peece, as the beams of the Sun, to
correct their sawsie peering, with blindness) not only disgorge their Envy,
but wrest the sense to be succinct; I (knowing your Name to be such, as amongst
the discerning Spirits deserves the highest Attributes of worth; and of such
singular power, 'twill extirp the Malevolent thoughts that reign in the vulgar
and most infectious Traducers) tender this, as my first Sacrifice, at the Altar
of your mercy. And if it may obtain the reflection of your acceptance, 'twill
so much encourage your poor Admirer, that I shall be Ambitious in the
continuance of your favors: These are the Mayden-blosomes of my Muse, which
(without your protection) may (in their infancy) be destroyed by the breath of
Zoilus; but sheltered by your Honor, they shall live, and dare the Critics
rancour, retorting to their own shame. Sir, the fostering this Orphan will
make you famous for Charity, and impose an obligation beyond expression, upon

Your Honors truly devoted, JO. TATHAM.

To the honored Patron of his Book.
SIR,
AS my service binds me and my love,
(May your fair self so of the same approve)
As your deservings, I have placed you here
Equal with Phoebus in his Hemisphere,
Where your refulgent brightness cast's a light
Into these twinkling Lamps, and give's them sight.
Minerva bad me tell you she is proud
Of those deserts which in your breast do crowd
As in a throng, which our capacity
Not able to find out, leave's to her eye.
Thrice worthy Hero, may your Halcion days
Be never extinct till crazie Time decays.
Jo. Tatham.

Fancy, to the Reader.
REaders of all sorts, when you have survai'd
Each room within this Theater, and paid
Sufficient for admittance, you will allow
To render me account of all, and how
You like the fabric, if it be well reared;
The thought of falling is not to be feared,
Though he that did erect it, has not served
Seven years to the Profession, nor deserved
The Attribute of Architect, yet he
Expects by your fair hands to be made free;
He Will then set up in the City, and in spite
Of Suburb power, or Corporation's might:
Use his best skill to please you. Faith, be just,
Do not enscale his Freedom with the aust,
He Is pressed to obey you howsoever, and will
Without a grumble, serve you, and fulfill
Forsooth, your precepts being pressed so low,
I hope you will raise him, Char'ty teaches so:
Yet, he will not beg your favors, to assist
Him, by Certificate, do what you list;
He knows the worst on it, if you do refuse,
It Is but the having (to the Hall) his Muse
To have the gentle notch; and so to try
If he in time can gain the Mystery;
He swears he will defy you, when that he
Atchives to the Warden of the Company.
To his friend the Author on his Fancies Theater.
Fancy, in all his Colors never appeared
So variously delightful, as in this
Magnificent Theater, which thou have reared
Out of thy Genuine brain, and call'st it His.
Here does he take all shapes, and act all parts;
The noble Hero, and the humble Swain;
The jocund Lovers, and lamenting hearts.
As well the Buskind, as the Comic strain.
Fancy has something here for every one,
From Reveller to Mourner; still provided,
Each brings a proper apprehension;
And one not by another humor guided.
But let all come and welcome: The severe
Cato himself may have free entrance here.
R. Broom.

To his friend the Author, on his ingenious Theater of Fancies.
A Theater is built, and every part
Ordered with various Workmanship and Art,
The Scenes with Protean transformation move,
Presenting Buskins, Socks, and Themes of love:
A Mourners tears, and joy of a fair Bride;
Smart Satyr, and a world of change beside.
It Is not the Building only Men should see,
But what is prepared for Action in it by thee.
Upon the outward form let no Man look,
But search the richer inside of thy Book.
And if their humors do not judgment blind,
They Will most things pleasing, none offending find.
Sic censet Amicus. THO. NABBES.

To his loving friend the Author, on his Fancies Theater.
It Is worth enough to have so many friends,
Who do applaud with judgment thy fair ends*
Which raise thy Towering Fancies to such height,
That every line affords us a conceit
Far different from the Whimzies of the time,
Where it is their chiefest praise to trot in Rhyme,
And thunder out their meaning in a Phrase,
Would strike a Martial spirit in a maze:
But let the world judge if what thou have done,
Deserve not good men's approbation?
For my part, I shall deem thee worthy praise,
When such a troop as these extol thy Bays.
When Fancy in thy Theater does play,
And wins more credit than a second day;
When thy pure Helicon so high does flow,
It out-braves Jordan or the swelling Poe.
Let not thy Fancy ebb, but more and more
Enlarge it is limits, and encroach the Shore.
And let the Sea-borne Goddess ever be
Propitious to thy strains of Poesy.
And may thou in thy Verse so happy prove,
That Cupid may affect thy beauteous Love
Dearer than Psyche, till thou make her be
Fairer than thine, lest he should Rival thee.
Thy Friend C. G.

To his Friend the Author, on his Fancies Theater.
FRiend, since the choice and most Emphatick phrase
Appears too slender to enrich thy praise;
How shall the discord of my jarring skill
Ought but detract from th'honor of thy Quill?
But yet, so just an interest in my love
Thy merits claim, that should I not approve
The rich Exchequer of thy pregnant Brain
To it is true worth, I should appear a stain.
Come all you Youths filled with Phoebean fire,
(As tribute to the Music of his Lyre)
Bring each with willing Palms a Daphnean Bough,
And make a Chaplet to impale his Brow,
Into whose Breast Apollo's self has ray'd
Such lofty Raptures, as may well persuade
The transmigration which Pythagoras
Maintained for truth, may for authentic pass.
For, when th'inticing pleasure of thy Line,
And teeming Fancies unexhausted Mine
I view, me thinks the Genius of those Three
Admired Laureats are ensphear'd in Thee,
Smooth Shakespeare, neat Randolph, and witty Ben,
Flow in a mutual sweetness from Thy Pen:
Nature in Thee seems Arts parallel,
For Thou art both her Pride and Miracle.
May th'Virgin Candor of thy infant Bays,
Unravisht, spring, spite of our Critic days;
And from Thee such Nectarean Dew distill,
As may the world with admiration fill.
Geo. Lynn.

To his good friend M. John Tatham upon his Fancies Theater.
TO see what upstart Scriblers strive in Rhyme,
To be the Paper-blu^rers of the time,
Makes me amazed; yet if they would but see
The flowery Raptures that are done by thee,
They would no question blush to see the Bulls,
And rabling Ballads of their windy sculls.
Here they may see composed a spicy-nest
Of flaming Fancies, all in spangles dressed:
For here each line that to the eye appears,
May sing a Lullaby unto the Spheres.
Poor Fancies mar a Theater, but see
The Fancies Theater is made by thee.
Robert Chamberlain.

To his friend M. John Tatham on his Fancies Theater.
TO show my self in Print I never had thought,
But that thy Fancies has my thoughts out-wrought.
What shall I say? it is this I do admire,
And think thy wits like to the aspiring fire,
Will never descend; thy brain from vulgar strains
Is clarifi'd so neatly, it contains
Th'Epitome of smooth and well scanned verse,
And though in future times thy aged he^se,
Shall be enthroned with Laurel; yet this age
May blame my zealous friendship, and in rage
Both carp at thee, and me: But it shall never
Make me strike sail, but rather make my steer
Bear stiff with malice for to think that men
Would make abortive this thy Infant Pen.
But yet my hopes are confident, that they
Cannot but give thy worth a branch of Bay,
Though not a Laurel, which slow-paced Time
Shall bring, and humbly offer at thy Shrine.
H. Davison.

To his friend John Tatham Gent. upon his Fancies Theater.
THou did not mean thy Theater should be
Common (though public) to th'Obliquity
Of every duller eye: It Is raised too near,
(Propt by thy Fancies Atlas) to the sphere
Of purest wit, which the dull sons of Earth
(Should they afflict the Universe with dearth
Of Ignorance and Envy, pile it up
In envious heaps for their ascent to crop
Thy Bays) can never aspire to: Attempt they may,
And pass our duller air; But the clear Ray
Of thy bright worth appearing, will deprive
Their terrified soul of sense; deceive
Their hopes through their own ruin And what they have
Now for their steps, anon shall be their grave,
Pressed by the weight of Ignorance: But then
Their guilty blushing shame shall rise again
To scornful memory, whose black name shall give
More luster to thy praises, to survive
'Till Time has lost himself: And this great All
Be brought to its confused Funeral.
Pass not a Zoylists envy, since thou have known
Thy censure through their breath, whose pleasure none
Can without sacrilege dispute. But if
Thy fearful soul cannot retain belief
Of safety, Jove shall to secure thy fear,
Displace his Bird from's bosome-nest, and there
Harbor thy Muse: But what injustice can
Refuse the God's, and take the word of Man,
Thou Have had a Jury of Immor^^lls, that
Have given their censure: find not guilty; what
Bold Heav'n-contemners then dare contradict,
When the Divine Vote's publish their Edict?
The Daphnean Bay graspt by the Frosts cold hand,
Does grow more freshly green; thy Muse shall stand
As firm against Envies storm, till Fame shall be
Proud to record thy still green memory.
James Jones.

Upon his Dream and Censure of the Gods.
ANd can thou dream so well? then never wake,
Unless it be that so thou may partake
The real substance of thy thoughts, and then
Thou Wilt make a subject for the rarest Pen
To treat on: But having at a venture
Invoked The Immortals for to have their censure
Upon thy Fate; Sol sooner shall stand still,
And fire the Orbs, but thou shall hate thy will.
H. Davison.

To his friend M. Io. Tatham on his Fancies Theater.
WHen I beheld and viewed each several line
Appearing a full fraughted Magazine
Of choice conceits; such as our Fancies now
(Differing from what they were) must needs allow:
How sweet and how delici'ous to the taste:
How pleasing to the eye, how trimmed, how chaste;
And where thy Fancy hits upon a crime,
Thy Verse does mask it, suting with the Time;
How eloquent thou art, how thine own phrase
Becomes an Orator, and tells thy praise;
The faults I found were few, the greatest was
(And yet for some known reasons it may pass)
Where thou do court thy Mistress, and does wipe
Each word with gold, enough for to invite
All eyes, all hearts; our greatest fear was, we
Should suffer by th'inchanting Orat'ry.
I know thy Muse is chaste, and will not strive,
T'attract all Beauties to her pleasing hive.
My wishes bid go on, and may thy Rhyme
Flourish beyond the utmost date of Time.
William Barnes.

On the Author of the Fancies Theater.
AMongst the rest, Friend, Tatham, I am come,
To do thy Fancies right, and quit the sum
I stand engaged for: since my forward youth
Signed Love a Bond, for current Coin of Truth,
To pay at several times* the world shall be
Thy Secretary; and take this truth from me,
In all thy Shop of Fancies, not a Line
(I emulate thee so) but I wish mine;
'Twill be sufficient portion for thy Name
To live by; for Times Treasurer, winged Fame,
Shall, as thy worth deserves, speak thee as high
As any filled her Trump with Poesy.
Tho. Rawlins.

To his friend M. John Tatham, upon his Fancies Theater.
MY Muse composed more of love than fire,
Would spare her Pen, and silently admire
Thy worth, which her expressions cannot raise,
Unless she borrow thine own style and phrase,
And from thy proper heaps purloyne a store,
Which pays one debt to make a thousand more;
Did not thy friendship and thy sacred merit
Conjure up flames even in a frozen spirit.
Though last in number, think me not the least,
I thought as much as all thy Friends expressed;
But our sincere desires suffer much wrong,
Since the sad difference 'twixt the heart and tongue;
My thoughts soar high, though my expression's weak,
True friends think out their tale, when others speak.
Yet write I this not for peculiar ends,
To cast aspersion on your other friends;
I in that Consort jointly do prefer
My offering to thy Fancies Theater.
An. Newport.

To his friend the Author, on his Fancies Theater.
Dear friend, my infant Muse will be
Obscured, when as the Readers see
Thy amorous strains, and thou wilt be found
To be with greater glory crowned
By my weak Lines, which to thy praise
Affords a Coronet of Bays.
In this I am thy friend, to be
Thy foil, that plainly men may see
Thy greater luster, and may spend
Their Censures gently on thy friend.
R. Pynder.

To his friend the Author.
HAd I Chapmans Line or Learning, Iohns^ns Art,
Fletchers more accurate Fancy, or that part
Of Beaumont that is divine, Dun's profound skill,
Making good Verses live, and damning ill:
I then would praise thy Verses, which should last
Whilst Time has sands to run, or Fame a blast.
But I Have a Brain so dull, that though I beat
The Anvill never so often, there is naught but sweat
And empty vapors crown my long lost pain.
I write, it is bad, dislik't, rub't out again;
And in this serious folly I abuse
The patience of my Lamp, my Oil I loose;
Nor is it fit, that each unworthy Line
Should court the light, but only such as thine.
Then since I cannot write what I desire,
May thine for ever live, mine is for the fire.
W. Ling.

21 Aprilis, 1640.
Imprimatur,

JOHANNES HANSLEY.

A DIALOGVE between Momus, Time, and the Author.
Momus. HOw now presumpt'ous Lad, think thou that we
Will be disturbed with this thy Infancy
Of wit: --
Or does thy amorous thoughts beget a flame
(Beyond it is merit) for to court the name
Of Poet; or is it common now adays
Such slender wits dare claim such things as Bays:
Or does thy sickly Fancy think to get
Some fool to be enamored on thy wit?
Thy reason, prithee, why, ambitious Boy,
Thou do present the world with such a toy;
Yet giv'st it such a title, that 'twere sin
To view the outside, and not look within;
The Fancies Theater, a Title we
Durst never assume to reach, much less for thee:
It is the very Prologue, to invite
A Puritan to covet for it is sight.
And then again I wonder, what mad vain
Did prompt thy Fancy, to present a strain
(So far unworthy) to so bright an eye,
Where all deserts and true perfections lie.
When I behold his name, me thinks I see
Phoebus himself, the God of Poesy,
-- By whose judicious eye deserts shall live, --
And spite of killing Envy, shall survive.
I should mistrust my self, should I but think
His judgment will at thee connive, or wink;
To him, forgetful Lad, durst thou present
These weak conceits; or was it to prevent
Our rasher censure; thinking thou might sing
At peace, once sheltered underneath his wing?
I laugh to see thy follyes, yet I swear
I heartily could wish thy Fancies were
Such as might well deserve him; for, know, I
Do envy at thy blessed prosperity.
Is not the world crammed full of wits? why then
Should thou be favored thus above those men,
Whose high and rare deserts, does claim to be
The Kingdoms best and richest Treasury?
Yet all their fortunes, and their merits, they
Would level at his feet; and, well they may.

Time. IT is confessed, that Tyme's old age could yet
Never glory in a world, so full of wit,
Nor was his snowy hairs crowned with delight
Of sweeter choycer Raptures, such as might
(Like gold-tongu'd Orpheus) make stones follow men:
Their Verse extinct, Stones propagate again,
And though the world does boast of such, yet we
Do find it stayn'd with base impiety;
Such as thy self proud Momus, that do strive
To damn young wits, to keep thine own alive.
Time must amend this fault I say, unless
The world is weary of the big swollen Press,
And her deliverings; When our Wits are dead,
Shall only their great Names be registered,
And not their works; or shall not th'Muses heire^
Increase and multiply as Time, and Years?
For now adays our younger wits are quite
Disheartened by the venom of thy spite;
Whose base detraction would have none to be
Enrolled within the List of Poetry,
But of thy Sect; whose numbers still increase,
Belching out foul-mouthed words, derision's ease;
For could your Sect make what you would mend, 'twere well,
It Is better prate than do: But let me tell
The world my humor, though I Have often bin
Taxt as being guilty of this Critic sin,
In giving leave to your profane intent,
(A thing Heaven knows, my judgment never meant)
I do pro^est, though Opportunity
You have engrossed and bribed, yet, 'twas not I.
I hate thy doings, so I Will henceforth be
A scorner of thy base dishonesty.
Is it not time that Time should urge the air
Of such gross putrefaction; and repair
The almost lost deserts of many, which
Dare not presume their senses to enrich
With the Divine instinct of Poesy:
Fearing thy Carping and thy Blasphemy.
There cannot now a Rapture be put forth;
But thou detract'st the substance of their worth.
Is thy wit rare, or do thou think there is none
Can equalize thy Fancies, but thine own?
Misguided selfe-conceited Idiots, see,
But your own ignorance and simplicity;
And then you will yield it is better mend, than make;
This without Bribe, or favor, I have spoke
For him whose wit's (as yet) but raw, till Time
And years has taught him higher for to climb.
Then forward ( Youth) let not the Critics eye
Be th'cause ^o stay thy ingenuity.

Author. LEt me first crave from thee gray headed Time,
Thy absolution, e're I put my Rhyme
To be a Courtier in the wanton air,
Making their Progress to each witty fair.
And courteous Mistress, unto whose white hand
I wish them happy journey, while I stand
Devoted for their service: I have been
Too, too, too prodigal, and have not seen
My errors: but have wilfully run on,
As Steward to some liberal Gentleman?
Where I have been too lavish, and have spent
What was my Masters, freely to me lent.
And though the Steward has but little now
Left for to show his Master, yet I vow
I have some remnants left, although they be
But shreds to what I might have gained from thee.
If I have used thee ill. I Will be thy Slave,
And henceforth dote on nothing but my grave.
Yet let me thus much tell thee; my desire
Never kindled from a base ambitious fire
Of an applause, though carping Momus he
Murmurs, and bites my Title Page and me.
I have observ^d his envy* and I say,
I do not this in hope to get a pay,
Reward, or such base mercenary gain;
Let them that gape for it, have it for their pain.
I will not sell that little mite of wit,
If so (without offense) I dare term it,
At any rate; Nor do I care the while,
If at the Title they do lend a smile;
I willingly would please them, yet if they
Will not be pleased, I weigh not what they say.
My Title Momus, let me tell thee true,
Is for to please my self, not to please you.
Nor do I strive to gain a Poets name;
A title my weak soul durst never aim
To court at; For, I may as soon aspire,
To kiss the Sun, as warm me at that fire.
To end expostulation, thus much know,
What my dese^ts can merit, I do owe
To him whose kind acceptance makes me blessed,
Lifting me higher than the Eagles nest.
And if my wit increase (as years in me)
I shall aspire no higher than to be
Accounted as his Servant; and will lay
My offerings at his feet as well as they,
Whom you allege deserved him better; why?
They can but give their store, and so will I.
Then why should you as cankered, so deject
That, which his wisedome's pleased with to protect:
But I Will not bar your custom, for it is known
You will detract all Writings but your own.

To the truly worthy and his much honored friend, Sir Edward Savage.
HOw some will err in making that seem good,
Scarce has allowance to be understood!
Honor consists in Virtues, nor is it fit
Each worthless faune should claim a share in wit.
It wrongs the Poets Genius, whose pure fire
Will suffer no privation, when the Quire
Of Fancy-propping Muses does distill
The oyly-drops of merit from the hill
Of Noble-worth, to tell the erring sense
Of credulous Man, that Truths pre-eminence
Keeps no alliance with such motions, tends
To soothing flattery, the bad Man's friends.
And to that end sends me Ambassador,
To make the world acquainted what you are:
With vows unfeigned, Noble Sir, you are one,
That shares on Natures distribution.
And I would say, but that your modest ears
Are wool'd against your own praises, though it appears
Roab'd in reality itself, you can
Distinguish 'twixt the best and worst of Man:
One who may claim the Attributes of wise,
Noble, and courteous, and from these does rise
The living Emblems, Charity and Love,
The Orbs by which each faculty do move,
That claymes a being in you. You appear
The spacious bliss where Virtue keeps her Sphere,
In a sweet temp'rature; the thought of Pride
(As Omen to your Virtues) you deride,
Exiled from that bosom which inherits*
The uncorrupted wishes to your merits.
May health still crown you with felicity,
Till you desire to change Mortality,
For th'reserved bliss in Elysium,
When as your Dove-like expirations come.
And may your better part transferred be
Into a constellatious Sovereignty:
While Vertues-Lovers Requiems sing, and I
Have vital motion, study for the ^ye
Of your devoted Servant.

A Newyeares gift to Clarinda.
FAshions are now a days so often used,
That meanest Peasants have the same abused.
Each servile creature can command their Rings,
Gloves, or the like, (such b^se mechanic things)
Reason must guide you then; such toys as those
Are subject still to losing; I Will repose
More confidence in you, and will impart
A far transcendent Gift, my loyal Heart:
Embrace it then, and let no envious fate
Cross our united loves, nor derogate
From what you former were; such Gifts as this
Deserve the keeping, nay, some future bliss.
Upon an old rich Woman in love with a young Gentleman.
MOre rich than wise, and yet more wise than fair,
Years add gray Trophi^s to enrich thy hair;
Rather than live to love, die with despair.
When as sad Comets in the Skies appear,
Some strange disaster then approaches near,
Which in our doubtful Souls begets a fear.
Thy Nose is that disaster; for, in thee,
No less than thousand Comets we may see,
As symptoms to ensuing misery.
Below thy Nose, a Hill we may descry,
Darkning the light appearing from thy eye,
Within that hollow Concave where they lie.
Eye, Nose, and Chin, since you in darkness be,
Premeditate before you visit me,
And raise young Cynders to your Venerie.
And in Nights shade meet with your shadow, where
Some Incubus by chance may get an heir,
Making the World accursed with such a pair.
Or if thy withered Hand (begot by Time)
Should with thy Eye, Nose, Chin, and Face combine,
Without discordant, for to make me thine:
Know gumlesse-wooer that diseases thirst,
To seize thy hand, where th'Apoplexy must
Bring thee e're long, unto thy neighbors dust.
Or if thy withered thigh desires to know
The sweet contents that in our Youth do flow,
Convert a tear into a flood below.
So may some Cripple wanting Alms, supply,
Thy al-most desperate necessity:
And please both nose, gums, chin, thigh, hands, and eye.
Covet no more when that you are so sped
Nor dye your cheeks with color from your bed,
Since before th'Ark you lost your Maydenhead.
The Superscription of a Letter sent to Clarinda.
FRom my Master here I Am come,
To embrace your Martyrdom*
Let no other hand come near me,
You alone have power to tear me.
If you like not what is within,
Then your frowns may purge my sin:
But if he or I can please,
Friendly let me rest at ease.
The Letter.
Go pale-fac't Paper to my Dear,
And whisper this into her ear:
Though I absent am, yet she
Keeping thee, embraces me.
Let no rude hand dare to touch thee,
Care not though a thousand grutch thee
Of that bliss which in her Hive
Thou enjoy'st till I arrive,
And be sure thou do not fly
From the glances of her eye.
Where she goes, be thou about her,
Gad not thou abroad without her;
Nor let any dare to see
What Is between my Love and thee.
Nay, and when she chance to sleep,
Gently to her Bosom creep,
Where I charge thee, rest till she,
With her kisses waken thee.
Go and prosper for a space,
Till I rob thee of thy place.
To Clarinda.
PRetty Wanton, prithee say,
Did you see my Heart to day?
Marks to know it, you shall find
Always constant, true, and kind;
Wounds about it, it does bear,
Drops are trickling here, and there,
^n which wound you will find, a Dart
Shot by you into my heart,
^f you saw it; do not blush,
Th'wounds are fresh, and blood will gush
unto your face, and you be known,
To covet more than is your own.
Send it back, but let it be
Sound as when it came to thee.
Do not think for to deny it;
These are tokens will discry it.
How can I subsist and live,
When my own you will not give?
Yet if you will send to me,
Yours in fair exchange, I Will be
Mute, and not report that I
Suffer by your cruelty.
^hen I prithee let me know,
If you will exchange, or no.
In praise of Sack.
TO write thy praise, let every Poets Quill
Flow with sweet Dew, sucked from Parnassus Hill.
Sack, I adore thee; nay, the Muses nine
Count thee the Fabric of their heavenly Chime:
And in their choice ^nventions strive to gain
Thy liking, ere the World peruse a strain.
Aged thou art, by which thou do possess
Of Noble Spirits, Poets numberless:
And to thy Cistern's head do all resort,
Admire thee, as they do admire the Court.
The very Children, ere they scarce can say
Their Paternoster, or their Christ-Crosse A,
Will to their Parents prattle, and desire
To taste that Drink, which Gods do so admire:
So by degrees, ere Time can count their years,
Thy strength does make them Ovids witty heirs.
To Clarinda, walking with her in his Garden.
SAy, my Clarinda, is the Rose
Not proud to have thy sweet repose,
Since they derive their dye from those,
Those precious Colors, Red and White,
Dwell in thy Checkes, may Gods invite
To feed, not surfeit with delight.
Twere sin, Clarinda, to believe,
From thee they could such harm receive;
Yet should they, thou can Cordials give.
^ay, my Clarinda, why the Air
Appears thus fresh, soft, clearly fair,
Yet cloudie Vapors yonder are?
Why does the injured Philomell
Hither retire, her moan to tell,
Yet Wood-men want her doleful knell?
Why does she alter now her Vote,
Purging the Quinzie in her throat,
Pays sorrow with a pleasing note?
Why Violets in Purple dressed,
The Damask thus the Rose invest,
Whose perfumed Mantles grace the East?
Why do the humble Pebbles rise
Like Opals, to out-brave the Skies,
And Iris various Clouds despise?
Tell me, Clarinda, why the Sun
Is set before his course is run,
Ready to fire his Region?
And why does his beloved Flower
Forget her Cue, her time and hour,
And shuts not, when he shows his power?
Each spicie Child, whose crisped Bed
Intwines the Earths Spring Maidenhead,
Are blessed, in kissing where you tread.
Or why does every thing beside,
That Is good, in this small place abide,
When other Gardens want such pride?
It Is thou, Clarinda, make this place
So fertile glorious; when you pace
This Walk, each Evil shuns your Chase.
When you appear, th'amorous Air
With modest breath salutes your hair,
And whispers out their zeal in prayer.
The Nightingale confines her woe,
And gives mirth liberty to go,
As Echoes to your Beds of Snow.
The Violet, Rose, and Pebbles have
No other Liveries than you gave,
Yet such as may the World out-brave.
The Sun does melt to see thy face,
The perfect Model of pure Grace;
H'ad rather burn than mend his pace.
The Marigold knows none but thee,
To whom she owes observancie,
Opens and shuts at your bright eye.
Though now this place is trim and fine,
When you depart, all will decline,
And others seem more rich than mine.
Oh then! Clarinda, stay and bring
Night into Day, the Winter, Spring;
We need not then a Wintering.
Clarinda described.
CLarinda! Oh, that very Name
Includes such worth, that he but dares
Without a Reverence speak the same,
Commits a sin his tears and prayers
Can never wash off: it is so foul,
It Is her pure sighs must cleanse his Soul.
Who says, that Leda's Swan is white,
Or sweetness dwells in Hybla's Trees,
Or Roses balmie breath delight
The Pallats of the active Bees,
Deceives himself; they all appear
Not worth our thoughts, Clarinda near.
Her Hair our Appetites entice,
Her Front a Mount of bleached Snow,
Her Eyes are Natures Paradise,
Her Lips are Mines where Rubies grow:
Her Breath perfumes the checkered fields,
They have no sweet, but what she yields.
Her Neck the polisht Ivorie wears,
Her Breasts the Valleys of Desire.
When Love cuts through the circled Spheres,
There lights, to cool the scorching fire
His Breast received from her: whose art
Without his aid can smite a Heart.
In every part she is most rare,
All good in her contracted is,
Nature's whole stock's envolv'd in her,
Th'Epitome of heavenly bliss;
Her Voice can stay the hand of Fate,
Her Smiles young Cupids can create.
Her ex'lence Metaphysicall,
Partakes not of old Natures stamps,
For she is supernatural,
Her Luminaries, Heavens Lamps:
I will conclude, she is all divine,
For else I never had writ her mine.
On Clarinda smiling.
HAve you beheld the Orient Sun appear,
Casting his splendor to each neighboring Sphere?
When cold-blood Winter copulated Ice,
Congealed a Frost, covering each Bough with Spice
As white as Winters hayres; how he displayes
His youthful heat, auspicious to his Rays;
How each tree melts, or to a jelly turns;
Such was Clarinda's smile, that ever burns,
And melts my yielding Heart, that I till now
Cloistered with Ice, could not of heat allow.
A Contemplation of Liberty and Love.
What is that freedom which men call
A blessedness to sport withal:
Or what those joys which Lovers deem,
To equalize their best esteem,
I long to know, that I may see,
The difference 'twixt those joys and me.
Responsio.
THen know, Loves joys are such as still
Are subject to Fates supreme will.
And every hour the Lover finds
Cross friends, cross stars, and crosser winds.
Till Seas grow calm, and we arrive
At Loves eternal peaceful Hive.
If Patience then may bring me ease,
Swell bigg a while you boyst'rous Seas*
Upon the hinderance of meeting by rain, sent to his friend Mr. W. B.
WHen last we did encounter with the GLOBE,
The Heavens was pleased to grace us with his robe
Of settled motions; but Aquarius, he,
Like an ambitious Churl, disdaines that we
Should have another meeting; Bacchus smilde,
But not prevailed, because an Infant child:
Nor could we get a Venus to embrace,
Mars strives to keep them back, and hold them chase.
Jove stamps, Apollo frowns, The Heavens all over,
Seem as contentious, and are in uprore.
Mercury does seem to clogg his feathered h^eles,
With weighty lead* in stead of flying, reeles
Into great Taurus center, the BULL-HEAD,
Where, with dull Claret we our senses fed,
Delaying time, till the roboyst'rous rain
Ceased its unmatched course, then up again
To walk; The Heavens not yet appeas^d, cast down
Their urmost Envy in that flood to drown
Our then expected hopes, in that poor we
Were forced to keep our center, not to fly.
Great Bishop^gate can witness in what hour,
We did arrive within its hapless Bower.
The Gods did seem thus angry, thinking we
Should by our mirth consume their Treasury.
What Is best to do? we must not now contend
Against their power, and so farewell my friend.

Upon Inconstancy.
Inconstancy, how chance that thou of late,
Art grown the chiefest Minion to my Kate?
Could your ambition find no other room,
Or secret place, but make her breast your Tomb
Of ayrie motions, filling so each vein
With swelling pleasures mixed with base disdain:
That now there is not a corner scarce left free,
To lodge a thought of hidden secrecy?
Hence thou insatiate Monster, Lovers hate.
The Commons envy, and the scorn of th'State;
Get thee to Court, use there thy tyranny:
Let Lovers sports alone; base Infamy,
Think not to harbor in a breast so fair;
I banish thee, and do conjure thee, never
Usurp that center yields us such delight:
But usher thou the obscure and darkened night
Of ever gnawing conscience* in such souls
Whose base and impure actions, still controules
Their pale-check'd Lovers* on whose fickle state,
Despair and horror does attend and wait.
Go base Neglect, and scorn, presume no more
T'assayle those Virtues, that her choycest store
She may impart to me; if thou be thence*
I know I shall not want her excellence*
Upon Clarinda's coming to Town, and departure.
NOW comes the pride of Earth, the glorious Spring;
And Philomel, to welcome her, does sing.
The pretty birds do play,
And make a Holyday.
And I with them present my offering:
The Arabian Bird presents to her, her kind,
Never seen before; on whose sweet face, the wind
Sucked in his breath
For fear of death;
And Phoebus in his Majesty then shinde:
And on her head cast his perfumes: but they,
As far unworthy, to her breath give way.
The odours which
The World enrich,
Did to her breath their choysest sents convey;
The Queen of Love ashamed, did hide her head,
And Cynthia in a cloud bemuffeled,
Did murmur there,
And in her Sphere
Waxt pale to see her lips and cheeks so red.
The humble Pebbles where her feet did lite,
Were straight made Jacinths, Saphires, Rubies bright,
Who wantonly did kiste
At such a change as this.
And blessed the coming of this glorious light.
If any Objects pleased her, with a glance
They should be Mines of Dyamonds; but Chance
The fickle Goddess would not be
Propitious to our hopes, 'cause we
She feared, with her, might out-vye Spain and France:
Nay, both the Indies: None need plough the Seas
To purchase wealth with toil; for, here with ease
They might obtain
A world of gain,
Had she but writ in smiles to them, I please.
But oh! she is gone, and every thing has now
His courser Nature on; Winters rough brow,
And Boreas blast
With envious have
Rends every tree, dis-leaves each twigge and bough;
The Phoenix too retired unto her nest,
And pining for her absence, pierced her breast
With sighs, and di'd,
Left none beside
Clarinda, with her worth to be possessed.
On the first leaf of a Psalm. Book presented to Clarinda.
TO her fair hand I this direct;
Good Angels guide, and her protect
That keeps my heart; O, may she be
But touched with flames of Love, like me!
Another vacant leaf in the same Book.
SHine little Book, more glorious than the Sun,
In her fair heart that has thy Masters won:
May thou procure in her relenting tears,
To pity him whose thoughts breed naught but fears.
I know that thou have power enough, and Art
To wound, rewound, and cure a wounded heart.
Thou art her chief delight, whose virtuous mind,
To study thee from childhood has enclinde:
Tell her thy Master sent thee, for that she
Might think on him, by often reading thee.
To Clarinda, walking with her in the night in a Wood or Grove, she being
fearful.
Fear not Clarinda, though th'emulous Night,
Doubting his forked Queen should loose her light,
Retires behind a Cloud; horne-mad to see,
Her glorious lamps extinguished by thee.
Yet did she know the good she might embrace
At her full rising, on her mealy face
(Viewing thy exquisite beauty) would be drawn
Mantles of crimson blushes, t'grace the lawne
Of her complexion, till the angry Morn,
Grown pale with Envy, sues they may adorn
Her cheeks. --
But the pride of Heaven's eclipsed, this peaceful Grove
Enjoyes their Cynthia, every st^rre does move
(As your attendants.) Here, what need I crave
Twy-light from Heaven, that such a Guider have?
Do you not see each harmless creature hies
With early haste to view those Radiant eyes,
As Heavens bright Tapers? th'active Fayries do
Trip from their Glo-worme, and resort to you:
But having seen you, vanish, thinking day
Was sent their tardy errors to betray;
Repine, and dye for anger. The Nai^des
Seeing themselves surpast in Beauty, please
Their Fancies with adoring you, desire
No greater bliss, than warmth from your pure fire.
Why weeps my dear Clarinda? here is none
Dare injure thy known pur'ty, thou art alone
In naught but singularity; See, The skies
Offer their stock of tears, to save thy eyes.
Mix not thine, with corruption; they can be
No less (my Fair) 'till puri^'d by thee.
Each tear that falls from that celestial fount*
Is of more price, than Craesus wealth can mount
To by Arithmetic; it is of that store,
One drop will buy the world when it grows poor.
See, they have left with thee, ambitious rain,
To watch thy opportunity to gain
Such undeserved happiness* I Will seek
Anon for every pearl upon thy cheek:
There shall not one be lost; each tree does shake
Their sappy heads; drops falling down do take
Hold with thy breath, compounded Nectar's made,
Which by Favonian winds is straight conveyed
To Jove's Emperial Palace; to the brink
They fill their Bowls, and Healths about they drink
To us, and our success; the blinking Boy
Recovering sight by thee, is drunk for joy,
And vows unto his Mother, and the rest,
To build his Paradise upon thy breast;
So proves my Rival: but, I know, thy might
Has power to blind him; as thou gav'st him sight,
So drown his expectation in the flood
Of the incensed Justice of the good.
The Graces wait for thee; and Cedars now,
As you past by, their lofty tops they bow,
To do you reverence, while you sooty Hall
Stays your approach to guild it, then it shall
Resemble heaven for brightness. Fancy die,
If what thou speak be an Hyperboly.
To Clarinda singing and playing on the Lute, she being bashful upon the
sight of him.
BLush not Clarinda, though my senses steal
Upon thy modesty; I prythe^ seal
My welcome with a smile. Oh! stop not Sweet,
Let once again thy air and singers meet
In blessed contention; I prote it, my ears
Were rapt into attention, and the Spheres
Wantonly tript to hear 'em; sure, there lies
Some power 'bove Magic in those Star-like eyes;
Whose swift pursuit gives life unto each string,
I'obey the touch of thy soft fingering.
The amorous courdage of thy Lute convayes,
Unto the Heavens such Harmony, that stays
The Planets to admire it: But thy breath
Despite of Nature, can enlive pale death.
Sing then Clarinda, ravish evry sense,
With the choice concord of thy excellence.
Out-doe the Lybian Harper, touch thy Lute,
And doom the world to silence, Angels mute,
While thou chaunt'st Madrigals, whose flight may tell
The world thou art Heavens only miracle;
For that the Earth till now has never bin
Possessed of such a glorious Seraphin.
Oh happy room that has atchived more
Grace by her voice, than e're thou knew'st before,
Or thy first Master hoped for; she has made
Thee by her presence an Elizian shade.
The dumb Effigies dance, and th'hangings do
Shake off their gravity, and congie to
The motion of your body (which till now
Made gray with sorrow, wore a sullen brow)
And youthfully do move; my fair One, see,
Thy Power's above the reach of Poetry,
Or Art, or Fancy; live to cure the world
Of Lethargies, and when cursed clouds are hurld,
T'oppres't --
Send forth thy breath; 'twill purify the air
From Plagues infection, full, as well as prayer.
An excusive Letter made by the Author, for a friend of his ^o his Father.
AS one who having robbed, fearing no Law,
Till hue and cry a^^aults him, and does draw
Perforce his body to the Jail, where long
Enduring ali extremes, at last is stung
With some remorce of conscience, does ^elent
His wicked life, a reformed penitent.
He goes far that never back returns,
An angry fire it is that ever burns
Within the heart of man. Oh! then be pleased
To let your anger pass, and be appeased,
Though all this while, my Infant years did stray,
And trod the path of follies baiting way:
Though all this while I was in blindness led,
And all my senses unto fondness wed:
My unripen'd years had not the wit to find
The vain delights that still provokes the mind,
Till buying wit now at the dearest rate,
I gained experience through my best friends hate:
Witness the daily tears I shed at last,
In true repentance for my follyes past.
Then worthy Sir, your pardon let me crave;
Without your pardon I no life can have:
For better 'twere that life from body fled,
Than in your deep disdaines lie buried.
Let my repentance plead for mine offense,
And my reformed life my innocence.
To Clarinda upon her absence from her window.
FAirest, if passions might express my love,
If my unfeigned sighs might force belief:
If that my nightly watchings could but move
Your Adamatine heart, and give relief;
Though now I praise your beauty, I should more,
Make you my Idol, as my Saint adore.
Oh what unworthy actions have you seen?
What cause, or why, am I thus slighted now?
And held so little in your wont esteem?
Has my youth broke a syllable, or vow
Which once I willing made? speak, and be sure,
To find a spotless heart, as chaste, as pure.
Why should you now withdraw that heavenly light,
Which struck amazement in each living creature?
The luster of your beauty from my sight;
A grace bestowed on you, by choice dame Nature.
You are her only choice, O prithee why
Should thou thus derogate, to let me dye?
Was it because my longing eyes did still
Covet to view thy beauty every day,
Glutting with surfets, yet had not it is fill,
But begs a pleasing smile, and then away,
Leaving behind a heart so full of woe,
That I could better stay than thence to go?
(...) was it because my love to thee was such,
That I each minute set thy praises forth;
And never thinking that I loved too much
A soul of such rare beauty, and pure worth,
Hoping at last to purchase such a prize,
That should Jove see, he might eternalize?
To Clarinda, having had no answer to the former Letter.
NOt yet an answer! has your well-^^n'd Muse
Forsook her pleasing Pamphlets, and refuse
To grace me, as the subject of her Verse?
Or do you please to keep 'em for my Hearse;
Thinking your studies (whilst living) were ill spent,
Unless in jesting sort and merriment?
Not as a solid Lover, but as one
Who never fetched sighs, shed tears, or lent a groan,
Which I, poor I, have done. Oh, why has Heaven
Graced you with such a feature, and not given
A correspondent heart? or, if it be
That you retain your Lyrick Verse for me,
To grace my sable Hearse; I Will pray no more;
You need not, Lovers shall my case deplore;
Such as have known what it is to lose a heart,
They, they shall pity me, and bear a part.
And if thy studies be to such an end,
Live happy, and embrace another friend,
Whom you can fancy better, while poor I
In peace forsake this Earths mortality.
To Fortune.
GReat Queen of Mutabilitie, to thee
I send my Votes; nor beg I smiles from thee;
My low and humble thoughts shall never aspire
To climb unto an Earldom, or Empire;
Nor are they sweld with strong Ambition so,
To beg a Lordship, or thy favors: no;
Since begging is so useful, I Will forbear
To beg, lest whipping fall unto my share.
I will not ask thee any thing, but what
Thou can not give, that only is my lot.
First, I would have from thee thy massy store,
Whereby I may extend it to the poor;
Nor should it court your fawning Parasite,
Or kiss rich Dives wealth, that is infinite*
Give me thy eyes, and with thy eyes I Will see,
To give desert its due, scorn flattery.
But thou art blind, they say, and do not know
On what, or whom thou do thy wealth bestow.
Thy judgment rather than thy eyes are blind,
In my opinion, else thou could not find
Such ominous distinctions 'twixt true worth
And dunghill Doublets, muskt and sented forth:
The Gallants Feather, and his tatling Spur,
The City Miser wrapped in's Neighbors Furre,
The Countrey-dolthead Mungrell brought to Land,
Though illegitimate, is by thy hand
Advanced above the rank of Carters son,
(Reserved for laughter till his wealth is done)
Gulls were ordained wits pastime, it is their fate
To be wits slave, though on wits gold they bate.
How aptly thou have fan^i'd out their Mates?
On vicious Gallants still diseases waits,
Accompanied with pride and infamy,
Base son and daughter to civility.
On your engrossing Usurer attends
Legions of timorous heart-quakes, that portends
Some eminent danger, masqu'd with Vailes of gold,
Immured in dung that does his conscience hold.
Your plodding Countryman, whose subtle shift
Employed to vex his neighbors by his thrift;
Continual suits in Law, a Terms vexation
Consumes more angels than a long Vacation.
His misery's in this, his painful evil
Can never gain 'bove factor for the devil.
Then what are all these blessed in, save the Ore
That guilds their lives, yet leaves their souls most poor?
Should I with strict severenesse use my skill
In the deep search of folly, wade my quill
Through pitchy Seas of Satyrisme, I might
Rip up thy parched intrals, and incite
Each sense we master, to grow fat, and swell
With uncurb'd laughter; let my whispers tell,
Thou do reside in ignorance, and braggs
Most in thy gorgeous vestments, when the rags
Of poverty's more precious: what upholds
Thy pride but indiscretion? Will controules
The Law of reason, and when these do reele,
Thy state is unsupported, and thy wheel
Broke in despite of frowns; thou can not see
(As we do) into thine own misery.
Wrack not thy wealth on errors, but require
More brawny-nerv'd assistance, whose pure fire
Cohabits with true judgment; wisdom can
Envolv'd in reason, make the soul of man
Run up the Pyramids of praise, and show
The world new ways to honor thee. Then know
Thy choice of Votaries; the Poet will
Practice his Arts Encomions, and distill
His rich harmonious Raptures that shall raise
A Fabric to thy name, 'bove the reach of praise,
Virtues white essence next in order shall*
Accompanied with Patience, offer all
Her stock of goodness, and the Scholar turn
His books to Martyrs, at thy Altar burn.
Europe must needs adore thee; wonder more
To see the Scholar rich, the Miser poor.
Poets shall then disdain the threadbare Bride,
When silver-fac'd Pecunia is allied
To their ingenious Pockets; Oh 'twould be,
Me thinks a glorious metamorphosie*
But why am I thus passionate, and speak
Of such impossibilities, to break
My Optic Science? Well, the world may see,
I would hav't so; though Fortune lowres on me,
No matter, use your Envy, thou shall be
Enricht with nothing* save inconstancy.
To Clarinda upon her inconstancy.
I Find; you are no Changeling, for indeed
You can dissemble neatly, and still feed
My hopeless comforts with your hearty vows,
That neither Faith, nor Constancy allows:
I blush to speak thy weakness, prithee why
Do thou make black thy tongue with perjury?
Wantons do often use it, can thou be
A faithless Wanton, and so fair a She?
I dare not say you love me, your reply
Will then ungently give my tongue the lie.
You are not true as I am, but still prove
A seeming Saint, in vowed dissembling love.
Yet know, I love you, and would have you do
A miracle in Woman, to be true.
What constancy can thou expect from any,
That art so fickle, and can love so many?
I prithee leave dissembling, do not gloze,
Or guild thy words with vows, make silver dro^^e;
Thy vows are far more precious; gold to them,
Is as a Leaden Crown to a Diadem:
Which vows you will use so often, that they will be
The chiefest witness against thy guilt and thee.
To his much honored friend Master Robert Newsteade Gent.
TO rank thee friend, amongst my best of friends,
For thy Quotidian favors, makes amends,
In part, though not in all; and then again,
When I conceive the fickle state of men,
How soon their faith's extinct, how quickly gone,
Like to a thing but newly thought upon:
My fear begets a passion, and does strive
To hug my friends, and keep their names alive.
To his good friend M. H. D.
FRiend, I must blame thee, yet I thank thee too:
Thou have done that which many would not do;
For when my lines lay open to your view,
Begot by me, yet fetched their breath from you,
Through your persuasions, and entreaty, I
Have thrust my Rimes into the worlds wide eye,
Where I expect their censure, yet I swear,
Be It good, or bad, thou shall embrace thy share.
Thy verse my Verse to the world does Usher in;
Not to requite thee then 'twere held a sin:
Nor will I be too lavish in thy praise,
(Thy worth alone may gain Poetic bays)
All that I Will do, if any count me rude,
Is to repel the brand, Ingratitude.
Io. Tatham.

An Ode Acrostick-wise on the Virtuous Gentlewoman, Mistress A. P.
Amongst so many, whose desire
Lives fresh thy goodness to admire,
I do present my Votes, to be
Crowned with thy Resplendencie.
Enjoy thou Beauty, whose deserts
Proclaim thee Mistress of all hearts,
Virtues blessing, with those Graces
Reigning in their proper places,
Dayning now to wait on thee,
Yielding to thy Soveraigntie.
And while the stars shall grace the Skies,
Like sparks of light from Cynthia's eyes,
Embrace more blessings than can be
Cast by Arithmetic on thee,
Enrich thy Nuptials with a Guest,
Proud to harbor in thy Breast;
Vesta with her Virgin Crew,
Richly decked, to wait on you,
Devoted comes, and at your Shrine
Yssues forth her Offering.
Aurora's sence-delighting Flowers
Leave to deck her fragrant Bowers,
Indeared to your ever Spring,
Courting Philomel to sing
Encomiasticks, as your due,
Purchased by those gifts which you
Vouchsafed to lend them, to adorn
Rose-cheek'd and nixious-finger'd Morn;
Distilled Pearls from your bright eyes,
Yields them their Morning Sacrifice.
And now the Music of the Spheres
Lent by you, invites all ears;
Iuventa 'maz'd from whence it came,
Comes to meet your Pophian flame,
Early brings to please your sense,
Pauch^ian Fumes, rich Frankincense,
Vestituted with delight,
Resplendent as the Morning bright,
Dis-^obes her self, and leaves in truth
You the only Queen of Youth.
Aglaia, with her Sisters two,
Likewise comes to wait on you;
Injured Virgins to you fly,
Craving shelter from your eye,
Eternized by those Blessings which
Presaged their Virtues should enrich,
Uniting there an ardent Zone,
Reason tells is you alone;
Dryades, with all their powers
You command, and they are yours*
Arabian Phoenix needs must be
Less rare than Fly, compared to thee;
Jove in revenge, and envying me^,
Chained himself, to dote on thee;
Emperious Love has lost his heart,
Pretending thou have got his Dart;
Vows must be only made to thee,
Releasing Loves captivity;
Deny not your perfections true;
Youths Queen (and all) does rest in you.
All Beauties, Graces, Virtues be
Lively pencil'd out in thee:
In thy hair we may discrie
Chaste Love sit in majesty;
Eyes thou have, by which the Sun
Plyes his course, ere day be done;
Voice? the Nightingales sweet throat,
Runs hoarsely to thy Dorick note:
Dance? did the rare Penelope
Yet live, she needs must yield to thee:
As in the Sphere of Goodness, every Sense
Has by instinct in you their Residence.
To Philomel.
LEave Philomel, to make thy moan,
It Is I have cause to grieve alone:
Thy Woes had periods; mine must be
Invaded with fresh Cruelty.
The Joys I have, are such as may
Make the green Spring a Winters day*
Or such as when desired, do take
A course to kill, for pity sake.
Cease then thy noise of woe, unless
Thou Wilt grieve for my unhappiness.
To Clarinda.
THat I did love thee, summon up my Vows,
As uncorrupted witnesses allows
No partiality; peruse my truth,
Unspotted, as th'immaculate zeal of youth,
Unfeigned, as the Orasons of Saints,
Expird, as Altars Incense, that acquaints
Heaven with sincere devotion; that I did
Adore each feature, as well seen as hid;
Examine each particular line and phrase
My doting fancy offered to thy praise;
That every smile enlivened my dull sense;
Search but the custom of thy influence,
And it appears in Characters of bliss,
No Paradise so pleasing as a kiss;
That I did deem thy polisht Ivory brow,
A firmament, wherein twin-starres allow
A greater luster than the pride of Heaven,
Contracted t'a full sky-light, could have given
Us Mortals Ask the World, and then over which
A Mount of Alabaster does enrich
Thy smooth Ermin-like forehead, to thy cheeks,
The stock of Flora for a refuge seeks.
Those Tresses which thou wear'st are golden snares,
Though falsely some did nominate them hairs.
The Afric Coralls on thy ruby lips
Mix their perfections, and in Nupti^ll skips
Trip to the Spheare-like Music of thy voice
Able to charm a Seraphin; the choice
Electrum in your neck; your azure veins
On snowy beds discypher to the Swains
The Tempe of true happiness, when they
By my command did to 'em homage pay.
I set thee forth in Verse, raised thee so high,
All sinned, that breathed thee less than Deity.
My praises out-did Nature, thou were then
The only subject for my Muse and Pen.
The world shall likewise testify; but here --
Yet wisdom bids me stop: I will not swear,
Though I have cause to execrate thy faith,
Which is a blessing your sex seldom has.
I will omit all rashness, only this,
Confute thy soul even in its hope of bliss.
False and neglectfull Woman, had thou bin
Deformed in thy person, as thy sin,
I should have then abhorred thee, and my eyes
Perceived the strong infection in thee lies.
Thou art not fair; 'twas only Fancy led
Me to Hyperbole's; thy cheeks once red
Colored by me, thy eyes, lips, hands and all,
In Lethe have deserving Funeral.
Thy breath infects as-killing pestilence;
No more Panchayan Gums, choice Frankincence,
Shall grace it with resemblance; thou art
Of an Ethiopian color every part;
Pencil'd by Shame and Infamy: thy name
Rac'd forth the Role of Constancy and Fame.
The world only records thy falsehood; try
If thou can win me to credulity,
That thou did love me once, and check each tongue,
For it is aspertion it is no potent wrong,
Less vindicated; but my faculties
Abjure thee now, though once thy Votaries,
And cannot retain belief Colusive you
Were ever real, but in being untrue;
That only thou were made for; else thy breast
Would never have covetted a new impressed:
But, like the constant Emerauld, have kept
Its primitive, stamp, and purity; falsehood slept
In ignorance: O ye powers, can there be
An absolution for impiety?
If you will decline from Justice, then you may
Flatter her erring hopes with a long day
Of fatal trial, whose conviction must
Precipitate her gloryes into dust
Sure, though prolonged, the difference then will be;
The Insulting freedom chained, my bondage free.
The Authors Dream.
WHen as my dull and wearied eyes, had long
With tedious watchings, 'bout my temples hung;
The vale of sleep like a long wasted Lamp,
Smothered, went out, and fell into a damp:
My senses tasting of some happiness,
Ambition rose, and strove for further bliss,
Till that me thought, an Echo in my ear,
Bad, rise and follow me, why sleep'st thou here?
With that a Winter-sweat did overspread
My bloodlesse cheeks as in amazement dead;
Each limb did shake, my panting heart did knell
Death's sad unwelcome tone, Nights-passing-bell;
The selfsame voice again did seem to be
The comforter of my sad hopes and me.
Music possessed mine ears, in that I then
Contemned my fears, and seemed awake again.
No sooner had my ears enjoyed so rare
Unlooked for pleasures, but did straight repair
A Lady of that beauty (clad in white)
As seemed to outface Day, and conquer Night.
Her hair disheveled hung, about her brows
A wreath of Laurel; on her garments, vows
Of perjured Lovers, mingled with the blood
Of some poor injured creature, that withstood
No ill-tempestuous storm in hope to gain
For her pure constancy the Elizian Plain;
When as their spotted souls as black as hell,
Shall choke themselves with vows in Pluto's Cell.
Her breasts not bare, but in a modest manner,
Show the pure color of true Lovers Banner.
Under the which they hold their second faith,
(Those spungy pearlesse Twins the females has)
About which blood a precious stone was placed,
Such, as had Venus worn, it would have graced
Her wanton beauty, and have forced the Boy
T'a'left his dallying, and the sport enjoy.
On the other side whereas black vows do make
A darkness shadow, brightness does partake
Of golden Charecters, that who so see,
Must by those golden letters guided be.
Rich Sandals fetched from far, of purest gold,
Did her unvalu'd feet in pleasure hold,
As white as is the purest morning milk,
And seemed ensnared with fine Arabian silk.
With her two Virgins also clad in white,
Supporting on each side this Queen of light.
Upon each garment artificially
Was interweav'd a pearl distilled eye,
Sad, discontented, languisht, broken hearts,
Fears, tears, sighs, sobs, laments, and piercing darts.
Cross Fates, friends frowns (in gold) the Parents hate,
Seemed their contentions to expostulate,
With that their souls sweet Organs tuned. Forbear;
Let thy fears vanish, we shall bring thee where
Death keeps his Court, the sable irksome Cell
Of murdering souls, where sins with Furies dwell:
There thou shall see each broken Vow to have
Deserved punishment: dead, want a Grave.
Yet fear not Youth, for through the air we will hover,
And with our robes of truth thy doubts will cover.
My fears then left me, and we mounted straight
On a winged Chariot they enjoined to wait
For us, drawn with four milk-white Doves;
Such as dame Venus's pleased with, when her Loves
She means to visit; through the air than we,
Swifter than nimble-footed Mercury
Did fly. -- At length
Such shrill confusions beat into my ears,
As would have sunk the world, dissolved the spheres:
But Truth my still supporter, bade me be
No whit yet daunted, for I soon should see
Horrors of worse affrightments; with that shake
The lower earth, and from a Sulphurous lake
Flew flames of quenchlesse fire, with the smoke
Of loathsome brimstone, eating trees of Oak.
The dismal noise of screech-Owles, hissing Snakes,
To^ds, Adders, Monsters, and what else pertakes
Of ugly poison, seemed a Cavalere,
And fellow partner with all creatures there:
In that fal^ tears made furrows in my cheeks,
And for some reconciliation seeks;
With that demanding of my guider Truth,
What place that was? she answered, pretty Youth,
A place where false neglectfull Lovers be;
Such as have cancelled faith and loyalty.
This is the place where thy disdainefull Fair
Shall be created new; tear her bright hair;
Rejoice to have a Serpent to her bed,
And by deformed monsters ravished.
My panting soul then sunk, but tender she
Raised me again, demanding straight of me
The reason of that passion; I replied,
I loved her still: though Reason it denied:
Shall she for whom my studies I have spent,
(Fair Truth) receive this doom and punishment?
Shall Monsters then enjoy what I before
Did Idolize, and as my Saint adore?
Shall they suck honey from so rich a Hive,
And glut themselves with that each soul alive
Would humbly kneel for: O, shall they then be
The only means t'enlarge my misery?
Truth's answer was, we will leave this doleful place;
Banish distrust, we will mend our slow-wing'd pace,
And drive thee to the Tempe of content,
Where Love shall laugh at Falsehoods banishment,
And in dispight of Envy, shall obtain
The feeling welcome of his heart again.
Where Pyramus and Thisbe live in bliss,
And there enjoy each other with a kiss.
Then did we drive our Chariot through a Grove
Of Mayden-flowers, where the Queen of Love
Met with her Martialist, and present came
With due salutes, and homage to Truths name.
The Chariot staid, we lighted, and then went
Into a place called Loves true ravishment.
Where every pretty Bird in warbling notes,
Did give us entertainment with their Votes.
Each Lover had his Mate, and on the Green
Did sport and play, and blush because o're-seene,
Exchanging kisses, in so much that I
Did emulate their candy'd jollity.
The Virgins that did wait upon our Queen,
Left her with me, and went into a Green,
Where two sweet Youths, clad in a crimson dye,
Did give 'em entertainment to the eye.
Joys met with joys, the Quiristers did sing,
As welcoming the wanton youthful Spring,
Where in an Arbor, crowned with Violets,
Each with his Mate new happiness begets.
Truth's smiling Aspect with her Afric gemms,
Offered a whisper to me, and condemns
My former incredulity, then gave
Me her advice to purchase ought they have:
Opens her richest Caskenet, and shows
The bed of Odours, where the Elizian Rose,
The sence-delighting Violets, and the rest
Of Flora's pride, are in a Garland dressed,
Compassed about with little hoops of Glass,
Reflecting on each cheek that by 'em pass.
The groundwork honey, and the Juice of love,
The Mornes refreshment. Nectar cast by Jove,
(Instead of dew) upon their colored veins,
With oil of Constancy to keep from steynes
Of every ruder hand, and there they lie
Unpluckt by any, save Maturity.
No mervaile then Winter cannot afford
Us such Redolent Miracles, when th'hord
And Closet that retaynes 'em, is a place
Impaled with all contents, and Beauties Chase,
A Park where Hearts keep their Imperious way
Without usurping Tyrants, they can pay
Their Morne-devotion without loss of life,
Exactions trouble, or a womb of strife:
Here they like Doves, use Nature in her kind,
Mutually live each with his Mate, refinde
From the gross errors dwell in Mortals, who
Think it is enough, in that they only woo,
Without a thought of fervency, if one
(A Woman, for none else would be a stone)
Finds an incurable folly to invade
Her Lover, called passion, she has a Trade,
Though 'twill scarce get her living, yet she will grow
Fat with insulting over her Patients woe,
Which custome's here a Stranger; here, said Truth,
Laws are enacted to entreasure Youth;
Here Flora's Spring, Autumn, and checkered May,
The pleasing Gales of Zephyres do convay;
And this their Winter Mansion: Yet they know
No frosty finger can assault 'em so.
Here they inhabit without nipping pain,
'Till gentle Zephyres post* 'em back again,
To kiss the worlds known Wanton, then ensues
Th'unused rashness that their births abuse;
Each wilful finger and depraving hand
With Insolency robs, uses command
(Instead of mild entreaties) tears from thence
The infancy of their sprung influence:
Crops the sweet Virgin flower before the age
Makes it completely ripe, while the sad Bryer,
Mother to those rich gemms, embraces fire;
Or else left destitute: who does become
Barren in naught but grief, her martyrdom.
Oh irreligious Mortals, see your error:
Covetous in nothing but in hoording Treasure,
Which last like Roses, leaving once their Tree,
Becomes inconstant through inconstancy.
Then know the difference, and invest thy self
With whiter thoughts, banish respect of pelf,
That like a hellish Advocate delude
Man's sense into a glittering servitude:
Which choakes 'em in disgestion; cut the tie
Which binds thee to thy ruin, let 'em be
Disjoined for ever, and deem constancy
The only means of Fortune, for without
Such resolutions never go about
To style thy self a Lover; it is a thing
Abhorred in real Actions, 'twill not bring
Mortality to th'pleasure signed for thee,
This sacred Tempe's true felicity:
Where no tempestuous storm of Parents hate,
Shall dare to cross thy e're propitious Fate.
Thy Love and thee amongst the rest in sweet content,
Shall spin your times in endless merriment:
But if that she be obstinate, and still
Disdaines our dread command and powerful will:
I Will send a summon by our blindfold Boy,
That shall convert to terror every joy.
Go tell the lower world what you have seen,
As you do honor us a Maiden Queen:
This have I shown you, that the world may know,
What power we have, and what to us they owe.
Then post you back, you winged Messengers,
And leave him where we found him; Time refers
No other conference, for the gladsome Day
Appears; then hence, pack on, make have away,
For fear our theevish frosty-bearded Time,
Rushes through th'speares too fast, and Phoebus shine.
With that they mounted me, and in the space
Of one poor minute brought me to the place
Where first they found me, that my giddy brain
Struck with amaze, knew not from whence I came,
'Till gentle Morpheus, that did first surprise
My weakened senses had unlocked mine eyes,
And gave free passage to each stretching part,
By the pure skill of his never failing Art.
Then kind Aurora graced me with a smile,
And Phoebus welcomed me from my exile.
In that my late dull spirits then were apt
To entertain secrets in Riddles wrapped.
Then did I think upon my former charge,
Given by my guider Truth to me at large.
And all those pleasures I that night did see,
Grew fresh and pleasant in my memory:
That I not disobeying her command,
Like a true Subject, in another land
In trust for her, must let her praises be
Blazoned by Fames guilt Trump of Poesy.
And first unto my Dearest as a friend,
I did unfold my Dream, and recommend
Each passage I had seen, time, place, and where
Of pain, joy, grief, or bliss, she might have share.
But she not giving credit or belief
To any such weak fictions, nor relief
To me, or any others; but does still
Continue in her bad obdurate will.
Leave her I must; but let her know, that face
Shall live to be the subject of disgrace.
Nor shall one tear be shed in pity; she
That lived disdainful, shall disdained be.
To Cupid.
Cupid, I Am inflamed with fear,
Lest her beauty bribes thy care;
She Is sufficient to entice
Virtue out of Paradise;
When her breathings kiss her lips,
Expired Gums and Odours skips;
Every Accent is a charm,
And her circle is her arm,
In the which she will raise or lay,
Man or spirit, flesh or clay;
She Is an Artist that delights
More in Conquests than in fights,
It Is her use to fetter those
Icy-bodies she has chose
(In her own reserved intent,
T'appeare by it more excellent)
To her bright Phebean hair,
Where perfumed M^anders are;
In such a prison Jove, or thee
Would descend and Captive be.
But, here is the glory crowns her most,
She dissolves those lumps of frost,
And gives it active blood and fire,
(Rather wonder, than desire)
Makes it form; for, from her eye,
A hot Promethean flame does fly,
And penetrates so every breast,
Th'augmenting flames cannot be expressed.
In that she only erres in part,
It Is wilfulness, not want of Art.
She shoots her scorching beams too fast,
Piles flame on flame, and blast on blast;
And then she leaves him in his flame,
Though one poor tear would quench the sam^*
Her oiled expressions she did gain,
From the false Mercurian train.
It Is a language winds the ^ares
To admiration, gulls the Spheres;
Yet all these, rarities are used
To the contrary sense, therefore abused.
Then Cupid, now thou know by me,
How to shun her flattery:
Be thy self, and let her know,
Beauty does a reverence owe
To thy powerful frown: go play
My part a while, and for me say,
(If that her smiles don't bribe thy wit)
Rather for scorn than praise she is fit.
Cupids Summons.
FAirest Mortal, think not I
Privilege a starre-like eye,
Or the choycest Fair on earth;
I can blast 'em in their birth:
Yet that you might feel desires,
Quenching Loves Idalian fires.
Amongst a many Beauties more,
I preserved thee to adore
My Deity: but now I see
Thou disdain'st my power and me.
Therefore by my Paphian Bow
My commands must let you know,
That a strange complaint of late,
Beat a parley at my Gate;
And so entered, that the Gods
With that uprore grew at odds:
In so much that they me sent
Messenger of punishment,
In my Mothers sacred name,
You a Traitor to proclaim
Against the Laws of Love and Beauty.
And to what you owe by duty
To th'AEthereall powers and me,
Canceled through Inconstancy.
By my Bow and flaming Dart,
By the Lovers bleeding heart,
By the hand, and by the glove:
By the eye that captived Jove,
I command and summon thee,
At Loves Bar to answer me,
To what we shall there object,
Against thy scorn and base neglect:
Fail not creature, as you will
Answer, your ensuing ill.
The Oath after appearance.
PAle-cheek'd Mortal, now your eyes
Return their luster to the skies:
No hue of Rosie-red does guide
The welcome Lilyes, as a Bride:
Nor are th'Lilyes fresh, and gay,
As they were the other day.
The present guilt does make it known,
Beauty lent, is not your own.
Venus now the Queen of Love,
Is in presence, and must prove
You a disobedient heir
To her glorious Hemisphere.
Paphos Archer hates to own
You a sister to his throne:
And must here as witness be
To your black-mouthed perjury;
Therefore on this gold-leaf'd book,
In which Lovers often do look,
Lay your hands, if you be free
From usurping Tyranny,
From the many sighs and tears
Lovers use, their nightly fears:
From their passions, folded arms,
Lulled asleep with Sirens charms,
From the murdering of a Heart,
Glorying at th'excessive smart:
From an angry lowering eye,
Spying Lovers destiny,
From a mock or scornful smile,
That kills, though pleases for a while.
From a heart that harbors scorn,
Leaving witless Youths forlorn:
You may freely swear, but see,
The Rose has left his Treasury,
Your stars are clouded; Rubies to
Have left th'exchequer'd lips of you,
And with sweet gales transported thence,
To seek a better residence.
Hence to trial Themis now
Against thy guilt does set her brow
And Conscience calls; you must appear
At Loves Bar, and answer there.
His Allegations against Clarinda.
TO you fair Cyprian Dame, I do present,
A languisht heart bound to imprisonment,
(Without your fair releasement) to an eye
Swelled with Ambition, flat Conspiracy,
Whose still aspiring soul did think 'twas duty,
That greatest Mortals should admire her beauty.
Nay, to that height Ambition had conveyed
A strong belief, she was not Earthly made,
To entertain a Love that had no power,
Like Jove t'appeare in an Argolian shower,
And when bright Sol his glorious Rays displaide
To grace the world, Conceit might soon persuade
He^ witlesse-fancie, his all-seeing eye,
Borrowed it is luster from her brighter eye.
Your self whom Paris well did judge to be
Heavens only piece, the fairer of the three,
She would not blush to say, had the Youth seen
Her matchless Beauty, you had been no Queen*
And I in ignorance believed the same,
Blinded with love, so weaved into a frame
Of doting passions, having no alliance
To my own welfare, or her base defiance.
For her I wasted all my hours in grief,
Expecting comfort, yet found no relief;
Often have I cursed the Boy that first betrayed
My hearts security, forcing me to wade
Through th'ever sable stream of cursed despair,
Or crimson gulf of horror to the staire
Of absolute madness, still ingendring ill,
Now sink, then rise, subject to Fates stern will:
Not knowing thee to be of sacred line,
Yet felt thy sting, but knew it not divine,
As now I do. But thought some Circes might
With charms bereave me of my bodies right,
Forgive me sacred Deities; no more
Will I blaspheme your goodness as before.
No oaths or vows of Hymenean right
Could move her mind, no liquid tears invite
Her heart to pity, no disast'rous fate
Of future mischief could accelerate
My present death. But in her scornful look,
I read her meaning as in Angers book,
Sometimes with a dissembling smile retains,
Me longer to increase my Lovesick pains.
As does the cunning Doctor keep in ure,
His queasie Patient, and prolongs the Cure;
Either to make his skill the brighter shine;
Or else for fear his Patient should combine
With others, and he lose his Cure; e'ne so
My cunning fair with smiles would work too;
Knowing that none but she had equal power,
To crown my hopes, or blast 'em in an hour.
And thus in endless passions did I lie,
Lingering my breath, Deaths bare Epitomy.
Nor would she pity that my spring-like age
Should dying, live, in Lovers Pilgrimage.
When as th'impartiall Maids have been at strife,
Which first should cut my thread, and end my life,
She Would tyrannize over my passions; nay, and more,
Disdained your power, whose aid I did implore;
Telling me, Beauty had more than Love,
Beauty was that strong charm enchaunted Jove.
Then would appear such lightning from her eye,
As seemed to equal Iunos Majesty.
Here do I stand for to aver, and prove
Her base, disloyal, and my constant love.
Be just you Powers, and let your sentence be
A punishment too good for perjury;
That future times perusing of her shame,
May praise your Justice, and abhor her name;
Without your sentence, all will soon aspire,
Like proud Prometheus for to steal your fire:
For th'envie of their Sex it is so deep,
They Will study nightly, and revenge in sleep.
The Censure of the Gods. Present. Jupiter. Sol. Cupid. Vulcan. Juno. Venus.

Sol. We will not hear her answer, her reply
Will but add torments to her misery.
Her guilt is too apparent, therefore we
For thy aspiring thoughts, do banish thee
From that best light, which earthly creatures do
Admire, and yearly pay a tribute to.
Since from thine eye such sparks of lightning came,
To blast our servant here we will veil the same
From thenceforth never --

Venus. Forbear; indeed you wrong me: her offense
Requires a censure from our Excellence.
Was she not Ours, 'till her presumptuous soul
(Inflamed with Treason) sought for to control
Our all-commanding power, has she not bin
Stained with the folly of Narcissus sin?
Has not her Beauty made the world below
Forget that duty which to us they owe,
Deeming our greatness but a fallacy,
Mentioned by children in their infancy?
Then know, to us, to us she has done wrong,
Corrupting Mortals with her venomed tongue,
To cast mists on our greatness; since then she
Has not yet tasted of those sweets that we,
And those that live to love, do still enjoy,
All subject to the anger of my Boy:
She shall be barren in that happiness,
And never embrace what hidden sweets there is
In Lovers glances; but shall live to be
The only scorn to Loves posterity;
She shall love one, and (living) love him so,
Her love shall gain his have; his hate, her woe.

Jupiter. This must not be, your censure does appear,
Not from desert, but Envy; I dare clear
The innocent soul. Why barren? cause, you know
The sweets already; none can merit so.
Forsooth a kiss is envied, and a glance
That does unbreath, man's spirits with a trance.
Denied embraces is forbidden: what if I
Endeavor to salute lip, breast, or -- why?
Would blushes beat me thence? woo her white hand
To lead me to the fountain, where I Will stand
As cold as Marble, 'till her lips do seal
A Patent for my entrance, I Will appeal
Not to your Will, but Love; ah, 'two'd arise
Mutually sweet, when both hearts sympathize.
Come, you forget your self; is it not rare,
To have a woman honest, while she is fair?
Which by your Sentence must be; 'faith, and then
She Will grow more famous, though less loved of men.
Had you been charie of your Maidenhead,
As you were of your Beauty, y'might have spread
Your Ivorie Leafes to Sparrows, and they would peck
Those Letters out, which do your Goddess deck.
Fair Maid, for that thou have a stirring thought
Of Greatness, hating all but such as brought
A Shower like Us, into our Dana's Lap,
We fancy thee too much, to let a Clap
Of raging Thunder pierce thee -- lend thine ear --
What, is it a match? No: Why? think thou they hear?
We will adjourne the Court. Not? prithee say;
I am incinder'd; kiss me, 'twill allay
My heat: come, I will have it so; we will steal
Into an obscure cranie, put the eye
Of Phoebus out; my appetite does frye.

Vulcan. How Jupiter does look now: it is a prey
Would make all sell their happ'nesse; by my fay
A plump-cheek'd wench, and does deserve no less
Honor than Venus, were she of her Dress.
I Will to her -- don't believe him Less, his Wife
Will blast thee with her anger, entrap thy life,
As she did poor Alomena's; lean to me
Venus and I are out, I Will none but thee.
And though I Am rough and sootie, yet I can
Bestow on thee the pleasures rest in man,
As well as he; my hoof shall be set right,
If thou swear to let me taste delight;
Or if thou will not swear, or yield, yet be
A woman; wink, and let me feed on thee.

Jupiter. Thou art a saucy Vulcan; go about
To make me thunderbolts for th'Summer rout,
Use your black-cru^ted hands in the Cyclops forge,
Or dye your Horns a sable hue; disgorge
Your juicie stomach where our Horses lies;
Your man-like action needs must please their eyes;
Or make thy Wife turn honest: but I fear
Mars has too late uncharm'd her Hemispheare.

Vulcan. Why in this passion? alas, I will connive
At all your doings, provided I may thrive
As well as you by it. What, not agree?
Juno shall know thy folly then -- Do You see
How brisk he is with th'piece of Venerie?
The match is made, and he must clip the thread
That ties her beauty to her maiden bed.

Juno. We Will make her feel our wrath. Why fall you not
To Censure? Where Is our Jupiter? Absent: What,
Courting the trash of Beauty?

Jupiter. Yes; but loose
My labor: she is grown cunning, to refuse.
Nay, use your pleasure now; she will scarce be made
Capable of Venus traffic, Wantons Trade.

Juno. Then, Boy, it is thee we stay for; let thy Art
And tongue agree.

Cupid. Doubt not, I Will find her heart.
Since I as Vmpire stand; I will, that she
A faithless Wanton shall from henceforth be;
One, whose insatiate Womb no mean shall know,
But prostitute her Body, till she grow
Unusefull, and that time shall let her see
A period to her hidden Venerie.
Her person shall be much desired of many,
Nor chaste nor constant shall she prove to any,
But covet to embrace new fashions still,
Whereby to glut her base insatiate will.
Those that have long been practisers in sin,
She shall instruct new ways to wallow in,
And with her fair illusions shall invite
All sorts of Nations to her seemed delight.
But when her Face with furrows shall appear,
And that her Cheeks no Rosy color bear,
When her soft Lip shall want the force to bind
Thousands by adjuration to her mind;
When as the youthful heat has left to reign,
And that her Nerves an Icie cold retain;
Where Eyes begin to look into her Soul,
Where they epsy it spotted, wicked, foul;
When as her Hands, so much admired, shall be
Withered, and like a bare Anatomy;
Then shall she lingering live without relief,
Nor shall one prove a helper to her grief.
Those whom her youth and time she spent withal,
(When as her Beauty became prodigal)
Shall loath to hear her named; and more, her fight
Shall be to 'em as poisonous Aconite:
And when that Time shall, with his Neighbor Death,
Steal unawares, and stop her vital breath,
All that she leaves behind, is bu^ her Name,
And that lives only to enlarge her shame.
So, while she lives, her life is but a hate,
And yet her death proves more unfortunate:
Wretched by birth, and so brought up to woe,
In Life accursed, in Death her Souls chief foe.
Then what remains, but only this to prove,
A scorn to Time, a hatred unto Love?
And on her Grave this Epitaph shall be
Read, to condemn her vicious memory.

Her Epitaph.
HEre remains a Piece, that shame
Does forbid to own, or name:
She was once, as this, a Stone,
'Till Conversion made her none;
Then her Beauty stained her Soul,
Being fair, she was most foul:
Loved, yet hated all; it is crossed,
Whom she loved, she hated most.
She was skilled in Language too,
Every Nation did her woo;
She could French interpret well,
Till she fashioned how to spell
Through the Nose. If any pass
On this tender yielding Grass,
To view this Piece, do not weep,
It Is a passion they may keep;
Only Charity bids us say,
She is happy now she is Clay.
Omnes. We like thy Censure well, and are content
She shall endure thy Doom and punishment.

An Epithalamium on the two happy Pair, Thomas B. Esquire, the younger, and
his fair Bride.
UP lazy Morn, send through the odorous air
A blush, that may invite the Hemispheare
To wonder, then look pale with spleen, deny
To all, save to this Bride, supremacy.
Wonder; in that the still usurping Night,
Fat with the weight of sins dismounted, spite
Of his assistant Horrors, e're his Reign,
Fatal to erring Mortals, could obtain
Its final course; and Day appear, before
Thy Porter had unhinged his painted Door;
And it is confessed, that Night two hours ha^s lost,
Since her bright rising banished his Host;
Stars hid themselves in Clouds, no Cynthia seen,
The petty Lights would all have Cynthias been,
Could they have vanquished Nature; but the height
Of their Ambition proved their Opposite,
And sunk them in their Errors* Oh! to see
A Heaven on Earth, yet Heaven no Heaven to be,
'Lesse by her Light assisted; the Sky appear
In sable dress, while Day did trip it here,
A new Aurora brake, whose potent smiles
Gilded the Eastern Morn, thawed Winter Isles
Tyl'd over with plates of Ice; showed th'Heav'ns grow poor
In goodness, yet from her they may gleane store,
To furnish 'em for ever, 'lesse they be
Too prodigal of her liberality.
Hamstead was made a Paradise, each Bush
Retained a Spring-like Coat; the chirping Thrush
Grew proud and wanton, and did use their Note
In fancying Anthems, which they got by Rote;
The chanting Philomels mellifluous strain,
O'th'piked Eglantine revived again;
The amorous Spring and Roses there were blown,
That in their Chaos slept, forgot, unshowne;
The frostie-bearded Winter at her feet
Dropped into Pearls his substance; and the Sheet
That Earth of Nature borrowes to lie in,
Checkered with Flora's beauties, did begin
To prove abortive, came before their time;
Yet safe delivered of its Spicie slime,
Forced by her radiant luster; every Tree
Wore Fruit forbidden, cause her Liverie.
Can this stir Wonder in thee? No; for it is
No wonder, did thou know but what she is:
She Is all divine, whose Virgin influence
Merits the courtship of the days bright Prince,
By whose amplexures, mixtures, Nuptial ties,
Religious Votes shall from each Soul arise,
To bless their bright Conjunction; for the which,
Hymen, whose care is Virtue to enrich,
Has singled out her Consort, brought her one
That out-rayes P^oebus through his Horizon;
Adorned with Masculine Virtues he can be:
Should I compare him to The Heavens; but He,
And in that He, consists such ample worth,
We want a Homers Pen to set it forth.
He Is exquisitely rare, should I say more,
'Two'd not enlarge his worth, but make me poor
In fancy: for alas, what need I tell
The world a story, which they know so well?
I will conclude in prayers, not in praise,
Though you deserve them both, while I have days
Or minutes to unburden: may Increase
For ever Crown the Harvest of your Peace;
May you live like two Angels sent from Heaven,
To teach the world examples, and run even
In Virtues progress, till your sacred Urne
Claymes its prerogative, your ashes turn
The Phoenix Exequies to nothing. Why?
Your lives extinct, Perfections with you dye;
Nor shall our Ages after mention one,
Without committing Sacrilege, you gone,
But your Remembrance, which shall last, and be
The only Phoenix to Posterity.
Shine like the Twins of Miracle; for it is true,
Nature complied with Wonder, framing you.
Let your refulgent Beams afford more Light,
For Turtle loyalty, than the wished sight
Of Phoebus, rouzed from the Ocean,
Ascends to his full Lines Meridian.
Flourish in the blessed Concords Unity,
And spinne your Lives into Eternity.
An Epithalamium on the happy Nuptials of his much respected friend Geo. F.
Gent.
RIse wanton Phoebus, leave thy amorous play,
And prune thy self, to grace this Nuptial Day;
Shake off thy drowsy Looks, and let thine Eye
Appear in its full height of Majesty.
Let Hermes in his greatest glory shine,
And Bacchus drink full Bowls of Helvian Wine:
Let Jove forget to play with Ganimed,
And Mars once leave the Cyprian Goddess Bed;
Vesta, with all thy Darlings, hither hie,
And crown our Wedding with thy company:
Bring thou our Bride to Church, but leave her there;
Nor blush not, if she chance to shed a tear;
Fears do possess the tender years of one,
Unapt to know th'untwining of her Zone.
Hymen* Rites finished, let your Welcomes be
To grace our Bridegroom with your Company.
And now let chaste Desires adorn her Bed,
Whose Blushes shows the Dye of Maydenhead;
Wishes and sweet content may they possess,
Each heart bring joy to the other numberless.
Who bids Goodnight unto our Bride, be dumb,
(And says no more) Such as shall hither come,
Must not bring one Nights joy alone, but force
Their throats to reach with Eccho's, till they hoarse.
Millions of joys attend 'em both for ever;
May they be cursed who shall their chaste hearts sever.
Acrostick on the well-deserving Gentlewoman, Mistress Eliz. Hill.
Enricht with Natures choicest Excellence,
Light to thy Sex, thou art rare Quintessence,
Jove's e're admired Creature, in whose face
Zeal seems to keep account of woman's grace;
A thousand joys attend thee, and may e're
Beauty (adorned with Virtue) be thy share;
Exquisite Creature, whose perfections lie
Transparent to each well-discerning eye,
Heaven sends you here, to grace Mortality.
How much was Helen counted to be fair,
In so much more thou art beyond compare;
Love is thy Mirror; then be not too proud,
Lest Heaven dims that Beauty with a Cloud;
And so debar us Mortals of that bliss,
Which each deserving Soul desires were his.
Acrostick on Mistress Marie Rashley, in requital of her Musical entertainment.
Many that know you not, may think that I
Am by affection led to flattery,
Raising your Virtues to sublimest height,
In hope to gain you as my purchased right,
Enflamed by Love; ah no, my zeal is such,
Rare Phoenix, that I cannot write too much,
As praises due; for should Apollo hear
Such Dorick Music, he would leave his Sphere;
Hymen would boast, if you unto his Shrine
Love, with your Virtue, bring as Offering;
Each God would leave his Throne, could Nature frame
Your equals to embrace their Paphian flame.
On his very loving friend, Mistress Bridgett Peck. Acrostick.
Beauty with Virtues, does enlarge the store,
Riches without those Virtues, are but poor;
In thee both shine, to make thy brightness known,
Dame Natures glorious workmanship alone,
Graced with her feature, and so highly prized,
Emaculate, to be eternalliz'd;
Thou peerless piece of Virtue, live to be
Times wonder, and Man's chief felicity.
Prudence, the Soul of Wisdom, 's in thy breast,
Endu'd with all thy Graces, and there rest
Courted. Urania in thy Breast does find
Kind Zeal, the true Companion to her mind.
To his virtuous Kinswoman, Mistress S. B.
IF to adore thee, were not held a sin
Beyond the reach of mercy, I Would begin
To render up my Orasons to thee,
And so by custom, write thee Deity.
If to admire thy Beauty, and thy Grace,
And praise the Native Liveries of thy Face,
Tell Stories of the whiteness of thy Breast,
Thy Hand, thy Leg, thy Foot, and never rest,
'Till I had made thee famous with my Pen,
And raised thy Name in great esteem amongst men;
If with industry I sought to please;
Yet thou would^st count 'em but Hyperbole's;
So modest is thy faith; thou can endure
No strains of wit, that seems to be impure,
Or stuffed with needless superstition,
The knowing follies in some wanton one:
Thou art entirely virtuous; Pardon me
If I transgress, speaking Truth's Embassy:
For he that is zealous, will confirm the same,
Love blows the fire, but you can quench the flame.
An Elegy on the virtuous Gentlewoman Frances Dixon.
WHy smiled the Heavens? why did Sol display
His golden beams to grace the slow-foot Day?
What made th'AEtheriall power to clear the skies?
And why did Venus scorn thy Obsequies?
While Vesta's Darlings wearing black, did show
What true devotion to chaste corpse they owe,
Jove did appear, and court thee e're grim Death
Had power to stop thy odorous balmie breath.
And had thou yielded, then thy years had bin
Enlarged to feast the Gods with pleasures sin:
But making slight of's gifts, enraged he
Leaves thee to what the Destinies decree.
Then it is no mervaile that the Heavens did smile,
To see weak Mortals can their hopes beguile.
Thou mirror of true Chastity, let me
Pay hourly tribute with my tears for thee.
Nor think pure course as many use to do.
I strive with them to mourn in fash'on to.
Ah no, I hate it: for my inward part
Shall witness that the Mourner is my heart.
Religion wept, and sung, and Virtues score
Was paid in tears, and sighs, her only store,
Sending thy sable Hearse homeward to bliss,
Where Chastity receives it is happiness.
And the fresh tincture of thy virgin-Tye
Shall wreath thy brow with spotless memory.
The Gods did smile for anger, 'cause poor we
Enjoyed on earth so rich a prize as thee;
And in a rage have t'ane thee from us here,
To place thee in the Elementall sphere.
On his loving friend M. John Day an Elegy.
DOn Phoebus now has lost his light,
And left his Rule unto the night:
And Cynthia she has overcome
The day, and darkened the Sun:
Whereby we now have lost our hope,
Of gayning Day in's Horoscope.
A strange Eclipse did late arise,
Where naught but blood did deck the skies;
And in that fight was taken away,
Our thrice desired refulgent day;
And only Phoebe does appear,
To grace the mournful Hemisphere*
With her dew-ey'd Hyades,
Hoping with their lights to please
The angry world; but it is in vain
To think their light can longer rain,
Since their chiefest aid is gone
Day: and left his Horizon.
Yet from The East we may descry,
A new Day approaching nigh.
To whom The Heavens have given strength,
And made his hours of equal length;
Vowing that the Night shall never
Displace him from his golden sphere,
'Till this Sun begets a Sun,
And his Son another Son.
Epigram 1.
WIll the Perfumer, met me in the Street,
I stood amazed, he asked me what I meant.
In faith, said I, your Gloves are mighty sweet,
And yet your breath does cast a stronger scent.
EBRIUS. Epigram 2.
EBrius had long sick of a Fever bin,
And feeling the reward he had for sin,
Did freely vow unto the powers Divine,
(But at his meat) not to drink any wine.
And being recovered, he began to think
How he might keep his vow, and safely drink.
And wheresoever he came, commanded straight,
That cloth and meat should on the Table wait.
A BRASIER. Epigram 3.
Jonas the Brasier and his wife fell out,
He called her Slut, and so it came about.
Slut Knave she said, now in good sooth you lie.
With whom (quoth he?) whereat she began to cry,
Replied; Enough; I Will yield in such a case,
When you are still your self a Brazen face.
Epigram 4.
A Youthful Lad matched with a wrinkl'd Dame,
Whose gold did kindle in the Youth a flame;
And being wedded, she with tears would say,
I fear my Heart, that thou will gad astray,
Because my time with age is almost spent,
And cannot yield to Youth its full content.
Yet prithee Love let me this poor boon crave,
That you on me a small respect will have.
Fear you my love, said he? now I protest
Thy tears have wrought impression in my breast;
And here I vow, by Heaven, if thou would
Desire to ear (thou should not want) my gold.
But this I swear, if he co'd so provoke her,
His full intention was for to have choked her.
FINIS.
LOVE. Epigram 5.
IF any Soul desires to know
How Love at first came blind,
Before the Poet made him so,
The Reason now h'shall find:
Which here to All I Will willingly impart.
Love shot his eyes and lost 'em in my heart.
LIPS. Epigram 6.
I Was in company with two or three
Disposed for Mirth; amongst us was a Less
Handsome enough: her Prodigality
With frequent kissing on our lips did pass*
To one she would say, How do thou like that kiss?
And to another (faith) thine was as sweet?
Swearing her lips dissolved, the juice of bliss,
Which between hers, and ours, did freely meet:
Whereat, we all did laugh; I swear (quoth she)
If you say otherwise, you say not well;
I will refe^'t to you, Sir, meaning me:
Are they not moist, pray taste again and tell.
I did so, and replied* thus much I felt,
Either thy Lips, or else thy Painting melt.
DAME SULLEN. Epigram 7.
PUtting some questions to a Sullen Dame,
To each of them her answer still was, Well:
The more I strove t'divert her from the same,
The more she plagued me with her apish Well.
Impertinent to my demands; at last
Finding a way to search her folly out,
And change her note which formerly had past;
I used my Art to bring the same about,
Speaking but this, How does thy Husband do?
She fetched a sigh, and said, he does but ill;
Pardon me Sir, for I must tell it you,
The more's my grief, and much against my will,
He is so frigid grown: He has not done
Me right, (I vow) since the last Mornings-Sun.
A Lawyer and his Wife. Epigram 8.
A Beetle-headed Lawyer, one of those
That leaves his Conscience in his other hose
For fear of Bribing, and could never spell
Vices imo Iacobi perfect well,
Knew no more Latin, than his Clarks afford
Him to encounter with the Kitchin-boord;
Some stale unsavory stuff, at second hand
Which he will have, to never understand;
He knows how many lines there is in a sheer,
How Fayres are kept, and how his Fees do meet:
And that is enough for him, the rest must be
Supplied by his Clarks best indust'ry.
I name no man, but there was such a one,
Lived in Tricesimo of good Queen Ioane.
This man of worth was wedded to a fair
And comely Creature, born near th'Northern air,
By whom the Churl got wealth; yet he never thought
On th'richnesse of the Jewel he had bought
Almost with nothing; and would scarce allow
Her Buttermilk, or strokins from the Cow:
Yet the poor thing with patience did endure
^ll this and more, saying to her self, that sure
H^ would one day remember, how he had
Promised her often, the next Fees should clad
Her pretty body: His Fees still came in,
But still with his old Note he would begin,
The next that comes is thine, in Sexto Girl
Thou shall walk in, or say I am a Chirle:
Which the poor soul could have said long ago:
But to be brief, the wool was yet to grow
Should make her cloth for Gowns and such like things
She had occasion of; each day he sings
One Note, and strives with words to put her by;
Till need had found her out a remedy.
And of his Clyent newly come to town
She took up Fees, and he took up her Gown.
To his much esteemed friend M. John Tatham on his Fancies Theater.
FRiend, let me honor thee, I did not think
'Till now, thou had sipt at Agamppes Brink,
Though I confess thy Genious was so free
At all times, that I feared thy Poetry
Would with conveniencie appear unto
The World, and Friends; something I have to do,
And this it is; I tell thee Friend, from me
Thou must expect no strains of flattery
In too much praising; Thus much I dare say,
I know thy Fancies each sense ravish may
As well as they have done mine, for I never knew
A line, but what was good, proceed from you;
I Have said enough, and though I last am come
To fill a Page, and take up Paper room;
Yet with as free a Heart to these last lines
Of thine, I offer as to those which shines
Before, thy Friends have done; and proud am I
To be a Sp^rke amongst stars in such a sky.
Geo. Spark.

To the Honorable Sir John Wintour Knight, Secretary of State, and Master of
Requests to the Queens most excellent Majesty, The Honored Patron of his Book.
THe Vine and Fig Tree to the God did bring
Their Mayden-tributes for their offering,
In hope to purchase by their blessed Decree,
Favors that should our last Man's memory,
And to that end, plead Merit, show that Wine
(Man's nourishment) without the Grape-sick vine
Had never been thought on, nor the dimpled sun
Of Semile sit crowned upon his Tun
With the Grapes Chaplet; then the Fig Tree too
Boasts of her worth, shows what her strength can do
With foreign States, how great, how rich, how skilled
In Languages: the Merchants Cofers filled
Partly by her large travels; how the sense
Of man is cherisht by their excellence:
And both concluded if the Gods did please
For a set-time to grant 'em Writs of ease
From future transportation, that they might
With more security enjoy their right,
And be the select trees of all the rest,
That by their sacred favors should be blessed,
They Would render duly to their Treasury,
A full increase for perpetuity,
And add unto their titles more than yet
Was fancied in the Poets vein of wit.
The Laurel, Pyne, and Poplar that could never
Boast of a happy fruit to crown the year,
Hearing the others o^tentation, th^ught
There was no hopes for them, they had not brought
Things meritorious; nor could they infer
Large circumstance, to make the Gods confer
Their choicest blessings on ^em, all their stor^
Was in their naked selves, barren and poor.
These Barren Plants doubting a sad success,
By reason of the others happiness,
Would have departed; but the pious Gods
Knowing their faith was sure (how e're the ods
'Twixt em in riches made the others be
In ^ore respect with Worldlings,) did agree
(For some reserved conditions) to supply
Their poor defects by gracious clemency.
The Vine and Fig tree straightway hereupon
Stole from the Presence, shamed at what they would done;
Those that were worthless trees of late, are now
By the Gods Patronage and gentle brow,
Made happy, and the only trees that be
Held famous, for their singularity.
The Moral's mine Sir; great ones favor men
Of meaner quality, not for deserts that pen
Them meriting Characters, but in favoring them
They give them all their worth, esteem, and jem.
So the reflection from your Honors eye,
On this weak piece, will awe base Crit^c^e;
And so secure my freedom, that I may
(Soaring above their spleen) your Will obey.
To a Gentlewoman having been scandalized by some.
GRieve not dear Mistress; faults that are undone,
If but suspected, might as well be done
Amongst souls of no capacity, that draw
An envious breath, not ruled by Reasons law;
They may more safely tax the Gods of sin,
Than the composed strictness you have lived in,
Who rather are the Patroness of Truth,
Spending in broken sighs your precious youth:
Than one that gives way to those loose desires
Our giddy Youth are prone to; such quick fires
Never boiled your innocent blood, nor in your breast
Did e're impure thoughts discompose your rest;
You never were dressed like th'gaudy Queen of May,
Swimming through th'streets in Coaches to a play;
Nor did you ever wear in your fair looks
Lascivious glances, Lusts intangling hooks:
You never kept your bed to use your wit,
To ape a fashion, which to pattern it
Would puzle all the Tailors save the French.
O fairest Mistress, would my tears might quench
The flavor of your sorrow; I know you ^ree
From this black, false, unheard of calumny,
Or each particular Page or line that may
Admit of blurres to wrong thee, or decay
The least of thy perfections; Think not then
It lies in th'malice of the devil or men
To stain thine Innocence, whose unspotted zeal
Only to Heaven, not to the World appeal.
There you are fixed a Saint already: why
Then you would waste your self so pensively?
These scandalls wound you not, they will heavy fall
On their own heads, whose weight will sink 'em all.
Temper your crosses Mistress, be more mild
To your fair self, than vainly thus to strive
Against your Natures sweetness, and impose
Such cruelty on your self. Malice that throws
Her venom at you, if I do not err,
Shall with it be her own executioner:
So did the spotless Damsel suffer wrong,
By the sinne-plotting Elders; but e're long
Heaven did acquit her: And so Heaven pure Maid
Does acquit thee from this aspertion laid*
So have I seen a fierce-opposing cloud,
With an intent bright Cynthias light to shroud
Under its sable wings, in triumph stay
For a set space, then dully move away,
When with a sudden motion she would appear
Bright as her self, yet to our eyes more clear
Then formerly she was: so is it with thee
Whom Envy left in deep obscurity.
But now shine forth, the illustrious beams display,
And make our night seem a continual day.
A Wart on a Gentlewomans arm.
What Is that so near your skin allied
and will not thence,
His head is in your colors died
without offense.
His perfect red and white has mixed,
So long with your pure blood he is fixed,
and will not part
Without much trouble to your heart:
but why
Do You hide it now, and set a Dye
upon your cheeks,
As being bashful, cause it seeks
the light,
It cannot sure appear more white
than on your arm;
Nor wear a better coat of red,
Than your chaste blood has mingled
most sweet and warm;
So Strawberries suck the gentle stream
Of fresh and most delitious Cream.
To one professing and swearing love to all Women.
It Is not Love thy pulses beat,
But the Itch of base desire;
Whose impure unlawful heat
Sets both life and soul on fire.
Love delights not in those things
Which disgrace and ruin brings.
Love is figured as a Child,
Emblem of pure Innocence:
Passionate, but undefiled,
Zealous, without a pretense.
Love does carry in his eye
Constant flames that never dye.
Love's not subject unto change,
Nor does his affection move,
Where time-pleasing Fancies range
Epicures with freedom prove;
It Is not to each face that is fair,
He does his all^geance bear.
Nor is it Oaths that make a Lover:
Flying vows to every she
May intemperate lust discover,
Where consuming follies be.
Love is simple of himself,
And respects nor praise, nor pelf.
Love's not guided unto fear
By the Tongues deceiving Art,
Raptures that intrance the ear.
What he covets, is the Heart,
On the which he does display
Beams far clearer than the day.
At Loves sacred Altar lies
Hearts as stainlesse as the Dove,
Mutual in their sacrifice
To the purity of love,
Which with Nuptial kisses smother,
Growing flames in one another.
Then if thou intend'st to aim
At a Lovers part, be just;
Punish that destroys the same,
Prick thy sw^lling veins of Lust,
Let thy rank pollution run,
He Will adopt thee then his son,
While thou seek'st to please thy eye,
Never hope to taste true bl^ss^s,
When the appetite does fry,
Surfeits so, it pleasures misses;
For the blessed desire of Love,
's by inspiration from above.
A Song to the picture of a Lover in his absence.
COme, oh come away my Dear,
Let me not for ever languish:
Lest I buy my joys too dear;
Sighs my tender Heart will vanquish;
For thee I have out-watch'd the night,
While angry stars did read my story,
And silver Cynthia hid her light,
As envying at my wisht-for glory;
When thus upon thy lips I played,
Making a soft impression there,
The jealous Goddess then dismayed
For her Endym^on, left her sphere,
And ever since has harbored here.
Seeing a Gentlewoman making her ready in a window.
WHat new light's you that breaks and wraps man's sense
Into a world of wonder, excellence
Discypher'd to the life; some good protect
My eyes lest they transgress; I could affect
Each amorous glance or gesture she bestows
On the reflecting Flatterer, how she throws
Odours against odours, and her snow-white hands
Distilleth oil of Roses, she commands
The Suns retirement, and for him does light
My Fancy to rare objects infinite.
See, see the Twins of Miracle, her Breasts
Whiter than new fallen snow the spycie Nests,
And Pillowes for Love^ lips to rest upon!
Now she disroabes her night-clothes, now goes on
Her rich Carnation satin to entice
Men to forsake their hope of Paradise.
Delusion, vanish; do not think to win
Me from that bliss I have possession in,
Though my Clarinda's lost, I will not be
Polluted with thy vile immodesty.
Thy skin though white shall never infect my eyes,
Or stain my cheeks with blushes, nor surprise
A thought of mine; no Counterfeit; I do
Abhor thy actions and thy colors too;
Wilt not yet leave t'allure me? by that power
Dwells in my Mistress name, I do conjure
Thy absence from that casement which lets in
Naught but the straggling fantasmes of sin:
Oh: art thou slunk away, had her pure name
Sufficient skill to make thee know thy shame,
And now in some obscure unhallowed place
Thou pin'st (unpittied) at thy own disgrace.
Pardon me dearest Mistress, that I have
Made use of your blessed name as aid to save
Me, from the errors I was leaning to,
And heretick-like forgot my faith in you.
To a coy Mistress.
THink not coy Mistress, I am one
So fond, that can affect a stone,
Or some such thing, unless I see
There Is something in it will pleasure me.
I cannot tie my Heart on looks,
Angle whole Summers in the Brooks.
In expectation of a dish
Of Salmon; 'cause a Princely fish.
I cannot dwell on such delays,
Or stay in hope of Halcyon days;
If I possess my pleasures now,
No happier days will I allow.
Why should I hope for things to come,
That may be had with ease of some;
So trifle precious Tune away
For empty hopes, and fruitless play?
Because you are something fair, must I
Wait your coy leisure to reply,
When with some other long e're this,
I might have felt a Lovers bliss?
I can as well content my sense,
With one of lesser excellence
That Is not so nice, nor will debate
The time, when love should actuate.
I Am earnest (Mistress); and must try
(If you refuse) a remedy
Elsewhere; you know that youthful blood
Consumes it self, unless withstood.
Then quickly let me know your mind;
Delays are childrens play; be kind
As you are fair, and let us possess
Our Loves, and pleasures numberless.
A Cherry gathered in the Spring,
Is a choice Present for a King;
Those that till August hang, you know
Are rotten, and then common grow.
Those Roses too that have desire
To dwell still with their mother Bryer,
Must at the last (though let alone)
Fall off themselves, when over-growne.
The Cherry and the Rose would be
Of little value, did not we
For novelty sake, allow them good,
Their worth would scarce be understood.
Women had long since lost their name,
Had not we men revived the fame.
You might like things neglected lie,
As useless, were not men you nigh.
Then think on this, and let us prove,
There is no joy on earth but Love,
That every simple Less may find
(As we did) fire of subtle kind.
Those foolish Girls that feel a heat,
Their bashfulnesse dare not repeat:
When they by us know what to do,
They Will banish fear, and fall to woe.
And so by our example, they
That have been stubborn, will obey;
And Girls that stay 'till fifteen, will
Repent the time they spent so ill.
All sorts of people from the age
Of twelve to thirty shall presage
Our happiness, and jointly come
To crown our Loves El^zium.
Meeting a piece of Mortality val'd.
VNvale thy self, and shine as bright
As sun by day, or stars by night.
What pity it is to hide a face
Enricht with such a comely grace!
Thy Hair like Hemlocks careless fall,
To deck thy amorous eyes with all,
As fiery as the evening, where
We read the next day will be fair.
Thy curious forehead to us show,
Where Ca^buncles in number grow;
But the beauties of thy Nose
Would fright a man out of his clothes,
To dance a naked round delay,
When on th'Tobacco Pipe you play;
And the pale brightness of thy lips,
Would force the Sun to an eclipse.
Thy cheeks of fat and foggy stuff,
Like the running Dropsy, swell and puff:
But oh! the Apples on 'em grow,
I think were rotten long ago.
Thy precious neck and breasts display
Thy skins antiquity, for they
Like a dried dunghill, chop and break,
Until thy snowt begins to leak.
Thy parched fists defy the Sun;
For all the malice he has done,
Cannot change thy hyde, nor any stayne
Corrupt it, for it is died in grain.
Thy spacious belly and thy waste,
Have grease sufficiently to baste
A Heard of Swine, the' have such a store,
A Shambles cannot purchase more.
Thy Thighs like two Colosses seem
Proportioned, with thy bodies Teeme,
And those which bear thy ponderous Britch,
Are mighty Columns full of itch.
But some that have thy Hoofes espied,
With fear the fools fell down and died;
Yet all this while I have forgot,
Thy Tongue as still as Cannon-shot.
All parts of thine I cannot display,
The rest unseene, the Devil may.
Thou art the Wonder of this age,
And want nothing, but a Cage.
Which thou in time, may purchase too,
If that the Beadle will but do:
Then come and join thy Vice with me,
Bless Nature for her Prodigy.
To his Friend upon saying his Mistress was not fair.
WHy do thou think my Mistress is not fair,
Because she is not as most Women are,
Unprofitably proud, nor will admit
Of scorn, to tart the sweetness of her wit;
'Cause she in actions (most irregular
To Loves choice Edicts) will not, Will prefer
Above her Reason, nor was ever known
To boast of Beauty, more than was her own;
She Is not precisely coy, nor yet too free
In her bestowing Favors, but to me.
She never used a Dram of Vicious Art
To take man's eye, and afterward his Heart.
She needs no Ivory Teeth, no Spanish Red,
Or Powders of Inticement: she is sped
In Natures Properties; let it suffice
I love her, 'cause she loves not a Disguise.
Disdain did never usurp her Ebon Brow,
Nor does she tip her language with a Thon
In base derision; her sweet Lenity
With her Minds object shares of Purity.
Greece glori'd much of Helens beauteous Rays;
But Troy lamented more at the decays
And ruin followed it. Do think that I
Govern my actions solely by my eye;
Beauty is but a Garment used to hide
Some imperfection, which if once espied
Discretion bids us shun; then't may appear.
Beauty with V^rtue seldom does coheare;
But where they are Relatives, it is so much rare,
That Beauty is Divinely singular,
And merits much; yet let my Mistress be
Black as a Crow, she seems a Swan to me;
She Is not defamed, nor curtailed of that shape
Nature bestows on any, your Court-Ape
Is not contented with, and to appear
More excellent, will buy their Painting dear,
Which on their cheeks lies thick, to show their store
Like parched Walls new whitened, Oker'd ore.
Was not her face I courted, but the refined
Inestimable Jewel of her mind.
She has within her that which can declare
A soul sufficient to create her fair;
And her conditions sweetness to each eye
Appears th'Appendix where felicity
Does sit enthroned; All these perfections dwells
In her alone. Humanity excells,
And is so much Divine, her firm faith can
Translate to immortality frail man.
Punish thy errors friend, and that I may
Assure my self thou art penitent, obey.
By thy subscribing, that it is only she
Employed on earth for our eternity.
A Prologue spoken upon removing of the late Fortune Players to the Bull.
WHo would rely on Fortune, when she is known
An enemy to Merit, and has shown
Such an example here? We that have paid
Her tribute to our loss, each night defrayed
The charge of her attendance, now grown poor,
(Through her expenses) thrusts us out of door.
For some peculiar profit; she has t'ane
A course to banish Modesty, and retain
More dinn, and incivility than has been
Known in the Bearwards Court, the Beargarden.
Those that now sojourne with her, bring a noise
Of Rables, Apple-wives and Chimney-boyes,
Whose shrill confused Echoes loud do cry,
Enlarge your Commons, We hate Privacie.
Those that have plots to undermine, and strive
To blow their Neighbors up, so they may thrive,
What censure they deserve, we leave to you,
To whom the judgment on it belongs as due.
Here Gentlemen, our Anchor's fixed; And we
(Disdaining Fortunes mutability)
Expect your kind acceptance; then we will sing
(Protected by your smiles our ever-spring;)
As pleasant as if we had still possessed
Our lawful Portion out of Fortunes breast:
Only we would request you to forbear
Your wonted custom, banding Tyle, or Pear,
Against our curtains, to allure us forth.
I pray take notice these are of more Worth,
Pure Naples silk, not Worstead; we have never
An Actour here has mouth enough to tear
Language by the ears; this forlorn Hope shall be
By Us refined from such gross injury.
And then let your judicious Loves advance
Us to our Merits, them to their Ignorance.
To a Vow-breaker leaving this land.
Go perjured Wanton, and invite
With thy forged Language for a night,
The ears of thy newfangled Mate,
Knowledge of thee begets a hate.
Go, and with thee take all the sin
Thy Sexes frailty have lived in
Since Adams fall; for thou art worse
Than Eve, or serpent, Man's chief curse.
What dire pretense, what fained cause
Has made thee violate Loves laws;
And all those vows which once to me
Thou made, before his Deity.
What strange eclipse is in, thy Youth,
Which once did shine as clear as Truth
In her best luster, to my eye,
For it could not thy Faith discry?
Has some new flame possessed thy blood,
Which will consume, if not withstood,
Thy souls chief portion, and strive
To make thy shame alone survive?
Or did the niceness of my love
From those immodest Acts which move
Perhaps in some, beget in thee
A thought of such impiety?
Some senseless Wretch that never knew
Lusts debts, and th'payments that ensue,
It Is likely, has to please his sense,
Deflour'd thy Beauties excellence.
And thou made stupid with his praise,
Regardlesse how thy Youth decays,
By thy intemp'rate Will, do run
A course without Religion:
Tend'ring to His unlawful suit,
Each day that blessed forbidden fruit,
Which Heaven did give thee, and ordained
Thy Prayers should have kept unstained.
How are our Beauties happy made,
That thou have left thy Native shade
To wander to the Iberian Coast,
Where thou may of thy falsenesse boast?
Had thou continued longer here,
Some strange infection we might fear;
Our Beauties would have drawn from thee.
Thou banished, they from it are free.
Each creature now with fresh desire,
May safely warm 'em at Loves sire,
And not suspect those flames unjust
You used, consuming Hearts to dust.
Do think fond Woman, by thy flight,
To hide thy shame from the quick sight
Of thy own conscience? it alone
Shall be thy Guilts companion:
Which shall surround thy spotted breast
With such black thoughts, that if expressed
Either by Pen, or else by Breath,
Would fright a timorous Maid to Death.
The gentle winds that now appear,
Mild as the breath of Lambs, shall bear
Upon their wings in furious rage,
Thy Crimes to every Foreign Stage.
The tatling bushes in the Groves,
Shall tell the Story of our Loves:
Which well observed, they will all conspire
With Lightning, and consume with fire.
Both thee and thy Familiar, so
Unlooked for my revenge will grow,
And thy example will so strike
In some, they will fear to do the like.
Thou can not pass by Brook or Spring,
But hearing their soft murmuring,
Thy conscious soul will guess that straight
It whispers thy unhappy Fate.
Go where thou will, and use thy charms,
To circle him within thy arms;
Thou for a time will dote on, then
Return unto thy Fate again.
It Is past my Creed, to think that you
Now false to me, can long be true
To him: for why? new faces breed
New appetites, whereon to feed.
Had he each various way to please,
And held a surfeit no disease;
Yet that thy custom still may swell,
Thou Wilt mix, though with some Infidel.
His faith with thine may best agree,
There Is such a fatal sympathy
In your affections, every part
Resembles thine, when heart in heart.
Then take my counsel and possess
Some uncouth shaggy Wilderness.
There take Plantation, and be wise;
Both wanting faith, all faith despise.
There mingle limbs, and procreate
Some Prodigy may ruin Fate;
So keep those dangers off, which they
Intend shall be thy Youths decay,
And suddenly will fall on thee,
For this thy vilde Apostacy,
Which a Nuns penance cannot call
Merit, t'purchase Mercy withal.
Thy travailing friend when he does find
Thy want of faith, to the next Wind
Will beg a whaftage, to be rid
Of thee, which sacred laws forbid
Conversing with; thy sins are grown
So foul, they needs must be thy own
For perpetuity; then he
Is mad that stays to share with thee.
When thoroughly thou have dived into
Thy own defects, 'twill puzle you
To hope forgiveness, when you see
With blushes your deformity,
And every spot which will declare
Thee black as night, though once as fair
As Summers noone-tyde in her pride,
Thou were as near to Heaven allied;
Had thou not lost that Essence, which
By faith all Women does enrich,
And played away at one poor vye
Thy souls entire security.
Thou which have so profusely spent
Thy Youth, and Beauties Ornament,
Can hope to live, 'till age does pour,
Upon thy head a silver shour?
Or if those hopes may have success,
Thou that have tasted the excess
Of pleasures, can thou look to have
More comfort than the insatiate Grave?
Our present pleasures vade away,
But those to come will never decay,
Reserved in Heaven; be not remiss
In seeking (then) such future bliss.
Farewell, And when that thou have taken
A full survey of what I feign
Will follow:
For all my wrongs, but teach thy eye
To shed a tear; and so will I.
To a Gentlewoman being fearful upon the water, by reason of the roughness
often.
WHy do you tremble fair one, why has fear
Displanted the best Beauties of the year
From their warm beds your cheeks? what? does the sight
Of the rough waves your timorous heart affright,
Cause in the conflict with the boisterous wind,
You doubt they will to your passage be unkind?
Let not such thoughts invade you; though the sky
Is with the unruly stood in Mutinity:
Yet your firm faith is of sufficient power,
To calm the greatest tempest, in an hour,
Should they mix elements, and every blast
From the contentious North threaten a waste
To the distempered water, so afflict
The Universe with terror, we would direct
Our motions over 'em, where our Boat shall play
As free as when an East wind guides the way;
Then be more confident of your own worth,
While we as Prodigies admired, launch forth.
Mistake me not, it is not a self-conceit
Of my deserts, kindles in me this heat
Of resolute boldness, but it is in you
To whom all Attributes of worth are due.
Under your blessed protection I shall be
Fixed as a Rock, that scorns their injury.
Do you observe, as soon as you appear,
How they retreat as glad to see you here,
To end their difference, Boreas does retire
To use his force t'encrease the Cyclops fire.
Now with an amorous breath begins to move
The golden tramells of your hair to love,
Now mildly steals a kiss; it is no sin to say
He courts you as his fair Orythia.
The waves have smoothed their wrinckles to, and do
(Learning by Boreas in what form to woo;)
With smiling aspect, seek to re-invite
You from your fears, to note how they delight
To bear your blessed weight, and while they skip
For joy, the sun is playing with your lip,
All Rivals in such bliss, the streams dash in,
Wantonly kiss your garments, not your skin:
That as a thing forbidden, they adore,
But dare not touch as warned from it before:
The'are all officious safely to co^vey
Us to the place we look for, while sad they
Mourn for your absence, each dissolve to tears,
So drown themselves for drowning you with fears.
To his friend, advising him from Love.
WHen to my fair Clarinda I gave breath,
My expectation was not present death,
Her unjust doom on me, nor did I look
For such a change, that had some freedom took
In her Hyperboles. All that have seen
Her Beauty, and my Praises, would have been
My witness against her, how much I deserved
In her best thoughts, whose studies had preserved
Her Name unto eternity, had not she
Discovered her whole sexes infamy
By her revolt, that my enforced Pen
(Against its Nature, used for sonnets when
I called her Mine) did charactize her shame
Blacker than Ink could make it; for the flame
My vitalls once possessed, when it did know
Hers was declining, would not stronger grow:
But by degrees extinguished, else 'twould prove
Our pains injustice, motives not of Love.
Had thou but known her Will, thou would have said
She was a pretty, handsome, well-fac'd Maid,
Though not endu'd with those perfections I
Did boast of to the World; Poets may lie
As well as seeming Prophets, for what she
Enjoyed 'bove Natures bounty, sh'ad from me,
My lines at first did pollish every l^mb;
But pencilling her heart, my eyes grew dim;
Both Pen and Fancy failed me, I gave over,
Finding her heart stained with the leaprous sore
Of base deceit, and left her with that poor
Implicit Beauty which she had, before
My verse had nourisht it; what cans't expect
For all thy service, more than such neglect?
Should thou make every line swell with conceit,
And sing her praises in each Epithet;
Yet thy reward at last will be like m^ne.
Oh friend! all vvomens Fancies do decline
With hours and minutes, and the greatest bliss
Poor Man can hope for, is but in a kiss
The shadow of content, which having got,
It fires his soul, and yet it pleases not.
Why should we make an Idol of a face
Of the same mould as ours, and add a grace
To It by our Homages; so enthrall our eye,
When Heaven and Nature gives it liberty.
What though the strange Ideas of our mind,
Transform our thoughts to every shape and kind:
That we approve that best that is worst of evils,
Hold Women Saints, cause some are glorious devils?
Shall we persist, committing sacrilege
Against Heaven and goodness, give them privilege
'Bove mother Nature, make that hand 'cause white
A miracle: that eye 'cause clear and bright.
The Deity I worship, so profane
Heavens purity and leave a lasting stain
On our discretion, make a foolish toy,
A Puppet to be played with, our chief joy
And best of hopes, loosing all the pride
Rests in true manhood, and our youth beside,
For one, framed our inferior, the weak thing
Of peevish woman, which in mentioning
Declares their first creation, and from whence
They do derive (forsooth) their Excellence?
What pleasure is it to dally with the Fan
Of thy fine Mistress, or be less a man,
And kiss her Glove, gain from her eyes a glance,
That may thy easy heart a while entrance,
Fett'ring with golden hopes thy giddy youth,
Hanging Despair upon the heels of Truth?
Their Loves are like ones breath on purest steel,
No sooner on, but off, they never feel
Nor understand affection; what we call
Beautie's a thing most prejudicial
To our humanity, how e're it seem,
A precious object in our eyes esteem,
We gaze on it as th'Porcupine on th'starres,
'Till Ruin overtakes us in the Wars.
We hold with our own errors, and should we
Enjoy this new set up Idolatry,
Our States were yet uncertain, for they still
Would have some fetch to satiate their will.
They are infirm in loyalty, and be
Like the golden Apples hanging on the tree
Over Tantalus, which if but touched, will fall
Straight into ashes, so that little All
Of good in Women is compounded so;
The least breath of temptation they will yield to.
There is so many sleights used by vilde Woman,
That th'custome (like themselves) is now grown common.
They can instruct their eyes to weep, when they
Like Crocadiles are readiest to betray
Our lives to eminent danger; they do make
Love (...) knots of ^ushes, which in twisting break.
The sweets they give us, treacherously assumes,
To stifle up our senses with Perfumes.
If we from Gall can extract Honey, then
Sin may produce such Virtues. Simple men
Aptly may credit: but believe me Friend,
Those that are bad, their Mischeifes have no end.
They are to their affections so unjust,
They banish chaste Love to comply with Lust.
I have bin long a Scholar in Loves School,
Experience made me a Proficient fool,
I know the desperate effects ensue
This apish love, and would advertise you
(As one that friendship and your knowing merit
Has fastened in a cordial tie;) inherit
(Dear Sir) that blessed freedom, which the name
Of Worth in Man can challenge, temper the flame
You have received: let not your female creature
(Knows how to work upon so good a Nature,)
Take you up wholly, so your friends to be
Deprived of what they love; Your company
Which they hold precious to 'em. Gentle Sir
Let not your course run so irregular:
But limit so your passion, that we may,
Despite of Love or Venus, have a day,
Or two, or three to consecrate to mirth,
And give our hopes in you a second birth.
You that are one that shares in all the parts
Of Natures blessings, and sublimist Arts,
You that know all, that Man should know, is good,
As worthy in your actions, as by blood
Of your prime Ancestors, you that justly can
Instruct in knowledge the illitterate Man
By exact rule; be so much now your self,
And let your judgment banish th'scurvy Elfe,
Your too much doting Love, a thing that none
But fools and madmen will be seen to own:
Dotage is incident to years fourscore;
But you as yet have not seen twenty four:
It dulls the sense, and stupifies the wit,
And to reside with them it is most fit.
I know thy wit's as active as the fire,
And subtle as the air. Kill that desire
Would list thee amongst such Idiots. I know
A nobler way than that for thee. Then go
Unto thy Study, see how ruinate
It Is grown, and through thy absence desolate.
See how thy Books lie speechless, how they mourn
(Like true observants) till thy sweet return.
And see what Randevous the Mo^thes have made;
Here lies a member of an Iliade,
Compacted once, was Homers: Now it lies
Unto their spoil an humble Sacrifice.
Correct these faults my friend, and thou shall see,
That childish Love's not worth thy Library.
But I have dived too deep, and may suspect
(Your Temper being moved) you will correct
Me as the rest, taking on me a task
Which may be doubtful to you; yet I Will ask
No mercy from you; what I Have done, it is fit
You should conceive was zeal, so tender it.
To the truly virtuous and his much honored Lady, the Lady Jane S. an Ode.
YOu, that are she
Which every Woman ought to be,
The glory of our age;
Whose sweet demeanor shows
Where Love and Virtue flows,
Where Beauty and Delight does dwell,
We cannot find your Parallel
In all this Terren stage.
You that are she
Whose youth is from corruption free,
My Fancy dare uphold.
Were there more such as you,
To noble Actions true,
Men need not fear to say they did
Possess some heavenly treasure, hid
E're since the age of gold.
You that are she
Composed of Natures Rarity.
Cherries in Winter grow
Upon your lips, which tell
How much you do excel
The Summers pride: but on your breast
The Phoenix builds her spicie nest,
Without dissolving snow.
You that are she,
The top branch of that glorious tree,
for Pious acts renowned,
Departed hence, but are
Each of them fixed a star
In Heavens bright firmament, while you
Inherit here as your just due
Honor with Virtue crowned.
You that are she,
Distinguish can formality
From needless pride; when we
Seek for some beauteous face,
Adorned with modest Grace.
A Lady that is so well enclinde.
She bears a Seraphinian mind;
Whose sacred Meditations to us show,
She Is marked a Saint, we need not farther go,
For you are only she.
To the right Worshipful Sir I. B. K. upon encouraging him in Poetry.
MY Muse as cold as clay, from your quick Rays
Promethean like grew Masculine, her Bays
Received a freshness, your AEtheriall fire
Ran through her faculties 'till her desire
Met with my wishes jointly to begin
Our votes to you; yet stay; it were a sin
Should she omit your Lady, and your Race,
The perfect figures of the sum of Grace.
And honored Sir, to you, whose powerful name
Merits above the Donatives of ^ame:
You that are great in goodness, whose blessed Fate
Makes you a Pillar of this British state:
May you be free from sorrow, free from care,
That may disturb your quiet, to declare
You only mortal. May you live to see
A Nestors age in blessed felicity.
May you continue ever in that seat
Your merits, and not Fortune, have made great.
May you enjoy your wishes full content,
To crown your latter days till they are spent.
May you embrace a Fathers comfort, by
Your children in succesfull Progeny,
May they in it be happy, and may health
Purchase the keeping you, and your just wealth
From others deprivation, may Increase
For ever crown the Harvest of your peace.
A Sigh.
POst happy sigh upon the wings
Of some blessed Cherubin, that sings
Continual Anthems in the Quire
Of Heaven, there finish thy desire.
Thou were not borne for the poor use
Of Mistress, but my sins abuse;
And it is not fit thou should endure
A mixture with this air impure;
Thou drew'st thy breath from me, and art
The issue of a contrite heart.
As Mothers, e're their time be run,
With anguish bring a breathless son
Into the world; so I did thee,
With grief and unfain'd misery.
Thou Art of as little use, unless
Thy Innocence can win access
To enter heavens ears; we need
Some Cherubin to intercede
For us; expense we need not fear,
Bribes have no power to enter there:
Or if thou doubt'st (because but one)
Thou can not well express a groan,
Nor justly plead for mercy, I
Will send thee Legions more, shall buy
My soul from death, When all agree
To fill the heavens with Harmony.
To his friend J. W. a Meditation.
DId we consider rightly what a store
Of imperfections waits to ruin man
From's infancy to's grave; Vice makes a sore
Upon his soul incurable, that can
Precipitate his glories to the Abyss,
Once banished from the Paradise of Bliss.
His first breath is a cry, His last a groan;
Yet happy in that groan, if he died well,
Angels shall wait his soul's ascension, none
Of Virtues instruments but shall excel
In joy each other, that man's penitence
Has brought him to that place of excellence.
Th'unbridled Youth giving his folly raines,
Disclaimes all council that his errors show,
Until a second mischief binds in chains
The giddy Colt, and then he finds his woe.
All that his Parents left him once consumed,
He will appear a Peacock, but unplum'd.
LOVE CROWNS THE END.

A PASTORAL PRESENTED BY THE SCHOLLEES OF BINGHAM in the County of Notingham,
in the year 1632.

Written by Io. Tatham Gent.

^ LONDON: Printed by I. N. for RICHARD BEST, and are to be sold at his Shop
near Grayes-Inne-gate in Holborne. 1640.

The Prologue.
YOu stars of Honor, brighter than the day,
Or new raised Phoebus in his morning Ray;
A^ rich in Wisdom as in Virtues rare;
Accept the choicest dish our wits prepare,
As a third course to please your eye, which still
Covets to have of novelties its fill.
We have not bundled up some Kickshawes here
To bid you welcome; We do hate such geere.
Our braine's the Kitchen, and our wit's the meat,
Preparitive to which, we bid you eat,
If liked, if not refrain't; you Judges sit
To damn or save our not yet ripened wit:
So rest upon your goodness; if you frown,
Our poor endeavors then are trodden down.
Love crowns the end.
A Grove discovered, and in an obscure corner thereof Cliton as being a sleep.
To him Alexis. ALEXIS. HOW still the morning is, as if it meant
To steal upon us without Times consent,
And pry into our errors. I have been
Searching in every Thicket, Wood, and Green
To find my Lamb, and many doleful cries
Entered my ears e're day. What Is this that lies
In such an obscure place, where none scarce tread,
Unless the Ghosts of the disturbed dead?
Bless me great Pan, I see it is Clitons face
With a sword drawn; how happy was my chase
This way! I hope his folly has not made
Himself a Beast, as butchered with this Blade;
'T may be he sleeps: I Will speak to him, and try;
Yet I half doubt him 'cause he here does lie.
Cliton, awake, the Night's dislodged, and now
Bright Morn is trimming of her Virgin brow,
To court the Sun, when from the Western deep
And Thetis lap his glimmering beams do peep
T'ascend his glorious Carre. Cliton -- awake,
And with thy sleep all dreams of horror shake
That may affright thee.

CLITON. Kind Alexis, thanks,
How found you me?

ALEXIS. Walking those flowery banks,
'Twixt the green valley, and the place which we
Have consecrated to Loves Deity:
Seeking a strayed Lamb, I did hear sad moanes
Proceed from some like peales of parting groans,
Which I pursued, but in my search I found
None but your self: you resting on this ground
I wondered much to see you!

CLITON. So you might.
But when you have heard the cause on it, 'twill affright
Your easy breast. Do you observe this Hand,
This fatal Hand, at my unjust command
Did: -- Oh, I could destroy't!

ALEXIS. For what offense?


CLITON. This hand has spilt the blood of Innocence,
My Florida's.

ALEXIS. How?


CLITON. And when I Would done
(As I might well) did hide me from the Sun,
Fearing his eye would be the only cause
To find me out; and here from men and laws
I have obscured my self, and could not say
'Twas justly night, when night: Nor day when day;
My fact had sulled both.

ALEXIS. What urged thee to such inhumanity?


CLITON. Only suspicion of her loyalty,
Dreaming Lysander had enjoyed her love,
My jealousy to cruelty did move:
I slew her three days since, and since have bin
Each night at that place I stained with my sin,
To seek the body, but some sacred Power,
For none else durst approach her purity,
Has certainly made her immortal, and
Conveyed the body to some holier land.

ALEXIS. Is the body gone then?


CLITON. Or else my eyes do fail me as an* abject not worth their help.


ALEXIS. Thy crime requires contrition; to that end,
Thou shall with me. Thy days to come shall spend
In holy uses; I Will prepare for thee,
In the best form I can, each property
Belonging to a pensive man. You must
Forget all youthful pleasures, think on dust,
And penitence the only means to bring
Thy soul to rest after this wandering.
Will you with me?

CLITON. To death, or otherwise, since Florida is dead. Exeunt.


Cloe pursued by a lustful shepherd. Lustful Shepherd. ^tay my darling,
do not fly,
This place is private, here is none nigh.
Fear not Wench, I Will do no harm,
But embrace thee in my arm;
Cull and kiss, and do the thing
Shepherds do at wrasteling,

CLOE. Oh help, if any Shepherds, near,
Hear my laments.

Lust. Shepherd. Yet creature, do not fear:
But if you with coy disdain,
Do think to leave me in my flame,
I Will force those golden locks of thine
To lie beneath these feet of mine;
Then yield and here enjoy such sweet
As with our embraces meet.

CLOE. Oh hapless Maid, no aid will come. Lysander steps forth.


LYSANDER. Fear not Virgin; here is some
Natures monster; Villain, why
Does thy flame now burn so high?
Will no other serve thy turn
To quench the heats that in thee burn,
But so fair a soul as she?
Villain hence, or else I Will be Lustful shep. gazeth on him, then runs in.
Thy Butcher.

CLOE. Kind Youth, to whom am I
Bound for this fair courtesy?

LYSANDER. First unto Heaven fair Creature; next to me
A poor unworthy Shepherd.

CLOE. May your Sweetest whom you love,
Ever constant to you prove.
Be she brighter than the Sun,
Pleasing as our day at noone;
Fresher than the morning dew:
Sweeter than a new killed Ewe;
Like Aurora decked with flowers,
Or the welcome April showers.
May she love you, and you be
The mirror for true Constancy;
Go gentle Youth, and this day prosperous be
Amongst our Swains in your Activity. Exit.

LYSANDER. A thousand thanks reward you
Pan be my guide, and thou fair Gloriana,
Whose beauty has encinder'd my poor heart
Almost to nothing this day; thou shall find
Thou have a power above our humane kind.

DAPHNES. Exit. Bright sun, why do thou shine on me?
Is it to mock me? keep thy light; for I
Had rather live in darkness, and so dye.
Or do thou show thy luster in disdain,
Because I have so often with speech profane
Blasphemed against thy goodness, And in praise
Of a poor earthly creature spent my days?
Do thou yet smile? forgive me, and I Will be
No more her servant, but will honor thee.
Keep thou thy brightness Phoebus, and this day
From all our Swains I Will bring the prize away. Exit.

Leon, Gloriana, and Francisco. FRANCISCO. Fairest, this day, be pleased to
smile on me,
And let those hidden favors yet unshewne,
Flow in abundance, that Swains may see
None e're can conquer me, but you alone.

GLORIANA. My favors friend is past, and you have tasted
So much of my poor bounty, that it is wasted.

LEON. We stay too long son, pray make haste,
Let us not spend time in waste.
Daughter, you shall go with me,
Where their pastime we may see.
Hark, I hear 'em make a noise; A noise within.
Oh my hearts my bonny boys,
Play your parts; when I was young
I was full as stout and strong.

FRAN. Dearest, I must part; this calls me hence.
Father, I leave you. Exit Fra:

GLORIANA. For ever I hope, would I could prophecy,
And be effectual; it should be so.

LEON. Daughter, this way let us high;
I am old, I Will not come nigh:
Nor shall thou my dapper Girl,
Lest those staves that often whirle
Hit thy face. What again! A^w^ again.
Nay then I fear we go in vain.

GLORIANA. Yet Father let us go, that w^
May know who gained the victory. Exeunt.
The lustful sheeph^^rd like a Satyr. Because Dame Nature, pox of all her
tricks,
Has not dealt so well with me as she ought,
Making me but a lump of rough-hew'n stuff,
The pettish Wenches will not play with me,
Nor tick nor toy, and cause I Am apt for sport:
How e're I Am formed, I Have put on this disguise,
To fright the baggages, when getting some
'Twixt these my arms, ^'le force 'em to my will,
Yet pass unknown. Thus I my senses fill.
Scrub within. So ho, so ho, so ho. What noise is yon?

SCRVB. Through the Woods, and through the Woods have I run after the Runaway
my Master. -- What art thou in the devils name?


Lust. shepherd. Sirrah, I am --

SCRVB. A devil, I knew't before: Thou should be a leacherous devil by thy
hayrie hide: but I am no Succubus goodman devil.


Lust. shepherd Do thou fear me?


SCRVB. Oh Lord, me Sir. I have met such another devil as thou art, in my
Porridge dish.


Lust. shepherd. And did thou know him?


SCRVB. Know him? how do you mean know him? I should be loath to know him or
thee, or he thee, or thy grand-Master me for any ill; for I have defied the
devil and his works ever since the general Earthquake, and that my Mothers
Cat miscarried in the horse Pond.


Lust. shepherd. Was thy Mother a Witch?


SCRVB. Offers to strike. How a Witch you devil -- I Will witch you.


Lust. shepherd. Hold man: she was an honest woman.


SCRVB. Nay, now thou lie, and thou be'st the devils devil:
For I have heard her soberly say, she had six --
Bastards by a Sowgelder before she pigg'd me.

Lust. shepherd. Offers again. Hold, hold man.


SCRVB. The devil afraid of blows! I Will make you spet fire.


Runs after him. A great sh^wt. Lysander with a Garland on's head, and
scarfes on's arms, Cloe following him. CLOE. Friendly Swain, the day is
yours; you see
My prayer it seems succesfull was to thee.
Pity my maiden tears; till now, I never
Su'd to a shepherd, but the shepherds were
My suitors.
Nor deem me light* because my love is such;
I love indeed, and fear I love too much.
You saved my life, my chastity, what more?
Take me as one that was your own before.

LYSANDER. How much I grieve fair Shepherdess, my Fa^^
Will not allow me such a just proportion,
To render thee, as thy deserts have merited
From me.

CLOE. Oh friend!
I^le be your servant, and your flocks will keep.
I Will nightly watch while you do sweetly sleep*
And in the morn I Will willingly to field,
While you do taste the sweets Loves valleys yield,
And with industrious labor against noone,
Will get your dinner ready, so you will
But smile on me, and say well done.

LYSANDER. To starve your hopes from further prosecution in this suit.
Know I Have already fixed my resolution
To love none but fair Gloriana, she
Is the Commandresse of my life, and fortunes:
So much I pity you, that I could wish
I had two hearts, that you might share in one
As a just recompense for your love, but why do I
Entertain such frivolous unnecessary talk.
May you live happy, and enjoy as rare,
And constant Shepherd as your self is fair. Exit.

CLOE. Is my face withered? or has Nature so
Deformed me lately that I am not Cloe?
For thee poor Cloe Shepherds have pitched the Bar,
Wrastl'd, and leaped, and shown the feats of War.
For thee each strove to gain thee as his Dove;
But thou did slight and scorn their simple love.
How many Verses have the Shepherds made,
In praising of thy Beauty, whilst thou laid
Thy heart on him that hates to hear thee named,
And thy delight is still to have him famed?
How many Rings and Gloves have thou received
From the poor Swains thou often times deceived?
For thee on Holy days they often would
Meet on the Heath next to the Pinders fold,
Where they with Music, and such sweet content,
Would spend their time to make thee merriment.
Since then my love is not one mite rewarded,
And that my Beauty is no more regarded:
I Will tear these golden locks, that shepherds may
Leave off their sport, and make no Holy Day.
SINGS. I will follow through yon Grove,
Where I soon shall meet my Love;
Then with sweet embraces we
Will clip, and cull, and none shall see.
A willow Garland I will make,
And sweetly wear it for his sake.
Then through Thickets, Woods, and Plains,
I will hide me from the Swains?
Hy da, hy da, what art thou? As she is running in, meets her.

DAPHNES. You were not wont to question that; how fares my dearest Love?


CLOE. Hence thou coward, hence from me:
Blush at thy disloyal^y.
Did not tell me thou would gain
Me reputation by thy fame;
And suffer'st now a stranger bear
The prize, and thou to have no share?

DAPHNE. Your frowns my Fairest, and not he,
Gained from me the victory.
Had you smiled as you did frown,
All his strength I Would mauger'd down.
What has disturbed my Love? who has committed
This injury to thy person?

CLOE. Ha, ha, ha; fool, fool! see you now fool?
Fool! kiss -- kiss -- kiss -- Exit.

DAPHNES. What fickle things are women? yet they are such men cannot be
without; our too much doting on 'em makes 'em proud; for loving them, they would
make us hate our selves. I do suspect this bad distemper in her proceeds from
some denial Lysander has given her to her unlawful suit, knowing my love to
her. It Is so. I must not let her suffer in too high a nature. Exit.


A place discovered all green mirtles, adorned with Roses, a Title written
over't thus. LOVERS VALLEY. Lysander and Gloriana. LYSANDER. Dearest Love,
fair as the Eastern morn,
When with her Summers roabe she decks the Plains,
And hangs on every bush a liquid pearl,
In Mayes triumphing month* sweet as the air,
The Phoenix does expire in, sit while I play
The cunning Thief, and steal thy heart away,
And thou shall stand as Judge to censure me,
To recompense thy loss I must agree;
To give my heart, which being understood,
It Is but exchange, I keep your heart, you mine.

GLORIANA. Content my Love thus, she would court thee,
And thus and thus she would play a Wantons part:
Do I not blush Adonis. Kiss him.

LYSANDER. Oh, you must not blush! you spoil the jest on it,
I Will span thy Waste, and do as Wantons use;
I Will be Adonis, but will not refuse.

GLORIANA. Nay fie, you stray beyond your limits.


LYSANDER. Kiss. Modesty allows such undefiled mixtures.

To them FRANCISCO. Ah! where are my eyes? what cursed unruly winds Have blown
'em out, and in their stead placed these base counterfaits! Oh you Deities? you
are unjust to suffer this? If these eyes be my own may they be blasted, that
without my License Durst see this object: but yet let reason
Sway my passion.
Why do I wish a mischief on my self
That must see their destruction? I have long
Suspected him by reason of her Necios,
And the continual scorn dwelt on her brow
When I did proffer love, were I provided
I Would rush upon 'em, and from his base arms
Snatch the false Girl, but I Will stand secure
A while and over-heare 'em.



GLORIANA. It Is time to part, w'ave dally'd Time too long.
Lysander, will you walk?

LYSANDER. Thinks Gloriana
That Time is lost that is spent with her Lysander

FRANCISCO. Deluding devil

GLORIANA. I could Lysander.
(Might it not stain my Mayden-yeares) live only
By gazing on thy Beauty.

LYSANDER. Nay, now you mock me; but I hope e're long
We shall with more security enjoy
What our hearts wish for. Where shall we next meet?

GLORIANA. In this very place to morrow be sure you meet.


LYSANDER. Exeunt. I will not fail.

FRANCISCO. Nor I to meet you both. Oh my best stars!
How I shall weave my self into revenge just, just Gods
you have stamped my brain for mischief* which on them
I Will execute.
And none shall pry into my faults within.
Revenge has Coverts, fit to hide his sin.

Exit. CLOE mad. SINGS. Hey down a down derry,
And shall not we be merry?
A fire on thy hole,
It Is as black as a cole,
And thy nose is as brown as a berry.
Hi ho. What a thing this love is?
When Love did act a woman's part,
She sings. She could have died with all her heart,
It swelled her so in every part;
She swore 'twas wind, and then did --
Hi, hi, hi, hi,
Nymphs to her
Sing about her.
Love cannot choose but pity yield,
He never lived in tented field,
Amongst iron hearted men,
He knows both how, and when
Thee to restore
To what thou were before.
He has a tender breast, which knows
Your wants by the tormenting woes
He Is subject to himself.
Then do not you despair,
That are both young and fair.
Thus we convay you hence.

CLOE. Takes Cloe with 'em. Where do you lead me? Exeunt.


Lysander and Gloriana. LYSANDER. How blessed are we, that Fortune has
So much befriended us in this happy?
Convenient opportunity?

GLORIANA. It Is an unaccustomed favor,
And we ought in duty to acknowledge
A thankfulness for it.

LYSANDER. She sits down. So sits the pride of Nature to out-vye
Each glorious Beauty of the checkered field,
And Flora's richest Wardrobe.

GLORIANA. I perceive
You Have practiced long in th'flattering Rules of love.
What will reward you?

LYSANDER. A kiss is more than I can merit.
Will you sing.

GLORIANA. And you will give me another for my pains.


LYSANDER. Put it to the trial,
You shall not loose your labor.

SONG. GLORIANA. Sit while I do gather flowers,
And depopulate the Bowers.
Here Is a kiss will come to thee;

Lysander. Give me one, I Will give thee three.
BOTH. Thus in harmless sport we may,
Pass all idle hours away.

GLORIANA. Hark, hark how fine
The Birds do chime,
And pretty Philomel
Her moan does tell.
BOTH. Then pity, pity love, and all is well.

GLORIANA. Here Is the Violet, Pink, and Rose,
The sweetest breathings for the nose.

LYSANDER. Yet thy breath to me does yield
More fragrant sents than all the field.

GLORIANA. Love cares not for flowers or toys,
Play games for your apish Boys.
Nor superstition
For his condition
Is for to know

Lysander -- if you love or no?


GLORIANA. Then answer, love I or no.
But yet me thinks that face should be
The Model of true constancy:
Therefore no reason have I,
To suspect thy loyalty,
Here Is another kiss for thee.

LYSANDER. Give me one, I Will give thee three.
BOTH. Thus in harmless sport we may,
Pass all idle hours away.

GLORIANA. Hark, hark how fine
The Birds do chime,
And pretty Philomel,
Her moan does tell*
BOTH. Then pity, pity Love, and all is well.

LYSANDER. You Have sung me most a sleep, my eyes are dull and heavy,
Faith I must make thy lap my pillow.

GLORIANA. Repose thy gentle head on it. Alas!
I Am heavy too, and must obey my destiny. Sleep.
The Destinies. SING. Sleep on, sleep on,
For we have so decreed,
That thou must bleed:
Sleep on, sleep on,
And may thou never rise,
For blood the shepherd cries.
Sleep on, sleep on. Exeunt.

A heavenly messenger in white. SONG.
Rise, rise Lysander to prevent
What the Destinies decreed.
Thou art constant, permanent,
And must not bleed*
Thy constant seed
Shall be the shepherds joy,
No annoy
Shall attend
Such a friend
As the Lasses need.
Rise, rise, awake!
And sleep off shake;
The Heavens are pleased thy part to take,
For thy Love's sake. Exit:
GLORIANA. They stir. Lysander, where ar't? Lord how my fancie's troubled!

LYSANDER. How fares my Gloriana? I have had
Strange thoughts that would have dispossessed
Me of my rest, had I not took it here
On your sacred lap.

Francisco disguised with others* FRANCISCO. That is the man: upon him instantly
While I attach his Mistress.

GLORIANA. Ah me Lysander, what means these sad spectacles*


1. VILLANE. We must have life and death.


GLORIANA. Both life and death: how can that be?


FRAN. Thy life, and thy Lysanders death.


GLORIANA. I Have heard that voice e're now
Afford more milder language.

FRAN. Stop her mouth lest she does charm me
Unto pity.

LYSANDER. Are you but men, and dare do this?


GLORIANA. Oh spare Lysander, sheath your swords in me.


FRAN. We Will not expostulate: take that.


2. VILLANE. And that.


GLORIANA. They take her with them. Oh Lysander!
Stay, stay, let me but breath my last
Upon her lips, and I Will forgive this Butchery.
Cowards, Villains, Miscreants, have you left me?
But oh my fairest, whether art thou fled?
Fear has made pale those cheeks that were so red.
I Will follow thee: they shall not dare to touch
The least hem of thy garments. But oh, I faint;
And must surrender up to earth that part
I took from her. Gloriana, oh Gloriana!

Claudia and Florida. CLAVDIA. We may for recreation walk,
And use some pretty harmless talk.
Religion does not tie us to
A stricter course than we can do.

FLORIDA. It Is dangerous walking, every field
Does naught but sounds of horror yield,
And to my fancy does appear
Poor slaughtered Maids; the Butchers bear
The name of Lovers, and can find
A way in killing to be kind. Lysander. Oh!
Ah me, whence came that groan?

CLAUDIA. It is a Shepherd wounded sore.


FLORIDA. Sure I Have seen this face before!
Oh it is Lysander the truest Swain,
That ever breathed on Grove or Plain.

CLAUDIA. What, is he marked for present death?


FLORIDA. No, there is hopes of life: his breath
I feel come coldly. Take him with 'em.

CLAUDIA. Help him in.
Pan be just, reward this sin.

SCRUB. The devil and his dam I think have carried away my Master; I cannot
find him in never a Wenches placuit, (pocket I should say) and yet I have
been in a simple many since I came among these Mutton-Mongers, these
sheepe-eaters, unless they have hid him amongst their wool, I cannot imagine
where he should be I will wear my shoes to pieces but I Will find him. Exit.


Lysander, Claudia, Florida, and Cloe. LYSANDER. Religious Matron, from your
divine hand
I have received my life next to heavens providence:
Sure my wounds were not desperate, or else
Some Angel did afford a sovereign Balsome
To cure 'em in such an instant: but howsoever,
I must ascribe it to your pious care:
For which I owe you more than I can pay,
Unless it be my life.

CLAUDIA. The Surgery I use is sent from Heaven,
And you owe them your life, not me.

LYSANDER. But Florida,
Did you never hear of your Cliton since?

FLORIDA. Never.
Yet I would gladly see him, did I know
By what means to atchieve it?

CLOE. Dear friend, the stories of us both if weighed
In an equal balance, would poize each other
Yet to put her love to the Test, I Will undertake your message.

LYSANDER. Thou will endeare me to thee then, about it.


FLORIDA. Exit Cloe. You heard how Cloe came to our happy Cure.


LYSANDER. Never.


FLORIDA. The Wood Nymphs brought her to our Cell, finding
Her strayed where ever since she has bin.

LYSANDER. If you will with me, I Will promise you, you shall see your Cliton:

FLORIDA. On those conditions I will.


CLAVDIA. Whether now?


FLORIDA. No farther than with your consent, and if you please, yo^ may go
with us.


Clau. I am contented. Exeunt.

Gloriana distracted. SINGS. I know Lysander's dead,
Then farewell maydenhead;
Thou art but one:
When I am gone:
It never shall be said -- hy ho, ho.
Oh Lysander.

CLITON like a Hermit. Save you fair Maid, I wish you joy,
Free from ought that may annoy
Your quiet, or disturb your sense;
Send you health and penitence.

GLORIANA. Ha, ha, ha, what, are you Lysander? what, with that beard there is a
great beard indeed: hark you Friar Tuck, do you see you handsome shepherd
Lysander?

Why did you say he was dead?

CLITON. You are mistaken, I Am a Hermit that can cure
All wounds, but what sin makes impure;
And those are cured by one above:
I can help those ills that move
Man to distraction, jealous fears,
In man or woman. I have years
Has gained experience to apply
For all sorts a safe remedy.

GLORIANA. SINGS. Do you see where he does stand,
With a Crosse-Bow in his hand.
I will follow thee my Dear,
Though the Goblins keeps there.

CLITON. Offers to go in. Stay pure Maid.


GLORIANA. Why do you hold me old man? insooth you shall not.

CLITON. ^f you will be ruled by me,
You shall your Lysander see.

GLORIANA. shall I indeed now?

CLITON. ^ome with me and you shall know
More, if you will but patient grow. Exeunt.

Leonand Alexis. Good Father, be patient.


LEON. (...) not my daughter lost, my only daughter,
^he only staff whereon my age did rest,
And only comfort which I had on earth?
Oh! I am miserable.

Leon and Alexis. ^here's hopes yet left to find her.


LEON. ^ever. Some rude and savage hand has killed my Girl,
^aving deflowered her of her virgin honor.
Talk not of patience, it is the only means
To cure a bad distemper, to grow worse,
And fire it out of him. Oh my Alexis!

ALEXIS. I Am lost in loosing her.
Let us endeavor to find her,

LEON. I Will take thy counsel, goodness guide me still,
Sometimes are Parents cross against their will.

Exeunt. Lysander. Claudia. Florida. LYSANDER. We Are almost at his Cell, where
he does waste
Himself away with grief, thinking you are
A Citizen in Heaven, and that wrong
He did you, has so defiled his soul,
It cannot be purged off but by such penitence.

FLORIDA. You Have moved my heart that it dissolves to tears,
Of blood, and water, for the strictness he
Has undergone for me. Enter Cloe and Daphnes.

CLOE. I Am glad I Have found you; do you see we are coupl'd as
Lovers ought to do: but your Gloriana is lost beyond
Recovery.

LYSANDER. How?


DAPHNES. She hearing of your death fell frantic, and
Since I have not seen her never our Groves.

LYSANDER Let us put wings to our pursuit to find her;
And first we will search his Cell.

CLAVDIA. Great Pan send all things well. Exeunt.


FRANCISCO. Oh Conscience, how thou do buz into my ears; despair
The thing attends my guilt, Gloriana lost:
For whose sweet sake I heap't new sins upon me?
What has my fury purchased nothing? Yes!
Hell, and destruction, which only by a hair hangs over my head, which blown
by the least wind, falls down and sinks me.


SCRVB. You sirrah, madcap, that creepes like a Crab there: Hark you, do not
you know one Francisco and Pisander, two vagabonds, that cannot live in peace
with Poultry, but they must fly after sheep?


FRANCISCO. I owe that wretched name Francisco.


SCRUB. Who? you with that face! pray where is Pisander then?


FRANC. I left him at the Court when I came thence.


SCRUB. I see you shepherds will lie abominably, he has been from the Court
ever since seven years before he was borne.


Lysander. Leon. Gloriana. Claud. Florida. Cloe. Cliton. Daphnes. Alexis.
LYSANDER. Friends, we are happy made, Fortune and Love reserved these blisses
to crown the end of things.


CLITON. The story you related Florida.
How this divine Matron did take your body,
Finding it warm, and did apply such Balsames
As has preserved your life, makes me most happy.

LYSANDER. I Am blessed in my Gloriana.


DAPHNES. I in my Cloe.


CLITON. And I in Florida.
Leon, Alexis, Claudia, and Florida. And we to see you possess such bliss.

FRAN. Ah! Protect me some blessed power: keep farther off. I am yet reconciled
with heaven. I do confess I killed you! Oh be merciful for their sweet
sakes, whose innocence cannot see, or be disturbed by thee. There they are by
thee; thy once dear Gloriana.


LYSANDER. What a distemper's this?


FRANCISCO. What will appease thy Ghost? give me but time to ask forgiveness
of those sacred powers I Have most offended, by depriving thee of life and being,
and thou shall have my life for thy just sacrifice.


LYSANDER. I apprehend his guilt: shepherd, fear not; your hate grew not to
such desperate effects as you expected. Feel, I live and breath!


FRAN. Delude me not, it is impossible.


LYSANDER. These shall witness it.


OMNES. We do.


FRAN. Can you forgive then my attempt?


LYSANDER. With a true heart.


OMNES. Lysander's still himself, noble and wise.


FRANCISCO. And can you Fairest wipe that Ignominy off, I deserved from you?


GLORIANA. My Lysanders word suffices for us both.


FRAN. Then may you both live happy many years:
May your joys, never be disturbed by fears.

SCRUB. Hark you sir, now all your talk is over, I would know one thing of you?


LYSANDER. And what is that?


SCRUB. Have you met with one Pisander, Leon, and Francisco in your Travailes?

The Duke is dead that banished good old Leon, and could I find him; his lands
shall be restored.


LEON. I am that Leon that with my son and daughter here have lived e're
since in this Rural way.


OMNES. Blessings do follow blessings.


LYSANDER. Then I am that Pisander that left the Court, to gain thy Daughters
love by the name of Lysander. Scrub, do thou know me now?


SCRVB. A pestlence on it, you are he indeed.


FRAN. Pisander, embrace thy friend Francisco.


LYSANDER. Francisco! thou cloy'st me with joy. Embrace.


FRAN. I left the Court for the same end you did.


LYSANDER. She Is mine now Sir, is she not?


LEON. As fast as the Priest can make her,
Fortune has made all happy: Yet it is fit
If they will wed, your hands should license it.

Amor finem coronat.
GEntle Reader, there are some faults which (through the obscurity of the
Coppie, and absence of the Author) have passed the Press; To particularize
them were needless; But favorably look over them, and with thy Pen
courteously correct such defects as thou shall find, not condemning the Press
or injuring the Author.


