RICHARD TARLTON.


Tarltons Jests.

Drawn into these three parts.

1 His Court-witty Jests. 2 His sound City Jests. 3 His Country pretty Jests.
Full of delight, Wit, and honest Mirth.



LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Bear. 1638.

Tarltons Court-Witty Jests.
How Tarlton played the Drunkard before the Queen.
THE Queen being discontented; which Tarlton perceiving, took upon him to
delight her with some quaint jest: whereupon he counterfaited a drunkard, and
called for Beer, which was brought immediately. Her Majesty noting his humor,
commanded that he should have no more: for (quoth she) he will play the beast,
and so shame himself. Fear not you (quoth Tarlton) for your Beer is small
enough. Whereat her Majesty laughed heartily, and commanded that he should
have enough.

How Tarlton deceived the Watch in Fleetstreet.
TArlton having bin late at Court, and coming homewards through Fleetstreet, he
espied the Watch, and not knowing how to pass them, he went very fast,
thinking by that means to go vnexmained: But the Watchmen perceiving that he
shunned them, stepped to him, and commanded him in the Queens name to stand.
Stand, quoth Tarlton? let them stand that can, for I cannot. So falling down,
as though he had been drunk, they helped him up, and so let him pass.

How Tarlton flowted a Lady in the Court.
Upon a time, Tarlton being among certain Ladies at a banquet which was at
Greenewich, the Queen then lying there, one of the Ladies had her face full of
pimples with heat at her stomach, for which cause she refused to drink wine
amongst the rest of the Ladies: which Tarlton perceiving (for he was there of
purpose to jest amongst them) quoth he, A marren of that face, which makes all
the body fare the worse for it. At which the rest of the Ladies laughed, and she
(blushing for shame) left the banquet.

Tarltons opinion of Oysters.
Certain Noblemen and Ladies of the Court, being eating of Oysters, one of
them seeing Tarlton, called him, and asked him if he loved Oysters? No (quoth
Tarlton) for they be ungodly meat, uncharitable meat, and unprofitable meat.
Why, quoth the Courtiers; They are ungodly, says Tarlton, because they are
eaten without grace, uncharitable, because they leave naught but shelles: and
unprofitable, because they must swim in wine.

Tarltons resolution of a question
ONe of the company taking the Gentleman's part, asked Tarlton at what time he
thought the Devil to be most busied? When the Pope dies, (quoth he.) Why says
the Courtier? Marry (answered he) then all the Devils are troubled and busied
to plague him: for he has sent many a soul before him thither, that exclaim
against him.

How a parsonage fell into Tarltons hands.
HEr Majesty dining in the Strand at the Lord Treasurers, the Lords were very
desirous that she would vouchsafe to stay all night: but nothing could prevail
with her. Tarlton was in his Clownes apparel, being all dinner while in the
presence with her, to make her merry: and hearing the sorrow that the Noblemen
made, that they could not work her stay: he asked the Nobles what they would
give him to work her stay? The Lords promised him any thing, to perform it.
Quoth he Procure me the Parsonage of Shard. They caused the patent to be drawn
presently: he got on a Parsons gown and a corner-Cap, and standing upon the
stairs, where the Queen should descend, he repeated these words: A Parson, or
no Parson? A Parson, or no Parson: but after she knew his meaning, she not
only stayed all night, but the next day willed he should have possession of the
Benefice. A madder Parson was never, for he threatened to turn the Bell-mettle
into lyning for his purse: which he did, the Parsonage and all, into ready
money.

How Tarlton Proved two Gentlewomen dishonest by their own words.
TArlton seeing in Greenwich two Gentlewomen in the Garden together, to move
mirth comes to them, and enquires thus: Gentlewomen, which of you two is the
honester? I, says the one, I hope without exceptions: and I quoth the other,
since we must speak for our selves: so then says Tarlton, one of you by your
own words is dishonese, one being honester then the other, else you would
answer otherwise: but as I found you, so I leave you.

How Tarlton answered a wanton Gentlewoman.
A Gentlewoman merrily disposed, being crossed by Tarlton, and half angry, said,
Sir, a little thing would make me requite you with a cuffe. With a cuff,
Lady, says Tarlton? so would you spell my sorrow forward: but spell my sorrow
backward, then cuffe me and spare not: when the Gentlemen by considered of the
word, they laughing, made the simple-meaning Gentlewoman to blush for shame.

How Tarlton dared a Lady.
AT the Dinner in the great Chamber where Tarlton iested, the Ladies were
daring one another: quoth one, I ever durst do any thing that is honest and
Honorable. A French crown of that, says Tarlton. Ten pound of that says the
Lady. Done, says one, Done says another. Tarlton put two pence betwixt his
lips, and dared her to take it away with her lips. Fie, says she, that is
immodesty. What to kiss, says Tarlton? then immodesty bears a great hand
over all: but once in your life say, you have been beaten at your own weapon.
Well, Sir, says she, you may say any thing. Then says Tarlton, remember, I
say you dare not, and so my wager is good.

How Tarlton landed at Cuckolds haven.
TArlton being one Sunday at Court all day, caused a pair of Oars to tend
him, who at night called on him to be gone. Tarlton being a carousing, drunk so
long to the Watermen, that one of them was bumpsie, and so indeed were all
three for the most part: at last they left Greenwich, the Tide being at a great
low fall* the Watermen yet afraid of the Cross Cables by the Lime-house, very
dark and late as it was, landed Tarlton at Cuckolds-hauen, and said, the next
day they would give him a reason for it: But Tarlton was feign to go by land
to Redriffe on the dirty bank, every step knee-deepe: so that coming home,
he called one of his boys to help him off with his boots, meaning his
stockings, which were died of another color. Whereupon one gave him this
theme the next day: Tarlton, tell me: for feign would I know,
If thou were landed at Cuckholds-haven or no?


Tarlton answered thus: Yes, Sir, and I take it in, no scorn:
For many land there yet miss of the horn.


How Tarlton fought with black Davie.
NOt long since lived a little swaggerer: called Black Davie, who would at
Sword and Buckler fight with any Gentleman or other, for twelve pence: he being
hired to draw upon Tarlton, for breaking a jest upon huffing Kate, a Punke, as
men termed her: one evening, Tarlton coming forth at the Court gate, being at
Whitehall, and walking toward the Tilt-yard, this Davie immediately drew upon
Tarlton: who on the sudden, though amazed, drew likewise, and enquired the
cause: which Davie denied, till they had fought a bout or two. Tarlton
courageously got within him, and taking him in his arms, threw him into the
Tilt-yard, who falling upon his nose, broke it extremely, that ever after he
snuffled in the head; poor Dauie lying all that night in the Tilt- yard,
expecting the doors to be opened came forth, and at the Barber-surgeons told
of this bloody combat: and the occasion of it was (quoth he) because Tarlton
being in a Tavern, in the company of this-damnable Cackatrice, huffing Kate,
called for wine, but she told him, That without he would burn it, she would
not drink. No quoth Tarlton, it shall be burnt, for thou can burn it without
fire. As how Sir (quoth she?) Mary thus. Take the Cup in thine hand, and I will
tell thee. So he filling the cup in her hand, said it was burnt sufficiently in
so fiery a place: she perceiving her self so slouted, hired me to be her
Champion, to revenge her quarrel.

How Tarlton answered the Watchmen, coming from the Court.
TArlton having played before the Queen till one a clock at midnight, coming
homewards, one of them espied him, called him, Sir what art thou? A woman,
says Tarlton. Nay, that is a lie, say the Watchmen; women have no such beards.
Tarlton replied, if I should have said a man, that you know to be true, and
would have bidden me, tell you that you know not, therefore I said a woman, and
so I am all woman, having pleased the Queen, being a woman. Well, sir, says
another, I present the Queen: then am I a woman, indeed, says Tarlton, as
well as you, for you have a beard as well as I, and truly Mistress Annis, my
buske is not done yet: when will yours? leave thy gibing, fellow, says the
Watch, the Queens will is, That whosoever is taken without doors after ten a
clock, shall be committed, and now it is past one: commit all such, says
Tarlton, for if it be past one a clock, it will not be ten this eight hours:
with that one lifts up his Lantern, and looks him in the face, and knew him;
Indeed M. Tarlton you have more wit then all we, for it is true, that ten was
before one, but now one is before ten. It is true, quoth Tarlton, Watchmen had
wont to have more wit, but for want of sleep they are turned fools: so
Tarlton stole from them: and they to seem wise, went home to bed.

Tarltons answer to a Courtier.
TArlton being at the Court all night, in the morning he met a great Courtier
coming from his Chamber, who espying Tarlton, said: Good morrow, M. Didimus
and Tridimus: Tarlton being somewhat abashed, not knowing the meaning thereof,
said, Sir, I understand you not, expound, I pray you. Quoth the Courtier,
Didimus and Tridimus, is a fool and a knave: you ouerloade me, replied
Tarlton, for my back cannot bear both; therefore take you the one, and I will
take the other, take you the knave, and I will carry the fool with me.

Tarltons quip for a young Courtier.
THere was a young Gentleman in the Court, that had first lien with the Mother,
and after with the Daughter, and having so done, asked Tarlton what it
resembled: quoth he, As if you should first have eaten the Hen, and afer, the
Chicken.

Tarltons answer to a Noblemans question.
THere was a Nobleman that asked Tarlton what he thought of Soldiers in time
of Peace. Marry (quoth he) they are like Chimnies in Summer.

Tarltons Jest to an unthrifty Courtier.
THere was an unthrifty Gallant belonging to the Court, that had borrowd five
pounds of Tarlton: but having lost it at Dice, he sent his man to Tarlton to
borrow five pounds more, by the same token he owed him already five pounds.
Pray tell your Master (quoth Tarlton) that if he will send me the token, I will
send him the money: for who deceiues me once, God forgive him: if twice, God
forgive him: but if thrice, God forgive him, but not me, because I could not
beware.

How Tarlton flouted two Gallants.
TArlton being in a merry vain, as he walked in the great Hall in Greenwitch,
he met my old Lord Chamberlain, going between two fantastic Gallants, and
cried aloud unto him, my Lord, my Lord, you go in great danger: whereat
amazed, he asked whereof: of drowning (quoth Tarlton) were it not for those
two bladders under each of your arms.

Tarltons sound City Jests.
Tarltons jest of a red face.
TO an Ordinary in White Friars, where Gentlemen used, by reason of
extraordinary diet, to this Tarlton often frequented, as well to continue
acquaintance as to please his appetite. It chanced ^o upon a time (especially)
being set amongst the Gentlemen and Gallants, they enquired of him, why
melancholy had got the upper hand of his mirth; to which he said little, but
with a squint eye (as custom had made him hare eyed) he looked for a Jest to
make them merry. At last he espied one that sat on his left side, which had a
very red face, he being a very great Gentleman, (which was all one to Tarlton)
he presently in great haste called his Host: Who do I serve (my Host) quoth
Tarlton; The Queens Majesty, replied the Good man of the house. How happens
it then, quoth Tarlton, that (to her Majesty's disgrace) you dare make me a
companion with Seruingmen, clapping my Lord Shandoyes Cullisance upon my
sleeue, looking at the Gentleman with the red face; me thinks, quoth he, it
fits like the Saracens head without Newgate. The Gentleman's Salamanders face
burnt like Erna for anger. The rest laughed heartily. In the end (all enraged)
the Gentleman swore to fight with him at next meeting.

A sudden and dangerous fray, twixt a Gentleman and Tarlton, which he put off
with a jest.
AS Tarlton and others passed along Fleet Street, he espied a spruse young
Gallant, black of complexion, with long hair hanging down over his ears, and
his beard of the Italian cut, in white Satin, very quaintly cut, and his body
so stiffely starcht, that he could not bend himself any way for no gold.
Tarlton, seeing such a wonder coming, trips before him, and meeting this
Gallant, took the wall of him, knowing that one so proud, at least looked for
the prerogative. The Gallant scorning that a Player should take the wall, or so
much indignifie him, turns himself, and presently drew his Rapier. Tarlton,
drew likewise. The Gentleman fell to it roundly: but Tarlton (in his own
defense) compassing and traversing his ground, gaped with a wide mouth, whereat
the people laughed: the Gentleman pausing, enquired why he gaped so, O Sir,
says he, in hope to swallow you; for by my troth you seem to me like a Prune
in a mess of white Broth. At this the people parted them. The Gentleman noting
his mad humor, went his way well contented: for he knew not how to amend it.

Tarltons Jest of a Pippin.
AT the Bull in Bishops-gate-street, where the Queens Players oftentimes
played, Tarlton coming on the Stage, one from the Gallery threw a Pippin at
him. Tarlton took up the Pip, and looking on it, made this sudden jest.

Pip in, or nose in, choose you whether,
Put yours in, ere I put in the other.
Pippin you have put in: then, for my grace,
Would I might put your nose in another place.
A jest of an Apple hitting Tarlton on the face.
TArlton having flouted the fellow for his pippin which he threw, he thought
to bemeet with Tarlton at length. So in the Play Tarltons part was to travel,
who kneeling down to ask his father blessing, the fellow threw an Apple at
him, which hit him on the cheek. Tarlton taking up the Apple, made this jest.

Gentleman, this fellow, with this face of Mapple,
Instead of a pipin, has thrown me an Apple,
But as for an Apple, he has cast a Crab,
So in stead of an honest woman, God has sent him a drab.
The people laughed heartily, for he had a Queen to his wife.

How Tarlton and one in the Gallery fell out.
IT chanced that in the midst of a Play, after long expectation for Tarlton:
being much desired of the people, at length he came forth: where (at his
entrance) one in the Gallerie pointed his finger at him, saying to a friend
that had never seen him, that is he. Tarlton to make sport at the least
occasion given him, and seeing the man point with the finger, he in love again
held up two fingers: the captious fellow, jealous of his wife, (for he was
married) and because a Player did it, took the matter more hainously, and asked
him why he made horns at him; No (quoth Tarlton they be fingers: For there is
no man, Which in love to me,
Lends me one finger, but he shall have three.
No, no, says the fellow, you gave me the horns. True (says Tarlton) for my
fingers are tipped with nails, which are like horns, and I must make a show of
that which you are sure of. This matter grew so, that the more he meddled, the
more it was for his disgrace: wherefore the standers by counseled him to
depart, both he and his horns, lest his cause grew desperate. So the poor
fellow, plucking his hat over his eyes, went his ways.

How Fiddlers fiddled away Tarltons apparel.
IT chanced that one Fancy and Nancy, two Musicians in London, used often with
their boys to visit Tarlton, when he dwelt in Gracious-street at the sign of
the Saba, a Tavern, he being one of their best friends or benefactors, by
reason of old acquaintance: to requite which, they came one Summers morning to
play him The Hunt's up, with such Music as they had. Tarlton, to requite
them, would open his chamber door, and for their pains would give them
Muskadine: which a Cony-catcher noting, and seeing Tarlton came forth in his
shirt and nightgowne to drink with these Musicians, the while this nimble
fellow stepped in, and took Tarltons apparel, which every day he wore, thinking
that if he were espied to turn it to a jest: but it past for current, and he
goes his ways. Not long after Tarlton returned to his chamber, and looked for
his clothes: but they were safe enough from him. The next day this was noised
abroad, and one in mockage threw him in this theme, he playing then at the
Curtain: Tarlton, I will tell thee a jest,
Which after turned to earnest:
One there was, as I heard say,
Who in his shirt heard Music play,
While all his clothes were stolen away.


Tarlton smiling at this, answered on the sudden thus, That Is certain, Sir, it
is no lie
That same one in truth was I,
When that the thief shall Pine and lack,
Then shall I have clothes to my back:
And I, together with my fellows,
May see them ride to Tiborne Gallows.


Of Tarlton and a beggar.
TThere was a poor beggar but a conceited fellow, who seeing Tarlton at his
door, asked something of him for Gods cause. Tarlton putting his hand in his
pocket, gave him two pence in stead of a penny: at which Tarlton made this
Ryme; Of all the Beggars most happy thou art,
For to thee mine hand is better then my heart.


Quoth the Beggar.

True it is, Master, as it chances now:
The better for me, and the worse for you.
How Tarlton deceived a Doctor of Physic.
TArlton, to satisfy the humors of certain Gentlemen his familiar
acquaintance, went about for to try the skill of a simple Doctor of Physic,
that dwelt not far from Islington, and thus it was: he took a fair Urinal,
and filled it half full of good Wine, and bore it to this Doctor, saying it
was a sick man's water: he viewed it, and tossing it up and down, as though he
had great knowledge: quoth he, the Patient whose water it is, is full of gross
humors, and has need of purging, and to be let some ten ounces of blood. No,
you Dunce, replied Tarlton, it is good piss, and with that drunk it off, and
threw the Urinall at his head.

How Tarlton frighted a Country fellow.
TArlton passing through London, by chance he heard a simple Country fellow in
an Alehouse, calling for a Kingstone pot of Ale, stepped in to him, and
threatened to accuse him of treason, saying Sir, I have seen and tasted of a
penny pot of Ale, and have found good of the price, but of a Kingstone coin I
never heard: therefore it is some counterfeit, and I must know how thou came
by it: hereupon, the country fellow was driven into such a maze, that out of
doors he got, and took him to his heels, as though wilde-fire had followed
him.

How Tarlton was deceived by his Wife in London.
TArlton, being merrily disposed as his Wife and he sat together, he said unto
her, Kate, answer me to one question, without a lie, and take this crown of
gold: which she took on condition, that if she lost, to restore it back again.
Quoth Tarlton, am I a Cuckold or no, Kate; Whereat she answered not a word,
but stood silent, notwithstanding he urged her many ways. Tarlton seeing she
would not speak, asked his gold again. Why, quoth she, have I made any lie;
no, says Tarlton: why then good man fool, I have won the wager. Tarlton mad
with anger, made this Rhyme.

As women in speech can revile a man;
So can they in silence beguile a man.
One asked Tarlton what country man the Devil was.
IN Carter Lane dwelt a merry Cobbler, who being in company with Tarlton, asked
him what Countryman the Devil was; quoth Tarlton, a Spaniard: for Spaniards
like the Devil, trouble the whole world.

A Cheese-mongers question to Tarlton.
IN time of scarsity, a simple Cheese-monger hearing Tarlton commended for his
quick wit came unto him and asked him, why he thought Cheese and Butter to be
so ^^^re; Tarlton answered, Because Wood and Coals are so ^^^re, for Butter
and Cheese a man may eat without a fire.

Tarltons answer to a rich Londoner.
TArlton meeting a rich Londoner, fell into talk about the Bishop of
Peterborough, highly praising his bounty to his servants, his liberality to
strangers, his great hospitality and charity to the poor. He does well, says
the rich man, for what he has, he has but during his life. Why (quoth
Tarlton) for how many lives have you your goods?

How Tarlton gave away his dinner.
AS Tarlton and his wife sat at dinner, his wife being displeased with him,
and thinking to cross him, she gave away half his meat unto a poor Beggar,
saying, Take this for my other husbands sake. Whereupon Tarlton took all that
was left, and likewise bade the poor fellow to pray for his other wives soul.

Tarltons answer to a boy in a Rhyme.
THere was a crackrope Boy, meeting Tarlton in London street, sung this Rhyme
unto Tarlton: Woe worth thee Tarlton,
That ever thou wast borne:
Thy Wife has made thee Cuckold,
And thou must wear the horn.


Tarlton presently answered him in Extemporie.

What and if I be (Boy)
I Am never the worse:
She keeps me like a Gentleman,
With money in my purse.
How Tarlton bad himself to dinner to my Lord Majors.
A Jest came in Tarltons head where to dine: and thought he, in all that a man
does, let him aim at the fairest: for sure if I bid my self any where this
day, it shall be to my Lords Majors: and upon this goes to the Counter, and
entered his action against my Lord Mayor, who was presently told of it, and
sends for him. Tarlton waits dinner time, and then comes, who was admitted
presently. Master Tarlton (says my Lord Mayor) have you entered an action
against me in the Poultry Counter? My Lord (says Tarlton) have you entered an
action against me in Woodstreet Counter? Not I in troth, says my Lord. No
(says Tarlton) he was a villain that told me so then: but if it be not so,
forgive me this fault, my Lord, and I will never offend in the next. But in the
end he begins to swear, how he will be revenged on him that mocked him, and
flings out in a rage. But my Lord said, Stay, M. Tarlton, dine with me, and no
doubt but after dinner you will be better minded. I will try that, my Lord,
says Tarlton, and if it alter mine anger, both mine enemy and I will thank
you together for this courtesy.

Tarltons Jest of a box on the ear.
ONe that fell out with his friend, meets him in the street, and calling him
into a corner, gave him a box on the ear, and feld him, getting him gone, and
never told wherefore he did so: which Tarlton beholding, raised up the fellow,
and asked him the reason of their sudde^ falling out. Can you tell, Sir, said
the fellow? for by my troth as yet I cannot. Well said Tarlton, the more fool
you: for had I such feeling of the cause, my wit would remember the injury:
but many men are goslings; the more they feel, the less they conceive.

Tarltons Jest to two Tailors.
TArlton meeting two Tailors (friends of his) in the evening in mirth cries,
Who goes there, A man, answered a Tailor: How many is there? one? Yea, said
Tarlton: two, said the other Tailor: then you say true, said Tarlton: for two
Tailors go to a man. But before they parted, they foxt Tarlton at the Castle
in Pater noster Row, that Tarlton confessed them two Tailors to be honest men. So
what they spent in the purse, they got in the person, Coming but one, by
Tarltons account, they returned, two. But Tarlton coming one, returned less
by his wit* for that was shrunk in the wetting.

How Tarlton iested at his wife.
TArlton and his wife keeping an Ordinary in Paternoster Row, were bidden out
to Supper: and because he was a man noted, she would not go with him in the
street, but entreats him to keep one side, and she another: which he consented
to. But as he went, he would cry out to her, and say, Turn that way, wife:
and anon, On this side, wife. So the people flockt the more to laugh at them.
But his wife (more than mad angry) goes back again, and almost forswore his
company.

How Tarlton committed a Rakers horse to ward.
WHen Tarlton dwelt in Gracious street, at a Tauern at the sign of the Saba,
he was chosen Scauenger, and often the Ward complained of his slacknesse, in
keeping the streets clean. So on a time when the Cart came, he asked the Raker
why he did his business so slackly? Sir (said he) my fore-horse was in the
fault, who being let blood and drencht yesterday, I durst not labor him. Sir
(said Tarlton) your horse shall smart for it: and so leads him to the Counter:
which the Raker laughed at, and (without his horse) did his work with the rest,
thinking Tarltons humor was but to jest, and would return him his horse
again anon. But when that anon came, he was feign to pay all his fees of the
Prison, as directly as if he himself had been there. For if Tarlton had
committed the Master, the business had not gone forward: therefore the horse
was in prison for the Master.

How Tarlton made Armin his adopted son to succeed him.
TArlton keeping a Tavern in Gracious-street, he let it to another, who was
indebted to Armins Master, a Goldsmith in Lombard Street, yet he himself had a
chamber in the same house. And this Armin (being then a wag) came often thither
to demand his Masters money, which he sometimes had, and sometimes had not. In
the end the man growing poor, told the boy he had no money for his Master,
and he must bear with him. The man's name being Charles Armin, made this
Uerse, writing it with Chalk on a Waine-scot. O world, why will thou lie?
Is this Charles the great? that I deny.
Indeed Charles the great before:
But now Charles the less, being poor.
Tarlton coming into the room, reading it, and partly acquainted with the
boys humor, coming often thither for his Masters money, took a piece of
Chalk, and wrote this Ryme by it: A wagge thou art, none can prevent thee;
And thy desert shall content thee,
Let me divine: As I am, so in time thou wilt be the same,
My adopted son therefore be,
To enjoy my Clownes suit after me.


And see how it fell out. The boy reading this, so loved Tarlton after, that
regarding him with more respect, he used to his Plays, and fell in a league
with his humor: and private practice brought him to present playing, and at
this hour performs the same, where, at the Globe on the Banks side men may
see him.

Tarltons greeting with Banks his Horse.
THere was one Banks (in the time of Tarlton) who served the Earl of Essex and
had a Horse of strange qualities: and being at the Crosse-keyes in
Gracious-street, getting money with him, as he was mightily resorted to; Tarlton
then (with his fellows) playing at the Bell by, came into the Crosse-keyes
(amongst many people (to see fashions: which Banks perceiving (to make the
people laugh) says Signior (to his horse) Go fetch me the veryest fool in the
company. The Jade comes immediately, and with his mouth draws Tarlton forth.
Tarlton (with merry words) said nothing but God a mercy Horse. In the end
Tarlton seeing the people laugh so, was angry inwardly, and said, Sir, had I
power of your horse, as you have, I would do more than that. What ere it be,
said Banks (to please him) I will charge him to do it. Then (says Tarlton)
charge him to bring me the veriest whore-master in this company. He shall
(says Banks,) Signior (says he) bring Master Tarlton here the veriest
whore-master in the company. The Horse leads his Master to him. Then god a
mercy horse indeed, says Tarlton. The people had much ado to keep peace; but
Banks and Tarlton had like to have squared and the horse by to give aim. But
ever after it was a byword through London, God a mercy Horse, and is to this
day.

An excellent Jest of Tarlton suddenly spoken.
AT the Bull at Bishops-gate was a Play of Henry the fifth, wherein the Judge
was to take a box on the ear, and because he was absent that should take the
blow, Tarlton himself (ever forward to please) took upon him to play the same
Judge, besides his own part of the Clown: and Knel then playing Henry the
fifth, hit Tarlton a sound box indeed, which made the people laugh the more
because it was he: but anon the Judge goes in, and immediately Tarlton (in his
Clownes clothes) comes out, and asks the Actors what news; O (says one)
had thou been here, thou should have seen Prince Henry hit the Judge a
terrible box on the ear. What man, said Tarlton strike a Judge? It is true
in faith, said the other, No other like, said Tarlton, and it could not be but
terrible to the Judge, when the report so terrifies me, that me thinks the
blow remains still on my cheek, that it burns again, The people laughed at
this mightily: and to this day I have heard it commended for rare, but no
marvel, for he had many of these: But I would see our Clowns in these days
do the like: no I warrant ye, and yet they think well of themselves too.

Tarltons Jest with a Boy in the street.
A Wag-halter Boy met Tarlton in the street, and said, Master Tarlton, who
lives longest? Mary Boy, says Tarlton, he that dies latest: and why dye men so
fast, said the Boy? Because they want breath, said Tarlton: no, rather said the
Boy, because their time is come: the^ thy time is come, said Tarlton, see who
comes yonder: Who? said the Boy? Mary, said Tarlton, Bull the Hangman: or one
that would willingly be thy hangman: Nay, hang me the^, if I employ him at this
time, said the Boy. Well, said Tarlton, then thou will be hanged by thy own
confession: and so they parted.

A Jest of Tarlton, proving Mustard to have wit.
TArlton keeping an Ordinary in Paternoster row and sitting with Gentlemen to
make them merry, would approve Mustard (standing before them) to have wit: how
so says one? It is like a witty scold, meeting another scold, knowing that
scold will scold, begins to scold first: so says he, the Mustard being lickt
up, and knowing that you will bite it, begins to bite you first. I Will try that,
says a Gull by, and the Mustard so tickled him, that his eyes watered. How
now, says Tarlton, does my jest savor? I says the Gull, and bite too: if you
had had better wit, says Tarlton, you would have bit first: so then conclude
with me, that dumb unfeeling. Mustard has more wit than a talking unfeeling
fool, as you are. Some were pleased, and some were not, but all Tarltons care
was taken (for his resolution was ever) before he talked any Jest.

How Tarlton took Tobacco at the first coming up of it.
TArlton (as other Gentlemen used) at the first coming up of Tobacco, did take
it more for fashions sake then otherwise, and being in a room, set between two
men overcome with Wine, and they never seeing the like, wondered at it; and
seeing the vapor come out of Tarltons nose cried out, Fire, fire, and threw a
cup of wine in Tarltons face, Make no more stir, quoth Tarlton, the fire is
quenched: if the Sheriffs come, it will turn to a fine, as the custom is.
And drinking that again, Fie, says the other, what a stink it makes? I am
almost poisoned. If it offend, says Tarlton, let us every one take a little of
the smell, and so the savor will quickly go: but Tobacco whiffes made them
leave him to pay all.

Tarltons pretty Country Jests.
Tarltons wit between a Bird and a Wood-cock.
IN the City of Gloucester, M. Bird of the Chapel met with Tarlton, who
joyful to regreet other, went to visit his friends: amongst the rest, M. Bird
of the Queens Chapel, visited M. Wood-cock of the College, where meeting,
many friendly speeches past, amongst which, M. Wood-cock challenged M. Bird of
Kin: who mused that he was of his affinity, and he never knew it. Yes says
M. Wood-cock, every Wood-cock is a Bird, therefore it must needs be so. Lord
Sir, says Tarlton, you are wide, for though every Wood-cock be a Bird, yet
every Bird is not a Wood-cock. So Master Wood-cock like a Wood-cock bit his
lip, and mumbudget was silent.

Tarltons Jest of a Gridiron.
WHile the Queens Players lay in Worcester City to get money, it was his
custom for to sing extempore of Theames given him: amongst which they were
appointed to play the next day: now one fellow of the City amongst the rest,
that seemed quaint of conceit, to lead other youths with his fine wit, gave
out, that the next day he would give him a Theme, to put him to a non plus:
diverse of his friends acquainted with the same, expected some rare conceit.
Well, the next day came, and my Gallant gave him his invention in two lines,
which was this: Me thinks it is a thing unfit,
To see a Gridiron turn the Spit.
The people laughed at this, thinking his wit knew no answer thereunto, which
angered Tarlton exceedingly, and presently with a smile looking about, when they
expected wonders, he put it off thus. Me thinks it is a thing unfit:
To see an Ass have any wit.


The people hooted for joy, to see the Theame-giuer dashed, who like a dog with
his tail between his legs, left the place: But such commendations Tarlton
got, that he sapt with the Bailiffe that night, where my Theamer durst not
come, although he were sent for, so much he vexed at that unlooked for answer.

Tarltons answer in defense of his flat nose.
I Remember I was once at a play in the Country, where as Tarltons use was, the
play being done, every one so pleased to throw up his Theme: amongst all the
rest, one was read to this effect, word by word: Tarlton, I am one of thy
friends, and none of thy foes.
Then I prithee tell how came by thy flat nose:
Had I been present at that time on those banks,
I would have laid my short sword over his long shankes


Tarlton, mad at this question, as it was his property, sooner to take such a
matter ill then well, very suddenly returned him this answer: Friend or foe,
if thou will needs know, mark me well,
With parting dogs and bears, then by the ears, this chance fell:
But what of that? though my nose be flat, my credit to save,
Yet very well, I can by the smell,
scent an honest man from a Knave.


Tarltons Jest of a Bristow man.
WHen the Queens Players were restrained in Summer, they traveled down to S.
James his Fair, at Bristow, where they were worthily entertained both of
Londoners, and those Citizens: It happened that a wealthy Citizen, called M.
Sunbanke, one morning secretly married his maid; but not so secret, but it was
blown abroad* That morning Tarlton and others walking in the Fair to visit
his familiar friends of London, and being in company of Bristow men, they did
see M. Sunbanke coming, who had his property with his neck, not to stir it
any way but to turn body and all. It chanced at the Fair end, he stood to
piss against a wall: to whom Tarlton came, and clapping him on the shoulder,
God give you joy of your marriage, says he, M. Sunbanke, being taken pissing
against the wall would have looked back to thank him, and suddenly turns about
body and all in the view of many, and showed all: which so abasht him that
(ashamed) he took into a Tavern, protesting that he had rather have spent
ten pound. Sure (said the Uintner) the fault is in your neck, which will not
turn without the bodies assistance, and not in M. Tarlton. Call you him M.
Tarlton, says M. Sunbanke? Yea, Sir, says the Uintner, he is the Queens
Iester. He may be whose Iester he will be, but this jest agrees not with me
at this time, says M. Sunbanke.

A Jest broke of Tarlton by a Country Gentleman.
IN the country where the Queens Plaiers were accepted into a Gentleman's house,
the wagon vnlading of the apparel, the wagoner comes to Tarlton, and does
desire him to speak to the Steward for his horses. I will, says he: and
coming to the Steward, Sir, says Tarlton, where shall our horses spend the
time? The Gentleman looking at Tarlton at that question suddenly answered, If
it please you, or them, let them walk a turn or two, or there is a fair
garden, let them play a game or two at bowls in the Alley: and departs thence
about his other business. Tarlton commending the sudden wit of the Steward,
says little. But my Steward not quiet, tells to the Gentlewomen above, how he
had driven Tarlton to a non plus with a jest, whereat they all did laugh
heartily: which a Seruingman loving Tarlton well, ran and told him as much.
Tarlton, to add fuel to the fire, and loath to rest thus put off with a jest,
goes and gets two of the horses into the garden, and turns them into the
bowling Alley, who with their heels made hauock: being the Gentleman's only
pastime. The Ladies above from a window, seeing horses in the Garden Alley*
call the Knight, who cries out to Tarlton, Fellow, what meanest thou? Nothing
Sir, says he, but two of my horses are at seven up, for a peck of Prouender, a
foolish match that I made. Now they being in play at bowls run, run* your
Steward may come after and cry rub, rub: at which though they smiled, yet the
Steward had no thanks for his labor, to set the horses to such an exercise,
and they could not blame Tarlton, who did but as he was hidden. But by this
Jest, oats and hay, stable room, and all, was plenty.

How Tarlton made one of his company utterly forswear drunkenness.
AT Salisbury, Tarlton and his fellows were to play before the Mayor and his
brethren: but one of his company (a young man) was so drunk, that he could
not: whereat Tarlton, as mad angry, as he was mad drunk, claps me on his legs a
huge pair of bolts. The fellow dead asleep, felt nothing. When all was done,
they conveyed him to the Iaile on a man's back, and entreated the Iailer to do
God good service, and let him lie there till he waked. While they were about
their sport the fellow waked, and finding himself in durance, and the Iaile
hung round with bolts and shackles, he began to bless himself, and thought
sure in his drunkenness he had done some mischief. With that he called to
know, but none came to him: then he thought verily his fault was capital, and
that he was close prisoner. By and by comes the Keeper, and moaned him, that
one so young should come to so shameful a death as hanging. Anon another
comes, and another with the like, which further put him in a puzzle. But at
last comes Tarlton, and others, entreating the Keeper, yet if it might be,
that they might see their fellowere they went. But he very hardly was
entreated. But at length the poor drunken Signior called out for them. In they
come. Oh Tom, says Tarlton, hard was thy hap, in drunkenness to murder this
honest man, and our hard hap too, to have it reported, any of our company is
hanged for it. O God, O God, says the fellow, is my fault so great? then
commend me to all my friends. Well short tale to make, the fellow forswore
drunkenness, if he could escape, and by as cunning a wile (to his thinking)
they got him out of prison by an escape, and sent him to London before, who was
not a little glad to be gone. But see how this jest wrought: by little and
little the fellow left his excessive drinking, and in time altered his desire
of drunkenness.

How Tarlton saved his head from cutting off.
TArlton upon a time being in the Country, and lodging in an homely Inn,
during which time there was a Gentleman dwelling in the same town, somewhat
frantic and distraught of his wits: which madman on a sudden rusht into
Tarltons bedchamber, with his sword drawn, and finding him there in bed,
would have slain him: saying, Uillaine, were it not valiantly done to strike
off thy knaves head at one blow? Tarlton answered. Tut, Sir, that is nothing
with your Worship to do: you can as easily strike off two heads at one blow,
as one: wherefore, if you please, I Will go down and call up another, and so you
may strike off both our heads at once. The mad man believed him, and so let him
slip away.

How Tarlton escaped imprisonment.
TArlton having been domineering very late one night, with two of his friends,
and coming homewards along Cheape-side, the watch being then set, M. Constable
asked, Who goes there? Three merry men, quoth Tarlton. That is not sufficient.
What are you, quoth. M. Constable? Why, says Tarlton, one of us is an eye-maker,
and the other a light-maker. What say thou, knave, do mock me? the one
is an eye-maker, the other a light-maker, which two properties belong unto God
only: commit these blasphemers, quoth the constable. Nay, I pray you good M.
Constable, be good in your Office, I will approve what I have said, to be true
quoth. Tarlton. If thou can says the Constable, you shall pass, otherwise you
shall be all three punished. Why (quoth. Tarlton) this fellow is an ey-maker,
because a Spectacle-maker; and this other a maker of light, because a Cha^dler,
that makes your darkest night as light as your Lanthorn. The Constable seeing
them so pleasant, was well contented. The rest of the watchmen laughed: and
Tarlton with his two companions went home quietly.

How Tarlton deceived a Country Wench.
THe Queens players traveling into the west Country to play, and lodging in a
little Uillage, some ten miles from Bristow, in which village dwelt a pretty
nut-browne Less, to whom Tarlton made proffer of marriage, protested, that he
came from London purposely to marry her. The simple maid being proud to be
beloved by such a one whom she knew to be the Queens man, without more
entreaty, yielded: and being both at the Church together, and M. Parson ready
to perform his duty, and coming to the words of, I Richard take thee Ioane:
nay, stay good Master Parson, I will go and call my fellows, and come to you
again: so going out of the Church in haste, he returned at leisure; for, having
his horse ready saddled, he rode toward Bristow, and by the way told his
fellows of his success with his Wench.

How Tarlton went to kill Crows.
IT chanced upon a time, as Tarlton went forth with a Birding piece into the
fields to kill Crows, he spied a Daw sitting in a tree, at which he meant to
shoot; but at the same instant, there came one by, to whom he spoke in this
manner: Sir quoth he, yonder I see a Daw, which I will shoot at if she sit. If
she sit, said the other, then she is a Daw indeed: but, quoth Tarlton, if she
sit not, what is she then? Marry, quoth the other, a Daw also: at which words
she immediately flew away: whereupon, Tarlton spoke merrily in a Rhyme, as
follows: Whether a Daw sit, or whether a Daw fly,
Whether a Daw stand, or whether a Daw lie,
Whether a Daw creep, or whether a Daw cry,
In what case soever a Daw persever,
A Daw is a Daw, and a Daw shall be ever.


How a poor Begger-man ouer-reached Tarlton by his wit.
AS Tarlton upon a day sat at his own door, to him came a poor old man and
begged a penny for the Lords sake: whereupon Tarlton having no single money
about him, asked the beggar what money he had? No more money, Master, but one
single penny. Tarlton, being merrily disposed called for his penny, and having
received it, gave it to his Boy to fetch a pot of Ale: whereat the beggar grew
blanke, and began to gather up his wits, how to get it again: the pot of Ale,
for the beggars penny, being brought, he proffered to drink to the Beggar. Nay,
stay awhile Master, quoth the Beggar, the use is, where I was borne, that he
that pays for the drink, must drink first. Thou say well, quoth Tarlton; go
to, Drink to me then. Whereupon the beggar took the Pot, saying, Here, Master,
I drink to you, (and therewithal drank off every drop.) Now Master, if you
will pledge me, send for it as I have done. Tarlton seeing himself so
ouer-reacht, greatly commended the Beggars wit, and withal in recompense
thereof, gave him a Teaster: with that the Beggar said, that he would most
truly pray to God for him. No, answered Tarlton, I pray thee pray for thy
self, for I take no usury for almsdeeds.

Of Tarltons pleasant answer to a Gallant by the highway side.
IT was Tarltons occasion another time to ride into Suffolk, being furnished
with a very lean large horse: and by the way, a lusty Gallant met him; and in
mockage asked him, what a yard of his horse was worth? Marry Sir, quoth
Tarlton, I pray you alight, and lift up my horses Tail, and they in that shop
will tell you the price of a yard.

How Tarlton would have drowned his Wife.
Upon a time, as Tarlton and his Wife, (as passengers) came sailing from
Southampton toward London, a mighty storm arose, and endangered the Ship,
whereupon, the Captain thereof charged every man to throw into the Seas the
heauiest thing he could best spare, to the end to lighten somewhat the Ship.
Tarlton, that had his Wife there, offered to throw her ouer-boord: but the
company rescued her; and being asked wherefore he meant so to do? he answered,
She is the heauiest thing I have, and I can best spare her.

How Tarlton made his Will and Testament.
OF late there was a Gentlman living in England, that wheresoever he dined,
would of every dish conney a modicum thereof into his Gown sleeue: which
Gentleman being upon a time at dinner at a Gentleman's house in the Country,
there he used his aforesaid quality, in the company of Master Tarlton, who
perceiving it, said thus unto the company: My Masters, I am now determined
before you all, to make my last Will and Testament: And first, I bequeath my
soul to God my Creator, and my body to be buried in the sleeue of yonder
Gentleman's Gown, and with that, stepping to him, he turned up the Gown
sleeue, whereout, here dropped a bit, and there a bit, with choice of much other
good cheer, still shaking it, saying, I meant this sleeue, Gentlman, this
sleeue I meant.

How Tarlton called a Gentleman knave by craft.
WIthin a while after, as the same Gentleman and Tarlton passed through a field
together, a Crow in a Tree cried Kaw, Kaw, See yonder Tarlton, quoth the
Gentleman yonder Crow calls thee knave. No, Sir (he answered) he beckens to
your Worship as the better man.

Tarltons Jest of a Country Wench.
TArlton going toward Hogsdon, met a country maid coming to market, her Mare
stumbling, down she fell over and over, showing all that ever God sent her,
and then rising up again, she turned her round about unto Master Tarlton, and
said, Gods body Sir, Did you ever see the like before? No, in good sooth, quoth
Tarlton, never but once in London.

How Tarlton deceived an Inne-holder at Sandwich.
Upon a time, when the Plaiers were put to silence, Tarlton and his Boy
frollickt so long in the Country, that all their money was gone, and being a
great way from London, they knew not what to do; but as want is the whetstone
of wit, Tarlton gathered his conceits together, and practiced a trick to bear
him up to London without money, and thus it was: Unto an Inn in Sandwich they
went, and there lay for two days at great charge, although he had no money to
pay for the same: the third morning he bade his man go down, and malcontent
himself before his host and his hostess, and mumbling say to himself, Lord,
Lord, what a scald Master do I serve? this it is to serve such Seminary
Priests and Jesuits: now even as I am an honest Boy, I Will leave him in the
lurch, and shift for my self: here is ado about Penance and Mortification, as
though (forsooth) Christ has not dyed enough for all. The Boy mumbled out
these his instructions so dissembling, that it struck a iealously in the
Inne-holders heart, that out of doubt his master was a Seminary Priest;
whereupon, he presently sent for the Constable, and told him all the foresaid
matter and so went up both together to attache Tarlton in his chamber, who
purposely had shut himself close in, and betaken him to his knees, and to his
crosses, to make the matter seem more suspicious: which they espying through
the keyhole, made no more ado, but in they rushed, and arrested him for a
Seminary Priest, discharged his score, bore his, and his boys charges up to
London, and there in hope to have rich rewards, presented him to M. Fleetwood,
the old Recorder of London: but now mark the Jest; when the Recorder saw
Tarlton, and knew him passing well, entertained him very courteously, and all
to befooled the Inne-holder, and his mate, and sent them away whith fleas in
their ears: but when Tarlton saw himself discharged out of their hand he
stood jesting and pointing at their folly, and so taught them by cunning, more
wit and thrift against another time.

Of Tarltons Wrongful accusation.
Upon a time Tarlton was wrongfully accused for getting of a Gentleman's Maid
with child and for the same, brought before a Justice in Kent, which Justice
said as follows: It is a mervalle (M. Tarlton) that you being a Gentleman of
good quality, and one of her Majesty's servants, would venture thus to get
Maids with child. Nay rather (quoth Tarlton) were it marvel, if a maid had
gotten me with child.

Tarlton deceived by a Country wench.
TArlton traveling to play abroad, was in a Town where in the Inn was a
pretty maid, whose favor was placed in a corner of Tarltons affection: and
talking with her, she appointed to meet him at the bottom of a pair of
stairs. Night and the hour came, and the maid subtly sent down her
Mistress: whom Tarlton catching in his arms, Art come, wench, says he? Out
alas, says the Mistres, not knowing who it was. Tarlton hearing it was the
Mistres, start aside, and the maid came down with a candle, and she espyde a
glimpse of Tarlton in the dark, who stepped into another room. How now,
Mistres, said the maid? Something (said she) affrighted me, some man sure, for
I heard him speak. No, no, Mistress, said the Maid, it is no man, it was a
Bull calf that I shut into a room, till John our Pounder came to have pounded
him for a stray. Had I thought that (says she) I would have bit him such a
knock on his forehead, that his horns should never have graced his Coxcombe,
and so she departs up again afra^id. But how Tarlton took this jest, think
you.

How Tarlton could not abide a Cat, and deceived himself.
IN the Country Tarlton told his Oastesse he was a Coniurer. O sir (says she)
I had pewter stolen off my shelfe the other day, help me to it, and I will
forgive you all the pots of Ale you owe me, which is sixteen dozen. Says
Tarlton, To morrow morning the Devil shall help you to it, or I will trounce
him. Morning came, and the Oastesse and he met in a room by themselves.
Tarlton, to pass the time with exercise of his wit, with Circles and tricks
falls to conjure, having no more skill then a dog. But see the jest, how
contrarily it fell out: as he was calling out, mons, pons, simul and fons, and
such like, a Cat (unexpected) leapt from the gutter window, which sight so
amazed Tarlton, that he skipt thence, and threw his Hostess down, so that he
departed with his fellows, and left her hip out of joint, being then in the
Surgeons hands, and not daring to tell how it came.

How Tarlton and his Oastesse of Waltham met.
TArlton riding with diverse Citizens his friends, to make merry at Waltham, by
the way he met with his Oastesse riding toward London, whom he of old
acquaintance saluted. She demands whither they went? Tarlton told her, to make
merry at Waltham. Sir (says she) then let me request your company at my house
at the Christopher, and (for old familiarity) spend your money there. Not
unless you go back (says Tarlton) we will else go to the Hound. But she
(loath to lose their custom) sent to London by her man, and goes back with
them, who by the way had much mirth, for she was an exceeding merry honest
woman, yet would take any thing: which Tarlton hearing, as wise as he was
(thinking her of his mind) he was deceived: yet he asked her if the biggest bed
in her house were able to hold two of their bigness (meaning himself and her?)
Yes (says she) and tumble up and down at pleasure. Yea, one upon another,
says Tarlton? And under too, says she. Well, to have their custom, she
agreed to every thing, like a subtle Oastesse: and it fell so out that Tarlton
having her in a room at her house, asked her which of those two beds were big
enough for them two? This, said she: therefore go to bed sweetheart, I Will come
to thee. Mass (says Tarlton) were my Boots off, I would indeed. I Will help
you, Sir (says she) if you please. Yea (thought Tarlton) is the wind in that
door? come on then. And she very diligently begins to pull, till one boot was
half off. Now (says she) this being hard to do, let me try my cunning on the
other, and so get off both. But having both half off his legs, she left him
alone in the Shoomakers stocks, and got her to London, where Tarlton, was three
hours, and had no help. But being eased of his pain, he made this Ryme for a
Theme, singing of it all the way to London: Women are Wanton, and hold it no
sin,
By tricks and devices to pull a man in.


Tarltons meeting with his Country acquaintance at Ilford.
ON a Sunday, Tarlton rode to Ilford, where his father kept: and dining with
him at his Sisters, there came in diverse of the Country to see him, amongst
whom was one plain Country plough-iogger, who said he was of Tarltons kin,
and so called him cousin. But Tarlton demanded of his father if it were so? but
he knew no such matter; whereupon says Tarlton, whether he be of my kin or no,
I will be cousin to him ere we part, if all the drink in Ilford will do it.
So upon this they caroused freely, and the Clown was then in his Cue so that
(in brief) they were both in soundly. Night came and Tarlton would not let his
cousin go, but they would lie together that night, meaning to drink at their
departure next morning. Tarlton would by wit leave him in the lash, since power
would not. But see the jest: That night the plain fellow so pist Tarlton in
his bed, thinking he had been against the Church wall, that he was feign to cry
for a fresh shirt to shift him* So when al was well, they must needs drink at
parting: where indeed (to seal kindred soundly) the fellow h^d his load: for
hearing that his cousin Tarlton, was gone to London, zounds he would follow,
that he would, none could hold him: and meaning to go toward London, his aim
was so good, that he went toward Rumford to sell his Hogs.

How a Maid drove Tarlton to a Nonplus.
TArlton meeting with a wily Country wench, who gave him quip for quip; Sweet
heart (said he) would my flesh were in thine. So would I, Sir (says she) I
would your nose were in my, I know where. Tarlton angered at this, said no more;
but goes forward.

Tarltons answer to a question.
ONe asked Tarlto^ why Monday was called Sundaies fellow? Because he is a
sausie fellow (says Tarlton) to compare with that holy day. But if may be,
Monday thinks himself Sundays fellow, because it follows Sunday, and is
next after: but he comes a day after the Fair for that. Nay (says the fellow)
but if two Sundays fall together, Monday then may be the first, and it would
show well too. Yes (says Tarlton) but if thy nose stood under thy mouth, it
would show better, and be more for thy profit. How for my profit, said the
fellow? Marry (said Tarlton) never to be cold in winter, being so near every
dogs tail. The fellow seeing a foolish question had a foolish answer, laid
his legs on his neck, and got him gone.

Tarltons desire of enough for money.
TArlton coming into a Market town bought Oats for his horse, and desired
enough for money: the man said. You shall, Sir and gave him two half pecks for
one. Tarlton thought his Horse should that night fare largely, and comes to him
with this Rhyme: Jack Nag, he brag, and lusty brave it,
I have enough for money, and thou shall have it.


But when Jack Nag smelt to them, they were so musty, that he would none (God
thank you, Master) which Tarlton seeing, runs into the Market, and would
slash and cut. But til the next Market day the fellow was not to be found, and
before then Tarlton must be gone.

How Tarltons Dog lickt up six pence.
TArlton in his Travail had a Dog of fine qualities, amongst the rest, he
would carry six pence in the end of his tongue, of which he would brag often,
and say, Never was the like. Yes, says a Lady, mine is more strange, for he
will bear a French crown in his mouth: no, says Tarlton, I think not: lend
me a French crown, says the Lady, and you shall see: truly Madame, I have it
not but if your dog will carry a cracked English crown, here if is but the Lady
perceived not the jest, but was desirous to see the dogs trick of six pence.
Tarlton threw down a teaster, and said, Bring Sir: and by fortune the Dog
took up a Counter, and let the money lie: a Gentlewoman by, seeing that, asked
him how long he would hold it? An hour, says Tarlto^: that is pretty, said
the Gentlewoman, let us see that: mean time she took up the six pence, and
willed him to let them see the money again: when he did see it, it was a
Counter, and he made this Rhyme. Alas, alas, how came all this to pass?
The worlds worse then it was:
For silver turns to brass.
I, says the Lady, and the dog has made his master an Ass: but Tarlton would
never trust to his Dogs tricks more.

Tarltons Jest of a Horse and a Man.
IN the City of Norwich, Tarlton was on a time invited to an hunting: where
there was a goodly Gentlewoman, that bravely mounted on a black horse, rode
exceeding well, to the wonder of all the beholders, and neither hedge nor ditch
stood in her way, but Pegasus her horse (for so may we term him for
swiftness) flew over all, and she sat him as well. When every one returned
home, some at Supper commended his Hound, others his Hawke, and she above all,
her Horse: and, said she, I love no living creature so well (at this instant)
as my gallant horse: yes Lady, a man better, says Tarlton. Indeed no, said
she, not now: For since my last husband dyed, I hate them most, unless you
can give me medicines to make me love them. Tarlton made this jest instantly:
Why, a Horse mingeth Whay, Madam, a Man mingeth Amber,
A Horse is for your Way, Madam, but a man for your Chamber.
God a mercy, Tarlton, said the men: which the Gentlewoman noting, seeing they
took exceptions at her words, to make all well, answered thus: That a Horse is
my chief opinion now, I deny not,
And when a man does me more good in my chamber, I him defy not.
But till then give me leave to love something: then something will please you,
said Tarlton, I am glad of that, therefore I pray God send you a good thing, or
none at all.

Tarltons talk with a pretty Woman.
GEntlewoman, said Tarlton, and the rest as you sit, I can tell you strange
things: now many Gallants at Supper noted one woman, who being little and
pretty, to unfit her prettiness, had a great wide mouth, which she seeming to
hide, would pinch in her speeches, and speak small, but was desirous to hear
news. Tarlton told at his coming from London to Norwich, a Proclamation was
made that every man should have two wives. now Jesus, quoth. she is it possible? I
Gentlewoman, and other wise able too, for contrarily women have a larger
preeminence, for every woman must have three husbands: Now Iawsus, said the
Gentlewoman, and with wonder shows the full wideness of her mouth, which all
the table smiled at: which she perceiving, would answer no more. Now Mistress,
said, Tarlton, your mouth is less then ever it was, for now it is able to say
nothing. Thou art a cogging Knave, said she. Mass, and that is something yet,
said Tarlton, your mouth shall be as wide as ever it was, for that Jest.

A Jest of Tarlton to a great man.
THere was a great huge man, 3. yards in the wast, at S. Edmondsbury in
Suffolk, that died but of late days (one M. Blague by name) and a good kind
Justice too, careful for the poor, this Justice met with Tarlton in Norwich:
Tarlton, said he, Give me thy hand: But, you Sir, being richer, may give me a
greater gift, give me your body: and embracing him, could not half compass
him: being merry in talk, said the Justice: Tarlton, tell me one thing, what
is the difference betwixt a Flea and a Louse? Marry, Sir; said Tarlton, as much
and like difference, as twixt you and me: I like a Flea see else) can skip
nimbly: But you, like a fat Louse creep slowly, and you can go no faster,
though Butchers are over you, ready to knock you on the head. Thou art a knave,
quoth the Justice. I, Sir, I knew that ere I came hither, else I had not been
here now, for ever one knave (making a stop) seeks out another. The Justice
understanding him* laughed heartily.

Tarltons Jest to a maid in the dark.
TArlton going in the dark, groping out his way, hears the tread of some one
to meet him. Who goes there, says he? A man, or a monster? said the maid, A
monster: said Tarlton, A candle hoe: and seeing who it was, Indeed said he, A
monster, I Will be sworn: for thy teeth are longer then thy heard, O Sir, said
the maid, speak no more then you see, for women go invisible now adays.

Tarltons Jest to a Dog.
TArlton and his fellows, being in the Bishop of Worcesters Seller, and being
largely laid to, Tarlton had his rouse, and going through the streets, a Dog
(in the middle of the street, asleep, on a dunghill) seeing Tarlton reele on
him, on the sudden barkt, How now Dog, says Tarlton, are you in your humors?
and many days after it was a byword to a man being drunk, that he was in his
humors.

FINIS.

