OF MARRIAGE and Wiuing.

AN EXCELLENT, pleasant, and Philosophical Controversy, between the two
famous Tassi now living, the one Hercules the Philosopher, the other, Torquato
the Poet.

Done into English, by R. T. Gentleman.



LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, and are to be sold by John Smythicke, at his
shop in Fleetstreete, near the Temple Gate. 1599

TO THE NO less worthy then learned Gentleman, the Lord Giouan Battista Licino.
Sir, I perceive you are an earnest Intercessour and suter, that I would suffer
a Declamation I made some few years ago against Women, to come abroad in
Print: and to persuade me unto the same, you allege two reasons. The one is,
because it being (as you say) a most rare and curious piece of work, it is
sought for and desired of many. The other, for that you doubt lest the world
seeing the Answer of my dear Cousin Signior Torquato Tasso, unto the same,
falsely presupposing that I blame Marriage, it might one day (as you doubt)
having no witness to contrary it, bring some blemish or stain unto the
clearness and pureness of my piety and religion: And therefore I, who for
your first reason would have most plainly and absolutely have denied your
request, knowing very well the lightness and the imperfectness of this
Discourse, In consideration of your second, cannot choose but yield unto your
friendly desire: so as I, resigning all the interest and right I have of the
same unto you, do give you full power and authority to do with this toy what
you please: for, for mine own part, I assure you I knew not upon whom to
bestow it, for the unworthiness thereof. Only this I will entreat you, that
when you shall send it abroad to be common, you will vouch safe me so much
favor, as to satisfy the curious Reader, that it was done upon no other
occasion, then of a certain youthful Caprichious Humor, protesting unto you,
that I my self longere this, had contradicted the same, had not my foresaid
famous kinsman prevented me in mine own meaning, whose conclusion and censure,
as I ratify and confirm for most infallible and true: so, who shall read
mine own, shall easily perceive that it does not much disagree from his
opinions, if he well mark and have but an eye unto the beginning and end of
the matter from whence the manner of Writers is to draw and borrow their
purpose and inventions. And thus craving every Noble and generous mind, to
make the best construction of the same, Vibascio le Mani, and bid you farewell.
From my House in Bergamo, this first of May, 1598.

Al seruitio del V. S. Hercole Tasso.

THE DECLAMAtion of Hercules Tasso, a learned Philosopher, against Marriage or
wedding of a Wife.
MOst noble Auditors, never has there been handeled, neither is it possible
to handle, a Matter, either more high, either more difficult, or of more
importance, the^ this is of which I will entreat this day before you: Mine
intent being to prove most manifestly, and by apparent reasons, that no
wiseman, nor any of discretion, ought to take a wife. It is a high question, by
reason of the excellency of the end depending on the same. It is Difficult,
because of the necessity of Procreation. And it is of Importance, for that it
includes all things within it self. High, because it concerns the felicity
of Man. Difficult, because Socrates himself could not resolve upon the same.
And of Importance, for that being once married, it is (then) too late to
repent. It is high, because the three Uertues, Political, Moral, and
Economicall, are comprehended in the same. Difficult, considering the use of it
in every degree. And it is of Importance, for that it determines and clearly
shows the quality of the life to come. To conclude, it is high, for that
such have discoursed in praise of the same as cannot lie: It is difficult,
because Matrimony is not counted blame* worthy: and it is of importance, by
reason it serves as a mean to attain that eternal blessedness, for which we
all hope. And yet for ^l this, I am thoroughly persuaded (as an undaunted
Champion) to try this Combat, assuring my self to win the Race, before I
begin to run: especially having so great a number of judicial and worthy men
(as my guides) to conduct me: so many sound reasons as whips or motives to
prevail for me: and having skillful Experience, which shall rule the bridle in
my running orderly: and lastly, knowing that the almighty hand of the sacred
scriptures will uphold me, that I cannot fall in my course. And because I
perceive already the gentle watchword given to set forward by the courteous
trompet of your accustomed h^^ht and still silence, Behold I thus begin.

We ought to take the example, and follow the authority of those whom the
world has accounted for the wisest: and such a one Thales Miletius was not
only reputed, but also held to be the first man that had the name of wise
attributed unto him: being afterward reckoned one of those seven who only were
of ye Grecians called wise men: he being importuned by his mother Cleobulina,
to take a wife whilst he was young, always answered her, that it was yet time
enough: and afterward being grown in years, and urged by her more earnestly,
he told her, that it was (then) past time, and too too late. This grave man
meaning hereby, that it was not good to marry at all. Then let not us marry,
except we will martyr our selves for ever.

Bias, Prieneus, Bion of Boristhenes, and Antistenes the Athenian, being
demanded of their friends what kind of woman they should choose for their
wife: they all three with one consent answered thus. If thou marry one that is
fair, she will grow to be common: If one that is foul, she will wax
loathsome, and become to be a corsie unto thee. As if they meant to advise such
as requested their opinions herein, not to take any at all, of what condition
soever.

Theophrastus a great Philosopher, and successor in the Chair of Aristotle,
was of conceit, that if any man would take a wife, it was very necessary for
him, to be marvelous rich, and with all lusty, healthful, and of a strong
complexion: and that the woman he should marry, should be fair, of good
behavior, and a gentlewoman borne: yet his especial advise was, that although
a man might happen of such a one so well qualified, if he were wise, he would
not have him to venture on her for fear of a further danger.

Epicurus alleging that more purgatories then pleasures were to be found in
Matrimony, dissuaded men likewise from the same. Pamphilus Saxius was of the
same mind: affirming that the more fair and learned women were, the more
dainty we men should make to wed them: because every commodity brings his
discommoditie: and every thing excellent, is not without excessive and
unspeakable pride. Then if in this case we rather covet liberty then bondage,
if we would live quietly and not contentiously, if we will be counted virtuous,
and not wantons, if we love to be free men, and not slaves, and if we will seek
what is good, and shun what is bad, let us (then) let such alone, with whom
being (once) yoaked, we can never be quiet. If we will not be defiled, let us
touch no pitch: if not polluted, let us not handle filthe: and if we mean to
live pleasantly, let us never marry.

Mirthus the Philosopher, famous in the old time amongst the ancient Sages in
Greece, rendering a reason why he did not betake himself unto a wife, says
thus. If (quoth he) the Woman on whom I should light, should chance to be
good, (as it is twenty to one the contrary) yet must I loose her in the end
whether I will or no: If she should be badde, I must bear with her perforce:
If poor, I must supply her wants and necessity: if rich, I must support her
pride and insolency: If foul, I must loathe her: and if she be fair, I must
keep a watch and guard over her: and (which is worse then all the rest) I must
(said he) resign, and make a deed of gift of my liberty, unto a person, that
would never seek to please my humor, nor once content me. But there is no man
whatsoever, but loves and looks to receive thanks and kindness, where he
has bestowed and done good turns and courtesies, nor any one but greeues and
laments to be troubled with the foresaid plagues and passions. Then to escape
them, let no man marry, except he mean to mar him self for ever.

Demosthenes, writing unto the Tyrant Corynthus his friend, who had requested
him to set down his censure, what qualities one should seek to find in a
woman that he meant to marry withal, returned him this answer: First, she
must be rich, that thou may have wherewithal to live in show and carry a
port: next, she must be nobly borne, that thou may be honored through her
blood: then she must be young, that she may content thee: then fair, that thou
need not to hunt after other game: and lastly, honest and virtuous, that thou
may not take the pains to provide a spy to watch her. And (quoth he) who
without these conditions takes a wife, he were better be quick buried, then
otherwise wedded: giving us to understand hereby, that there is none more
rightly unfortunate indeed, then such a one as is not marvelous charie and
wary in the choosing of his wife. But as it is impossible to find a she, that
has all these good properties in her, so it is most manifest, that this
worthy Orator, did not allege and bring them all together to no other end
then merrily to give us to understand by the consequence aforesaid, that most
wretched and unhappy have such been, and always are, that have heretofore
had, and now have betaken themselves unto this bitter sweet Marriage: and so
to conclude, shall we be, if we shall like blind men, stumble into this
intricate Labyrinth of Wiuing.

Hear me O ye people of Megara (cries out the sage Sosacius. Certainly most
pestilent things are Women, and yet nevertheless it is not possible to live
without some one mischief or other hanging on our elbowes, seeing that both to
marry, and to live without marriage is ill. But because in mine opinion,
amongst many evils, that is the most tolerable, that is counted the least, and
to that least, it were best always to cleave unto: let us leave to marry, for
so shall we, (as shall be most apparently found) leave the worst, that otherwise
is like to happen unto us.

Metellus the Roman, surnamed Numidicus, animating the people of Rome to
marriage, My fellow Citizens (quoth he) if we could be brought into this world
without the company of Women, we would all of us study how to shake off this
heavy yoke from our shoulders: but seeing Nature has so ordained the matter,
that we cannot live neither orderly with them, neither very well be without
their bewitchng company, we ought rather to provide for the perpetual good and
quiet health of our own selves, then to seek how to enjoy a little private
contentment and small lasting pleasure: showing most plainly, that the chief
and best contentment indeed, was to be without them. Neither is it a simple and
right Contentment, to be free from women, but rather a Beatitude or
Blessedness, for little said he, to that he might have done, because he would
not work a contrary effect unto his own meaning.

But let us hear Cato what he says, and let us mark if his speeches be not
agreeable unto this purpose. If the world says he, could continue without the
use of Wives, we should never be without the company of the Gods, to dwell
amongst us, where now we have none but Devils, that accompany us.

An excellent Philosopher called Secundus, protesseth, a wife to be the
confusion of man, an insatiable beast, a bottomless gulf, a continual
Melancholy, a consuming Care, an increasing war, a quotidian Evil, a
troublesome let to all good study and learning: a mortal danger to the
Husband: a polluted vessel of base adultery: a passing bad kind of untamed
cattle: a heavy and insupportable clogge: a most fretting corsiue to the
mind: and an over proud and usurping Tyrant to him that weddeth her. If then
we will be free from such Fiendes, and escape these more then hellish miseries,
If we will enjoy with Metellus, Contentment, and with Cato lead our lives
happy, let us bless our selves from these Crosses, and slay from these Woes
to Men, as from most venomous Scorpions. And although the World (in general)
cannot continue without them, yet may it increase, though we (in particular)
do not like Antonies pigges, run crying still after them.

Dion sets down three Evils in the world, that exceed all others
whatsoever, the cheifest of which, he accounts women. That there is not a
worse thing the^ these consuming Cankers are, Home does write, Euripides
sets down, Seneca affirms, Terence avouches, and Aristophanes openly
testifies: All of them exclaiming with once voice, that as they are passing
bad, so are they most excellently ill. Certainly (says Cicero against Verres)
either these women were borne of Uices, or else the Uices, were brought into
the world by women.

Plautus the Comedian, counsels every one to shun them, as loathsome
Todes. A pretty little fair one, but a monstrous great Evil, have thou happened
upon (quoth Aristippus) to a friend of his, that had gotten a fair, but yet a
little wife.

Protagoras marrying a daughter of his own unto his enemy, gave out that he
could not have done him a more notable displeasure, then to give him a wife. A
good old Father marrying a wife, when he was aged and well strooken in years,
being demanded why he did not rather venture upon this state of life when he
was young and lusty, and therefore far fitter for the same: alleged for his
reason, that then he was wise and provident, but now he doted like an old
fool. Let us then bannish (as unprofitable Creatures) all Women from us, and
let us abandon and exile all wiuing from amongst us, since they are given and
bestowed as fit presents upon our deadliest enemies, and deprive us of our
right wits and senses, making us to become as wise as Woodcocks.

Diogenes the Cinicke, being asked at what years a man should marry, said,
that in youth it was too soon, and in his age too late: imitating Thales, who
(as I told you before) used like weapons as these same, in his own defense:
and to one that had patched up such a beggarly piece of botching work, Syrrha
said he, to a little sweet meat, thou have gotten a great deal of sower and
bitter sauce.

This Diogenes, although he was waiward, yet was he witty, and passing
pleasantly conceited, though crabbedly favored, who coming one day by an
Olive Tree, upon which certain women had hanged themselves, Now I would to God
(quoth he) that all other Trees would bring forth such kind of fruit as this
does.

Menander, after he reports, that the best Woman in the world, is the worst
thing that ever Nature created, concludes, that we should rather bury them
alive, then dare once be so bold as for to marry with any one of them.

Arrius agreeing with these foresaid two Philosophers, seeking of Pacuuius, a
few Graftes of certain Trees, upon which three of his wives had hanged
themselves orderly in sequence, one after an other, does manifest and make
apparent most clearly, by these their speeches and proceedings, how pestilent
a poison this subtle sex of Eve is, and how loathsome and abominable the
name of Wife is to be accounted of, and consequently how happy he is, that is
not wirried by this kind of she Woolfe: and how fortunate he may think
himself rightly to be, who being infected with this plague, can quickly by
death be rid from her. Let not then, such as be without them seek to have
them, nor thrust their fingers foolishly into the fire when they need not.

He that takes a wife (says Hesiodus) is like a bruised Bark tossed and tumbled
too and fro with the boisterous winds and raging tempests of unfriendly and
malicious Fortune. He sells himself as a slave, and buyeth a troublesome
suit in litigious law, that enters into Matrimony, says Panormitanus the
Abbot. And that renowned Orator Uarro, is of opinion, that he that will never
fall a wrangling, must live without one of these she tempting crabbed
Comforters.

Hesiodus meaning hereby, that a Wife is the Correllatiue, and as contrary as
Fortune: and the other twain, that she is worse then any bad law matter, or
contentious suit whatsoever. So as he that is acquainted what excessive costs
and charges, what exceeding pains and troubles, what great dangers and
perils, what loss and miseries, and what despair and unquietness of mind,
shipwrackes and suits of law do bring men unto, may easily gather and
conceive, with what sweet quiet, and pleasing ease, with what great advantage
and sure safety, and with what sufficient satisfaction, happy security, and
gladsome contentment, they pass their time that live without these old she
Satan's, the Ouerthrowers of Mankind: and we that know the same, let us hold
it for Canonical, and leave them as Apocripha, not to be believed, nor worthy
to be conuersed withal, except upon extreme need and necessity.

Divine Plato, and grave Appolonius Tianeus (besides an infinite number more,
needless as now to repeat) all which, were men of so deep knowledge and
wisdom, as the world shall for ever admire them, lived all their lives time
Celibes, that is, Celestem vitam agentes, Bachelors, in all happiness and
blessedness y^ might be. And so likewise as had Socrates and Eucidites done, had
not a certain law forbid the contrary amongst them, in those days in which
they lived: binding every man (as then) to take not only one of these women,
but a brace of them together at one time for failing.

The Essei, a kind of Philosophers amongst the Jews, abhorred this order of
Matrimony.

Mitio in Terence, thought himself most happy, only because he had never
been troubled with these unruly filly follies: And Demea his brother, he
reputed as unfortunate, for that he was infected with this kind of plague. And
to conclude, a certain Greek Poet sings thus.

He never care did know, nor suffered strife,
who always lived has without a wife.
Shall we then making no account of these grave Examples, Counsels, and
Experiences, wilfully run into our own danger? Shall we with the foolish
Sole, leap out of the pan into the fire? Not so, I hope, if we love to keep
our bones whole, our bodies in health, and our selves in sound skins: except
we should follow the advice of a certain notable politic and merry
conceited Gentleman now living, who being entreated by a friend of his to tell
him if he should take a Wife, if carry her away with him, if touch her, and if
put the King on her? Yes man (quoth he) what else? I would have you use to such
a Saint as a Wife is, all such like Ceremonies: marry withal, he added this:
that he should take her, but by the hair of her head: he should carry her, but
unto the next River: he should touch her, but with a good Bastinado: and put
the Ring on ber, but yet through the Nose, like a beastly Buffala, or rooting
Sow: and so sending her packing with her pasport to the next Uillage of Little
Ease, never more to come after him.

The learned Petrach exhorts us to shun Women, not as we would ordinary
kind of Serpents, but as if they were murdering Basiliskes, auouching that
they kill no less then the others with their borrowed shadows, that is, with
their paintings of white and read: with their glaunces, that is their subtle
looks and false eyes: with their enchanting whistles, that is their flattering
and glauering speech. Besides he says, that such a man only is rid of a
froward, disdainful, and pettish wife, that does not marry at all.

Whereupon Alphonsus King of Aragon, was wont merrily to say, that then only the
wedding life would be pleasing and quiet, when the husband should be deaf, and
the goodwife blind, because the female Sex is of so small discretion, as for
every small toy she will be jealous, and jealousy brings always sorrow as
an Appendix with it: from whence springs brawling and yawling, grunting and
groaning, mumping and moaning, howling and gnashing of teeth: with which (as in
a Morice dance with iangling Belles) they make deaf and torment the miserable
and wretched husbands, they then wishing (but too too late) that they had gone
to the gallows to be hanged, when they first went to the Church to be thus
martyred through Marriage, in such a lamentable and continual fashion. But
neither are the one deaf, neither the other blind, and therefore never can
this kind of life be quiet or peaceable at any time, such a Catterwawling
keep these kind of scratching Kitlings. Then is this no Galliard for us to
dance, if we be wife.

Achilles Tacitus of Alexandria, not content to have said with Caricles, that a
wife if she be fair, is very badde, and that if she be foul, she is a double
mischief, and a terrible misfortune: nor with Clinias to be amazed and to
wonder, how a father can have so hard a heart as to condemn his son, being
his own flesh and blood, to such an infinite great infelicitie as he does, when
he forces him to take a wife: but his censure is, that no other thing was that
bitter and insupportable plague which Jove being incensed against Prometheus,
for stealing fire from heaven, did inflict upon him in these verses.

To plague men mortal for the stolen Fire,
In show of what seems good, so bad a thing
I Will give to them; that loving in desire,
They to themselves by loving, woe shall bring.
Then to place a wife at his side, as a just scourge and chastisement for so
grievous a fault. Which interpretation, although at the first appearance it
seems to be meant otherwise* seeming as it were of a more higher nature: yet
is it not so rightly taken in another sense, but that I can bring the same to
serve my purpose most fitly, (if others shall apply it after the same way that
I do) to serve their turn: And if first they will remember that the reason
only, why the hands of Prometheus were tied with a King of Iron, and afterward
that he was bound to a great stone, the ancient and learned sort would give us
to understand thereby, that the King, from that day forward should signify the
Hieroglificall state of matrimony: seeing that by the same (as a most necessary
ceremony) it is continued still by them, and used (at this day) by us in
weddings: they differing from us in this point only, that whereas at the
first, their King was of plain Iron, in which was put some base or simple
stone, of little or no value at all, we giving our selves to new fangle
wantonness, and to the vanity of our time, will have ours wrought most
curiously, with the most richest and precious Jewels that can be found in all
the world. Besides Puhagoras judgment is, the King does import, nor mean
nothing else, but bondage, slavery, and hardness of life. Such then as shall
consider of these circumstances, may easily call to mind this last
interpretation: (and Tacitus being as well of this opinion as my self, and
Sappho and Hesiodus, agreeing with us in the same) to be very necessary, and
not much varying from the purpose at all: which if it be so, it then
consequently follows, that not any one that is in his right senses, ought to
seek to marry: because it is the natural property of all that live, to
desire and procure their own good: and contrariwise, to detest and abandon,
that that is ill for themselves, as this should be for any man, that should
venture to enter into this troublesome state of life.

Lastly, Philemon the comicall Poet, used to say that he did not much marvel
at him, that had once ventured himself upon the seas, but he did exceedingly
wonder at him, that coming safe to land, returned again thither: nor so
likewise at him that was once married, but at such a one as had more then once
tried that fortune: it seeming unto him, that as it was an ordinary and light
matter to commit an error for want of experience, so likewise was it more then
incredible beastliness, that any should be so sottish as to thrust himself
afresh into a giddie maze of infortunes and miseries: having experimented the
same, not a little unto his cost most bitterly before.

Yet that learned man alleged not the same reason why he wondered at second
marriages, of whom Pontanus speaks, who being demanded of Caron why he
married not again, seeing he had so good fortune in his first choice:
answered, because he well knew, that what was rashly begun, sildome or never
happened twice well done: secretly inferring hereby, that to take a wife was
the Act of a hairbraine, wild, and rash fellow. Which Act we will not allow
our selves: meaning not to accost, no not as much as to the first Bridale, to
avoid and shun all such proceedings as are not seconded and borne out through
the privilege and authority of Virtue her self.

But let us now leave all these antiquities aside, although proceeding from the
most learned and wisest men, and come to sound reasons, and right Philosophy:
for by the same, consisting chiefly of two points, will Iorderly prove, that we
ought not in any wise to marry. First, for the base indignity and corrupt
wickedness of women's nature: and secondly, because so many mischiefs happen unto
their husbands, through their overmuch selfe-wild folly, and too too peevish
frowardness.

Beginning then thus: I say that all such Creatures as are mortal, do
participate and take of their sex or kind, not only in what is Individual,
as well of good or evil (whereupon such being the humane nature, it suffers
likewise these qualities) but it is a most clear case, that Man, being the Act
and Form, as (indeed he is) does follow, and take what is good: and so by this
reason, the woman is made of that part that is worst. Now if the nature of
good, is to avoid (as much as lies in his power) from what is badde, surely
then ought Man to renounce and abjure Wiuing and Marriage: and not affect the
same in any wise.

Uile and abject (and not alone and simply understood) are all such things,
that have not in themselves, their own proper ends. But such a one is Woman,
who was created for Man, as witnesses Saint Paul, and therefore imperfect and
vile: as being not framed for any other respect or use, then for a Receptacle
of some of our Excrementall humors: standing us in the same steed, as the
Bladder, the Gaull, and such other uncleanly members of our body does unto us,
and no otherwise. From whence then I marvel, can any pleasure or delight spring
rightly from her?

Auicen writes (disputing of these questions, whose authority is allowed as
authentical, by S. Thomas Aquinas) that if you consider some one thing, you
shall find that the same has not within it self, his substance or essence,
the truth, nor the necessity: but if it receive the same outwardly, and by
other means, you shall perceive the Opposites of th^se, to be proper unto it:
in such wise, as it will fall to take the name of Non Ens: of that that has no
being: of False, and Impossible: as the term of Dark or Obscure, is
attributed unto the the Air, by reason of the borrowing and help, which it
takes of Light: showing by that means clear and bright.

Now this being granted, I apply it thus: The Woman that has no being, but
only what is given unto her (as it were of Alms) from the ribbe of Man, shall
without doubt fall under this infamous consideration of such a Non Ens: being
Nothing, or a thing without substance. But will you have worse, or rather shall
I speak more truly? Why the^ thus. What thing soever is borne by chance,
besides the intent and meaning of Nature, is a foul fault, a wicked vice, or a
hateful monster, the same not consenting unto ought but to that which is best,
and more perfect in their kind, which is Man.

But then by this Argument, a woman (that as Aristotle, Prince of the
Peripatetickes, affirms) is so borne, must needs be a Creature, imperfect,
corrupt, and defiled. Let us not then bathe our selves in such foul puddles.

After the same manner is Woman borne, through the defect of the Virtue
Operative, or the working power of Nature, as Monsters are brought forth
through defect, or through superabundance of matter, then is she borne Per
Accidens: but these Accidental things, are by the Philosopher compared a little
before unto the aforesaid things that have no being. And that this Ens may be
changed from good to bad, and from badde to good, Aristotle teaches Eudemius
the same: And so by this rule, a Woman, and Badde, shall be (after a sort)
Synonimas, and by this means, the one should import and be of as much force as
the other. Every Woman would willingly be a Man, as every deformed wretch, a
goodly and fair creature: and every Idiot and Fool, learned and wise: but
all natural instincts and motions, move and bend from imperfect, to what is
perfect: and from what is lame and wants, to that which is full and
oueraboundeth: so the^ by this rule, the same woman is convicted of
imperfection and defect: she is lothed of y^ man that has known her before
carnally: whereas she on the contrary, loves the place where the fact was
first done, as well as the man: this being a most manifest proof of a great
loss unto him, and a sign of a kind of gain or dignity unto her. Then an
unworthy and contemptible thing is a woman. She is the particular influence of
the Moon, as appears by the constitution and complexion of her body,
conformable unto the same: and by the fullness and emptiness of both of them
all at one time. But from the Moon proceeds nothing but bad qualities, as
our natural Philosophers well know: neither from a woman comes any thing y^
is good. They are as I should have told you before, of quality and complexion,
cold and moist: the one appears by the softnes of their flesh, and by the
bigness and fullness of their breasts, strutting out like cowes vdders: and the
other is manifest through y^ thickness of their hair, and the smalnesse of
their growth, and especially by y^ rawnesse of their blood which issues
oftentimes from them: and who are of such complexion (besides that for the most
part, it breeds thick fleame, driueling spettle, and smoking vapors coming
from the stomach) are continually trobled with dropping Distillations, with
rewmaticke Catars, with the solemn pain of the headache, with gowtie swellings,
with scuruy scabs, with loathsome pushes, with mattry blains, with filthy
ructing in the stomach, with the falling sickness, with the gnawing grief of
the entrails, with the cruel colic, with the woeful Iliack passion, and such
like sweet diseases: which as Aristotle in his 9. book de Animalibus, says,
do force and infect y^ spirit to be sleepie and heavy: sluggish and slow:
^lothfull and dull: unmindful and forgetful: simple and sottish: cold and
chilly: unpleasing and unsavory: fearful and timorous: astonished and amazed:
malicious and enutous: irksom and loathsome: carping and biting: fond and vain:
curious and precise: insatiable, and unsatisfied: jealous and suspicious:
miserable and covetous: froward and pettish: ignorant and assish: proud and
insolent: bold and impudent: a great liar, and a smooth dissembler: she being
not able to resist, but must needs alter the inclination and disposition of the
body (according to the opinion of Plato, Xenocrates, Aristotle, and of all
Phisi^ians) by reason of the sympathy and affinity that is betwixt her and
the same.

By the Conversation, Use, and touching, the Nature of things often times are so
strangely altered, as they receive new habits, nouel customs, and foreign
qualities, quite repugnant to that which is their own. The salt turns that
into his nature, wherewith he is covered. One of the Graihounds of Lycurgus,
loathing to follow the Hare, leapeth into the porredge pot.

And Origin affirms, that the Hunter draws unto himself the nature of
brute beasts, instead of better game. And Platoes conceit is, that to reaccount
and tell of fearful and horrible matters, makes some kind of men shrewdly
afraid: and to set out a wanton and lascivious love History, makes some
others become very wanton and effeminate. But he that takes a wife, lives
inseparably with a woman, and is with her so strictly united, as it is
impossible to be more. Then how shall such a poor soul do with himself, to
be free from envy, from fear, from frowardness? and how can he escape from
committing a thousand worse faults then these be?

And to be brief, how may we more apparently perceive and know this
insufficiency and unhappiness of this unlucky Sex of women, then in this
only, that God has not vouchsafed to have made and formed woman after his
own Image and likeness, as he has done Man: either absolutely understood as
it pleases Theodoretus, Senerianus, and Gagneus, to interpret the same,
because of the authority, pre-eminence and rule, which he has and holds in
this world, above all other living Creatures: as we read in Genesis, and in
Paul to the Ephesians: or respectively meant, according as Thomas Aquinas notes
upon the Corinthians, (enlarging so much more this liberty and authority
spoken of before) affirming, that even in the very souls and minds of us
men, Nature has infused much more vigor and force, then in the unprofitable
kind of women.

But let us come unto our Argument. The contrariety of effects, as well
natural, as such as are understood by Election, show to be contrary in their
beginnings, and allege (in their Authors) causes for the same: as Aristotle
in his Topickes, in his Politickes, and in his book entitled de Celo, sets
down the same to be so. Now Paul commands, that in the time of prayer and
preaching, Man should stand with his head bare, and that women should keep
their vailes still over them: and not alone in Churches, but as well in all
other public assemblies and congregations: alleging no other reason for
such difference distinguished between them, then because that men are the
Images and glory of God: which if it be so, then say I, impossible it is that
woman should be the same, seeing she is forbid to vnshadowe and vnbare her
head. And if there be any that by some other kind of interpretation of this
divine Image, shall go about to prove woman to be worthy of some part of the
same, I assure you for certainty, that very hardly or never can they bring it
to pass, to come so near to be counted the very Image of God, (to use
Bonauenters own proper terms) as we have done, as well because of the
probable distinction of the foresaid Doctor Angelicus, alleged before, as
also in respect of that which we shall hereafter hear of that worthy
Alia^us, a man of great fame. Neither does this repugne any thing that we have
said, because that in the creation of the first man, it is said that God made
both man and woman: taking their Arguments from thence, that therefore there
cannot happen between them Anterioritie of times, nor principallities or
degrees in their ends (as the Schoolmen term it): and less does it hurt
us, that it is set down in the second of Genesis, that before the Creation of
the Woman, God himself said (having respect unto the increase of the world)
Let us make Man a Helper like unto himself.

As if from those words we might infer, that they being both of one and
self same quality, should therefore be (both) either like good or bad.

As concerning the first Objection, I answer with Augustine, in his sixth Book,
entreating of such a matter, that Moses in that place speaks of Women
Potentially, or rather Causually, or Seminally, (for such is his own phrase)
and not Actually, as he does when he treats of Man.

Which thing well appears by the incompatibilitie (as I may say) of the words
that were spoken, by which the ancient figure of Plato might be renewed and
allowed again. This sovereign Historiographer, Lawgiuer and Captain of God,
meaning by this word WOMAN, that from her the Virtue Productiue was included
within Man himself, as by the effects following, we are satisfied more at
large.

As for the second, we denying the Consequence, I will show the reason why I
do so: affirming, that amongst likeness of things, there is no necessity
that the similitude should hold in every point, but rather that it changes
and turns for the most part amongst those of diverse kinds, according unto
some conformity or proportion of the same: as if we should say, that science
changing, to that that is to be known, were like unto the sense, with that
that is sensible: or rather the eye being in the body of Man, resembled the
mind within the inward soul.

Aristotle in his Topickes, sets us down such Presidents, and such.
Likewise does Hilarious in his Treaties, where he discourses of Sinodes, and
Epiphanius, where he disputes against the Democriti.

Augustine shows the same with examples, of Eggs, of Stares and Hens: with
Wheat and Branne. And Sistus the Sanesi, with the Olive, and the wild Hollie
Tree.

Chrysostom alleges in proof of this, the resembling variety of beasts,
comparing them unto Man, sinning diversely, We see also the like by the Names
that are attributed unto God in the sacred scriptures, one while giving him the
title of a Lion, another while of a Lamb, and an other while of an insencible
Creature.

And to be short, Saint Aquinas defines the same in the first Chapter of his
first ^omb, by the relation of Equalities, not always embracing the ends. So
that, I confessing (as I have done before, and now still do) the Community of
the Woman with Man, in her formal and specificall being: and so per
Consequence, in the Edentitie of the end: I say and affirm again, that by so
much she comes behind him, by how much as she is imperfect.

And know, that whosoever for all this will most insolently and over saucily,
uphold this second point, besides that, he shall fall into the error of the
Audiani, (who were of opinion that God had a body fleshly and mortal as we
have, by reason of the likeness of his own shape which he had participated
unto us) he shall likewise be forced to confess by the same Text, that there
was no distinction of the Sex, between Man and Woman: for otherwise, Moses
and Christ, should iumpe and agree in Nature and fullness of Grace: seeing it
is read in Deuteronomy, that Christ (as then) should come and descend from
Moses, for so Moses himself did affirm.

Amongst all Creatures then, as well Intellectual, as Material and mixed, Man,
only possesses (I say Man by himself, distinguished from Woman) certain
Excellencies and Honors, which alone raise him to that height of greatness as
you have heard before: which most willingly I would here set forth, if it
were fit time and place so to do, as indeed (now) it is not. Yet is it a very
good place, and fit time to wonder and admire at the ordinary presumption and
audatious boldness of these unworthy women, who too too malepert and
insolent, dare with their Brazen and bold faces, venture to call themselves
men's Companions: as also to bewail and lament the common ignorance and
blockish simplicity of us men in this point, that without having any orderly
respect at all unto our own worthiness and worth, we do still so seruily
and abiectly abase ourselves, as to yield unto these devouring and painted
sepulchers, daining to strike sail so low, as to stoop to our ^lauish
inferiors: when not only (besides what is before repeated) God himself in
Genesis, most manifestly places them under us: as likewise does Saint Peter,
in his first Chapter. So does Saint Paul to the Colossians charge them, to
the Corinthians wills them, and to the Ephesians, commands them to be
obedient and to submit themselves unto us.

And the self same Apostle writing unto the two last mentioned Cities,
adds: that woman was created for Man, and not Man for Woman, and that Man is
the Head of the Woman, as our Savior Jesus Christ is chief over the Church:
shall we then be head over some of the members, as over the hands, over the
feet, and over the rest? and shall the same goutie foot be so saucy, or so
selfeconceited, as to persuade it self that she is as good as the head?
Because then the wife becomes as a mixed substance with him whom she weddeth,
(every one of them as a new Salmare, with her Hermites, renewing daily
Hermophradites) shall therefore, that which is taken (which is the Woman, come
to be equal with that which takes, which is the Husband? Forsooth no.

And so in like manner, shall not the body be of less account, and less noble
then the soul, although as soon as she inuesteth and incorporateth her self in
the same, they both live and love so entierly together, never parting at all
one from the other (as the wife does oftentimes from the good man) but live
united together until death them depart? I think it shall be so, and that great
difference is betwixt them.

Then (worthy Gentlemen) let us rowse our selves out of this drowsy sleep,
shaking these base conceits of subjection from out our minds, and let him that
is a Man, show himself by this absolute power he has, to be such a one
indeed, nor let him henceforward part stakes, with that which God wills he
should keep wholly unto himself: I mean this honor and glory due unto him,
bestowing it upon these women so far unfit and unmeet for the same: for who
shall so do, not only shows himself unworthy of so great a gift, but also
not a little offends the Almighty one, who is the giver of the same. And let
her that is a woman, suppress and keep down her shameless pride, and
ouerbold rashness, and not with aspiring Lucipher, presume to arrogate that
place unto her, to which she is not called: otherwise, she is like to receive
like grievous punishment as he did, allotted unto her for the same foul
offense. Neither must she repine nor grudge, if she have not so high a place as
man has, since the Angels themselves want the same, and yet are they content
with their state in which they live, they knowing that it is in the hands of
the Potter to make vessels, unto what use he pleases. Therefore let her be
satisfied, and think she is well used, to be placed in the second degree, I
mean between man and unreasonable creatures, which is (of right) her roomth,
taking the name, either of a child new conceived, as is the opinion of
Hippocrates, or else of one less, of a Demie man, after the advice of
Auerroies. Neither let them think, this strange, or that they be hardly
handled herein, when as Plato writes after much consideration and study had
about them, affirming in the end, he could not find between them and the
brutish beasts, any apparent distinction at all.

But (perhaps) some will think I roue too much at large, therefore I will
(now) come unto my other promise, one of the chief pillars and grounds of
mine argument, which was of such euilles, as women, either by their own
selves, or by reason of such children as they bring unto those too too
careless and unwary husbands, who too unluckily chance upon them: which last
point I will not handle as I did the other Allegorily, auouching authorities
and arguments for to prove the same: but as it were reporting a tale or
History, I will show what happens daily by experience, and what is put in
practice not a little every hour, to the no small woonoring and amazement of
you all.

For what woman is she that marries, but before her husband can come to take
the Assay of her sower sweetness, has not wearied and tired him with her
cheating and cunniketching so many toys and bables, to furnish themselves
withal, as we see now adays in every one of their kind (in a manner) to
wear about them, they making their bodies to show like a Pedlers shop of new
fangled devices: this being a most manifest sign, and an infallible token of
their ordinary lightness and wantonness of mind? what new spouse is she,
that scarce has bin two days in her husbands house, but will straight (as if
she were a Princess) make new laws and orders; that wilnot find fault with his
estate and living; that will not curse her father in law, and rail on her
husbands mother; that will not set her husband and his brethren together by the
ears; that will not wrangle with his kindred; go to cufs with her maids, and
abuse her men with terms, scarce fit for villains: and lastly, is so lofty
and proud, that every thing stincketh in her nose? What is she, but that at her
first coming, with her ribald inventions, and false and forged suggestions,
does not deprive her husband of his oldest and dearest friends, they being the
best part of his own self, making him to hate and detest such as do most
dearly love, honor and account of him? What is she, but that within a while
after she is married (as if it were her bounden duty to make spoil and
havoc, and not conserve and be a good huswife for her husbands profit) never
leaves to tire and weary him and to fall out with him, one while for one
foolish thing, and an other while for an other? What is she that does not
choke him with one bitter pill or an other, continually casting in his teeth,
either the nobleness of her birth, or else the infiniteness of her wealth
which she brought unto him? What is she, but does in small time poison him, if
either he be suspicious of her, or she frantic and mad with jealousy for
him? and to conclude, what husband is he, but as one grown desperate through
his Wives bad usage toward him, had rather die a thousand deaths then to live
with her, seeing that she takes all he does, quite contrary unto his good
meaning: never making account of any kindness he bestows upon her, but in
lieu thereof, gives him every minute of an hour sharp tauntes, overthwart
aunsweres, froward repinings, bitter complaints, and most impudent lies, still
to disgrace him?

If thou commit the charge and government of thy house unto her, she greeueth
and cries out that she is overmuch troubled, groaning as it were, to have so
heavy a burden thrown upon her: if thou do not commit the managing
thereof unto her, she exclaimeth that thou dare not trust her: if thou
ridest about thy business abroad into the Countries, she then says, it is
an excuse and devise, only to shun and fly from her company: and if thou
stay not still spending thy time idly by her, as no wise man will or ought,
except he be out of his wits: why then thou have quite forgotten and
abandoned her for ever: if thou keep within doors, she imagines thou do
it to watch her as a spy: and if thou go abroad, she will think thou can
not abide her: if thou be troubled with any thing in thy mind, she
affirms, that it is nothing but malice thou bear unto her: If thou eatest
not, she suspects nothing she does can content thee.

Sleep thou soundly, she then thinks thou art wearied with having taken thy
pleasure somewhere else. But if thou sleep not, then it is because thy mind
runs upon such a wench or an other: salute by chance as shou walk, any
young Gentlewoman thy neighbor, or acquaintance, straight thou art naught with
her: and praise but the behavior of beauty of such a one or her like, she
will tell thee thou art in love sirreuerence with her. Stay out more then thy
wonted hour about some earnest matter, she persuades her self, that then
thou art a wenching. If thou fallest sick, then she banneth and curses,
swearing that she is brought into an Hospital; and let her fall sick indeed,
or be but sick of the sullens, then must thou in despite of thy teeth, be ill
too for company: so much must thou turmoile and take pains about her. If she
greeueth, thou must grieve too; and if she put finger in the eye, thou must
weep too for good fellowship; otherwise she roreth out like Bull of a Basan,
that she sees very well thou do hate her, that thou can not abide to stay
by her, and that thou think long till she kick up her heels, and make a
die. And to conclude, she will neither say nor do any thing but all by
contraries, such and so vile is their perverse and Diabolical nature.

Now if to these grievous and insupportable behauiours, we shall add the
heavy crosses of their continual alarums of discontentments and brawles; why
then these be ordinarily the crosses of these miserable men: and these iangling
peales do they ring continually unto them.

Well (says Dame Parnell) yet happy is such a Gentlewoman, for she has a
husband that makes much of her indeed: O what a fine gown she had upon her
this morning, the very lace and fringe about it, is worth more then any three
of the best that ever I yet wore, since I was first borne: And what rich jewels
and great orient pearl had she about her neck? but her Kings, her Girdle,
her Purse, her rich Furs, so sweetly perfumed, they past, and were the
richest of all that ever I saw. Well may she show her self amongst the
proudest, and walk where she pleases, not a little unto her credit: but I
poor soul, cannot with mine honor look out of doors, nor suffer any to come
and visit me, so much am I fallen out of reparations, for want of good
apparel. Besides, happy is my Lady such a one, for she is used with all
respect and compliments, of Courtly ceremonies, befitting a right wife, where I
am scarce made account of as they do a common servant, for she may go abroad
here and there as best likes her, without needing either to give account where
she has bin, or asking any leave to take her pleasure: whilst I all the day
long sit wearing out my fingers ends with sowing and working, as if I were a
little gyrle set to my task, or else like a base skullion, must attend on my
kitchinstuffe and cookerie in the Kitchen, and scarce can I go to Church to
serve God, but that at my return, I am so baited at, that a dog would never
endure such a life as I do. But what want all the rest of my neighbors and
kindred? Marry nothing at all, they can but ask and have: but demand and
straight it is brought unto them. For have not they all their houses furnished
with all such stuff as is requisite for the same? have they not Gentlemen to
attend upon them, waiting women to follow them? have they not their Coches, to
take the air when they list? and may they not, if they so like, go for their
recreation unto their gardens of pleasure, and banqueting houses in the Summer
time? yes, yes, they have but what they will. But I (I think I am accursed)
what have I? what want I? who attends on me? and what followers have I? where
are my servants? nay rather unto whom am not I a servant? Well well I say no
more, I see there is not any woman in all our City worse used then I am, so I
am, and yet I know no reason why I should be thus dealt withal: for though I
say it my self that should not say so, I am as young as they are, as well
favored as they, as well borne and as rich: nay then I will say more then I
ever thought to have done: They have many faults that I have not, and want
those good qualities that I enjoy: I by Gods body do they want them, that they
do.

And having so said, and wringing out two or three little little tinie tears
(and those God he knows with much ado) they begin a fresh skir^ish as their
fashion is, and proceed with their second peale of railing in this sort.

But it is no matter; for I must needs say, I have rightly deserved to be used
thus, and worse too if it were possible; seeing I have played the fool so
grosely as I have done, who might have married with such a Noble man, and with
such a County, and such a Cauellier would very feign have had me, if I had
been willing, all these three being the brauest and gallantest Gentlemen of all
our City: and yet like a beast as I was (I think I was bewitched, that I was)
I would have none of them, only because I would match with him that knows
not how to use such a one as I am according unto my estate and worthiness.

And thus talking idly and going from one vain and tedious discourse unto an
other, she concludes at the last, that thou art not scarce worthy to wipe
her shoes, and that the very dust and filth that comes out of her fathers
house, is more worth then all thy revenues, and all the money thou spendest
for housekeeping in thy house.

But now (most gracious Auditors) what is he that would be so much an enemy
unto his own self, as to go about to labor and to purchase that thing which
is naught, vicious, monstrous, imperfect, corrupt, uncertain, vile, wicked,
filthy, inconsiderate, diseased, malicious, envious, and good for nothing? and
who is he that loves himself so ill, but will shun, fly and abhor these
froward and waspish s^^s, these yrkesome troubles, these choking pears, these
desperate poysonings, these backbitings and railings, and these discontentments
and loathsome fashions, these repinings, grunting and grumblings, these plagues
and crosses, these catterwawling outcries, these odd shifts, devises, and
villainies, these disgraces and base injuries, these scornful disdaines,
these continual casting of him in the teeth most spitefully, with 1598. such
pestilent tricks more? Surely I think not any but such as be stark staring
mad.

But let us search this infectious botch and corrupt ulcer, more deeper, and
letting pass these aforesaid grievous afflictions (as they are most grievous
indeed) there is no doubt but we shall find, that he that is married, is
inflicted with far worse plagues then these are: because that the Husband must
be either rich or poor, if he be poor, he is then so melancholy and so much
discontented, as he can never have comfort, nor be merry with her: if he be
rich and well to live, she then grows so insolent and high minded, as she
makes no more account of him then of an ordinary man.

Next, she must be either fair and well favored, or else foul and deformed:
if she be this last, first thou art tormented with her loathsomenesse every
time thou look upon her; and then commonly such ugly bugges as she is, are
by nature in love with every one they see: amongst which, she always finds
some one licorish fellow or other, that will take pains to hunt in thine own
park, leaving the horns of the dear for a remembrance to be thy fees, for
thy gentle good will and kindness: but if she be fair, she then grows to be
vain, caprichious, and fantastical, and will not stick to give ^ut that she
is liked, and sought for by every gallant: and she that is a mark at which
every one shoots, listen too one, but one man or another will hit the same:
for if long courting, if dutiful service, or double viligent attendance cannot
obtain her, yet perhaps, propernes of personage will do i^: and if that cannot
preu^^e, out of doubt, either money, fine qualities, valor of arms; sweet
whispering prayers, inchauntments, subtle devises, or willing forcements, will
win her at the last: all which are means, by which diverse men diversely study
to bring their purpose unto their long desired end.

But say that amongst some hundred thousands, there is by great chance some
one, who rather through defect of nature, then for any respect of virtue,
preserves with much ado her honor, chaste and untainted, yet for all this,
shall thou have much adoo with her, and perhaps more then with the other: for
such as these are, presupposing, they not only do that which is their duties,
but rather much more then they ought, and that they work as it were miracles,
will (forsoothe) have us to be wonderfully beholding unto them for the same,
looking that we should sacrifice unto them with all dutious devotion, and that
as new Goddesses, we should extol, praise, admire, and adore them.

And truly I must needs say, that if there be any such that live thus
chastely, she is to be held as a wonder, seeing her nature coueteth rather to
be still in the midst of the Bordellos and brothel-houses, and there being,
to spend her time night and day with one infamous or incestious beastly
villain or other. And not to talk of this age in which we now live in, let
but the old world speak in this matter of Pasiphae Queen, I would say Queen
of Candie: of Simiramis, Queen of Soria: of Messalina, wife to Claudius Caesar
the Emperor: of Faustina, daughter to an Emperor, and wife unto a Philosopher,
and Emperor of Maria, married to Gueius Pompey: of Metella, spouse unto Lucius
that Noble Roman of Olimpia, mother to Alexander the great: and of Cleopatra
Queen of Aegipt, with infinites of such other Bridewell stuff: all which,
because they found themselves in that place of estate and dignity, as they
thought they were not subject neither unto the danger of death, neither unto
any regard of their honors, followed so much the brutish appetite of their
inordinate and insatiable lust, as some of them, not being content with
mankind, would needs put in practice to enjoy the detested company of most
loathsome, deformed, and four footed beasts.

Again, say the chance to be ignorant, sottish, or crafty and learned, if the
first, why then she will go gossipping up and down, revealing and bewraying,
not only what has happened in private betwixt thy self and her, but any
thing else whatsoever besides thou have done in any other company: amongst
which, it is impossible but that in process of time, some such things may
chance to have fallen out, as had been far better in respect of the reputation
and honor of you both, to have been still concealed, then made manifest abroad
unto the whole world. And if thou happen on the other, thou art in as bad a
taking: for she counts thee but a cocks comb, thou being compared unto her
self: Thou art a good simple fool, and no better with her: she will teach
thee how to behave thy self as if thou were a fool: and how to speak, as if
thou were an Ass: and in the end thou shall grow to be a common laughing
stock for every body: for she will never obey thee, nor stand in any awe of
thee, nor any way do thee any honor or duty.

So likewise, either her own mother is living, or not, and if thine be dead,
then shall thou find thy self to be in a shrewde peck of troubles: for then
have thou no body to teach her how to govern thy house and family, to learn
her how to converse amongst her equals: Thou have none fit to accompany her,
nor any with whom thou may trust her in thy absence, or when she shall be
abroad. But if she have a mother, and thou none, then is it far worse for
thee, for she will always be haunting thee, like unto a Ghoast, pearing and
prying into thy dealings like a subtle spy: and never will she give over
yalping and bawling, finding one fault or another still with thee, saying: My
daughter prospers not, I know not what the reason is of the same, but she
looks every day worse and worse: I think I promise you, she takes thought,
and that it is because you do not love her as you should and ought to do: you
are too blame (son) I tell you plainly that you are: and therefore I will have
her home unto mine own house, to see if I can cheer her better: for here you
cause her to foil too much, and make her over labor her self, she has not
been used unto this hard kind of life, that she has not: you must let her go
abroad when she pleases to take the fresh air, you must make much of her,
and see that she want nothing, for I know her nature well enough by mine
own, she is as good and as loving a Child as ever Woman bare, a fair word
gets any thing at her hands, but if you use her a little vn^indly, it is a
hundred unto one, that you kill her: and therefore it is great shame for you,
that you make not more account of her then you do.

Neither as this enough, nor has she then done, but she turns toward her
daughter, to whom in steed of remembering and putting her in mind of the
duty which every married wife owes unto her husband ^ she will persuade
her, and make her believe that she ought to be half master with her husband:
and therefore if she her wife, she will seek to please and to content her
own self, and not thee: and that such are held and reputed but for Cocknies
and foolish Women, that suffer themselves to be ruled by their mad headed
husbands, telling her (that if he bid thee do one thing) do thou (my G^rle)
another: If he says I, do thou say no: If he bid thee go to such a place, go
thou to another place: If he will thee to wear such a fashioned garment,
wear thou a quite contrary one to his bidding: If he command thee to stay at
such a time at home, be sure at that hour to go abroad, and so cross him
still: If he be angry, fall thou a chiding: If he exclaim, cry thou out
straight: If he curses, do thou blaspheme: And to be brief, yield not an
inche unto him: once get the masterie of him, and I warrant thee (my Wench) it
is thine own for ever after.

For I my self have found the experience, and see the same daily in other
Women, that to hold their tongues, and to suffer and bear what their
hairebraine Husbands say and do, is the only cause that makes them to be used
so badly, and villainously by them: whereas contrariwise, I find that there is
none of us live so merrily and more at hearts ease, then such as stand stoutly
to their tacklings, resist as careless, and make least account of their
husbands. And this is the godly lessons she learneth unto her pretty and
towardly daughter.

Now if grave mothers themselves give such ghoastly counsel unto their
forward Children, what shall we think of these Launderers, of these common
Gossips, of these counterfayt puritan Dames, and such like homely stuff as
use to haunt unto every house, and by that means cunningly insinuate and
creep into the favor of our wives and mistresses?

Let any man but consider within himself thoroughly of the matter, and he
shall quickly find into what danger he brings himself, that gives leave
and liberty unto such light huswiues, to have egresse and regresse into his
house, suffering them to have daily access thither.

But, do but once restrain these filthy Baggages from thy door, and forbid
them any more free entrance into the same, (Lord) how thy Wife will then take
on, she will swell like a Toade, swear like a Cutpursse, and brave thee to thy
face like a Smythfield Russian: affirming she is utterly disgraced and
discredited, disparaged, and scandalized: and she will take the matter so
hotely, and so highly in the nose, as for a while she will neither speak nor
answer unto thee, as if she were grown dumb and deaf on the sudden.

Besides, as I said before of thee, so say I of thy Wife, that she must be
either rich or poor, both which are passing badde: for if she be a Beggar,
and thou not very rich, then must you both smart for the same: rubbing out in
the World most miserably, and wonderful hardly: And if she be rich, and
thou poor, she will then make thee stark deaf, with her continual din and
noise, making an open proclamation like a common Crier, that she has made
Jack a Gentleman, and has drawn Dunne out of the mire: that she has brought
thee out of thy lousy rags, into courtly silks* and that thou had died
like a beggar under a stall, had it not been for her full bags.

Again, she will be either prodigal, or covetous (for their Nature knows no
golden mean): and if she be miserable, thy whole family smarteth for it: and
they wanting, thou can not any way have any thing in good order: besides,
thou shall be continually disquieted, being forced to call for every small
triflle thou lackest. And if she be pordigall, she will squander and vainly cast
away in one day, more good provision, then would serve thy house a whole year:
flattering every one of thy servants, at thy Table and elsewhere, only to win
them to be her creatures, and to be at her command: and every stranger that
comes to eat with thee, will she use as kindly in this sort, giving to this
huswife bread, to that gossop wine: and to that she Pandresse, corn: to this
man shirts, to that man bands and ruffes: and to an other, handkerchers or
purses, or such like joys as these.

In like sort, her humor must be either too too merry and over impudent and
bold, or else too too squeamish coyish, and disdainful. If it be of the first
sort, it will make thee suspect all will not go well. And the other (out of all
doubt) will do what shall be ill indeed: either she will have gossipping in
thine own house, unto thy great disgrace or hinderance, or else she will go a
gadding where feasts and Velias be used abroad: and if the one does dislike
thee, I know thou can not be but disconted with the other. For among diverse
other things, which every wise man notes as a prognostication or token of the
behavior of a lascivious and light huswife, he counts the often running
abroad, and the resorting from one house unto another, not to be the least,
which mark is so certain and infallible, as Saint Paul says, he makes no
doubt to set the same down as an effect that follows all such loose widows
as have violated and broken their faith, vowed unto the contrary not long
before.

Moreover, thy wife must either hate thee or love thee, imagine which of these
thou will, for as the one will soon kill thee, so the other will as quickly be
reaue thee of thy life Phaedra loving, caused Hippolitus to die. And
Clytemnestra hating, wrought the destruction of Agamemnon her Husband.

She, must be either a Widow or a Maid, the elder of which, will have the
customs and the fashions of her first husband to stand (as it were for a law)
unto him whom she new marries: and the younger knows not how to carry her
self any way in good order, and so oftentimes through this defect, she shameth
her self, her friends, and her husband.

To be brief, they will be either barren or fruitful: and hap, what hap can
of these twain, nothing can happen but ill unto thee: seeing that if she be a
barren Do (leaving apart to set down that that happens for the most part,
by reason of their unwholesome complexions, always subject to one loathsome
disease or another) thou art deprived of that conclusion thou did hope for,
of the help thou did assure thy self of, and of the stay thou did
believe thou had provided and prepared to be a relief unto thy weak and
drouping old age: besides that, to thy unspeakable grief, thou see a
strange heir to enjoy thine own goods: yea and sometimes thy mortal enemy to
succeed thee, whilst thou beholdest most plainly and as it were in a Glass,
the very low waine, and utter downfall of thy whole lineage and stock: thine
own name and thine ancient House, with the memory and remembrance of all thy
Predecessors and thy last self, to be extirped and extinguished in thine own
death for ever. But say thou have children, then is there no plague, hell, nor
Purgatory, that is comparable, either in quality or quantity, like unto
thine. For all such troubles, griefs, passions, bitterness, and sour
incombrances which we have heretofore showed, that Man can be plagued withal,
by reason of want of issue, are but pastimes, sportes, pleasures and delights,
in respect of this: because that one proceeds from an intrinsicall, a
strange, and only one cause, or occasion, but this is derived and comes from
many: for many children may we have by our own selves, which are our own
flesh and blood, and the very Quintisence of our substantial love (as I may
say) toward them.

And to come to the purpose (letting pass that whilst they lie as Infants in
their Cradles, or as little Children run up and down the streets, continual
conceits come into our heads, and daily fears of some notable mischaunce or
other that may happen unto them, either that the Nurse is careless of them,
and so they come to a mischief, or else by reason of their exceeding charges
in the bringing of them up, the troublesome noise they still keep, crying and
bawling day and night) no sooner are they commen to years of discretion, but
if they be Maids, (and thou a right careful father for them) thou never
come home again without suspicion or fear, that one or other, either will
steal secretly in unto them, or has already scraped and gotten some too too
familiar acquaintance with them, thou being not ignorant how easily such
Natures as theirs be, are soon entreated, and how with fair words, they are
brought a bed oftentimes in fools paradise: their heels being so short, as
they catch such shrewde falls, as they can scarce be rid of the swelling
that comes of the same, in forty weeks after.

These be the guawing corsiues, that eat the very heart of a right careful
Father as I called thee even now: and I use this term unto thee, only to the
disgrace of some certain Fathers, dwelling here in our Country, who only are
but mere shadows of the same: being of so free and franche a mind, as they
cannot only brook that their Daughters should revel and pass their time
merrily all the live long day, walking and rouing abroad in the fields with
their loving servants and sweet hearts, and in the night go running up and
down like a company of wild Buckes, seeking good company at other neighbors
houses.

But they themselves, even in their own houses, give them leave and liberty
to dance indecent and shameful Daunces, and to have secret conference in
private and suspicious places with whom they list.

And as I may say of these Fathers, so are there as badde Mothers, who being
left widows by their dear husbands, and Stewardes of mountains of wealth,
for their own good, and to the advancement of their Children, not only spend
vainly and prodigally their own, but also that which is bequeathed unto their
poor Orphans, growing in their old years into such misery and want, as
they become little better then Palliardes unto their own Daughters, and so
utterly undo themselves and their Children too, being a most unconscionable
and unchristianlike part, and not to be suffered in a godly Commonwealth,
seeing Saint Paul himself testifies and pronounces, that person to be worse
then an Infidel, that takes not care to provide for his family and children.

But leaving such unnatural and barbarous mothers, to live in this miserable
estate as they most justly deserve, with their poor children, who being
utterly overthrown through such parents means, their innocence and forced
necessity to lead these shameful lives, crying out for revenge unto the
Protector of all such abused poor Creatures, I will come again unto the
former careful parents of whom I spoke before.

And put the case as I said but now, it be the good fortune of thy Daughters,
that thou can never take them tripping in any fault, by reason that other be
appointed to watch to see thee safe, and to see the coast be always clear:
yet shall thou never be free from some one grief or another, only if it were
but for fear of scandalous reports, of badde and malicious tongues, in whose
power it consists to make the world believe, that, that most chaste Queen of
Carthage, was but an arrant strumpet: and contrariwise, that that most impudent
and adulterous Penelope, was to be counted and held for a most rare example and
pattern of singular and exceeding chastity.

But now thy daughters being commen unto years of marriage, it greeues thee
that none dema^deth them for wives, and when they be demanded, thou art as
sorrowful, because perchance thou have not wherewithal to give them dowries.
But say they may be married, and that thou have money to give unto their
husbands with them, yet have thou brought them to be but slaves unto others,
which is no small corsie unto thee: for being married, they are no better then
servants unto them. Neither is that man's fortune better yt has sons only,
then he that has all daughters, but rather in my conceit worse, by reason that
men are more accounted of then women: and that a greater expectation is hoped
of them, then of the other: and being put abroad into the world, they therefore
are subject to more mischances the^ the other by ods. The farther they are off
from thee, the more they still do run in thy mind lest all should not be well
with them. If they take any journey, why thou then in thought do ride with
them for company, always fearing least some thief or other should rob or kill
them. If they be Merchants and use to traffic amongst strangers for
merchandise, thou still art with them, doubting either least they spend beyond
all gods forbid as they say, or else yt they may be ouerreached in making of
their bargains. If they venture on the seas, thou likewise hoysest up the
sails of the winds of thy thoughts, lest their ship by tempest should run
upon some rock, least Pirates should seize on them, or least they should be
drowned in the bottomless gulf. If they live ciuelly, as scholars in the
University, yet art thou careful for them: the hard life they lead there,
the sitting up late at their books, and the overmuch studying to distemper
their brains, thou think will too much trouble them. Again, thou doubtest
they have none to attend on them whilst they are in health: being sick, that
they shall be forsaken of every one: that they have no acquaintance but such
as hates them, nor any friend to defend, advise, and to counsel them for the
best. If they be Martialistes, and follow the wars, the danger they are in to
be slain abroad, takes away thine own life from thee at home. If they live
with thee idly in thine own house, then shall thou never be quiet, never
shall sleep enter thine eyes, neither shall thy meat at any time do thee
good. For one while thou art pensive to see how they run to Lauernes and
Ordinaries, playing away their money and their thrift together: and an other
while thou art perplexed, when thou hear of some villainie or outrage which
they have offered unto one man or other: now they seek to raise scandals and
slanderous reports of some honest family, whereby they are brought into
trouble: and then again, they fall into the profunditie of the french disease,
and that does most of all disease thee.

Besides, they will fall a quarrelling and making of fraies, and that will
afflict thee: and then shall thou hear they are committed to prison, or
wounded mortally, and that will sore gall thee: within a while after, thou
shall hear (may be) that they themselves are abused, discredited and
disgraced, and that stets and chafes thee: or for some heinous offense are
banished their country, and that killes thee. And to conclude, because they
fall sick and die, and then thou love them so dearly, as thou beginnest to
despair, running as it were out of thy right wits, whereby thou offendest both
God, thy self, and nature.

So as he that has children, there is not a hinderance, but he has it: not a
trouble, but he is tired withal: not a grief, but he is vexed withal, not a
burden, but he is suppressed withal, and not a torment but he is tormented
with the same.

There is no sorrow, but he is acquainted with it: no misfortune, but he is
afflicted with all: no danger, but he is drowned in it: no annoyance, but he
feels it: no fear, but he is scourged with it: no cross, but he bears it:
no corsie, but he tries it: no mischance, but moves him: no heart-brerking, but
burns him: no disaster, but distempers him: no passion, but pincheth him: no
anguish, but does oppress him: no misery, but does molest him: and to be
brief, no plague but does punish him.

And therefore I conclude with a certain anncient and grave wise man, that to
have no children, is a great good unknown, and perhaps the very greatest which
happens unto any man, whilst he lives.

So as if we should grant, that for some other causes we ought to marry, yet
for this one only occasion are they to be hated, and to be shunned of every
one of us, in seeing they are the causes of so many millions of evils, which
they bring forth into the world against, us by bringing forth such unfortunate
children unto us.

But say, that neither for those of their children, neither for the
discommodities and troubles, which both through the one and the other we bear
and suffer, we should not abhor and detest this subtle sex of deceitful
evil, yet ought we so to do, were it but only for that they deprive us of our
own sweet natural freedom and most pleasing liberty, which as the Lawyers
say (whose knowledge is not without the grounds of reason) we ought to prefere
before our proper lives, and so true and apparent is it, that they rob from
us the same, as it should be but labor lost to prove it by Picus Mirandula, he
affirming, that husbands no otherwise owe their bodies unto their wives, then
the soul does it self unto God: or by Saint Paul, affirming our Wives to be
mistresses over our bodies, and not we our selves. So that it were more
superfluous and vain to bring in our senses for proof of the same, when every
one that is so muffled and yoaked, feels after a certain manner, that his
hands are tied, and his feet bound: so as if a man's going be taken away, I
think he can stand but with little ease.

He that will not believe this, is as bad as a petty Heretic: if he but call
to mind the picture of matrimony it self as the most wise Egyptians drew
the same, one while painting it as man that had both his hands and his feet
manacled together, an other while representing it with such a plain fashioned
yoke as you tie horned Oxen with all: which doubtless is a most manifest
imprese or sign of bondage, slavery, and continual servile drudging.

Besides, is not that which we call Honor, the chief and principal of all
external good things? No doubt it is. Why then by all reason we ought to
conserve and preserve the same more then our own liberty and lives. Now he
that shall (except for the inward virtues of the mind) venture as it were upon
a Mumchaunce with a false pair of Dice, both the one and the other: is not he
worthy to be quoted for a fool? I know every one will say he is.

And shall it not then be worse then gross foolerie, and self wild madness
it self, for any man to commit the trust and custody of his honor unto a
woman, worse then a weak vessel of brittle Glass, who with every little
touch is so short heeld, as she presently falls and breaks? And so does he
whatsoever he be that enters into this intricate Maze of marriage, after the
custom, or rather to say more rightly, after the sottish ignorance of this
doting age, which has placed the Honor and the infamy of Man in the power of
the dishonestie, and black swanlike chastity of his wife, as if the virtue
and vice of others should prevail more, and be of more power in others, then
in our own selves.

Let us not then entertain these venomous serpents in our bosoms, for as long
as we keep what is our own within our own selves, we shall not be in danger
of loosing the same: the exceeding greatness of which evil, how mighty it
is, we may gather from hence, that the Almighty God himself places it in
Deuteronomie, amongst the cursings which he allotteth unto the transgressors
of his comaundements.

To conclude, if this which is now our disputation, that is, whether it be fit
to take a wife or no? was heretofore a question, which so much troubled the
Gentiles, that although (almost for what small cause soever, they might be
deuorced from them) they were doubtful still what to do, and could never as
yet resolve upon what to determine: why should it not be a clear and resolute
case with us not to marry, unto whom it is not permitted, for all their
exceeding and grievous faults they shall daily, and that most wilfully commit,
to rid them away from us, as long as we shall live.

But oh immortal God, if it be a matter so plainly proved, both by the
counselles, reasons and experience of the wisest and best men that ever lived
amongst us, their drift and meaning herein being none other, then to persuade
us for to withdraw our selves from such lettes as hinder us from all humane
felicity, by shunning this sorry go merry dance of married man's round: how
much more ought we the rather to do the same, being invited hereunto by the
example and persuasion of such as have been the choice vessels and elect
oracles of the thrice sacred and holy Ghost, whose intentions have been only
to dehort and persuade us from those that steal us away, entice us from that
which is divine and eternal. Let us hear Salamon, who by the gift of
revelation from above, knew all the causes, beings, and natures of every thing,
and from whose stock it pleased Christ our blessed Savior to descend; who
speaking of a Woman, says, that he found her more bitter then death it self,
that she is the occasion Man rebelleth against God, and counsels us not to
live or to converse with her, because as from garments Mothes do proceed: so
does the injustice of man from her, which injustice (says he) is yet far
better then the best works that that injurious sex can do.

Let us read Mark and Matthew the Evangelists, where Christ being demanded
if it were lawful for one to repudiat and forsake his wife for any occasion
whatsoever, and he answering no, except it were for adultery, (which also is
understood only by the separation of the bed) and by this you shall find,
that from hence the Apostles gathered and concluded, that it was best not to
marry at all.

Let us look into Saint Luke, and we shall likewise see our Savior himself,
animating men to learn and to relinquish these wives, we shall hear him say,
that we must needs as it were hate them, and that otherwise we cannot follow
him, neither rightly enjoy him, for we find, that he that had taken a wife
could not come unto the holy supper, where that good man with other his guests
attended for him: I say to that spiritual supper, most glorious and blessed,
unto which God from the beginning inuiteth and ordains (as much as in him
lies) every one to join in general.

And to this effect let us hear Paul to the Corinthians, where he will say,
that it is not good to touch a woman, and he will persuade such as have never
been married, and widowers that have been wedded, to stay and live ash then
did at that time, that is, without a wife, which he himself had had once. If
the text of Ignatius who lived in his time, was not corrupt and falsified, he
will advise such as have none, not to take any at all: and those that are
married, he will tell them that he pitieth them, because that first they endure
most bitter storms and troubles, and then they become too too careful, and
ouerpensiue for worldly goods, not seeking after any thing so much, as how to
please their wives: whereas the same Apostle adds, that such as are unmarried
give their minds only unto heavenly matters, endeavoring most studiously and
carefully how to please God.

Let us meditate and call to mind, the revelation written by that secretary of
God, Saint John, and we shall find in the same, that not any of those hundred
forty four thousand which sung new praises, knew ever any woman, and that
none but such immaculate and undefiled Innocents could say the like.

Let us come back again unto that celestial crier Esaias the Prophet, and we
shall find, that he that lives a Batcheler, God promises to him, a name in
his house, and a far better and higher place then unto him that shall be
married.

Let us come unto Saint Augustine, where he entreats of the inequality and
proportion of merrits, meant by Christ, in the numbers of thirty, sixty, and a
hundred: and undoubtedly, he will affirm, that in these greater numbers, he is
comprehended that does not marry: and in the first and smallest, are contained
such as be married.

Let us search in Saint Jerome, who besides that, he interprets the
exposition of these numbers, after this manner: he moreover auerreth this, that
so much difference is there to go the nearest way unto heaven, between him
that has a wife, and him that has none, as there is between sinning and
doing of good works: applying the first unto the unmarried, and the last unto
those that have wives. Likewise he will say, that the woman is the fountain
and original of all evil, the swift way to all wickedness, the sting incurable
of a scorpion: and to be brief, a generation most detestable and hateful. But
let us a little come back again unto Origin, and we shall find, that he
defines her to be the head, or rather beginning of sin, the weapons of the
devil, the expulsion out of Paradise, the mother of all transgressions, and
the only distinction of the law. Tertullian calls her the entrance into
Hell, the first bringer in of the forbidden fruit, the breaker of the law
divine, the overthrow of man, whom Satan himself durst not be bold to tempt.
Chrysostom writes, that she is the enemy to all virtuous friendship, a
plague incurable, abad necessary evil, a natural and ordinary kind of
temptation, a sought for calamity, a domestical danger, a delightful
detriment and hurt: and so following on with such bad titles as these, in
sequence, he reckons up a huge rabble of them, amounting to the number of
600. at the least, going far beyond Aluarus Pelagius, who gave over as being
tired with setting down three hundred of the same.

Epiphanius exclayming against them openly before the people, declares how
rightly our first graund-father Adam, discovered the conformities of their
natures, with that of the Serpent, in taking the first of that sex, Eua^
because this word EVA, so written, signifies (after the Hebrew language, a
woman: but adding before the same an H. (as an aspiration) it then signifies a
Serpent. Ciprian has written whole volumes against this pestilent sex. And
Gregorius Nasianzenus concludes, that a bad thing is a Dragon, more worse then
the venomous Aspis: but the malice of a woman (says he) exceeds and far
surpasses both the one and the other. But these damned heresies (for now I
come to the place where I first left) did not they at the beginning, proceed,
and had they not their first increasing and growing through the means of women?
No doubt they had. Behold Simon Maigus, who foysted in his erroneous
blasphemies, through the help of an infamous Courtezan, called Helena.
Nicholas of Antioch, he prevailed with his poisonous opinions, by reason of a
pestilent thraue of ungodly women, which he drew and carried up and down with
him. Martius the Stoic, and Cardonius, before they entered into Rome, sent a
woman as their precussor, or forerunner, to work the peoples minds unto their
wicked purposes and persuasions. Apelles the Hereticque, did nothing without
the consent of Philomela.

Montanus, through the power of Prisca, and Maxilla, two Noble and rich women,
first with gold and then with false doctrine, corrupted many Churches.

Arrius that notable pernicious Priest of Alexandria, used the authority of
the sister of his prince, to deceive the world withal. Lucilla with her
wealth, assisted Donatus that Arch Hereticque, to infect Africa. In Spain,
Agape undid and utterly overthrew Elpidius. Polemnius in a certain place is
advised, that if ever he meant to have his son Chrisantus, renounce his
Christian faith, he then should give him a wife, as a temptresse unto him. And
at this day I pray you who maintains and of late has maintained so many kind
of religions as are in Germany, and in other places therabouts, but only the
busy he aded women of the said countries? What should I say more, if y^ wife
of Adam himself framed out of his blessed side, placed as then in the most
delectable garden of all delightful pleasures that might be, retaining as then
the innocence given unto her, and enjoying the celestial influences, served
for no other use then for the devils instrument, to make both him and us to be
thrown headlong into hell fire: shall not then our wicked wives, who are
conceived through concupiscence, borne in sin, dwelling in a deceitful world,
accursed of God and by the law, be worse then devils themselves unto us, and as
it were stumbling blocks to hinder us from returning once more back again unto
heaven, our allotted country. But if they were not so bad and dangerous
creatures, as is here set down, how then comes it to pass, that women are
counted to be the very lively tokens and badges of sin, as Cirillus and Origin
have set them down to be? Why would the divine providence have so wroght, y^
not any one almost of y^ holiest Jews should bring forth or beget any of
them? and why likewise would the same have tolerated that Salfaat, the father
of only women should die in sin? How should they come to be meant by the
Cabalists, to be that badde part of our selves that always lies in wayt to
withstand and suppress that which is the most reasonable in us? Why should the
laws of Moses, as also those of the Romans, forbid and take exceptions
against the wills they made?

Why did Cato command Husbandmen that they should not admit them to be present
at their vows and sacrifices, and that they should not so much as see the
solemnizing of the same? Why should Hercules, the Hieroglificall Tipe and
Figure of the Reasonable Power, drive them away, and exclude them from out his
Temples? Why at the Institution of the Pass* over or feast of Easter, would
God bind and tie the Israelites to eat rather the Male Lamb, then the
Female? For what reason should Saint Paul have given charge that they be silent
and hushed in the Churches? Why should he forbid them to take upon them to
instruct or teach any? Why have diverse holy men procured and sought to hinder
them that they cannot enter into their Monasteries? Why was it that after one
of them by a particular Dispensation coming into that Monastery of the
Carthusian Monks in Pauia, they all followed after her with a wispe of straw
burning in their hands, as if it were to purge and make clean the infection,
that such as she might leave behind them in the air it it self thereabouts?
And to conclude, why have so many Popes prohibited and straightly forbidden
them entrance into some certain particular and most devout places in Rome and
elsewhere, but only because they are so bad?

It rests then, that women are most pernicious and ill, and which is worse,
are like still (so) to continue. And therefore most honorable Audience (or
rather my Noble Lords and Masters) for whose good I stick not, nor make any
account to fall flatly out, and to be at deadly hatred with all Women kind, I,
as one resolute and resolved, conclude, that it is best for such of you as be
Bachelors, to continue Celibes still. Quasi celestem vitam agentes, and such as
are married, I pray and beseech God most heartily, and desire him even from the
bottom of my bowels, and very inward of my soul, to give you that most
needful gift of patience whilst you are so plagued: and for his great mercies
sake, either (soon) to mend them, or quickly to end them. And as for such of
you as have bin troubled with these stinging waspes and incurable diseases
(worse then Nolime Tangere) but now through special grace from above, are rid
from them (being as it were near come out of S. Patrickes purgatory, into S.
Peter's Paradise) with you, I, as wel-willer of your great happiness,
congratulate and rejoice and participate with you for your most blessed
deliverance out of that irksome dungion of Little Ease, and from that servile
slavery, worse then that the miserable I sraelites sustained under the
tortering Egyptians intolerable thraldom and bondage.

And yet for all this, needs must I say, that this shape of women, do bring,
and under their apparel does descend (sometimes) more then super humane and
angelical natures, not alone different and exempt from al such defects before
rehearsed, but also of such excellent perfection and more then rare
excellency, of so great bounty, and so worthy valor and virtue, as they bring
far more beatitudes and blessings (both present and to come) unto such men,
whom they shall so much vouchsafe themselves to marry withal) then the before
mentioned others, do accumulate and heap upon their husbands, plagues and
troubles. Yet must I tell you, that such are as sildom seen as black Swans, or
as the peerlesse Phoenix: of which sort, I must confess two only are most
famous and renowned throghout the world. Of which, the one for a ^irgine and
Maiden Queen, is the most excellent and virtuous Princess Elizabeth, the
admirable Queen of England: and the other, for a wife, though now a Widow,
Loisa, Count Vadomous daughter, wedded unto the late French King, Henry, the
third of that name. Whom because I cannot worthily enough commend, I will with
reverent wonder in silence admire: unto whose bewtious virtues, and virtuous
bewties, I have bound my self one whole day to display some part of the same:
for on the sudden, unprovided, and without advise, are not matters of so high a
Nature as these, to be entreated and handled. And therefore I will here cease:
yet not cease to wish, that as they may still continue fortunate and glorious
in this world, so they may be tryumphant and blessed in the world to come.

Ho detto.
Facerti.

Vxor (Amice) tibi est semper mala, cum male tractus*
Fit peior, sed fit pessima, quando been,
Sed bona, si moriatur erit, melior tamenidte
Sifaciat vino, est optima siproperi.
(Friend) marry when thou please, yet shall thou find
Thy wife bad always, and but use her ill
And she is worse, but use her well and kind
She is worser then, and so continue will:
Yet is she good (if she but once would die)
But better, if she packt before thy self,
But best of all, if she went speedily,
Leaving behind to thee her hoorded wealth.
Qui capit vxorem poenam capit atque dolorem
Qui caret vxore poenae caret atque dolor,
What so he be that takes a wife,
Is sure to take grief, sorrow, pain and strife.
What so he be that wants a wife,
Is sure to want grief, sorrow, pain and strife.
Vxor, corpus, opes, animam, vim lumina, vocem
Destruit, annihilat, necat, eripit, orbat, acerbat.
Man's body, goods, his soul and strength,
His sight, his voice and all
Wife destroies, consumes, kills, foyles,
Blindes, marrs, and makes him thrall.
Menitri, nere, lacrimari nilque tacere,
Decipere, hae vere Dotes sunt in Muliere.
To cogge and lie, to whine and cry,
To prate and never blin:
To spin and weaue, shift and deceive,
These women's dowries bin.
Foemina fax satana irosa foeteus dulce venenum
Semper prona rei quae prohibetur ei.
A Woman's Satan's Firebrand hot,
A stinging Rose corrupt, a poison sweet,
Ready to do amiss, though she is forbid,
Prone to all ill, but for what is good, unmeet.
Ue tibi foemine, quisquis es apta i^go.
Woe unto thee and double smart,
If to a wife once yoakt thou art.
A Defense or Answer unto the foresaid Declamation, written by that famous
Poet and Orator, Torquato Tasso.
That it is good to take a Wife, and that Marriage, is both Honorable and
necessary.

RIght Worshipful Sir, and my singular good kinsman, I first was given to
understand that you have married a Wife, and presently upon the same, I saw a
certain book of yours, in which you not only blame Women, but likewise inueigh
most bitterly against Marriage. And although I could wish that your writings and
your deeds were equally to be praised, yet if I should commend the Action, I
cannot rightly give praise to the composing of the same; for so doing, I should
disagree as much from mine own self, as your works do from your own
speeches.

But you (perhaps) by the one, would make some proof of the excellency of
your sharp wit, and by the other, manifest unto the world your constancy in
love, whereby as in the first you are to be counted witty, so in the last you
are worthy to be commended for your wisdom: it being my part, not a little to
rejoice with you in both of them, and congratulate with you as much in your
praises, as in the greatest joy and feasting you make for your marriage.

Nevertheless, as neither the fragrant flowers of the pleasant spring time,
nor the green leaued boughs of diverse colored Garlands, bewtified with sweet
Mirtell, with lovely Roses and perfumed Uiolets, if they be not placed orderly,
and with cunning art befit nor become all places, nor at all times: so all
pleasing praises agree not with every age: neither are meet for every calling
and profession.

Therefore I rejoice with you in some part of your pleasures, and I condole and
grieve, that the Himenean verse, the Uirgins Corus, and the nuptial song, which
most willingly I would have sung with others, are as it were troubled,
disquieted, and disgraced, by reason of speeches full of scandal and disgrace:
whereas you your self (who know better so to do then any other) should have as
highly advanced women, as you have depressed and abased them, immitating (or
rather exceeding herein, Stesicorus the Poet, who changed his note, singing a
second song, quite contrary to his first: and not doting Homer, who became
wilful blind, not remembering the foul error he had (before) committed.

But that which you would not do, some elequent Gentlewoman will (perhaps)
take in hand, for as Euripides says, One woman uses to defend an other in
courtesy.

So all your objections shall not alone be refuted by her reasons, and your
allegations by her arguments, but you shall be utterly confounded by her
admirable beauty, which is such a silent kind of eloquence, as it is of far
more force and power to persuade every way, then any other painted or
passionate Rhethoricque whatsoever.

And if true persuasion stands in the lips (as it does in very deed) in no
part is it of such efficacy, nor of greater delight to the hearers, then in
the mouth of a fair and gracious Lady: whilst she reasons of her self
modestly, and for her companions courteously, and for both learnedly, she
having such strange virtue in her, as all the thundering speeches and lightning
words which Pericles used to the mutenous people of Athens, and all the smoothe
and flattering phraises which tickle the ear, and inchaunt the mind, are
nothing in comparison of hers: the sweet delivery of her voice, resembling a
pleasing Lullabie, that brings a delightful slumber upon a man, making him
glad and feign to yield and veil unto her pathenticall and enchanting
discourses: neither shall she need (as Phrina did) to vnbare the white
Alablaster of her mountain snowy breasts, in the grave judgment place, or
reverent tribunal seat, because in this case, the weak weapons of cankered
backbiting and malicious slander, shall he forced presently to fall out of
the hands of their spiteful adversaries, every tatling tongue being shut up
with the fast lock of hushed silence, that dare (but once in conceit) prattle
or talk over licenciously never so little against them.

But I perhaps speak now with that affection, which were far more fitter at an
other time, and for an other occasion, of which I could not as yet until now
well give over, because it is the last garment that a wise man should dispoyle
himself of. But as the same Euripides says, to commend the virtue of a
gentlewoman in such sort as is convenient for her dignity and estate, is the
property of a wise and learned man.

And could I promise unto my self so much from my learning, as others might,
or ought in reason to assure themselves of my credit, or challenge me rightly
for to stand in their defense, I would then dare to enter and venture to try
this combat with you, although you are borne and come of the selfsame blood
that I am: for these contentions are like unto fained battles, fought in jest,
in which it is lawful for kinsmen to prove their valors one against the
other.

But as in all Courtly Justes and royal Tournaments, not any uses to enter,
but such a one as besides the pleasant delightsomenesse of his Colors, and the
pomp and richness of his Caparisons, and the splendant glistering of his
gilden Armor, carries likewise in show, the high prised favor of his dearest
Mistress: So should not I ofright (being deprived of all such like means)
intermeddle in this matter, and come as it were an undaunted gallant, to brave
you in your own battle: whereupon I chose rather (for a while) to hold my
peace, then by contradicting you, to write any thing: yet because I was as it
were forced unto the same, upon an occasion of great importance (which I will at
this time conceal unto my self) I thought it not much out of the way, to
request you to take that, in friendly wise from me, which of another (may
chance) you might conceive to be an arguing, or an answer, quite against you.

First therefore I exhort you (dear Cousin) that you repugne not against your
own self, but that you so order al your actions by the Dial of Discretion,
that your doctrine may be conformable according unto your own works: and if
you shall please to think it worthy to place this my discourse, as an
Attendance or a follower of yours, you shall find that the one will be no
disparagement nor overthrow unto the other. But as in one and the selfsame
tree, those pears which are old are grafted with young and new pears, and as
the apple, by the apple, the fig by the fig, and the vine by the vine,
receives and recouereth life again: so shall mine answer take life from yours,
and in exchange as it were, return back the same again unto you. And if my
reasons shall in part seem contrary and repugnant unto yours, the^ shall it
happen, like unto those plants which are new grafted, upon which not alone is
seen fruit of their own kind, but oftentimes (as it were by miracle) we view
ye Seruise to spring out from ye boughs of the Medler tree: the Pomgranet and
Drenge, to grow on one tree together: and on y^ science where the white grape
ripeneth, the red begin to wax ripe, and white Mulberies to hang by the black,
all upon one branch: Then (dear Hercules) let this friendly kind of Grafting
be in our contrary opinions, whilst most truly though briefly I come unto
the matter.

Neither do I request this, because I would arrogate that authority unto my
self which was granted by Maximus Tirius, to Anacarsis the Poet, for he was
of conceit, that the head and as it were the top of all wisdom (contained in a
perfect life) was placed in the quietness of the mind, and comprehended in the
brevity of speech, with which they came to touch the very quick and pith of
the matter. But I desire to take this course, not as one presumptious or
ouer-arrogant, trusting unto the excellency of mine own wit, but because of
the infirmity of my body, and by reason of the weakness of my memory, and
therefore I would willingly tie and close up that in few speeches, which
(otherwise) I could if I lifted draw out at length, and display if at large.
And if by chance it shall happen to me as it sometimes did unto Anacarsis, who
discoursing upon a certain argument, there were diverse men that all the time
ranns up and down, making a noise about the question, and troubling him in the
delivery of the same, whom he therefore compared and likened unto light
horsemen, and rank riders, that fly up and down the Country: yet will I
endeavor and force my self in such a tumult and insurrection of conceits, and
caprichious discourses of opinions not to be troubled at all, like unto a
soldier that stands stoutly in his place, never giving once back what
violent charge soever is given against him. Although my chiefest study has
bin for the most part pleasing POESY, yet will I now forget the same, and in a
loose kind of plain and familiar Prose, briefly, according unto my promise,
and to the purpose, answer your chief points objected against women:
although my self a Bacheler, not filling many leaves of paper with bare words
only, like unto the unprofitable blast of fruitelesse wind; remembering the old
saying, that Frustra fit per plura, quod per pauciora fieri potest. And thus a
Jove surgit opus, I thus begin.

I say then, that the authority of Thales Milesius, from whom those
Philosophers called Iouici had their beginning, is not of greater privilege
any way then that of grave Solon, who gave Laws unto most of the learned
Cities of Greece, with which they so many years most happily flourished, and
governed their Commonwealths, making all Ionia subject unto them, and utterly
(in a manner) overthrowing the Empire of the Barbarians; And yet this Solon had
wife and children. And although reasoning with Thales (as we may read in his
life described by Plutarch) he was somewhat moved with the lamentable loss of
his virtuous son, yet ought not we to leave and give over those things that
are both lawdable and necessary, as is this sacred Matrimony, if by chance
there should happen any effect contrary unto the desire of him that takes a
wife.

But say that Solon did overmuch bewail the death of his daere son, yet did
not Xenophon take on so heavily, as to give over the Sacrifice he was in hand
withal, and as then about to solemnise: but hearing that his son had dyed
honorably, he placed again the Garland upon his head, which upon the first
report of those sad news he had taken off before: and for that this Philosophy
is one of those that are of account, and great, with the greatest Kings and
Monarks that then lived, and had command and rule over their huge and royal
Armies, I see no reason but that his authority should be held in esteem, and
go for current, more then any others.

Consider what he has written in that little book, where he entreats of the
government of a house, and you shall find that he affirms how the Gods
themselves (amongst other things most wisely ordained by them) devised this
easy yoke of Matrimony, first because the generation of living creatures
should not want, and then that there might be some such as should nourish and
comfort us in our old age; And because mortal men live not under the open
air, and in broad fields (as other creatures do) but under a shelter and in
houses, it is convenient that a grave Matron and provident Huswife conserve and
keep those things close and in covert, which the Husband does purchase and get
abroad.

Where you bring in certain old fragments (as reuersions) of Bias and others,
who said, If thou take a fair woman unto thy wife she will be common, and if
a foul one, it will be a pennaunce unto thee to behold her: the same was
retorted and turned quite contrary, (All o reuerso) in this manner by Pitacus
Mitalenus, who was one of the seven Sages also, of whom Greece did so much
vaunt. If (quoth he) thou take a fair woman, it will be a pleasure unto thee,
and if a foul one, why, then she will not be common. Or it might be answered
well thus: If thou choose a fair one, thine own wisdom shall keep her unto
thy self alone, and if a foul one, yet the love thou bear her, shall make
her seem pleasing unto thee: for a wife is as other things are, which may be
ill or well employed and used, so that the prudent carriage, and wary
circumspectnes of the husband, has great interest in the chastity of a woman.

And because Chastity is the beauty of the soul, there is reason that a fair
soul be resident and lodged always (if it be possible) in a fair body: that
very same beauty which we see in sweet Gentlewomens faces, being no other
thing, then the right glittering luster, and glorious brightness of a victorious
and triumphant soul, which having vanquished and overcome all whatsoever
opposes it self contrary against her, in the selfsame manner, as the
conquering Sun dissolueth and disperseth the shadowie and gloomie clouds,
she shining with dauntlesse majesty in the controwling eyes sparkling like
Diamonds, and depainting the pleasing countenance with far more delightful
cullers, then are those which we behold with great pleasure in the heavenly
Rainebow: or rather as Iris, is a token and sign of the atchiued victory of
the Sun; even so is this gracious favor and amiablenes of the look, a
certain and infallible argument of that of the mind: in such sort as that
that is naturally desired of many by election, happens (by Fortune) to be
granted but unto one alone.

Neither can the authority of Epicurus, which you afterward allege, alter my
belief in this matter, but rather confirms it more stronger, for those
things that are eschewed and shunned by the bad, ought to be followed and
sought for of the good: and those that are blamed of such as are ignorant,
deserve of right the praise of those that are most learned.

But (perhaps) if I should proceed after this order, hardly could your fruit
and mine be gathered together off from one self tree, but (as if they were
shaken with a blustering wind) some of them would be found to lie bruised on
the ground, and therefore because one discourse may add life unto another, I
will begin to graft according unto the advice of Theophrastus, from whose
counsel I mean not to swerve: for there is no doubt but that it is as
necessary for rich and sound men of body to marry, as it is for such as be
poor and diseased to live without wedding at all. And yet I would not so
expound his meaning, as if it should be different from that of his masters,
who if he had thought that Matrimony had bin bad, he would not then have
reproved the community of wives, with which it seemed he was much offended:
neither that as concerning goods, which are as expedient and necessary for the
bringing up of their children, nor have given out that Man was a living
creature, borne to be accompanied, and that amongst all other companies
belonging unto a private house, that of the Husband and of the wife was the
principal and chiefest: through which speeches, being so plain, me thinks
no man needs to doubt of his opinion. And after this selfsame manner, the
authorities of many that you produce, may be most truly interpreted, Plato
himself persuading us to bring forth children, and to bring them virtuously
up, in the same sort as the Lamp which is lightened, gives light in course
from one company to another.

And verily, that Poet spoke passing well, that the one gave the Lamp of life
unto the other, no otherwise then is used amongst us at this day in the
Galliard or Dance of the TORCH, when the man takes it of the woman, in whose
hands it seems (as it were) that both life and death is reposed and placed.

Musonius a Philosopher of great account, affirms, that weddings were the
first beginners and founders of families and housholdes, so that whosoever
goes about to deprive man of the same, destroys the House, the City, and
all humane offspring, which cannot continue without increase, as the right and
lawful increase cannot be maintained without Marriage. For a Family, or a
City, are not composed of men alone, but of men and women together. Nay which
is more, there have been Cities and Monarks found in the world, consisting
only of women, (as was that of the Amazons) but that there could be an
Empire or Kingdom of men without women, has never bin yet known: and
therefore we may conclude by this rule, that women are more necessary amongst
themselves, and so consequently, needing the less the perfection of others.
And the same Philosopher says, that the friendship between man and woman is
more ancient, and of longer continuance, then all the rest whatsoever. Neither
does Hieron the Siracusan, differ from this former judgment, for he will have
all our predecessors successors, to be borne through society and company, and
that the chief and principal of the same, are especially known and discerned
by Marriage: for Cities cannot be without families, and such families as are
not of married folks, do want as defectious and imperfect: for that house
cannot be without defect, in which Marriage is not, because, neither the most
royallest part of the soul can be without his subject, neither the subject or
inferior without this which is so royal. Antipho Anasfundricus discoursing of
Marriage, says, that a perfect life cannot continue nor be without wife and
children; for that house is as well lame, as that City is imperfect, in which
are women alone, or men only.

But (peradventure) we have given too busy and too too low a beginning unto
Matrimony, seeing her original is as it were Celestial, beginning even then
when the soul is first placed and espoused unto the body as Dant writes, who
perhaps (in this) would imitate the ancient Philosophers, of which, some
affirm that Reason does signorise and dominere in the mind, like a Father
over his family: as she that is most ancient and fittest even from the
beginning of man's birth to discourse and judge, but the cupiditie or
greediness of the mind, being a womanish passion, and ouertender of the
soul, which is gentle and easy to be brought to relent, represents a woman:
and Animositie and dauntlesse courage full of aspiring thoughts, and princely
heat, as he is willing oftentimes to be obedient unto the mind, resembles a
young man, the unity and concord of the same (which ingendreth and defines)
being the affects of this animositie. But this cupiditie or greediness of
mind is Definite and Determinate, and that is uneven by her own nature, where
this is even, although it depend upon other things, that having her perfection
from her own self, and this being made perfect by borrowing of others. So,
then the example of Marriage is in the Soul before it come to be in the house:
so by this consequence, who so destroys Marriage, not only separateth man
from woman, but also the Soul from the Body, and as it were, cutteth off from
the Soul his head, dividing it from his other parts: so as without doubt,
adultery is a murderer, as says Sperou Speroue. By the authorities then of so
many worthy Philosophers, we ought to believe that wiuing is both necessary
and good, and we must give credit unto Reason, who also persuades us unto the
same: for if those occasions be bad which corrupt and defile Matrimony, there
is no question then, but that Marriage it self is most excellent and good: but
it is overthrown by two passing bad things, the one is Death, which is the
final end of all evils, and is most terrible: and the other is Dishonestie,
which is as it were the death of the Soul. Besides, if those things are good
which conserve the same, there is no sense, but that Marriage it self should be
good, but it is preserved by life, which is most sweet, and most desired of
every one, and supported by modest bashful Chastity, the most lawdable and
precious praise-worthie virtue amongst all others in a woman.

Again, if pensive solitariness be counted a miserable, yrksome, and
displeasant life, then is company happy, delightful, and pleasing: but
amongst all companies, there is none more deerer nor more joyous, then that
which is between Man and Wife. If to abandon and forsake all lascivious love,
and unwholesome loathsome Curtezans, be held an honest part, then is chaste
Matrimony honest, which is the happy occasion of the same. If it be
profitable to leave superfluous pomp and vain expenses that brings too late
repentance with it, then is this nuptial band profitable and commodious: and
if to end all old grudges and ancient civil enmities, brings health and
prosperity both to Cities, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, then is there
nothing more wholesome nor just, then this so honorable and lawful coupling
together. For there can be no greater nor more upright justice, then to make
war and wage battle for a man's own wife, as Menelaus did for Helena, and
Cambises the Persian king, for his Notesia, daughter of Apria king of Egypt,
from whom Amasis had taken away her kingdom. Lastly, none can enjoy more
pleasure in this troublesome life of mortal men, then to be blessed with
happy fruit of comfortable children: but these, either are not enjoyed without
Marriage, or else nothing so happily, nor so lawfully. Nay, the husband is
like the master of a goodly Garden, who (at his pleasure) without fear,
gathers the morning sweet Roses, and the pearlie dewed Uiolets, but the
Adulterer coming in sneakinglie in the night, opening the same with counterfeit
keys, and climing softly up unto the trees, where he lurketh in covert, is
resembled unto a timorous thief, who stands always in such fear, as he can
never (in a manner rightly) enjoy or take any kindly use of such things as he
steals.

Then by all these reasons Marriage is good, neither ought it to be left in any
wise in the Active life of man, since it brings not (as your Cosen said
before) trouble, but rather true felicity and happiness. For as the yoke can
hardly be drawn by one Ox alone, so the burden of this our humane life,
cannot be sustained or borne out by Man alone, neither, only by Woman, but the
one agreeing and assisting the other, it will prove to be very light, which
of it self does seem very heavy and grievous: whereby we learn, that that
old fable of Aristophanes is not altogether false, because the husband lives
with two souls, with that of his wives, and with his own: and discourses and
reasons with two tongues, sees with four eyes, hears with four ears,
labors and takes pain with four hands, so as these proceedings and
actions, are easy, well esteemed of, and virtuous, where the wife does help
what she can. Neither is there any thing of the husbands so much his, but that
the wife has also interest in the same: nor has she ought, but that he has
a property likewise therein: seeing they are, not only Companions of the bed,
but as well partners in all their other proceedings and determinations
whatsoever: as Dien Cassius Niceus affirm, all other friendships and curt^sies
being joined together, less perfectly, and far more vnsurely, they being
resembled unto a gallemawfrie of pease, or such like gross meat. Whereas the
love of the man and the wife, is as wine mingled with water: for the liking of
married folks is divided and mingled in every part: neither have they only
their children, common unto them both (which is far dearest above all
whatsoever) but the soul and body likewise, and perhaps the virtue of the
soul and body both alike too. So that, as they which enter into a sweet
Garden full of many fragrant flowers, cannot distinguish rightly the perfect
sent of the Rose from the Lilly, nor the Uiolet from the Hiacint, nor the
Gilliflower, from the Carnation, because they all at once make a kind of
melody or harmony, of diverse sweet savors together, which the calmie wind
and gentle air does breathe into their senses on the sudden: so the prudence
of a husband, his fortitude and magnanimity, his liberality and his bounty
are mixed together, as one proper sweet perfume, with the pleasing sent of
feminall temperance, and roseall modesty: and with the humble submisse
meekness, and more then precious pearl, Chastity of a modest woman: in such
manner as it can hardly be discerned, which is the one, and which is the other.
And if the sacred skill of divine Poesy, is as well in the Man as in the
Woman, as we see as much by the verses of Sappho, as by those of Anacreon, or
by the learning of Bacides, as by the answers of Sibilla. And if Painting and
Music, is as well in the one Sex as the other, and all Arts flourish in both
kinds, with like and equal excellency, then is it not unseemly that these
these virtues compared together in the same sort as the Statues of Phidias, or
Praxitiles, with other artificial and rare works are used to be, should have
the selfsame Form, and as it were the very like Caracter, without any
difference at all: neither that there should be any distinction between the
Magnificence of Sesostides, and that of Semiramis, and the greatness of
Pelopida, and that of Timodia. And although virtues (sometimes) are wont to
take certain differences (and as it were) lively cullers from them to whom
they do naturally belong, by reason of their bringing up in the Exercises of
the same* yet nevertheless this happens unto Men amongst themselves, as well
as it chances unto Women: for Ajax was valiant after one fashion, and
Achilles after an other: neither was that wisdom of Nestor, that which was in
Ulysses: nor that prudence of Agesilaus, the selfsame that Cato had: neither
did Irene and Alcesta love their Husbands both after one manner: nor was
Cornelia Magnanimous in that sort that Olimpia is said to be. So that hereby we
may conclude, that it is not necessary diverse sorts of wisdoms, justice or
valiantnes of minds should be, but we may rather avouch and affirm, that
they are rather differences by reason of their vnequalities, then because of
their Speties or Kind. And though some will have it to be granted unto
Authority, that Differences are said to come after another manner and sort,
yet does it not therefore follow, that the woman should be deprived of these
virtues: but if it be true that was spoken by that excellent Poet of Tuscania:

Rare Virtue never comes by chance,
But rather Art does it advance.
She being endowed with all these Uertues, cannot by Nature be brought forth
by Chance, although that in particular Subjects she had another kind of
intent and meaning: for, otherwise she should be rather the Stepdame of the
world, then a kind and universal Mother of all such things as we presuppose
and mean; her fashion being to conserve and preserve the eternal speties and
kinds equally, as well of Men as of Women, drawing forth and painting the lap
of the matter of all Forms, which are the Reasons in the Soul: and Ideas in
the divine understanding, as the chief minister of the heavenly providence,
which has the selfsame care of woman, as it has of man.

A Woman then is not created against the purpose of Uniuersall Nature, (nor per
Accidence as the Scholemen call it) and say that she were less perfect then
Man, yet ought she not to be separated from him, for so should the Soul be
divided from the Body by this Reason, and the mixtures of one element from
another, and so by this consequence should follow the distinction of the whole
world, occasioned and chauncing by Discord, as writes Empedocles. Neither,
because some women are found, through whose faults Marriage bonds are infringed
and dissolved, as Clytemnestra and Helena, Phedra, and the covetous wife of
Amphiaraus, with the 49. Daughters of Danaus, therefore is the number of those
that be good, the less, but rather, so much the more greater, by how much they
were the more renowned and glorious. For the wife of Admetus would needs die
for her husband, although she refused to lose her life for her sons sake. And
Argia and Euadne, solemnized most royal Exequies for their bedfellowes: and
Artemesia made her heart a sepulcher for her dear Spouse, the same being far
more famous and miraculous then the Mawsoleum which she framed, although it was
termed to be one of the 7. wonders of the world. So did Lucretia stab her self
with a dagger: and Portia killed her self with swallowing hot burning coals,
because their husbands might be thoroughly assured of their faith and
consta^cie. And Ipsicratea, like to a servile slave in humble sort bearing of a
running Lackies weeds and port, would be companion of the banishment and
flight of Methridates, as she had bin before copartner of his pomp and glory.

Neither have only certain particular women, but whole troops and bands of
them, left behind them most honorable examples of their feminine virtues, as
the wives of the people called Tirrheni, who exchaunged their garments with
their husbands, being in prison and condemned to die. And the Saguntine women,
who ensued the men of Marsilia: and in our days, the Ladies Baptista, surnamed
Saluzza, and Eleonora of Aragon, were bright mirrors of matchless chastity,
in the Court of the Duke of Ferrara, and in that of Vrbino, Isabella, and
Leonora Gonsaga, personages of rare modesty.

I could recite diverse other examples, as well of our own Country, as of such
worthy women of France, Spain, Germany, and England: who have so entierly
affected their linkid Mates, that not only they have exposed themselves unto
diverse mortal perils for their sakes, but have also most willingly offered
their dearest blood as sacrifice to die with them. But who is he that can
rightly set down the numberless numbers of such stainlesse and immaculate
sweet Ladies? when there are so many to bewtifie the earth withal, as there be
stars inafrosty night, to set out and adorn the heavens withal? Neither were
many of these renowned alone, but others also of whom there is no mention made
in Histories. All which co^cealed themselves (for the nonce) from fame her
self (although she has hundreds of eyes and toongs) shadowing themselves with
the veil of shamefastness, which is so pure, clear and fair, as it
glistered only in the eyes of their husbands, not being able to be discerned
with the gross eyes of any other man else. And if it be true as it is written,
that in the skies there are certain hidden signs, besides such as are
discerned by us, about which the Sun does take his Circle and compass: so may
the concealed virtues of Women be compared unto these same, as more glorious
and exceeding far the others, although they display so many beams and
brightness, as no mortal creatures else can do the like.

In the Active life then which ought to be Noble and ^^lustrious Matrimony, is
not only a help and a st^^e, a great easement and lightsomenesse unto the
same, but it is a glorious ornament, and an exceeding great credit: neither in
the life Contemplative does it seem that it brings any impediment at all as
concerning Contemplation: for it hindered not Pithagoras, nor Socrates, nor
Crates, at all, being all three married men, and such as lived always with
their Wives: and yet do I think that hardly can any be named that ever
studied more Philosophy then they.

But Crates (certainly) although he wanted both house and al other things
necessarily belonging unto house keeping, yet would he have a wife: and lacking
a private place unto which he might repose himself, he (poor man) took up
his lodging, and lived with her in the Porches of Athens.

But perhaps this kind of Philosophy is too disagreeable, and unfit for a
civil and orderly life, being as it were bannished in disdain, not only from
the Courts and Palaces of Princes and Noble men, but likewise from the learned
Schools and Academies also. So that, although it be a laudable course to
marry a Wife, yet ought we to leave her or to take her, not only for her good
or badde quallities (as some have affirmed) but we must likewise have regard
unto the riches or poverty as well of the husband as of the wife: for a man
nobly borne, should not (by right) match with a woman whom he cannot be able,
either by his own proper goods, or with such wealth as she brings of her
own, maintain her like a Noble Gentlewoman: whereby we find, that that
saying of Philippides is very pretty.

Thou have (quoth he unto a friend of his) married a rich Woman, but yet ill
favored, and therefore shall thou sleep unquietly, though thou go gallantly
and fare daintely.

Nor less witty then this was of Epicarmus, who affirms, that to take a
Wife, is no other manner of thing, then to play at Dice, and venture thy
Fortune: for if thou chance to light upon one that is courteous and well
qualified, thou shall be blessed in thy marriage: but if thou happen on one
that is insolent and proud, and that will never keep within doors, thou then
shall have not a wife, but a most intolierable misfortune as long as ever thou
live.

Let us take them then, having regard, as well unto the virtues of the mind,
as unto the beawties of the body, and riches of Fortune: and if we cannot make
our choice as we would (and that we shrowdly doubt the worst) why then let us
leave them.

And yet would not I have a man to mistrust overmuch, except upon a good ground
and sound cause: For Mala men's, malus animus. An ill disposition, breeds an
ill suspicion. And there are some, that because in their youths they have
played the wild Coltes, and gone astray into other folks grounds, therefore
they think their Wives will repaie them with the same money, suffering their
friends to take commons at their Tables: which as it is vanity to think, so
is it more folly to suspect, and greatest foolishness of all, to speak of
the same.

But to return where we left, It seems unto me very difficult, that this
conclusion can hardly be brought to be counted as doubtful, by any
sophistical reasons. By which also is concluded, that a woman has some
virtue, either as it is proper unto her self, (as Aristotle's opinion is) or
else as it is common, as well to the man as to the woman, as Plato most plainly
sets down. But yet which of these two questions we should determine upon,
by Theological Doctrine (the one of which, as it were a Gimmall King,
depends upon the other) I mind not now to set down or dispute of: for so
should I seem to pass from one kind unto an other, and from one Science unto
a another: and so ascending up unto Divinity, I shall be as a stranger that
scarce understands the language of those that discourse with him, and so in
the end not be able to set down mine own opinion unto them.

But you (Signior Hercules, are most fortunate in this) who with the orderly
Rules of the right Tuscan speech, have so aptly joined and united together, so
fruitful and so copious a knowledge of all things together, not a little unto
your great commendation and praise.

And yet (with your favor) I will speak a word or two as concerning this
matter, which when you shall so please, you may at your leisure consider of
with Signior Christophoro your brother, he being as exellent a Philosopher, and
as exceeding a good Divine, as any living at this day.

I say then, that in that Argument, about which both Aristotle and Plato, are
in controversy: there is not any man of sufficient authority and power, to
give censure and judgment upon the same, unless he be some peerlesse Divine:
as was Basilius, surnamed the Great, who affirms, that the virtue of the Man
and of the Woman, was all one thing, and the very same. Therefore can none
blame the Woman, but they must likewise find fault with the Man, by the same
reason: nor praise the one, but that they must commend the other in like
manner: in such strict wise, are not only their Offices and Actions conjoined
together, but their very virtues themselves, the which if they were ever
distinguished and divided, the same distinction was very wise and discreet:
nay rather to speak more truer, most convenient and necessary that it should
be so.

Neither is the opinion of Saint Paul any thing discrepant from the same, for
he writes unto the Corinthians, that the woman is the glory of the man. And
in the selfsame Epistle, he shows the Equality thereof, saying that the
woman has not power over her own body, but man: and so likewise that the man
has not authority over his own body, but the woman.

And in another place he shows the Dependancie (as I may say of the woman)
affirming that she was made of man, and for him created: for in his creation,
Eve was taken out of the side of Adam: which most undoubted truth, might force
any grave Stoicke in a manner, to laugh at the foolish and ^ottish Fables and
loud lies of Focilides, who wrote that a woman was formed of four living
creatures, of a Dog, of a Waspe, of a Sow, and of a Mare: of which last she
took her long hair. And to smile no less at those Tales of Simonides (who
coming in with his five Eggs, whereoffoure were rotten) dreameth that some of
them are created for a Sow, some others of the crafty Fore, who knows all
things: neither is any thing be it good or bad, had from him as he says (and
by these, I guess he meant such as be sharp shrowes) some others of the
earth, some of the sompter Ass, othersome of a Weasell, other of Asses, but
he that has one that comes of a Be, he (says he) is passing happy, for
she grows to be excellent in all kind of works, and proves to be a
passing good Huswife, increasing her husbands stock wonderfully. Now were not
these opinions too too gross and ridiculous, they were somewhat to be
tolerated, and to be borne withal: especially when the co^ceits be such as
oppose themselves not too much against most true and grave matters of great
importance, as these be whereof I now speak. I say then, that woman was created
of a most dainty, fine, and tender matter, because she might be the more
tractable and easy to yield unto the commandments of her husband. Whereupon
passing from y^ first question unto the second, we may boldly say with Saint
Paul himself, that it is better to marry then to burn: and to take of him
this good counsel, that he that is bound seek not to be unbound: and he
that is loose, (if he so like to live still) seek not to come into bands:
although to be bound in this sort is no sin, as Christ himself has first
taught us before all other, who honoring marriage with his most precious
presence, and his wonderful miracle, confirmed the ancient honor of the
same: in praise of which whole volums, might be writ an infinite number of
histories reported, which your self (kind Cosen Hercules) although you have
dispraised, or rather but seem to dispraise, ought in duty and with devotion
for to commend more then any other. And whilst you are silent, ruminating as
it were in sweet contemplation of the sweetness and pleasures of the same, I
will be bold under correction, not claiming any privilege, as some others
perhaps ouerboldly would, bringing in for authority, Pictoribus atque poetis.

Qui libet audendi semper fuit aequa potestus, learned Poets and rare Painters
that have skill, may write and paint (controwles) what they will, it may be
lawful for me with your voice to conclude thus.

O sweet conioyning of loyal hearts, O dulcet union of our souls together, O
most lovely and nuptial knot, O most chaste, pure and religious marriage
yoke, who art rather a pleasing ease, and a most welcome delight to supporte
and bear, then any hard weight or grievous burden to sustain: rather a
releeuing comfort that vpholdeth us every way, then a troublesome labor, that
any way paineth us.

Thou first did bring mankind to dwell in a house, enclosing him within a
wall, causing him to build Cities and Towns to inhabit in, where before men
lived like sauadge beasts in the woods and deserts, dispearsed one from an
other.

Thou first did alter dark Caves into delightful chambers, and cold
snowy Mountains, into bewtifull and goodly Palaces and lodgings: thou made
that lawful which (rightly) did please, and honest, that which every one
desired. Thou did set just laws to humane pleasures, and a lawdable bridle
to vntaimed headlong desires.

Through thee that came to be proper, which before was common, and that
particular, which before was general, bringing that to be of account, which
before was held of no esteem. By thee honor was conjoined unto delight, and
pure chastity with perfect love. By thee came down from heaven, loyal faith,
and spotless modesty, and all other virtues: nay rather thou were the first
founder of the same, thy holy laws teaching men to take up defensible weapons
in the honor of their wives, they learning by this means to become valiant.
Thou taughtest others to assemble and gather together their friends, their
kinsfolks and subjects, filling the seas with sails and armed Nauies, and to
fight many years in foreign coasts, to recover their wives whom they had lost.
And if we may give credit unto ancient Histories, the first famous wars
which ever were first begun, began upon this occasion, between those of Asia
and them of Europa, who in the end growing weary of travel and fearful of
farther vaungers, came to agreement, and to grow unto a truce, in the keeping
of which, prudence and instice consists: for it showed unto many of the
wisest sort, that it was not necessary to have war upon war, nor discord
upon discord: whilst the long absence of husbands, learned women mild
temperance and grave modesty, through which most of them continued chaste and
undefiled amongst whole multitudes of Ruffinlike suitors, and swaggering lovers:
and many of them through the sweet remembrance of their best beloved Husbands,
have showed themselves most bountiful unto strangers, and most charitable and
courteous unto Pilgrims and travelers: so that what by reason of one thing or
of an other, they prized their virtues at so high a rate, and so honorably
carried themselves in all their actions, as they did minister sufficient ma^ter
unto the fluent vain of the most praise sounding Poets, and to the flowing
prose of the smoothe Rhetoricians, Mellifluens Orators, and antiquity writers
of pleasant Histories, rightly to be commended and to set them most worthily
down. And were it not for thee, no^ any could scarce know or understand the
renowned name of immortal virtue, of glorious honor, and of that thing which
is legitimate or honors.

Thou art the cause that fair Ladies in their behauiours commit nothing
worthy of reprehension. Thou art the root of godliness, whence springs the
branch of shamefastenesse, which is the only defense that nature has given
unto them, to keep their reputation, to preserve their chastity, to maintain
their honor, and to advance their praise.

To thee then is due all commendations proceeding from modest speeches. To thee
is given the glory of every good work: and to thee is rendered all thanks for
humane felicity and happiness, for else our living without thee, would be no
other, then woeful misery: heavy tribulation and grievous wretchedness,
world without end: but thou turnest and conuertest Gall into Honey, Uineger
into Wine, and loathsome bitterness into the sweetness of love, making us all
happy by thy working: sicknesses are less grievous unto us, adversity less
noisome, health of body more precious and dear, and prosperity more pleasing
and of better relish, only through thy operation and power. Thou do lesson
sorrows and increasest the delights of this life, making the troubles thereof
seem less with thy mutual consolations and comforts, multiplying our
pleasures with common and ordinary satisfaction and amends. Thou art the
occasion, that to the pilgrim, after his long labors and wearisome iournies,
his return back again into his own country seems the more pleasanter
unto him. That to the sayler after many bitter storms and boisterous tempests,
the kenning of his wished land, and the sight of his much desired Haven, is the
more dolightfull unto him: and that unto the Husbandman after much tilling and
sowing of corn, and often planting of fruit with great labor and toil, the
expected increase is more sauerie and welcome unto him. Thou art the cause that
the brave soldier and Cauelleir retiring himself from bloody broils and
perilous battles, inioyeth more contentedly the hearty welcomes, and the
sugared embracings of his loyal spouse and wife, and that the quietness of a
private house is far more sweet unto those who have withdrawn themselves,
and left the hurliburltes of the Courts, and the endless suits, and
troublesome businesses of such as be in law. Thou art the giver of peace and
rest, and the conformer and renewer of friendship and kindred. Thou art a
banisher of molestations and troubles. Thou art the messenger of joy, gladness
and good will. Thou art the restorer of loss and hindrances. Thou art an
increaser of commodity and profit: and thou a bountiful and splendant
housekeeper. Thou art liberal, just, upright and holy. Thou make children
and nephews certain and assured unto their parents and kinsfolks, where
otherwise they would be counted doubtful and basterds: and which is more, thou
make our selves known unto our selves: for (but for thee) no man could know
himself, nor would procure to have a lively resemblance in their behauiours,
of those from whom they came: neither would children of illustrious offspring
prove so rare, nor so rightly immitate the renowned virtues of their
magnanimious predecessors. Thou art the cause that many given to gad abroad,
do willingly stay at home, that all things are well and orderly governed, that
the heart and mind is better cheared, that evil suspicions are expelled and
buried, that angry brawlings are detested, that charges and expenses are
diminished, and the great excess of apparel not so much used, wherein we are
commonly so curious, that otherwise (being naturally great sauers) only
therein are we great wasters: all which abuses are avoided by the provident
Wives discreet and wise carriage of her self.

To conclude, thou art the cause that man being as he is, for the sovereignty
of government fittest to rule, is endued with skill and experience to perform,
with capacity to comprehend with wisdom to understand, with strength to
execute, with solicitude to prosecute, with patience to suffer, with means to
sustain, and above all, with a great courage to accomplish and bring to an end
any enterprise: yet for all this, he is contented to be advised sometimes by
his wife, (though a weak woman) so dearly does he love her, for in marriage,
love indefferent serves not, nor love fained, prospers not, but right
perfect love indeed knitteth loyal hearts in an indissoluble knot of amity,
everlastingly to endure: and where such love is, there do the parties look for
virtues, and not for riches, and there as it is a joyful begnning amongst
them, so is there as blessed a continuance and end, all things prospering with
them, and sorting out happily eue^ unto their lives end.

Finally, if any defends his country, he then defends marriage, if any
saves his father or his mother or his children, he then preserves Matrimony:
and through Matrimony came it to pass, that Cimon of Athens was resembled unto
Milciades, Alexander to Philip, and Africa the great, to Scipio his father: and
that the one Decius, after the immitation of the other offered, his life for
the good of his country.

Neither does only the love of the husband and wife, contain in it the full
force of Marriage, but the love and charity, as well of the parents as the
children themselves. And therefore (most sacred Matrimony) do not thou
think it sufficient to separate us from rude beasts, but thou make us
resemble and to be like unto immortal creatures? for through our stock and
issue, perpetuated and continued in our children by legittimate succession, the
most strongest Cities and most spacious kingdoms, are successively delivered
from one unto an other, passing from one heir, unto the government of an other.

And as in the breed of the best horses, the name of their countries race is
imprinted upon them with a hot burning Iron mark, so the right descent and
lineage of men, is conserved and known by nature, through the dauntlesse
valor, sweet benevolence, kind affability, obsequious thankfulness, mild and
courteous qualities in every generous and noble mind.

So as by these thankful means, the very speechless Sepulcres, show with
letters of gold, the names and surnames of fathers and grandfathers, most
curiously carved in white Alablaster and Marble, and the stately Palaces and
hallowed Temples, with other buildings, as well publicque as private, being
adorned and bewtified with titles and superscriptions, do signify unto the
world, the virtues of their princely Ancestors: in such sort, as after we have
passed that of this life, and been dead for many worlds before, yet does not
our name and memory die with our corrupt bodies: but lives still in an other
life, not unlike those that are celestial.

Whilst by reckoning up sons issuing from sons, and Nephews descending
from Nephews, the glory of our ancient antiquity and descent is renowned
and revived again: the old fame and good report, which we left here upon the
earth whilst we lived, seeming to begin (once more) as it were to wax young
and fresh in our offspring, who living as I said most famously like the renowned
men of their age, carry such rare shows, by reason of their virtues in the
world, they succeeding lineally after us, and descending from the strength of
our loins.

Thou then (most divine matrimony) end only thou, and none but thou, and thou
alone createst and make Noble men upon the earth. Thou make valiant
co^querors, victors and triumphers. Thou art the cause men are fortunate,
happy and blessed: and by thy means resemble immortal creatures. Thine are the
sweetness of children, and unto thee does belong the dainty fruit of the
same. To thee appertains all honor, glory, virtue and immortality of
eternal fame, and perpetuity of everlasting remembrance: thy holy ordinance
being first instituted and appointed (as I said before) in the blisfull place
of Paradise, where was no sin: and when Man was in his chief perfection: and
therefore, if antiquity may give any worthiness, what is more ancient then
this sacred estate which God himself, the founder of all, ordained and
consecrated? What is more honorable and praise worthy then this, that Christ
with his mother in Canaan, did not only with his own presence make
honorable, but also with miracles did sanctify the same? What is more just,
then to render that unto our posterity, which we of our predecessors have
before received? What thing is more inhumane then for man to contemn that as
profane, which the eternal Jehovah has hallowed, and Nature her self
bewtified? Christ our Savior commands that man shall forsake father and
mother, and cleave unto his well-beloved spowse: and what is more holy then love
toward our parents, which God in his commandment has rewarded with long
life, and yet Matrimony is preferred before the same? What is then more
ncessarie then marriage, which contains in it the felicity of man's life, the
flower of friendship, the preservation of Realms, the glory of Princes, and
that which is most of all, it causes immortality?

To conclude, where in the e^nd, though it be long, yet at the last, you not
only allow of marriage, but commend women in the persons of two great princely
Potentates (although you might have done it in many others beside). In this I
cannot choose but confirm your judgment, especially in the famous English
Nueen, I finding my self far insufficient and unable to praise her, by reason
of her royal qualities, and matchless virtues, they being like a soundlesse
Ocean that has has no bottom, like unto an intricate laborinth, wherein a
man may sooner loose himself, then find the end of the same any way.

And therefore I, although (a stranger in) all humble duty, wish her, for
ever, prosperous: unto all the world, gracious: and in all places glorious,
that there be no end of her praise, until there happens a final end of all
things.

Dixi: Incerti:
FINIS.

