A BOOK, CONTAINING THE TRVE PORTRAITVRE OF THE COVNTENANCES and attires of
the kings of England, from William Conqueror, unto our Sovereign Lady Queen
Elizabeth now reigning:

TOGETHER WITH A BRIEF report of some of the principal acts of the same
Kings, especially such as have been least mentioned in our late writers.

Diligently collected by T. T.

LONDON Printed by John de Beauchesne dwelling in the Black Friars. 1597.

WILLIAM, Duke of Normandy, base son of Robert Duke of Normandy, being a
warlike and politic prince, of near kindred, and great credit with Edward
Confessor king of England (whom he perceived more given to virtue the^ to
policy, and through weakness of body, and course of years, unlikely to live
long) began to contriue in his mind, the attaining of the crown of this land
after the deceasse of the old king. For acco^plishing whereof, he placed
diverse Normans in the greatest rooms about him whilst he lived, and when he
was dead, levied an army of sundry nations, and therewith pretending the
patronage of England against Harolde the son of Godwin, that usurped the
kingdom, first fought with him and slew him, at the place now called Batell in
Sussex, the xiiij. of October, in the year 1066. took the crown upon him by
election of the Estates. Then seeking to stop titles, he imprisoned Eadgar
Etheling, the only true heir of the Saxons blood, and by means of Ethelbert
Archbishop of Hamborow for money, procured Suene king of Denmark to surcease
the clame of the Danes. Having thus established his affairs died at S. Geruis
near Roane the 9. of Sept. an. 1087. when he had reigned xx. years, x.
months, and xxvj. days, and was buried at Cane, in the abbey of S. Stephen,
which he founded.

GVILIELMVS CONQVESTOR.
portrait of William I

WILLIAM Rufus third son to the Conqueror, borne in Normandy long before his
father obtained the realm, hearing of his death made have into England (least
by his elder brother Robert he should be prevented) was by his large gifts,
which he bestowed out of his fathers treasury, having obtained the keys
thereof, received of the Nobility, accepted of the inferior sort, to be their
king, but chiefly by the persuasion of the archbishop Lanfranke, under whom he
was brought up, and was by him crowned at Westminster the xxvij. day of
October, anno 1087. He was brought up with great care of his parents, obeying
his father in all his actions, wherefore his father at his death appointed him
to succeed in the kingdom. He vanquished the Welshman, overcame the Scots,
and subdued his two uncles, and others of his Nobility that rebelled against
him in the behalf of his elder brother, Robert Duke of Normandy. He was slain
with an arrowe as he was hunting in the new forest in Hamshire, by a knight of
his, called Sir Walter Tirel, the first day of August an. 1100 when he had
reigned xiij. years, lacking xxij. days, and was buried at Winchester.

GVILIELMVS ^ RUFUS
portrait of William II

HENRY Beauclarke, fourth son to the Conqueror, was chosen king after the
burial of his brother, by means of his old familiar friend, Henry Earl of
Warwick, although there was some controversy amongst the Nobility about the
same, yet the rather they consented thereto, because he was by birth both an
Englishman, and son to a King and Queen, for he was borne in England the
third year of his fathers reign. He was crowned at Westminster the fifth day
of August by Maurice Bishop of London, in the absence of the Archbishop
Anselme. In the seventh year of his reign he took his eldest brother Robert
Duke of Normandy prisoner, and so he kept him till he dyed. After which time he
called himself King of England, and Duke of Normandy. He left behind him but
one only daughter lawfully begotten, Maud the Empress, then married to Geffrey
Plantaginet Earl of Angio, mother to King Henry the second. He died at S.
Denis in the forest of Lions in Normandy, the first day of December, anno
1135. when he had reigned xxxv. years and four months, and was buried in the
Abbey of Reding, which he had founded.

^ HENRICUS ^ I ^
portrait of Henry I

STEPHEN borne in France, and brought up in England under his uncle king Henry
the first, Earl of Mortain, and in right of Maud his wife Earl of Bolein, third
son of Stephen Earl of Champaine and Blais, and Alice his wife, daughter to
William Conqueror king of England, began his reign over this realm the ij.
day of December, anno 1135. and was crowned at Westminster the xxvj. day of the
same month by the hands of William Corbuell archbishop of Canterbury. This king
came to the crown by usurpation, and perjury both of himself and most part of
the Bishops and Nobility (both he and they being before that sworn to
maintain the right of Maud the Empress and her issue) for the which God
justly sent this plague of dissension and rebellion amongst them, which never
could be appeased during his reign. He was valiant and hardy, for in a
battle at Lincoln, where all his Nobility were fled or taken, he valiantly
stood in the forward continually fighting, bestowing such stroks as those who^
he hit, were either rewarded with death, or never prospered after. He died in
Kent the 25. of October, 1154. having reigned 18. years, 9. months, and 23.
days, and was buried at Feuersham. After whose death there was interregnum 54.
days.

STEPHANVS REX
portrait of Stephen

HENRY surnamed Fitz Empress, borne in Main, son of Geffrey Plantaginet
Earl of Angio and Maud the Empres daughter and heir to Henry the first, king
of England, being of the age of xx. years, began his reign over this realm the
xix. of December, 1154. and was crowned the same day at Westminster. This king
in right of his father united the Earldom of Angio to the crown of England:
and the Dukedom of Aquitaine, with the Earldom of Poitiers in right of
Alianore his wife, and by conquest subdued the Duchy of Britain, and the
kingdom of Ireland thereunto. So that he was the only Monarch and chief
governor from the Isles of Orcades beyond Scotland, unto the uttermost bonds of
the mountains Perines, which divide France and Spain. He was the first that
ordained the Justice of Air, and for the ease of the people he divided this
land into six circuits, appointing to every one 3. Judges, well learned in the
laws of this land. He ended his days at Chinon in France the vj. day of July,
ann. 1189. when he had reigned 34. years, 7. months, lacking ten days, and
was buried at Fount Euerard. After whose death there was interregnum for the
space of lviij. days.

^ HENRICUS ^ II ^
portrait of Henry II

RICHARD Earl of Poitiers, born at Oxford, second son of king Henry the ij.
being xxxv. years old began his reign over this realm the 3. of September. 1189.
and was crowned at Westminster the same day, by Baldwin Archbishop of
Canterbury. He taking his journey toward the holy la^d, was misused by the way
of the Cipria^s, whereat he being offended, set upon them, subdued the^, and in
xv. days conquered the whole Island, took the Emperor thereof, and kept him in
fetters of silver. From thence he took his journey to the siege of Acon, where
he most valiantly behaved himself, so that his only name was a terror to the
Turks. After this, by reason of rebellion of his brother John, and invasion of
his territories beyond the seas by the king of France, was forced to return
home and was taken by the way and imprisoned by Leopoldus Duke of Austria,
whose envy was great against him, because in his youth he had slain the Dukes
brother with a chesse board in the Court of France, as they played together.
This king besieging the Castle of Chalut, was stricken with a venimed quarrel,
whereof he died the 6. of April, 1199. having reigned 9. years, 7. months,
and three days, and lies at Fount Euerard. After whose death there was
interregnum 21. days.

RYCARDVS ^ I ^
portrait of Richard I

JOHN Lord of Ireland, Earl of Mortain and Gloucester, brother to the late king
Richard 1. and youngest son of king Henry the ij. being of the age of xxxij.
years, began his reign over this realm the xxvij. of April, 1199. and was
crowned at Westminster the same day. This king was the first that did write
himself Lord of Ireland: which continued in his successors, until king Henry
the 8. the 21. of January, in the 33. year of his reign wrote himself king of
Ireland. This king took, imprisoned, and put to death his nephew Arthur Duke
of Britain, son and heir to Geffrey Duke of Britain, third son to king
Henry the ij. right heir to the crown: and kept Alianore his sister in
prison, because she should neither marry nor have issue: wherefore Philip the
French king cited him sundry times to appear before him which he refused to
do: and was therefore adjudged by his Peers of France to forfait all his lands
which he held of the crown of France. He died in the Castle of Newarke the 19.
of October, anno 1216. when he had reigned 17. years, 5. months, and 23.
days, and lies at Worcester. After whose death there was interregnum for the
space of 8. days.

JOHANNES REX ^
portrait of John

HENRY the third, son and heir to king John, being 9. years old began his
reign over this realm the 28. day of October. 1216. and was crowned the same
day at Gloucester by the hands of Peter bishop of Winchester. This king brought
into this land and preferred to great dignities his half brethren by the
mother, sons of Hugh de Brun Earl of March, whereby they grew so insolent and
proud that they disdained all the English Nobility, which was the first
occasion and beginning of the great rebellion called the Barons wars, wherein
many thousand English men lost their lives, beside the disinheriting of some of
the chiefest of the Nobility for ever. This king in the 44. year of his reign
passed over sea into France, and concluded a league, wherein it was agreed that
the king of England should surcease the claim of all his lands in France,
except only Aquitain, whereupon he and his successors until the xiiij. year
of Edward the third, wrote themselves kings of England, Lords of Ireland, and
Dukes of Aquitaine. He died the xvj. of November, anno, 1272. when he had
reigned 56. years, and 20. days, and was buried at Westminster. After whose
death there was interregnum for 3. days.

HENRICUS ^ III ^
portrait of Henry III

EDWARD the first, King of England, son of king Henry the third, at his
fathers decease warred against the Infidels in the holy la^d, and began his
reign the xx. day of November anno 1272. was crowned at Westminster by Robert
Kilwardby Archbishop of Canterbury, the xviij. day of September in the second
year of his reign. By his first marriage he increased his inheritance in
France, with the Earldom of Ponthiou. By his conquest he enlarged his
kingdom at home with the principality of Wales, which he bestowed upon his
eldest son, and began the custom of the kings of England to create their
eldest sons princes of Wales. He reformed the extortion of his officers, and
chiefly of them which had the administration of Justice. He established laws
for the preservation of his own estate, especially that of Mortmane against
donations to religious houses: that of Quia emptores terrarum, against
alienatio^ without license, and that of Quo warranto against usurpation of
royal jurisdictions and liberties. He died at Burgh upon the Sands, the vij.
day of July, anno 1307. when he had reigned xxxiiij. years, vij. months, and
xviij. days, and lies at Westminster.

^ EDVARDVS ^ I ^
portrait of Edward I

EDWARD the second, borne at Carnaruon in Northwales, son to King Edward the
first, began his reign over this realm the 8. day of July, in the year of
our Lord 1307. and was crowned at Westminster by the Bishop of Winchester,
deputy for Robert Archbishop of Canterbury then absent in exile, the xxiiij.
of February next ensuing. He was much given to follow the advice and counsel
of light persons, which caused the Nobility to rebel against him, but at the
first he overcame them, and took Thomas Earl of Lancaster their chief
Captain, and sat in judgment himself on him at Pontfret, where the same
Earl had sentence given against him, to be drawn for his treason, for his
murder, spoil, burning and robberies, to be hanged, and for his shameful
flying away, to be beheaded: but because he was of the kings lineage, he was
only beheaded. At the last such of the Barons as before escaped, and chiefly
the Mortimers with help of the Queen and the young Prince, then new come out
of France, took the King, and imprisoned him, when he had reigned xix. years,
six months, and seventeen days.

^ EDVARDVS ^ II ^
portrait of Edward II

EDWARD the third, son to Edward ij. began his reign over this realm the
xxv. day of January, ann. 1327. his father yet living and in prison, and was
crowned at Westminster on the i. of February following This king created his
eldest son Edward Duke of Cornwall (which was the first Duke that was created
in England since the Conquest) and ordained that the kings eldest sons ever
after should be Dukes of Cornwall. He largely augmented the wages of the
Judges of both benches, and barons of the exchequer, and allowed the^ three
robes every year, because they should not take fees or rewards of any but
only of the king, so that they should be the better able to minister justice
to every man without affection, and punished the offenders herein most seuerly.
For he caused Sir William Thorp knight chief Justice of the kings bench, to be
arrained for taking of money (contrary to his oath) of certain persons co^uict
before him at Lincoln, for felony, to defer their execution, and being found
guilty, had sentence to be hanged, and to forfeit his lands and goods to the
king. He died at Shene, the 21. of June, 1377. having reigned 50. years and
five months, lacking 4. days, and lies at Westminst.

EDVARDVS ^ III
portrait of Edward III

RICHARD the second king of England, borne at Bordeaux, son to Edward the
black Prince, being xi. years old, began his reign the xxij. day of June,
anno 1377. and was crowned at Westminster the xvj. day of July next ensuing, by
the hands of Simon Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury. This king was comely of
personage, and in bountifulness and liberality far passed all his
progenitors, much more given to rest then to marshall affairs, following the
fantasy of flatterers and young heads, neglecting the Nobility, which was
cause of rebellion in the beginning of his reign, of great strife among the
Nobility in the midst, and the overthrow and utter destruction of himself in
the latter end. He was the first that created any to the dignity of a Marquis
in this realm of England. He also created Margaret daughter and heir to
Thomas of Brotherton Earl of Norfolk and Marshall of England, Duches of
Norfolk. He was at the last forsaken of his friends, taken and put in prison
by Henry Bolinbroke, son and heir to John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, who
succeeded him. He reigned 22. years, three month, and 9. days, and was
buried at Langeley.

RICHARDVS ^ II ^
portrait of Richard II

HENRY the fourth, borne at Bollingbroke in Lincolnshire, Duke of Hereford, son
and heir to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, being banished by king Richard
the ij. after the death of his father, entered England in Holdernes, first made
claim only to the Duchy of Lancaster, being his fathers inheritance, after
having augmented his power, by false and sinister surmises claimed the crown
of England, set upon the king, took and imprisoned him, where he most
miserably ended his life: began his reign over this Realm the xxx. day of
September, an. 1399. and was crowned at Westminster the xiij. day of October
following by the hands of Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury. This king
in the beginning of his reign was much troubled with civil wars, and also
with invasion both of the Frenchmen and Scots, but yet at the length he
(through Gods help) obtained the victory over all his enemies, and lived in
great quietness with love of his subjects all the 1 est of his reign. He died
at Westminster the xx. of March, anno 1413. when he had reigned xiij. years,
and six months lacking x. days. And was honorably buried at Canterbury.

HENRICUS ^ IIII ^
portrait of Henry IV

HENRY the fifth, borne at Monemouth, in the Marches of Wales, son of king
Henry the fourth, began his reign over this realm the xxj. day of March, in
the year of our Lord 1413. and was crowned at Westminster the ix. day of
April following by the hands of Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury. On
the which day there was a terrible tempest of snow, to the great admiration of
all those that were present. He was tall of body, and very strong, given
altogether together to marshall affairs, and a mortal enemy to idleness, as
it plainly appears by his great conquests. In the beginning of his reign he
was troubled with domestical rebellion, in the midst with wars in France,
but in the latter end, concluding a perpetual league with Charles the French
king, married his daughter, was made heir and regent of France, and so in all
his styles was written until his dying day. He ended his life at Boys Vincent
by Paris the first day of September, between two and three of the clock in
the morning, in the year of our Lord 1422. when he had reigned nine years,
five months, and eleven days, and was buried at Westminster.

HENRICUS ^ V ^
portrait of Henry V

HENRY the sixth, borne at Windesore, son of king Henry the fifth, being of
the age of viij. months, began his reign over this realm the i. day of
September, in the year of our Lord 1422. and was crowned first at Westminster
the vi. of November 1429. by the hands of Henry Chicheley Archbishop of
Canterbury, and afterward the vij. day of September, anno 1431. at Paris by
the hands of Henry Beauford Cardinal of Winchester. This king was the first
that erected any to the dignity of a Vicount in this land, or that created any
Barron by charter or pattent: for before his days all Barrons were either made
in the field, or called to that state by Parliament writ. He was far more
fitter for the Church, then for cheualrie, for prayer, then for prowess, a man
most unfortunate in all his worldly attempts, he lost not only all that his
father won in France, but also his own kingdom here at home, for he was at
the last in the xxxix. year of his reign driven out of his kingdom, and
after that, taken and put in prison, where he most miserably ended his life.
He reigned xxxviij. years, six months, and sour days, and was buried
first at Chertesey, and after removed to Windsore.

HENRICUS ^ VI ^
portrait of Henry VI

EDWARD Earl of March, borne at Roane in Normandy, son and heir to Richard
Duke of York, son to Richard Earl of Cambridge, son to Edmund of Langley
Duke of York, fourth son to Edward the iij. king of England, began his
reign over this realm (by the name of king Edward the fourth, the fourth day
of March anno 1461. and was crowned at Westminster the xxix. day of June next
following by the hands of Thomas Bourghchier Archbishop of Canterbury. This
king was much troubled with civil wars, insomuch that he was in the midst of
his reign forced with his chiefest friends to avoid the realm for a time,
his adversary king Henry being restored to the crown again, but that
continued not long. He was also troubled with wars against the Scots. But
having brought all things both at home and abroad to quietness, he began to
wax idle and covetous, which was not only cause of much grudge amongst the
people, but also of shortening of his days. He ended his life at Westminster
the 9. day of April, in the year of our Lord 1483. when he had reigned xxij.
years, one month, and v. days, and was honorably buried at Windsore.

EDVARDVS ^ IIII ^
portrait of Edward IIII

EDWARD the fifth, borne in the sanctuary at Westminster, son of king Edward
the fourth, began his reign over this realm the tenth day of April, in the
year of our Lord 1483. being of the age of thirteen years, but by the
cunning dealing of Richard Duke of Gloucester his unnatural uncle, was never
crowned, although there was great preparation made for the same: for his uncle
at the first taking upon him to be protector and governor both of the child and
the realm, after that defaming him, and all his other brethren and sisters to
be bastards, imprisoned and executed most part of his friends, and procured the
younger brother, Richard Duke of York and Norfolk to be fetched out of the
sanctuary at Westminster, and put them both in the tower of London, from
whence they never departed, but were there most lamentably murdered, by the
procurement of their cruel uncle. This king was deposed when he had reigned
two months, and eleven days, and was obscurely buried in the Tower of London.

EDVARDVS ^ V
portrait of Edward V

RICHARD Duke of Gloucester, youngest brother to king Edward the fourth, began
his usurped reign over this realm by the name of k. Richard the third, the
xxij. day of June, an. 1483. and was crowned at Westminster the vj. day of July
next ensuing. He not contented with the deposing of his nephews from their
right, nor thinking himself surely settled in the kingdom, till he had berest
them of their lives, caused the great seal of England to be fetched from John
Russell bishop o. Lincoln, Lord Chancellor, being at London, and brought
unto him, being on his progress then in Warwickshire, wherewith he secretly
sealed such commissions as served to the murder of the two sweet babes. And
the^ sent the seal back again to the Chauncellor, after it had bin viij.
days in his custody. He most impudently defamed his own mother with adultery,
and likewise king Edwards children to be bastards, the easier thereby to come
to his purpose. But all this would not serve, for Henry Earl of Richmondentred
the realm, and in a battle by Bosworth slew him the 22. of August, 1485. when
he had reigned most tyrannically two years, and two months, and was buried at
Leicester.

RICHARDVS III ^
portrait of Richard III

HENRY Earl of Richmond, borne in Penbroke castle in Wales, son of Edmund
of Hadham Earl of Richmond, son of Owen ap Meredeth, and Queen Katherine
the French kings daughter, late wife to king Henry the fifth, being of the age
of xxx. years, began his reign over this realm, by the name of king Henry
the vij. the xxij. day of August, anno 1485. and was crowned at Westminster the
xxx. day of October next ensuing, by the hands of Thomas Bourghchier Archbishop
of Canterbury. This king was wise, valiant, and hardy, for as the fame went, he
slew king Richard the iij. with his own hands. He used oftentimes to sit in
proper person in courts of Justice, sometimes in one court, sometimes in
another, which caused true and perfect justice to take place. He bestowed his
offices not of favor nor affection, but on such as were most apt and fit
persons for the same. He gathered much riches by executing of penal laws. He
ended his life at his new manor of Rich mond the xxi. day of April at night,
in the year of our Lord 1509. when he had reigned xxiij. years, viij.
months, and lies buried in his new chapel at Westminster.

HENRICUS ^ VII
portrait of Henry VII

HENRY borne at Grenewich, second son to king Henry the vij. being of the
age of xvij. years and upward, began his reign over this realm by the name
of king Henry viij. the xxij. day of April, 1509. and was crowned at
Westminster the xxiiij. day of June next ensuing, by the hands of William
Warham archbishop of Canterbury. By his first wife the Lady Katherine daughter
to Ferdinand kind of Spain, he had a daughter named Mary, that was afterward
queen of England. By the Lady Anne Rochford Marquionesse of Penbroke, daughter
to Thomas Bolein Earl of Wilsthire and Ormond, his second wife, he had Lady
Elizabeth now Queen of England. And by the Lady Jane, daughter to Sir John
Seint Maure knight, his third wife, he had a son named Edward, that succeeded
his father in the kingdom of England. This king erected the court of
Augmentation of the revenues of the crown, and the court of Wards, and
ordained that the chief officer thereof should be called the master of the
Wards for ever. He ended his life at Westminster the xxvij. of January, anno
1547. when he had reigned xxxvij. years, 9. months, and 5. days, and lies
buried at Windsor.

HENRICUS ^ VIII ^
portrait of Henry VIII

EDWARD the sixth, borne at Hampton Court, son and heir to king Henry the
viij. being of the age of ix. years, began his reign over this realm the
xxviij. of January, 1547. and was crowned at Westminster the xx. of February
next following, by the hands of Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury. This
king in his tender age so profited in all kind of virtue and good learning,
that he attained to the perfect knowledge of the Greek, Latin, and French
tongs. In wisdom and good policy he far extelled all others of his years,
much like to have proved another Solomon, if death had not prevented his days.
He was much delighted in reading the sacred Scripturs, and other good authors,
the better thereby to be able, in true justice, to govern his people committed
to his charge. Yet for all this, his tender age gave occasion to some of his
stubborn and stifnecked people to rebel. And the pride of some women was
cause of great dissension amongst his Nobility, which not long after was a
shortening of some of their days. He ended his life at Grenewich the v. day of
July, anno 1553. in the xvi. year of his age, when he had reigned vj. years,
v. months, and 8. days, and was buried at Westminster.

EDVARDVS ^ VI ^
portrait of Edward VI

MARIE borne at Grenewich, elder daughter to king Henry the viij. and sister
and heir to the late deceased king Edward the vi. being of the age of xxxviij.
years, began her reign over this realm the vj. of July, anno 1553. and was
crowned at Westminster the 1. of October next following, by the hands of
Stephen Gardener bishop of Winchester and Chauncellor of England: for Thomas
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury was then prisoner in the Tower. She being
indebted in very great sums of money both to the society of Fulckers and other
merchant strangers, borrowed so much money of her subjects upon privy seals
as acquitted the foreign debt, thinking much better to be indebted at home,
then to pay great interest abroad, procured thereby much evil will and hatred
of her subjects, as never afterward could be removed. After this the loss of
Caleis so troubled her, as the memory thereof would never out of her mind till
her dying day: so that shortly after she died at her mansion house called S.
James near to Westminster the xvij. of November, 1558. at iiij. of the clock
in the morning, having reigned v. years, v. months, and x. days, and was
buried at Westminster.

MARIA ^ REGINA ^
portrait of Mary I

ELIZABETH our gracious Queen, born at Grenewich, second daughter to king
Henry the viij. sister and heir to the late Queen Marie, being of the age of
25. years, and two months, began her most prosperous reign over this realm
the xvij. of November, 1558. and was crowned at Westminster the xv. of January
next following, by the hands of Owe^ Oglethorp bishop of Carlisle. She is a
Princess adorned with all good litterature, both holy and humane, a nourisher
of peace both at home and abroad. Amongst all other her most rare virtues, she
has reformed religion, she has reduced all base coins (which were current
here before her days) into perfect gold and silver, so that there is no other
money less or more curra^t within her dominions: which is not to be seen at
this day else where under any Prince Christian or Ethnicke. She has builded
such fair and strong ships, and furnished so mighty a navy for the defense of
her country, as makes all her enemies afraid to attempt any thing against the
same. God of his infinite goodness defend her Majesty from all perils and
dangers, who this 38. years and more, has taken care to keep us in
quietness: and grant her Nestors years, to her glory and our great comfort.

ELIZABETH ^ D ^ G ^ REGINA ^
portrait of Elizabeth I


