engraved title page TORQVATO TASSOS AMINTA Englisht.

To this is added ARIADNE 'S Complaint in imitation of ANGVILLARA; Written by
the Translater of TASSO'S AMINTA.

Meglio e il poco terreno ben coltuiare, che'l molto lasciar per mal gouerno
miseramente imboschire. Sannazo.

LONDON, Printed by AVG: MATHEWES for WILLIAM LEE, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Turks Head in Fleetstreet. 1628.

The Speakers are
CUPID, in Shepherds weeds. DAPHNE, companion of SILVIA. SILVIA, beloved of
AMINTA. AMINTA, lover of SILVIA. THIRSIS, companion of AMINTA. SATYR, in love
with SILVIA. NERINA, Nymphe. ERGASTVS, Shepherd. ELPINE, Shepherd. CHORUS, of
Shepherds.
The Prologue.
CUPID in habit of a Shepherd. WHo would believe that in this human form,
And under these mean Shepherds weeds,
A god head? nor yet of the lower rank,
But the most mighty among the gods; whose power were hid
Makes often the bloody Sword of angry Mars
Fall from his hand; stern Neptune hurl away
His powerful trident; and great Jove lay by
His thunderbolt: and thus attyr'de, I hope
My mother Venus shall have much ado
To find her Cupid. For the troth to tell,
Sh'has made me play the runaway with her:
Because (forsooth) she will sole mistress be,
And to her pleasure bind my shafts and me;
And (vain ambitious woman as she is)
Would tie me to live still amongst Crowns, and Scepters,
And to high Courts confine my power and me;
And to my vnder-followers graunts to live
Here in these woods; and to advance their powers,
Ore silly Shepherds breasts; but I that am
No child, (though childish be my gate and looks)
Will for this once, do as shall please me best:
For not to her, but me allotted were
The ever awful brande, and goulden bow:
Therefore I purpose to conceal my self,
And run from her entreates; (for other power
Then to entreat, she shall not have ore me:)
I hear she haunts these groves, and promises
Unto the Nymphs and Shepherds, which of them
Will bring me to her, kisses for their pains,
And more then kisses too; and cannot I
To them shall hide me from her, liberal be
Of kisses, and more too as well as she?
The Nymphs I know will like my kisses best,
When I shall woe them that am god of love:
Therefore my mother does but looze her pain,
Here Is none will bring her home her son again.
But to be surer, that she may not know
Or find me out by the vsd'e marks I bear,
I Have laid my quiver, bow, and wings from me;
Yet come I not hither vnarm'de; this rodd
I carry is my brand transformed thus,
And breathes out unseen flame at every pore;
And this dart (though it have no goulden head)
Of heu'nly temper is; and where it lytes
Inforceth love; and eu'ne this day shall make
A deep and curelesse wound in the hard breast
Of the most cruel Nymph, that ever yet
Has bin a follower of Dianas train;
Nor will I pity Siluia more, (for so
Th'obdurate stony-brested Nymph is called)
Then erst I did the gentle-hearted Swain
Aminta, many winters since, when he
(Poor wretch) then young, followed her younger stepps
From wood to wood in every game and sport:
And for more sure effecting my intent,
I Will pause a while till some remorse and pity
Of the poor Shephedrs sufferings, have a little
Thawde the hard ice congealed about her breast
With maiden peevishness; and when I find
She grows more plyant, will I launch her breast:
And this to do with better ease and art,
Amongst the feasting troops of the crowned Shepherds
That hither come to sport o'hollydayes,
I Will put my self; and here, even in this place
I Will give the speeding blow unseen, unknown.
To day these Woods shall hear another voice
Of love then ere before, and more refin'de;
My god head here shall in it self appear
Present no longer in my Ministers:
I Will breath soft thoughts into their courser breasts,
And make their tungs in smoothest numbers move;
For wheresoere I am, still am I Love;
No less in Shepherds then in greatest Peers;
And inequallity in people, I
Can temper as I please, such is my power.
The Rural sound of homely Shepherds reed
I can make equal with the learned lyre,
And if my mother (which disdaines forsooth
To see me here) be ignorant of this,
She Is blind, not I
Whom the blind world reputes blind wrongfully.

To the Reader.
ERe thou read farther, let me entreat thee Reader (in favor of Tasso, the
great Author of this small Poem) to correct these following faults escaped in
the Printing.

In Act. Pri: Scen: Pri for theenes, read thieves. In the next line for whice,
r. which. In Act. Prim. Sce. secund. for giddy Bees, read greedy Bees. In the
first Chorus, for Was then, read, Was not then. And in the same Chorus, for
Live we while, read Love we while. In Act. secund. Scen. prim. for eyelids
fault, read eyelids foult. In the second Chorus, for read'st thine, read
read thy. In Act. Ter. Scen. Pri. for foft best, r. soft breast. In the next
page for he went, r. he wont. In the end of the Scene for they it may, r. that
it may. In the third Chorus for Lone no price, read Love no price. In Act.
Quint. Scen. Pri. for tenter lap, r. tender lapp. In VENVSSES Search, for your
hears keys, r. your hearts keys.

Actus Primus.
Scen: Prima.
Daphne. Siluia. Is It possible (Siluia) thou can resolve
To spend the fair hours of thy flowring youth
With such contempt of Venus, and her Son;
And have no more desire to be a mother,
And leave a part of thee (when thou art dead)
Living behind thee? Change (young fondling) change
Thy mind; and do not lead a life so strange.

Sil. Daphne, let others pleasure take in love,
(If in such thraledome any pleasure be;)
The life I lead contents me well enough;
To chase the flying Dear over the lawne
With Hounde, or well-aym'de Flight, and while I find
^hafts in my quiver, and beasts for my pray,
I Will want no sport to pass the time away.

Da: Fine sports no doubt, and sure a goodly life
For silly minds that never tasted other,
And for that cause alone it pleases thee:
^o duller ages heretofore could think
^cornes and water the best meat and drink,
before the use of corn and wine was found,
^ut now they are only eat and drunk by beasts:
And had thou but once proou'd the thousand part
Of the dear joys those happy lovers feel,
That truly love, and are beloved again,
Thou would with sighs repent thy time misspent,
And only call a lovers life Content.
And say, O my past springtyde, how in vain
Spent I thy widowy nights? how many days
In fruitless lonenesse, which I now be wail?
Why knew I not loves sweetes have this condition
To bring new joys with every repetition?
Change, change thy mind (young silly one) and know
Too late repentance is a double woe.

Sil. When I repent the thoughts I carry now,
Or say such words as these thou fayning framest
To sport thy self withal; the Floulds shall run
Back to their Springs, the Wolf shall fearing fly
The silly Lamb, and the young Leurett shall
Pursue the speedy Grayhound ore the plain,
The Bear shall in the toyling Ocean breed,
And finny Dolphine on the mountains feed.

Da: I so, just such another peevish thing
Like thee was I, when I was of thy years;
So looked, so pac'de, so goulden trest', so ruddy
My tysing lipp, so in my rising cheek
The damask rose was blown; and I remember
Just such as thine is now, my mind was then,
And eu'ne such silly pastimes as thine be
I likewise vsd'e; as with lim'd twiggs to catch
Unawares the fethred singers in the wood,
Track the Deeres footing, till I had intrapt them
And such like; when a gentle lover wood me,
With such a peevish grace hang down the head
And blush for scorn I would, as often thou doe'st;
And that unseemly form me thought became me,
Nay eu'ne disliked what others lik'de in me,
So much I counted it a fault, and shame
To be desir'de or lou'de of any one;
But what cannot time bring to pass? and what
Cannot a true and faithful lover do
With importunity, desert and love?
And I confess plainly the troth to thee
So was I vanquished; nor with other arms
Then humble suff'rance, sighs, and pity craving:
But then I soon found in one short nights shade,
What the broad light of many hundred days
Could never teach me; then I could recall
My self, shake off my blind simplicity,
And sighing say, here Cinthia take thy bow,
Quiver, and horn, for I renounce thy life.
And I hope yet to see another day
Thy wild thoughts bridled too, and thy hard breast
Yield, and grow softer at Aminta's plaints.
Is he not young and fresh, and lovely too?
Does he not love thee dearely', and thee alone?
For though belou'de of many Nymphs, he never
For others love, or thy hate, leaves to love thee.
Nor can thou think him to mean borne for thee;
For (be thou daughter of Cidippe fair,
Whose sire was god of this our noble flood)
Yet is Aminta old Siluanus heir,
Of the high seed of Pan the Shepherds god.
The sleeke-browd' Amarillis (if ere yet
In any fountains glass thou saw thy self)
Is not a whit less lovely then thou art;
Yet all her sweet alurements he reiects,
And madly dotes on thy dispightfull loathings.
Well, but suppose now, (and the heavens forbid
It come to more then supposition)
That he falling from thee, his mind remove,
And cleave to her, that so deserves his love;
What will become of thee then? with what eye
Will thou behold him in an others arms
Happily twyn'de, and thy self laughed to scorn?

Sil: Be it to' Aminta and his loves, as best
Shall like himself; I Am at a point for one;
And so he be not mine, be' he whose he list.
But mine he cannot be against my will,
Nor yet though he were mine, would I be his.

Da: Fie, whence grows this thy hate?

Sil: Why from his love.

Da: Too soft a sire to breed so rough a Son;
But who ere saw Tygars of mild Lambs bred,
Or the black Rau'ne hatched of a silver Dove?
Thou do but mock me Siluia, do thou not?

Sil: I hate his love, that does my honor hate;
And lou'de him, whilst he sought what I could grant.

Da: It Is thou offend'st thy self; he does but crane
The same for thee, that he desires to have.

Sil: I prithee Daphne either speak no more,
Or somewhat else that I may answer to.

Da: See fondling see
How ill this peevishness of youth becomes thee;
Tell me but this yet, if some other lou'de thee,
Is this the welcome thou would give his love?

Sil: Such and worse welcome they deserve, that are
These theenes of silly maids virginities,
Whice you call lovers, and I enemies.

Da: Is the ram then to th'ewe an enemy,
The bull to the bayfer, is the turtle too,
An enemy to' his mate that loves him so?
And is the Spring the season of debate,
That (sweetly smiling) leads to coupling bands
The beast, the fish, the foul, women and men?
And see thou not that e'ury thing that is,
Breathes now a soueraign air of love, and sweetness,
Pleasure, and health? behold that Turtle there
With what a wooing murmur he sighs love
To his belou'de; hark of yon Nitingall
That hops from bough to bough,
Singing I love I love; nay more then these,
The speckled Serpent lays his venim by,
And greedy runs to' embrace his loved one;
The Tygar loves, and the proud Lion too;
Thou only sauadge more then sauadge beasts
Barr'st against love thy more-then-yron breast.
But what speak I of Lions, Tygars, Snakes,
That sensible ar? why all these trees do love;
See with what amorous and redoubled twinings
The loving Vine her husband fair intangles;
The Beech tree loves the Beech, the Pine the Pine,
The Elm the Elm loves, and the Willows too
A mutual languish for each other feel.
That Oak that seems so rough and so impenitrable,
Does no less feel the force of amorous flame;
And had thou but the spirit and sense of love,
His hidden language thou would understand.
Will thou be less and worse then trees and plants,
In being thus an enemy to Love?
Fie silli'one fie; these idle thoughts remove.

Sil: When I hear trees sighe (as belike they do)
I Will be content to be a lover too.

Da: Well, mock my words, laugh my advice to scorn,
(Deaffe to Loves sound, and simple as thou art)
But go thy ways; be sure the time will come
When thou shall fly from the now-loued fount
Where thou behold'st and so admyr'st thy self;
Fearing to view thy self so wrinkled foul
^s age will make thee; but I note not this
^o thee above the rest, for though age be
^uill, it is so to all as well as thee.
Heard'st thou what Elpine spoke this other day,
The reu'rend Elpine to the fair Licoris,
Licoris whose eyes wrought upon him that
Which his songs should have wrought upon her heart,
^f Love could learn but to give each his due)
He told it (Batto' and Thirsis being by,
those two learned lovers) in Auroras den,
^^er whose door is writ -- hence ye profane,
^ye ye far hence, which words he writ (said he)
that in that high pitch sang of loves and arms,
and when he dyed bequeathed his pipe to him;
^here was (he said) low in the infernal lake
A dungeon dark, aye filled with noysom fumes
^reath'd from the furnaces of Acaron,
and there all cruel and ungrateful women
^^ue in eternal horror, and ar fedd
With only their own bootelesse plaints and cries.
^ooke to it betimes, or I am sore afraid
^here must a room be taken up for you,
(...) quite this cruelty to others vsd'e.
and 'twere but justice, that those fumes should draw
^ sea of sorrow from those eyes of thine,
that pity could never make to shed a tear:
Well, run on thine own course, and mark the end.

Sil: But what did then Licoris (prithee tell me)
What reply did she make to Elpine's words?

Da: How curious the art in other folks affairs,
And careless quite in what concerns thy self?
Why, with her eyes Licoris answered him.

Sil: How could she answer only with her eyes?

Da: Yes; her fair eyes wrapped in a sunny smile,
Told Elpine this; Her heart and we are thine;
More cannot she give, nor must thou desire.
This were alone enough to satis sie
And serve for full reward to a chaste lover,
That held her eyes as true as they were fair,
And put entire and hearty trust in them.

Sil: But wherefore does not he then trust her eyes?

Da: I Will tell thee; know thou not what Thirsis wri^
When hurryed so with love, and loves disdain
He wont to wander all about the woods,
In such a sort, as pity moou'de, and langhter
Mong'st the young Swains and Nymphs that gaz'de o^ him?
Yet writ he naught that laughter did deserve,
Though many things he did, deserved no less.
He writ it on the barks of sundry trees,
And as the trees, so grew his verse. 'Twas this --
Deluding eyes, false mirhors of the heart,
Full well I find how well ye can deceive:
But what auailes, if love enforce my will
To'imbrace your harms, and dote upon you still?

Sil: Well thus we wast the time in idle chatt,
And I had half forgot, that it is to day
We did appoint to meet in th'Oaken grove,
To hunt an hour; I prithee if thou will,
Stay for me till I have in yon fresh fount
^ayd off the sweat and dust that yesterday
^soyld me with, in chase of a swift Do,
That at the length I ouertooke, and kill'de.

Da: I Will stay for thee, and perhaps wash me too,
But first I Will home a while, and come again,
^or the daye's younger then it seems to be.
Go then, and stay there for me till I come;
and in the mean time, think on my advice,
that more imports thee, then the chase, or fount;
and if thou do not think so, thou must know
Thou little know; and ought thy judgment bow
To their direction that know more then thou.

Actus Primus. Scen: Secunda.
Aminta. Thirsis. AT my laments I Have heard the rocks, the waters
For pity answer; and at my complaint
^he leau'de boughs murmur, as they grieved for me;
^^t never saw, nor ever hope to see
Pity in the fair and cruel (shall I say
Woman or) tygar? for a woman she
Denies to be, in thus denying me
The pity this my miserable state
Draws from things senseless, and inanimate.

Their: Lambs on the grass, the Wolf feeds on the Lambe^
Love (cruellest of things) with tears is fedd.
And though he ever feeds, is never full.

Am: Alas alas, love has bin with my tears
Long since full fedd, and now thirsts only for
My blood; and long it shall not be, ere he
And the fair Cruel drink it with their eyes.

Thy: Ay me, what say thou' Aminta? Fie no more
Of this strange dotage; be of comfort man
And seek some other; others thou may find
As true, as this is cruel, and unkind.

Am: Alas how weary'a work were it for me
Other to seek, that cannot find my self;
And having lost my self, what can I gain
With busie'st search that shall requite the pain?

Thy: Despair not yet, unhappy though thou be,
She may in time relent, and pity thee:
Time makes the Tygar and the Lion tame.

Am: O but so long to hope and be delaid,
Is worse then death to one in misery.

Thy: Perhaps thy suffrance shall not long endure;
For mayds so' inconstant ar of disposition,
That as they are soon at odds, they are as soon won;
Uncertain as the leaf Howne with each wind,
And flexible as is the bladed grass.
But gentle Shepherd, let me crave to know
More thoroughly thy loves hard condition;
For though I Have often heard thee say thou love,
Thou never tould'st me yet, who 'twas thou love;
And well it fitts the nearenesse of our lives,
And friendship, that such counsayls should be none
Between us two, but free to both, as one.

Am: Thirsis, I am content to open to thee
What the woods, hills, and floods ar privy to,
But no man knows: so near alas I find
The Approaching period of this loathed breath,
That reason it is I leave some one behind,
That may relate the occasion of my death,
And leave it written on some Beech-tree bark,
Near where my bloudlesse carcass shall be laid;
That as the cruel Fair shall pass along,
She may at pleasure spurn with her proud foot
The unhappy bones,
And smiling say; lo here, lo where he lies;
The triumph and the trophey of mine eyes;
And (to increase her fame,) rejoice to see
In my sad end her beauties victory
Known to the Nymphs, and Shepherds far and near,
Whom the report may thither guide: perhaps
(Ab hopes too high) she may bestow a sigh,
And though too late, with some compassion rue
The loss of him dead, whom she living slew,
And wish he lived again. But I digress.

Thy: On with thy story, for I long to heare't;
Perhaps to better end then thou supposest.

Am: Being but a Lad, so young as yet scarce able
To reach the fruit from the low-hanging boughs
Of new grown trees; Inward I grew to be
With a young maid, fullest of love and sweetness,
That ere displayed pure gold tresse to the wind;
Thou know her mother hight Cidippe; no?
Montano the rich Goteheard is her father:
Siluia, fair Siluia it is I mean, the glory
Of all these woods, and flame of every heart;
It Is she, it is she I speak of; long alas
Lived I soneare her, and then lou'de of her,
As like two turtles each in other joy'de;
Near our abodes, and nearer were our bearts;
Well did our years agree, better our thoughts;
Together woue we netts t'intrapp the fish
In floods and sedgy fleetes; together set
Pitfalls for birds; together the pye'd Buck
And flying Do over the plains we chac'de;
And in the quarry', as in the pleasure shar'de:
But as I made the beasts my pray, I found
My heart was lost, and made a pray to other.
By little' and little in my breast began
To spring, I know not from what hidden root
(Like th'her be that of it self is seen to grow)
A strange desire, and love still to be near
And hourly drink from the fair Siluias eyes
A sweetness past all thought, but it had still
(Me thought) a bitter farewell; often I sighed,
Yet knew no cause I had to sigh; and so
Became betimes a lover, ere I knew
What love meant; but alas I knew too soon;
And in what sort, mark, and I Will tell thee

Their: Onn.

Am: All in the shade of a broad Beech-tree sitting,
Siluia, Phillis, and my self together;
A Be, that all about the flowery mede
Had hunny gathred; flow to Phillis cheek;
The rosy cheek mistaking for a rose,
And there (belike) his little needle left:
Phillis cries out, impatient of the pain
Of her sharp sting; but the euerlouely Siluia
Bad her be patient; Phillis (said she) peace,
And with a word or two I Will heal thy hurt,
And take the sting, and soon the grief away;
This secret erst the grave Aretia taught me,
And her I gave (in recompense) the horn
Of Yuory tipped with gould I wont to were;
This said, the libs of her fair sweetest mouth
Upon the offended cheek she laid; and strait,
(O strange effect) whether with the sound it were
Of her soft murmured verse of Magic power,
Or rather (as I rather do believe)
The virtue of her mouth,
That what it touches, cures, Phillis was cur'de;
And with the pain soon was the swelling gone.
I, that till then never dreamed of more delight,
Then on the shine of her bright eyes to gaze,
And joy to hear her speak, (music more sweet,
Then makes the murmur of a slow pac'de brook,
When it is with thousand little pebbles crossed;
Or the wind pratling' among the wanton leaves)
Began then, even then to feel a new desire
Possess me, of touching those dear lips with mine;
And grown more subtle then I was before,
(So love perhaps th'imagination whets,)
I found this new deceit, whereby to 'aspire
With greater ease to the end of my desire;
I faynde my self stung on the nether lip,
In like sort with a Be as Phillis was;
And in such manner began to moan myself,
As th'helpe my tongue craved not, my looks implored;
The harmless Siluia, pitying stratt my case,
Offered her ready cure to my fayn'd hurt;
But the vnfayn'd wound I bleed of, deeper made,
And far more deadly, when those coral twins
On mine she laid. Nor do the giddy Bees
Gather from any flower honey so sweet,
As I did from those freshest roses gather;
Though bashful shame, and fear had taught to bar,
Hot kisses from desire to press too far,
T'imbathe themselves; and did their heat withholde
And kill, or made them slower and less bold.
But while down to my beart that sweetness glided,
Mixed with a secret poison, such delight
I inly felt, that faigning still the grief
Of the sting had not left me yet; so dealt,
That she the charm repeated sundry times:
Since when till now, still more and more I find,
For all her charm, she'has left the sting behind.
Whose pain ere since has so increased upon me,
As my loue-labouring breast could hold no longer,
But that upon a time, when diverse Nymphs
And Shepherds of us in a ring were sitting,
Whilst the play was, each one should softly whisper
Some word in the ear of her that next him sat;
Siluia (quoth I soft in her ear) for thee
I pine, and dye, unless thou pity me.
No sooner heard she this, but down she hangs
The fair look, whence I might perceive to break
A sudden and unwonted ruddinesse,
That seemed to breat he forth anger mixed with shame;
Nor would shee' in other language answer me,
Then such a troubled silence, as appeared
Threatening and deadly; nor since then would ever
Willingly see, or hear me: Thrice the Sun
His yearly course has run, thrice the green fields
Has the naked Sythman barb'd; and three times has
The Winter robbed the trees of their green locks;
That I have tryde all means I could, to appease her,
And naught remains, but that I dye to please her;
And gladly would I dye, were I but sure
'Twould either please, or but draw pity from her;
Each were a blessing to me, though no doubt
Her pity were of both the greater meede,
And worthyer recompense for all my love,
And for my death; yet I were loath to wish
Ought, that too rudely might those eyes molest,
Or do the least offense to that dear breast.

Thy: Did she but hear thus much from thee, beleeu'st thou
It would not make her love, or pity thee?

Am: I neither know, nor can I hope so much:
She flies my speech, as the Adder does the charm,

Thy: Well be of comfort; my mind gives me yet,
We Will find a mean that she shall hear thee speak

Am: 'Twill come to naught; to beg such grace were vain,
For me to speak, where speech no grace will gain.

Thy: For shame despair not thus.

Ami: Alas just cause
Bids me despair; my cruel destiny
Was read by the grave Mopso long agon,
Mopso that knows the hid language of birds,
And understands the force of herbs and founts.

Thy: What Mopo's this thou speak on? is it not he
That carries honey in his supple tongue,
And friendly smiles for all he looks upon,
But in his heart deceit, and hidden bears
Under his coat a rasor? shame befall him;
The vilde unlucky doomes he lewdly sells
To silly fools with that grave look, and grace,
Ar far from truth; take it of my word, and trial.
I Will rather hope (and sure my hope will thrive)
That from this fellows idle auguryes
Much happyer fate will to thy love arise.

Am: If ought by proof thou know of him, good swayne
Hyde it not from me?

Their: I Will tell thee willingly.
When first my hap led me to know these woods,
I knew this fellow, and esteemed him
As thou do: So it fortuned once, I had
Desire and business to go see that great
Wonder of Cities, at whose ancient feet
The broad-fam'd river runs; and him I made
Acquainted with my purpose: he replies,
And thus began to preach; My son beware
Now thou art going to that seat of fame,
Where those deceiptfull crafty Citizens,
And evil minded Courtiers live, and wont
To scoff at us, and hold in such a scorn
Our plain distrnstlesse homely carriage;
Be well aduiz'd (my son) and press not there
Where the fresh colored robes with gould ar wrought,
Gay plumes, and dayly-varied dressings shine;
But above all, beware accursed Fate,
Or thy youths iollity conduct thee not
Unto that magazine of restless chatt,
But fly that cursed and inchaunted place.
What place is that (quoth I?) it is there (said he)
Where dwell th'inchantresses that have the power
And art to make men, and their minds transparent;
And what so Diamonds seem, and finest gold,
But glass and copper ar; those silver chestes
That seem full of rich treasor, ar no more
Then kennells full of filth, and cozen men;
The walls ar built too with that wondrous art,
That they will speak, and answer them that speak;
Nor in half words, and such imperfect sounds,
As wont the Eccos that here haunt our grounds,
But every word whole, and entyre repeating:
Nay more then this, the tables, chaires, and stools,
Hangings, and all that to each room belongs,
Have tongue and voice, and never silent ar;
False lies there, formde into the shape of babes,
Ar hopping all about; and be he dumb
That enters there, finds strait a tongue to prate
And lie with; but there is yet worse then this,
May happen thee; thou may perhaps be turned
Into a beast, a tree, a flood, a flame,
Into a flood of tears, a fire of sighs.
All this he told me; and I forward went
To see the City with this false belief;
And (as good happ would have it,) chaunc'd to pass
Along the place where stands that blessed dwelling,
Whence I might hear breath out such melody,
By Swans, and Nymphs, and heavenly Sirens made,
With voice so shrill, so sweet and full of pleasure,
That all amazed, I stayed to gaze, and listen:
Before the door there stood (me seemed) as guard
Of the fair shows within, a man in show
And of proportion stout, and knightly hue;
Such as (for what he seemed me) made me doubt
Whether for Arms he were, or counsel fitter:
With a benign, and mild, though grave aspect,
He highly-faire bespake, and led me in;
He great in place, me poor and homely man:
But then, what did I see? what did I hear?
Celestial goddesses, and lovely Nymphs,
New lights, new Orpheusses; and others too
Vnuayl'd vnclouded, as the virgin-morne,
When silver dewes her golden rays adorn.
There Phoebus shone, inlightning all about,
With all his sister Muses; among whom
Satt Elpine; at which sight, all in a trice
I felt my self grow greater then my self,
Full of new power, full of new diety?
And sang of wars, and Knightly deeds in Arms,
Scorning the rural Songs I wont to make;
And though I after did (for others pleasure)
Turn to these woods again, yet I retaynde
Part of that Spirit; nor yet sounds my pipe
So lowly as before, but shriller far.
And through the woods rings with a trumpets voice.
Afterward Mopso heard me'; and with so vilde,
And sour a countenance greeted me, that I
Became strait hoarce, and was a long time mute;
When all the Shepherds said, sure I had bin
Scared with the Wolf; but Mopso was the Wolf.
This I have told thee, that thou may believe
How little this man's words deserve belief;
And out of doubt, thou have the more cause to hope,
For that this fellow bids thee not to hope.

Am: I Am glad to hear this troth of him; but now
I leave my life, and my lives care to you.

Thy: Fear not it is all my care to cure thy pain:
Within this boure see thou be here again.

Chorus. O Happy Age of Gould; happy' hours;
Not for with milk the rivers ran,
And hunny dropped from every tree;
Nor that the Earth bore fruits, and flowers,
Without the toil or care of Man,
And Serpents were from poison free;
Nor for the Air (ever calm to see)
Had quite exil'de the lowering Night;
Whilst clad in an eternal Spring
(Now fiery hott, or else freezing)
The cheeks of heaven smil'de with clear light;
Nor that the wandering Pine of yore
Brought neither wars, nor wares from foreign shore;
But therefore only happy Days,
Because that vain and idle name,
That couz'ning I doll of unrest,
(Whom the madd vulgar first did raize,
And called it Honor, whence it came
To tyrannize over every breast,)
Was then suffered to molest
Poor lovers hearts with new debate;
More happy they, by these his hard
And cruel laws, were not debarred
Their innate freedom; happy state;
The goulden laws of Nature, they
Found in their breasts; and then they did obey.
Amidd the silver streams and flowers,
The winged Genii then would dance,
Without their bow, without their brande;
The Nymphs sat by their Paramours,
Whispring loue-sports, and dalliance,
And joining lips, and hand to hand;
The fairest Virgin in the land.
Nor scorn'de, nor glor'yed to displaye
Her cheeks fresh roses to the eye,
Or open her fair breasts to the day,
(Which now adays so veiled lie,)
But men and maidens spent free hours
In running Rivers, Lakes, or shady Bowres.
Thou Honor, thou did first deuize
To mask the face of Pleasure thus;
Bar water to the thirst of Love,
And lewdly did instruct fair eyes
They should be nyce, and scrupulous,
And from the gazing world remove
Their beauties; thy hands new netts woue
T'intrap the wild curles, fair dispred
To the open air; thou made the sweet
Delights of Love seem thus unmeet;
And (teaching how to look, speak, tread,)
By thy ill laws this ill have left,
That what was first Loves gift, is now our theft.
Nor ought thy mighty working brings,
But more annoyes, and woe to us;
But thou (of Nature and of Love
The Lord, and scourge of mighty Kings,)
Why do thou shrowde thy greatness thus
In our poor cells? hence, and remove
Thy power; and it display above.
Disturbing great ones in their sleep;
And let us meaner men alone
T'inioye again, (when thou art gone)
And laws of our Forefathers keep.
Live we in love, for our lives hours
Have on to death, that all at length deuoures.
Live we while we may; the wayne
Of Heaven can set, and rise again;
But we (when once we looze this light)
Must yield us to a never ending Night.

Actus Secundus.
Scena Prima.
Satyr solus. SMall is the Be; but yet with his small sting
Does greater mischief, then a greater thing.
But what of all things can be less then Love,
That through so narrow passages can pierce,
And in so narrow room lie hid? sometime
Under the shadow of an eyelids fault,
Now in the small curle of a shining tresse,
Now in the little pitts which form sweet smiles
In an inamo'ring check; yet makes so deep,
So deadly and immedicable wounds.
Ay me my breast is all one bleeding wound;
A thousand armed darts alas are lodged
By that fell tyrant Love in Siluia's eyes;
Cruel Love, cruel Siluia, sauadger
Then the wild deserts; O how well thy name
Suits with thy nature (Siluan as thou art)
The woods under their green roofes hide the Snake,
The Bear, the Lion; and thou in thy breast
Hydest disdain, hate, and impiety,
More balefull then the Lion, Bear, or Snake;
For they will someway be reclaim'de; thou neither
With prayers or gifts; Alas when I present thee
Fresh flowers, thou frowardly refusest them;
Perhaps because thou have in thy lovely face,
Fairer then those; Alas when I present thee
Fair Apples, thou do scornfully reject them;
Perhaps because thy bosom bears a pair
Fairer then those; Ay me when I present thee
Sweet honey, thou disdainfully deny'st it,
Perhaps because thy lips breathe sweeter honey
Then the Be makes; but if my poverty
Can give thee naught that thou have not more fair,
And lovely in thy self, my self I give thee;
But thou unjust scorn'st, and abhorr'st the gift.
Yet I Am not so foul, to be so dispiz'de,
If well I marked my self, when the other day
I viewed my shadow in the watery main,
When the wind blew not, and the sea lay still.
The manly tincture of my sanguine brow,
These muscled arms, and shoulders large enough;
This hairy breast of mine, and hory thyes
Proclaim my able force, and manly hood;
Make trial of me if thou doubt'st of it.
What will thou do with these same tenderlings,
On whose bare cheek the young down scarsely springs?
With what an art they place their hair in order?
Women in show, and women in their strength.
Tell me, who will thou have to follow thee
Over the bald hills, and through the leauy woods,
And fight for thee with Bear, and armed Bore?
No no, my shape's not it thou hat'st me for,
But it is my poverty thou do abhor.
Ah that poor Cottages will follow still
Great Towns example in what ere is ill;
This may be truly called the Golden age,
For gould alone preuailes, gould only raynes.
O thou (who ere thou were) that first did teach
To sell love thus, accursed be thy dust.
And thy cold buried bones; nor ever may
Shepherd or Nimphe say to them, rest in peace;
But be they washed with raines, and tossed with winds,
And may the passers by, and all the rout
Of beasts with foul feet spurn them all about.
Base mercinary love, thou have deflour'd
Loves nobleness; and turned his happy joys
Into such bitterness, and sharp annoyes.
Love to be slave to gold? O miracle
More odious, and abominable far
Then the large earth produces, or the Main.
But why alas, why do I vex my self
Thus all in vain? no, let each creature use
Those arms that Nature for his aid has given him,
The Heart his speed, the Lion his strong pawe,
The foaming Bore his tuske; the woman's arms
And power lie in her beauty', and graceful shape;
I, since my strength is the best help I have,
And am by nature fit for deeds of force,
Will for reward of all my love misspent,
Force this proud cruel to my own content.
And by so much as I can understand,
(As yon Goteherd that has observed her ways
Has lately told me) she does often repair
To'a water-fount to wash her self; the place
He made me know, and there I mean to lie
Close in a thickett near, to attend her coming,
And as occasion fits, I Will make her mine,
What can she do then, what avail alas
Can her hands give her, or her legs to fly
(Poor wretch) from me so forcible, and swift?
Let her a good year weep, and sigh, and rail,
And put on all the power her beauty has;
If once I catch her by the snary curles,
We will not part in have, till I have bathed
(For my revenge) my arms in her warm blood.

Actus Secundus. Scen: Secunda.
Daphne. Thirsis. THirsis (as I have told thee) well I know
How well, Aminta Siluia loves; heaven knows
How many friendly offices I have,
And will do for him; and so much the rather
For that thou do entreat in his behalf;
But I would sooner take in hand to tame
A Bear, or Tygar then a fond young wench;
The silly thing (simple as fair) sees not
How sharp and burning be her beauties rays,
But smiles or cries; yet wounds where ere she go,
And fondly knows not if she hurt or no.

Thy: Tush there is no wench so simple but she knows
Soon as she leaves the cradle, how to seem
Spruce, and delightful; and what arms to use
To hurt, or kill outright, and what to heal
A wounded heart, and give it life withal.

Da: What Master is it that shows 'hem all these arts?

Thy: He that instructs the birds to sing and fly;
The Fish to swim, the Ram to butt, the Bull
To use his horn, the Peacocke to display
His many-ey'ed-plumes beauty to the day.

Da: How name you this same teacher?

Thy: H'has a name.

Da: Go trifler.

Thy: Why I prithee art not thou
Fit enough to teach twenty girls their lessons?
I Will warrant thee, I; and yet to speak the troth
They need no teacher; Nature teaches them
Although the nurse and mother have a part.

Da: Come you are unhappy; but in earnest now
I Am not resolved Siluia so simple is
As by her words she seems; for the other day
One deed of hers put me in doubt of her:
I found her in those broad fields near the town,
Where amongst drown'de grounds, lies a little Isle,
And round about, a water clear, and calm;
There over she hung her head; and seemed (me thought)
Full proud to see her self, and took advice
O'th'water, in what order best to lay
Her locks, and them about her brow display,
And over them her veil, and over that
The flowers she carried in her lapp; now here
She hung a Lilly, there she stuck a Rose;
Then laid them to her neck, and to her cheek,
As to try whethers hew the other past;
At last, (as joyful of the victory)
She smiling seemed to say, the day is mine;
Nor do I wear you for my ornament,
But for your own disgrace (counterfeit flowers)
To show how much my beauty passes yours.
But while she thus stood decking of her self,
She turned her eye by chance, and soon had found
That I had noted her, and blushed a main,
Down fell her flowers; I laughed to see her blush;
And she blushed more, perceiving that I laughed;
But, (for of one side of her face, the hair
Was hung abroad, and the other not,) she turns
To th'water once on twice, to mend the fault,
And gazed as 'twere by stealth, (fearful belike
That I too nearly eyed her,) where she saw
Her hair (though orderlesse, yet) hanging so,
As graced her well; I saw, and saw her not.

Thy: All this I will believe: guest I not well?

Da: Thou did: but yet I will be bold to say
That I have seldom seen a Shepherdess
Or Nymph what ever of her years discreeter;
Nor was I such when I was of her years:
The world grows old, and of a troth I think
It grows as ill as old.

Thy: True; heretofore
Those of the City were not wont so much
To haunt these woods as now adays they do,
Nor meaner people in the village bredd,
To come so much among the citizens;
Their bloods are now more mingled, and their customs.
But leave we this discourse; and tell me now
Could thou not find a time Aminta might
Either alone, or in thy presence come
To speak to Siluia?

Da: I cannot tell;
Siluia is nyce and strange beyond all measure.

Thy: And he nicely respest full beyond measure.

Da: He Is in the wrong then, fie on such a lover;
Nice (quoth you?) counsel him to leave that vice,
If he will learn to love; he must be bold,
And urge with speeding importunity;
Let him a little filtch; if that be vain,
Then ravish: tush know thou what women ar?
They fly; but every step wish to be taken;
What they deny, they wish were snatched from them;
They fight, but still wish to be overcome.
I tell thee this Thirsis, but in thine ear:
Blabb not what IN say to thee', I cannot speak
Inrime (thou know) but if I could, I Would say
Somewhat more worth then rhyme to bear away.

Thy: Fear not, I will not speak
Ought from thy lips what ere they open to me.
But gentle Daphne, for the dear days sake
Of thy past youth, help me to help Aminte
Poor wretch that dies.

Dap: Ah what a propper style
Of coniuration (fool) have thou deuiz'd
To move me with; bringing my youth to mind,
The pleasure I have lost, and pain I find.
But what would have me do?

Thy: Thou Art not to seek of wit, nor yet of power,
Do but dispose thy will, I Will ask no more.

Da: Well then, I Will tell thee: we ar going now
Siluia and I together all alone
Unto Diana's fount, to wash our selves;
There where the planetree with his safer shade
Ore-spreds the cool stream, and is wont t'inuite
The weary huntresses to rest, and cool them:
There she will uncase her so-beloued limbs.

Thy: And what of that?

Da: What of that? silly thou art
Or else thou would not ask me what of that.

Thy: Suppose I hit thy meaning, who knows yet
If he will dare to meet her there or no?

Da: No? Why then truly let him stay till she
Come to woee him; and when will that be trow ye?

Thy: Do she or not, he does deserve she did.

Da: But now let us leave this theme; and talk a word
Or two of thee; say Thirsis, wilt not thou
Resolve at last to be a lover too?
Thou Art not yet old; few more then thirty years
Have ouer-slipt thee, and I well remember
Thy infancy; will thou live ioylesse still?
For only 'a lovers is the happy life.

Thy: The joys of Venus he inioyes as well,
That shunning lovers painful miseries,
Tastes of the sweet, and lets the sour alone.

Da: O but that sweet grows dull, and gluts betime,
That is not seas'ned with a little sour.

Thy: Better it is to be glutted (of the two)
Then pine before one feeds, and after two.

Da: But if the food be pleasing, and possessed,
It Is good before; and in the tasting best.

Thy: No man can so possess what he desires,
As just t'inioy it then when is hunger craves it.

Da: Who hopes to find, that never means to seek?

Thy: It Is dangerous to seek that which once found,
Pleases a little, but not found, torments
Much more; no, no, I Will go no more a wooing;
Cupid shall triumph over me no more;
I know a little what those sufferings be,
Let others prove them if they list for me.

Da: Belike thou have not inioy'd loves pleasure yet:

Thy: Nor do I wish to buy the plague so dear.

Da: You may perhaps be forced against your will;

Thy: Who keeps himself far off, cannot be forced.

Da: Who can be far from love?

Thy: Who fears and flies.

Da: But what auayles to fly from him has wings?

Thy: Love but newborn, has wings but short and small,
And hardly strong enough to fly with all.

Da: Be'ing young, we know him not; but after, long;
And when we feel him once, he is grown too strong.

Thy: Not if we never felt him grow before.

Da: Well; ye shall hau't; we will see how well you will
Bridle your eye and heart; but I protest
Since thou can play both Hound and Hare so well,
If ere I hear thee call and cry for help,
I will not move a foot, nor yet a finger,
Nor stir an eye, nor speak a word for thee.

Thy: Would have the heart (cruel) to see me dye?
If thou would have me love, why love thou me,
And lett's now make a loving bargain on it.

Da: Away you mock me now; well well, perhaps
You do not merit such a love as mine.
I Have seen many a ladd as fine as you
Deceived with a fair seeming painted face.

Thy: I do not jest nor mock thee; this is but
A color now to bar me loving thee,
As it is the custom of you all to do:
But if you will not love me, I Am content,
To live still as I do.

Da: I, live so still,
Happyer then twenty others; live in ease;
Perhaps unawares ease may engender love.

Thy: O Daphne, a God this ease has bred me; he
That has appeared a second god to me
By whom so many herds and flocks ar fedd
From the one to the other Sea, upon the fair
And fruitful Plains, and on the craggy backs
Of the steep Apenines: he said to me,
When as he made me his; Thirsis (quoth he)
Let others chase the Wolf, and Thief, and keep
A watchful eye over my walled sheep;
Let others care be to reward, or punish
My Ministers; let others feed and tend
My flocks, and keep the accoumpt of milk and wool;
And take, and pay: take thou thine ease, and sing,
Wherefore it is reason good, I let go by
All looser strains, and vainer carrolings;
And sing his Auncesters, and their high praise,
Who is to me Jove, and Apollo both;
Since in his looks and deeds he both resembles
Issue of Saturn and of Heau'ne. Poor Muse
To mean for such a task; and yet how e're
Horce voic'd, or clear she sings, he not contemns her.
I sing not him, too high for my low rimes,
Whom silent adoration only can
Worthily honor; but still shall his altars
Be sprinkled with my flowers, and never without
My humble Incense fuming all about.
Which simple (yet devout) religion in me
When it shall leave my heart, the Hearts shall feed
^n the air on air; and so the floods shall change
their bed, and course; that Sone shall Persia greet,
and the large Tigris beat the French- Alps feet.

Da: O thou fly'st high; prithee descend a little,
And to our purpose.

Thy: Then here lies the point;
That as thou go with her unto the fount,
Thou use thy best cunning to make her coming,
And hear Aminta speak; mean time my care
Shall be to make Aminta meet you there.
I fear my task will be the hard'st of both.
Onn then of Gods name.

Da: Yes, I go; but Thirsis,
We were discoursing of an other matter.

Thy: If mine eye fail me not, yon same should be
Aminta, that comes hitherward; it is he.

Actus Secundus. Scena Tertia.
Aminta. Thirsis. NOw shall I see what Thirsi' has done for me;
And if he have done nothing, ere my woes
Melt me'into nothing, I Will go kill my self
Before the proud face of that cruel maid,
That so delights to see my hearts deep wound
Made by her murdering eyes, as sure it can
Please her no less, to see her sad command
Fulfilled on my own breast with my own hand.

Thy: News, news Aminta, happy news I bring thee;
Clear then thy browe, and cast thy griefs away.

Am: What is it thou say Thirsis, what bringst thou me,
Life, or death? new joy, or new misery?

Thy: I bring thee life and joy, if thou but dare
To go and meet them; but I tell thee true
Thou must not faint but play the man Aminta.

Am: Why against whom should I advance my force?

Thy: Suppose the Nymphe thou love were in a wood
That (wal'de about with mountains of sharp briars)
Were full of Tygars, and of greedy Lions,
Would thou go thither?

Am: Yes, more cheerfully,
Then village-lasse to the dance o'holly days.

Thy: Were she engaged amongst troops of armed thieves,
Would thou go thither?

Am: Yes more greedily,
Then runs the thirsty Heart to the cool streeme.

Thy: O but a harder task asks greater labor.

Am: Why I would pass through the devouring torre^ts,
When the dissolu'de snowes down the mountains rain:
And headlong run t'ingulph them in the main:
Or through the fire; or indeed down to hell;
If any place a hell may termed be,
That shall contain so heavenly a thing as she.
But prithee tell me all.

Thy: Here then.

Am: Say on.

Thy: Siluia' at a Fount, starnak'd, and all alone
Attends thy coming; dare'st thou now go thither?

Am: Siluia? and all alone? and stays for me?

Thy: Yes all alone, unless happily there be
Daphne', who thou know is all in all for thee. (ah do not

Am: Naked?

Their: I, naked, but.

Am: But what?
Mangle me thus.

Their: Why but she does not know
That you should meet her there; though (as I say)
She Will there attend you, do but have away.

Am: Bitter conclusion; that infects, and poisons
What ever sweet thy former speeches promised,
Why with such art
Do thou delude me, cruel as thou art?
Is It not enough
Think thou for me thus full of grief to be,
But thou must come to mock my misery?

Thy: Be ruled by me Aminta, and be happy;

Am: What should I do?

Thy: Why not let slip that good
That fortune (much thy friend) presents thee with.

Am: The beau'ns forbid that ever I should do
Ought to displease her; nor yet ever did I
The thing that justly merited her frown;
Vulesse it were my loving her so much;
Which yet if'twere a fault, was none of mine;
It was her beauties; and by beau'n I vow
I mean not to begin to'offend her now.

Thy: Why but yet tell me, if'twere in thy power
To leave to love her, would thou do it to please her?

Am: No sure; love will not let me say, or think
That ere I should desist from loving her,
Though'twere in my own power.

Thy: Why an't be so,
In her dispight whether she will or no,
Youl'd love her,

Am: No, no, not in spite of her,
But I would love her.

Thy: Yet against her will?

Am: Why yes, against her will.

Thy: And wherefore then
Dare you not take of her against her will,
That which (although't erkes thee at first to do)
In the end will quite thy pains and please her too.

Am: Thirsis, let love that speaks within my breast
Make answer for me; thou, (through thy long use
Of reasoning much of love) too subtle art
For me; love ties my tongue, who tied my heart.

Thy: Why then thou will not go?

Am: Yes, yes, I Will go;
But not where you would have me:

Thy: Whether then?

Am? To death; if this be all y'haue done for me.

Thy: Is this that I have done then nothing worth?
And do thou think Daphne would counsel thee
To go, unless she saw a little more
Into thy Siluias heart, then thou and I?
Suppose she has revealed her mind to her;
Think you she would abide that any else
Should know it? or know she knew it ere the more?
So that to covet an express consent
On her part, think you not it were to seek
What in all reason must offend her most?
Where Is this your care then, and desire to please her?
Perhaps she would that your delight should be
Your own theft, not her gift; what skil't I pray.
Whether you have it this, or the other way?

Am: What certainty' have I that her mind is such?

Thy: See still how sillily you seek to have
That certainty which must of force displease her;
And which above all things else you should not crave:
But who assures you to the contrary
But that she may mean so as well as not?
Now if she did, and that you would not go;
(Since both the doubts and dangers equal be)
Is not a valiant then a base death better?
Thou Art mute; thou art overthrown;
Confess it then;
Nor doubt but this thy ouerehrow will be
The Occasion of a greater victory.
Go'we.

Am: Stay.

Thy: Why stay?
Know not how swiftly the time runs away?

Am: Prithee lett's think first what, and how to do.

Thy: We Will think of all things as we go; but he
That thinks too much, does little, commonly.

Chorus. O Love, of whom, and where is taught
This thy so doubtful Art, and long
Of loving, that instructs the tongue
At ease to utter every thought.
That the wild fant' sie does deuize?
Whilst with thy wings above the heaven it flies.
The learned Athens taught it not;
Nor was it to Liceus known;
Apollo, god of Helicon
For all his knowledge knew it not.
Faint and cold is what he speaks,
Nor from his voice such a fire breaks
As does thy greatness (Love) befitt:
Nor can his wit,
Or thoughts unto the height arise
Of thy profounder mysteries:
Thou readst thine own lesson best
(Great Love) and onely'art by thy self expressed.
Thou of thy grace and bounty daynest
T'instruct the vnlearnedest, and plainest
Men of thousands, how to see
And read those wondrous things that be
Writ with thine own hand in an others eyes.
Thou teach those thou love best,
A purer language then the rest,
And with smoth ease to breath their fantasies.
Nay often times, such is thy rare
And most misterious eloquence,
That in a confusd'e broken sense
And half words that imperfect are,
The heart is best revealed and seen;
And such perhaps move more by far
Then many words that better pollisht been.
Yea eu'ne Loves silence often does more express
Then words could do, the minds unhappiness.
(Love) let others if they please
Turn ore the works of Socrates,
And those great volumes of the wise;
While I but read what is writ in two fair eyes.
Perhaps the penn that higher climes,
Will but halt after the rimes,
That in the rough and vncooth tree
With my rude artlesse hand engraven be.

Actus Tertius.
Scena Prima.
Thirsis. Chorus. O Sauadge cruelty'; O th'ungratefull mind
Of a most most ungrateful Maid; O Sex
Full of ingratitude: and thou lewd Nature,
Nigligent mistress, and maker of things,
Wherefore, ah wherefore made thou womankinde
So fair, and sweet, and mild ouely without;
And did forget to make their insides good?
Poor youth, I fear 'has made away himself
Ere this; alas I cannot find him out:
Three hours from place to place, and where I left him
Have I bin seeking him; but cannot find
Or him, or any print of his strai'd foot:
Sure sure he is dead.
I will go ask yon Swains I see, if they
Can tell me any tidings of him. Friends
Did you not see Aminta, or happly hear
News of him lately?

Cho: Thou do seem to me
Full of distraction, what is it troubles thee?
How came thou so'out of breath, and to sweat so?
What ayl'st thou? say what is it thou fear or want;

Thy: I fear Amyntas harms; tell me I pray'
Saw ye him not?

Cho: Not since he went with you
A while agon, but what do you fear in him.

Thy: Alas I fear
Lest he have slain himself with his own hand.

Cho: Slain with his own hand? how so? what might cause
Such vengeance on himself?

Thy: Why love, and hate.

Chor: Two powerful enemies:
What cannot they do, when they meet together?
But speak yet clearer.

Their: His too much love, and her too much disdain
Whom he loved so.

Cho: Ah tell thy story out;
This is a way of passage, and ere long
Perhaps some one will bring us news of him,
Or himself come.

Thy: I Will tell it willingly;
For it is not just that such ingratitude
Should rest without the due deserved blame.
Aminta heard (and I had told it him,
And was his conduct too, the gods forgive me)
That Siluia was with Daphne gone to'a Founte
To wash themselves; thither then (not without
A thousand doubts and fears in him) we went;
And twenty times we turned again, (his heart
Being all against it,) but that I was feign
Almost against his will to force him onn;
But drawing near unto the Fount, we heard
A sadd lamenting voice; and all at once
Daphne we spy'de wringing her hands, and strait
Seeing us coming, ah run, run (she cries)
Siluia's deflowered. Th'inamoured Aminta
No sooner heard it, but swift as a Pard
He flung away; and I made after him:
Nor far we went, when lo before our eyes
We saw the young maid naked as at her birth,
Fast fettr'd by the fair hair to a tree;
About whose branches in a thousand knotts
The curles were linked, and entertwin'de, the girdle
That wont to deck, and guard her maiden loins,
Served as an actor in her rauishment;
Binding her arms about the trees hard trunk,
The tree it self became a helper too,
For by her feet a branch or two grew out,
Which (easy bending) both her tender legs
Had fastened to the tree; and face to face
A beastly Satyr stood; who but eu'ne then
Had newly made an end of binding her,
All the defense she could (poor soul) she made;
But sure'twould have but little steeded her,
Had not we come. Aminta with his dart
Flue like a Lion
Upon the Satyr; and I gathered stones;
VVhereat he fledd; and gave Aminta leisure
To feast his greedy eyes with her fair limbs,
Which trembling seemed as tender, white, and soft,
As vnprest curds new from the whay divided.
Full was her face of anger, grief, and spite;
He gently accosting her with modest looks,
Spoke thus; O lovely Siluia pardon me;
Fardon my hands for daring to approache
So near these beauteous limbs of thine; alas
It is necessity inforceth them,
Necessity t'unloose these bands of thine;
And let it (I beseech thee) not displease thee,
That Fate has raised them to this happiness.

Cho: Words that would mollify a heart of flint;
But what reply made she?

Their: Why none at all.
But with a look full of disdain, hung down
The head, and hidd her fair lapp all she could;
He stood vnbrayding her intangled' tresses,
And sighing said (the whiles,) O how unworthy
Is this rude trunk of so fair knots as these?
See what advantage have Loves votaries,
That (like this tree) have with so precious bands
Their hearts entwined: Cruel plant, could thouse
This hair thus injured, that thus honors thee?
Then with his hands her hands he fair vnlooz'd,
In such a sort, as that he seemed affraide
To touch them, yet desired to touch them still:
Then stooped he down t'untye her feet; when she
Finding her late bound hands at liberty,
Said with a scornful, and disdayning look;
Shepherd, I am Diana's; touch me not;
Leave me, I shall unbind my feet my self.

Cho: Ah that the soft best of a maid should harbor
Such pride; O Courtesy full ill repayde.

Their: Strait he with reverence withdrew himself,
Not lifting once his eyes to look on her;
Barring himself of his delight; that she
Might lay no blame on his immodestie.
I that was hid near hand, and saw all this,
And heard it all, was eu'ne exclaiming on her,
But that I curbed my self; see the strange creature;
After she was with much ado got loose,
Away she hurryed strait, swift as a Do,
Without so much as 'Thanke ye, or farewell;
And yet knew well, she had no cause to fear;
So modest and respectfull was Aminta.

Cho: Why fled she then?

Th: Perhaps she thought it showed
Better; and argued more her modesty.

Cho: Her foul ingratitude: but what did then,
What said the poor Aminta?

Their: I cannot tell.
For (angry) after her I ran amain
To have oretane, and staid her; but in vain;
For soon I lost her; and again returning
Unto the Fountain where I left Aminta,
I found him not; and my heart much misgiues me
Of some self ill befalne him; for I know
He was resolved (before this happened him)
To end his life and miseries together.

Cho: It is the common use and art of Lovers
To threaten their own deaths; but rarely shall
We see the effect in any of them all.

Thy: Pray heau'ne he be not of those rare ones then.

Cho: Tush fear him not.

Thy: Well I Will down to the Cave
Of the sage Elpine; thither he perhaps
Will be retyr'de, if he be yet alive;
For there he went full often to'allay and ease
The rage of his bitter calamities,
With the sweet sound of Elpines Reeds; that winn
And draw with their alluring voice, to hear them,
The hard stones from the craggy mountain topps;
Make floods and waterfounts run with pure milk;
And often the rough barked trees against their kinds
Distill sweet honny from their bitter rindes.

Actus Tertius. Scen: Secunda.
Aminta, Daphne, Nerina. Pitiless (Daphne) was that Pity of thine,
When thou held'st back the dart; because my death
Will but more painful be, the more delay'de:
And now, why do thou stay me trifling thus,
And hold me' in vain with these thy long discourses?
If thou be fearful of my death, thou fear
My happiness.

Daph. Leave leave Aminta
This thy unjust despair: I know her well;
And 'twas her bashfulnesse, not cruelty,
That made her run away so fast from thee.

Am: Ah that my only friend must be Despair,
Seeing that only Hope has bredd my ruin:
And yet it would be breeding in my breast
Again, and bid me live; when, what can be
A greater ill to so great misery,
Then still to live, but to be still unhappy?

Da: Why live yet, live with thy unhappiness;
And bear it for thy greater happiness
When the time comes; think what thou lately saw
In the fair naked one, and let that serve thee
For a reward sufficient for thy hope,
And make thee in love with life.

Am: 'Twas not enough
For love, and fortune, that I was before,
So wretched, as I scarsly could be more;
But that I must be showed (t'augment my ill)
Part of my bliss, yet go without it still.

Ner: Must I be then the Raven, and sinister
Relater of so bitter news? O wretched,
Wretched Montano; ah what will thou do,
When thou shall hear the sad, and killing story
Of thy own only Siluia? poor old man,
Most hapless father of a hapless child;
Ah now no father.

Da: I do hear a sad
Lamenting voice.

Am: I hear the name of Siluia,
That strikes mine ear, and my heart through at once;
But who is it names her?

Da: It Is I think the Nimphe
Nerina, she whom Dian loves so well,
That has so lively eyes, and lovely hands,
And so becoming a behavior.

Ner: Yet he shall know it; and go gather up
The Unhappy relics, (if yet any be;)
Ah Siluia Siluia, O accursed fate.

Am: Ay me, what means this Nymph? what says she?

Ner: Daphne?

Da: Nerina? what is the matter that thou nam'st
Siluia so often, and sigh'st at every word?

Ner: There Is cause enough Daphne; ah too too much.

Am: Ay me I feel, I feel my breast so full
Of ice, my breath half stopped; lives she, or no?

Da: Tell us all, tell the worst Nerina.

Ner: O heaven,
Must I be then th'vnhappy' historian?
And yet it is fit I tell my sad tale out.
Silu'ia starnak'd (whereof ye know perhaps
The cause) came to our house, where being clad,
She afterward desired me I would go
A hunting with her, as it was before
Appointed, to the Grove of Oaks, (for so
The place ye know is called;) I did agree;
And onn we went, and found there many Nymphs
Gathered together; not far off, behold
Rusheth a huge Wolf forth, whose yawning jaws
Foamed with a bloody froth; Siluia then near him
Let fly a shaft at him; and in his head
The arrow light; he took the wood again,
And she at heels persu'd him with a Dart
Into the wood. --

Am: Ah sorrowful beginning,
I fear, I fear a sad conclusion.

Ner: I with an other Dart followed their footing;
But setting out too late, was cast far off;
And having gained the wood, I lost the sight
Of them; yet kept their track, and ran so far,
Till I was got into the desertest
And thickest of the wood; at length I found
(And took up) Siluias Dart upon the ground;
And not far off a white veil, which (ere while)
I did my self bind up her hair withal;
And whilst I looked about me', Ispi'de seven Wolves
Licking blood off the ground, that scatt'red lay
About a few bare bones; and 'twas my hap
To escape unseen, while they so earnestly
Minded their pray.
I full of fear turned back, and came my way.
And this is all that I can say of Siluia;
And here is the veil.

Am: Thou Have said, thou have said enough;
O blood, O veil, O Siluia, 'dead dead --

Dap: Poor youth he dies; he is dead; ay me he is dead
With grief.

Ner: He breath's yet, he is but in a trance;
Tarry he comes again t'himselfe.

Am: O grief,
Why do, why do thou thus torment me?
And wilt not end me? thou art unjust. Perhaps
Thou leau'st the work to my own hand: I am,
I am content it shall be my own care;
Since thou will not, or can not do it; Ay me,
Ay me if nothing want to make this clear,
And nothing want to make my miseries
Now brimfull; why do' I linger? why do I stay?
O Daphne Daphne, was it to this end,
This bitter, bitter end thou did reserve me?
My death had then bin sweet, and pleasing to me,
When thou and heaven held back my Dart, and saved me;
Heaven that was loathe (belike) I should prevent
With death, the woes it has prepared for me;
But now't has done the very worst it can,
I hope both heaven, and you may suffer me
To dye in peace.

Da: Stay yet, stay wretch, and learn
The truth yet better.

Am: Ah the truth is such,
'Iue stayed too long, alas I Have heard too much.

Ner: Ay me, wretch that I am, why did I speak?

Am: Gentle Nimphe, let me crave that veil of thee,
The poor remaynder of her; they it may
Accompany me for these few sad hours
Of way, and life yet left me; and increase
That martirdom, that were no martirdom
Were it not much more then enough to kill me.

Ner: Shall I denie't, or shall I give it him?
The cause he asks it for, bids me retain it.

Am: Cruel Nimphe, to deny me' a grace so small
In my extremity; and even I see
How in each trifle fortune crosses me.
I yield, I yield; long may it bide with thee:
Long live ye; my way to my death must be.

Da: Aminta stay, Aminta', a word Aminta,
Hark, stay; alas how swift he flies away.

Ner: He runs so fast, it will be in vain for us
To follow him; 'twere best I onward went
Upon my way; and yet perhaps 'twere better
I stayed, and held my peace, then my self be
Author of poor Montano's misery.

Chorus. DEath, there is no need of thee:
Love alone, and Constancy
Ar enough (without thy Dart)
To tire upon an honest heart.
Yet so hard is not the way
To Loves fame, as many say;
For Lone no price but love regards;
And with it self, it self rewards.
And often in seeking it, is found
Glory that lives, when we are under ground.

Actus Quartus.
Scena Prima.
Daphne. Siluia. Chorus. NOw may the wind upon his wings bear hence
All ill may happen thee; together with
Th'accursed news so lately spread of thee.
Thou art alive (the gods be thanked fort't)
And even but now I did believe thee dead;
So had Nerina painted to the life
Thy late hap; but I would she had bin dumb,
Or some that heard her deaf.

Sil: Indeed I escaped
So narrowly, as I believe she might
Full well suppose me dead.

Da: Suppose she might
Yet not have told it with such certainty.
But tell me prithee how thou did escape
The danger so.

Sil: Why I in following
A Wolf into the wood, had thickt with him
So far, till I at length had lost his track;
And as I stood thinking to turn again
Back as I went, I spide him, and I knew him
By' a shaft that stuck in's head near to his ear,
Which I not long before had shot at him:
He was accompanied with many more,
About the body of some beast new slain;
But what beast 'twas I knew not; the same Wolf
I think knew me so well, that on he made
Toward me with his head besmeared with blood.
I bouldly stood, and bent a Dart at him,
And when I thought his distance fit for me,
I threw, but (whether it was fortunes fault
Or mine) I mist him, as thou know I use
Not often to do; he fiercer then before
Rusheth upon me; and was come so near,
That I, (my shafts now spent) found it too late
To trust my bow, and took me to my heels:
Away Tranne; he followed me as fast.
See now my hap; a veil that I had ty'de
My hair withal, was half undone, and flew
At the winds pleasure loosely, that at length
'Thad wound it self about a bough; I felt
That somewhat stayed me; but the fear I had,
Redoubled so my strength, that though the bough
Did all it could to hold me, I broke loose;
And as I left my veil behind, I left
Part of my hair withal; and so had fear
Lent my feet wings, that I out-went the Wolf,
And came safe from the wood; when turning home
I met thee thus amazed, and am no less
Amazed my self to see thee so.

Da: Ay me
Thou live, it is well, would all were well besides.

Sil: What ayl'st thou? prithee art thou sorry then
That I Am alive?

Da: No; that thou live I Am glad;
But for an others death I must be sad.

Sil: How Is this? for whose death?

Da: Why Aminta's death.

Sil: Aminta dead? alas how may that be?

Da: Nay how I cannot tell; nor yet am sure
Of the deed done; but I believe it firmly.

Sil: What Is this thou tell me? alas what might be
The Occasion of Aminta's death?

Da: Thy death.

Sil: Make me conceive thee.

Da: Even the heavy news
Of thy death, which he heard, and credited,
Has brought him to his end, some-way or other.

Sil: Fie, thou art deceived; and this thy thought will be
As vain as was the news thou heardst of me;
For surely no man will dye willingly.

Da: O Silu'ia Siluia, thou do not feel
Nor know what 'loues flame can do, in a breast
That is a breast of flesh, and not of flint
As thine is; for did thou but know it, I know
Thou would have loved him that loved thee more
Then both his eyes; more then his breath and life;
I do believe it, nay I Have seen, and know it.
I saw, I saw him when thou fledst from him
(Unkind and cruel as thou were) when he,
Even then when thou should rather have embraced
Then scorned him so, against his breast had bent
His Dart, with full intent to kill himself:
Nor any whit repented of the deed,
When (stayed by me from farther wounding him)
The sharp steel had his garment and his skin
Dyed in his blood, and had pierced through that heart
That loyal heart of his, that thou before
Had wounded worse, had not I held his hand,
And saved him all I could: but O alas
That slight wound served but as a trial only
And small proof of his desperate constancy;
And but to teach the fatal steel, to do
The black deed it was preappointed to.

Sil: Ay me what is this thou tell me?

Da: But at last
When the news came that thou were dead, I saw him
Sound at the hearing on it, and dye away;
And came no sooner to himself again,
But furiously he flings away amayne;
And sure I fear, alas, too sure 'twill prove
Has killed himself;
Such was his too much grief, and too much love.

Sil: But hold'st thou this for certain?

Da: It Is too true.

Sil: Ay me why did thou not strait follow him?
And stay him? ah let us seek, let us find him out;
Since from my death, his deaths desire is bredd,
He must live still because I am not dead.

Da: Alas I followed him, but he had soon
So far outrunne me, as I now despair
That we shall find him having lost his footing.

Sil: We must alas we must inquire him out
Some way or other speedily, least he
Thorough our slownesse his own murdrer be.

Da: Belike then (Cruel) thou art but grieved he should
Take from thee the honor of this goodly deed?
And would thy self be the brave murdresse?
Must no hand else but thine, an Actor be
In the execution of this Tragedy?
Well, set thy heart at rest; for howso're
He dies, thou art his only murderer.

Sil: Ah thou do wound me; and thy every word
Adds to the agony'e of my bleeding breast,
Struck through with fear of him; and with the bitter
Remembrance of the sauadge cruelty
In me, which I called honesty', and so 'twas,
But too seuereit was, and rigorous;
I find it now, alas I now repent it.

Da: What Is this? what do I hear?
Why thou art pitiful then, and thy heart
Seems to have feeling of another harms;
What do I see?
Why thou do weep too; I Am amazed at this?
Whence ar these tears? Is It love that causes them?

Sil: It Is pity, it is compassion causes them.

Da: Compassion is the messenger of love,
As is the lightning of the thunder clap.

Cho: It Is often times the property of love
When he would creep unseen into young hearts
Which austere Chastity has long time shut
And barred against him, to assume the habit
And semblance of his handmayd Pitty', and so
Deceiues them ere they be aware, and gets
Into their breasts unknown and vndiscry'de.

Da: These ar loue-teares (Siluia) they flow so fast;
Do thou not love indeed? ha? not a word?
Yes, it is too true, but alas it is too late.
Behold the strange ways of Loves chastisement;
Wretched Aminta, thou that (like the Be,
Which hurting dies, and in an others wound
Leaves his own life,) have with thy death, at last
Pierced that hard heart, which living felt thee not.
But if, O erring Spirit, (as I fear
Thou art, and seuer'd from thy empty corse)
Thou wandrest here abouts; behold her playnts;
Living thou lou'dst her, see she loves thee dead.
And if thy cruel fate would have it so,
That thy love could not be repaid till now,
And that her love was only to be purchased
By thee at this dear price; let it suffice thee
(Where more thou can not have) that thou have bought it
As dearly now, as she could rate it thee;
Even with thy death.

Cho: Dear bargain for the buyer;
And all unprofitable, and infamous
Unto the cruel seller.

Sil: O that I
Could with my love redeem his life again,
Or with my life his life, if he live not.

Da: O pity, O discretion, too late bredd;
Little avail they to revive the dead.

Actus Quartus. Scen: Secunda.
Nuntius, Chorus, Siluia. Daphne. I Am so full of woe, so full of borror
As all I hear and whatsoere I look on
Me thinks afflicts, disquiets, and affrights me.

Cho: What strange news brings this man, that seems to me
So troubled in his looks, and in his speech?

Nun: I bring the sad news of Aminta's death.

Sil: Ay me what says he?

Nun: Aminta noblest Shepherd of these woods;
That was so comely and so gracious;
So dear unto the Nymphs, and to the Muses;
And dead but eu'ne a ladd.

Cho: Ah of what death?
Tell us, ah tell all; that we may in one
Lament with thee his mischief, and our own.

Sil: Ay me my heart fails me'; I dare not approach
Th'unwelcome news which I of force must hear.
Vilde breast of mine, ohdurate heart of mine,
What fear'fl thou now? go hard'ly, press upon
The murdering knives that are in yon man's tongue;
And there display thy fiercenes? friend, I come
To bear my part of all the woe thou bring;
Perhaps it does concern me more by much
Then thou art aware of; It belongs to me;
Grutch me not on it then.

Nun: Nimphe I do believe thee;
For eu'ne upon his death, I heard the wretch
Call still upon thy name to his last breath.

Da: Now, now begins, the heavy history.

Nun: I was upon the mids of yon high hill,
Where I had spread abroad some netts of mine
To dry them, when not far off from me, came
Aminta by, with a sad clowdy look,
And altered much from what he wont to be
Both in his face and fashion; which I spying
Ran after him; and staying him, quoth he
Ergastus thou must do a courtesy
For me of much importance and avail;
It Is to go with me but a little hence,
For witness of a deed I have to do;
But first I Will have thee bind thy faith to me
By a strict oath to stand aloof from me
And not approach to let or hinder that
That I shall do: I (that could nere have dreamed
Of such a furious madness in him) yielded
To's will; and made desperate inuocations
Calling to witness Pan, and Priapus:
Pales, Pomona', and nightly Hecate,
Which done, he led me higher up the hill:
Where, clambring through wild rocky passages,
(By ways nere found, and never trod before)
We gayn'd the top, that ouer-hung a valley,
'Twixt which and us was a steep precipice,
And there we stayed; I casting down mine eye,
Began for fear to tremble, and shrunk back.
After a little pause, he smil'de me thought,
And seemed more cheerful then he was before;
And that made me misdoubt him less then ever:
After that; (quoth he to me) see thou tell
The Nymphs and Shepherds what thou shall behold;
Then looking down, Ah that I had (said he)
So ready at my will, the throat and teeth
Of those same greedy Wolves, as these rocks be;
I would not dye of other death, then she
Who was my life; nor have my carcass torn
But by those teeth that tore those delicate
And beauteous limbs of hers; but since that heaven
Denies so great a blessing to me, I
Must be content some other way to dye;
And though a worse way, yet a speedier.
Siluia I follow thee, Siluia I come
To bear thee comapny,
If thou disdain me not; O I should dye
Much more contentedly; were I but sure
My follow'ing thee would not disquiet thee,
And that thy hate had ending with thy life:
Siluia I follow thee, I come. Which said,
Down from the place he headlong threw himself,
And I turned ye to see it.

Da: VVretched Aminta.

Sil: Ay me, ay me.

Cho: Why did not hinder him?
Perhaps the oath thou took'st barred thee to do it?

Nun: Not so; for setting all such oaths at naught,
(Vain doubtless in such cases) when I saw
VVhither his fond and headdy madness tended,
I reached at him; and (as ill hap would have it)
Laid hold but of this thin scarf, wherewithal
He girt himself; which (all too weak to bear
His bodies weight, that rested all upon it)
Remayn'd broke in my hand.

Cho: And what became
Of the unhappy carcass?

Nun: I know not;
For I was so dead stricken at the sight,
As my heart would not suffer me, to look
And see him dashed to pieces.

Cho: O strange fate.

Sil: Ay me, were I not made of stone indeed,
This news would kill me. Ah if the false death
Of me that cared no more for him, was cause
Enough to end his life;
Much more cause is there that the certain death
Of him that loved me so, should be enough
To end my life; and it shall end my life;
And if grief cannot do it, the sharp steel shall;
Or else this girdle here, which justly stays
As loath to follow his sweet Masters ruins,
Till it have done on me the due revenge
Of his sad death, and my ingratitude.
Unhappy girdle (relic of a more
Unhappy Master) ah do not disdain
To Abide a while with one so odious;
For thou shall stay but to be th'instrument
Of his revenge, and of my punishment.
I might have bin, alas I should have bin
Yoke Fellow with Aminta here on earth;
But since that cannot be, by thy help now
I Will find him out among the infernal shades,
And there go bear him better company.

Cho: Content thee (thou sad soul) it is Fortunes fault,
And not by thy mean, that this ill is wrought.

Sil: Shepherds why plain ye? if ye moan my woes,
I do deserve no pity; that have bin
My self so pitiless; if ye wayle the death
Of the poor Innocent, ab it is too small;
Grief is too poor to pay his deed withal.
And Daphne thou I prithee dry thy tears;
If for my sake thou weep'st; for my sake cease.
And for his sake that was a thousand times
More worth then I; and go along and help me
To find the unhappy bones; and bury them;
It Is that alone that keeps me still alive,
And that I do not even now kill my self.
It is the least and last duty is left
For me to do him, for the love he bore me;
And though this vile hand of mine, might perhaps
Blemish the pi'ety of so just a deed;
Yet he I know will like the deed the better,
For being done by it; for I am sure
He loves me still; his death assures it me.

Da: I am content to'assist thee'in seeking him,
But talk (for heavens sake) of this death no more.
Alas wee'ue had too much of that before.

Sil: Till now I Have lived only unto my self,
And my own wayward humor: for the rest,
I vow it all to'Aminta; and if to him
I may not, I Will live yet to his cold carcass,
Till I have done it the last obsequies:
So long I may; longer I will not live.
But Shepherd set me in the way (I pray')
Unto the valley at the high hills foot.

Nun: There O'that hand it is, and not far from hence.

Da: I Will go along and guide thee, for I well Remember't.

Sil: Farewell Shepherds, Nymphs farewell;
Farewell woods, fields, and flocks; farewell, farewell.

Nun: This maiden speaks me thinks in such a strain,
As if she went nere to return again.

Chorus. Love; thou reioyn'st what Death vnbinds?
(Thou friend of Peace but she of Blood;)
Yet thou her Triumphs over raignest;
And in uniting gentle minds,
Make Earth so heavenly an abode,
As thou to dwell among us daynest:
Thou smooth'st the rugged hearts of men;
And inward rancors driu'st away
(Great prince of happy peace;) and when
Mild breasts are troubled, do allay
Their woes; and by thy working strange,
Framst of things mortal, an eternal change.

Actus Quintus.
Scena Prima.
Elpine, Chorus. Doubtless the laws where with Love governs
His Empire evermore, are neither hard
To follow, nor unjust; and those his works
Which many men do condemn wrongfully,
Are full of providence, and mystery,
Lo with what art,
And by how many unknown ways, he leads
His votaries unto their happiness;
And places them among the highest joys
And pleasures of his amorous Paradise,
When oftentimes they feel themselves sunk down
Eu'ne to the very bottom of all ills.
Behold Aminta with his headlong fall,
Aspires unto the top of all delight;
O happy' Aminta; and so much the more
Happy now, as unfortunate before.
This thy example makes me hope no less,
That once at last my louelesse fair (that couers
Under those freindly smiles, such cruelty)
Will with true pity heal the wounds, that she
Has with her fained pity made in me.

Cho: Yon is the reu'rend Elpine; and me thinks
Speaks of Aminta' as if he were alive,
Calling him happy, blessed, and fortunate,
Ah hard condition of unhappy lovers;
He belike counts him fortunate, that dies
For love, and is beloved (when he is dead)
Of her he lou'de so well; and this he calls
The paradise of love; O with how light
And poor rewards the winged Loue-god contents
His servants. Art thou (Elpine) then indeed
In such a pitiful estate, as that
Thou can term fortunate, the miserable
Death of the poor Aminta? and would thou
So far thy life to loves subjection bow,
And undergo the like fate?

Elp: Friends be merry
What of his death perhaps ye have heard, is false.

Cho: That were a welcome news.
Did he not throw himself down headlong then
From yon high Mountains topp?

Elp: It Is true he did.
But 'twas a fortunate and happy fall;
That looked so like death, and is proou'd to him
Not life alone, but a most joyful life;
For now he lies lulled in the tenter lapp.
Of his beloved one that seems much more
Fond of him now, then she was coy before;
Drying each tear he lets fall, with a sighe,
Or with the like, freindly requiting it.
But I am going to find out Montane
Her Father, and conduct him where they be;
For there wants nothing else but his consent,
To both their boundless joys accomplishment.

Cho: Their age, their blood and birth, their mutual loves,
And all agree; and the good oulde Montano
Will he glad doubtless of posterity,
And to' arm his gray hairs with so sweet a guard,
So that his will no doubt shall second theirs.
But thou (good Elpine) tell what god, what fate
In that so dangerous, and deadly fall
Prescru'd Aminta.

Elp: I am well content;
Hear then, hear that which with these eyes I saw;
I was before my Caves mouth, which ye know
Lies at the hills foot, on the valleys brimme;
There Thirsi' and I were reasoning together
Of the fair she that in the self same nett
Had first ensnared him, and me afterward;
When I preferring my lou'de servitude
Before his free state; all at once we heard
A shreeke; and saw a man fall frbm above,
Upon a bushy knowle; for on the side
Of the steep hill, there grows (all of a heap,
And as 'twere woue tog there,) a round mass
Of brambles, thorns, and certain weeds among;
There first he light before he lower fell;
And though he made way through them with his weight,
And fell down to the ground before our feet;
Yet so that stop abated the falls force,
As 'twas not mortal; though so dangerous
As that he lay a while deuoyd of sense,
And as a dead man without show of motion.
We with amazement, and compassion were
Dumbe-strucken at the sudden spectacle:
And knowing him, and knowing soon (with all)
He was not dead, nor perhas like to die,
Appeaz'd his woe, and eased him all we could;
Then Thirsis made me throughly' acquainted with
The Whole passage of his loves. but while we sought
To bring him to himself again, and sent
To fetch Alphesibeo (t'whom Appollo
Tanght thou art of Physic, when he gave his Harp
And Lute to me) came Daphne, and Siluia,
Who (as I heard) had bin to seek him out
Whom they supposed dead. But when Siluia
Had found and knew him, and beheld his cheeks
And lips so bloudlesse, and discolored,
As the wanne Violet's hue their paleness past;
And saw him languish, as if then he had
Bin drawing his last breath; she gave her sorrows
A liberal passage through her earnest cries;
And beating her fair breast, falls down upon him,
Laying her face on his, and on his lips
Her lips.

Cho: And did not bashful shame restrain
Her more, who is so strict and so severe?

Elp: Bashfulnes often bars weak loves of their longings,
But is too weak a curb for a strong love.
But then, as if her eyes had bin two fountains,
She drowned his cold face with her pouring tears;
Whose water was of so great force, and virtue,
That he revived; and opening his dim eyes,
He sighs forth a hollow' Ay me, from the bottom
Of his sad breast; she caught the heavy sound
Of that same bitter breath; and mingled it
With her sweet breath; and so restored, and healed him.
Then; who can say? who can imagine what
Both of them thought, and at that instant felt?
Each now assured of others life? and he
Assured of her love, and to find himself
Entangled in so loved, and loving arms?
He that loves firmly may imagine it,
Yet hardly too; but no tongue sure can tell it.

Cho: Is then Aminta safe belike, and well,
And so clear from all danger of his death?

Elp: He Is safe, and well; save that he has a little
Battred his flesh, and somewhat scratcht his face;
But 'twill be nothing; and he ways it not.
Thrice happy he, to have given so great and high
A sign, and earnest of his Constancy;
And now inioyes the fruit of his firm love;
To which his sad indurings, and pains past,
Prove pleasing and sweet sawces at the last.
But peace be wi'yee'; I must go seek about
Till I have found the good Montano out.

Chorus. I Know not whether the much sour
This (now blessed) Lover (serving, burning,
Now dispairing, and still mourning)
Has felt; may in one happy' hour
Be thoroughly repaid again
With pleasure equal to his pain.
But if the good more pleasing be,
And come more welcome, after we
Have felt the ill; I do not crave
(O Love) this happiness to have.
Let others be so blessed by thee,
And grant the Nymph I love, may be
Won with a little less adooe;
Less prayers, less service when I woo;
And let the sauce to our loves, be
Not so much pain, and misery:
But sweet disdaines, repulses sweet;
Fall off a little, and strait meet.
That after a short frown or twain,
New peace, or truce may knit our hearts again.

The End of Tasso's Aminta.

VENVSSES Search for CUPID.
Down from the third heaven, I (that am
His queen, goddess, and mother) come
To seek my son, (the runaway
Cupid.) I lost him yesterday.
As he lay playing in my lapp
(Whether of purpose, or by happ
I cannot say,) but his gold shaft
Fell with the point on my left side,
And pricked me'; and when my hurt he spide,
(As erst h'has served me') he flew away, and laughed.
But though sometime I angry seem,
A tender care I have of him;
And now (my anger laid aside)
Have bin to seek him far and wide;
As well my heavens each part about
As Mars his orb, and thoroughout
All the other wheels that move, and stand;
The shining heaven has not a Sphere,
But I have bin to seek him there,
Yet cannot find this little vagabond.
Wherefore now amongst you (meek
Mortals) I am come to seek
My child, who of entim s I know,
Takes delight to live with you;
But I more then half despair
To find him amongst you (Ladies fair)
For though oftentimes he flies
About your face, and by your eyes,
And would feign enter your breast,
And in your bosoms make his nest;
Yet they are so bard against him with disdain,
That there I fear he does but knock in vain.
But amongst you Men more kind
I may hope my son to find;
Your milder breasts will not disdain
This fugitive to entertain;
Therefore to you my suit must be;
Tell mee' (I pray') then, where is he?
He that can but give me tyding
Where the Wag has his abiding;
Shall for his rewarding, sipp
A pair of kisses from my lipp,
Soon as he will wish to take them,
Full as sweet as I can make them:
But he that shall the kindness do me
To bring my little wandrer to me,
Shall expect a greater meede
Wherewith to recompense his friendly deed;
And such as all the wealth I have
Cannot exceed; no though I gave
All Loves Kingdom; and I take
To witness the black Stigian lake,
That I will truly pay my vow.
Tell me therefore, tell me now
Where Is my Son? who graunts my suite?
But no man answers; all are mute.
Perhaps ye have not seen the Elfe,
Or he has so disguiz'de himself
Ye know him not; perhaps h'has left
His brand, and from his shoulders reft
His painted wings; and thrown them by,
With the rest of his Artillery.
But I Will give y'other marks of him, whereby
Ye shall diserne, and find him easily.
This Love (thus masked) although he be
Old both in years, and subtlety;
Seems but a boy in shape, and face,
And (like a boy in gate, and pace)
Is never constant to one place.
Such sports and pastimes uses he,
As common unto children be;
But all his sports he tempers so,
They Are dangerous, and full of woe
To those he plays withal; displeased
He will be soon, and soon appeaz'd;
And in his face at once appears
An enterchange of smiles and tears.
His hair is gould, and curled, and grows
(As Fortune often painted shows)
Hanging long before; but short
And thin on his heads hinderpart.
His face cleare-colour'd, and delightful,
Like to fire is quick and sprightfull;
And does easily express
His minds audacious wantonness.
His inflamed eyes are full of guile,
Which still he sugars with a smile.
Under the brow unhappily
He uses often to throw his eye,
That rowles vnsteedy here and there,
And never is firmly fixed any where.
His tongue is sweet; and when he speaks
A pleasing air from his lips breaks,
In many' a peec'd imperfect word,
Which yet a winning sound afford.
His voice is shrill, and clear, and small,
Which uttering, still he smiles withal;
And those his fleering smiles does baiyt
With hidden treason, and deceit,
Which (like the Snake) surke in the bed
Of those flowers undiscovered.
And first with these he does begin
To'vnlocke your breasts, and enter in.
When having seemed all courtesy,
All meekness, and humility,
And that (as a poor pligrim) ye
Have harber'd him in charity,
Then 'ginnes he by degrees, to express
Himself, and wrong your easiness,
Grows proud and wondrous insolent.
And never rests, is nere content
Until he be (Ungrateful Elfe).
Possessed of your heats keys himself;
And strait turns all those out of door
That there inhabited before;
And places others in their room,
A troop of newer guests; to whom
He makes your reason thrall; and finds
New Laws wherewith to rule your minds;
And thus becomes of a mild guest,
A cruel Tyrant ore the breast;
And so his new placed Powers assist him
He kills or conquers all that ere resist him,
Now by these marks (both of his face,
His hauiour, quallities, and grace)
Which I have given yee', I hope ye may
Know this disguized runaway.
Tell me' I pray' then, where is he?
But not a man will answer me.
Yee'll conceal him from me then?
Ah foolish unadvised men,
Ye cannot Love so closely hyde,
But that at length he will be spy'de;
And in your words and looks appear,
By tokens evident and clear;
And then such happ will you betide,
As unto him that seeks to hide
A Snake in's bosom, till his cries
And blood discover where he lies.
But since I cannot find him here,
(Ere I return up to my Sphere,)
I Will seek for him on Earth some other where.
Madrigall.
VEnus, I hear thou roam'st about
To find thy wandering Cupid out,
Who (having played the wag last day)
For fear of britching flue away;
And promisest to give a kiss
To him can tell thee where he is;
Come then, and thrive in thy request;
Kiss me, and take him in my breast.
ARIADNES COMPLAINT In Imitation of ANGVILLARA.
NOw were the lesser tapers of the Night
Burnt out; the Moon to' her blazing Brothers ray
Yielding the faint streams of her frailer light;
And now the rosy Messenger of Day
Her purple doors vnbarring, restores sight
To the blind world; fannes the soft mistes away
From sleeping eyes; and to the days behest
Rowses up every bird, and every beast.
When hapless Ariadne, with the day
Opes her (yet drowzie) eyes; and first her head
Turns on that side, where she supposed lay
The treche'rous man that from her side is fled.
Her loving hand first this, then the other way
She vain extendes; in vain about the bed
Her leg, and arm mooues; whence a cold fear takes her,
That startles every limb, and broad awakes her.
She risen up; about her shoulders throws
Her garment, and her widdowed bed forsakes;
With hair unbound, and robe that loosely flows,
(Led by the rage wherewith her swollen breast aches)
Shrieking as one distraught, she frantic throws
Her wild eyes here and there; then (speedy) makes
Towered the still shore; and that she finds bereft
Of the false bark she late at anchor left.
Now on the wharfe she pores, now on the Main;
But more then shore, and waters cannot see.
A thousand times and more she calls in vaiue,
And the loved name repeates incessantly.
Her voice the rocks receive, and back again
The sound return, calling as well as she.
Theseus she calls; the rocks do Theseus cry;
Yet neither voice can purchase a reply.
Along the sandy beache a steep cliffe stands,
Whose vaster limbs the aspiring for head strain
To height so aerye', as it the sight expands
Far ore the broad blue bosom of the Main.
To this she runs; clambers with legs and hands,
Nor weary rests till she the top attain.
Hard is th'ascent of the rough craggy stone,
Yet her will makes the difficulty none.
Thence she discouers (for by this the day
His broader light had opte) the swollen sails spread,
And by the wild wind now brown far away.
From her discolored cheeks the warm blood fled,
Within her veins freezes; in her dismay
She faints; and falls to th'carth colder then lead;
Yet the same grief that does of sense deprive her,
Wakes her again, and does anew revive her.
'Twixt grief, disdain, and rage divided, thus
She loud exclaimes; whither (false man) O whither
Fly'st thou disloyal? look, look Theseus,
Look if that bark that brought us both together,
(And should hold both, and holds but one of us)
Carry the full freight hence it came with hither.
Cruel! if thou have with thee my soul, and mind,
Why leau'st thou the other half of me behind?
Ah can though abide my loyal Spirit to range
So far (to follow and attend on thee)
From her own home; and this known breast exchange,
For one so willing to be rid of me?
Thus she complains; shreekes, weeps; to'her passions strange
Strange gestures suting of calamity.
But th'heedlesse wind, what ere she sighing say,
Blows the vain breath, and the winged bark away.
Feeling her voice with shriekes grown faint, and hoarce,
She waves her ceaselesse arms about her head,
And often her garment; th'imbark'd eyes to force
Back to the shore; but all was vain she did.
The farr-sayl'd pine bears on his steady course
So fast, as wholly' almost to blue air sled.
She waves, and beckons still, till from her sight
She finds th'vngratefull sail is vanished quite.
Yet still she gazes; and at length anue
Mournes, and such clouds of woe her Powers benight,
As, though her eyes redouble could their view,
Her swelling tears would scarce allow them sight.
More weak, her sense the more impatient grue;
Whence with new thought she leaves the craggy height,
And to the Tent breathless her self withdrue.
She says, perhaps yet I may find him there;
So strives to cozen, and delay her fear.
But there her busiest search can nothing find,
But death-like silence, and an empty bed;
Whereat (fresh passion tyring on her mind)
With cheeks paler then roses plucked, and dead,
Down on that side the Cabane where th'vnkinde
And false Athenian late laid his head,
Her head she lays; and with eyes showring still,
Crossed arms, and sad groans, thus repeates her ill.
O faithless man, what have I done alas,
Or wherein ever ill deserved of thee,
That in this uncouth solitary place
Thou thus inhumanly abandon'st me?
Ah whither in this miserable case
Shall I repair? what can my refuge be
But death (for end of a state so distressed)
By famine, or by some deuowring beast.
In this inhospitable Isle, vntrode
By humane foot, accompany'de with none
But such as far from man have their abode,
(Wild beasts, and wandering fowls,) thus all alone,
Thus to be left? and under such a load
Of woe, and none to pitty', or hear my moan?
O falsest man, must I that from the grave
Sau'de thee, for meede this sad requit all have?
When through those errors of the maze I led thee,
TO avoid th'undoubted forfeit of thy life;
And with so timely' advice, and aid bestedd thee,
As rid thy land of tribute, thee of strife,
Exchanged my native shores for those that bredd thee,
Kingdom, and friends, and all to dye thy wife;
Have I for this, for this (false Theseus)
Have I deserved to be requited thus?
If through the doubtful Laborinth I gave
Thee th'easie mean t'escape, and set thee free,
(Whom from the Minotaure no art could save
But mine that purchased thy delivery,)
Why do thou not (an easier boon I crave)
Why do thou not from hence deliver me?
If from that ravenous beast I saude thee, why
Leau'st thou me here by ravenous beasts to dye?
Or shall I tell my self, this Isle may be
By men (though barbarous sure) inhabited,
That may perhaps relieve, and succor me;
Ere with beasts jaws, or hunger I be dead?
Oh sillyest hope! when all this misery
By trusting Man is fallen upon my head,
Is It possible I can ere be so vain,
Ere be so madd to trust to Man again?
Ah false smoth looks, feigned vizar of deceit;
Lewd breast, foul harbor of impiety;
Bitter-sweete, tongue, balefull alluring bayte
Of my ore-credulous simplicity.
Ah Theseus lay'dst thou all these foes in wait
To circumuent so much Integrity?
A great exploit no doubt th'haue done: betray'de
The loyal bosom of a silly maid.
Treacherous sleep; why charmd'st thou so mine eyes,
And in thy soft chain held'st them fettered still,
While the false fugitive did from me rise?
Ye winds too, accessaries to my ill,
Oh how officious (like corrupted spies
Set to betray me) did y'obey his will?
First the one surpised, and bound me where I lay;
The Other then stole, and bore my wealth away.
And thou deceitful Tent, and faithless bed;
O how ungrateful, how unjust ye be?
When my Souls treasure I deposited,
And safe entrusted to your custody,
Was It not your dues to have redeliu'red
Into my hands what I delivered ye?
But Theseus, why do' I blame, bed, sleep, or wind,
Poor vnder-agents of thy treas'nous mind?
Thou, only thou'tis reau'st me of my life;
Thou that so late coupled'st my hand with thine,
In sign thou took'st me for thy wedded wife;
And to the Rite summond'st the Powers divine
For records; vowing till Deaths fatal Knife
Thy breath divided, to be ever mine.
Then pluckd'st my Virgin flower; Thou, only thou
False Man, have thus abus'de, and left me now.
Thou (my hearts first, next honors, now lives thief)
Thou thou have thus amidd these frights, and fears
Left me'on this desolate shore, void of relief.
A pray for howling Wolves, and greedy Bears.
Far from the care of a Paternall grief;
Far from the comfort of a Mothers tears;
Whom I must never more behold; but dye
Without a friend near me to close my eye.
Ah Theseus, thou now to thy native shore
Return'st with honor, and immortal praise;
Where (as a god) each one will thee adore,
And circle thy victorious head with Bayse;
When thou shall tell how to the fatal door,
(Through the intricacy of so many ways)
Thou gott'st; and then having the Monster slain,
So easy' a mean, found'st to get out again.
The father to his child will pointing cry,
Lo yon is Theseus that adventured
His life, to gain his Countries liberty;
And has the Land from thrall delivered.
When I that helped thee to the victory,
Shall here lie dead; perhaps unburied.
Annexe this stratageme to the other past,
How thou here left'st thy loyal wife at last.
So foul a deed will all the rest deface,
To Have paid such faith with such impiety.
Ah neuermore (for shame) steal for thy grace
From ancient Kings thy fained Pedigree;
Thy mother never was of Pitheus race;
Nor could Egeus ere thy father be.
Rather the breasts of some wild Panthar fed thee,
Or sauadge Tigar in the desert bred thee.
This sighed; she leaves the Tent; and the steep cliffe
Again ascendes: diuersifies her woes
With fresh plaints; now weeps, now shrieks out her grief.
Ecco (that from the depths at her cry rose)
Lends (in compassion) all the poor relief
She can; meeting her plaints at every close.
And when her tender hand each the other beats,
She imitates, and the sad noise repeates.
Ah (says she) could I'in space of a short groan
From hence to thy Ships prowe trensported be,
That from the hatches thou wight'st hear my moan,
And these sad pangs of my affliction see;
Were not thy heart harder then is the stone
I tread upon, sure thou would pity me.
But though gross air does from thine eyes withhold me,
With some remorse yet in thy thought behold me.
Behold yet in thy thought my bitter plaint:
Behold these tears, that with a frequent rain
Drench my torn hair: of could thy fant'sie paint
To life but the least part of my vast pain,
Knew'st thou how often this voice (now hoarce and faint)
Has call'de thee' already, and still calls in vain;
Thou'ldst restore all, to me of all bereft;
T'whom scarce so much as eu'ne to hope is left.
Ah Theseus, yet return: do not forget
Thy self so much, to be so merciless;
For my desert of thee, relieve me yet,
Before I fall into so great distress.
Ah no! for my desert I Will not entreat;
Since thou neglect'st it, and my faithfulness.
Yet be 'it thy own sword saved thy life, not I;
It follows not that I should therefore dye.
O if ere humane pity one soft beam shed
Into thy bosom, let me not in vain
Thus still implore thee; but (though far hence fled)
Steare hither that so longed-for Bark again.
And if at thy return thou find me dead,
Let yet thy hapless wives cold bones obtain
This mercy; to be gathered up by thee,
And in thy native Athens buried be.
While thus the afflicted one (her shining hair
And fair flesh tearing) desperately mournes;
And in her restless fit of rage, and fear
(Mixed Feauer-like) freezes at once, and burns;
Th'euer-young god, that late was conqueror
Of Inde, and now thence under sail returns,
In happy hour espyes her; and his sails
Directs toward the rock whereon she wayles.
Soon as the Ioue-borne Bacchus his gaze bent
On her sheene forhead, and aluring eyes;
And (with the shrill sighs that her bosom rent)
Observed the sweet sad tenor of her cries;
And understood her lineage and descent
Derived from two so supreme dietyes
As Jove himself by Sires; by mothers side
From the bright God that does the winged Day guide;
He burns in amorous fire; prays, persuades, tryes
From their sad mood her sorrowing thoughts to woo
With all the softest words he can devise:
But finds all vain that he can say, or do.
She heedes him not; but still on Theseus cries.
Yet he, resolved to win, and wed her too,
Summons the Paphian queen; and to her care
Commits the menage of his loves affair.
Venus, that ever was god Bacchus friend,
(And whom his absence faint, and mirthless makes^)
Does at his call, her best assistance lend;
And to accomplish what she undertakes,
With careful hand does to the cure attend
Of the old wound (first,) whereof her bosom aches.
Which heald; she' inspires Liaeus eyes, that dart
New fires, which through her eyes inflame her heart.
And for his sake, to do her grace, whom he
Has chosen for companion of his bed;
Though from Apollo she descended be,
(Whom since her stolen loves he discovered,
She hates;) yet as from her sires forfait free,
She'imbraces her; and from her own fair head
A bright crown takes, (for mortal brows unfit,
So rich it was;) and crowns her brows with it.
This Crown had Vulcan forged: Earth's richest mine
The matter gave; which to imbellish more,
He taught the curious hoope all over to shine
With brightest gemmes the wealthy Orient bore.
So rich a diadem scarce Power divine,
Much less inferior Mortal ever wore.
No marvel; since the great Artificer
Made it of purpose for his wife to wear.
The Cyprian goddess with her fair hand dries
The wayling mayds drowned cheeks Liaeus wooes;
She shuns; but faintly. Faintly' a while denies.
At last yields For alas how can she choose,
Assayl'd by two so powrefull dyeties?
Her mind does now all thought of Theseus loose.
Bacchus she loves. He marries her. And (night
Once come) both taste the nuptial beds delight.
And that her fame (although she mortal were)
Might to ensuing times be ever new;
The pleased god takes the crown from her fair hair;
Which as to the Artick ycie Pole he threw,
The diadem through thin and yielding air
In an uninterrupted circle flew
Up toward Boots, and the slow Teeme; where
Arcturus guards the great, and lesser Bear.
As it ascends, each precious gemme thereon
Redoubled luster by the motion gains.
A seu'erall Star is now each seu'erall stone.
Yet so the former shape entyre remaynes,
As still in every eye that looks thereon,
The Constellation a crowns form retaynes.
And when the sullen night on the earth does frown,
Who see's it, calls it Ariadnes Crown.
FINIS.

