Tarltons news out of Purgatory.

Only such a jest as his Iigge, fit for Gentlemen to laugh at an hour, etc.

Published by an old Companion of his, Robin Goodfellow.



AT LONDON, Printed for T. G. and T. N. 1590.

The Contents of the whole book.
The tale of Pope Boniface, and why he wore a Millers cap, and a malkin in
Purgatory. fol. 4 What kind of men those be that God never made. 6 What
creatures those be, that in sight are Carnations, in smell Roses, in hearing
Sirens, in touching Nettles, and in taste wormwood. 9 What occupations take
more pains about God, then the Pope. 10 The tale of Friar Onyon, why in
Purgatory he was tormented with Waspes. 13 The tale of the three Cuckolds, of
their Impresses, and Mottoes. 21 The tale of the Cook, and why he sat in
Purgatory with a Cranes leg in his mouth. 22 The tale of the Vickar of
Bergamo, and why he sits with a coal in his mouth in Purgatory. 29 The tale
of the Painter of Doncaster, and why in Purgatory he was beaten with a bell
rope. 33 Why the gentlewoman of Lions sat with her hair clipped off in
Purgatory. 38 The tale of two Lovers of Pisa, and why they were whipped in
Purgatory with Nettles. 42
To the Gentlemen Readers, Health.
GEntlemen, the Horse when he is first handed to the wars, starteth at the
crack of every piece; and every coucht Lance is a censure of death to a fresh
water Soldier: So fares it with me, for never before being in print I start
at the sight of the Press, and having not dared to look into the open light,
I feared with the Owl to fly before it be twylight: yet I have heard others
whose books have past your view, account you so favorable, courteous and
affable, shrouding every escape with silence; that I presumed the rather to
experience with them the hope of your favors: which if I find as they have
done, though I be blind Bayard, yet I will in the thickest of the mire plunge
up to the Saddle for your sakes. Virgill before he wrote his Aeneidos, wrote his
Culex; and assaide in trifles, before he attempted in Triumphs. Lucan wrote
Quaedam Lirica, before he began with Bellumper Emathios plusquam Ciuilia
campos. Room was not builded on a day, and men that venture little, hazard
little: So gentlemen, I present you with a toy of Tarltons, called his news
out of Purgatory; which I desire you accept as courteously as I offer willing to
to please: Though they be Crepundia yet read them, and if you find any
pleasant Facetia, or Quicquid Salis* think all sauory, and so pleased without
being satirically peremptory: for Momus will have a mouth full of inuectiues,
and Zoilus should not be Zoilus if he were not squint eide. Therefore leaving
their humors to the wordmongers of malice that like the Vipers grew odious to
their own kind, hoping of your courteous censure, I bid you farewell.

Tarltons news out of Purgatory.
SOrrowing as most men do for the death of Richard Tarlton, in that his
particular loss was a general lament to all that coueted, either to satisfy
their eyes with his Clownish gesture, or their ears with his wittyiests. The
wonted desire to see plays left me, in that although I saw as rare shows,
and heard as lofty verse, yet I inioied not those woonted sports that flowed
from him as from a fountain, of pleasing and merry conceits. For although he
was only superficially seen in learning, having no more but a bare insight
into the Latin tongue, yet he had such a prompt wit, that he seemed to have
that Salem ingenij, which Tullie so highly commends in his Orator. Well,
howsoever either natural, or artificial, or both, he was a mad merry
companion, desired and loved of all: amongst the rest of whose welwishers
myself being not the least, after his death I mourned in conceit, and absented
my self from all plays, as wanting that merry Roscius of Plaiers, that
famozed all Comedies so with his pleasant and extemporall inuenti^n: yet at
last, as the longest Summers day has his night, so this dumpe had an end: and
forsooth upon whitson monday last I would needs to the Theater to see a play:
where when I came, I found such concourse of unruly people, that I thought it
better solitary to walk in the fields, then to intermeddle my self amongst
such a great press. Feeding mine humor with this fancy I stepped by dame Anne
of Cleeres well, and went by the backside of Hogsdon: where finding the Sun to
be hot, and seeing a fair tree that had a cool shade, I sat me down to
take the air, where after I had rested me a while I fell a sleep: As thus I
lay in a slumber, me thought I saw one attired in russet with a but tond cap
on his head, a great bag by his side, and a strong bat in his hand, so
artificially attyred for a Clown, as I began to call Tarltons woonted shape to
remembrance, as he drew more near and he came within the compass of mine
eye, to judge it was no other but the very ghost of Richard Tarlton, which pale
and wan sat him down by me on the grass. I that knew him to be dead at this
sudden sight fell into a great fear, insomuch that I swet in my sleep: which
he perceiving, with his woonted conntenance full of smiles began to comfort me
thus. What old acquaintance, a man or a mouse? Have thou not heard me verefie,
that a Soldier is a soldier if he have but a blew hose on his head? Fear not
me man, I am but Dick Tarlton that could quaint it in the Court, and clown it
on the stage: that had a quart of wine for my friend, and as word for my foe:
who hurt none being alive, and will not prejudice any being dead: f^r although
thou see me here in the likeness of a spirit, yet think me to be one of
those Familiares Lares that were rather pleasantly disposed then endued with
any hurtful influence, as Hob Thrust, Robin Goodfellowe and such like spirits
(as they term them of the buttry) famozed in every old wives Chronicle for
their mad merry pranckes. Therefore since my appearance to thee is in
resemblance of a spirit, think that I am as pleasant a goblin as the rest,
and will make thee as merry before I part, as ever Robin Goodfellow made the
country wenches at their Cream boules. With this he drew more near me and I
starting back cried out: In nomine Jesus, avoid Satan for Ghost thou art none,
but a very di^el (for the souls of them which are departed) if the sacred
principles of Theology be true) never return into the world again till the
general resurrection: for either are they pla^st in heaven, from whence they
come not to entangle themselves with other cares, but sit continually before
the seat of the Lamb singing Alleluia to the highest, or else they are in
hell: and this is a profound and certain Aphorism, Ab inferis nulla est
redemptio: upon these conclusiue premises depart from me Satan the
resemblance of whom soever thou do carry. At this pitching his staff down
on the end, and crossing one leg over an other, he answered thus: why you
horeson dunce, think you to set Dick Tarlton Non plus with your Aphorisms? No,
I have yet left one chapter of choplodgicke to tewslite you withal, that were
you as good as George a Green I would not take the foil at your hands: and
that is this, I perceive by your arguments your inward opinion, and by your
wise discretion what pottage you love: I see no sooner a rispe at the house end
or a Maipole before the door, but I cry there is, a paltrie Alehowse: and as
soon as I hear the principles of your religion, I can say, oh there is a
Caluinist: what do you make heaven and hell Contraria immediata, so contrary,
that there is no mean betwixt them, but that either a man's soul must in post
have go presently to God, or else with a whirlewind and a vengeance go to the
devil? yes, yes my good brother, there is Quoddam tertium a third place that
all our great grandmothers have talked of, that Dant has so learnedly writ of,
and that is Purgatory. What sir are we wiser then all our forefathers? and
they not only feared that place in life, but found it after their death: or
else was there much land and annual pensions given in vain to morrowmasse
priests for dirges, trentals and such like decretals of devotion, whereby the
souls in Purgatory were the sooner advanced into the quiet estate of heaven.
Nay more, how many Popes and holy Bishops of Rome, whose Ca^nons a^cnot err,
have taught us what this Purgatory is? And yet if thou were so incredulous
that thou would neither believe our old beldames, nor the good Bishops: yet
take Dicke Tarlton once for thine Author, who is now come from Purgatory, and
if any vpstart Protestant deny, if thou have no place of scripture ready to
confirm it, say as Pithagoras scholars did (Ipse dixit) and to all bon
companions ^t shall stand for a principle. I could not but smile at the mad
merry doctrine of my friend Richard, and therefore taking heart at grass
drawing more near him* I prayed him to tell me what Purgatory is, and what
they be that are resident there: as one willing to do me such a favor, he
sat him down and began thus.

Tarltons description of Purgatory.
AFter thy breath has left thy body, and thy soul is set free from this vile
prison of earth, where it has been long enclosed, then does it wander forward
into a fa^ broad way, where at the tourning of a cross there are three
passages, one on the right hand, and that is very narrow and leads unto
heaven: The second on the left hand, is broad and fair, over a green vale,
and that conducteth unto hell: now betwixt these is there a lane neither to
broad nor to narrow, and that is the (...) way to Purgatory: wherein after you
have wandered a while, you come to a bridge, framed all of Needle points and
over that must you pass bare footed, as the first penance for your foremost
offenses. Then sir to have a little ease after that sharp absolution, shall
you come into a fair meadow, and that is all ouergrowne with Aue mary's and
creedes, this is to put you in remembrance of our Ladies P^alter, which if you
can say a hundredth and fifty times over before you pass the meadow, you escape
passing over a whole field of hot burning ploughshares, that day and night lie
glowing hot for such purposes: after these and a many more of other miseries,
which I am by the law forbidden to utter, you come to purgatory gate, where
for an entering penny, you have forty lashes with a whip as ill as ever were
given in Bridewell: then are you admitted entrance. At the first you shall come
into a very sumptuous hall, richly hanged with tapistrie, so fine and so
curious, that the most cutthroate Broaker in England would take the worst of
the hangings for a sufficient pawn: In this hall shall you see an infinite
number of seats, formed and seated like an Amphitheater: wherein are roially,
nay more then roially placed all the Popes, except the first thirty after
Christ, and they went presently to heaven: and the reason was, because
Purgatory was then but a building, and not fully finished. In those seats I
say the popes sit triumphantly with their pontificalibus, and their triple
crowns, but yet abiding pains of purgatory, as well as the meanest in all the
house, equally proportioned according to the measure of their sins: some for
false wresting the scriptures, others for ambition, some for covetousness,
gluttony, extortion, symonie, wrath, pride, envy, many for sloth, and
idleness: and some I can tell you have come thither for wenching matters,
that's counted in Rome but a ve^iall sin, and therefore three dirges and two
tapers offered to the picture of old Pasquille, is sufficient to wipe away so
small an offense. But amongst all the rest two of them made me to marvel at
the strangeness of the punishment: The first was Boniface the fourth, and he
sat in this order.

He was richly attired in his pontificalibus, and somewhat more rich then the
rest, but upon his head, in stead of his triple crown, he wore a dustie
millers cap: and whereas other Popes held in their right hand the keys of
heaven, and in the left the sword of Paul, he held between both his hands a
durtie malkin, such as Bakers sweep their Ouens withal, and right over his
head was written this old adage in Latin: Ne suitor vltra crepidam.

And because thou shall know the reason why we was thus punished, mark this
merry tale.

The tale of Pope Boniface, and why he wore a Millers cap, and a malkin in
purgatory.
THere dwelled sometime in the city of Rome a Baker, named Astasio, who for his
honest behavior was well accounted of amongst his neighbors, insomuch, that
what ^se soever his bread was baked after, his loaves never past the balance.
This Astasio had sundry prentises and iourneymen to do his business, for he
was chief Baker to the popes holiness: amongst whom there was one called
Miles, who was a strong lusty lubber, and one that was as ripe conceipted for
knauerie, as the Miller that ground their meal for theeuery, and had as many
good conditions, as his mistress had points of chastity, and she was thought
a virtuous matron: for a Cardinal lay in her house, to instruct her with holy
sentences, and where such blessed men lie, there can be no lechery. Well Miles
was a mad wagge, and when he had done his business, to exercise his wits
would diverse times resort to some one or other of the cloister of Nuns,
amongst these merry wenches, to put in practice the excellency of his prattle,
he so behaved himself, that if higher fortune had not fallen him, the Nuns of
Santa Maria had entreated their abbess to have made him their fac totum: but
to his greater dignity, thus it fell out. It chanced that Pope Pius fell
sick, and for that he knew Cardinals were ambitious, and would fly with
Icarus whatsoever befall, to avoid all mutinies that might ensue after his
death about the succession, of the Papacy: he called his Cardinals together,
and charged them to elect none Pope, but he that could absolve these three
questions.

1 What kind of men those be, that GOD never made. 2 What creatures those be,
that in sight are Carnations, in smell Roses, in hearing Sirens, in touch
Nettles, and in taste Wormwood. 3 And what occupations take more pains about
God then the Pope.
Upon these the Cardinals were agreed and went home to their several lodging,
leaving Pius well contented with their mutual consent, and resolved to die,
since he had so well determined of the succession of the papacye to be brief,
as every dog has his day, so the Pope had his date, for the next morning he
died. And upon this there was a general mourning through all Room, the
Cardinals wept, the Abbots howled, the Monks rored, the friars cried, the Nuns
puled, the Curtizans lamented, the bells rang, and the tapers were lighted, that
such a black Sanctus was not seen along time before in Rome: well to be short,
his ^unerals were solemnly kept, and his body carried from Castle Angelo to
Saint Peter's Church and there intombed. After his death every one of the
Cardinals aspiring to the papacy, pondred in his brain the meaning of these
questions but they were not so good scholars that they could either divide,
define, or distinguish upon them, especially Cardinal Montecelso that lay at
the Bakers house, who along while had these questions hammering in his head,
but to small purpose, for the more he sought the farther off he was, which
grieved him full sore: for the day was come wherein they must give up their
verdict, and the synod of the Cardinals appointed to meet Cardinal Montecelso
ashamd to go, because he was so monstrous a dunce, knowing yt Miles the bakers
man was a fellow of a prompt wit, and withal so like the Cardinal, as no man
possible could discern the one from the other, brought it so to pass, that he
persuaded Miles to g^ and hear the questions, and to sit in his roabes amongst
the rest of the Cardinals: promising, if he won the victory by his wit he
would when he were Pope so labor, that he would make him a Cardinal. Miles
that was eu^r malepert, and more saucy then honest, undertook the matter and
bluntly over his bakers mealye Cassock for have put on the Cardinals habit, and
went very solemnly to saint Peter's church: where the rest of the holy
brotherhood sat, taking his place amongst them as Montecelso had directed
him. When thus they were all gathered together, the eldest of the fraternity
laid open unto them that now by the death of Pius ye papacy stood sede
vacant: yet by ye good direction of his holiness in his life time to anoide
further controversy in the Church, he had left a mean to know who should be
next successor in the sea, and thereupon he propounded three questions, which
began at the eldest, and so gradatim went downward: sundry men gave sundry
verdictes, at last it came to Cardinal Montecelso, wh^ was youngest, to yield
his reason, which if it were not probable and plausible, the Synod must devise
some other means to know the successor: for the questions were so dark that
amongst the rest they were as inscrutable Aenigmaes. Well to Miles at last came
the matter to be made manifest, who very demurely in his scarlet roabes and
his grave bennet, began thus: My Lords and fellow brethren in this dignity,
now is the text fulfilled: The last shall be first and the first shall be
last: For I that am youngest in years, am like to be eldest in judgment, and
being last in degree, am like to be first in dignity. Therefore you foolish
dunces thus to absolve these three questions.

What kind of men be those that God never made.
I tell you they be Popes, Cardinals, Abbots, Monks, and Priests: for n^ne of
all these did God ever make: and thus I prove it. The Creator, both according
to the principles of Philosophy and Theology, is greater th^n the Creature,
and it is impossible that the maker should bec formed or fashioned by the thing
made; as a pot to make a Potter: is it not then as repugnant to reason that God
should make a Priest, when the Priest every day in his mass makes God? and so
is he the creator and God the creature: therefore brethren the Priest is the
man that God never made, because we our selves know that the Priest i^ Gods
maker. To this they all applauded and said: he had spoken as much as Pius
meaut. Now quoth he to the second question.

What creatures those be, that in sight are Carnations, in smell Roses, in
hearing Sirens, in touching nettles, and in taste wormwood.
Thus I answer: they be (my masters quoth he) these kind of cattle that we
covet so much to keep, and these be women: for he that sees a gallant wench,
which we Italians term Bona Roba, with a fa^e face flourisht over with a
vermilion blush, she seems to his eye as beautiful as a Caruation: and her
breath that is as sweet and odoriferous as a Rose: he that listens to her
words, shall find them as pleasant and melodious as the Siren, and as full of
flattery as Cyrces: so that he that will avoid three wiles, must with Ulysses
tie himself to the mast, or else venture on three dangerous shelues: in
touching they be nettles, for they sti^g to the quick: and in taste whosoever
tries them, sh^l find them as bitter in the end as wormwood. When Miles had
discourst this, they thought Sphnix himself could not have yielded a better
reason, and therefore our gentle man Baker went on to the third thus boldly:
and now masters, quoth he, to the last.

What occupations take more pains about God then the pope.
Marry quoth Miles, there be three, the ploughman, the Miller and the baker:
and thus I prove it: The ploughman he takes pains to ^sse his field, to sow
his corn, and in harvest with toil to reap, in winter to threshe it out with
the sweat of his brows. Then it is conveyed from him to the Miller and he
bestiers him self to set his stones in frame to grind it: next it is
transported to the Baker, and he boults it and sifts the bran from the flower,
and with great pains makes it into afine Cake and bakes it, last it is brought
to the Pope, and he when he is at mass says but hoc est corpus meum, and it
is God: he spends but alitle few wast words about it, whereas the other three
labor long ere they bring it to perfection: therefore these three take more
pains about God then the pope. One of the old Cardinals hearing this, wondering
at his wit began to repeat over ye names of the plouhgswaine the Miller and
the baker: Miles hearing him name the Baker, took straight Pepper in the nose
and starting up threw of his Cardinals roabes, standing inhis dustie Cassocke,
swore I by cockesbread the Baker, and he that says to the contrary, here stand
I Miles the Bakers man to have the prowdest Cardinal of you al by the ears.
The Cardinals all this while thinking it had been Monterelso and no^ seeing it
was Miles the Bakers man, to sooth up the matter and cl^ake their own
ignorances made him Pope and called him in stead of Miles, Boniface: where he
soon forgot being a Priest yt ever he was a Clarke: in so much that on a day
passing to Saint peter's Church, his maiste. Astasio met him, and amongst the
rest did his holiness great reverence, but Miles now that was Pope, could not
look so low as a poor baker, which his master espying, as he came by said
that the Pope might hear. Non fuit sic a principio: No Knave quoth he, but ye
shall hear sang anon; Sic erit in secula seculorum Amen. Thus went the Bakers
man in solempe porcessio^ to Saint Peter's church, and there after his
instalment hard mass, and so departed home to Castle Angelo. And for that he
was aduan^st from from a Bakers trough to the papacy, and after grew so proud
and insolent, that he would not know his old master: he sits in a Millers
dustie Cappe and a Bakers malking: to signify, the former pride of his life.

Next him sat Hildebrand, and he held a red Hering in his hand, because he made
lent: and one Pope sat with a smock sleeue about his neck, and that was he
that made the imbering weeks; in honor of his fair and beatifull curtizan
Imbra.

A little beyond sat Alexander, who was forest to make clean rustie Armor, that
like Sisiphus stone had no end: for as fast as he scowred, ye cancker still
fretted that he did: In caucasum saxum volucre: and this was because he was a
better soldier then a Scholar. Hard by him was Julius, that upon the bridge
threw S. Peter's keys into Tiber, and took him to ye sword of Paul: infinite
other sundry offenses: but such a multitude were plangd for wenching, that of
the^ al there was not one escaped free for ye fault. But Vrbane the second, that
was in stalde Pope in the morning and was poisoned before dinner, and yet the
question, whether, if he had lived that night, his lemon and he had not bidden
penance in purgatory for their sins. Thus when I saw all these statelye
fellows, as I was ready to go out of the hall, I spied sitting in a corner a
bare faced youth, well featured, of a lively countenance, and a sweet look,
in Poopes attire: but on her head in stead of a myter she had a kercher, and
in her hand a distaffe: I thought it had been Hercules that was found playing
the wanton so with Ompha^e, or Sardanapalus amongst his Curtisans. But at last
I spied it was a Pope, or had been a Pope: But whether man or woman, or what it
was I sold not tell, till I spied written over his head in great Caracters
this style:

Papa, Pater, Parens Patriae, Prope Portas Petri, Pauli, Paruum Peperit Puerum.

Then I perceived it was Pope Ioane that honest woman, that as she went a
procession through the Lateran was brought to bed in the streets. I smilde at
her attire, and left her to her punishment. Passing from thence I went into a
lower Room, and there were all kings and princes, and men of name, which for
that I might slander their royal titles, I omit with silence. But thus they
were all punished according to their offenses, no more spared for their wealth
then the poor for their poverty; unless they died highly in the popes favor;
and perhaps there was some indulgence to mittigate their punishment. I left
them, and anon I came into a baser room all full of Monks and Friars, what
sins I saw there figured fo^th I am ashamed to rehearse, only Fri^r Onyon
the holy Confessor of Florence, he sat there naked, all anointed with h^ny
and miserably tormented with waspes. The cause of his punishment I learned to
be this.

The tale of Friar Onyon, why in purgatory he was tormented with waspes.
THere dwelled a widow in Florence of good parentage, and large possessions,
more beautiful then she was wealthy, and yet she was the richest widow in all
Florence, her name was Lisetta, the only fault that was found in her was,
that her beauty was more then her wit, and that such a selfeloue of her
excellency had made her ouerweene her self, that she thought none fit to be
her husband in all Forence. Thus though she were lookde at for her outward
perfection, yet was she laughde at for her inward follies. Well howsoever
others censured of her, she thought her penny better silver then the rest, and
would so strive to excel other Gentlewomen in the niceness of gesture, that
^fttimes she marde all: in so much that her coy quaintness was a byword in the
city. Every week forsooth, because she would seem as virtuous as she was
fair, she devoutly went to Friar Onion, to be confessed of her sins: the
Priest, who was a lusty lubber, and a tall swain, and nursed up lust with
idleness; began to look upon her more narrowly, and to take a particular
view of her perfections; with that entering with a piercing insight into her
selfeloue; thought, that she might quickly be ouerreacht in her own conceits:
for he thought, that if the wisest women were won with fair praises, and
large promises, it were more eas^e to entrap her with the discourse of her
excellency. Therefore he laid his plot thus: the next time Lis^tta came to
shrift, after she had made her confession, and had received absolution for her
sins, Friar Onyon looking earnestly upon her, fetched a far sigh and said: ah
Madam! if you knew as much as I know; as you are the fairest, so you would
think your self the happiest of all weomen that are alive. And why sir I pray
you, quoth Lisetta? ah said friar Onyon: it is such a secret as may not be
revealed: for if I should disclose it to you, and you by any means make it
manifest, there were no way with me but a most miserable death. Lisetta, as all
women be desirous of novelty, was so greedy to hear what good was toward
her, that she made a thousand protestations, and uttered a thousand oaths,
never to bewray what her ghostly father should tell her in secret. Then Madam,
quoth Friar Onyon, with a grave and a demure countenance, know your beauty is
so excellent, and your persection so far beyond the common course of all
other women, that not only all men that see you, admire you as a miracle: but
the very Angels in heaven are enamored of your proportion. The Angels, quoth
she, is that possible? The angels, madam, and not the meanest, but the most
beautiful of all the rest: for the Angel Gabriel is so far in love with you,
that the other night he appeared unto me, and charged me to do his earnest
commendations unto you, with promise, that if he might be assured of your
secrecy, he would at convenient times visit you, and interteine you with such
love as befitteth such holy spirits.

This tale so set a fire Lisetta, that she not only thanked Friar Onyon for
his commendations; but counted her self the most fortunate of all women, that
she was beloved of so blessed a Saint: and therefore when and where it pleased
him, he should be entertained with as honorable secrecy, as a poor dame of
her calling might afford. Friar Onyon seeing this geere would work, prosecuted
his purpose then subtly: he presently fell down on his knees before her, and
desired, that for such happy news as he had brought, she would grant him a
boon. Lisetta liberal now to perform any demand, bad him ask. Then he
began thus: Madam, quoth he, for that the Angel Gabriell is a spirit, and his
brightness such, as no mortal eye can suffer, and therefore must come unto
you in some humane shape, I pray you vouchsafe, that my body may be the
receptacle for him, that while he puts on my carcass, my soul may enjoy
the sight and pleasures of paradise: so shall you not hinder your self, and do
me an unspeakable benefit. Lisetta seeing Friar Onyon was a lusty tall fellow,
willing in what she might, to pleasure him, granted his request very
willingly: whereupon it was concluded, that she should leave the door open,
and about midnight the Angel Gabriell should come to visit her. Upon this
resolution home went Lisetta, as merry as a pie, tricking up her bedchamber
with all bravery, and rich perfumes for the interteinment of her paramour.
And, Friar Onyon, as busy as a be, was making his wings and his trinckets
ready to play the Angel: well, he dealt so, that he agreed with an old pandor
that dwelt opposite to the house, and there made himself ready, and at the
hour appointed went to Lisetta: where he found the door open, and so entered
up till he came to her bedchamber; where she sat expecting his coming:
as soon as she saw him with his glorious wings and his white roabes, she rose,
and fell at his feet: but he lovingly took her up, imbracst her, kissed her, and
pointed to the bed, whether the Angel went after he had laid apart his
abiliments, and Lisetta followed with as much speed as might be: Caetera quis
nescit. Early before break of the day, Gabriell took his leave of his
Lisetta, and went to his lodging, leaving her the proudest woman in the world,
that she was beloved of an Angel. Friar Onyon he got him to his cell, and
there took up his broaken sleep he had lost till nine of the clock, that
he went into his Oratorie: where he had not sytten long, but Lisetta in as
great bravery as might, came to the church, and then offered up in greater
devotion a burning taper to the Angel Gabriell; afterward her orisons done
she came to friar Onyon, who after some conference demanded her of her new
lover, whom she highly commended, and he again gave her great thanks, that
she vouchsaft him to be the re^eptacle of so holy a Saint: for all the while
his body was with her, his soul did taste the Joys of paradise. These two
thus agreed, it so fell out that sundry times as occasion and opportunity would
give leave, the Angel Gabriel visited Lisetta: The Friar thus frolic in this
conceited content was thwarted by fortune on this manner: Lisetta waxing very
proud with the remembrance of her new lover, was so coy and disdainefull, as
she thought never a dame in Florence fit for her company: insomuch that many
wondered why she grew so insolent. ^ut the more they maruailed, the more she
was malapert, conceiving such abundance of selfeloue within her stomach, that
she was with child till she had uttered her mind to some of her gossips: on
a day sitting with one in whom she had most affiance, she began to require
secrecy, and she would unfold unto her a thing not only strange but of great
import. Her gossip as the custom is, began to blame those wives whose secrets
lay at their tongues end, and said, she was never touched with any stain of
her tongue: and therefore what soever she told her, should be buried under
foot and go no further. Upon this Lysetta began to rehearse unto her from
point to point, the whole discourse of the Angel Gabriell, how he was in
love with her, and how sundry nights he lay with her, and many more matters
which he told her of the joys of Paradise. Her gossip being a wily wench kept
her counter. a^c^ very demurely, commending the excellency of her beauty, that
did not only amaze men, but drew even Angels to be ^amoured of her: promising
to be as secret in this matter as her self. She thought the time long till
they might break off talk, and therefore as soon as she could find
opportunity, she took her leave, and ^ted her homeward: but to her house she
could not go, till thee had met with two or three of her gossips; to whom in
a great laughter she unfolded what madam Lysetta had told her, how she was
beloved of the Angel Gabriell, and how sundry nights he lay with her, and
told her of the joys of Paradise. This was work enough for nine days, for
the wonder of Madame Lisettas barn went through all Florence: so that at last
it came to the ears of Lisettas friends, who grieved that such a clamor should
be raised of their kinswoman: knowing her folly, thought to watch near, but
they would take the Angel Gabriell and clip his wings from flying. Well
secret they kept it, and made as though they had not hard of it, yet kept they
such diligent watch, that they knew the night when the Angel would descend to
visit Lisetta: whereupon they beset the house round, and as soon as Friar Onyon
was in, and had put off his wings, and was gone to bed, the rushing in of the
watch wakened him from his rest, and that with such a vengeance, that trusting
more to his feet then to his feathers, he left madam Lisetta amazed at the
noise: and he himself was so sharply beset and so near taken, that he was
feign to leap out of a hie garret window, and so almost break his neck, into
a little narrow lane. Well his best joint scapte, but he was sore bruised: yet
fear made him forget his fall, that a way he ran to a poor man's house where
he saw light, and t^ere go^ in, making an excuse how he had fallen among
thieves; and so desired lodging.

The man having heard talk of the Angel Grabriell, knowing very well Friar
Onyon that knew not him, let him have lodging very willingly, but all this
while that he escapt, were Lisettas friends seeking for the saint, that so
tenderly loved their ki^swoman: but they could nor find him, and to heaven he
was not flowne, for they ha^ found his wings: sorry they were that Gabriell had
mist them. But they chid hard, and rebuked the folly of Lisettas selfeloue,
that was not only so credulous, but such a blab as to reveal her own
secrets: it was late, and because they had mist of their purpose they departed,
leaving Lisetta a sorrowful woman, that she was so deceived by the Angel
Gabriell. Well night passed, and the morning came, and this poor man friar
Onyons host told him, that he knew not ^ow to shift him: for there was that
day a great search for one Friar Onyon that had escapde naked from Lisettas
house, and who so kept him in secret should have his ears naild on the
pillorie: at this the Friar started and said: alas friend I am the man: and if
by any means thou caust convey me to the Dortor of our Friory, I will give
thee forty Duc^ats: if you will, quoth his host follow my counsatle, fear^
not, I will convey you thither safe and unknown, and thus. This day there is
great she was made before the Duke of Florence, and strange sights to be seen,
and diverse wild men disguised in strange attire are brought into the market
place: now I will dress you in some strange order, and with a mask over your
face, lead you amongst the rest, and when the show is done, carrying you as
though. I should carry you home, I will ^nueigh you into the Dortor backside
secret and unknown. Although this seemed hard to the friar, yet of two evils
the least was to be chosen, and he consented to suffer what the host would
devise. Whereupon he that was of a pleasant conceit used him thus: he
anointed him over with barme mixed with honey, and stuck him full of feathers,
and tying him by the neck with a chain, put a visor on his face, and on either
side tide a great ban Dog, in this come equipage marched this poor man with
the Friar. He was no sooner come into the open street, but the people having
never seen such a sight before in Florence, did not only wonder at the
strangeness of his dressing; but maruailed what this nouelty should mean:
whereupon an infinite number not only of the common sort, but of the grauest
citizens followed, to see what should be the end of this wonder.

With a solemn pace marched his keeper, till he came to the market place,
where tying him to a great pillar that stood there, he then let make in all
places of the city solemn proclamation, that who so would see the Angel
Gabriell, should presently come to the market place, and behold him there in
that amorous dignity that he did usually visit the Dames of Florence: at this
proclamation there was a general concourse of people, especially of the better
sort that had hard of Lisettas loves: so that the duke himself came thither,
and amongst the rest Lisettas kinsmen. When all the market place was full of
people, the host pulled the visor from the Friars face: at which the people
gave a great shoute, clapping their hands, and crying, the Angel Gabriell, the
Angel Gabriell, he that comes from heaven, to make us wear^ horns. I need not
I hope, entreat you to believe, yt poor Friar Onyon was heavily perplered,
especially when the day grew hot, he naked and anointed with honey, so that all
the waspes in the city, as it were by a miracle, left the Grocers shops, and
came to visit the Friar, because his skin was so sweet: but alas to the poor
man's pains, that he was almost st^ng to death. Diverse of his ^ouent came
thither to see the strange apparition of the Angel, who when they saw he was
Friar Onyon: then they covered their shaven crowns with their cooles, and went
home with a flea in their ears. Thus all day stood the poor Friar woondered
at of all the people of Florence, and tor^ented with waspes, and at night
fetched home to the Dortor by some of his brothers: he was clapped in prison,
where for sorrow poor Gabriell died: and because he did so dishonor the other
Friars, he bydes this torment in purgatory.

The discourse of the Friar thus past, I viewed them all that were Churchmen:
and after went into a lower room, where there was a medley of all manner (...)
people of all trades, sciences, and occupations, assigned to such sundry
torments, as man's eye would almost surfeit with the variety of objects, even
the very broom men were there for robbing of the broom closes between
Barking and London. And hard by them was there a place empty formed thus: It
was made like the shape of Tiborne threesquare, and all painted about with
halters, and hard by stood two tall fellows with carters whips so stearnely
looking, as if with every lashe they would cut a man to the bones: there was
written over the place a great roman B. I could not learn for whom this
torment was provided, for ye so many men, so many censures: some said it was
for one Boniface which should be Pope, and should prove a great persecutor:
others, that Bonner should be brought from his place among the prelates, and be
whipped there for breeching of Bartlet Green naked in his garden: but the most
voices went, that it was for Bull the hangma^, because at his whipping in london
the carters showed him too much favor. Well for who^soeuer it is, God bless
me from it, for he is like to be well belabored with two lusty knaves.
Looking still about, I saw three men seated as it were in thrones higher then
the rest, with three shields hanging by them, having impreses and mottoes, I
stayed and gazed my fill upon them: for they had no punishment, but were as
prisoners detayned in purgatory, but with a pre-eminence; for which soever of
the Ghosts passed by gave the^ a knee with a reverence. I maruailed what they
should be, and one told me it was the three degrees of Cuckholds; with that I
smilde, and lookde more narrowly upon them, I spide written over the firsts
head this short sentence, One and One. Over the second, None and one: over the
third One and none. This was to me a dark Aenigma, that I wished some Sphinx
to unfold the secret, at last on^ stepped to me and told me the whole matter
thus.

The tale of the three Cuckolds, of their impreses and mottoes.
THese three me^, my friend quoth the ghost, when they lived were three famous
men, and yet Cuckoldes, as by their attier thou may perceive: but different
in degree, nature and condition. He which sits highest, over whose head thou
see is written, One and One, had a beautiful dame to his wife, fair and
well featured; yet a great deal more full of beauty then of honesty: but
howsoever qualified, a good wench she was, and one that was not such a niggard
but she could keep a corner for a friend: to be brief, she would bear a man
false at tables, and her husband that loved Irish well, thought it no ill
trick at tables to bear a man too many: he saw it and knew very well, that
his wife loved another as well as himself: yet he loved her so, that he
would not discontent her, but suffered her to have her longing and to feed
her own fancy, and like a wittold winkt at it, and therefore worthy to wear
the horn. Thus while he lived the dishonor of his life was shame enough for
his leudnes, and now after his death because he was so kind a man, they have
plast him there without any punishment, because it was penance enough to have
his conscience pricked with a restles sting of baudry. And here they have made
him a gentleman, and in his Scutchion have given him the Ram rampant, with a
mighty pair of horns hanging over his eyes: to signify, if it be rightly
emblasde, that he had such a great head, yt looking through his horns he did
see and not see, shocking on with heavy palms as belwether to the rest, his
Motto is stolen out of Tully: Non solum pro nobis. Meaning, that as we are not
borne for our selves, but for our Country, so he did not marry a wife for
himself, but for his neighbors: this was the kind opinion of this grave
wittold.

The second, over whose head is written, None and One, was a man of an honest
and virtuous disposition, who having a fair wife, that though she could not
tread right, yet wrincht her shoe inward; that was as secret as she was
false; and though she could not live Cast yet she lived Caute: he never
suspected her; but as he was honestly minded toward her, and kept himself to
the wife of his bosom, so measured her foot after his own last, and thought
none in the world to have a more chaste wife, although indeed none had a more
lascivious wanton. This poor man was none in his own conceit, yet was one
indeed: and therefore is he placst here without any torture: for that it is
plague enough for him that he had a whore to his wife. He is likewise made a
gentleman and gives Arms the Goat, which by imblasure signifies, that as the
Goat carries his horns behind, so having horns because they were not
apparent on his forehead, thought he had none, and yet carried a fair pair
backward like the Got, his Motto is: Creed quod habes and Habes. Meaning, that
a man's content stands as his believing is; so that if a man in his own
conscience thinks he has a fair wife, it suffices, what soever proof makes
manifest to others.

The third, over whose head is written, One and None, is a man that has a
woman of surpassing beauty to his wife, excellent and rare in properties, and
every way as virtuous in honest perfection, a woman as fair as Heelen and as
chaste as Lucrece: yet forsooth, because his wife is more fair then the common
sort, and therefore more gazde on for that wheresoever she goes, many men's
eyes wait upon her and diverse lascivious youth attempt to frequent her company;
yet she that is wholly resolved upon virtue has the tortue is under her feet
and gads not abroad; but keeping home auoids all occasions of dishonor: yet for all these manifest instances of her honesty, the eye of her husband fiered with
suspicion so inflames his heart with jealousy, as there is none looks on his
wife, but he thinks he comes to court her, and she glaunces her ei^ on none
but straight she loves him: if she smile, it is to think how her love and
she shall meet; if she lower, it is because she has not seen him to day:
thus living does he lead a hellish life in the labirinth of Jealousy, and
therefore is he placst here without punishment in Purgatory, because there
can be no greater torment then to be plagued with the restless sting of
Jealousy. He is as the rest are, made a gentleman, his arms the Ass, with a
marvelous pair of long and large ears. The emblason this, that as the Ass
for the length of his ears thinks them to be horns, and yet indeed are but a
plain pair of ears: so he like an Ass because he has a fair wife, thinks
that per Consequens he must be a Cuckold, when indeed he is none, and so
supposes his ears to be horns: his Motto is, Ne mulieri credas, ne mortus
quidem. Meaning, that what fair show soever a woman does hear of honesty,
yet there is no credit to be given unto her coyness: but he resolves with
the crew of the yellow hosde companions, that Mulier, howsoever it be spoken or
understood, is a word of inconstancy: therefore though he has no horns,
because his wife is too honest, yet like an Ass for his Jealousy, he shall
have a long pair of ears whiles he lives.

Thus was the order of these Cuckolds discourst unto me, which as soon as I
heard I went on further to spy any worth the noting, much I saw that were
frivolous to re earse, as diverse women that were hanged up by the tongues for
scolding, and especially one Botchers wife of Sudbury, who was so famous for
that Art (if we^ may term it a science) that after her death, she was
chronicled amongst the successiue scoldes her neighbors for an Archgossip in
that faculty: for her husband being a poor painful man that lived by his
daily labor, came home every night and brought her duly and duetifully ^is
groate, which could not content her, but she would in brave terms abuse him,
and call him rascal and slau^; but above all, prickelowse, which he could
not ab^e: wherefore having often forbad her, and seeing she would take no
warning: on a day took heart at grass, and belabourd her well in a cudgill:
but all would not suffice: the more he beat her, the more she called him
prickelowse. Seeing stripes would not prevail, he threatened to cut out her
tongue: it is no matter for that knave quoth she yet shall the stumpe call
thee pricklowse: at this answer^ the poor Botcher was so mad, that taking a
rope and tyi^g it abo^t her middle, having a well in his yard, and thereunto
he let her down into the well, and threatened to drown her: ^ush all would not
prevail, but she c^ied more vehemently: wherefore he duckt her over head and
ears, and then when her tongue could not wag, she heaued her hands above water,
and knack with her two nails of her thombes: then seeing nothing would
prevail but death, he drew her up and left her to her villainy: she above
(...) rest was tormented. A little below her I saw a Cook that was a mad merry
fellow, and he sat demurely with a Cranes leg in his mouth, having no other
punishment, at this I smilde, and asked the cause, and it was told me thus.

The tale of the Cook, and why he sat in Purgatory with a Cranes leg in his
mouth.
THere dwelled in Venice a Gentleman called Signor Bartolo, who being one of
the Consil adorie, and greatly experienced in the civil law, was much
frequented of sundry suitors, amongst the rest there was a gentleman his
neighbor, that by fortune had caught some eight or ten Cranes, a foul in high
esteem in that City: these as a thing of great price he bestowed on Signor
Bartolo, who accepted them with that gratefulnes, that so good and bountiful a
gift merited. Proud forsooth of this present he fed them up in one of his
yardes, looking with great care to them, because the Venetians hold them so
rare. On a day desirous to make his neighbors partakers of his dainties, ^e
bad diverse of them to Supper, and commanded his Cook to provide good cheer,
and amongst the rest, chargde him to kill a Crane, and to see that it were
excellently well roasted. The Cook, whos^ name was Stephano, made all things
in a readiness for Supper, and when the time was convenient, laid the Crane to
the fire. Now sir this Stephano was a fellow^ that was somewhat amorous, and
excellent at courting of a Country wench; in so much that he was the chief
gallant of all the parish for dancing of a Lincolneshire hornepipe in the
Churchyard on sondaies: being thus well qualified, he was generally loved of all the gyrles thereabout, and especially of one in the town, whom he had so long
dallied withal, that the maid fell sick, and her diseas^ was thought to be a
Timpany with two heels: well howsoever she was spedde, and Stephano had done
the deed. This maid hearing what a great feast should be at signor Bartoloes
house, hied her thither, not only to see the good cheer: but that she must
feed her eye with the sight of her Stephano, who now was ruffling and sweating
in the kitchen; she made an excuse and came in for fire, but in an unlucky
time for the poor Cook: for she no sooner saw the Crane but she longd for
a leg, and that so sore, that there was nothing but that or death: whereupon
she calde Stephano to her, and told him that she must needs have a leg of
the Crane: for she so deeply longd for it, that if she had it not, it were
able both to cast her away and that she went withal. Although poor Stephano
alledgde many excuses, as the displeasure of his Master, and the fear of the
loss of his service: yet no reason could prevail with her, who was without
reason: and therefore what for love he bare her, and for dread of discredit
that might ensue, if for want of her longing she should fall to travel, he
ventred a joint, and when the Crane was enough cut her off a leg. His wench
thus satisfied went home: And Supper time grew on, for all the guests were
come, and presently because it was somewhat late, sat down: where they were
served very bountifully, at last the dainties the Crane forsooth, was brought
up, and signior Bartolo commanded the Caruer to truncke her, which when he had
done, she was set upon the table: the gentleman of the house fell to
distributing to his guests, and at last mist a leg, with that looking about
he calde the Caruer, and asked him where the other leg was: Sir quoth he, your
Maistership has all the Cook sent up: thenquoth Bartolo go to the Cook, and
ask him where the other leg is: the Caruer went down and did his Masters
command; the Cook thinking to face out the matter, began to smile: why quoth
he, we may see Cranes are dainty in this Country, when gentlemen cannot tell
how many legs they have? go tell my Master I sent him up as many legs as
she had. The fellow brought this news to his Master, who in a great chafe
called for the Cook, and asked of him how many legs a Crane had: marry sir
quoth he, one: why malapert villeine quoth Bartolo, mockest thou me before all
these gentlemen? not I sir quoth the Cook: For I am sure I have dressed many in
my life: and hitherto yet I never saw a Crane have but one leg. With this
answer Bartolo was thoroughly inflamed with choler, but that he would show
himself to be patient amongst his neighbors, he suppressed his anger with
this mild reply: Either, gentlemen, you may think I or my Cook is drunk,
that hold a dispute about a Cranes leg: but for that this night I will not
be impatient, I pass it over: but to morrow morning all as you are here, I
humbly request you to take so much pains as to rise betimes, and to be Judges
between me and my man, whether Cranes have two legs or no: for I have eleauen
Cranes more, and we will early go into the yard where they feed: and this
shall be the wager between my man and me, if they have but one leg, I will
give him twenty Ducats and a suit of Satin: if they have two, he shall have
twenty blows with a cudgill, and I will turn him quite out of service: with
this motion the Cook seemed very well contented, that all the guests smilde to
see poor Stephano so obstinate: upon this matter they began to descant and
fell into pleasant chat, and so passed away the supper time: at last, although
loath to depart, yet every man departed with great thanks to Signior Bartolo for
their good cheer, promising, very early in the morning to be with him. Where
we leave them, and again to the Cook, who provided al his trinckets in a
readiness, to trudge away with bag and baggage the next morning: for he knew
his matter was naught; thus with a heavy heart he passed away the night, and in
the morning fell in a slumber: but he had not long lien in his dream, but
Bartolo accompanied with his neighbors knocked at his man's chamber door, and
bad him rise, that they might end the quarrel: poor Stephano started up and
with a heavy cheer coming out of his chamber, gave his master and the rest
the Bon Ioure: Come syrrha quoth his master, here are the gentlemen my
neighbors are come to be equal censors of our controversy: hold, take the key
of the yard, and open you the door, and then let us see how many legs a Crane
has: the Cook took the key and very easily opened the door, and entered in,
and all the Cranes, because it was so early, were at strud, as their custom is
generally all stood upon one leg, and held the other under their wing.
Stephano seeing the advantage not willing to let so fair a ball fall to the
ground, (...) himself: now sir (quoth he) I hope your self and the rest of
the gentlemen will confess I have woonne the wager: for you see here is never
a Crane that has more then one leg. At this seeing how nimble he was to take
the advantage, they all laughed: Truth sir quoth his Master, they stand now on
one leg, but straight you shall see me make them all have two: with that Signor
Bartolo lifting up his hand cried, So ho; and with that the Cranes let down
their legs, and every one stood upon two: how now you knave quoth his
Master, how many legs has a Crane? has she not two? yes marry sir quoth
he, and so would your other Crane have had, if you had done this: for if your
worship when you had seen the Crane in the platter had but one leg, had as
loud as you do now, cried, So ho, why then she would have had two legs as
well as these: At this jest, Signor Bartolo fell into such a laughing and all
his guests with him, that he laughed away choler, and admitted (...) ^an into
his woonted favor: whereupon Stephano told them the whole discourse, what
happened between him and his wench, and upon this merrily they went all to
breakefast. Now Sir, although this fault was forgiven: yet because he died not
in favor with the Priest of the Parish, he was appointed for stealing the
Cranes leg to stand in Purgatory with a leg in his mouth for a certain
season.

After I had heard this discourse of the Cook, I went on further to see if I
could perceive any other such Iestes as might make me merry in so
melancholicke a place, at last, as I cast mine eye aside, I saw where a poor
Uickar sat with a Coal in his mouth, I askde the reason why he was appointed
to such punishment, and it was answered me thus.

The tale of the Vickar of Bergamo, and why he sits with a coal in his mouth
in purgatory.
THere dwelled sometime in Bergamo a vickar that was well-beloved in the town,
for that he was a boon companion, and would not stick to play at trumpe all
day with his parishoners for a pot or two of Als, a fair reader he was, and
pleased the people well, marry for his learning that was little, and toongs he
had no more then were in his mouth: neither would he trouble himself with the
knowledge of many languages, but applied his idle time upon good fellowship. It
chanced that his score growing very great, and much chalk upon the post, his
hostess wanting money to pay the Maltman, waxed hasty with the vickar for her
debt, he being then bare of pence, because his quarterage was not come in,
told her she could not have it as yet, whereupon they grew to words, and from
words ^lowes, for mass Uickar went away with a broken ^ead, which driude him
into such a choler that he sought al means how to revenge, and he laid his
plot thus. Every sunday morning before mass all the youth of the ^arish did
accustom to come to the Alehouse to eat hot puddings, which was great profit
to the goodwife: now to prevent her of this commodity, the vickar spoke
against it, and forbad it openly: yet it was not so deeply inueighed against,
but that diverse Sundaies they would make a steal thither to breakefast: and
one Sundaye amongst the rest, the whole crew being gathered together, notice
was given to the vickar: whereupon he hied him thither, and sound them all hard
at it by the teeth: when they saw mass vickar come in, every man rose up and
ran away to shift for himself, the hostess she whipped in with her puddings;
so that there was none left in the house but Master vickar: who spying a
doozen of lusty large black puddings hangde in the Chimney, whip them into his
wide sleeue, and went his way: he was no sooner gone, but the goodwife coming
out mist her puddings, and little suspected the Uickar, but thought some of her
guests had carried them away: whereupon she told it to her husband, who let the
matter pass lightly, and wished his wife to make her hastily ready, that they
might go to mass: on goes she with her holiday partlet, and spoonging her
self up, went with her husband to Church, and came just to the service: well
master Uickar who was in a great chafe, mumbled up his mattins, and after
service was done very stoutly got him into the pulpit, and began to fall to
his collation, his text was upon the Gospel for that day, which he so
coursde and can^asde over that he fell at last to talk of the breakefast: oh
neighbors quoth he, as I came this day to Churchward, I came into a house,
nay into an Alehouse, where I found a crew at breakefast before Mass, at a
bloody breakefast, a black breakefast, yea neighbors the Devils breakefast;
and with that he threw his arms about him with such violence, that his wide
sleeue untied, the puddings fellout, and hit an old wife on the head that she
fell over again: the hostess seeing her doozen of puddings that she mist,
cried out to her husband: oh man, quoth she, there is the doozen of Puddings that
were gone out of the Chimney; hie thee least they be gone: at this there was
such a laughing, and such a rumor, that the poor Uickar was feign to leave of
his collation, and come down to answer what the Alewife objected against him:
but he was so well-beloved in the parish, that the Alewife was punished, and her
Sunday breakefasts put down by a common consent of the Churchwardens. The
Uickar thus well reuengde of the Alewife, endeavored how to make amends to his
parish, and therefore casting in his head how he might bring it to pass; one
day as he traveled toward Pisa he met a stranger, who had certain ^eathers
in his hand of a byrd called Apis Indica, which were long and large, of the
color of gold, and were so bright as scarce one could look against them:
such before were never seen in Italy. Mass Uickar as soon as ^ee saw these,
had a reach in his head, and iumpt with the trauailer to buie one, a prise was
pitched for thirty Iulios, and Mass Uickar paid it: having this, home he
came, and bought a case of crimsin Ueluet imbrodred with gold, to put his
feather in, keeping it with great curiosity and secrecy, making report that
he had one of the richest relics in the world, and promising upon Candlemas
day next to show it: whereupon it was not only blazed abroad throughout the
town, but in all the villages and hamlets adjoining, that both old and young
prepared themselves to see this holy relic. Two of the crew, who were
brothers at the breakefast of Puddings, hearing these news sought how to be
even with master Uickar: and therefore brought it so to pass by a wenche of
the house where the Uickar lay, that they might see the holy relic; she
brought them to the chamber and the box wherein the case lay in perfume, the
fellow looking in, and seeing a feather, neither respecting reason, nor
religion, took it out and put it in his bosom, and filled the case full of
charcoales that lay by, and so putting the case into the box, kissed the wench
and went his way. Service time being come, master vicar runs up for his box,
claps it under his arm, and away he goes to Church: and for that it was
Candlemas day a high day, he said and soong a very solemn Mass; and that
being done, seeing such a multitude of people, he got him with a great grace
into the pulpit, and began his text, which after he had ratled over a little, he
told them what sundry relics were left to the Church for the benefit of the
people: oh my masters and good friends quoth he, parishioners and neighbors:
You see that every city here about, nay through the whole world, has some holy
relic or other, as a blessing belonging to their corporation: but our poor^
town of Bergamo has had none: But now God has considered of your estate, and
has sent you a richer and more holy then all the rest. Some town, quoth he,
has a piece of the cross, or of the nails, or a piece of the spoong, that
recht Christ Uineger; at Room there is the spear that pierst his side; at
Venice the Chawbone of saint Mark, good for the falling evil; at Vienna the
tooth of S. Appolym wholesome for the toothake; at Pysa the hoof of Saint
Loy^s horse that heals such kind of cattle; for the Swine Saint Anthonies
bell; for the pos^, Saint Dunstones tongues; for the Squ^sey, Saint Martins
trough; for the eye sight Saint Winifrids girdle; for the (...) Saint Asaphs
Beads, and a thousand more, which are now needless to rehearse: but good
people, I have here for your comfort one of the feathers; yea one of those
holy and glorious feathers, that the Angel Gabriell wore when he said Aue
Maria to the mother of Christ: old^ wives, and aged men, yea rich and poor
kneel down, and with joy behold so great a miracle; with that they all fell
upon their knees, and he pulled forth his box, and drew forth the case, which
when he hard rattle, he marvelled: but when he put his hand in, and found
nothing but coals, his heart was cold in his belly, and he swet for woe: yet
having a knauish and a ready wit, he suddenly and upon the present shifted it
thus. Good people, quoth he, I have mist of my box, and have left the wing of
the Angel Gabriell behind me: but I have here a relic no less precious then
that, which I thought not to show you before Easter day, and these be the
coals that Saint Lawrence the holy Martyr was broild with, and with that he
drew the Charcoale out of his poake: these parishioners quoth he, even the very
mark that is made with these, is good against all evil spirits, against
blasting and witchcraft; and therefore seeing it is the will of God I should
show you these first, I will come down and mark you all with the holy relic
of Saint Lawrence; so he s^ept down out of the pulpit, and crossed them all to
his great prof^t, and their content: for which cause in that ^e mocked the
people, he is appointed to stand (...) purgatory with a coal in his mouth.

The vickars tale of Bergamo being ended, I went further, and presently I
espied a little door, whereout issued a most fearful noise tempered with
such far fetched sighs and grievous shrikes, that it was a sound much to be
pitied: the smalenesse of the voice discovered that they were women. Whereupon
I pressed more n^re the door, and looked in at a little chinke, and there I
might see a company of beautiful women of all ages pit^fully tormented, as
sitting in a place full of smoke and stinking sauors, and bitten continually
about the hearts with scorpions: in all there were not above three of them, and
yet they uttered as grievous laments as though there had been a thousand. I
demanded why these were punished above the rest; they said, they were such as
died maids and kept their virginity without spots, that hated men; and for
that they were so hard hearted, they were adjudged to that sharp punishment.
Straight as I cast mine eye up, I spide in a blind corner where a Painter sat,
having the picture of a roode hung before him, and every time he looked upon
it, he had three bastanados over the shoulders with a belroape, as of the rest,
so I inquirde the cause of this, and it was discourst to me thus.

The tale of the Painter of Doncaster, and why in purgatory he was beaten with
a Belroape.
I Know you are not ignorant, how in king Edward the sixts days all popery and
superstition was banished, and the light of the Gospel pulled from under the
Bushel where it was covered, and to the sight and comfort of all set upon a
hill: so that all his relics were abolished, and his idols pulled down, and
the Church as near as they could, cleansed from the ^regs of such an
Antichrist: whereupon the Painters that liude with such ^rash, as trimming of
shrines and roodes, altars and Saints, and the caruers that made such images,
were feign with Alexander the Coppersmith to cry out against Paul and his
doctrine, having so little work that they almost forgot their occupation. ^nt
when for the sins of this land, and wickedness of the people, the Lord took
away their good king, and deprived them of the sweet Manna of the Gospel, and
sent them again Antichrist with all his traditions, Queen Marie lawful
successor in the kingdom; made proclamation, that all those roodes which were
pulled down, should be set up again in every Church. Amongst the rest, the
Church of Doncaster in Yorkshire, desiring to be one of the foremost, to
signify their obedience and devotion, in all have sent for the Painter to make
them a roode, and agreed upon the price. Whereupon he went about his work, but
for that his hand had been out of use by the space of six years, he had
forgot the lineaments of the visage, and the other woonted proportion, that he
made it very hard fauourde; yet as every man's work seems well to himself, he
went forward withal and set it up on a satterday at night on the Roodloft: on
sunday at mass there was old ringing of Bells, and old and young came to church
to see the new roode, which was so ill fauourde, that all the parish mislikt
it, and the children they cried and were afraid of it: upon this they fell in
great displeasure with the painter, and when monday came, and he was with the
cheese of the parish for his money, they denied flatly to pay him any, because
his work was so ill wrought. He upon that called them before the mayor of the
town, who was a man that favored king Cowards religion, as far as he durst,
and to him the painter made his complaint, that the parishoners now that he
had made their roode, would not pay him his money: the Mayor demanded of them
why they denide him payment: they answered, for that he had like a bungler made
Christ so hard favored, that it was not only unfit to stand in any church, but
their children were afraid to look on it: so that every way it should greatly
hinder devotion. But yet quoth the mayor, the poor man has done his goodwil,
you must consider his hand has b^n long out of use, and therefore there is no
reason though his cunning has failde him, but you should pay him his money:
well sir quoth they, at your request we will give him what our bargain was:
but we must buie a new rood, and cannot tell what to do with the old: marry
neighbors quoth the Mayor, if he will not serve you for a god, follow my advise,
clap a pair of ^ornes on his head, and I warrant you he will prove an
excellent good devil: and that sir, quoth the painter, will I do over and
beside their bargain. Thus were the poor parishioners of Doncaster mocked, and
yet paid their money: but their Uickar so dealt with bell, book, and candle
against the poor painter for making the ill favored roode, that he s^s in
purgatory beaten with a Belroape.

The tale of the Painter being ended, passing a little further, I might see
where sat a crew of men that woar^ Baie garlands on their heads, and they were
Poets, amongst which was old Ennius; Virgill, Iuuenall, Propertius, and wanton
Ovid, Martial, Horace, and many more: which had written lascivious verse, or
other heroical poems. But above them all I marked old Ronsard, and he sat
there with a scroule in his hand, wherein was written the description of
Cassandra his Mistress, and because his style is not common, nor have I heard
our English Poets write in that vain, mark it, and I will rehearse it, for I
have learnd it by heart.

RONSARDS DESCRIPTION OF his Mistress, which he wears in his hand in
Purgatory.
Down I sat,
I sat down,
where Flora had bestowed her graces:
Green it was,
It was green
Far surpassing other places,
For art and nature did combine
With sights to witch the gasers eyne.
There I sat,
I sat there
viewing of this pride of places:
Straight I saw,
I saw straight
the sweetest fair of all fair faces:
Such a face as did contain,
Heavens shine in every vain.
I did look,
Look did I,
and there I saw Appollos wyers,
Bright they were,
They were bright,
with them Auroras head he tiers,
But this I woondred how that now
They shadowed in Cassandras brow.
Still I gazde,
I gazde still,
spying Lunas milk white glase:
Comixt fine,
Fine comixt,
with the mornings ruddie blase:
This white and red their seating seeks
Upon Cassandraes smiling cheeks.
Two stars then,
Then two stars
passing Sun or Moon in shine
Appearde there,
There appearde
and were forsooth my Mistres ^ine:
From whence proud Cupid threw his fires
To set a flame all men's desiers,
Breasts she had,
She had breasts
white like the silver dove;
Lie there did,
There did lie
Cupid ouergrowne with love,
And in the vale that parts the pain
Pitched his tent there to remain.
This was she,
She was this
the fairest fair that ere I see;
I did muse,
Muse did I
how such a creature found could be;
A voice replied from the Air,
She alone and none so fair.
This was Ronsards description of his Mistres, and he is for^ll to hold it in
his hand, that every time he cast^ his eyes on it, he may with ^ghs feel a
secret torment, in that he once loved toomuch being alive. A little above ^ate
the gh^ of a young gentlewoman that had been false to her husband, she
should have been grievously tormented: but that she bestowed an annuity for
three years pension upon a morrow mass priest, who so labored it with
dirges, trentals and masses Ad requiem, that she had no other punishment but
this, that her beautiful hair wherein she so much delighted, and whose
tramels was a train to intrappe young gentlemen, that now was clipped off bare
to the scull, and so she sat ashamde and mourning: the cause as I learnde was
this.

Why the gentlewoman of Lions sat with her hair clipped off in Purgatory.
IN the City of Lions there dwelt a gentleman of good account amongst his
neighbors, called Monsieur Perow; this gentleman having lands and revenues
sufficient to maintain his estate, thought fully to heap to himself content,
and therefore sought out a young virgin of equal parentage to himself, with
whom he had a sufficient dowry, and her he loved, and she likte him, and so
they married, living in good estimation amongst their Tenants. As they were thus
linked together in wedlock, so it seemde in outward appearance that they were
so strictly tied in affection, as no means might alienate. But women, whom
nature has framde to be inconstant, cannot be altered by nurture. The Palm
will grow straight though it be never so depressed; and a wanton will be a
wanton, were she married to Cupid, and so it proud by Maria; for so was the
gentlewomans name: who because she was fair had many Suitors, that attempted
to be riuals with her husband in her love; amongst the rest as she resolved
to choose one, there was a young amorous youth of Lions calde Pier, he sought
diverse means to creep into her favor, past by her house, and cast up looks
that pleaded for pity, and had banded him again glances that foreshewed good
will: Thus with interchange of favors they lived. Pier seeking opportunity how
to reveal his mind to Maria, at last as he walked one day forth the town,
he saw where she was walking only with one of her maids, taking therefore
opportunity by the forehead he stepped to her, and began to court her with
sundry protestations of his love, which had been long and so surely set as no
despair could race out, promising not only to be a faithful servant in
constancy: but to be so careful of her honor as of his own life: and for
your gravity, think Mistres quoth he, that faults in affections are fleight
follics, that Venus has shrines to shade her trewants, and Cupids wings are
shelters for such as venture far to content their thoughts, unseen is half
pardoned, and love requires not chastity, but that her Soldiers be chary.
Maria hearing the wag thus play the Orator, having love in her eyes and desire
in heart, after a few faint denials, thrusting him away with the little
^inger, and pulling him to her with the whole hand, she granted him that
favor to be called her servant. Grarde thus he grew in such credit, that there
was no man with Maria but Pier, having thus a love beside her husband, although
he was a fair man and well featured; yet she found fault with him, because
he was a meacocke and a milkesoppe, not daring to draw his sword to revenge
her wrongs: wherefore she resolved to entertain some Soldier, and so she
did: for one Signor Lamberto a brave Gentleman; but some thing hard facde,
sought her favor and found it, and him she entertained for her Champion.

Thus had she a white liuerd Adon to feed her eye with beauty, and a stout
Hercules to revenge all her wrongs with his sword, and a poor husband to
shadow both with his horns. Living thus contentedly in her own conceit, her
husband went into the Country to a Farm of his, and thither with him he
carried his wife, where he passed away many merry days in such pleasure, as
Country sports can afford: at last serious affairs forcing him to it, he rid
his way for three or four days to certain of his friends there adioining.
Maria seeing her husband gone thought not to let time slip, nor to lose
opportunity: and therefore the next day after sent for Pier, who hasted as fast
as might be, till he came to his Mistres, where he had such friendly
intertainement as fitted both their humors; she caused her maid to make
great cheer, and as soon as it was ready, to dinner they went, where they were
scarce set but one knocked at the door, the maid looked out and it was Signor
Lamberto, she ran and told her Mistres; who fearful that he should see Pier
or know of him, hid him under the bed, and commanded her maid to bid Signor
Lamberto come up: she like a cunning Curtizan giving him such favorable
intertainement as though he were the man whom above all other she made
account off. Faith sweet (quoth he) I heard thy husband was from home, and so
I took my nag and came gallopping hither: set him into the stable quoth the
Mistres: No quoth (Signor Lamberto) let him be there still and bite of the
bridle, for my business is such, as I will only dine with you, and then bid you
farewell: with that he sat him down to dinner. Poor Pier lying close under
the bed; thinking every minute an hour till he were gone: as thus they sat in
their cups and were wantonly qua^ing one to another; came in the maid
running, and said, her Master came riding: at this Signor Lamberto started up
and was amazed: but the gentlewoman was in a fear that had two lovers at once
in her house, and yet could have hidden them both had it not been for the
horse that stood tied in the Court yard: well a shift must be had, and where
sooner then out of a woman's head. What shall I do quoth Signor Lamberto? marry
I pray you good sweet heart quoth she, to save your own credit and mine,
draw your sword and go down the stairs, and as you go, swear and say,
that you shall find a time and place more convenient, when you will be
reuengde to the uttermost; so he did, and by that time was the gentleman of the
house come in, who maruailed to see a horse tied in the Court, and therefore
alighting off came up the stairs, and as he came, met Lamberto with his sword
drawn, and his face full of frowns, swearing, when fitter time and place
should serve he would revenge and that with extremity. What is the matter
quoth the Master of ye house? he answered nothing, but put up his sword, took
horse and away toward Lions. As Soon as the gentleman came up, he found his
wife amazde, sitting in the hall in the midst of the flower, as half beside
her self: what is the matter wife (quoth he) that thou art so amazed, and
that Signor Lamberto went down with his sword drawn in such a rage? Ah
husband (quoth she) as I sat here at my work, came running into the court
yard a proper young man having thrown away his Cloak and his Hatte, and
desired me, as I tendered the state of a man, to save his life, for Signor
Lamberto would kill him: I pitying his case stepped in and hid him in my
bedchamber: with that came Signor Lamberto gallopping, dismounted in the court
and drawing his sword, came running up and would have broken open my chamber
door, but that on my knees I entreated him to the contrary: at my request he
went his way, frowning as you see, and so he is rode to Lions: the poor young
man (alas) husband lies hid under the bed in great fear: and this tale she
told so loud that Pier heard every word, and therefore had his lesson what
he should answer: smyling at the prompt wit of his Mistres that had so
sudden a shift. Bid him come out wife quoth he: then she oapt the door,
and Pier he came as one greatly affrighted from under the bed. The gentleman
seeing him a proper young man and weaponlesse, had pity on him and said: he
was glad that his house was a sanctuary for him, and greatly commended his wife
that she had saved him from the fury of Signor Lamberto, whom all Lions
accounted a most desperate man: upon this taking Pier by the hand they sat
down to dinner, and when they had taken their repast, the gentleman very
courteously conducted Pier home to Lions. Now for because she was thus
inconstant, she to quality her pride and insolency, sat in Purgatory with
the punishment before rehearsed.

This tale being ended, I lookde a little further, and I might see where a
young man and a young woman sat together naked from the middle upward, and a
very old man whipping of them with nettles: they as persons that little
regarded his punishment, would often times kiss, and then the old man as one
inwardly vered, would bestirre all his strength to torment them: the reason of
this strange show was thus discourst unto me.

The tale of the two Lovers of Pisa, and why they were whipped in Purgatory with
nettles.
IN Pisa a famous City of Italy, there lived a gentleman of good lineage and
lands, feared as well for his wealth as honored for his virtue; but indeed
well thought on for both: yet the better for his riches. This Gentleman had one
only Daughter called Margaret, who for her beauty was liked of all and desired
of many; but neither might their suits, nor her own eye prevail about her
fathers resolution, who was determined not to marry her, but to such a man as
should be able in abundance to maintain the excellency of her beauty. Diverse
young gentlemen proffered large ^ments, but in vain: a maid she must be
still till at last an old Doctor in the town that professed Physic, became
a suitor to her, who was a welcome man to her father, in that he was one of the
welthiest men in all Pisa. A tall stripling he was and a proper youth, his age
about four score, his head as white as milk, wherein for offense sake there
was left never a tooth: but it is no matter, what he wanted in person he had in
the purse, which the poor gentlewoman little regarded, wishing rather to tie
her self to one that might fit her content, though they lived meanly, then to
him with all the wealth in Italy. But she was young and forest to follow her
fathers direction, who upon large covenants was content his daughter should
marry with the Doctor, and whether she likt him or no, the match was made up,
and in short time she was married. The poor wench was bound to the stake, and
had not only an old impotent man: but one that was so jealous, as none might
enter into his house without suspicion, nor she do any thing without blame:
the least glance, the smallest countenance, any smile was a manifest instance
to him, that she thought of others better then himself: thus he himself
lived in a hell and tormented his wife in as ill perpleritie. At last it
chanced, that a young Gentleman of the City coming by her house, and seeing
her look out at her window, noting her rare and excellent proportion, fell in
love with her, and that so extremely, as his passions had no means till her
favor might mittigate his heartsicke discontent. The young man that was
ignorant in amorous matters and had never been used to Court any Gentlewomen,
thought to reveal his passions to some one friend, that might give him
counsel for the winning of her love, and thinking experience was the surest
Master, on a day seeing the old Doctor walking in the Church that was
Margarets husband, little knowing who he was, he thought this the fittest man
to whom he might discover his passions, for that he was old and knew much,
and was a Physician that with his drugges might help him forward in his
purposes: so that seeing the old man walk solitary he ioind unto him, and
after a courteous salute, told him that he was to impart a matter of great
import unto him; wherein if he would not only be secret, but endeavor to
pleasure him, his pains should be every way to the full considered. You must
imagine gentleman, quoth Mutio, for so was the Doctors name, that men of our
profession are no blabs, but hold their secrets in their hearts bottom, and
therefore reveal what you please, it shall not only be concealed; but cured,
if either my Art or counsel may do it. Upon this Lionel, so was the young
gentleman called, told and discourst unto him from point to point how he was
fallen in love with a gentlewoman that was married to one of his profession,
discovered her dwelling and the house, and for that he was unacquainted with
the woman, and a man little experienced in love matters, he required his favor
to further him with his advise. Mutio at this motion was stung to the heart,
knowing it was his wife he was fallen in love withal: yet to conceal the
matter and to experience his wives chastity, and that if she played false he
might be reuengde on them both; he dissembled the matter and answered, that he
knew the woman very well, and commended her highly; but said, she had a
Churl to her husband: and therefore he thought she would be the more
tractable: try her man quoth he, saint heart never woonne fair Lady: and if
she will not be brought to the bent of your bow, I will provide such a potion
as shall dispatch all to your own content, and to give you further
instructions for opportunity, know that her husband is forth every after noone
from three till six. Thus far I have advised you, because I pity your
passions as my self being once a lover: but now I charge thee reucale it to
none whomsoever, least it do disp^rage my credit to meddle in amorous matters.
The young Gentleman not only promised al careful secrecy, but gave him hearty
thanks for his good counsel, promising to meet him there the next day, and
tell him what news. Then he left the old man, who was almost mad for fear
his wife any way should play false: he saw by experience, brave men came to
besiege the castle, and seeing it was in a woman's custody and had so weak a
governor as himself, he doubted it would in time be delivered up, which fear
made him almost frantike: yet he driude of the time in great torment, til he
might hear from his riual. Lionello he hasts him home and suits him in his
bravery, and goes down toward the house of Mutio, where he sees her at the
window, whom he courted with a passionate look with such an humble salute, as
she might perceive how the Gentleman was affectionate. Margareta looking
earnestly upon him, and noting the perfection of his proportion, accounted him
in her eye the flower of all Pisa, thinkte her self fortunate, if she might
have him for her friend, to supply those defaults that she found in Mutio:
sundry times that afternoon he past by her window, and he cast not up more
loving looks then he received gracious favors: which did so encourage him,
that the next day between three and six he went to her house, and knocking
at the door, desired to speak with the Mistres of the house, who hearing by
her maids description, what he was, commanded him to come in, where she
interteined him with all courtesy.

The youth that never before had given the attempt to court a Lady, began his
exordium with a blush: and yet went forward so well, that he discourst unto
her how he loved her, and that if it might please her so to accept of his
service, as of a friend ever vowde in all duty to be at her command, the
care of her honor should be deerer to him then his life, and he would be
ready to prise her discontent with his blood at all times.

The Gentlewoman was a little coye, but before they past they concluded, that
the next day at four of the clock he should come thither and eat a pound of
cheries, which was resolved on with a succado des labres, and so with a loath
to depart they took their leaves. Lionello as joyful a man as might be, hyed
him to the church to meet his old Doctor, where he found him in his old
walk: what news sir quoth Mutio? how have you sped? Even as I can wish quoth
Lionello. For I have been with my Mistress, and have found her so tractable,
that I hope to make the old peasaunt her husband look broad headed by a pair
of browantlers. How deep this stroke into Mutios heart, let them imagine that
can conjecture what jealousy is; in so much that the old Doctor asked when
should be the time: marry quoth Lionello, to morrow at four of the clock in
the afternoon, and then Master Doctor quoth he; will I dub the old Squire
knight of the forked order.

Thus they past on in chat till it grew late, and then Lionello went home to
his lodging, and Mutio to his house, covering all his sorrows with a merry
countenance, with full resolution to revenge them both the next day with
extremity. He past the night as patientlye as he could, and the next day after
dinner away he went, watching when it should be four of the clock, at the
hour just came Lionello, and was entertained with all courtesy: but scarce had
they kissed, ere the maid cried out to her Mistress that her Master was at the
door: for he hasted, knowing that a horn was but a little while on grafting:
Margaret at this alarm was amazed, and yet for a shift ^pt Lionello into a
great dry fat full of feathers, and sat her down close to her work: by that
came Mutio in blowing, and as though he came to look somewhat in have, called
for the keys of his Chambers, and looked in every place, searching so
narrowly in every corner of the house, that he left not the very privy
unsearched: seeing he could not find him, he said nothing, but fayning
himself not well at ease staide at home, so that poor Lionello was feign to
stay in the dry fat till the old churl was in bed with his wife; and then
the maid let him out at a backdoore, who went home with a flea in his ear to
his lodging.

Well the next day he went again to meet his Doctor, whom he found in his
woonted walk; what news quoth Mutio? how have you sped? A pox of the ^uld
slave quoth Lionello, I was no sooner in, and had given my mistress one kiss,
but the jealous ass was at the door, the maid spied him, and cried her
Master: so that the poor Gentlewoman for very shift, was feign to put me in
a drie-fatte of feathers that stood in an old Chamber, and there I was feign
to tarry while he was in bed and a sleep; and then the maid let me out and I
departed.

But it is no matter, it was but a chance, and I hope to cry quittance with him
ere it be long: as how quoth Mutio? Marry thus, quoth Lionello: she sent me
word by her Maid this day, that upon thursday next the oulde Churl suppeth
with a patient of his a mile out of Pisa, and then I fear not but to quitte
him for all: It is well quoth Mutio: Fortune be your friend: I thank you
quoth Lionello, and so after a little more prattle they departed.

To be short, Thursdaye came, and about six of the Clock forth goes Mutio,
no further then a friends house of his, from whence he might descrie who went
into his house, straight he saw Lionello enter in; and after goes he,
insomuch that he was scarcely sitten down, before the Maid cried out
again, my master comes: the good wife that before had provided for
afterclaps; had found out a privy place between two seelings of a plauncher,
and there she thrust Lionello; and her husband came sweting, what news, quoth
she, drives you home again so soon husband? Marrye sweet wife quoth he, a
fearful dream that I had this night which came to my remembrance, and that
was this: me thought there was a villeine that came secretly into my house with
a naked poinard in his hand, and hid himself: but I could not find the place,
with that mine nose bled, and I came back; and by the grace of God I will
seek every corner in the house for the quiet of my mind. Marry I pray you do
husband, quoth she: with that he locked in all the doors, and began to search
every chamber, every hole, every chest, every tub, the very well, he stabd
every fetherbed through, and made hauock like a mad man, which made him think
all was in vain, and he began to blame his eyes that thought they saw that
which they did not: upon this he rest half lunatike, and all night he was very
wakefull, that toward the morning he fell into a dead sleep, and then was
Lionello conueighed away.

In the morning when Mutio wakened, he thought how by no means he should be
able to take Lionello tardy; yet he laid in his head a most dangerous plot, and
that was this: Wife quoth he, I must the next monday ride to Vycensa to visit
an old patient of mine, till my return, which will be some tendayes, I will
have that stay at our little graunge house in the country: marry very well
content husband, quoth she: with that he kissed her, and was very pleasant, as
though he had suspected nothing, and away he flings to the Church: where he
moetes Lionello: what sir quoth he what news, is your mistress yours in
possession? no, a plague of the old slave quoth he; I think he is either a
witch or else works by Magic: for I can no sooner enter in the doors but he
is at my batke, and ^o (...) was again yesternight: for I was not ^me in my
(...) before the maid cried, my master (...); and then was the poor soul
saine to conueigh me between two ^tings of a chamber in a sit place for the
purpose: where I ^ght heartily to my self, to see how he sought every corner,
rans^t every tub, and stabd every ^eatherbed; but in vain, I was safe enough
till the morning, and then when he was fast a sleep, I lipt out. Fortune frown
es (...) quoth Mutio: I but I hope quoth Lionello this is the last time; (...)
she (...) begin to smile: for on monday next (...) to Vicensa, and his wise
lies at a graunge house a little o^he town, and there in his absence I will
revenge alfor^ missor^: (...) send it to be so quoth Mutio, (...) so (...) his
(...). These two lovers longd for monday; and atlast it came, early in the
morning Mutio horst himself, and (...), and a man, and no more, and away ^e
(...) to his grang^ house; where after he had broke his fast he took his
leave, and away toward Vicensa. He rod^ not far ere by a false way he returned
into a thicket, and there with a company of country peasants lay in an
ambuscado to take the (...) Gentleman: in the afternoon comes Lionello
galloying, and as soon as he came within sight of the house, he sent back his
horse by his boy, and went easily a foot, and there at the ^ry entry was
enterteind by Margaret, who led him up the (...), and conuaid him into her
bedchamber saying be was welcome into so mean a c^ttage: but quoth (...), now
I hope fortune shall not envy ye purity of our loves. Alas alas mistress cried
the maid, here is my master, and 100. men with him, with bills and staves: we
are betrayed quoth Lionello, and I am but a dead man: fear not quoth she, but
follow me, and straight she carried him down into a low parlor; where (...) an
old rottenchest full of writings, she put him into that, and covered him with
old papers and euy^ntes, and went to the gate to m^te her husband: why signor
Mutio, what means this hurly burly quoth she? vile and shameless strumyet as
thou art, thou shall know by and by ^th he. Where is thy love: all we have
watch him and seen he enter in: now quoth he, shall neither thy tub of
feathers, nor thy seeling serve, for perish he shall with fire, or else fall
into my hands. Do thy worst jealous fool quoth she, I ask thee no favor:
with that in a rage he beset the house round, and then set fire on it. Oh in
what a perplexity was poor Lionello that was shut in a Chest, and the fire
about his ears? and how was Margaret passionate that knew her lover in such
danger? yet she made light of the matter, and as one in a rage called her
maid to her, and said; Come on wench, seeing thy Master mad with jealousy
has set the house and al my living on ^re, I will be reuengd upon him, help me
here to lift this old Chest where all his writings and deeds are, let that
burn first, and as soon as I see that on fire I will walk toward my friends:
for the old fool will be beggard and I will refuse him. Mutio that knew al
his obligations and statutes lay there pulled her back, and bad two of his men
carry the Chest into the field, and see it were safe, himself standing by and
seeing his house burnd down stick and stone. Then quieted in his mind he
went home with his wife, and began to flatter her, thinking assuredly that he
had burnd her Paramour; causing his Chest to be carried in a Cart to his house
at Pisa. Margaret impatient went to her mothers, and complainde to her and to
her brethren of the jealousy of her husband: who maintained it to be true,
and desired but a days respite to prove it: well he was bidden to supper the
next night at her mothers, she thinking to make her daughter and him friends
again. In the mean time he to his woonted walk in the Church, and there
praeter expectatione^ he found Lionello walking: woondring at this, he
straight enquires what news? What news Master Doctor quoth he, and he fell
in a great laughing; in faith yesterday I escaped a ^owring: For syrrha I went to
the grang^ house, where I was appointed to come, and I was no sooner gotten up
the Chamber, but the magical (...) her husband beset the house with bills and
staves, and that he might be sure no seeling nor corner should shrawde me, he
set the house on fire: and so (...) it (...) to the ground, Why quoth Mutio
(...) how did you escape? alas quoth I, well fare a woman's wit, she conueighed
me into an old chest full of writings, which she knew her husband durst not
burn, and so was I saved and brought to Pysa, and yesternight by her maid let
home to my lodging. This quoth he, is the pleasantest jest that ever I heard:
and upon this I have a suit to you, I am this night bidden forth to supper,
you shall be my guest, only I will crave so much favor, as after supper for a
pleasant sport, to make relation what success you have had in your loves: for
that I will not stick quoth he, and so he carried Lionello to his mother in
laws house with him, and discovered to his wives brethren (...) be was, and
how at supper he would disclose the whole matter: for quoth he, he knows not
that I am Margarets husband: at this all the brethren (...) him welcome, (...)
so did the mother to, and Margaret she was kept out of sight. Supper time being
come, they fell to their vict^, and Lionello was carrowst unto by Mutio, who
was very pleasant to draw him to a merry humor, that he, might to the full
discourse the effect and fortunes of his (...) ended, Mutio requested him to
tell to the Gentlemen, what had happened between him and his mistress. Lionello
with a smiling countenance, began to describe his Mistress, the house, and
street where she dwelt, how he fell in love with her, and how he used the
counsel of this Doctor, who in all his affairs was his secretary. Margaret
heard all this with great fear, and when he came at the last point, she caused
(...) ^p of wine to be giue^him by one of her sisters; wherein was a ring that
he had given Margaret; as he had told how he es^t burning, and was ready to
con^e all for a troath, the Gentlewoman drunk to him: who taking the cup and
seeing the ring ^hauing (...) reaching head, spide the fetch, and perceived
that all this while this was his lovers husband; to whom he (...) revealed
these escapes: at this drinking the wine, and swallowing the ring into his
mouth, he went forward. Gentlemen quoth he, how like you of my (...) and my
(...)* well (...) the (...)* tieme^, I pray you is it true* as true quoth he,
as if I (...) be so simple as to reveal what I did to Margarets husband; for
know you Gentlemen, that I knew this Mutio to be her husband whom I noti^ed to
be my lover, and for that he was generally known through Pisa to be a iealious
fool: therefore with these tales I brought him into this paradize, which indeed
are follies of mine own brain: for trust me by the faith of a gentleman, I
never spoke to the woman, was (...) ner in her company, neither (...) I (...)
her (...) I see her. At this they all fell in a laughing at Mutio, who was
(...) that Lionello had in (...) him: but all (...) well, they were made
friends, but the (...) went so to his heart, that he shortly after died, and
Lionello enjoyed she Lady, and for that they two were the death of the (...)
man, now are they plagued in purgatory, (...) he (...) them (...) Nettles.

As Soon as I had pa^d over these two of Pisa, I looked about and saw many
more, as mad and pleasant as the (...): but my time was come that I must to
the ^ge to be censured, what (...) have my (...) for all the man wanton (...),
(...) I (...) when I was alive, faith at last because they (...) I was abooue
companion, they appointed that I should sit and play Iigs all ^y on my Taber to
the ghosts without cea^g, which has brought me into such (...), that I now
play far better then when I was alive: for proof thou (...) hear a hornepipe:
with that putting his pipe to his (...), the (...) he str^cks I started, and
with that I wak^, (...) such concourse of people through the (...), that I
(...) play was ^ne, whereupon rising up, and (...) at my dream, and after
supper took my (...), (...) I could set it down, but not half so pleasantly
(...) he s^oake it, but howsoever, take it in good part, and so farewell.

FINIS.

