THE ANNALS OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.

THE DESCRIPTION OF GERMANY.

M. D. XCVIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT EARL OF ESSEX AND EWE, EARL Marshal of
England, Viscount Hereford and Bourchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier
and Louaine, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, Master of the
Queens Majesty's horse, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy
Council.
THE woorthines of this Author well known unto your honor, puts me in some
hope of pardon for my presumption: in presenting unto your Honors view, and
craving a favorable acceptance of my bold unskillfulness. For if History be the
treasure of times past, and as well a guide, as image of man's present estate, a
true and lively pattern of things to come, and as some term it, the
work-mistresse of experience, which is the mother of prudence: Tacitus may by
good right challenge the first place among the best. In judgment there is none
sounder, for instruction of life, for all times, to those which often read him
iudiciously, nothing yielding to the best Philosophers: no word not laden
with matter, and as himself speaks of Galba, he uses Imperatoria breuitate:
which although it breed difficulty, yet carries great gravity. I present him
therefore to your Honors favorable protection in regard of himself: but yet no
otherwise then as a glass, representing in lively colors of prowess,
magnanimity and counsel; not only worthy personages of ages past and gone,
but also your L. own honorable virtues, whereof the world is both vvithes and
judge. If your L. vouchsafe to receive him (though greatly darkened of that he
first was, and very much dimmed in respect of the History already in our
tongue) into any degree of favor, I little doubt but others will both look on
him, and the better like and allow him; for here belovve we receive either
light or darkness from above. Vespasians example wrought more than a law: for
obsequium in principes, and aemulandi amor, to speak with Tacitus, makes that
to be in greatest request, which perhaps in it self deserves least.
Whatsoever my unskillful pains has been, my zeal and devotion to your
Honor I present with it; unto whom I wish al good hap and felicity, with the
accomplishment of virtues and Honorable desires.

Your Honors most humbly devoted RICHARD GRENEWEY.

TO THE READER.
THat which most men allege (courteous Reader) as a cause of publishing unto
the world their commendable endeavors; as commandment of superiors,
entreaty of friends, or such like: causes yielding some excuse, if things well
done by them needed any; that can I no way pretend: though no man has iuster
cause to invent somewhat to excuse that, which (well knowing and confessing my
own insufficiency) I should by no inducements have been drawn unto. For I
wanted not judgment to know, that to perform this I undertook as I ought,
was a matter beyond the compass of my skill: yet nevertheless my will
ouercomming my own judgment and reason in undertaking, I have ventured my
credit to the wide sea of common opinion, and dangerous censure; and knowing
the best have followed the woorst. A fault perhaps pardonlesse, in the
rigoroust censure, and which bred in my self a long time distrust and fear:
yet at last, encouraged by hope to find some milder judges for my boldness, I
ventured this labor, and performed it thus meanly as thou see: trusting the
courteous Reader, if in ought I have pleasured him, will afford me his good
word for my good will, and in that I have done amiss pardon, and a favorable
construction for my pains. And although in reason it seems, I should most of
all fear the censure of the learned (if any such vouchsafe to read this
translation) in regard they best can, and with quickest insight pearce into my
want of skill, judgment, and understanding; yet in those is my greatest hope,
because they be learned. Cause sufficient to fear no captious or carping
constructions, as a property ill beseeming their good quality and education.
I was well assured that he who best might, would take no further pains in this
kind: nor hearing of any other which would, I thought some could be contented
to have it rather il done, than not at all. Friendly Reader, I crave pardon for
my faults, and desire thou would favorably bear with my ouersights.

Farewell.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE ANNALS OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
The Proeme of Tacitus, containing the form of government until Augustus
time: with the subject of this work.
THE city of Rome was in the beginning governed by Kings. Liberty and the
Consulship L. Brutus brought in. The Dictators were chosen but for a time: the
Decemuiri passed not two years: neither had the Consularie authority of the
Tribunes of the soldiers any long continuance: nor Cinna, nor Sillaes dominion:
Pompey and Crassus quickly yielded to Caesar's forces: Lepidus and Antonie to
Augustus; who entitling himself by the name of Prince, brought under his
obedience the whole Roman state, wearied and weakened with civil disorders.
But as well the prosperous, as unprosperous successes of the ancient
Commonwealth, excellent writers have recorded: neither wanted there worthy
and singular wits, to deliver Augustus exploits; until they were by the
ouerswarming of flatterers utterly discouraged. Tiberius, Caius, Claudius and
Neroes actions, they yet living and flourishing, were falsely set down, for
fear; and after their death, through fresh hatred, as corruptly as before.
Whereupon I intend to deliver some few things done in Augustus later times:
then Neroes reign, and other occurrents as they fell out, without passion or
partiality, as being free from motives of both.

1. The means by which Augustus came to the empire: and whom he chose to
succeed.
AFter that Brutus and Cassius were slain, and no arms now publicly borne;
Pompey defeated in Sicilie; Lepidus disarmed; Antonie killed; and no chief
leader of Julius Caesar's faction left, but only Augustus: he would no longer
be called Triumuir, but in show contented with the dignity of a Tribune to
defend the people, bearing himself as Consul: after he had wound into the
favor of the soldier by gifts; of the people by provision of sustenance; and
of all in general with the sweetenes of ease and repose; by little and little
taking upon him, he drew to himself the affairs of Senate; the duty of
magistrates and laws, without contradiction of any: the stowtest by war or
proscriptions already spent, and the rest of the nobility, by how much the
more serviceable, by so much the more bettered in wealth, and advanced in
honors: seeing their preferment to grow by new government, did rather choose
the present estate with security, than strive to recover their old with
danger. That form of government the provinces disliked not, as mistrusting the
Senates and peoples regiment by reason of noble men's factions; covetousness of
magistrates: the laws affoording no security, being swaied hither and thither
by might, ambition, and corruption. Besides this, Augustus laboring by some
stay, to settle the sovereignty, advanced Claudius Marcellus his sisters son
being very young, to the pontifical dignity and Aedilship: and M. Agrippa
meanly descended, but in martial exploites warlike, and a companion in his
victories, to be twice Consul together; and after Marcellus death chose him to
be his son in law. And his own house not failing, he bestowed the title of
Emperor upon Tiberius Nero and Claudius Drusus his wives children; and adopted
Caius and Lucius, Agrippaes children: and making show to the contrary; yet his
earnest desire was, they should be called Princes of youth, and chosen Consuls
elect, before they had cast off their praetext or infants garments. But when
Agrippa was dead, and Lucius going into Spain to take charge of the army, and
Caius returning wounded out of Armenia, by hasty fate or treachery of their
stepmother Liuia: Drusus also dead long before, only Nero was left of all
Augustus sons in law. Unto him all men now crowched and fawned; being
received the adopted son of Augustus; copartner of the empire; associate of
the Tribunitian dignity; shown to the camp as successor; not as before by
secret devises and practices of his mother, but openly persuading the Emperor
thereto. For she had so enthralled the silly old man, that Agrippa Posthumus
his only nephew, he had confined in the Island Planasia: in deed, badly
trained up in liberal sciences, and sottishly bragging of his strength and
actiuitie of body; but yet never detected of any notorious vice. He gave
Germanicus son unto Drusus, charge over eight legions, by the river of Rhene;
and commanded Tiberius (albeit he had a son of his own) to adopt him, the
better to establish the succession with mo stays than one. Wars there were
none at that time, but only against the Germans; not so much in regard of
enlarging the empire, hope of booty or reward, as to blot out the dishonor
received, when he lost his army with Quinctilius Varo. All was quiet in the
city; the old names of the magistrates unchanged; the young men borne after
the victory at Actium, and the greatest part of the old, during the civil
wars: how many were there which had seen the ancient form of government of
the free Commonwealth? Thus then the state of the city turned vpside down,
there was no sign of the old laudable customs to be seen: but contrary,
equality taken away, every man endeavored to obey the prince; misdoubting
nothing whilst Augustus yet strong in body, was able to defend himself, his
house, and peace. But when he grew old and feeble with sickness, and that the
end of his government, and hope of a new was not far off: some few, but in
vain, discourst of the commodities of liberty; some feared war; some desired
it: but the greatest part used lavish speeches, and spread rumors against the
next coniectured successor. Agrippa they accounted by nature cruel, and
through the indignity of his late disgrace easily kindled; young, and raw in
state matters; unable for so great a charge. In deed, Tiberius was of
convenient and ripe years, expert in feats of war; but possessed with the
hereditarie pride of the Claudian family: yea many apparent sparkles of
cruelty did burst out in him, howsoever he went about to suppress them.
Besides, he was brought up in a house, which knew how to reign: the Consulship
was more than once cast upon him with triumphs. During the time that he was at
Rhodes (cloking his exile under color of retiring himself) he dreamte of
nothing but revenge, dissimulation, and secret means of licentious lusts:
withal, he had his mother at hand; intolerable in all imperfections incident
to the sex: and thereby they were to obey a woman, and two young men, which
would in the mean space oppress, and in time rent in pieces the Commonwealth.

II. The death of Augustus: and Tiberius Nero made Emperor.
Whilst they thus debated the matter, Augustus malady increased; and as it
was suspected by some, through the lewd practice of his wife. For not many
months before a rumor was spread, that Augustus with the priuitie of a few,
accompanied only with Fabius Maximus, had conveyed himself to the Island
Planasia, to visit his nephew Agrippa, both weeping tenderly at their meeting,
with manifest tokens of love, and a hope conceived that the young man should be
recalled and restored to his Grandfathers house. Fabius disclosed this to
Martia his wife, and she to Liuia, and C. Nauus to Caesar: for not long after
Fabius (doubtful whether by his own procurement or not) being deceased, his
wife Martia among other her lamentations at her husbands funeral, was
ouer-heard to accuse her self, as the cause of her husbands death. But
howsoever the matter passed, Tiberius had scarce put foot in Illyricum, when
by letters from his mother he was recalled in post haste: not being well
known, when he arrived at Nola, whether there were any breath yet left in
Augustus or not. For Liuia had beset the house with a watchful and straight
guard, sometimes giving out that Augustus was on the mending hand; and so having
made all sure on all hands, as the time and occasion required: the same rumor
which not long before gave joyful news of Augustus amendment, now published
that he was dead, and Nero in possession of the Empire. The first exploit this
new Prince did, was the murdering of Posthumus Agrippa; whom a Centurion
resolute and appointed for the purpose, and taking him unarmed, and misdoubting
nothing, yet could hardly dispatch. Tiberius made no words of this to the
Senate, but pretended that it was done by his fathers appointment; who (as he
said) had given charge to the Centurion which had the garding of him, to make
him away incontinently after he had intelligence of his death. Little doubt but
Augustus, complaining of the young man's untowardly behauior, caused his exile to
be confirmed by decree of the Senate: but yet he never persisted long in
desiring the death of any of his; neither was it credible that to assure the
estate to his wives son, he would seek the blood of his own nephew. But
very likely it is, that the young man's death was hastened by Tiberius fear, and
Liuiaes hatred: the one as jealous, least he should bandie for the
sovereignty: the other through the natural hatred incident to all
stepmothers. When the Centurion brought him word (as the manner of service was)
that he had fulfilled his commandment, he answered presently, that he
commanded him no such matter, and that he should answer it before the Senate.
When this news came to Crispus Sallustius ears (who being inward in greatest
secrets with Tiberius, had by letters given the Centurion order how to
proceed) fearing least his own turn should be next, dangerous to him alike:
to confess the truth, or to stand to a lie: advised Liuia that she should not
in any wise diuulgate the secrets of her house, the counsel of friends, and
services of souldyers; and that Tiberius should beware of weakening the power
of sovereignty, in referring all things to the Senate: the quality of
absolute rule being such, that it could not stand but in one alone. Now at Rome
the Consuls, the Senators, and Gentlemen ran headlong to servitude; and the
more nobler the fairer show, and the more hasty; but with a composed and
settled countenance, least they should seem ouerglad of the death of the last,
or discontented with the new Prince; they tempered their grief with joy, and
lamentation with flattery. The two Consuls Sext Pompeius, and Sext. Apuleius
did first swear allegiance to Tiberius Caesar: and after into their hands,
Seius Strabo, and C. Turrianus, the one Captain of the Guard, the other chief
officer for provision of corn. After them the Lords of the Senate, the
soldiers, and the people. For Tiberius would have all things begun by the
Consuls, as the manner was in the ancient free common wealth: as though he had
not resolved with himself whether it were best for him to accept of the Empire
or not. No not so much as the Edict to call the Lords of the Senate to
counsel, but was proclaimed in virtue and authority of a Tribune; which
dignity he had received in Augustus time. The words of the Edict were not
many, and delivered in modest terms. That he would only consult what pomp and
honor were fit to be done for his father: and that he would not depart from the
body: which should be the only public charge he would undertake.
Nevertheless when Augustus was dead, he gave the watchword to the guard: placed
the watch: disposed of the soldiers: managed all the affairs of Court, as if
he had been Emperor. The soldiers waited on him to the place of public
assemblies; to the Senate house; and dispatched letters to the Camp; as though
he had been in full possession of the state; irresolute in nothing, but when he
should speak in the Senate. The chiefest cause proceeded of fear; least
Germanicus, who had so many legions at commandment; such strong aides of
confederates; and so exceedingly beloved of the people; should rather hold,
then expect the possession of the Empire. He stood on his reputation likewise,
and seemed rather to be called and chosen by the Commonwealth, then creep in
by the canuasing of a woman, and adoption of an old man. It was afterward
further known, that he used that lingering doubtfulnes, the better to sound
the affection of the Nobility; for observing their countenance, and wresting
their words to the worst, he bare them all in mind. In the first meeting of
the Senate, he would have nothing debated, but Augustus last will and
testament; which being brought in by Vestaes Virgins, declared Tiberius and
Liuia to be his heirs: and that Liuia was adopted into the Julian family, and
entitled by the name of Augusta. After them he substituted his nephews, and
nephews sons: and in the third place the Peers of the city, which in
general he hated: yet he did it to win fame and glory with posterity. His
legacies were moderate, like unto other citizens, saving that he gave as well
to the common sort, as the rest of the people, four hundred and thirty five
thousand nummos: Three pound uen shillings 11. pence q. cee.
to every soldier of the Pretorian band a thousand; 7. li. 16. s. 3. d.
to every one of the legionary cohorts which consisted of citizens of Rome,
three hundred 46. s. 10. d. ob.
.

III. The solemnities of Augustus funerals, and the censure which men gave of
him.
AFter that, consultation was had concerning the pomp and solemnities of the
funerals; among which the most honorable and magnificent were judged to be
these. Gallus Asinius thought it meet that the dead corpse should be brought
through the triumphall gate; and L. Arruntius, that the titles of the laws by
him ordained, and the names of the nations by him vanquished, should be carried
before him. Messalla Valerius added, that it was convenient the oath of
allegiance should every year be renewed in Tiberius name. Who being demanded
of Tiberius whether he had commandment from him so to advise? answered, that
he did propound it of his own free motion: and that in matters concerning the
commonwealth, he would use no man's advise but his own, although it should be
with danger and offense: so far had flattery spread it self, that that only
kind remained unpracticed. The Lords of the Senate after that cried with one
voice, that they themselves would carry the corpse to the funeral fire on their
shoulders: which Caesar did yield unto with a modesty, yet savoring of
arrogancy. And admonished the people by Proclamation, that they would not (as
in times past they had disturbed the burial of Julius Caesar of famous memory)
carried away with ouergreat affection, so desire now that Augustus body should
rather be burnt in the place of public assemblies, then in Campus Martius, a
place deputed to that use. The day of the funerals being come, the soldiers
were placed as it were a guard to the body, when as such as had either seen, or
heard their fathers report, of the fresh and late yoke of cruel servitude
vnluckely attempted to be shaken off, and recover their ancient liberty: then
I say when the murdering of Julius Caesar the Dictator, seemed unto some a
wicked, and unto others a worthy deed; laughed to see that now an old Prince
which had reigned so many years, and provided heirs to succeed him in might
and wealth, should need a guard of soldiers quietly to celebrate his funerals.
This bred sundry speeches of Augustus, many maruelling at vain and frivolous
things: as that his death fell on the same day he was made Emperor: that he
dyed at Nola in the same house and chamber, that before him his father Octauius
did: they made it a great matter that he alone had been as often Consul, as
Valerius Coruinus, and C. Marius both together: that he had continued Tribune
seven and thirty years; had been honored with the name of Emperor one and
twenty times; with many other old and new dignities bestowed or invented for
him. But among the better sort his life was diversely commended or discommended:
Some said, that the love of his father, and the care of the Commonwealth, at
that time when all laws were dashed, drove him to civil wars, which can
never be begun or prosecuted by any good means: and that he had yielded in
many things to Antony, and to Lepidus in like manner, because he would revenge
his fathers death. For seeing the one grew careless with age, and the other
wasted with lasciuiousnes, there was no other means left to redress all
discords in the commonwealth, then to bring her under the obedience of one
alone, who should govern; nevertheless not as King or Dictator, but as
Prince. The Empire he had bounded with the Ocean, and other Rivers far off:
the Legions, Provinces and Navy, were linked and knit in peace and unity:
justice was ministered in the cities: the allies entreated with modesty: the
city beautified with sumptuous building: and if any rigorous dealing had been
used against some few, it was for settling of quietness in the whole. Contrarily
some said, that the love of his father, the corruption of times, served him but
for a cloak and color: and that he had stirred up the old souldyers by gifts
and bribery, through ambition and desire of rule; that being yet but young and a
private person, he had gathered a power; corrupted the legions of the Consuls;
that he made a show only of favoring Pompeius side: but had no sooner gotten
by order of the Senators the fasces or knitch of rods, and the Pretorship;
after the death of Hircius and Pansa, (both slain by the enemy, or Pansaes
wound poisoned, and Hircius murdered by the souldyers, or by Caesar the
contriuer of the feate) but he seized on both their forces, extorted the
Consulship, mauger the Senators; and the power assigned him to subdue Antony,
he converted against the Commonwealth. He banished the citizens, divided their
lands, and gave away their goods, which were things by the doers themselves
discommended. In deed, the revenge and pursuing his fathers death upon Cassius
and Brutus maybe tolerated (albeit it had been convenient for a public benefit
to have laid aside private grudges) but he deceived Pompey under color of
peace, and Lepidus under a shadow of friendship. Afterward he tolled on Antony
with the treaty of Tarentum and Brundusium, and marriage of his sister, which
deceitful alliance he paid with the loss of his life. Doubtless a peace
ensued this, but a bloody one, as may witness the death of Lollius and Varus,
and in Rome it self, of Varro, Egnatius and Iulus. Neither did they forbear
to discourse of his domestical affairs: as that he took Neroes wife from
him, and asked the opinion of the Pontife in a scoff, whether there might be a
lawful marriage betwixt them, she being with child by her other husband, but
not yet delivered. They forgot not L. Atedius, and Vedius Pollios riot and
lasciuiousnes. Finally, that Liuia was an intolerable and burdensome mother to
the common wealth, and to the house of the Caesar's a dangerous stepdame. There
was no honor left for the gods, seeing he would himself by the Priests and
Flamines be worshipped in the temples, with all the ornaments belonging to the
gods. Neither was Tiberius chosen successor to the State for love of himself,
or care of the Commonwealth, but deeply inseeing into his lofty and bloody
disposition, he would by being so unequally compared with so outrageous a mate,
win glory afterward to himself. And although Augustus had not many years
before uttered honorable speeches in Tiberius behalf before the Lords of the
Senate, when he sued to make him once again Tribune: yet he interlaced some
things among, touching his attire and behavior, which in the excusing of him,
seemed to turn to his disgrace and reproach.

IIII. Tiberius dissembling color in refusing the empire: Augustus judgment
of three which were desirous or vvoorthie of the Empire.
AVgustus funerals being ended according to the usual manner; a temple and
religious ceremonies were instituted in honor of him: from that time forward
all suits and requests were made to Tiberius, who discoursing diversely of the
greatness of the empire, and in modest terms of his own insufficiency,
thought Augustus wisdom only capable of so weighty a charge; that himself
being assumed by Augustus, as an associate and partner in the state, had by
good proof learned, how hard a matter, and how subject unto fortunes change:
rule and sovereignty was. And seeing the city was replenished with so many
famous and worthy personages, better it were and more ease, that many,
ioining their studies and cares together, should undertake the charge, than
cast all upon one man's shoulders. This speech carried greater majesty than
truth: for Tiberius either by nature, or by custom, yea even in those things
which he would have known, spoke always darkly and doubtfully; but then of
set purpose endeavoring to hide his drifts, wrapped himself more than ever, in
a dark cloud of uncertainty and ambiguitie. But the Lords of the Senate
fearing all one thing (which was least some peril might ensue, if he should
doubt that they perceived his dissimulation) began to lament; complain; offer
up vows; and lift up their hands to the gods; to Augustus image, and to his
own knees; until he commanded the book of remembrances to be brought forth
and read. That book contained the wealth of the public treasure; how many
citizens and allies were in arms; what strength there was by sea; how many
kingdoms, provinces, and countries yielded obedience to the empire; what
tribute was levied; what customs; what necessary charges issued out; what
gifts; and al written with Augustus own hand. Withal he gave a politic
instruction (yet whether for fear or envy uncertain) how to restrain the
empire within bounds and limits. Whilst these things were a handeling, and the
Senators in most low and humble manner entreating, that he would accept the
charge: Tiberius letting slip a word by chance, that as he was unable to take
charge of the whole; so he would undertake the protection of any one part they
should assign him. Asinius Gallus asked him, what part, Caesar, would thou
have committed to thy charge? Who being stricken into amaze with this unlooked
for demand, stood mute a while: then gathering his spirits to him, answered;
That it ill befitted his modesty, to choose or refuse any one part of that,
from all which he desired to be excused. Gallus replied (for by his countenance
he coniectured he was offended) that he did not therefore demand that question,
as thought he would sever that, which was inseparable; but by his own
confession convict him, that the Commonwealth was but one body, and therefore
to be governed by ones only wisdom. And continuing his speech added many
things in commendation of Augustus: and called to remembrance Tiberius own
victories, and diverse notable things done for many years in time of peace. But
all this could not appease the Princes inueterate hatred against him: as though
by marrying Vipsana daughter to M. Agrippa, once wife to Tiberius, he had
carried too lostie a courage, and higher aspiring mind, than the private
calling of a citizen; and savoring of the headie and fierce humor of Asinius
Pollio his father. After that L. Aruntius using speeches not unlike unto
Pollio, offended alike. And although he bore Aruntius no old grudge, yet
because he was wealthy, bold, learned, and in reputation with all men, he had
him in jealousy. When Augustus drew toward his later end, discoursing who
were likeliest to possess the place after his death; who would refuse it
although they should be chosen as meet: who being unmeet and unable, yet
would desire it: who could discharge it, and would undertake it: said that M.
Lepidus was for his sufficiency able, but would refuse: Gallus Asinius greedy
to lay hold on it, but was insufficient: L. Aruntius was not unworthy, and
if occasion were given would venture for it. All men agree that the two first
were so named, but for Aruntius some put Cn. Piso: and howsoever it was, all
saving Lepidus, through Tiberius practice, for sundry pretended crimes were
made away. L. Haterius likewise, and Mamercus Scaurus troubled his jealous
head: the one by saying, How long Caesar will thou suffer the commonwealth to
want a head? The other because he hoped that the petitions of the Senators
should take effect, seeing he did not as he might, withstand the relation of
the Consuls by being Tribune. He inuaied sharply, and that incontinently
against Haterius, but let go Scaurus without any word: although he were more
implacably offended with him then the other. And being wearied with the clamors
of all ingenerall, and importunity of some in particular, by little and little
yielded unto their requests: not so much because he would confess, he took
the charge of the Empire on him; as to make an end of refusing, or being any
more entreated. Certain it is, that as Haterius went to the palace to crave
pardon of Tiberius; he narrowly escaped from being slain of the soldiers:
because that casting himself at his knees as he was walking; either by chance,
or happily hindered by Haterius, the Emperor fell: yet that danger did nothing
mitigate his wrath: until Haterius making entreaty to Augusta, by her earnest
suit was protected. Exceeding great flattery was used toward her by the
Senators, some being of opinion that she should be called the foundres of the
commonwealth, some the mother: and many that besides the name of Caesar, the
son of Iulia should be added. But Tiberius answered that titles of honor
ought to be moderately given unto women: and that he would use the same
moderation in such, as should be bestowed on himself. This he did upon envy
and jealousy: and therefore thinking her greatness to be his own abasement,
would not suffer her to have a sergeant before her, or an altar to be dedicated
in memory of her adoption, nor any such like honor. He entreated nevertheless
that proconsularie authority might be given Germanicus Caesar, which was sent
him by ambassadors, with commandment to comfort him for the death of Augustus.
The reason why the like was not demanded in favor of Drusus, was because he
was there present and Consul elect. And as Augustus had ordained before, he did
nominate twelve competitors, for the Pretorship, and bound it with an oath he
would not pass that number, although the Senators exhorted that they might be
increased. That was the first time that the election of Magistrates was taken
from the people, and transferred to the Lords of the Senate. For although
until that day all matters were swaied as best liked the Prince: yet some
things were left to the favor and voices of the Tribes. Neither did the people
but with a vain rumor complain, that their right was taken from them; and
the Senators seeing themselves delivered of many bribes and unseemly suits,
were well contented to accept the authority: Tiberius so moderating the
matter, that he commended only four competitors, which should be elected
without suit or fear of repulse. The Tribunes of the people made request, that
it might be lawful for them to set forth plays at their own costs, and
record them in the Calendar of the City, and call them Augustales, by the
name of Augustus. The Plays were granted: but the costs and expenses were to
rise out of the public Treasury: and that it should be lawful for them to
use the triumphall robe in the race, but not be carried in a Chariot. Not long
after the annual celebration of these Plays, was cast upon the Praetor, which
was judge between the citizen and the forrener.

V. A rebellion in Pannony, stirred up by Percennius.
THis was the estate of the city affairs, when the legions of Pannony
mutined: for no new occasions, but only because the change of the Prince gave
license of hurlyburly, and hope of gain by civil wars. These were three
legions of the summer camps committed to Iunius Blaesus charge, who advertised
of the death of Augustus; and Tiberius entering to the government (in regard of
the vacation which then happened, or joy conceived) neglected the accustomed care
of his duty. Hereupon the souldyers began to grow licentious and quarelsome,
and gave ear to the most dissolute and disordered: and in fine, hunted after
riot and ease; set naught by all military discipline, and refused travel and
labor. There was one Percennius in the garrisons, who had been sometimes a
ringleader of factious companions on Stages and Theaters; afterward a common
soldier; an impudent and saucy prater; well practiced in disturbing
assemblies, to show favor unto such actors as he favored. This Percennius
after the better sort were gone to their lodgings, by little and little in
secret conuenticles in the night, or in the shutting of the evening, gathered
together, and stirred up the vnexpertest of the souldyers, and such as were
most doubtful what entertainment they should expect after the death of
Augustus. And when he had gathered about him of the most licentious a
sufficient rabble, and readiest instruments of sedition, in manner of an
Oration he began to question with them thus: Why they would like bondslaues be
subject to a small number of Centurions, and a smaller of Tribunes? when durst
they seek a redress, if they would not now present themselves to the Prince
with entreaty or the sword; whilst he is new, and not fully settled in the
state? they had through cowardlines held their tongue many years, some thirty,
some forty in pay, ouergrowne with age, and many their limbs lost in service.
And after they were licensed to depart, yet they were not at an end of service;
but detayned under ensigns, endure as great toil as before under a new name.
And if any escaped so many hazards alive, they were drawn into sundry
countries, where under a color of some lands, either moorish bogs, or barren
mountanous crags were allotted to their share. Besides, service was painful in
it self and unprofitable; their lives and bodies valued but at ten asses 7.
pence ob.
a day: having no better allowance to furnish themselves with weapons,
apparel, and tents; and redeem themselves from the cruel usage of the
Centurians; pay fees of vacations from servile ministeries: yet their stripes,
wounds, hard winters, scorching summers, bloody battles, and fruitles peace
had no end: and hope of redress there was none, unless certain laws were
set down for such as enter into service; as that every ones pay should be
bettered to a deniere 9. pence, counting the denarius as 12. asses.
a day; and none bound to serve above sixteen years; that from that time
forward, they should not be detayned under ensigns, but receive in the same
camp they served, their recompense in ready coin. What? did the Pretorian
bands, which received two deniers 18. pence.
a day, and at the end of sixteen years were sent to their houses, oppose
themselves to greater dangers then they? yet he did not speak this to deprave
or diminish the credit of the citie-gard, but because they should consider
what a hard part they were offered; yet he for his own part being lodged among
savage and barbarous people, did from his cabine see the enemy every hour.
The baser sort came murmuring about him, and stirred up others with diverse
encouragements: some reprochfully showing the wales of their stipes; some their
gray hairs; some their ragged torn coats; some their naked bodies. At last
they grew into such a fury and rage, that they purposed of three legions
shuffled together to make one: but they changed that devise very quickly, every
one through emulation coveting that honor for his own legion: and pitched the
three standarts and ensigns together: withal they threw up mounds of turfes,
and placed on it a Tribunal, to the end the seat might be more conspicuous.
As they hastened to finish the work, Blaesus came in among them, rebuking some,
and hindering now one, now another, and crying alowde, In my blood rather
embrue your hands; for it is a lesser offense to slay the Lieutenant, then fall
from the obedience of the Emperor. I will either with my life keep the
legions in faithful allegiance; or being slain by you, hasten your
repentance. Nevertheless they held on their work until they had brought it
breast high; when at last being overcome with his importunacy, they gave over
their enterprise: then Blaesus did in good and eloquent manner show unto them,
that it was not convenient that souldyers petitions should be carried to the
Emperor by mutiny and rebellion. Neither did the old souldyers under
Emperors in times past, nor yet they themselves demand of Augustus such
unlawful and new requests; and that in an unseasonable time: the new Prince
was burdened with cares in the beginning of his Empire. Notwithstanding, if
their purpose was to obtain that in a time of peace; which being conquerors in
civil wars, they never attempted; yet why do they contrary to the duty of
allegiance, and order of service use force? they should rather depute some
Ambassadors to Caesar, with public commission, to declare their requests.
They all cried immediately, that Blaesus son a Tribune, might undertake the
Embassy, and entreat that all such as had served sixteen years, should be
dismissed and sent home: which being granted; then they would enjoin him the
rest of his charge. The young man being departed with this message, they
surceased their rebellion. But the soldiers grew proud that the Lieutenants
son undertook to plead the common cause; as being an evident token that
they had wrung out that by force, which by modest demeanor they should never
have obtained.

VI. The rebellion continues: a practice of Vibulenus against Blaesus.
IN the mean season, certain bands of soldiers sent to Nauportum before the
rebellion began, to see the ways clear, the bridges safe, and other
conueniences for the war: understanding of the mutiny grown in the camp,
snatched up their ensigns; and sacking villages adioining, and Nauport it
self, which might have passed for a reasonable free town; iniuried and reviled
the Centurions which went about to bridle them; first with scoffs and
reprochful terms; then with blows and stripes. But they had an especial
hart-burning against Aufidienus Rufus, the campe-master; whom they pulled out
of his chariot, and loaded with a fardell of stuff, and made him march foremost
of all the company: now and then asking him in a mockery, whether he bare so
great a burden willingly or not; or whether so long a journey seemed not
tedious unto him? This Rufus had long been a common soldier; then a Centurion;
then the Camp-master: and sought to renew the ancient rigor of service: and
being himself hardened to bear any labor and travel, was so much the more
cruel, because himself had endured the like. These companies ioining with the
other legions, began to rebel afresh; and straggling some one way, some
another; destroy and waste al about them. Blaesus to terrify the rest,
commanded some few, and especially such as had the greatest pillage, to be
apprehended, whipped and cast into prison; for even then the Centurions, and the
better sort of the soldiers were obedient to the Lieutenant. But the prisoners
drew back, and resisted such as led them, catched hold and embraced the knees
of the standers by; calling euerieman by his name, or by the name of the band
he served under, or cohort, or legion; crieng that they should drink all of
the same cup: withal, they heaped injury upon injury against the Lieutenant:
called to witness the heavens and the gods; and left nothing undone or vnsaide,
which might serve to stir hatred, move compassion, breed fear, or provoke
anger. The soldiers clustered all together, brake open the prisons, set at
liberty the prisoners, and shuffled in among themselves, the fugitives and
condemned of capital crimes. This kindled the rage of the soldier: and more
ringleaders joined with them. Among whom one Vibulenus a common soldier, lifted
on the shoulders of the standers by, before Blaesus Tribunal, began to speak
unto the disordered and attentive soldiers in this manner. You have given light
and life to these innocent and miserable wretches; but when will you restore
life to my brother; and my brother to me? who, being sent unto you from the
Germane camp, to entreat of the common profit and good, was this last night
murdered by his Fencers, which he has always ready armed to cut the soldiers
throtes: answer Blaesus, where have thou thrown his body? for the enemies
themselves envy not that I should bury him? And when I shall have filled my
grief with kissing, and weeping over him, command me to be murdered also: so
as these our companions bury him and me; slain for no other offense, but
because we furthered the common good and profit of the Legions. He inflamed his
words with tears, beating himself on the face and breast: then thrusting them
from him on whose shoulders he was carried, and throwing himself at every man's
feet, drove them all into such amaze, and stirred such hatred, that part of
the soldiers laid hands on Blaesus Fencers, and bound them; part on the
residue of his family; and part ran hither and thither, to seek for Vibulenus
brothers body. And if it had not appeared incontinently, that there was no such
body found; if his slaves by torture had not denied any such pretended murder
to have been committed; and further, that Vibulenus never had any such
brother: the soldiers would hardly have spared the Lieutenants life.
Nevertheless, they thrust out the Tribune and Camp-maister, spoiled and robbed
such as fled, slew Lucillius a Centurion, whom the soldiers by a nickname
called Cedo alteran, give me another, because that when he had broken upon a
soldiers shoulders his vine wand, his manner was to call alowde, give me
another; and when that was broken, another. The rest were saved by hiding
themselves; only Julius Clemens they kept alive, because that having a ready
and quick wit, they thought him a meet man to be employed as an Ambassador in
the soldiers behalf. Besides this, the eight and the fifteenth legions, were
now ready to go together by the eats, because the eight legion demanded
Sirpicus a Centurion to death, whom the fifteenth defended: if the ninth legion
had not interposed her self, first by way of entreaty; then menacing such as
made light of them.

VII. Drusus is sent to appease the rebellion in Pannony: and the ringleaders
punished.
WHen Tiberius had intelligence of these mutinies; although he were close, and
a great dissembler of bad tidings; resolved to send his son Drusus unto these
legions, with certain of the principallest Gentlemen of the city, and two
Pretorian bands; without any limited commission, but to determine there, as
occasion best required. These bands were of extraordinary choice men, and
stronger then any other were used to be, and a great part of his guard of
horsemen, and the ablest Germans of his own guard. Aelius Seianus also Captain
of the guard was sent with him, once an associate and companion to Strabo his
father, and a man highly in credit with Tiberius; as well to be a guide to the
young Prince, as to show unto others the danger or reward of ill or well doing.
When Drusus was come near unto them, the legions met him as it were to do
their duty; but not as the manner was, cheerfully with glittering ensigns,
but in base and abject habit; and in countenance although pretending sadness,
yet in deed were nearer wilful obstinacy. After he was entered the trench of
the camp, they set a strong guard at the gates, commanded some troops to attend
at certain places of the camp, and the rest came and environed the Tribunal
in huge multitudes. Drusus stood up, and with his hand commanded silence to
be made. When the soldiers beheld what a multitude they were, they made a
dreadful noise with hideous tunes; then anon turning their eyes toward
Caesar, they quaked for fear: after that, they made a confuse murmuring and
buzzing; then a cruel outcry; and on a sudden all was hushed again; which
bred as men were diversely affected, either a fear in themselves, or in others.
At last the tumult ceasing, he read his fathers letters, which contained what a
special care he had over those most valorous legions, with whom he had
sustained many battles; and that as soon as his mind could be at rest, and
the mourning for his father past, he would deal with the Lords of the Senate
concerning their demands: that in the mean space he had sent his son which
should grant without delay, as much as for the present could conveniently be
yielded: and that the rest should be reserved to the consideration of the
Senate, whom it was convenient should judge as well what deserved favor, as
rigor and severity. They answered all in general, that Clemens the Centurion
had charge to propound their demands: he began with license to depart after
sixteen years, with recompense after the end of their service: and that their
wages might be a denarius a day; that the old soldiers should not be
constrained to continue under ensigns. But when Drusus began to pretend, that
these were fit matters to be referred to the Lords of the Senate, and his
fathers consideration; they cut off his speech with clamors, expostulating:
That seeing he had no authority to augment their pay; nor ease them of their
labor; nor benefit them any way; to what purpose was he come thither? But to
beat and put them to death, every man had authority. It was an old trick of
Tiberius to frustrate the legions desires, with the name of Augustus: and
Drusus does now put the same in practice. Shall they never have any sent them,
but such as are under the power of another? It was strange, that the Emperor
should refer only that to the knowledge of the Senate, which concerned the
soldiers commodity. It were as requisite the Senators advise should be
known, when a soldier should be punished, or brought to fight in battle. Did
it stand with reason, there should be masters appointed, to dispose of their
rewards and recompense; and that without any judge their punishments should be
arbitrary? At last they go from the Tribunal and threaten with their fists
those they met, of the guard, or Caesar's friends and familiars, as desirous to
pick quarrels, and raise sedition. But they bare a special grudge unto Cn.
Lentulus, because that he, for his years, and experience in martial feats,
in greater reputation then the rest; was thought to animate Drusus against the
soldiers, and first of all reject their licentious demands. Whom not long
after (foreseeing the danger he was in) going with Caesar to the standing camp,
they environed him, asking whither he went? toward the Emperor, or toward
the Senate? whether there he would be also against the legions profit? And
withal coming fiercely upon him, and throwing stones at him, all embrued in
blood, and certain of present death, yet was succored by such as came with
Caesar. That night, which menaced great disorder, and outrageous behavior, was
quieted by a mere chance. For the Sky being clear and bright, yet the Moon
seemed to be eclipsed on a sudden; which the soldiers, being ignorant of the
cause, construed as a presage of present ill luck: and comparing their
attempts, to the eclipse; were of opinion that their success should be
prosperous, if the goddess should become clear and bright again. Whereupon
they began with Trompets, Cornets, and other brazen instruments, to make a loud
noise, now joyful, now sad, as the Moon appeared either clear or dark. But
when the black clouds, rising, took from them the sight of the Moon,
supposing she had been hidden in darkness, and utterly lost her light: as
troubled minds fall easily into superstition, they began to complain and
lament, that, that portended their labors should have no end; and that the
gods turned their faces from their wickedness. Caesar thinking it expedient to
make his profit of their fear; and govern that by wisdom, which fortune had
offered; commanded the Pauillions to be viewed; Clemens the Centurion to be
called, and such others, as for their laudable virtues were best liked of the
common sort: who thrusting themselves into the watch, the wards, and
gate-keepers, increased sometimes their fear, and sometimes promised hope,
saying: How long shall we besiege the Emperors son? what shall be the end of
our revolt? shall we swear allegiance to Percennius and Vibulenus? shall we
look for our pay at their hands? shall they reward the old soldiers with
lands? to be brief, shall they take upon them the government of the Roman
Empire, in Neroes and Drusus stead? were it not better that as we were the last
which offended; so we should be the first to repent? Demands in common are
slowly granted: a private favor is no sooner deserved, then obtained. These
speeches troubled their minds, and bred a mistrust among themselves: the young
soldiers forsook the old: and one legion parted from an other. By little and
little they returned to their allegiance; went from the gates which before they
possessed: carried to their usual places the ensigns, which in the beginning
of their rebellion they had pitched together. Drusus the next morning calling
an assembly, although he were no great Orator; yet the worthiness of his birth
supplying that want, he condemned their former, and commended their present
behauior. Assured them that he was not to be overcome with fear and
threatening: but if he perceived in them a modest carriage, entreaty of pardon
with submission; he would write unto his father, that forgetting that which was
past, he would give ear to the legions suites. At their entreaty Blaesus, and
L. Apronius, a Gentleman of Rome, and one of Drusus company, and Iustus
Catonius a chief Centurion, were sent again to Tiberius. This done, Drusus
counselors disagreed in opinions: some holding it expedient, that expecting
the Ambassadors return; the soldiers in the mean season should be gently
entreated: some that sharp remedies ought to be used: affirming that there was
no mean in the common people; and unless they were kept in awe, they would
keep others under. That they might easily be dealt withal whilst they stood
in fear; and therefore it was needful that they should be brideled by their
Generals authority: the ringleaders of the revolt executed, whilst yet the
superstition held them in astonishment. Hereupon Drusus being naturally of a
rough disposition, caused Percennius and Vibulenus to be put to death. Some say
they were murdered in the Governors tent; others that their bodies were thrown
out of the rampire to the terror of the rest. After this, a search was made for
the principal captains of the conspiracy: whereof some roming about the
camp, were slain by the guard: others the soldiers themselves delivered, as a
testimony of their allegiance, into Drusus hands. But there did nothing more
augment the soldiers distressed case, then an untimely winter, continual and
cruel raines; that they could neither put foot out of their tents; nor meet
together: nor hardly keep up their standarts, through boisterous winds, and
stormy showers, tossing them hither and thither. They were not yet rid of the
fear, the heavens ire stroke them into: imagining that the stars grew not
dark in vain against their wickedness; and that the tempests fell upon them
for their lewd and villainous demeanor. There was no comfort left, but to
abandon those unlucky, and disloyal camps; and being purged of their offense
by some propitiatory sacrifice, each legion to repair to his standing camp.
The eight legion departed first; then the fifteenth. The ninth cried that they
ought to tarry for Tiberius answer: but being discomfited by the others
departure, preventing imminent necessity, voluntarily went away. Drusus not
expecting the Ambassadors return, seeing all quiet for the present, went back
to Rome.

VIII. A mutiny in Gallia, and many Centurions slain: Germanicus loyalty to
Tiberius.
ALmost at the same time, and for the same causes, the legions of Germany
rebelled: so much the more violently, by how much the more in number: with
great hope that Germanicus Caesar could never endure to be commanded by
another: and that by following the humor of the legions, he would by main
strength be master of all. There lay by the river of Rhene two armies: the one
called the higher, under the Lieutenant C. Silius: the other the lower, under
A. Caecina. But the Lord general over them all, was Germanicus, then greatly
busied in leuying of subsidies and taxations in Gallia. Those which Silius
commanded, wavering and irresolute, looked into the success of others revolt:
but the lower army grew into a rage and fury: the conspiracy beginning by
the one and twentieth and fifth legions, which drew also to their side the first
and the twelfth: all of them being in the same summer camps, in the confines
of Vbium, idle, or in very easy service. Advertisement being come of Augustus
death, a multitude of citie-borne bondmen, and after made free, newly mustered
to be soldiers, given to licentiousnes, and impatient of labor: began to fill
the minds of the ruder sort, with these speeches. That the time was now come,
that the old soldier might demand a shorter time of service; the new greater
pay; and all in general an end of their miseries: and opportunity given to
revenge the cruelty of the Centurions. This was not spoken by one alone, as
when Percennius incited the legions of Pannonie* nor unto dastards looking that
men of better courage than they should begin: but many seditious mouths and
voices, were at once heard to say; that the whole Roman state was in their
hands; that by their victories it was grown great: and that of them the
Emperors took their surname. The Lieutenant, the rage of the multitude having
taken away his constancy, durst not resist them: when on the sudden like
frantike men, with their swords drawn (a very old subject of quarrel and
hatred in soldiers, and a beginning of cruelty) they fell on the Centurions;
threw them along; laid them on with stripes; three score to one, to make even
number with the Centurions. And having thus mangled and torn them, and slain
some, they threw them out of the trench, or into the river of Rhene. Among
others Septimius fled to the Tribunal, and cast himself at Caecinaes feet:
but was with such importunacie demanded, that he could not but deliver him to
the butcherie. Cassius Chaerea (famous afterward to posterity for murdering C.
Caesar) then a young man, but of a stout and brave courage, made way with his
sword, through such, as armed, went about to hinder his passage. After that
neither Tribune, nor campe-master was obeyed; the watch and ward, and
whatsoever the present time required, was ordered, and distributed among
themselves. Those which deeply looked into the disposition of soldiers; judged
it a strong argument, of a great and implacable revolt, that they were not
scattered and divided; nor any attempt given by a few; but grew insolent
altogether: were quiet at once: with such a moderation and constancy, that
thou would have thought they had been governed by one head. In the mean
season, news was brought to Germanicus (who as I have said, was leuying of
subsidies and tributes in Gallia) that Augustus was departed. Germanicus had
married Augustus niece Agrippina, and had by her many children, and was Drusus,
Tiberius brothers son, and nephew to Augusta: but greatly perplexed, by
reason of his uncles and grandmothers secret hatred toward him; so much the
more deep and deadly, because unjust. This proceeded of the good will and
remembrance which the people of Rome had of Drusus: all of them certainly
believing, that if he had gotten the sovereignty, he would have sct liberty
on foot again: and hoping the like of Germanicus, bare him the like
affection. This young Prince was of a mild disposition, very courteous,
nothing at all resembling Tiberius in countenance, or covert and arrogant
speech. Besides this, women's quarrels were mingled among, Liuia (as is the
manner of all stepdames) exasperating Tiberius against Agrippina: a woman
indeed easily moved: but through her chastity, and love toward her husband,
though otherwise of an invincible stomach, yet turned all to the best. But the
nearer Germanicus was to the highest hope, the more he labored to settle
Tiberius in the state: compelling the Sequans adioining, and the cities of
Belgia to swear their allegiance unto him. Then understanding of the hurly
burly of the legions, departing in all speed, met the soldiers out of their
camp, hanging down the head; repenting them of that they had done. He was no
sooner within the trench, but there was heard a confuse lamentation and
complaint among them: some taking him by the hand as it were to kiss it,
thrust his fingers into their mouths, that he might feel they were
toothlesse: others showed their crooked bodies with age. Who perceiving them
confusely shuffled together, commanded to separate themselves into companies,
the easier to hear his answer: and bear their ensigns before them; the
better to discern their bands: wherein they obeyed slowly enough. Germanicus
beginning with the reverence of Augustus, fell by little and little into the
praise of the victories and triumphs, and especially the famous exploites
Tiberius had done in Germany with those legions. Then extolled the unity of
Italy; the loyalty of Gallia; and how all other parts of the empire were
quiet. The soldiers gave ear unto all this with silence, or with a small
murmuring: but as soon as he began to touch their mutinies; expostulating;
What was become of the modest behavior of soldiers? where was the honor of
ancient discipline? whither they had driven their Tribunes and Centurions? they
all unclothed themselves, showed him their wounds, scars, and marks of their
stripes: then with a confuse note, how dearly they bought their ease and
vacations; found fault with their small pay; the intolerable pains they were
put to in working: by name condemning the rampires, trenches, seeking of
stower, carrying of stones and timber, and all other provisions, either
necessary in the camp; or to keep the soldiers from idleness. But the
greatest clamors were heard to proceed from the old soldiers; whereof some
having spent thirty years in service, some more; besought him to provide for
such over wearied poor soldiers; and not suffer them to end the rest of their
days, in misery and pain: but delivered of such labor and toiles, that they
might at length enioie repose without penury. Some demanded the legacy
bequeathed by Augustus will, and wished Germanicus all good fortune; offering
themselves to his devotion if he would take upon him the empire. Whereat, as
though he had been distained with some villainy; he leapt from the Tribunal:
and as he would have departed: the soldiers turned their weapons toward him in
menacing wise: unless he would go back again. But crying that he would
rather die, than falsify his faith: drew his sword from his side; bent the
point of it toward his breast, ready to have thrust it in; if some which were
near him by catching hold of his hand, had not withheld him by maine strength.
That part of the throng which was farthest behind, and which is scarce
credible, some other getting nearer and nearer, encouraged him to strike
boldly; and one called Calusidius, offered him his naked sword; saying that it
was better pointed than his. But that even to the most furious, was thought a
barbarous and savage part, and an evil president. Caesar's friends had time to
conduct him to his pauilion: there they consulted what was best to be done;
because news came, that the soldiers were in hand to dispatch ambassadors to
the higher army, to draw them to the same attempt: and that they had
determined to sack Colen; and having imbrued their hands with that pray, run
on to pill and waste Gallia.

IX. Order is taken against the disorder, by yielding to the soldiers requests:
Germanicus sends away his wife and children.
GErmanicus feared so much the more, because he knew the enemy would not
fail to invade, as soon as he understood of the dissension within Rome, and
that the rivers side was undefended. On the other side, if the allies and
confederates should arm themselves against the legions, it was to begin a new
civil war. And that it was to the state dangerous a like; to use either
severity or liberality: and no less, to grant the soldier all thing or
nothing. The matter being thus debated on both sides, it was thought good, that
letters should be written in the princes name, containing: that such as had
served twenty years, should be fully dismissed: and such as sixteen,
discharged also; with condition only to remain under ensigns, and repulse
the enemy. That their legacies left them by Augustus, should be doubled and
paid. The soldier perceived that those were sleights to win time; and
therefore urged a present execution: license of departure was presently yielded
by the Tribunes; but payment deferred. The fifth, and one and twentieth legion,
refused to go to any standing camp; until they had their pay in the same
camps they served in. Which they received of such provision, as Caesar could
either make by his friends, or had to serve his own turn. Caecina the
Lieutenant brought back to Vbium, the first, and the twentieth legion, in base
and disorderly array: carrying between the ensigns and standarts, masses of
money, extorted from the Emperos treasure. Germanicus went to the upper army,
and there without delaie, took the oath of allegiance, of the second,
thirteen, and sixteenth legion; the fowerteenth yet resting doubtful what were
best. But they had all their discharge and money offered them unasked. At the
same time, certain vexiliarie soldiers which continued under ensigns, and
were placed for a guarde to the country, of two legions which before were at
jar, began a tumult in the country of the Chauceans: which was quickly
suppressed by putting to death two of the soldiers. Which Mennius the
Camp-master commanded rather for example, then right of his office. But the
tumult growing hot, Mennius fled; and being found out, perceiving that there
was no safety in lurking, tried what boldness could avail: saying; That they
bent not their forces against the Camp-master; but against Germanicus their
General, and Tiberius the Emperor: perceauing that those words daunted such as
would have hindered him, snatching up an ensign, went to the river side; and
denouncing him a fugitive and traitor which refused to follow; brought them to
the winter standing camp, astonished, and not daring to attempt any thing. In
the mean season the ambassadors sent from the Senate to Germanicus, found him
at Vbium, at the place called the Altar. Where two legions, the first and the
twentieth wintered, with the old soldiers lately dismissed and kept under
ensigns. The timorous and troubled in conscience, were surprised with a sudden
fear, least some were come by commandment of the Senate, to make frustrate
all, they had wrung out by rebellion. And as the manner of the people is,
always falsely to accuse some one or other whom they suspect: so now they
laid all the blame, on Munatius Plancus; who had been Consul and chief in
the Embasie: affirming him to be the author of that decree. And in the dead of
the night, went to Germanicus, importunately demanding an ensign which was in
his house: and flocking together brake down the gates: entered his house; drew
Germanicus out of his bed; and threatening to kill him, forced him to deliver
the ensign. Then running up and down, they met with the ambassadors, hearing
of the desperate tumult, going to Germanicus: the soldiers iniuring them, and
ready to kill them: and above others Plancus, who in regard of his dignity
could not flee: having no other refuge left in distress and danger, then to
fly to the camp of the first legion: where embracing the standard and
ensigns, found safety as in a religious place. And had not Calphurnius, the
standard bearer, guarded him from the fury of the soldiers (a thing which
seldom happens, even among the enemies) an ambassador of the people of Rome,
in the Romans camp, had with his blood polluted the altars of the gods.
As Soon as it was day, that the L. General, the soldier, and the attempts
might be known; Germanicus entered the camp: and commanding Plancus to be
brought to him, placed him in the Tribunal by him. Then sharply rebuking
their fatal rage, stirred up by the wrath of the gods, and not the soldiers
will: he opens unto them the cause of the ambassadors coming: their
privileges: bewailing with great eloquence, Plancus undeserved hap; and the
discredit of the legions. And having rather ravished then quieted the
assembly, sent away the ambassadors with a guard of auxiliarie horsemen.
During this fear, every man blamed Germanicus, that he went not to the upper
army, where he should have both obedience, and aid against the rebels: that
his fault had been great enough, in dismissing the soldiers with money in
their purses, and using them so courteously. And if he made no greater reckoning
of his own person; yet he had no reason to leave his young son, and his wife
great with child, as a pray to furious and mad men; breakers of all humane
laws. And that he should preserve them, at the leastwise, for their
grandfather, and the commonwealth. He then weighing long what he were best to
resolve: his wife refusing to forsake him; alleging, that she was descended
from Augustus, and protesting that she would never degenerate from her blood,
whatsoever danger might be presented: at last embracing both her and the child,
with many tears constrained her to depart. Away then packt this lamentable
company of women; and the Generals wife: fleeing with his little son in her
lap, with a heavy troop of her friends wives about her, lead away with her
for company: those which remained behind, no less sorrowful then they. This
resembled not a triumphing Caesar, marching out of his camp: but the bewailing
and lamentation of a city, conquered and sacked of the enemy. Which piercing
the ears of the soldiers: they went out of their cabbines; enquiring what that
dolorous tune was? and from whence proceeded that lamentable noise? And
perceiving those noble dames to go without any Centurion or soldier, to guard
them; and their Emperors wife destitute of her accustomed train, going
toward Treuers, to commit hirselfe to the mercy of strangers: were stricken
into shame and compassion: when they called to mind Agrippa her father,
Augustus her grandfather, and Drusus her father in law: and how she hir-selfe
was for her chastity and child bearing, honored of al: and how she had had, a
child borne and brought up in their camp: whom by a military name they
called Caligula: because that to win the favor of the common soldier, he wore
the same kind of stocking or buskin as he did. But nothing did move them
more, then the hatred to those of Treuers: and therefore began to entreat, and
hinder their going; praying her that she would return and remain with them.
Some ran before Agrippina; many turned back to Germanicus: who through the
late occasions, yet full of grief and anger, uttered to the multitudes about
him, this speech as follows.

X. Germanicus Oration to the soldiers: the fear the City was in.
NOt my wife, or son, are deerer unto me, then my father and the
Commonwealth: but him, his own Majesty; the Empire, the other armies shall
defend. I do now remove my wife and children (which nevertheless I would
willingly offer unto death, were it to your glory and honor) from the sight of
raging mad men: that all your lewd actions be purged with my blood only; least
if you should murder Augustus nephews son, and Tiberius daughter in law, you
should become guilty of more heinous crimes: for what have you not dared to
attempt these days past? or what have you left unviolated? By what name shall
I call this assembly? Shall I call you soldiers, who have besieged your
Emperors son even within the trench? or shall I call you citizens, by whom
the authority of the Senate is so little regarded? You have broken that law
which one enemy observes to another: violated the sacred freedom of
Ambassadors, and the law of Nations. Julius of famous memory, repressed a
sedition in his army with one bare word: calling such Quirites, which drew back
countrary to their oath of allegiance. Augustus of sacred memory, daunted the
legions at Actium, with his look. And as for us, although we be neither of
them, yet being extract from them, we think it strange and unmeet, that the
Spanish or Syrian soldier should contemn us. Thou the first legion, and thou
the twentieth, the one having received ensigns of Tiberius, and the other a
companion in so many battles, and enriched with so many recompenses, do you
thus guerdon your General? Is this the message I shall carry my father (who
receives but good tidings from all other Provinces) that neither the young, nor
old soldier, can be satisfied with license to depart, nor money in their
purse? And that here only, the Centurions are murdered, the Tribunes driven
away, the Ambassadors shut up? that the tents and rivers are stained with
blood? and that I my self, hold my life but at the courtesy of such as hate
me? Why did you snatch out of my hands, the sword which I meant to thrust
through my breast, the first day of our meeting? O unadvised friends: yet he
dealt better and more lovingly with me, which offered me his sword; for by that
means I should have ended my life, before I should have seen so many outrages
in my army. You should have made choice of a General, which would have left my
death unpunished; yet have revenged the death of Varo, and of the three
legions. The gods forbid, that the Belgians, though offering themselves, should
carry away the credit and the honor of succouring the Romans, and brideling
the Germans. Let thy soul, Augustus of sacred memory, received into heaven,
thy image father Drusus, and the remembrance of thee, together with these
soldiers whom shame and glory do enter into, wipe away this blot, and convert
this private rancor, to the destruction of the enemy. And you, in whom I
perceive another countenance and another will, if you purpose to restore the
Ambassadors to the Senate; yield dutiful obedience to the Emperor; and me, my
wife and son: withdraw your selves from the contagion of the seditious, and
go from them which have been the authors of this rebellion: that shall be a
sure token of your repentance, and a bond of fidelity. With these speeches the
soldiers humbling themselves, confessed all to be true which was vpbraided
them: and besought him that he would punish the faulty, and pardon those which
were seduced, and bring them against the enemy: recall his wife and the
legions child; and not deliver him to the Gauls for an hostage. Germanicus
excused the return of his wife by the neerenes of her time, and winter; yet
that his son should return again: and as for other things, that they
themselves should see them performed. The soldiers then, being better
persuaded, ran from place to place, laid hands on the most disordered persons,
and brought them bound before C. Cetronius, Colonel of the first legion: who
gave judgment and punishment on every of them in this manner. The legions
called together, stood with their swords drawn before the Tribunal: and the
offender shown by the Tribune out of a high seat: and if the soldiers did
cry that he was guilty, he was immediately thrown down headlong, and cut in
pieces: the soldier rejoicing in these massacres, as though himself thereby
had been acquitted. Germanicus did not hinder them at all, seeing, that being
done without his commandment, as well the fact, as the envy of it, should
light upon their own necks. The old soldiers following that president, were
anon after sent to Raetia, under color of defending the province, from the
invasion of the Sweuians: but in deed, to draw them from those garrisons; yet
breathing of cruelty, no less by that cruel means of redress, then memory
of their former outrages. This done, he took a survey of the Centurions: who
being called by the Captain, told their names, degrees, and country, what
pays they had received, and how many years: what exploits they had done in
service, and with what donatiues rewarded. If the Tribunes and legions approved
their valor and integrity, they kept their rooms: if by common consent,
covetousness, or cruelty were laid to their charge, they were cassirde. Things
thus settled for the present, there arose immediately, a matter of no lesser
weight then the former, through the headie insolency of the fifth, and one and
twentieth legion, lodged in winter standings threescore miles off, at Vetera.
For they first led the dance, and with their own hands, committed the lewdest
outrages: Nothing terrified with their fellows punishment, continued
impenitent, and still harbored anger in their breasts. Whereupon Caesar
gathers forces, prepares a Navy with confederates and allies, to send down
the Rhene: purposing if they were obstinate, to try it out in a maine battle.
No tidings being all this while brought to Rome, of the success in Illyricum:
and understanding of the rising of the German legions; the city trembling
with fear, began to blame Tiberius, that counterfeiting a doubtfulnes of
taking on him the Empire, mocked the Lords of the Senate, the weak and
unfurnished common people, and suffered the seditious in the mean time to
rebel, which by the weak authority of two young men could not be suppressed.
That he should therefore have gone himself in person, and opposed his
imperial majesty against them; at whose sight they would presently have
yielded, being by long experience skillful, and carrying with him power to
punish, or reward. If Augustus stricken in years, could make often iourneies
into Germany: should Tiberius being of a strong and able body, sit in the
Senate, carping the Senators words? He had taken good order how to keep the
city in servitude: and that it was now time to apply some medicine to the
soldiers mind, to induce them to a disposition of peace. Notwithstanding
Tiberius standing stiff in his determination, resolved not to forsake the head
of the empire, and hazard himself and the whole state. Many things troubled
his mind: as that the Germane army was the strongest: and the Pannonian near
at hand: the one leaning to the strength of the Gauls: the other, lying in the
confines of Italy: doubtful himself which first to go to; least the other
being postposed should take it in disdain. But his sons, might visit both:
as a thing standing well with imperial majesty, bearing greater state
farthest off. The young men might be excused if they referred some things to
their father: and if they should resist Germanicus and Drusus, he should be
able to appease or overthrow them. But if they should set light by the
Emperor, what remedy could be then looked for? Nevertheless as though he would
depart out of hand, he made choice of his followers, provided his carriages in
a readiness, prepared shipping; then excusing himself, now with the hardness of
the winter; now with this, now with that: he deceived first the wise, then the
vulgar sort, and the provinces a very long time.

XI. The first and the ninth legion kill many of the rebels: Germanicus over
comes the Marseans, beats down the temple of Tanfana. The death of Iulia.
But Germanicus, although he had an army in a readiness to revenge upon the
rebels: thinking it convenient nevertheless, to give them some respite; to see
whether they would be reclaimed by the example of the other legions: sent
letters before to advertise Cecina, that he was coming with a power: and that
if they would not punish the offenders before his coming, he would without any
respect make a general slaughter of them all. These letters Cecina secretly
imparted to the standard and ensign bearers, and the better sort: persuading
them to deliver all in general from infamy, and themselves from death. For in
time of peace each man's cause and merit was waighed; but in war, the guilty
and guiltless perished alike. They then sounding the minds of those they
thought fittest, and finding the greater number of the legionarie soldiers to
continue dutiful; following the Lieutenants advice, set down a time when to
cut off the lewdest, and most seditious among them. Then the watchword given,
they break into their tents; slew them; none privy to the cause but such, as
were of counsel in the enterprise: neither imagining the beginning, nor the
end of this butcherie. The strangest manner of civil war that ever happened
was this: for without order of battle; not sallying out of diverse standings;
but out of the same beds, in which they had eaten by day, and slept by night:
they banded into factions; lanced their darts: outcries were heard; wounds
given; blood shed; but the cause unknown: fortune ruled the rest, and some
honest men were slain among. But it was no sooner known against whom this
watch was intended, but the worst persons snatched their weapons likewise: no
Lieutenant, nor Tribune present to bridle them: but every man licenced to
revenge his fill. Germanicus anon after entering the camp, with many tears
calling that a butchery, and not a medicine, commanded the bodies to be burnt.
The bloody soldiers thirsted after the enemy, as a satisfaction of his
fury: supposing that the ghosts of their companions could by no other means
be appeased, then by receiving honorable wounds in their wicked breasts. Caesar
followed the soldiers heat, and building a bridge over the river, past over
twelve thousand, drawn out of the legions; six and twenty cohorts of allies:
and eight wings of such horsemen, as during the mutiny, were of good and
modest carriage. The Germans not far off were iocand: whilst we for the
death of Augustus, and by civil discords, kept holy day. The Roman army
marching with speed, past the wood Caesia; and the bound begun by Tiberius,
and encamped upon it: fortifying the front and the back with a trench, and the
sides with loppings of trees. From thence they marched through dark forests,
and consulting of two ways, which was best: the short and usual: or the
unbeaten and hardest: and therefore least doubted of the enemy. And having
made choice of the longest, they hastened other things the more. For the
scoutes had brought word, that the Germans would spend that night in solemn
feasting and banqueting. Cecina had charge to lead the way with a cohort
lightly armed, and make plain the passage of the wood; whom the legions
immediately followed. The starre-light helped them, till they came to the
villages of the Marsies: whom they beset round; being yet either a bed, or at
table; without fear, and no watch set. So far had they left all things at
randon; nothing misdoubting war; nor, being drunk, greatly caring for peace.
Caesar divided the legions greedy of pillage to waste the more ground, into
four pointed battles; and destroyed with fire and sword, fifty miles; neither
age nor sex, moving him to pity: profane and sacred places, and the temple
called Tanfana, a place of great fame among those people, he battered to the
ground: the Romans receiving no wound, but slaying the enemy half a sleep;
or unarmed, and straggling without order or array. That slaughter stirred up the
Bructeri, Tubantes, and the Vsipetes; who beset the wood, that way the army
should return. Whereof the Captain being advertised, he marshalled his men in
order at once, both to march and fight. Part of the horsemen with auxiliary
cohorts lead the way: after them followed the first legion: the cariages
enclosed in the midst, had on the left side the 21. legion; on the right, the
fifth: in the rereward, the twentieth; and after them the rest of the
confederates. But the enemy stirred not whilst the Roman camp marched
through the wood: then lightly skirmishing with the flanks and the formen; set
amain on the hindmost: who being but slenderly appointed, and amazed with the
thick troops of Germans, were ready to shrink: had not Caesar stepped to the
twentieth legion; crying alowd, that now was the time to blot out the infamies
of their former conspiracies: and show valor; and make haste to turn their
former fault into glory and honor. This speech so inflamed their courages, that
breking in suddenly upon the enemies, drove them to an open place, and hewed
them in pieces: and the vantgard getting out of the wood, began incontinently
to fortify and entrench. After that, they marched without disturbance:
emboldened with their late success, and forgetting what was past, were brought
to their standing camps. These news made Tiberius both glad and sorry: glad,
that the sedition was suppressed: sorry, that Germanicus had purchased the
soldiers favor by largess, and timely dismissing them: not alittle grieved
also with the glory that Germanicus got in that war. Yet he imparted these
news to the Senate, highly commending his exploites: rather in color and show
of words, then believed that he spoke from the heart. Drusus he commended also;
and the success of the Illirian rebellions, in fewer words, but more
unfeignedly, and with better affection; yet confirmed all that Germanicus had
granted; and gave the like to the armies in Pannonie. The same year Iulia
dyed: confined first by Augustus her father for her unchaste life, in the Island
Pandateria: then in Rhegium, a town seated upon the Sicilian sea. She had
been Tiberius wife, whom she contemned as an unfit match for her; whilst
Caius and Lucius flourished: which was the very inward and secret cause, why
Tiberius withdrew himself to Rhodes. But having gotten to be Emperor, and
that by the death of Agrippa Posthumus, her hopes were cut off; banished and
infamous, with great want hungerstarued her: persuading himself that her long
banishment, would have smothered the speech of her death. The like occasion
egged him to the like cruelty against Semp. Gracchus: who nobly descended,
quick witted, and eloquent to persuade to naughtines; seduced the same Iulia to
lewdenes when she was M. Agrippas wife. Neither was that the end of their
licentiousnes; but the wilful adulterer abused her company, when she was
Tiberius wife: incensing her to disobedience and dislike. Diverse supposing that
the bitter letters, which she sent to Augustus her father against Tiberius,
were of his inditing. Whereupon being banished to Cercina, an Island in the
Affrican sea, after fourteen years exile: the soldiers sent to put him to
death, found him on the shore as one expecting bad tidings. Of whom he
requested some short time, to write his last will to Alliaria his wife; which
being done, he offered his neck to the executioners: in the constancy of his
death, not unworthy the Sempronian name; though in his life he had degenerated.
Some gave out, that those soldiers were not sent from Rome, but from L.
Asprenas, Proconsull of Affrike, by Tiberius appointment; hoping though in
vain, that the infamy of the murder should redound to Asprenas discredit.
This year were instituted new ceremonies, by founding a society of Priests,
called Augustales: as in times past T. Tatius, desirous to continue certain
religious solemnities of the Sabins, ordained a company of Priests called
Titians. One and twenty of the chiefest of the city were drawn by lot, and
Tiberius, Drusus, Claudius, and Germanicus added to the number. These plays at
their first beginning, were disturbed by a contention rising betwixt stage
players: Augustus himself favoring the sport, to please Mecaenas; who was
exceedingly carried away with affection toward Bathillus, and himself not
disliking them, thought it no uncivil matter, to show himself at those
disports, amongst the common people. But Tiberius was of an other humor; yet
durst not on the sudden reduce the people to a straighter course, which so many
years before had been nuzled in pleasure and easy usage.

XII. Germanicus inuadeth the Chatti. A strife between two noble men of
Germany, Armihius and Segestes. Arminius wife is taken.
DRusus Nero and C. Narbo being Consuls, a triumph was ordained in honor of
Germanicus, the war yet continuing: for which although great preparation was
made for the summer following; yet he by a sudden incursion made on the Chatti,
did anticipate it in the beginning of the spring. For a rumor bred a hope, that
the enemies were banded into factions, some favoring Arminius; and others
Segestes: the one most loyal; and the other most disloyal unto us. Arminius
disquieted Germany: Segestes discovered often to Varus, but especially in the
last banquet, after which arms were taken, a rebellion intended: and counseled
him to cast himself, Arminius and the chiefest of the conspirators into
prison: the people not daring any attempt, the ringleaders being taken away;
and that he should have time thereby to sift out the offenders from the
innocent. But Varus by destiny, and Arminius violence died. And although
Segestes was by common consent drawn to the war, yet he showed himself very
backward by his private grudge against Arminius increasing more and more;
because he had taken away by force his daughter betrothed to another. Thus then
the son in law being odious to the father: the fathers in law at utter
defiance betwixt themselves; that which should serve for a bond of friendship
among friends, served here for a provocation of wrath and malice. Whereupon
Germanicus committed four legions to Cecinaes charge, five thousand
auxiliaries, and certain Germain bands levied in haste, inhabiting the hither
side of Rhene. Himself conducted the like number of legions, with twice as
many confederates: and having builded a fort on the hill Taunus, where his
father before him had appointed a garrison, led his army without encombrance
against the Chatti; leaving L. Apronius behind him, to mend and make sure the
passages by land and rivers: for by reason of a drought, and lowness of the
waters (a thing seldom seen in that country) they had marched a good way
without danger; but feared rain and rising of the water at his return. But
his coming was so sudden upon the Chatti; that the weaker sort by age, or
sex, were presently either taken or slain: the young men swam over the river
Adrana, and drove back the Romans, which began a bridge: But at last driven
away themselves with shot of arrows and other engines, entreating in vain of
conditions of peace: some fled to Germanicus: the rest abandoning their
villages and houses, dispersed themselves in the woods. Germanicus having
burned Mattium the capital city of the country, returned toward the Rhene:
the enemy not daring to set on him as he retired, as his manner is, when he
gave ground, rather upon policy then fear. The Cherusci would willingly
have succored the Chatti; but Caecinaes army fleeting from place to place,
kept them in awe: and overthrew the Marsi, which ventured to join battle with
him. Shortly after ambassadors came from Segestes, to crave aid against the
violence of his countriemen, which had besieged him: Arminius bearing greater
sway, because he incited them to war. For among barbarous people, the more
audacious a man shows himself, the more loiall he is reputed; and the
fittest instrument in troubled times. Segestes joined his son Sigismond to
these ambassadors; but being touched in conscience, was unwillingly drawn to
it: because that when the Germans rebelled, being priested at the altar of the
Vbians, he brake his head-bande, which was the mark of his calling, and fled
to the rebels. Yet trusting in the Romans clemency, fulfilled his fathers
commandment; and being courteously, received was conveyed with a guard, to the
shores of Gallia. After this Germanicus thought it convenient, to convert his
power against those which besieged Segestes, whom he delivered, with a great
number of his kindred, and followers. Among whom there were many noble dames,
and Segestes daughter, Arminius wife; affecting rather her husband than father;
and being taken, not once falling a tear, nor craving favor, ioining her hands
on her breast, looked down upon her great belly. The spoils of Varus
overthrow were at the same time brought in and distributed, as a booty to the
greatest part of such, as had yielded themselves with Segestes. Who with a
comely majesty, and bold courage, and loyalty to the Romans, began a speech
in this manner. This is not the first day that the people of Rome, has had
experience of my constancy and loyalty: for since Augustus of famous memory,
gave me the privileges of a citizen of Rome; I made choice of such friends or
enemies, as might stand you in stead: not for any hatred to my country (for
traitors are odious even to those whose instruments they be) but because I
judged it profitable alike to the Romans and Germans: and preferred peace
before war: for this cause I accused Arminius, rauisher of my daughter, and
infringer of the league concluded with you, before Varus the general. But when
I was by the slacknes of the general deferred to a farther day of hearing,
having small hope of support in laws; I besought him earnestly, that he would
commit me, Arminius, and the rest of the conspirators, to straight custody. I
call to witness that night (which if it had pleased the gods I would it had been
my last) in which those things ensued, which deserve rather to be bewailed,
than maintained. In fine, I laid irons on Arminius, and suffered the same in
my self, by his faction. But seeing you have vouchsafed me your presence; I
prefer old quietness before new garboiles; not hoping for any reward thereby;
but only to excuse my self from disloyalty, and to serve for a convenient
means of reconciliation for the German nation, if they will rather repent than
perish. For my sons youth and error I crave pardon: my daughter I confess,
was drawn hither by force. It rests in you to determine, whether it ought to
be of greater force, to be with child by Arminius; or be begotten by me.
Caesar with a mild answer, promised his children and his kindred safety: and
himself his ancient seat in the province. This done he brings back his
army, and with Tiberius liking, took upon him the name of Emperor. Arminius
wife was delivered of a son; which was brought up at Rauenna; of whom we will
speak more hereafter, and how he served for fortunes scorn.

XIII. Arminius stirs the Germans to war: seeks revenge: What danger
Caecina was in. Germanicus burieth the legions which were slain with Varus.
THe news being spread of Segestes yielding, and gentle usage, as men's minds
were affected to peace or war; so they were moved with hope or grief.
Arminius being fierce of his own disposition understanding that his wife was
taken prisoner, and the fruit of her womb, a bond slave; became as it were
mad: and raunging the Cheruscians country; craved for succor against
Segestes, and Caesar; not being able to contain for outrageous speeches:
saying That, that must needs be a brave father, a mighty Emperor, a worthy
army, that could, with so much help, carry away one silly woman. He had
defeated three legions, and so many lieutenants: not by treason, nor against
women great with child, but in the face of the enemy, and against armed men,
achieved his enterprises. And that the ensigns, which he had taken from the
Romans, were to be seen in the woods of Germany, offered up in honor of
their country gods. Let Segestes inhabit the conquered banks; and restore his
son to his priestlie dignity: that the Germans could never excuse it: that
the Romans have been seen to bear their rods, their axes, and gowns
between Abbis and Rhene. Other nations being strangers to the Roman
government, could speak nothing, of their cruel punishments and grievous
tributes: and seeing they had shaken off those burdens; and that, that Augustus
whom they placed among the gods, and Tiberius chosen after him, lost their
labor; they should not fear an unexperienced young man, nor his mutinous
company. If they preferred their country; their kindred; their ancient life,
before new lords, and new colonies; they should rather follow Arminius,
protector of their glory and liberty, then Segestes the author of reproachful
servitude. These speeches incensed not only the Cheruscians, but the neighbors
adjoining also; and drew Inguiomerus, a man once in credit with the Romans, and
uncle to Arminius by the fathers side, to their party, which increased Caesar's
fear the more. And therefore least the whole weight of the war should at
once fall upon him: he sent Caecinna with forty cohorts of Romans, to seauet
the power of the enemy through the Bructeries country, to the river of
Amisia. Pedo the Camp-maister had the conducting of the horsemen, by Frisia:
himself embarked four legions, and lead them through the lakes: all the
horsemen, footmen, and the whole navy meeting together at the said river; and
received the Chauceans among them, who had promised them aid. The Bructeri
burning their own country, Stertinius overthrew with a company of light
harnessed soldiers, sent against them by Germanicus* and found between the
slaughter and the booty, the banner of the nineteenth legion which was lost
with Varus. From thence the army marched to the utmost confines of the
Bructeri, all the country wasted betwixt the river Amisia, and Luppia: not
far from the forest Tentoburgh; where the relics of the legions which Varus
lead, were reported to lie unburied. Whereupon Caesar had a great desire to
celebrate the captains, and soldiers funerals; all the army moved to
compassion: some calling to mind their kinsfolks; some their friends: and some
in consideration of the hazards of war, and the slipperie estate of man
subject unto fortunes change. And having sent Caecina before, to search out the
secret places of the forest, and cast bridges and causeyes over the moist and
deceiptful passages of the bogs, they marched those doleful ways, yrksome to
behold, and dreadful to remember. Varus first encamping seat, by the large
circuit of ground it contained, and dimensions of the Principia, the place in
the camp where the standard and ensigns are pitched. Sav. in mar. lib. 1. cap.
7.
Principia, did show that the enclosure was capable of three legions: then by a
rampire half broken down, and a shallow trench, they perceived where the
ouertoyled remnant was retired. In the middle of the field lay white bones,
either scattered, or on a heap, as they had either resisted or fled: hard by,
trouncheons of weapons, and horses ribs; and before them men's heads, fastened
upon the bodies of trees. In the woods were their barbarous altars, on which
they sacrificed the Tribunes and chief Centurions. Those which escaped alive,
or broke prison after the butchery, told that here the Liutenants were slain;
there the standards taken: where Varus received his first wound; where with his
own unlucky hand he slew himself. On what Tribunal Armin ius made his
oration. How many gibbets he had set up for captives, and what ditches: and
with what proud disdain he skoffed at the ensigns and standarts. The Romans
then which were present, six years after the slaughter, oppressed with
grief, yet more then ever kindled with rage against the enemy; covered with
earth the bones of the three legions: as if they had been all their friends or
kindred; howbeit it was uncertain whether they buried the stranger or friend.
Caesar to show a grateful memory of the dead, and himself to be partaker of
their grief, with his own hands put the first turfe on their tombs; which
Tiberius misliked: either as construing all Germanicus actions to the worst; or
because the sight of the dead, unburied, would make the soldiers more
fearful of the enemy, and less forward to fight: and because a General
honored with the Augurall dignity, and devoted to most ancient ceremonies,
ought not to meddle in mortuaries. But Germanicus pursuing Arminius, already
crept into inaccessible places; as soon as he found conueniencie, thrust his
horsemen on him, and recovered the field which the enemy occupied. Arminius
gathered his men together; and commanding them to draw near the wood, turned
short on the sudden, and gave them the watchword which he had hidden there
before, to break out. Whereat the horsemen amazed, and the cohorts sent for a
supply, borne back with those which fled; augmenting their fear, were almost
thrust into the bogs, well known to the conquerors, and dangerous to the
Romans; had not Caesar come on with the legions in battle array. Which stroke
a terror into the enemy, and assured the courage of the soldier: both the
armies in the end parting on even hand. Anon after the army being brought to
the river Amisia, he conducted the fleet and the legions back again, in the
same manner they came thither. Some of the horsemen were commanded to return
to the river of Rhene, still coasting the Ocean shore. Caecina who conducted
another company, although he was skillful in the ways, yet was charged to
return with all diligence by the long bridges; which was a narrow causey
betwixt wide marshes, thrown up in times past by L. Domitius. The rest of the
country was miry, and full of fast binding clay, with some doubtful brooks.
Round about were woods, ascending little and little, which Arminius had filled,
by a nearer way, and light army, preventing the Romans, laden with armor and
carriages. Caecina doubting how he should at once, repair those bridges,
already decayed with age, and drive back the enemy; thought it best to encamp
in the same place; that whilst some were fortifying, others might skirmish
with the enemy. The barbarians used all force to break the wards, and make
way to the trench-makers: set on them, compassed them in; ran from place to
place; leaving nothing undone, to disturb them. The laborers and the fighters
made one confuse cry: nothing prospering on the Romans side. The place was
nothing but a deep mire, not firm to tread on, and slipperie to march: the
weight of their corselets an hinderance, and they unable to lance their
iauelins in the waters. Contrarily the Cheruscians being a great limmed people,
and accustomed to fight in bogs, were with huge spears able to hurt a far
off. To be brief, the night delivered the legions from an unlucky battle.
The Germans through prosperous success, nothing wearied, but forbearing from
rest; turned all the waters which rose in the mountains, into the under
grounds: whereupon the plain being drowned, and so much of the work
overthrown as they had cast up, the Roman soldier was put to a double
labor.

XIIII. The Romans escape a great danger through the good conduct of Caecina.
CAEcina had then in quality of a soldier of commander forty year received
pay: and therefore being acquainted as well with the changeable events of
fortune as prosperous successes, fell nothing at all in courage: but pondering
in his mind what might follow, found nothing more expedient, then to enclose
the enemy in the wood, until the wounded, and the cariages were gotten
before. For betwixt the hills and the marshes, there stretched out a plain,
capable of a small army. The legions were so placed, that the fifth should be
in the right flancke; the one and twentieth in the left; the first to lead; and
the twentieth to defend, if they were pursued. The night was unquiet for
diverse respects: the barbarous enemy, in feasting and banketting, songs of
joy, and hideous outcries filled the valleies and woods, which redoubled the
sound again. The Romans had small fires, broken voices, lay near the
trenches, went from tent to tent, rather disquieted, and not able to sleep,
then watchful. The general had that night a heavy dream; which drove him
into a fear: for he thought that he had seen Quinctilius Varus, rising out of
those bogs, embrued all in blood, calling him by name, and stretching out his
hand toward him; which he thrust back refusing to follow. At day breaking,
the legions appointed for the flanks, either for fear, or contempt, abandoned
their standings; and seized on the field adioining beyond the marshes.
Arminius although he might safely have, assaulted them, yet forbear a time.
But he no sooner perceived their bag and baggage to stick in the mire, and
ditches, and the soldiers troubled about it, disbanded and out of order, and
the ensigns confusedly disordered; as it falls out in such times, every man
busy to help himself, and deaf to harken what was commanded; but he
encharged the Germans to break in, crieng aloud. Behold Varus, and the
legions once again vanquished by the same destiny. Having thus said,
accompanied with a choice band of horsemen, breaks the ranks of the Romans,
and especially wounds their horses: which slipping, by reason of their own
blood, and moisture of the bogs; overthrowing their masters, either trod
vnderfeete, or scattered all they met. Much a do they had about the ensigns,
which they could neither bear up, the shot came so thick: nor pitch on the
ground, it was so mirie. Whilst Caecina maintains battle, his horse was
killed under him; from which being fallen, he had been taken by the enemy, if
the first legion had not opposed herself. The greedines of the enemy was some
help unto them; being more thirsty of pillage then blood: whereby the legions
had leisure toward the evening, to win the open firm land. And yet their
miseries did not thus end: They had defenses to make: and stuff wherewithal,
to seek: their tools to cast up earth, or cut turfes, were almost all lost:
tents they had none to cover them: nor medicaments to heal the wounded: and
dividing their meat partly stained with blood, or beraied with dirt, they
bewailed that unfortunate darkness; and that only day left for so many
thousands to live. By mere chance a horse brake loose in the camp, and
praunsing up and down, affrighted with noise, overthrew all he met in his
way: which stroke such a fear and terror in the soldiers hearts, that
thinking the Germans had broken upon them; ran all to the gates of the camp,
and especially to the Decumana, which was farthest from the enemy, and safest
to flee away. Caecina being assured that it was but a vain fear, yet not
being able either by his authority, entreatie, or forcible means to stay
their fleeing; cast himself a cross the gate; and so moved them to pity,
stopping the passage; because they would not tread on their captains body.
The Tribunes and Centurions showed them withal, that their sear was false and
without cause. Then assembling them in the Principia, and commanding silence,
admonished them of the time and necessity they stood in. That their safety
only consisted in their weapons; which yet they were to moderate by
discretion: keeping still within their trench, until the enemy, with hope to
break upon them, should draw near: and that then they should rush out on
every side, and so get to the river of Rhene. Whereas if they should fly,
they should pass through more woods, find deeper bogs, and the enemy more
cruel then ever: but by conquering they should purchase glory and renown:
putting them in mind of those things which were esteemed dear at home, and of
credit in camp: not once mentioning their disgraces and adversities. This
done, he assigned to the most courageous a horse: beginning with his own; then
with the Tribunes and Centurions, not respecting calling or quality: to the end
that they should first invade the enemy, and the footmen follow. The
Germains, what with hope, what with greedines of pray, what with disgreeing
opinions of captains; were as much disquieted as the Romans. Arminius
thought it best to suffer them come out of their fort, and set on them in the
bogs and marshes: but Inguiomerus advise, though more cruel, was most pleasing
to the barbarians: which was, that they should besiege the camp: persuading
that by that means, the assault would be easier; more captives taken; and the
booty entire and untouched. As Soon then as it was day, they beat down the
trenches, filled them up with hurdles, grappled up to the top of the trench,
few soldiers resisting them, and those all stock still in amaze. The cohorts
within had the alarm given; the cornets and trumpets sounded; and with a great
clamor sallied out courageously, and hemmed the enemy in: casting in their
teeth, that here there were neither woods nor quagmiers, but the places and
the gods indifferent to both. The enemies imagining it but an easy conquest,
and that there were but a few to resist, and those but half armed; hearing
the sound of the trumpets, and seeing the glittering of the armor; which
seemed so much the greater, by how much the less they were esteemed: on a
sudden were beaten down and slain, as men in prosperity greedy, and in
adversity, uncircumspect. Arminius and Inguiomerus fled, the one not hurt, and
the other grievously wounded. The common sort were slain as long as the day
and anger lasted: the legions returned at night to their forte. And although
there were more wounded then the day before, and no less want of victuales:
yet with the victory they thought they had recovered, strength, courage,
health, and all other necessaries.

XV. The danger the legions were in under Vitellius. Tiberius renevveth the
law of treason.
IT was noised abroad in the mean season, that the legions were besieged; and
that the German host was entering Gallia. And if Agrippina had not hindered
the pulling down of the bridge over Rhene; some through fear would have
ventured so lewd an action. Who being a woman of a great courage, took upon
her for some days the office of a Captain: relieved the soldiers, as they had
most need, with apparel and medicine. C. Plinius a writer of the German
wars, recounteth; that she went to the end of the bridge and there stayed,
praising and thanking the legions as they returned. A matter which entered
deeply into Tiberius mind: imagining with himself that it was not for
naught, that she used such care and courtesy: that she sought not the favor of
the soldier against the stranger. That there was nothing left for the Emperors
to do, if a woman took once upon her to visit the bands, go to the ensigns;
and seek means to corrupt the soldier? As though it had been but a small
point of ambition, to carry her son about the camp in the attire of a
common soldier, and call him Caesar Caligula. That Agrippina was now of greater
credit with the army, than the Lieutenants and Captains; and that a woman
had suppressed a sedition, which Caesar's name and power could not do. All this
was aggrauated by Seianus, well acquainted with Tiberius humor; and who had
long before sown seeds of hatred: which for the time he smoothered, because
they should burst out the greater in the end. But Germanicus gave P. Vitellius
charge of the second and fowerteenth legion, which he had brought by sea, to
conduct by land: to the end the ships might in the low water sail more
easily, or in the ebbing lie a ground more lightly. Vitellius had a quiet
beginning of his journey, a dry shore, and small flote: but by and by through
a gale of northren wind, the aequinoxe falling out the same time, and the sea
swelling extraordinarily; his army was tossed hither and thither: the face of
the earth was covered with waters, the sea, the shore, the fields, were all but
one. The uncertain sands could not be discerned from firm land: nor the
shelues from the deep seas: their horses and cariages were drawn under water,
and swallowed in the gulfes: dead bodies flotted and met one another: the
soldiers disorderly mingled, now breast, now chin high in water; and sometimes
loosing footing, either drowned or scattered. Encouragments took no place: and
being thus tossed with waves, the valiant man was not distinguished from the
coward: the wise not known from the fool; nor no difference betwixt counsel
and chance; but all wrapped up in like violence. In the end Vitellius having
gotten the higher ground, brought the rest of his company thither, where they
passed all that night without vtensiles, or fire: the greatest part either
naked, or moiled, in no less miserable a taking, then the besiged by the
enemy: for the end of those is glorious, and the death of these without
honor. The day showed them land, and they passed to the river Visurgis, where
Caesar was arrived with the whole fleet: into which he received the legions,
reported to have been drowned, and never believed to be alive, until they
saw Caesar and the army returned. Now Stertinius sent before to receive
Segestes brother Segimerus, who had yielded himself; brought him and his son
to Colen; and both pardoned; though Segimerus easlier then his son: because
it was laid to his charge, that he had skoffed at Quinctilius Varus body. But
to supply these losses which the army had sustained; Gallia, Spain, and
Italy, strove who should furnish most; offering armor, horses, gold, and such
things as they had most in a readiness. Germanicus commending their love and
affection, accepted only their armor and horses, and furnished the rest with
his own charges. And to comfort and mitigate the remembrance of their
overthrow, with some courteous usage; he went about to visit the wounded:
praising in particular every ones valiantnes, and looking on their wounds; fed
one with hope, and an other with praise: won all by good words, and care, and
made them constant to himself, and resolute to fight. The same year by decree
of Senate, the marks of triumph were ordained for A. Caecina, L. Apronius, C.
Silius, for their noble exploites achieved under Germanicus. And Tiberius
refused the Title, of father of his country, which the people had often cast
upon him. Nor would not suffer any to swear, to the observation of his
ordinances, although the Senate were thereto consenting: affirming, that all
mortal things were mutable and uncertain; and the higher he should clime, the
slipperer his estate should be. Notwithstanding all this, they could not be
persuaded that he meant well to the citizens; because he had put on foot
again the law of treason, known to the ancients by the same name. But by
virtue of that law other things were brought into question: as if any had
betrayed the army; stirred the people to sedition: badly managed the affairs
of the commonwealth: impaired and weakened the majesty of the people of Rome.
But then deeds only were punished, words went scotfree. Augustus was the
first, who under color of this law, comprehended the examination of infamous
libels: moved thereto by the insolent behavior of Cassius Seuerus, who had
defamed honorable persons, both men and women, with scandalous writings.
Tiberius also, when Pompeius Macro the Praetor asked whether judgment should be
given, touching the said crime, made answer; that the laws were to be
observed. Tiberius was the more exasperated, through certain verses cast
abroad by an uncertain author, against his cruelty, pride, and disagreeing
with his mother. It shall not be amiss, if I rehearse, with what pretended
crimes, Falanius and Rubrius, both mean Gentlemen of Rome were charged: to
make it known by what beginnings, what sleights of Tiberius, an utter ruin of
the commonwealth was intended, then suppressed; afterward revived again, and
in the end, ouermastered all. Falanius accuser objected against him, that
amongst other worshippers of Augustus (for such fellowships there were almost
in every house as it had been Colleges) he had received one Cassius a
stage player, and infamous of his body: and that with his gardens he had sold
Augustus image. Rubrius was accused to have violated an oath made in Augustus
name. When these things were brought to Tiberius notice, he answered: That his
father had not a place assigned him in heaven by decree of Senate, because that
honor should be converted to the overthrow of the citizens. That Cassius the
stage player, was wont to be admitted with others of the same trade, to the
plays which his mother had consecrated to Augustus memory. That there was
nothing done against religion, if his image was sold, as the counterfets of
other gods were, in the sale of their gardens and houses. And as for Rubrius
oath, it was to be held in the same account, as if he had deceived Jupiter
himself: and that the injuries done unto the gods, ought to be referred to the
care of the gods.

XVI. An accusation against Granius Marcellus, Orders against suing for
dignities.
NOt long after, Granius Marcellus Praetor of Bithynia, was accused of treason
by Caepio Crispinus his Quaestor: Romanus Hispo subscribed thereto: who entered
into a course of life, which the calamities of times, and men's boldness made
famous. For being needy, obscure, and a busy companion, by secret information
he so crept into the cruel humor of the Prince, that he was able in short time
to endanger the estate of the best in the city: thereby getting credit and
authority with one, and hatred of many. He gave an example, which many
following, of beggars became rich, of base and contemptible persons, feared;
procuring destruction to others, and in the end to themselves. He accused
Marcellus to have uttered bad speeches against Tiberius: which was an
accusation inevitable; because that having chosen out the greatest blemishes of
Tiberius life and manners, because they were true; were believed. Hispo added,
that Marcellus image was placed higher then those of the Caesar's; and that the
head of another of Augustus being cut off, Tiberius image was put upon it:
which so incensed him, that breaking silence, he cried out that he would
himself, and that sworn, give open sentence in that cause: to the end the
rest should be enforced to do as he had done; for as yet there were some marks
of dying liberty left in the Senate. Then said C. Piso. What place will thou
take Caesar to deliver thy censure? If thou will speak first, I shall have a
president to follow: if last, I fear I shall swerve from thee uncircumspectly.
Abashed with this, the hotter unadvisedly he had grown, the more repenting; he
suffered the arraigned of treason to be quit. As concerning the extorsions, the
cause was put over to the delegates. And not contented with the judgments of
the Senators, he assisted in the hearing of causes himself, and sat in the
end of the Tribunal, least he should put the Praetor out of his chair. Many
orders were given in his presence against canuasing for offices, and noblemens
suites: but whilst he labored for justice, liberty went to wrack. Whilst
these things were adoing, Pius Aurelius a Senator, complained that his house
was decayed and grown to ruin, by the raising up of a public way, and
conueyance of water: and craved aid of the Lords of the Senate in that
behalf. And where the Treasurers opposed themselves against it, he was
relieved by Caesar, who paid him the value of his house: desirous to employ
his money in honest actions: which virtue he long retained after he had shaken
off al others. He bestowed About 7. thousand eight hundred and twelve pounds
ten shillings.
ten hundred thousand sesterties upon Propertius Celer, once Praetor, and now
craving license to give up his room, by reason of the poverty his father left
him in; and commanded others which made the same suit, to make it known to the
Senate, that their petition was true: desirons to be accounted severe in things
well done: which caused others rather to endure their poverty with silence,
then by acknowledging it, receive a benefit at his hands. The same year,
through continual raines the river Tibris rose so high, that it covered all
the flat places of the city; and in falling, there insued a great ruin of men
and buildings. Whereupon a remedy being consulted of in Senate, Asinius Gallus
was of opinion, that the books of the Sybils should be searched: which
Tiberius hindered; as one who would hide from them, as well things divine as
humane. But he committed that charge unto Ateius Capito, and L. Arruntius.
Achaia and Macedonia complaining of their heavy taxations: it was agreed in
Senate, that they should no longer be governed by a proconsull, but by Caesar.
Drusus being made ouerseer of a play of fencers, set forth in his own and his
brother Germanicus name; because he seemed to take over great pleasure in
shedding of blood; stroke a fear into the peoples minds, and as it is
reported, was disliked of his father. Why Tiberius forbear to see this
spectacle, it was diversely construed: some thought because he loathed to be in
great assemblies: some because he was of a melancholy sad disposition: and also
misdoubting least some should fall into comparison, betwixt him and Augustus,
who was wont to be present at such plays with courteous and mild carriage. I
cannot think that his meaning was, to give his son occasion to show his
cruelty, and move the people to offense; although some have so reported. The
licentiousnes begun in the Theator the last year, grew now to a farther
outrage: many not only of the common people slain; but soldiers and
Centurions, and a Captain of the guarde, whilst they went about to bridle the
insolency of the people, and hinder them from using lauishing speeches against
magistrates. That sedition was debated in Senate: many being of opinion that it
it was convenient, that the Praetor should have authority to whip the
stage-plaiers. But Haterius Agrippa Tribune of the people contradicted him:
whom Asinius Gallus rebuked in an oration: Tiberius holding his peace;
suffering the Senate to use that shadow of liberty. Yet Haterius prevailed,
because Augustus had once declared the stage-plaiers to be free from stripes:
and therefore not lawful for Tiberius to infringe it. Many orders were laid
down touching the moderation and charges bestowed upon plays: and against the
insolent behavior of their favorers; whereof the chiefest are these. That no
Senator should enter into a plaiers house: that the gentlemen of Rome should
not accompany them in public places: that it was not lawful to see their
plays but on the Theater. And that the Praetor should have authority to banish
such lookers on, as behaved themselves disorderly. The Spaniards had license
granted them, at their request, to erect a Temple in honor of Augustus, in
the free town of Tarracon; which was a president for all the other provinces
to follow. The people making supplication, that they might be unburdened of the
imposition of one in the hundred of all things bought and sold, which began
after the wars were begun: Tiberius answered by an edict that it was the only
stay of soldiers wages: and that the state would be ouercharged if the old
soldiers should not be dismissed after twenty years service: and by this
means, the order wrunge out to appease the soldiers, that the soldiers should
be dismissed after sixteen years service, was abrogated. After this it was
propounded in Senate by Arruntius and Ateius, whether for the repressing of the
inundations of Tiber, it were convenient to divert the course of the rivers and
lakes, which were cause of his rising. Upon this occasion, the ambassadors of
other free towns and colonies were heard: and especially the deputies from the
city of Florence; requesting that Clanis might not be turned out of his own
channel into Arne, as a matter greatly to their hurt. The like speech the
Interamnates used, showing that the fertilest tract of Italy should be lost,
if (as it was intended) the river Nar should be cut into many branches; and so
all become a standing poole, if the new channels were not capable of so much
water. The Reatins did not in this case hold their peace: no way yielding that
the mouth of the lake Velinus should be dammed up, where it discargeth it self
into Nar: for so it would ouerflow al about it. And that nature had well
provided for the necessity of man's use: having given all rivers, their course
and mouth, and as well their bounds, as beginnings. That the religion of their
allies was to be considered, who consecrated unto the rivers of their country,
woods and altars. Yea that Tiber would not be deprived of his neighbour-riuers,
and so run his course with lesser glory. In the end either through the
entreaty of the Colonies, or difficulty of the work, or superstition, Pisoes
opinion was approved, which was, that there should be nothing changed. Poppaeus
Sabinus was continued in the government of Maesia, and Achaia and Macedonia
added to his charge. For it was Tiberius manner, to continue men in their
office and charge, either of war, or jurisdiction, sometimes during their
life; whereof there were diverse reasons given. Some said he did it, to avoid
the tedious care of often providing; and that he would have that to continue
which he had thought once well done: some did interpret it to be done of envy,
because many should not enjoy them: some, that as he was of a subtle wit, so
of no resolute judgment; as not choosing men of excellent virtue: and on the
other side, hating vices. He feared least the best would attempt somewhat
against him, and the worst dishonor the state. Which doubtfulnes brought him to
that pass at last, that he gave the government of provinces to some, which he
would not suffer to depart the city. Concerning the election of Consuls, which
was first observed under this Prince, and afterward by others, I dare assure
nothing: not only the authors, but the Prince himself does so much differ in
his orations. For sometimes not naming the suitors, he described every man's
beginning, life, and what pay he had received; that a man might easily guess
who they were. At another time, not touching any of those particulars, he
persuaded the suitors, not to disturb the elections, by bribing and canuasing:
promising that himself would be a mean for them. And oftentimes he said,
there were no more which pretended to be suitors, but such only, whose names he
had presented unto the Consuls: and that others might bring in their names
likewise, if they would trust either to their merit or favor. But all was but
fair words, and in deed deceiptfull and without effect: and by how much the
more they were masked with a color of liberty, by so much the heavier and
greeuouser a servitude they were like to bring after them.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE ANNALS OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
I. The cause of the Parthian wars. Vonones driven out of his kingdom.
SIsenna Statilius Taurus, and L. Libo being Consuls, the kingdom of the East,
and the Roman provinces rebelled: the beginning thereof proceeding from the
Parthians; who having demanded and received a King from Rome, yet contemned
him as a forrener, although he were descended of the Arsacides. Vonones was
this King, who had been before given in hostage to Augustus, by Phrahates. For
although Phrahates had repulsed the army and the Roman captains, yet he
showed all duties and reverence to Augustus. And the better to confirm
friendship, sent some of his children to him: not so much for fear of us, as
distrust of disloyalty in his own subjects. After the death of Phrahates, and
other succeeding Kings, through murders committed among themselves:
Ambassadors came to the city, from the chief noble men of Parthia, to
demand Vonones the eldest son of Phrahates. Caesar thinking that to be an
honor to himself, enduing him with great riches delivered him: and the
barbarians, as their manner is at the change of a new Prince, received him with
great joy. Not long after the Parthian grew to be ashamed, that he had so much
degenerated, as to demand a Prince from another country; trained up in the
sleights of their enemies. That now the royal seat of the Arsacides was given
and accounted among the Roman provinces. Where is the glory of those which
murdered Crassus, and chased away Antonie; if Caesar's bond slave after so many
years servitude should command and rule over the Parthians? He himself
kindled their difdainefull minds, by swaruing from his predecessors manner of
life; as going seldom a hunting; being careless of horses; carried in a
chariot in the streets; and loathing their country fare: his Grecian
followers were scorned, and himself laughed at, for keeping under his seal
his basest vtensiles. But the free access unto him, his courtesy toward all
men; unknown virtues to the Parthians; were accounted new vices: and because
they were not used of their ancestors, were odious alike to the good and bad.
Whereupon Artabanus, one of the Arsacides blood, brought up with the Dahes, was
raised against him: who in the first encounter overthrown, recovered new
forces, and enjoyed the kingdom. When Vonones was overcome he fled to
Armenia, then without a King; and betwixt the Parthian and the Roman wealth
wavering, through Antonies treachery: who having under color of friendship
tolled unto him their King Artauasdes, loaded him with chains, and in the end
deprived him of his life. Artaxias his son, hating us for the injury done to
his father, with the power of the Arsacides, defended himself and the kingdom
against us. But when Artaxias was slain by the treason of his nearest friends,
Tigranes was made King of the Armenians, and brought by Tiberius Nero into the
kingdom. Yet Tigranes reign dured but a short time, nor his childrens:
although they were, as the manner of strangers is, linked in marriage with the
Armenians. Then by commandment of Augustus, Artauasdes was appointed their
King, and afterward driven out: not without a great slaughter of our men. After
that Caesar was chosen to settle the affairs of Armenia; who with the good
liking of the Armenians, appointed Ariobarzanes, descended from the Medes, to
be their King: a man greatly reckoned of for the comelines of his personage,
and valiant courage. Ariobarzanes dying by misfortune, the Armenians would
endure none of his race: but tried the regiment of a woman called Eratus, whom
they expulsed in a short time: and lead an uncertain and loose kind of life,
rather without a Lord, then in liberty: and in the end received the fugitive
Vonones again. But when Artabanus began to use threatening; and that small aid
was to be expected of the Armenians: and yet if he should be defended by our
forces; it were to enter into war against the Parthians: Creticus Silanus
governor of Syria sent for Vonones: and appointed him a guarde: and suffered
him to enjoy all pomp and sumptuousnes, and name of a King: from which
mockery how he purposed to deliver himself, we will set down in his place.

II. Germanicus makes war in Germany.
But it displeased Tiberius nothing at all, that the East parts were in an
uproar; because that under that pretext he might draw Germanicus from his
accustomed legions, and by giving him charge over new provinces, expose him to
treachery and hazard. But he, by how much the more affectionate the soldiers
were toward him, and his uncle backward; by so much the more earnest he was to
hasten the victory; and laid all the plots he could to give the enemy
battle: Discoursing with himself, what fortunate or unfortunate successes had
happened unto him those three years past, which he had spent in war amongst
them: that the Germans in a pitched field and indifferent places would easily
be vanquished: that they took advantage of woods, bogs, short summers, and
timely winters: that his soldiers received not so great hurt by wounds, as by
long iourneies and weight of their armor: that Gallia was wearied with
furnishing horses: the long train of carriage was subject to ambushes; and not
easily defended. But if he should take sea, the possession was open for him,
and unknown to the enemy. Withal, that so the war might be sooner begun: the
legions and victuals brought together: the horses and horsemen conveyed by
channels and mouths of rivers into the heart of Germany. Having thus resolved,
he sent P. Vitellius, and Scantius to levy the subsidies of Gallia: Silius
Anteius, and Caecina had charge of all preparation by sea. A thousand ships
were thought to suffice: which were made ready with speed. Some were short, and
narrow at the fore and hinder part, and broad in the middle, as stronger
against the waves. Some were flat bottommed, to land without danger. Many had
rudders at both ends, that the rowers altering their stroke on a sudden; might
drive to land at either end. Many of them had bridges over, to carry both
their engines, horses, and provision: swift of sail, and nimble with oars; in
show gallant and fearful to the enemy, by reason of the soldiers
cheerfulnes. The place appointed to meet at, was the Island of the Batauians,
as a place of easy arrival; and fit to receine the army: and from thence to
transport them to the place of battle. For the river of Rhene keeping one
channel, or else enuironing but few Islands, at the entering of Batauia, is
divided into two rivers, and keeps his name and swiftnes through Germany
until he fall into the Ocean. But by the coast of Gallia it waxes broader,
and runs not so swiftly: and changing his name, the inhabitants call it
Vahales: which name, it afterward changes again into Mosa: so continuing
until it fall into the same Ocean, with a great breadth. Whilst the ships were
a putting from shore: Caesar commands the Lieutenant Silius, with a band of
men lightly appointed, suddenly to invade the Chatti. And himself
understanding that the fort of Luppia upon the rivers side, was besieged,
conducteth thither six legions. Silius by reason of sudden raines, did little
else then bring away, some small booty, and the wife and daughter of Arpas,
prince of the Chatti. Neither did those which had besieged the forte, stay to
fight; but slipped away, when Caesar's coming was noised. Yet they had thrown
down the tumbe, lately built in honor of Varus legions, and the old altar
erected for Drusus. The altar, the Prince reedified; and in memory of his
father, he and the legions ran a horse race; but thought it not convenient to
set up the tumb again: but fortified all passages betwixt the fort, Aliso, and
Rhene, with new mounds and bulwarks. By this time the Fleet was come: and
having sent before all provision, and assigned the legions and confederates
their shipping; himself entered the ditch, called the Drusian ditch, where he
made a prayer to Drusus his father, that having undertaken the same enterprise,
that he had done; he would willingly and benignly further him, with the example
and memory of his counsels and exploites. From thence he sailed prosperously,
by the lakes and Ocean, until he came to the river Amisia, where the navy was
left, leaving the river on the left side of it. Wherein there was an oversight,
that they brought the shipping no higher, the soldiers being afterward
constrained to land on the right side: whereby many days were spent in making
of bridges to pass them over. The horsemen and legions passed the first arm
of the sea, the waters being yet but small, without fear: but the auxiliary
soldiers which followed, and Batauians, whilst they sported themselves, and
showed their skill in swimming, were some hindered and troubled, and some
drowned.

III. Arminius dehorteth his brother Flauius from the Romans service.
AS Caesar was planting his camp, word was brought, that the Angriuarians were
revolted behind him. And Stertinius was incontinently dispatched away with a
company of light horsemen, which revenged their treason with fire and sword.
Betwixt the Romans and the Cheruscians ran the river Visurgis, and on the
bank side was Arminius, with the rest of the nobility: who inquiring whether
Caesar were come; and answer given him that he was: entreated that he might
have license to speak with his brother Flauius, who was in the camp: faithful
and trusty to the Romans: and who not many years before, had lost one of
his eyes, under Tiberius. His request was granted him: and as Flauius came
near, Arminius saluted him. And causing his followers to withdraw themselves,
requested that our archers which were placed in order on the bank side, should
stand farther off; who being gone away, he asked his brother how he came to
that blemish in his face. He named both the place and the battle. He asked him
further, what rewards he had received? Flauius tells him that his pay was
augmented, shows his chain, his crown, and other military gifts: which
Arminius skorned as base rewards of servitude. After that, they grew to farther
communication, the one extolling the greatness of the Romans: Caesar's wealth:
the grievous punishments inflicted on the conquered: and the clemency used to
such as yielded: that neither his wife nor son were entreated as enemies.
Arminius alleged the duty of his country: their ancient liberty: the gods
of the inward parts of Germany: that his mother and himself besought him;
that he would not rather choose to be a traitor and forsaker of his country,
then a captain of his kindred, allies and nation. Growing from thence by
little and little to hard words, although the river was betwixt them, they had
coped; if Stertinius had not run in, and held back Flauius, full of anger,
calling for his armor and horse. Arminius was heard to threaten on the other
side, and denounce battle: intermingling some latin words: for once he
commanded his countriemen; and received pay in the Roman camps. The next
day, the German army presented it self in battle array beyond Visurgis.
Germanicus not thinking it the part of a commander, to hazard the legions, not
having first made bridges, and appointed gards to defend them, passed over the
horsemen at the foord. Stertinius and Aemilius, sometime captain of the
principal ensign, were the leaders: who separated themselves far one from
the other, to divide the enemies forces. Carioualda, Captain of the Batauians,
where the river was swiftest sallied out: the Cherusci making as though they
fled, tolled them to a plain, environed with woods: and there turning again,
and spreading abroad, drove back those which made head; hotly pursued those
which shrunk: then being gathered round in a ring, overthrew them; some near,
some far off. Carioualda having long sustained the brunt of the enemy;
exhorted his soldiers closely together, to break into the enemy troops:
himself venturing amongst the thickest, was beaten down with darts; and his
horse killed under him, and many noble men about him. The rest either through
their own valor, or aid of the horsemen, with Stertinius and Aemilius,
escaped danger. When Caesar had passed the river Visurgis, he understood by a
fugitive from the enemy camp, what place Arminius had chosen to give battle:
and that other nations were assembled in a wood consecrated to Hercules, with
intention to assail the camp by night. The runnagate was believed: lights were
seen: and the espiales getting nearer, reported they heard a great confuse
noise of men and horses. Being therefore at a iumpe to hazard all, thinking it
convenient to found the soldiers mind, he bethought himself what was the
fittest expedient to try the truth. The Tribunes and Centurions brought him
oftener, pleasing then true news: the freed men were of a servile disposition:
in friends therewas flattery: if he should call an assembly, that which a few
should begin, the rest would applaude. That their minds would be best known,
when they were by themselves; not ouerlooked: in eating and drinking they would
utter their fear or hope. As soon as it was night, going out at the Augural
gate, accompanied with one alone, in secret and unknown places to the watch:
casting a savage beasts skin on his back, he went from one place to another:
stood listening at the tents: and ioyeth in the praise of himself: some
extolling the nobility of their Captain; others his comely personage: many
his patience, and courtesy: that in sports and serious matters, he was still
one man: confessing therefore that they thought it their parts, to make him
some requital in this battle, and sacrifice the traitors and peace-breakers
to revenge and glory.

IIII. Arminius and the Germans overthrow.
AMidst these things, one of the enemy camp, skillful in the Latin tongue:
riding close to the trench: promises a loud in Arminius name, wives, and
lands, and a hundred About fifteen shillings seven pence.
sesterces a day, as long as the war continued, if any would flee from the
Romans, and come to his side. That brauado did greatly exasperate the legious:
wishing among themselves: O that the day were come, that we might once come to
join battle with them: saying, that they would take possession of the Germans
lands, and bring away their wives by force. They accepted of their words as a
presage, and vowed they would have their wives and money for a booty. About
the third watch the enemy assailed the camp, but threw no dart: because he
perceived many in a readiness to defend their fortes: and no man remiss in his
charge. The same night Germanicus in a pleasant dream, thought he had been
offering of sacrifice, and that his pretext or robes of his infancy, had been
sprinkled with holy blood, and that he received another at the hands of Augusta
his grandmother. Emboldned with that dream, and the Augures foretelling lucky
success, concurring with it: he called the soldiers to an assembly: and
declared unto them what things by wisdom he had foreseen: and what he
thought expedient for the imminent danger of the battle. That not only the
open fields were commodious for the Romans to fight in, but the woods also and
forests; if they proceeded by discretion. Neither were the barbarous huge
targets, and long pikes so handsome, among trees and low shrubs; as darts and
swords; and armor close to the body. They should therefore lay on thick
load; and strike at their faces with their swords. That the Germans had neither
coat of fence nor helmet: and their bucklers were not ribbed with iron, or
sinews, but with osiars, or painted thin board. Their first rank was in
some sort appointed with pikes: but the rest had but short weapons burnt at the
point. And although they were grim in countenance, and of some courage for a
short fit: yet being once wounded they would flee and be gone without shame of
discredit, or care of their Captain: in adversity faint hearted and timorous:
but in prosperity, unmindful both of divine and humane laws. If they desired
an end of their wearisome iournies, and sea; in this battle they might ease
themselves. Albis was now nearer then Rhene: Neither was there any further
war to be made, if in that place treading the steps of his father, and uncle,
they would make him Conqueror. The heat of the soldier being inflamed with this
speech of the Captain, the sign of battle was given. Neither did Arminius nor
the rest of the Germa^ nobility omit to encourage theirs on the other side,
saying: These are the Romans which fled from Varus camp: who for fear of
ioining battle, had raised a rebellion. Wherofsom their backs loade^ with
wounds; and others their sides tired and broken with waves and tempests of sea;
once more offered themselus to the enemy full of ire, without hope of good; the
gods being against them. They took sea, and chose out the bie-waies of the
Ocean, least they should have been encountered as they came, or pursued, after
they were repulsed. But when they shall come to handistrokes, they shall find
small refuge in the wind and oars. That now they should call to mind their
coueteousnes, cruelty, and pride: was there any thing else to be done, then to
maintain their liberty; or die rather then be brought to servitude? Thus
encouraged, and demanding battle, they were brought into a place called
Idistauisum, betwixt Visurgis and the hills: not of one breadth, but now wide,
now straight, as the river or iutting out of the hills did suffer. Behind them
was a wood of high trees: and between those trees a plain and eeuen ground,
which the Barbarians had possessed with the entrance of the wood: the Cherusci
put themselves on the tops of the hills, to fall furiously upon the Romans in
the heat of the fight. The order of our battle was this. The aides of Gallia,
and the Germans were placed in the front: followed with the foot archers:
after them four legions; and Caesar himself with two Pretorian cohorts: and a
choice troop of horsemen. After them so many legions more, with light horsemen,
and bow men on horseback: and the rest of the confederates: all of them, most
careful to keep their order and array. Germanicus perceiving the Cheruscians
troops to come fiercely toward the^; commanded the ablest horsemen, to charge
him on the flank, and Stertinius with the other squadrons of horsemen, to
enuiron him, and set on him behind: promising to be himself at hand if need
required. In the mean season, eight Eagles (a very luckie sign) were seen to
flee toward the entrance of the wood. Which the Emperor perceiving; cried
that they should march on, and follow the Roman birds; the peculiar gods of the
legions. Whereupon the footmen brake in, and the horsemen sent before charged
them on the flank and on the back. And which is strange to report, two
companies of the enemy took a contrary flight: those which kept the wood, ran
to the plain: and those which held the plain, hastened to the wood. The
Cherusci being between both, were thrust down from the hills: amongst whom
with great valor, Arminius maintained the battle, with his hands, voice, and
wounds. All his might he bent against the archers, to have burst out that way,
if the cohorts of Gallia, of Raetia; and the Vindelicians, had not opposed
themselves with their ensigns. Nevertheless, by strength of body, and courage
of his horse, he escaped; having first died his face with blood, least he
should be known. Some report that he was known to the Cherusci, which were
among the auxiliarie bands of the Romans, and let pass by them. The same
either valor or guile, gave Inguiomerus means to escape; the rest were slain
on every side. And most of them endeavoring to swim over Visurgis, were either
with the darts thrown after them, or force of the river, or weight of such as
lept after, or with the banks which fell, killed or overwhelmed. Some cowardly
fleeing away, sought to clamber the tops of trees, and there hiding themselves
in the boughs, were shot through by the archers in a mockery: and others
bruised by the ouerturning of the trees. The victory was great, and unto us not
bloody. From five of the clock, until night, the enemies were slain, which
filled ten miles of ground with dead carcasses, and armor. Some chains were
found among their spoils; brought to emprison the Romans: as not doubting a
prosperous success. The soldiers saluted Tiberius by the name of Emperor, in
the same place where the battle was fought: and erected a mount of earth, as a
token of victory: and put on it the armor of the enemy: and underneath the
names of the nations which they had conquered.

V. A second battellvvoon by the Romans against the Germans.
THe wounds which the Germans received, and their overthrow, did not so much
fret and grieve them as this spectacle: in so much that those which were on the
point to abandon their dwellings, and make preparation to pass the river
Albis; catch up their weapons, and demand battle. The common sort, the
chief Gentlemen, young and old, assail and endanger the Romans. At last they
chose a place; environed with woods and a river, which had a narrow waterish
plain within it. The woods were environed likewise with a deep marsh: saving
on one side, where the Angriuarians had raised up a broad causey, by which
their territories were separated from the Cherusci. The footmen stayed there:
the horsemen hid themselves in the woods adjoining: that when the legions
should enter the wood, they might charge them on the back. Caesar was informed
of all their plots: he knew their deseignments, their places, their open and
secret devises, and turned the enemies fraud to his own destruction. The
charge of the horsemen and the plain he committed to Seius Tubero Lieutenant:
part of the footmen marched in order of battle to the wood: and part went
about to win the causey: the hardest he undertook himself; and the rest he
committed to the Lieutenants. They unto whom the plain fell, did easily enter
it: but those which were to assault the causey were sore gaulded, and put
back, with blows from above as if they had scaled a wall. The Captain
perceiving that the enemy had the advantage by fighting so near, caused the
legions to retire a little: and commanded the sling-casters and stonecasters
to let freely at them, and drive them from their fence. Many darts and spears
were shot out of engines; and the more the enemies were in sight, the more
wounds they received. The causey being taken, Caesar himself with his guard,
courageously entered the woods, and fought with the enemy hand to hand: who had
behind him a marsh; and the Romans a river or mountains: the place brought a
necessity of fighting to both parts: their hope consisted in their manhood:
and their safety in the victory. The Germans were no less courageous: but
they were overcome by the advantage of weapons, and manner of fight. For being
a great multitude, and the place narrow, they could neither thrust out, nor
draw back those long pikes; nor use any nimblenes of body in running in, and
stepping back: but were forced to fight, and not move a foot. Contrarily the
Roman soldier, his shield close to his breast: his sword in his hand: gored
the wide sided, and open faced barbarian: and by their slaughter opened a way
through them. Arminius being now courageles, by reason of continual danger, or
fresh bleeding wound lately received: but Inguiomerus flue up and down the
army, wanted rather fortune then courage. And Germanicus to be the better
known, unlaced his helmet, and besought them to continue the slaughter:
captives there was no need of: only the general butchery of the nation, would
make an end of the war. And in the evening he draws out one legion from the
army; to make ready the camps: the rest filled themselves until night with the
blood of the enemy. And for the horsemen, it is hard to guess which had the
better. Then Caesar having praised the valor of the conquerors in an assembly,
made a great heap of armor with this proud title. The people betwixt Rhene
and Albis being vanquished, Tiberius Caesar's army does dedicate those monuments
to Mars, Jupiter, and Augustus. Of himself he added no word, for fear of
envy: or because the memory of the fact was sufficient testimony for him.
Immediately after he commanded Stertinius to make war against the
Angriuarians, unless they would presently yield: who humbly entreating and
yielding to all that was demanded, received general pardon. But the summer
being now far spent, some of the legions were sent back to the standing camps;
and Germanicus embarking many, conveyed them to the Ocean, by the river Amisia.
At the first they had a quiet and calm sea: no noise heard, but the noise of
the oars of a thousand vessels; which sometimes likewise were driven with
sails: by and by hail pouring down out of black and thick clouds; and
sundry storms and tempests, arising from all parts; and uncertain raging
surges deprived them of all foresight, and skill in governing their shipping.
And the soldier fearful and unacquainted with the dangerous adventures of
sea, whilst he troubles the mariners, or unseasonably goes about to help;
hindered the office of the more skillful. In the end, the heaven, and all the
sea gave place to the southwind: which more and more prevailing, through the
mountains of Germany, deep rivers, and huge clouds; and growing more violent
and boisterous through the cold of the North, near which it is: tossed and
scattered the shipping into the wild Ocean, or rockie Islands, or dangerous and
unknown quicksands. Which being a little, but with much a do escaped, by the
changing of the sea, they went whither the wind drove them. They could neither
cast anchor; nor pumpe out the water which came in on them. Horses of service
and carriage; bag and baggage; yea their armor, they threw into the sea; that
the ships might be lightened, which leaked at the sides; the billows swelling
more and more. By how much the Ocean is more violent, then any other sea; and
Germany exceeds other countries in roughnes and sharpnes of air: by so much
that misfortune exceeded others, in strangenes and greatness: happening at the
shores of the enemies land, or in so deep and wide a sea; that it has been
believed to be the last, and beyond which there is no land. Some of their ships
were drowned; many cast upon Islands far off: the soldiers, the country being
uninhabited, perished by famine: unless it were such as relieved themselves with
the horses as were cast a land. Germanicus gallie only arrived at the
Chauceans country: who seeing himself all those days and nights upon rocks,
and points; crying that he only was guilty of the casting away of so many
persons: could hardly be kept and stayed by his friends, from casting himself
into the same sea. At length the sea growing lower, and the wind more
favorable; the lame and vntackled ships, with a few oars, or their
garments spread in stead of sails, or drawn at the tail of stronger,
returned. Which Germanicus mending in haste, sent to search the Islands: by
which care many of the soldiers were gathered together and recovered. The
Angriuarians lately received into protection, delivered some, which they had
redeemed, of such as dwelt further in the land: some were cast into Britany,
and sent back by the petie Kings. As every man returned from far countries;
he reported strange woonders; tempestuous storms; birds never before heard
of; sea monsters; doubtful shapes, whether of men or beasts: which they had
either seen, or imagined through fear.

VI. Germanicus being returned, wastes the country of the Chatti: and
recouereth an ensign, lost with Varus.
But the fame of the navy lost; as it did put the Germans in a hope, of
beginning a new war: so did it give Germanicus stomach to curb them.
Whereupon he commanded C. Silius to go against the Chatti, with thirty thousand
footmen, and three thousand horsemen: and himself invaded the Marsi with
stronger forces. Their Captain called Malouendus; who not long before had
yielded himself, gave notice how, that not far off, an ensign of Varus legion
was buried, and kept but with a slender guarde. A band of men was sent thither
out of hand: with direction, that some should toll them out, and assail them
in the front; and others by inuironing them behind, to open the earth and take
out the ensign: fortune showing hir-selfe favorable to both the companies.
This made Caesar more forward, and enters further into the land: wastes,
forrageth, rifleth the country; the enemy not daring to encounter him: or if
at any time he did resist; he was straight driven back: never (as they
understood by certain captives) fearing more in their lives. For they gave
out, that the Romans were invincible, and not to be daunted with any
misfortune; seeing that having lost their navy, and armor; and after that the
shores were covered, with the carcasses of their men and horses; they invaded
them a fresh, with the same courage, and like fiercnes: yea as if they had
increased their number. From thence the soldiers were brought back to their
winter standing camps: glad that they had recompensed their misfortune by sea,
with so prosperous a victory. Caesar used great largess, recompensing every
man, to the value of the loss he had sustained. Little doubt, but the enemy
grew faint hearted, and began to consult, how he might entreat a peace: and that
if the next summer the wars should have been continued, there would be an end
of all. But Germanicus was solicited by often letters from Tiberius, to
return and receive the triumph which was ordained for him: that he had passed
through many chances and accidents: that he had had prosperous success in
many battles: that he should remember what grievous and cruel losses he had
sustained, not by any oversight of the Captain, but by the winds and waves of
the sea: that he had bin sent nine times into Germany by Augustus of famous
memory: where he had achieved more noble exploites by counsel then force. So
he had received the submission of the Sigambri: so the Sueuians, and the King
of the Maroboduans were enforced to make peace: that the Cherusci and other
rebellious nations, seeing the Romans had had a sufficient revenge on them,
might be left to war one against another. But Germanicus entreating for one
year longer, to finish the enterprises he had begun; Tiberius assaulted his
modesty more earnestly; offering him the consulship once more: which he should
execute in person. He added further, that if there were any more wars to be
enterprised, he should reserve that subject, for the glory of his brother
Drusus: who no other enemy being left, could not but by warring against the
Germans, get the title of Emperor, or win the crown of laurel. Germanicus
made no longer stay, although he knew well that those were but colors, sought
through envy, to draw him from the glory he had already purchased.

VII. Libo accused of treason, kills himself.
ABout the same time Libo Drusus, one of the Scribonian family, was accused
for practizing against the state. The beginning, the order, and the end of that
business, I will set down: because those things came then first to light, which
for so many years had consumed and eaten the commonwealth. Firmius Cato a
Senator, and one of Liboes inward friends, induced this uncircumspect young man,
and easily led to vanities, to give credit to the Chaldeans promises, Magicians
ceremonies, and interpreters of dreams: vainly and boastingly putting him in
mind, that Pompey was his great grandfather; Scribonia, who had been Augustus
wife, his aunt; the Caesar's his cosen germans: and that his house was full of
images and monuments of his predecessors. He incited him further to licentious
riot: to take up and borrow money, making himself a companion of his want on
lusts and familiarities, the better to wrap and convince him with many
evidences. When he had found witnesses sufficient, and such also of his
servants which were privy to the whole matter, he desired he might be admitted
to the speech of the Prince: and by means of Flaccus Vescularius, a Gentleman
of Rome, and one of Tiberius familiars, discovered the matter, and the man.
Caesar was content with the accusation, yet denied conference with Firmius the
accuser: saying, that by the same messenger Flaccus, their speech might pass
from one to the other. In the mean season he honoreth Libo with the
Pretorship, inuiteth him to his table, never changed his countenance toward
him, nothing passionate in words (so skillful he was in concealing his anger)
and although he could have prevented both his words and enterprises; yet he
desired rather to know the manner of his proceedings: until one Iunius,
solicited to convince and raise infernal spirits by enchantments, uttered the
matter to Fulcinius Trio, one amongst the promoters, compted quick and ready
witted, and careless of discredit. This Trio accused immediately the party:
went to the Consuls: and required that the Senators would hear the matter. The
Senators were assembled, and given to understand that they were to deliberate
of an important and weighty affair. Libo in the mean time changing his
attire, went with certain noble women from one house to an other, entreated
his cosens, and craves their good word in his extremity: but all of them
refused; some pretending one excuse, some another; fearing least they should be
thought partakers of the same crime. The day come that the Senate sat; being
through fear, or as some report, faining himself sick, weak and weary, was
brought to the court gates in a chariot, leaning on his brother, and holding up
his hands, craved pardon of Tiberius; who received him, never once changing
countenance. Then Caesar read the libels alowd, and their authors; so
moderating himself, that he was not thought either to mitigate or aggrauate
any way the crimes. Besides Trio and Catus, there stepped forth two other
accusers, Fonteius Agrippa, and C. Liuius, striving which had best right to
plead against him; until Liuius (because they would not yield the one to the
other, and Libo came without any advocate) promised that he himself would set
down severally every crime by him committed. Then he produced such sottish
declarations, that among other things, they contained, how Libo had consulted
with the Magicians, whether he should ever have money enough, to be able to
cover the Appian way, from Rome to Brundusium; with many such simple and
frivolous matters, and more mildly to term them, pitiful. Yet the accuser
enforced one thing more: that in one writing of Liboes own hand, there were
added certain dangerous and unknown characters, to the names of the Caesar's
and Senators. And the party arraigned denying it; it was thought good, that
his bondmen which knew his hand, should be examined upon the rack. And because
that by an ancient decree of Senate, it was not lawful to torture a bondsman
against the life of his Lord; Tiberius a subtle deviser of new laws,
commands them all to be sold to a public Actor, that without prejudice of
the decree, they might be tortured, as not being Liboes bondmen. Whereupon Libo
desired that the matter might be deferred to the next day. And being at his
house, entreated his near kinsman P. Quirinius, to make the last intercession
for him to the Prince: who had answer given him that he should entreat the
Lords of the Senate. In the mean season his house was beset with a guard of
soldiers, who in the entry made such a noise, that they might easily be both
heard and seen. When as Libo loathing the very sight of the dainties ministered
for his last comfort, began to call for some one to murder him: and taking his
bond-mens right hands, and putting a sword in them; whilst they trembling with
fear, and refusing to do it, ran from one place to another: overthrew the
light on the table: in that mortal and deadly darkness, he thrust himself
twice in the guts. At the groan when he fell, his freed men came running about
him: but the soldiers seeing the murder, stood aloof. Notwithstanding, the
accusation was prosecuted with like asseueration, and Tiberius swore, that if
he had not voluntarily hastened his own death, he would have begged his life,
although he had been guilty. His goods were distributed among the accusers,
and Pretors rooms were extraordinarily given to such as were of the Senate.
Then Cotta Messallinus, gave his opinion, that Liboes image should not be
carried in the funerals of his posterity. C. Lentulus, that none of the
Scribonian family should take upon him the surname of Drusus. By the advice of
Pomp. Flaccus, certain days of general processions were ordained. L. P. and
Gallus Asinius, and Papius Mutilus, and L. Apronius, were of opinion, that
gifts should be offered to Jupiter, Mars, and the goddess of Concord; and that
the Ides of September. when Libo killed himself should be kept holy day. The
dignities and flatteries of these men, I have thought good to register, that it
might be known that that was always an old disease in the commonwealth.

VIII. An expulsion of Mathematicians. Areformation of abuses.
DEcrees of Senate were ordained, for the expulsing of Astrologers, and
Magicians Vide annotat. li. 1. hist. nu. 40. cap. 7.
out of Italy: among whom L. Pituanius was thrown headlong from the Tarpeian
rock: and the Consuls punished P. Martius without the Esquilin gate, with the
sound of trumpets, according to the ancient custom. At the next meeting of
the Senate, L. Haterius once Consul, and Octauius Fronto, who had been
Praetor, spoke much against the superfluous excess of the city. Where it was
decreed, that they should not serve at their tables vessel of beaten gold, nor
men wear silk above their degree. Fronto went further, and demanded that
there might be an order set down touching their plate, household stuff, and
number of servants: for it was yet a thing in use; for the Senators to lay
down that for a decree, which they thought expedient for the common wealth.
Gallus Asinius spoke to the contrary: saying, that with the greatness of the
Empire, private men's wealth was increased: which was no new matter, but of old
times received likewise: that the wealth in Fabricius time differed from that
in Scipioes; and yet all referred to the common wealth: which being but in
mean estate, the citizens houses were thereafter. But now that it is grown to
that magnificence; the estate of particular men is bettered also. Neither is
there anything too much or too little, either in plate, number of servants, or
other furniture of household, but in respect of the quality of the owner. The
revenues of a Senator were distinguished from a gentleman's: not because they
differed in nature; but as they were preferred in place, degrees, and
dignities, the one before the other. These things are procured for the recreation
of the mind, or health of body. Unless peradventure they would that the most
noble, should take most cares upon them, and hazard their persons in most
dangers; and yet want those pleasures and comforts, which best served to
lenifie and make them more easy. The acknowledging of vices under honest
terms, and the likeness of affections in the hearers minds, caused Gallus to
have an easy assent. Tiberius added, that that was no time for reformation:
and if there were any dissolutio^ in manners, there should not want one to
redress it. Among these things, L. Piso reprehending the ambition used in
places of judgment, corruption of justice, cruelty of advocates, the threats
of accusers; protested he would be gone and forsake the city, and lead his life
far off in some retired and solitary place in the country: and in so saying
went out of the Senate house. Tiberius was moved at this; and did what he could
to pacify him with fair words: and withal, was earnest with his nearest
kinsmen to stay him, either by entreaty or authority. Not long after the same
Piso, gave no less free testimony of his grief, by sommoning Vrgulania to
appear in judgment; whom the favor of Augusta had privileged above the
course of laws: But Vrgulania disobeying the sommonce being conveyed into
Caesar's house, made small reckoning of Piso: yet he desisted not, although
Augusta complained her credit was touched therein, and her calling embased.
Tiberius thinking it a part of courtesy, so far to yield unto his mothers
request, as to promise he would go to the Pretors Tribunal to defend
Vrgulania: went out of the palace, the soldiers being commanded to follow a
far off. The people which met him in the face, marked with what a settled
countenance he went forward, protracting the time and the way with diverse
discourses, until that (Pisoes friends laboring in vain to dissuade him from
the suite) Augusta had commanded the money which was demanded to be brought
to the Tribunal. That matter was so ended, not without some glory to Piso, and
greater fame to Caesar. But Vrgulaniaes credit and authority was so over great
in the city, that she disdained to come, and give witness in a matter which was
handled before the Lords of the Senate. And therefore the Praetor was sent to
examine her in her house: when as the ancient custom was, that even the
Vestall virgins were examined as witnesses, in the common place of pleading and
judgment. I would not recite the matters propounded that year, but that the
diversity of opinions, betwixt Gn. Piso, and Asinius Gallus in that point is
worthy the knowing. For Piso was of opinion, that although Caesar had promised
he would be present, that so much the rather he would prosecute his cause
against Vrgulania: and that in the absence of the Prince, the Senators and
Gentlemen might execute their charge, as a thing well beseeming the dignity of
the common wealth. Gallus, because Piso had first taken upon him the color of
liberty, held, that there was nothing done with majesty, and answerable to
the dignity of the people of Rome; but what was done in Caesar's presence: and
therefore, the assemblies of Italy, and meetings of Provinces, were to be
reserved until he would be present. These things were debated very hotly on
both sides, Tiberius giving them the hearing, and holding his peace, and in the
end they were deferred. There arose another controversy betwixt Gallus and
Caesar. For Gallus was of opinion, that the assemblies for creation of
Magistrates, should be from five to five years: and that the Lieutenants of
the legions, who had executed that charge before they had been Pretors, should
then be chosen Pretors elect: and that the Prince should every year nominate
twelve. Little doubt but this advise went deep, and reached to a secret of
state. Caesar nevertheless, as though his authority should thereby be made
greater, said, that it stood not with his modesty to choose so many, and
defer so many. And if the election should be every year, hardly could it be
chosen, but some would be offended, although such as had the repulse, might be
comforted with hope to be chosen the next year. And how would they hate me,
which should be deferred above five years? how could it be known in so long a
time, what every man's mind is, what his house, and fortune: If men grow too
proud in one year, what would they be if they should be continued for five
years? Magistrates should so be multiplied five for one: and laws subverted:
which have prescribed a time for suitors to exercise their industry, and to
procure and enjoy dignities. With this speech, in show plausible, he confirmed
the state to himself: he bettered the reuenews of certain of the Senators: and
therefore it was the more to be marvelled that he accepted no better of the
request of M. Hortalus, a noble young man, fallen into manifest poverty. This
Hortalus was nephew to Hortensius the Orator, and by the liberality of About
7812. li. 10. s.
ten hundred thousand sesterces given him by Augustus, persuaded to marry, and
have children, least so worthy a family should be extinguished. Standing
therefore with four of his sons before the entry of the Senate house, in stead
of his opinion, in a full assembly of the Senate in the palace, casting his
eyes sometimes on the image of Hortensius, placed among the orators, and
sometimes on that of Augustus, began as follows. These children, Lords of the
Senate, whose number and tender years you see; I have not begotten of mine own
accord: but because the Prince did so exhort me: and because my predecessors
had deserved to have issue to succeed them. As formy own part, seeing I could
neither attain to wealth, nor win the peoples favor through the alteration of
times; nor yet eloquence, which is the proper ornament of our house: I
contented my self if my small ability, were neither a reproach to my self,
nor a burden unto others. By the Emperors commandment I took a wife: behold
the offspring and progeny, of so many Consuls and Dictators: which I speak not
for envy to any, but to move pity. They shall inioie O Caesar whilst thou
do flourish, such honors as thou will bestow upon them. In the mean space
defend from poverty L Hortensius nephews sons, brought up by Augustus.
Tiberius perceiving that the Senators were inclined to his speeches, was the
more readier to gainsaie him almost in these words. If all such as are needy
begin to come hither, and crave for money for their children, they shall never
be all satisfied, and the commonwealth unable to supply their necessities.
Neither have our predecessors permitted us to digress, from the matter put in
deliberation; and when we should entreat of somewhat to the benefit of the
commonwealth, debate how to better our private estates: and increase our
substance with the hatred of the Senate, and Princes, whether they grant or
deny our requests. These are not petitions, but unseasonable, importunate,
unlooked for craving: to rise up in this place and with the number and age of
children, when the Lords are assembled to handle other matters, to assail the
modesty of the Senate, and use the like violence unto me, and as it were
forciblie to break open the public treasury: which if we wast by ambition,
must be supplied by unlawful means. Augustus of famous memory, has given
thee money Hortalus, unasked: yet not upon condition that it should always be
given thee: for in so doing, industry would decay, and idleness increase: if
men had not a fear and a hope in them. And if all men should carelessly expect
relief from others, they would be to themselves unprofitable, and to us
burdensome. These and the like speeches, although they were heard with the
approbation of such, whose custom is to applaude all the Princes actions, be
they honest or dishonest: yet many held their tongue, or secretly muttered:
which Tiberius perceived; and having paused a little: said that he had
answered Hortalus: Nevertheless if it so seemed good unto the Lords of the
Senate, he would give every one of his male children * two hundred thousand
sesterces. The rest gave him thanks: Hortalus held his tongue, either for
fear, or as retaining somewhat of the nobility of his ancestors, About 1562.
li. 10. s.
even in extremity of fortune. Yet Tiberius had no compassion afterward on
him, although the Hortensian family fell into shameful poverty.

IX. Clemens a bondslaue, counterfeiteth himself to be Agrippa: and his bold
answer.
THe same year, an audacious part of a bondslaue had shaken the whole state
with civil wars and discord; had it not been prevented in good time. A
bondsman of Agrippas called Clemens, understanding of Augustus death: with a
courage more then servile, purposed to go to the Island Planasia, and by fraud
or force bring away Agrippa to the German camp. But his enterprise was
hindered by the slownes of a ship of burden: and in the mean season Agrippa
being murdered, bending his mind to greater and dangerouser attempts; steals
away his ashes: and being come to Coram, a promontorie of Ethruria, in unknown
places hides himself, until his beard and hair were grown out; being in
favor and years not unlike his Lord. This done, he whispereth it abroad, by
fit companions of his secrets: first (as in things forbidden commonly it is
wont to be) by privy rumors, that Agrippa was yet alive: then openly, in the
credulous ears of the weaker sort; or busy headed and turbulent: and
therefore most desirous of novelties. His manner was toward night to go to
small towns; showing himself abroad, but seldom: nor stay long in a place.
And because time, and the eye try out truth; and falsehood wins credit on a
sudden, and by uncertainties, he either left some speech of him where he had
been, or prevented it, before any was begun. In the mean time it was commonly
reported throughout Italy, and believed at Rome, that Agrippa by the goodness of
the gods was preserved alive. In so much that being arrived at Hostia: there
great multitudes, and in the city secret assemblies showed signs of joy:
Tiberius being doubtful and perplexed, whether he should make away his bondsman
by soldiers; or suffer that vain credulousnes to vanish away with time. Thus
wauereing betwixt shame and fear: sometimes thinking it no policy to make
light of any thing: and sometime less to fear all things: in the end
committed the matter to Sallustius Crispus. He chooses two of his followers (or
as some say soldiers) and persuades them, as though they had fled for some
offense to go to him; offer him money; promise him loyalty; and that they
would stand to him in all dangers. They fulfilling his commandment, espieng a
night when he had no guarde: with aid sufficient, bound him, stopped his
mouth, and drew him to the palace. And when Caesar asked him, How he was made
Agrippa: it is reported he answered, As thou wast made Caesar. He could not
be brought by any means to disclose his confederates. Neither durst Tiberius
punish him openly; but in a secret part of the palace commanded him to be
murdered; and his body privily to be conveyed away. And although many of the
Princes own house, Senators, and gentlemen, were reported to have sustained him
with their goods, and aided him with their counsel; yet there was no further
inquiry made. In the end of this year a triumphall arch was erected near to
Saturnus Temple, for the recovery of the ensigns lost with Varus, under the
conduct of Germanicus, and Caesar's good fortune. And a Temple built also of
strong fortune, near Tyber in the gardens which Caesar the Dictator had
bequeathed to the people of Rome: and a Chapel dedicated to the Julian
family; and an image to Augustus at Bouilles.

IX. Germanicus triumphs: is sent to the East. The death of Archelaus King of
Cappadocia.
C. Coelius, and L. Pomponius being Consuls, the seventh Kalends of June,
Germanicus Caesar triumphed for the victories gotten against the Cherusci,
Chatti, and Angriuari, and all other nations inhabiting to the river of Albis.
In which triumph were carried the spoils, and captives, and counterfeit of the
mountains, rivers, and battles; and so the war was taken as ended, because
he was forbidden to prosecute it any further. The comlines of his person, and
triumphall chariot, laden with five of his children, made the show more
gallant. But when they thought with themselves how unlucky the peoples favor
was in his father Drusus: that his uncle Marcellus was taken from them in the
flower of his youth, and heat of the peoples love: that the affection of the
people of Rome was unfortunate, and of small continuance, they were all
secretly stricken into a fear. And although Tiberius gave in Germanicus name,
to every one of the people * three About 46. 1. 10. d. ob.
hundred sesterces a man, and made him his copartner in the Consulship; yet
could never be accounted a sincere friend, but that he went about to remove the
young man, under color of honor, and forged pretenses; or greedily taking hold
of such as were offered by chance. King Archelaus had now fifty years
enjoyed Cappadocia, greatly disliked of Tiberius, because that during his being
at Rhodes, he had used no show of duty toward him: which Archelaus did not
omit through pride, but because he was so admonished by Augustus familiarest
friends. For whilst C. Caesar yet flourished, and managed the affairs of the
East, Tiberius friendship was suspected, as dangerous. The house of the Caesar's
was no sooner extinguished, and that himself was in possession of the Empire,
but he tolleth Archelaus by his mothers letters to Rome: who not dissembling
her sons displeasure, offered him all gentle entreaty, if he would come to
him with submission. He then ignorant of the treachery, or misdoubting violence
if he seemed to perceive it, makes haste to the city: where being churlishly
received, and anon after accused in Senate; not for the crimes which were
pretended, but by anguish of mind, or feeblenes of age; and because not only
base, but also things indifferent are strange and unusual to kings; he either
willingly or naturally ended his life. The kingdom was afterward reduced into
a province: and Caesar declaring, that with the reuenews thereof, the tribute
of one in the hundred might be eased; made a decree, that from thence forward
one should be levied in two hundred. At the same time Antiochus, king of the
Comageni, and Philopater, king of the Cilicians being dead, those nations were
divided among themselves, some desiring to be governed by the Romans, and
others by Kings. And the provinces of Syria and Iudaea, ouercharged with taxes,
made supplication that their tributes might be diminished. These things
therefore, with those which I have rehearsed of Armenia, Tiberius shows to
the Lords of the Senate: and that the tumults of the Orient, could no way be
pacified but by Germanicus wisdom. As for himself, he was stricken in age,
and Drusus was not yet of ripe years. And thereupon by decree of Senate,
Germanicus had the charge given him over all the provinces, divided by sea, and
a greater command whither soever he went, then any, which either by lot or
Princes sending received government. Now Tiberius had before removed from Syria
Creticus Silanus, who was by marriage allied to Germanicus, his daughter being
promised in marriage to Nero Germanicus eldest son; and in his room had
appointed Gn. Piso to be Lieutenant, a man both rash and headstrong: not
knowing what it was to obey, as having that fiercenes of courage naturally from
Piso his father: who during the civil wars, aided in most eager manner the
sides which rose in Affrike against Caesar: then following Brutus and Cassius
faction; and license granted him to return, forbear all dignities, until he
was wooed to accept the Consulship, offered him by Augustus Caesar's own
motion. But besides the hereditary courage of his fathers, the nobility and
wealth of Plancina his wife, made him grow so insolent, that he would scarce
yield to Tiberius, and contemned his children as far inferior to himself: not
doubting at all but that he was chosen governor of Syria, to bridle and keep
under Germanicus hopes. And some believed that he had had secret commandment
by Tiberius so to do: and without all peradventure Augusta had put it into
Plancinaes head, (emulation being a usual matter amongst women) to contend and
quarrel with Agrippina. The court was divided, some secretly favoring Drusus,
some Germanicus. Tiberius did lean to Drusus, as his own, and of his blood:
but the small affection Germanicus uncle carried him, was cause that others
loved him the more: and because that by the mothers side he was more nobly
descended, having M. Antonius for his grandfather, and Augustus for his uncle:
whereas Pomponius Atticus, a Gentleman of Rome, great grandfather to Drusus,
did not answer the honorable memories of the Claudians. And Germanicus wife
Agrippina, did go beyond Liuia Drusus wife, in fruitfulnes, fame, and name.
Nevertheless the brothers did exceedingly well agree, nothing at all moved with
the emulation and contentions of their kindred.

X. The Germans are at variance between themselves: an earthquake in Asia.
NOt long after, Drusus was sent to Illyrium, to be trained up in feats of
war, and to win the soldiers hearts. And Tiberius thought it better, that the
young man lustly given, by the wanton lasciuiousnes of the city, should be
better fashioned in the camp, and himself in more security, both his sons
being commanders over the legions. But the color was, that the Sweuians did
crave aid against the Cherusci: for being rid of the Romans, and void of
foreign fear, through emulation of glory, a thing usual in that country, they
turned their arms against themselves. Ods there was none in the strength of
the nations, or valor of Captains, but that the name of a king, which
Maroboduus took upon him, was odious to the common people: and Arminius
favored because he fought for liberty. And therefore not only the Cherusci,
and their confederates: Arminius old soldiers took arms: but the Sweuian
nations also of Maroboduus kingdom. The Semnones and the Longobards took
part: and joining with Arminius had prevailed; if Inguiomerus with a strong
company of his vassalles, had not fled to Maroboduus for no other cause, but
only being old and uncle to Arminius, disdained to obey him being but young
and his brothers son. They pitched their battle with like hope on both sides:
not using rouing incursions, or skirmishing in scattered troops, as the manner
of the Germans in times past had been: but by long warring against us, they
had accustomed themselves to follow their ensigns, strengthen and aid one
another, and obey their Captains. Then Arminius viewing his army on
horseback vaunted to all he met, that their liberty was recovered; the
legions slain: and showed in the hands of many of the soldiers, the spoils
and armor which by force they had taken from the Romans. Contrarily he called
Maroboduus a runnagate, unskillful in wars; that he had saved himself in the
lurking holes of Hercynia: and then by gifts and embassies, entreated an
agreement: that he was a traitor to his country, and one of Caesar's followers:
therefore that they should thrust him out; with no less hatred then they had
slain Varus Quinctilius: that they should now call to mind so many battles:
by success of which; having in the end driven out the Romans; it is easily
seen who should have the upper hand. Neither did Maroboduus on his side forget
to vaunt himself, or inueigh against his enemy: but taking hold of
Inguiomerus, told them that all the honors of the Cherusci consisted in that
body: and that all that fell out luckily, was achieved by his counsel. That
Arminius a sot; inexpert in matter of war; attributed others glory to
himself: because he had entrapped by guile, three unfurnished legions with
their Captain, nothing misdoubting their fraud; to the great loss of
Germany, and his own ignominy; seeing his wife, and his son do yet endure
servitude. But as for him, he had maintained the honor of Germany unstained,
being assailed by twelve legions, under the conduct of Tiberius; and in the
end parted with reasonable conditions. Neither did it repent him that it was
yet in their choice; either to make war against the Romans, or accept of peace
without bloodshed. Both parts being incensed with these speeches; yet other
peculiar causes did more inflame them. Considering that the Cherusci, and the
Longobardi, did fight for their ancient honors, or fresh liberty: and
contrarily the others to enlarge their dominions. A fiercer encounter then this
there was never seen: nor a more doubtful issue: the right wings on both
sides being slain. And a new fight was hoped for, if Maroboduus (an evident
token of a faint heart) had not retired to the hills: and being somewhat weakened,
by the back sliding of Traitors, withdrew himself to the Marcomans, and sent
Ambassadors to Tiberius to crave aid. Unto whom it was answered, that he had
no reason to crave the Romans aid against the Cherusci; seeing he aided the
Romans nothing at all, when they fought against the same enemy. Yet as we have
said, Drusus was sent to make a peace. The same year twelve famous cities of
Asia, were destroyed by an earthquake in the night: a calamity so much the
greater, by how much the less looked for. The usual means of saving
themselves in in like cases, by fleeing to the open fields, doing them no good
at all; because they were swallowed up by the opening of the earth. It is
reported that huge mountains were laid flat, and plains raised up into high
hills: and fire flashed out among those ruins. And the disastre being more
grievous among the Sardians, then elsewhere; greater compassion was had on
them: for Caesar promised them About 78 125 pound.
an hundredth hundred thousand sesterces: and released the^ for five years
space of all that they were to pay to the common treasury. Next unto them
endomaged and relieved, were the Magnetians, near unto Sipylus. It was thought
expedient for the same space, to discharge of all tributes, the Temnians,
Philadelphians, Aegetians, Appolonienses and such as are called Moscenians, or
Macedonians, of Hyrcania, and Hierocaesarea, Myrina, Cymen, Tmolum; and to send
some of the Senators, to view and relieve their present estate. This charge was
committed to M. Aletus once Praetor; least if one who had been once Consul over
Asia, should have been deputed; there might some emulation have risen betwixt
equals; and thereby the business hindered. Caesar did with no less grateful
bounty, show his liberality when he bestowed the goods of Aemilia Musa, a
rich woman, fallen to the fisque; upon Aemilius Lepidus, of whose house she
seemed to have been. And the like when he gave the inheritance of Patuleius, a
rich gentleman of Rome (albeit he was instituted heir in part) to M.
Seruillius, whom he found to have been written in the first not suspected
testament: having declared before, that both their nobilities were to be helped
with money. Neither did he at any time take any inheritance, unless he had
deserved it by friendship. He did reject all such, as being unknown to him;
and for hatred unto others, declared the Prince to be their heirs. And as he
did relieve the honest poverty of the innocent: so the prodigal and needy
through their own behavior, he put from the Senate, or gave license to depart:
as to Vibidius Varro, Marius Nepos, Appius Appianus, Cornelius Sulla, Q.
Vitellius. At the same time, the Temples of the gods, begun by Augustus, and
fallen to ruin by age or fire: he dedicated to Bacchus, Proserpina, and Ceres,
near to the great Circus; which A. Posthumous had vowed. And in the same place
the Temple of Flora, built by Lucius and Marcus, Publicius, Aediles: And also
Ianus Temple, which C. Duillius had built near the herb market; who first of
all others, had a prosperous fight by sea for the Romans: and deserved a
triumph by sea over those of Carthage. The Temple of hope, which in the same
war Atilius had vowed, was dedicated by Germanicus.

XII. The accusation of Apuleia. Tacfarina makes war in Africa.
IN the mean season, the law against treason grew strong: and a pickthanke
accused Apuleia Varilia, Augustus sisters niece; that she had reprochfully
scoffed at Augustus, Tiberius, and his mother: and that nothing regarding that
she was by marriage allied to Caesar, she had abused her body. But as for the
adultery, there was sufficient order taken by the law Iulia: yet Caesar
requested that the treason might be distinguished from the other crime: and
that she might be punished, if she had spoken irreligiously against Augustus.
As for that which she had spoken against himself, he would not have it brought
into examination. And being asked by a Consul, what he thought of those things
she was accused of, against his mother; he held his peace. But the next time
the Senate met, he entreated in his mothers name, that such words as she had
uttered against her, might not be construed for a fault. Of treason also he
acquitted her: and entreated that the punishment of adultery, might not be
severely enforced against her: persuading her friends, that according to the
example of their auncetors, they would remove her from her kindred above two
hundred miles: and Manlius the adulterer was banished Italy and Affrike. When
Vipsanius Gallus was dead, there arose a strife in subrogating a Praetor in his
room: Germanicus and Drusus both then being at Rome, favoring Haterius
Agrippa, near kinseman to Germanicus: and some laboring to the contrary,
desired that according to the laws, amongsuters such should prevail as had
the greatest number of children: Tiberius rejoicing, that the Senate debated
the matter betwixt his children and the laws. Without doubt the law was
overcome: but neither by and by; nor with a few suffrages; but after the same
manner, as when the laws were in greatest force. The same year the war
began in Affrike, Tacfarinas being the captain of the enemies. This Tacfarinas
was a Numidian borne; and being an aid soldier, received pay under the
Romans: then a forsaker of them gathered together certain wandering
companions, inured to robberies, thefts, and pillage: whom he marshalled into
companies, and divided into ensigns, according to the manner of service: and
at last was reckoned a leader not of a disorderly multitude, but captain of
the Musulanians: which being a strong nation near unto the desert of Affrike,
having no dwelling in towns, took arms, and drew their neighbors the Moors
with them, under their captain Mazippa. Their army was so divided, that
Tacfarinas should encamp himself with chosen men, armed after the Roman
manner, and train them up in discipline and obedience. Mazippa with a company
lightly armed, should roue up and down, burn, slay, and terrify. They had
also persuaded the Cinithians, a nation not to be despised, to the like: When
as Furius Camillus Proco^sul of Affrike, having gathered a legion, and the
confederates which were under ensigns (a small power if you respect the
multitude of Moors and Numidians) and lead them against the enemy: and
doubting nothing more then least they should shift off the battle for fear,
with a hope of victory tolled them on, and in their hope overthrew them. Furius
placed a legion in the middle, the cohorts lightly appointed, and two companies
of horsemen in the wings. Tacfarinas refused not to join battle: but the
Numidians were vanquished; and the Furian name, after so many years recovered
the reputation of warriors. For ever since that Furius, which recovered the
city from the Galli, and his son Camillus; the glory of being captains has
remained in other families. And this man whom we have sooken of, not being a
man of action, his exploites were the more willingly set forth by Tiberius to
the Lords of the Senate: who decreed, that he should be honored with triumphall
ornaments; which to Camillus, by reason he was of a modest behavior, could no
way be a cause of envy.

XIII. Germanicus peregrination.
THe year following, Tiberius was the third time made Consul, and Germanicus
the second. But Germanicus took that dignity at Nicopolis, a city in Achaia,
whither he came by the coast of Illyrium; having first visited his brother
Drusus, then making his abode in Dalmatia: and having had an unprosperous
voyage by the Adriaticall and Ionian sea. By reason whereof he spent some days
in repairing his navy: and in visiting the coasts, which by the victory of
Actium were made famous; and the spoils dedicated by Augustus: with the place
where Antonie had camped; by those means renewing the memory of his
ancestors; for as I have said before, Augustus was his uncle, and Antonie his
grandfather: and therefore in that place he saw represented, things both
ioifull, and dolorous. From thence he went to Athens; which being an ancient
city, and a confederate with the Romans: he would have but one Lictor before
him. The Graecians received him with most exquisite honors, and represented the
ancient exploites, and saiengs of his predecessors: that their flattery might
be so much the more grateful and acceptable. And going from thence to Euboea,
hepassed by Lesbos: where Agrippina in her last delivery, had Iulia. Then
desirous to visit places of antiquity and fame, he went to the confines of
Asia, Perinthum, and Byzans; cities of Thrace: then he entered the straites of
Propontis: and the mouth of the Pontion sea. Withal he relieved the provinces,
which were wearied with civil discordes, and oppressions of magistrates. In
his return desirous to visit the sacrifices of the Samothracians, and sundry
other things; for change of fortune, and our beginning from thence worthy of
honor. The northren winds drove him back again. Then he coasted Asia, and
came to Colophona, to consult with the oracle of Clarius Apollo. There is no
woman as at Delphos; but a priest, usually chosen out of certain families, and
for the most part from Miletum: does hear only the number and names of such
as come to consult: then going down to a den, and drinking a draught of the
secret fountain; gives answer (being commonly ignorant in learning and
verses) in verses touching those things, which a man has forethought in his
mind. It is reported, that by circumstances of dark speeches, as the manner
of the oracles is, he prophesied that Germanicus death was not far of. But C.
Piso, to the end he might more speedily begin to effectuate his determination,
sharply rebuked the city of Athens, already amazed with his turbulent
behavior, indirectly carping at Germanicus, that contrary to the dignity of
the Roman name, he had used too great courtesy: not toward the Athenians which
had been wasted by so many miseries; but toward a rif-raffe of other
nations: and those which were Mithridates confederates against Sulla; and
Antonies against Augustus of famous memory. Other stale matters he objected
also against them; as that they had not prosperous success against the
Macedonians; and used violence against their own citizens: bearing them also a
special grudge, because that at his request they would not deliver on
Theophilus condemned of forgery, by the counsel of the Areopagites. From thence
sailing with all celeritie by the Cyclades, and seeking out the shortest cuts,
at the Island of Rhodes, he ouertooke Germanicus: nothing ignorant how he had
backbitten him: yet nevertheless such was his mild disposition, that when
Piso was driven through tempest against the rocks, and that his miscarieng
might have been imputed to chance, he sent galleys to succor him, and so
delivered him from danger. But all this did not mollify Pisoes heart, but
scarce enduring one days stay, forsakes and preuenteth Germanicus. For being
come to the legions in Syria; winning the basest of the common soldiers with
gifts: he began to displace the old Centurions, and severe Tribunes: and
bestow their rooms on his followers, or to the most lewdest: suffered idleness
in the camps: licentiousnes in the city: vagrant and riotous soldiers to
range the country: whereby they grew to such corruption, that among the common
sort, he was called the father of the legions. Neither did Plancina contain
her self within the bounds of womanly modesty: but would be present at the
horsemens exercise, as the running of the cohorts: and use reproachful speeches
against Agrippina, and Germanicus: some of the better sort of soldiers, ready
to follow her humor, in bad actions; because there was a secret rumor spread
that those things were not done with dislike of the Emperor. Germanicus knew
all this: but his greatest care was to prevent the Armenians. That nation was
in times past doubtful and uncertain to the Romans, not only through their
disposition and affection; but also through the situation of their country:
which stretching into our provinces, reaches even to the Medes. And being
seated betwixt great kingdoms, are often in wars, through hatred to the
Romans, and envy to the Parthians. King at that time they had none; Vonones
being expulsed. But the nation favored Zeno, Polemon king of Pontus son,
because that from his infancy, he had imitated the customs and attire of the
Armenians; their hunting and banqueting, and other exercises of the Barbarians
greatly esteemed: thereby winning the favor as well of the nobility, as common
people. Germanicus then in the city Artaxata, the noble men approouing it, in
the presence of a multitude, crowned him King: and the rest doing him honor as
their King, saluted him after the name of the city by the name of Artaxias. The
Cappadocians being reduced to the form of a Province; received Q Veranius for
their Lieutenant: and to give them a good hope of the Roman government, some of
the tributes usually before paid to the Kings, diminished: and over the
Comageni, then first reduced under the regiment of a Praetor, Q. Seruaeus was
made governor.

XIIII. Germanicus, and Pisoes iarring.
ALbeit, all the affairs of the allies were settled in good order: yet
Germanicus was nothing the more at his ease; by reason of Pisoes pride: who
being commanded either by himself, or by his son, to conduct part of the
legions to Armenia, neglected both. At length they both met at Cyrrum, where
the tenth legion wintered: Piso with a resolute countenance against fear: and
Germanicus as I have said the milder of the two, lest he should be thought to
threaten. But his friends their crafts master in provoking hatred; made the
most of that which was true, and suggested much which was false, laying diverse
things to his own charge, Pla^cinas, and his childrens. In the end, Caesar in
the presence of a few of his familiars, uttered some such speech to Piso, as
anger and dissimulation does suggest, and Piso answered with a proud
submission, and so they departed open enemies. After that time Piso was seldom
seen at Caesar's tribunal; and if he did assist at any time, he showed himself
froward, and always dissented openly from him. In a banquet made by the king of
the Nabateans, when there were presented crowns of great weight to Caesar and
Agrippina; and light ones to Piso and the rest: He was heard to say, that that
banquet was made to the son of a Roman Prince, and not to the son of a king
of Parthia: and withal threw away his crown, uttering many speeches against
the superfluity of the banquet: which although Germanicus could hardly digest,
yet endured all patiently. Whilst these things were adoing, Ambassadors came
from Artabanus, king of the Parthians, calling to mind their friendship and
alliance with the Romans, and desiring that they might renew right hands: and
that in honor of Germanicus, he would come to the bank of Euphrates. And
requested in the mean time, that Vonones might not remain in Syria, least he
should by messengers, draw the noble men of the country round about, to civil
dissentions. Touching the alliance, Germanicus answered magnificently: but
concerning the kings coming, and the honor done to himself, he answered
ciuilly, and with great modesty. Vonones was removed to Pompeiopolis, a sea
town in Cilicia; not so much at Artabanus request, as to spite Piso; unto whom
he was most acceptable, for many benefits and gifts bestowed upon Plancina.

XV. Germanicus voyage to Egypt and Thebes. Maroboduus and Catualda, both
expelled, flee to the Romans.
WHen M. Silanus, and L. Norbanus were Consuls, Germanicus went to Egypt, to
see the antiquities of the country; but pretended a care of the province:
where he opened their storehouses, and brought down the price of corn: and
did other things, to win the favor of the people: as to go without soldiers;
wear open shoes: apparel himself like the Grecians: imitating P. Scipio,
whom we have heard to have done the like in Sicily, when the war was hottest
against the Affricans. Tiberius having lightly blamed him for his behauior and
apparel, did most sharply rebuke him, that contrary to Augustus order, and
without the princes license, he had entered Alexandria. For Augustus amongst
other secrets of state, had reserved Egypt; and forbidden all Senators,
Noblemen, and Gentlemen, to enter into it, but with permission, least Italy
should be oppressed with famine: who soever should be master of that province:
being the key of the sea and land: and easily defended with a small power,
against a strong host. But Germanicus, not knowing that his voyage was
misliked, went up Nilus, beginning at the town Canopus, which the
Lacedaemonians built: because Canopus the governor of their ship was buried
there, when Meuelaus going back to Greece, was carried to a contrary sea, and
land of Libya. The next mouth of the river from thence, is dedicated to
Hercules; the first of which name was borne there, as the inhabitants do
report; and of whom all which come after him, of like valor and virtue, took
their surname. After that, he visited the great monuments of ancient Thebes:
where yet were to be seen Egyptian letters in old buildings, which contained
their ancient wealth. And one of their auncientest Priests, being commanded to
interpret those letters in the country language; related, that in times past
there had dwelt in that city, seven hundred thousand persons, of age fit to
bear arms: and that with that army King Rhamses had conquered Libya,
Aethiopia, Media, and Persia, Bactria, and Scythia, and the countries which the
Syrians, and the Armenians, and the Cappadocians, their next neighbors
inhabited: and that their dominion reached from the Bithynian to the Lycian
sea. There were also read the tributes imposed over nations, the weight of
silver and gold, the number and furniture of horses and armor: the gifts given
to the Temples, the Iuory, sweet savors: and what plenty of corn; what
vtensiles every nation was charged to furnish; which were no less
magnificall, then are now commanded, by the forces of the Parthi: or power of
the Romans. But Germanicus was yet tied to other miracles: whereof the chiefest
was, the image of Memnon made of stone; when it was stricken with the sun
beams yielding a sound like a man's voice: and the Pyramides as great as
mountains, on the not passable sands; built a vie by Kings in times past to
show their riches: and the ditches wrought by handie work to receive the
ouerflowing of Nilus; so narrow in some places, and so deep in others, that
the bottom cannot be found by any search. From thence he came to Elephantines,
and Syenes, in times past the bounds of the Roman Empire, which now opens to
the red sea. Whilst Germanicus spent that summer, in visiting many Provinces,
Drusus gate no small honor, by sowing sedition in Germany: and incensing them
to pursue Maroboduus already weakened, even to his utter ruin. Among the
Gotones, there was a noble young man called Catualda, who through Maroboduus
violence having before fled his country; things standing now in doubtful
terms; ventured a revenge. And with a strong power, entered the frontiers of
the Marcomans: and having corrupted the chief noble men to his confederacy,
forces the Kings palace, and a castle hard by. Where he found the old
spoils of the Sueuians and the base rascals of our Province: and certain
merchants; whom intercourse of Marchandice, and a desire of increasing their
wealth; or last of all a forgetfulness of their country; had drawn from their
own dwellings to the enemies country. Maroboduus being forsaken of all hands:
had no other refuge left, but the mercy of the Romans. And having passed the
river of Danub, where it coasteth the Province of Notica; wrote unto Tiberius,
not as a fugitive and suppliant, but putting him in mind of his former fortune
and estate: alleging that when sundry nations invited him to their alliance,
being sometimes a renowned King, he preferred the amity of the Romans before
them al. Caesar answered him, that he should have a sure and honorable dwelling
in Italy, if he listed to remain there: but if any thing of greater
advancement should happen unto him, that he should depart with the same safe
conduct he came thither. Afterward he declared in Senate, that the Athenians had
no such cause to fear Philip; nor the people of Rome, Pyrrhus and Antiochus,
as this man. An oration of his is yet extant, wherein he extolleth his power;
the strength of the nations he had under him; and how near an enemy he was to
Italy; and what plots he had devised to root him out. Maroboduus was received
at Rauenna; that if at any time the Sueuian should wax insolent; he was in
sight as it were always ready to return. But he departed not Italy the
space of eighteen years, and grew old with loss of reputation, through over
great desire of living. The like hope had Catualda, and no other refuge: for
not long after being driven out by the Hermunduri, under the conduct of
Vibilius, he was received and sent to Forum Iulij, a colonie of Gallia
Narbonensis. The barbarous people which followed both these; lest being mingled
among others, should disturb the quiet Provinces: were placed beyond Danubium
betwixt the rivers Marus, and Cusus; and a King given them of the Quadian
nation.

XVI. Wars betwixt Rhescuporis and Cotys. Rhescuporis is sent to Rome.
News being come that Artaxias, was by Germanicus made King of Armenia: the
Lords of the Senate ordained that Germanicus and Drusus should enter into the
city ouant, or with a small triumph; and that arches should be erected about
the sides of the Temple of Mars the Revenger, with the images of the two
Caesar's: Tiberius being more glad that he had established a peace by wisdom;
then if he should have ended the war by a maine battle. Now he determined by
some subtlety to set upon Rhescuporis King of Thrace. That country once
having been under Rhoemetalces: after his death, Augustus gave part of it to
his brother Rhescuporis, and part to his son Cotys. In that partition, the
erable grounds, the cities, and places adioining to Greece fell to Cotys share.
That which was uninhabited, wild, and lying near the enemy; to Rhescuporis.
The dispositions also of those Kings were such, that the one was tractable and
of a mild condition; this stout, coueteous, and impatient of a companion: and
both at the first living in cunning and dissembled concord. Then Rhescuporis
began to exceed his bounds; and draw that to himself which was given Cotys,
and use violence if he resisted: but not so hotly in Augustus time; whom he
feared being the author of both kingdoms, would revenge if he were despised.
But understanding of a change of the Prince, he sent in troops of thieves,
beat down his castles, and sought occasions of war. Nothing did more trouble
Tiberius, then that those things which were once settled, should now be
disturbed: and therefore making choice of a Centurion dispatcheth him away to
signify to the Kings, that they should not in any case enter into arms: and
thereupon Cotys dismissed presently the aid he had prepared. Rhescuporis with
a fained modesty, requesteth a place of meeting, to end their controversy by
conference: neither did they long doubt of the time, place, and conditions; the
one yielding to all with a facility of nature; the other accepting all with a
fraudulent meaning. Rhescuporis as he pretended to conclude this agreement;
makes a banquet: and when the night was far spent with great mirth, much eating
and quaffing of wine; he loaded uncircumspect Cotys with chains: who
perceiving the treason, besought him by the sacred ceremonies of the kingdom,
the gods of the same family, and by the entertainment of his table, he would
use no such violence. Having thus made himself master of all Thrace, he wrote
to Tiberius, that there were conspiracies wrought against him, and the
contriuer of them prevented. And withal, pretending war against the
Bastarnians, and the Scythians, makes himself strong with a new power of
footmen and horsemen. Tiberius wrote to him coldly again, that if there were
no fraud in his doing, he might trust to his innocence: but neither he nor
the Senate could discern the right from wrong, unless they knew the cause:
and therefore that he should deliver up Cotys, and come to them, and purge
himself of the envy of the crime. Those letters Latinius Pandus Propraetor of
Moesia sent with the soldiers, unto whom Cotys should be delivered. But
Rhescuporis balancing between anger and fear, and desirous to be guilty
rather of the fact committed, then only attempted; commands Cotys to be
slain: and untruly gave it out, that he had killed himself. Yet for all this,
Caesar altered not his intended course, but after Pandus decease, whom
Rhescuporis accused to have been his back friend, made Pomponius Flaccus an
old soldier, and with whom the king was very inward, and therefore a more fit
instrument to deceive, for the same cause especial governor of Moesia. Flaccus
being gone to Thrace, by way of great promises, persuaded him, although
doubtful, and calling to mind his own wickedness: to enter into the Roman
garrison, where he was guarded with a strong company, under color of honor. He
had Tribunes and Centurions at hand to counsel and persuade him: and the
further he went, the greater guard: and at last knowing in what terms of
necessity he stood, they brought him to the city: where being accused in
Senate by Cotys wife, he was condemned to be kept far from his country. Thrace
was afterward divided betwixt Rhaemetalces his son, who was known to be an
enemy to his fathers proceedings, and Cotys children: which not being of full
age, Trebellienus Rufus, who had been Praetor in the mean season, was made
governor of the kingdom: following the example of our predecessors, who sent
M. Lepidus into Egypt, to be guardian to Ptolemeus children. Rhescuporis was
carried to Alexandria, and there going about to escape, or because it was so
fathered on him, was killed. At the same time Vonones, who (as we have said)
was confined in Cilicia, having corrupted his keepers, under color of going a
hunting; attempted all means to escape to the Armenians; from thence to the
Albanians, and Heniochians, and to his Cosen the king of Scythia. And forsaking
the sea coasts, got into bywayes and forests: and by the swiftnes of his
horse, posted with all speed to the river Pyramus. The borderers understanding
the kings escape, having broken down the bridges, and he not able to pass at
any foord, was taken by the rivers side, and bound by Vibius Fronto, captain
of the horsemen. Anon after Remmius Euocatus, unto whose charge the king was
first committed, as it had been in an anger, thrust him through with his sword.
Whereupon it was the easlier believed that he had so slain Vonones, as one
guilty and consenting to his escape, and therefore fearing he should be
bewraied and accused.

XVII. Germanicus sickness and death. The variance betwixt him and Piso.
But Germanicus returning from Egypt: and perceiving that all which he had
commanded, either in the legions or towns, left undone, or changed clean
contrary; began to use grievous and contumelious speeches against Piso: and he
to requite Caesar with no less dangerous attempts. Whereupon Piso determined
to depart Syria: but staying a time by reason of Germanicus sickness; when he
heard of his amendment, and that the vows were accomplished for his health: he
drove away by his sergeants the beast brought to the altar, and disturbed the
preparation made for the sacrifice, and the solemn meeting of the people of
Antioch. Then he went to Seleucia, expecting the event of his sickness which he
fell again into: the rage thereof so much the more grievous, through an
opinion that Piso had poisoned him: for there were found pulled out of the
ground, and walls, charms, verses, and enchantme^ts: and Germanicus name
engraven in sheets of lead: ashes half burned, and tempered with corrupt
blood, and other sorceries, by which it is thought, that souls are dedicated
to the infernal powers. Some also were accused to have been sent from Piso, to
epsy in what state he was in. That drove Germanicus both into anger and fear,
considering with himself: if his house should be besieged; if he should lose
his life in the sight of his enemies: what should happen after to his woeful
wife, and his young children? he saw that the poison seemed slow in working: but
Piso hastened, that he might alone have the government of the legions and the
province. But Germanicus was not so destitute of friends, that the murderer
should enjoy the rewards of the murder. And hereupon enditeth a letter to him,
in which he renounceth his friendship. Some add, that he commanded him to
depart the province. Piso made no longer delay, but loses anchor, and
moderated his course to return the sooner, if Germanicus death should open him
a way to Syria. Germanicus being a little amended, and in some hope: then
growing feeble again; when his end was at hand, he spoke to his friends about
him in this manner. If I should die a natural death, yet should I have just
cause of grief against the gods: that by an untimely death, they shuold take
me in my youth from my kinsfolks, children, and country. But now being brought
to this pass by the lewd practice of Piso and Plancina, I leave in your
breasts for my last prayers; that you signify unto my father and my brother,
with what cruelty torn, with what fraud circumuented, I have ended my
miserable life, with a most naughty death. If the hopes conceived of me have
moved any; if neerenes in blood any: yea, if envy toward me when I lived:
they will weep, that he who has sometimes flourished, and escaped so many
battles, should now end his life by the guile and treachery of a woman: you
shall have occasion to complain to the Senate, and demand the execution of
laws. This is not the chiefest duty of friends, to show their affection
toward the dead, by a slow and dull complaint; but remember and execute that
which they commanded. Yea, such as knew not Germanicus, will weep for him: If
you did rather love me then my fortune, you will revenge my death. Show the
people of Rome Augustus niece, and the same my wife, and my children which are
six in number: the accusers themselves will have compassion; and those which
pretend wicked commandments, shall either not be believed, or not pardoned.
His friends taking him by the right hand, swore they would rather lose their
life, then omit revenge. Then turning to his wife, entreated her by the memory
of him, and by the children common between them, that she would lay aside all
haughtines, and submit her courage to raging fortune: lest returning to the
city, she stirred not with emulation of greatness more powerable then her self
against her. Thus much he uttered openly, and other things in secret; whereby
it was coniectured he stood in fear of Tiberius. Not long after he yielded up
the ghost, with great lamentation of the Province and countries about; foreign
nations and Kings lamented also: so great was his courtesy to his allies; and
mildnes to his enemies. He was no less venerable to those which saw him, than
to those which heard of him: and did so well temper the greatness of high estate
and gravity; that he avoided both envy and arrogancy. His funerals although
he had neither images nor pomp: yet by the commendation and memory of his
virtues, were honored of all men. Some there were which compared his favor,
his age, and manner of death, by reason of the vicinitie of the places wherein
they died, unto Alexander the great. For being both of a comely stature, noble
parentage, not much above thirty years of age: they died in strange
countries, by the treachery of their own people. But this man was courteous
toward his friends, moderate in pleasures, and his children certain, begotten
in marriage by one woman. Neither was he to be counted a less warrior then the
other: although he were not rash, and hindered to reduce under the yoke of
servitude the Germans daunted with so many victories. And if he alone had, had
the supreme managing of affairs, and power, and a name of a King: so much the
sooner he would have carried away the prise and renown of warfare, by how much
he did excel him in clemency, temperancie, and other good virtues. His body
before it should be burned, was laid naked in the market place of Antioche,
which was the place appointed for his burial. Whether he showed any tokens of
being poisoned or not, it is unknown: for diverse did diversely interpretit;
either as they were inclined to pity Germanicus, or suspected to favor Piso.
This being done, the Lieutenants and the Senators which were present, co^sulted
among themselves, whom they should make governor of Syria; and the rest not
greatly contending: it was long debated betwixt Marsus and Gn. Sentius; and in
the end Marsus yielded to Sentius being his elder, and prosecuting the suite
more eagerly. He sent to Rome one Martina, a woman infamous in that Province
for empoisoning, but deerly beloved to Plancina, at the suite of Vitellius and
Veranius, and others, which framed their acusations, as against one already
guilty of the fact. But Agrippina wasted with sorrow and feeble of body: yet
impatient of delaying revenge; took shipping with Germanicus ashes with her,
and her children: all men taking compassion, that a woman so nobly descended,
and who not long since in regard of her stately marriage, was honored and
reverenced by all men: should now carry in her lap, those lamentable relickes
of her husband: incertaine of revenge; doubtful of herperson; so often exposed
to fortunes mercy by her unlucky fruitfulnes.

XVIII Piso is doubtful whether he should return to Syria or not. And
prepares an army against Sentius.
IN the mean season a messenger, ouertaketh and aduertiseth Piso, at the Island
Cous, that Germanicus was departed. Which tidings he received intemperately,
offered sacrifices, visited the temples, nothing moderating his joy; and
Plancina growing more insolent, then first changed the mourning weed, she ware
for the death of her sister, into a ioifull attire. The Centurions flocking
about him, told him, that he had the good will of the legions, at his devotion;
that it was his best to return to the province, wrongfully taken from him, and
now void of a governor. Whereupon taking advise what was best to be done; his
son M. Piso, was of opinion that he should make all haste to the city: that
there was nothing yet done which might not be answered: and that
weakesuspicions, and vain reports were not to be feared. The variance between
him and Germanicus, was worthy perhaps of some rebuke, but not punishment:
and by taking the province from him, his enemies were satisfied. But if he
should return, Sentius being against him, a new civil war would begin.
Neither would the Centurions and soldiers continue on his side; with whom the
fresh memory of their captain, and the love deeply printed in their hearts
toward the Caesar's would prevail. Domitius Celer, one of his inwardest
friends, persuaded the contrary. That he ought to take the time when it was
offered: that Piso and not Sentius was made governor of Syria: unto him were
the fasces, and dignity of Praetor given, to him the legions committed. If any
violence should be offered by the enemy, who should more justly oppose his
arms against them, then he, who has received the authority of a Lieutenant,
and special commission? Rumors grow stale and vanish away with time: and often
the innocent are borne down with fresh envy: but if he had a power at hand,
and his forces increased, many things which could not be foreseen, by mere
chance might turn to the better. Do we hasten to come to Rome, with
Germanicus ashes: that Agrippinas lamentation, and the unskillful multitude, at
the first rumor, should lay hands on thee, unheard and undefended? Thou have
for thee Augustas conscience, and Caesar's favor, though in secret. And none
bewail more braggingly Germanicus death in outward show, then such as in their
hearts are most glad. Piso being forward enough of himself to haughty attempts,
was with small ado drawn to this opinion. And sending letters to Tiberius,
accuses Germanicus of riot and pride: and that himself was driven out of the
province, because there might be a way made open to innovation: that he had
again taken charge of the army, with the same fidelity, as he had already
governed it. Withal, he commanded Domitius, with a galley to sail into Syria:
and avoiding the coasting of the shore, and letting pass the Islands, take
wide and open sea. Then marshalling and arming runnagates, and rascal base
companions, and sailing over to the continent, he intercepted an ensign of
young and raw soldiers, which were going to Syria. And writes also to the
Lords of Cilicia, to send him aid: the young man Piso being nothing slack in
the service, although he was against the undertaking of the war. Wherefore
passing by the coast of Lycia, and Pamphylia, meeting with the ships which had
conveyed Agrippina to Rome, each side hating one another; made themselves
ready to fight: yet both sides fearing the one the other, they proceeded no
further then to hard words. Mirsus Vibius sommoned Piso to come to Rome to
answer for himself: who scoffingly answered him again, that he would come
and appear, when the Praetor which was to inquire of poisonings, would appoint
a day as well for the plaintiff, as defenda^t. In the mean time Domitius being
arrived at Laodicea, a city in Syria; and going to the standing camp of the
sixth legion, as most fit for new enterprises, was prevented by the Lieutena^t
Pacuuius. Sentius opens that by letters to Piso; warning him not to go about
to tempt the army with corrupters, nor raise any war in the Province. And such
as he knew to have Germanicus in mind, or were adversaries to the enemies, he
assembled together: putting them often in mind of the greatness of the Emperor,
and how the commonwealth was assailed; and thereupon gathers a strong power
ready to fight. Yet neither Piso, nor his side, although his enterprises fell
out otherwise, than he expected; did let slip that which was of most safety
for the present; but puts himself in a very strong castle in Cilicia,
called Celenderis. For by sorting and meddling together the runnagates, the new
and raw soldier lately taken, his own and Plancinaes slaves, and the aides
which the Lords of Cilicia sent, he marshalled them in form of a legion. And
then affirmed that he was Caesar's Lieutenant: but drouen out of the Province
committed to him; not by the legions, for they called him thither; but by
Sentius, which cloaked his private malice with false crimes: therefore that they
should stand stoutly to the battle; because the soldiers would not fight, when
they should see Piso whom heretofore they called their father. If they would
proceed by order of justice, the right was on his side: if by arms, he wanted
not strength. Then he displaied his companies in order of battle, before the
castle on a steep craggie hills side: the rest being environed with sea. On the
contrary side the old soldiers, with their supplies were marshalled into
ranks. On this side was the strength of soldiers: one that of place. In
courage and hope there was great odds also: and on their side no weapons, but
rude and clownish, prepared for a present shift. And when they came to handie
strokes; there was no longer doubt who should have the upper hand, but til the
Roman cohorts could win the plain ground: which done, the Cilicians showed
their backs, and shut themselves in their fort. In the mean space Piso went
about, but in vain, to assail the navy which waited not far off. Then
returned to the castle again, now tormenting himself upon the walls; now
calling to every soldier by his name, and offering rewards: assaied to raise
a mutiny, and did so much prevail, that the standard bearer of the sixth
legion, went with his ensign to his side. Then Sentius commanded the cornets
and trumpets to sound; gave an assault to the rampires; caused laddres to be
put up; and the ablest men to follow; and the others out of engines to shoot
darts, stones, and fire brands. In the end Pisoes obstinacy being overcome;
entreats that having yielded up his weapons, he might remain in the castle,
until Caesar were consulted, who should be governor of Syria. The conditions
were not accepted; nor any thing granted him: but only, that he should have
shipping and safe conduct to the city.

XIX. Great bewailing for Germanicus death: strange religions suppressed: loose
life restrained in women of account.
But when Germanicus sickness was noised at Rome; and as in news it falls
out, the farther it goes, augmented to the worser: all men burst out into
anger, grief, and complaints: saying, that therefore he was sent to foreign
countries: that was the reason why Piso had the province committed to him: this
was the effect of Augustaes secret conference with Plancina: that the ancient
men said most truly of Drusus, that the courteous and modest disposition of
children does dislike such as reign. Neither were they made away for any other
reason, but because, liberty restored; they had a meaning to reduce the people
of Rome to a certain equality. These speeches of the common people, the news
of his death did so much kindle; that before any edict of Magistrates, before
any decree of Senate was made, vacation being taken of themselves; the places
of judgment were abandoned; houses shut up; silence and mourning every where:
nothing of all this counterfeited or done for ostentation. And although they
did not abstain from outward tokens of mourning, yet in their hearts they
mourned much more. Certain Merchants returning by chance out of Syria,
Germanicus yet living, bringing joyful tidings of his health, were presently
believed, and spread abroad: and as they met one another (although they had
scarce heard the tale to the end) yet they reported it again, and they again
to others, still making it more, and increasing their joy. They ran up and
down the city, went about to wrest open the gates of the temples: the night
furthered their credulousnes, and in the dark every man more ready to
affirm. Neither did Tiberius gainsay these false reports, but let them vanish
away with time. But then the people, as though he had been a second time taken
from them, grieved more bitterly. Such was his funeral pomp done in memory of
him, as either men's love, or pregnancie of conceit could invent: as that his
name should be sung in a Salarian verse, which Mars priests were wont to sing:
that in the rooms of the Augustall priests, chaires of estate should be
placed, with garlands of oak: that his image graven in Iuory, should be carried
before the Circensian plays: and that none should be created Flamen or Augur
in Germanicus place, unless he were of the Julian family. At Rome, and at the
bank of Rhene, and on the hill Amanus in Syria, were erected arches, with an
inscription of his exploites: and that he died for the common wealth: a
sepulcher at Antioch where his body was burnt: a tribunal at Epidaphna, where
he ended, his life. It would be hard to number the images and places in which
he was honored. And when some thought it convenient that he should have a
sheeld of exquisite gold and greatness, dedicated him among the authors of
eloquence: Tiberius said he should have none but such as was usual, and
equal to the rest: for neither was eloquence to be judged of by fortune: and
that it was a sufficient honor for him, if he were put in the number of
ancient writers. That which before was called the band of young men, the
Gentlemen called Germanicus cuneum, or pointed battle: and ordained that the
squadrons of horsemen should follow his image the Ides of July. Many of these
ceremonies yet remain; some were presently left off; and some, time wore out.
But whilst this grief was yet fresh in every man's memory; Liuia Germanicus
sister, and Drusus wife, was at once delivered of two sons: which being a
thing rare, and welcome, even to mean families, did so rejoice the Prince,
that he could not contain (for even casual things he attributed to his
glory) but must needs brag before the Lords of the Senate, that no other
of the Romans of his greatness, had ever before had two male children at a
birth. But in such a time even that also, brought grief unto the people; as
though that Drusus increase of children, would the rather depresse Germanicus
house. The same year women's lascivious life, was punished by severe decrees of
Senate; and ordained that none should put their bodies to sale, whose
grandfather, father, or husband had been a gentleman of Rome. For Vistilia
descended of a pretorian family, had made her loose licentious life known to
the Aediles; according to a received custom among the ancients; who thought
it a sufficient punishment for unchaste women, if publicly they confessed
their lewdnes. And Titidius Labeo, Vistilias husband, was called into question,
because he had not inflicted the punishment of the law, on his wife manifestly
taken in the offense. But he for his excuse, alleged that the three score
days given to deliberate, were not yet past; and therefore thinking it enough
to punish Vistilia; she was confined in the Island Seriphon. It was debated in
Senate touching the rooting out of the Egyptian and Iudaical ceremonies: and a
decree made that four thousand libertines of competent age, infected with that
superstition, should be conveyed into the Island Sardinia, to suppress
robberies committed there: and if they should die through the vnwholesomnes of
the air, the loss were but vile and small: and that the rest should depart
Italy, if before a certain day they would not forsake those profane rites.
When those things were done, Caesar propounded, that another virgin should be
received in the room of Oecia; who with very great integrity, seven and
fistie years, had been gouernesse of the ceremonies of the Vestall virgins:
and gave thanks to Fonteius Agrippa, and Domitius Pollio; who offering their
daughters, strove in duty to the common wealth. But Pollios daughter was
preferred for no other reason, but because her mother had continued wife to her
first husband: Agrippa having diminished the reputation of his house with
diuorcement. Yet Caesar in regard the other was preferred, did comfort her with
About 78. 2. pound. 10 shil.
ten hundred thousand sesterces for her dowry. The people complaining of a
dearth of corn, he put down a price for the buier; promising to pay of his
own in every bushel Three pence ob. q.
two nummos. Yet for all this, he would not take upon him, the title of father
of his country, before offered him: but did sharply rebuke them, who had
called his affairs divine, and him Lord. And therefore under a Prince which
feared liberty, and hated flattery; all speeches ought to be brief; and yet
can hardly escape captious construction. I find in ancient writers of that
time, that Adgandestrius Prince of the Chatti, letters were read in Senate,
promising Arminius death, if poison were sent him to commit the deed. And that
it was answered him, that the people of Rome used not to revenge on their
enemies by treachery and privy means; but openly and armed. Wherein Tiberius
equalled himself to the old Roman Captains, which did forbid king Pyrrhus to
be poisoned, but disclosed it unto him. Now Arminius, the Romans being
departed, and Maroboduus expulsed, earnestly coveting the kingdom, had the
people as defending their liberty against him: and being assailed, and
fighting with doubtful fortune, was slain by the fraud of his own neerst
familiars. Doubtless the deliverer of Germany; and who provoked, not as other
Kings and Captains had done, the first springing up of the people of Rome; but
when they flourished most in rule and Empire. In his battles, he had doubtful
fortune, sometimes luckie, sometimes unlucky; but never was overcome in war.
He lived full seven and thirty years, and was Prince twelve. To this day he
is famous amongst barbarous nations; but in the Annals of the Greeks, which
admire nothing but their own doings unknown; and not greatly spoken of among
the Romans. Who whilst we extol ancient things, are careless of our own time.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE ANNALS OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
I. Agrippina comes to Rome: Germanicus funerals.
AGrippina although it were winter, yet still continuing her voyage by sea,
arrived at last at the Island Corcyra, over against the coast of Calabria: where
as one without mean in mourning, and unable to endure, she rested a few days
to settle her mind. In the mean time, her arrival known, her dearest
friends, and especially soldiers which had served under Germanicus; and many
also which she knew not, from the towns round about: some thinking it to be
their duty toward their Prince; and many following them flocked to
Brundisium, being the nearest and safest place of landing. And as soon as her
ships were discerned a far off: not only the haven and places near the sea
side; but the walls and house tops, and other places, from whence a man might
farthest kenne; were filled with a mourning and heavy multitude of people:
asking (as not knowing what was fittest for the time) one another, whether they
should receive her with silence, or acclamation, when she came out of her ship.
But when by little and little the ships drew near, they saw no cheerful
rowing, as the manner was wont to be: but all of them composed to sadness. But
being come to land with her two children; holding the funeral pot with her
husbands ashes in her hand, and her eyes fixed on the ground: all men began to
bewail and lament alike. Neither could thou have discerned the lamentation
of kinsfolks from the stanger; nor the women from the men: saving, that the
fresh grief of such as went to meet her, exceeded the lamentation of her
train, already wearied with long continuance of sorrow. Caesar had sent two
companies of his guarde to meet them: and gave further charge, that the
magistrates of Calabria, the Apuleians, and Campanians, should solemnise the
last obsequies in memory of his son. The ashes were carried on the Tribunes
and Centurions shoulders; the ensigns untrimmed; and the fasces or knitch of
rods, turned downwards, went before: and when they passed by any colonies, the
common people in mourning weed, and gentlemen in their attire called Trabea,
according to the wealth of the place, burnt garments, sweet odors: with other
accustomed funeral solemnities. Yea such whose towns were far off, yet met
them; erected altars; offered sacrifices to the infernal gods; witnessing
their dolor with tears and cries. Drusus went to Terracina with his brother
Claudius, and Germanicus children, which had remained in the city. The
Consuls, M. Valerius, and M Aurelius (who began then to enter into office) the
Senate and a great part of the people filled up the way, scattered hither and
thither, weeping, as every man's affection was. Flattery there was none: all men
knowing, that the death of Germanicus, joyful to Tiberius; could badly be
dissembled, howsoever he counterfeited the contrary. Tiberius and Augusta,
abstained from mourning in public: judging it a thing, under their majesty,
if they should be seen openly to lament: or least, the eyes of all men
observing their countenance, should epsy they did but counterfeit. I find not
in any author, or diurnall register, that his mother Antonia did any thing
worthy memory in that sole(...) when as besides Agrippina, Drusus, and
Claudius, the rest of his blood, are by name written of: either hindered by
sickness, or in mind overcome with sorrow, could not endure the sight of so
heavy a grief. I should easlier have believed, that Tiberius and Augusta,
which kept within doors, made her do the like: that their grief might be
judged equal: and that the grandmother and uncle, should seem to have kept
in, by the example of the mother. The day that the ashes were put in Augustus
tomb, was sometimes with silence desolate and still; and on the sudden unquiet
with weeping: all passages of the city were full: Campus Martius shined with
burning torches. There the soldier with his weapons; the magistrates without
the marks of their dignity and calling; and the people gathered into tribes
and companies cried: that the commonwealth was fallen to ground; and no hope
left: and that so openly, and boldly, that thou would have believed, they
did not remember by whom they were governed. Yet nothing went so near Tiberius
heart, as the ardent affection men bare Agrippina: calling her the honor of
their country; the only blood of Augustus; the pattern of antiquity: and
turning toward the heaven, and the gods, prayed that her issue might long
continue, and ouerliue the wicked. Some desired that the funerals might be
celebrated with public pomp: comparing the magnificence and honors that
Augustus had used for Drusus, Germanicus father. And, that he in the hardest
time of winter, went as far as Ticinum: and how never once departing from the
body, accompanied it to the city. That about the coffin were the images of
the Claudians and Iulians: that he was bewailed in the place of public
assemblies: praised with an oration before the people: and all honors done him,
which either our ancestors or later times could invent. But Germanicus had not
so much as the usual solemnities done for him: his body through distance of
place, was in some sort burnt, in strange lands: but by so much the more,
honors should now have been bestowed upon him, because fortune had denied
him the first. His brothers went to meet him but one days journey: his uncle
not so far as to the gate. Where are the ancient customs become? why was
not his image put before the Beer; and verses sung in memory of his virtues?
why was he not praised, and bewailed, with the usual representation of
mourning? All this was well known to Tiberius; and to suppress the speech of
the common people, he admonished them by edict. That although many notable
Romans had died for the commonwealth: yet none had ever been bewailed with
such an ardent affection. Which was to him and unto others also honorable, so
as there were a mean used. For the self same things are not seemly for noble
men, the Emperor and the common people. It was convenient that small houses, or
cities should mourn and lament, in fresh grief; and after their grief take
comfort again: but now it was time to confirm the mind, as Julius Caesar,
having lost his only daughter; and Augustus his nephews: did cast off all
sorrow. It was needless to allege ancient examples, to show how often the
people of Rome, had suffered constantly the loss of armies; death of
captains; and the utter overthrow of noble families. That princes are mortal,
and the commonwealth everlasting. Therefore that they should take their
solemnities again: and because the show of the Megalensian plays was at hand,
return to their pleasures.

II. Piso comes to Rome, where he is accused: and kills himself.
THe vacation ended, every man returned to his business: and Drusus went to the
army of Illyricum: the people bent to demand a revenge of Piso; complained
that he in the mean time now here, now there, in the pleasant country of
Asia, and Affrike, with a proud and subtle delay, did shift off the proofs
brought against his lewdnes. For it was commonly rumored, that Martina, as I
have before said, a woman infamous for poisoning, was sent to Rome by C.
Sentius, and being suddenly dead at Brundisium, had no token upon her that she
had taken her own bane; and that the poison was found hidden in a knarle of
her hair. But Piso having sent his son before him to the city, with lessons
how to pacify the Prince, went toward Drusus, not hoping to find him cruel
in his behalf, for the death of his brother, but rather favorable, as being
rid of such a concurrent. Tiberius to make a show of upright dealing, having
entertained the young man courteously, used the like liberality toward him as
he was accustomed to do to the noble men's children of such as he was familiar
with. Drusus answered him, that if the accusations laid against him were true,
the greatest grief should be his: and for his own part he could wish they
should be false and vain; and that Germanicus death might be prejudicial to
none. These words were openly uttered, and not in secret; neither was it
doubted at all, but that Tiberius had before hand taught him his lesson; when
as being plain, simple, and young, yet showed the cunning of the old man. Piso
having past over the Dalmatian sea, and left his ships at Ancona, went by
Picenum, and after by the Flaminian way, ouertooke the legion which was brought
from Pannony to Rome, to lie in garrison in Affricke: being common in every
man's mouth, how in the camp and in the way he did often show himself to the
soldiers. From Narnia (whether it were to avoid suspicion, or because such as
stand in fear are irresolute in their determinations) being conveyed by Nare,
and anon after by Tiber, he increased the evil will of the people toward him,
because he landed near the Caesar's tomb: on a day when the shore was full of
people: many followers after him: and Plancina accompanied with a train of
women, both, pleasant and cheerful in countenance. Among other causes of
envy and hart-burning, Pisoes house was one, looking on the market place,
trimmed to feast and banquet in, where nothing could be hidden. The next day
Fulcinius Trio, accused Piso before the Consuls. Vitellius and Veranius, and
the rest which had followed Germanicus, alleged that that was their office,
and that Trio had no part therein: and that as witnesses and openers of the
cause; and not as accusers, they were to report that which Germanicus had given
them in charge. Trio relinquishing the accusation, obtained license to accuse
his former life: and the Prince entreated to receive the hearing of the cause
to himself: which the defendant refused not, as misdoubting the Senators, and
peoples good will: and contrary, being well assured that Tiberius regarded not
rumors, but would lean to his mothers conscience: and that the truth; or
things believed and wrested to the worst, might easilier be discerned by one
judge: whereas hatred and envy bear the sway where there are many. Tiberius
was not ignorant, how weighty a cause he undertook, and how diversely he was
censured: and therefore calling some of his familiar friends about him, hearing
the menaces of the accusers; then the request of the party arraigned, referred
the whole cause to the Senate. In the mean season, Drusus returning from
Illyrium: although the Senators had decreed, that for receiving of Maroboduus,
and exploits done the summer past, he should enter the city, ouant, or with a
small triumph: yet deferring that honor for the time, he entered privately.
After that Piso had demauded T. Arruntius, Fulcinius, Asinius Gallus,
Aeserninus, Marcellus, Sext. Pompeius for his advocates; and all of them
alleging diverse excuses, M. Lepidus, L. Piso, and Liueneius Regulus undertook
his defense: the whole city being attentive to know how Germanicus friends
would stick unto him; what hope the party arraigned had; whether Tiberius were
able to master his affections, or would show himself. All these things were
greedily expected of the people: never showing themselves more attentive, nor
at any time licencing themselves a more secret speech of the Prince, or
suspicious silence. The day that the Senate met, Caesar made a premeditate
oration, tempered in this sort, saying: That Piso had been his fathers
Lieutenant and friend, and given by him to Germanicus as a coadiutor, by the
authority of the Senate, in the administration of the affairs of the East:
but whether he had there exasperated the young Prince, through disobedience and
contention: and whether he had showed himself glad of his death: or
villanously had made him away; that they should judge of that with upright
consciences. For if being Lieutenant, he has gone beyond the bounds of his
office: and shaken off his duty to his lord general: and reioysed in his
death, and my grief: I will hate him, and estrange him from my house, and
revenge, not the Princes, but private grudges. If any villainous deed be
detected in him worthy of revenge, even in the death of any private person,
afford your selves, and Germanicus children, and us, his father, reasonable
and just comfort. And examine also whether seditiously and mutinously Piso has
stirred up the army: whether by ambition he has sought to win the favor of
the soldiers: whether he returned into the province by force of arms: or
whether these things be false; and made greater then they are, by the accusers:
with whose ouergreat affection I have just cause to be offended. For to what
purpose should his body be shown naked; be handled of the common people; and
bruted abroad among strangers, as though he had been empoisoned; if these
things be yet uncertain, and are to be inquired of? I lament truly, and am
grieved for my son, and always shall. But I hinder not the defendant, to
allege all he can, for the purgation of his innocence: or if Germanicus had
any fault worthy of reprehension. And I beseech you, not to take the crimes
as already proved, because the cause is joined with my sorrow. If either his
neernes in blood, or his own faithfulness, has yielded him any to defend his
cause; help him, as much as in you lies, either by your eloquence or care, in
this his extremity. To the same labor and constancy, I exhort the accusers.
Germanicus this only privilege we will afford above the laws: that his
death shall be rather inquired of in the Curia, then in the Forum: before the
Senate, then other Judges. Let all the rest be debated with like modesty,
nothing regarding Drusus tears: or my grief: or if any slanders be forged
against me. After that, the accusers had two days given them to bring in their
accusations; and after six days were past, the defanda^t had three more to
justify himself. Then Fulcinius began with stale and frivolous matters: as
that he had governed Spain ambitiously, and couetously. Whereof being
convicted, he could not be interessed; if he could purge himself of the later
crimes: nor if he could defend himself from that accusation; yet was he not
acquitted, if greater matters were laid to his charge. After him Seruaeus, and
Veranius, and Vitellius with like affection; but Vitellius with greater
eloquence objected that Piso, for hatred to Germanicus and desire of
innovation, had so far corrupted the common soldier with licentiousnes and
injuries toward the confederates: that of the lewdest sort, he was called the
father of the legions. Further, that he had used cruelty against every good
man; and especially against Germanicus followers and friends: in the end, that
he had killed him with poison and enchantments. Then, that he and Plancina used
wicked ceremonies and sacrifices: that he had borne arms against the
commonwealth: that he would never have appeared in judgment, had he not been
overcome in battle. In many things his defense was weak: for he could not
deny but that he had woone the soldier by ambition: or that he had not exposed
the province as a pray, to the lewdest sort: nor the injurious speeches
against the general. Only he seemed to have purged himself of the
empoisoning: which indeed the accusers did not sufficiently prove: accusing
him to have empoisoned Germanicus meat with his hand, which was infected, as
he sat above him at a banquet. For it seemed absurd, that he should dare so
bold an attempt, amongst other men's servants, in the sight of so many standers
by, and in Germanicus own presence. And thereupon he offered his family, and
was very earnest that his seruitors might be examined upon the rack. But the
Judges were implacable for diverse respects: Caesar because he had made war
against the province: the Senators, because they could never believe, but that
Germanicus died by treachery: and that they had expostulated the matter by
letters the one to the other. Which Tiberius did no less deny then Piso.
Withal, the outcrie of the people was heard before the Senate house, that they
would not temper their hands, if he escaped by sentence of the Senate. And
they had drawn Pisoes images to the Gemonies; and broken them in pieces, if
they had not been saved, and put in their places again, by the princes
commandment. Piso was carried back in a chariot, by a Tribune of the
Pretorian band, diversely rumored: whether he followed him as a guard for his
safety, or executioner of his death. The like hatred was toward Plancina, but
greater favor: and therefore it was doubted, how far Caesar's authority
would reach in her behalf. As long as there was any hope left for Piso, she
promised to take part of whatsoever fortune with him: and if it so fell out, to
be his companion in death. But she was no sooner pardoned through Augustaes
secret entreaty, but she began by little and little, to separate hir-selfe
from her husband, and bring her defenses apart. The which when Piso perceived,
to aboade his utter destruction: doubting whether he should make any further
trial in judgment: his sons persuading him, he hardneth himself, and goes
once again to the Senate. Where his accusation being renewed, and the Senators
voices against him; and having endured all things aduers and cruel: he was
amazed at nothing more, then that he saw Tiberius without pity, without anger,
resolute, and not swaied with any affection. Being brought home from thence, as
though he had premeditated some justification for the next day: he writes,
seals, and delivers some few lines unto a freed man. This done, he gave
himself to the accustomed care of his body. Then the night being far spent,
his wife going out of the chamber; he commands the doors to be shut: and
the next morning early, he was found with his throat cut, the sword lying on
the ground. I remember I have heard of ancient men, that Piso was often seen
to have a little book in his hands which he published not: but as his friends
said, it contained Tiberius letters, and Commission against Germanicus: and
that he had purposed to disclose it to the Lords of the Senate, and accuse the
Prince; had he not been deluded by Seianus vain promises: and that he killed
not himself, but that some one was sent to murder him. But I will not assure,
either of those things: although I ought not to conceal it to have been
uttered by those, which lived until I came to man's estate.

III. Pisoes letters to Tiberius: Plancina is quit.
CAEsar having changed his countenance into sadness; persuading himself that,
that death of Pisoes would breed him envy: questioned often in Senate how Piso
had behaved himself, the day before he died; and how he had passed the last
night. And he answering most things wisely; and some inconsiderately; recites
the co^tents of the writing made by Piso almost as follows. Being oppressed
by the conspiracies of my enemies, and envy of a false crime: so far, that
there is no place left to my innocence and truth: I call the immortal gods to
witness O Caesar, that I have lived with all loyalty toward thee; and no less
duty toward thy mother. And I beseech you, that you would be an aid and
stay unto my children. Among which Cn. Piso is guiltles of my fortune
whatsoever it be: seeing he has lived all this while in the city. M. Piso did
always dissuade me from returning to Syria. And I would to God, I had rather
yielded to the counsel of my young son, then he to his old father. And
therefore I beseech you most earnestly, that being innocent, he suffer not
the punishment of my demerit. By the service of five and forty years, by the
fellowship of the Consulship which we bore together, once liked of Augustus the
father, and a friend to thee; I recommend unto thee as my last request, my
unfortunate sons life. Of Plancina he added no word. After this, Tiberius
excused the young man of the civil wars, because the son could not disobey
the fathers commandment: withal, he had compassion on the noblenes of his
house, and his own heavy fortune, howsoever he had deserved. Of Plancina he
spoke with shame and discredit: pretending his mothers entreaty: against whom
every good man was incensed, and secretly complained, saying: Is it lawful
then for the grandmother to look upon the murderesse of her nephew, talk with
her, and take her out of the hands of the Senate, that justice might not be
executed? Shall not that have place in Germanicus, which the law does permit
all other citizens? Caesar was bewailed by Vitellius and Veranius: Plancina
defended by the Emperor and Augusta: that now she might convert her skill and
poisons which she had so happily experimented, against Agrippina and her
children, and satiat the good grandmother and uncle with the blood of a most
miserable house. Two days were spent under color of examining the cause:
Tiberius urging Pisoes children, to defend their mother: and when the accusers
and witnesses, had spoken a vie against her, and no man answered for her, pity
increased more then envy against her. Aurelius Cotta being first demanded his
opinion (for Caesar propounding the case, the magistrates spoke first) gave his
censure that the memory of Piso should be blotted out of the Chronicles: that
part of his goods should be confiscated; and part bestowed upon Gn. Piso his
son; with condition that he should change his name: that M. Piso being
deposed from his dignity, and receiving About 39060 pound.
fifty hundred thousand sesterces, should be exiled for ten years: and
Plancinaes life pardoned at the suite of Augusta. Diverse points of that
sentence were mitigated by the Prince, as that Pisoes name should not be wiped
out of the Fasti: seeing that M. Antonius, who had made war against his
country; and Julius Antonius name, who had violated Augustus house, remained:
and M. Piso he delivered from infamy, and granted him his fathers goods,
never as I have often said, greedy of money: and at that time more easilier
pleased, for shame that Plancina was quit. And when Valerius Messallinus
propounded, that there should an image of gold be set up in Mars their
reuengers temple: and Cecina Seuerus an altar erected to revenge. He hindered
both, alleging that those things were to be dedicated and offered for foreign
victories, and that domestical adversities ought to be buried in sorrow.
Messallinus added, that thanks should be given to Tiberius and Augusta, to
Antonie and Agrippina, and to Drusus for Germanicus revenge, not once
mentioning Claudius. And L. Asprenas asking Messallinus before the Senate,
whether he had willingly omitted him? Claudius name was then first added. The
more I meditate with my self of things done both in old and later times; the
more the uncertainties and vanities of fortune in mortal affairs come to my
remembrance: for in fame, hope, estimation, all men were rather destined to the
sovereignty, then he, whom fortune had kept hidden for the future monarch. A
few days after Caesar persuaded the Lords of the Senate to bestow the dignity
of Priesthood upon Vitellius, Veranius, and Seruaeus: and having promised his
voice to Fulcinius for the obtaining of any dignity, advised him not to
overthrow his eloquence with rashness. And that was the end of revenging
Germanicus death: many things diversely reported; not only among such as then
lived, but in times consequent. So doubtful are all weighty matters; whilst
some take all as certain, howsoever they hear it: others report a truth
otherwise then it is: posterity adding to both.

IIII. Wars renewed in Affricke under Tacfarinas: who is defeated by Apronius:
Lepida condemned for changing a child.
But Drusus being gone out of the city, once more to learn future things by
the flieng of birds; enters in again, with a small triumph. And a few
days after, Vipsania his mother died, only of all Agrippas children, of a
natural death: because it was certainly believed, that some died by the
sword; others by poison or famine. The same year Tacfarinas, who as I have
said was the last summer driven out by Camillus, renueth the war in
Affricke: at the first by rouing pillages; unrevenged by reason of his sudden
coming; then by wasting of villages; and carrieng away great booties; and last
of al not far from the river Pagyda he besieged a Roman cohort. One Decrius was
Captain of the fort, a lusty man, and of good skill in matters of war: who
taking that besieging as a disgrace to himself; encourages his soldiers to
fight in open field; and marshalled his army in order of battle before the
fortress. The cohort being beaten back at the first brunt: he runs in
among the weapons of such as fled; rebuking the standard bearers, that a Roman
soldier would show his back, to a few untrained raw traitors. And having
received wounds, and an eye stricken out; yet put himself in the face of the
enemy; never leaving of fighting, until he was forsaken of his company and
slain in the place. Which when L. Apronius (who suceeded Camillus) understood:
being more perplexed with the shame of his own people; then glory of the
enemy: he draws out by lot (a rare matter in those days though in old times
practiced) every tenth person of the dishonorable band, and beats him with
cudgels to death. Which severity wrought so great good, that an ensign of old
soldiers, in number not above five hundred; defeated Tacfarinas army, going
about to assault a fort called Thala. In which battle Ruffus Heluius, a common
soldier, got the credit of saving a citizens life: on whom L. Apronius
bestowed chains and a spear. Caesar added a ciuicall crown to them: finding
fault rather then offended, that Apronius had not given it by his proconsularie
authority. But Tacfarinas perceiving the Numidians to be daunted, and refusing
to besiege any longer, scattered his war; giving ground when he was pursued:
and following a fresh when their backs were turned. Which manner of fight used
by the Barbarian, molested and kept the Roman play, to no purpose. But after
that greedy of pray, he drew to the sea coasts, and there encamped. Apronius
Cesianus being sent thither by his fathers appointment, with a troop of
horsemen and aid cohorts; adding unto them the rudest of the legions; had a
prosperous fight, and drove the Numidian to the deserts. Lepida, who besides
the honor of the Aemilian family, from which she was descended; had L. Sulla,
and Cn. Pompeius for her great grandfathers, was accused at Rome, for faining
her self to have had a child, by P. Quirinius, a rich man and without
children: and also of adulteries and empoisonings: and that she had consulted
with the Chaldeans against the house of Caesar: her brother Manius Lepidus
defending her cause. Quirinius being offended, and separated from her; yet had
commiseration on her, although she were both infamous and faulty. In the
hearing of that cause, it was hard to guess the princes mind; he did so turn
and wind himself, and interlace tokens of anger with clemency: having first
of all requested that matters of treason should not be debated at that time.
Then he drew M. Seruilius, once Consul, and other witnesses to broach such
matter, which he would seem to have suppressed: and sent to the Consuls
Lepidaes servants, whom he had guarded before with a company of soldiers: and
would not suffer them to answer by torture, to such interrogatories as did
appertain to his house. Neither that Drusus Consul elect should first yield
his opinion: which some construed to be a point of civility; that others
should not be forced to do the like: others did wrest it to cruelty: and that
he should never have given place, but to condemn the party called in
question. Lepida, the day of hearing falling out when the plays were to be
shown; entering the Theater with a company of noble women: calling on her
ancestors with a doleful lamentation; and Pompey himself, whose monuments
and images were there in view: moved such great compassion, that the people
gushing out in tears, began to curse Quirinius: wishing him all cruelty and
misfortune: upon whom being old and without children, and of base parentage,
she was bestowed, who had once been destined a wife for L. Caesar, and
daughter in law to Augustus. Not long after her lewd behavior was discovered;
by torturing her slaves: and all of them condescended unto Rubellius Blandus
opinion, which was that she should be banished. Drusus yielded unto his
opinion, although others were mildlier bent. Then Scaurus, who had had a
daughter by her, obtained, that her goods should not be confiscate. At last
Tiberius declared, that he was assured also by P. Quirinius slaves, that she
sought to poison him, as being an enemy always to noble houses. And so in a
short compass of time, the Calphurnians lost Piso: and the Aemilians Lepida.
But D. Silanus being restored to the Iunian family, was a comfort unto it:
whose fortunes I will lay down.

V. Decius Silanus touched with adultery: Papias Poppaeus law against
single life.
AS fortune was favorable to Augustus in government of state: so in household
matters unlucky and improsperous: his daughter and Niece which he banished the
city, being both of incontinent life: and the adulterers punished with death
or exile. For perceiving the offense to be common in the mouth both of man and
woman; and terming it by a rigorous name, of religion violated, or treason; he
passed the bonds of his ancestors clemency, and his own laws. But I will
lay down the ends of others, and what has happened in that age: if having
finished this which I have begun I shall have longer life, to undertake farther
matter. Decius Silanus, who was accused to have committed adultery with
Augustus Niece, although there was no seuerer punishment decreed against him,
then that he should be deprived of Caesar's friendship; yet interpreting that
to be a banishment, durst never entreat pardon of the Senate and the Prince,
until Tiberius came to be Emperor; and that by his brother M. Silanus credit
and authority, for his great nobility and eloquence highly esteemed. But
Silanus thanking Tiberius: he answered before the Lords of the Senate, that he
was glad of his brothers return from a long peregrination: and that he might
lawfully so do, because he was not expulsed by decree of Senate or law: yet
that the offense committed against his father, was entire: and that by Silanus
return, those things were not made frustrate which Augustus had decreed. He
remained after this in the city, but as a private man without office. After
this, they debated the matter concerning the moderation of the law Papia
poppaea, which Augustus stricken in years, had ordained after the Julian laws,
for augmenting the punishment of single life, and enriching the public
treasure. Neither for all that, were marriages and education of children the
more frequented: the single life having taken strong root: whereby the
multitude of the endangered by the law, growing greater, most houses were
subverted by the interpretations of enformers: and as heretofore through
lewdnes of life; so now by laws the estate of many was overthrown. This
gives me occasion to speak more at large of the beginning of laws; and by
what means we are come to such an infinite multitude and variety of them. In
most ancient times no disordinate desire reigned: every man lived without
reproach and vice; and therefore without punishment and restraint of laws;
neither was there any need of reward, when as every man desired honest things
of his own will: and where nothing was demanded against custom, nothing was
forbidden by fear. But after that equality was banished, and that ambition
and violence crept in, in stead of modesty and shame; rule and dominion took
footing, and continued for ever among many nations. Some presently, or after
they were weary of kings, desired rather laws: which at the first were simple,
men's minds being yet rude. And above the rest, fame commended those of the
Cretensians which Minos gave: and those of the Sparteans, which Lycurgus: and
not long after Solon prescribed more, and more exquisite, to the people of
Athens. Romulus ruled us as pleased himself: then Numa bound the people with
ceremonies, and divine laws: some were found out by Tullus and Ancus: but the
chiefest lawmakers was Seruius Tullius, which kings themselves were bound to
obey. Tarquinius being driven out; the people made many against the factions of
the Senators, to defend their liberty and establish concord. Then ten men were
chosen, to collect all the best laws of other countries; out of which they
composed twelve tables: the end of law and equity. As for the laws which
followed, although they were sometimes made against malefactors for their
misdemeanors; yet notwithstanding for the most part, they were brought in,
through the dissension of the communaltie and noble men: for getting of
unlawful dignities: or driving out of noble men; or other disorders. By this
occasion, the Gracchi, and the Saturnini were disturbers of the people: and
Drusus no less prodigal under pretense of the Senators name, corrupted his
companions with hope, or mocked them by sundry oppositions against them.
Neither did they omit in the war of Italy, nor in the civil war, to make
many laws: until L. Sulla the Dictator, the former laws either abolished or
changed: after he had added many unto them; forbear sometime from making any
more, though not long by reason of Lepidus turbulent demands: and because that
not long after, license was yielded the Tribunes to manage the people, as
themselves lusted. And now not in general, but against particular men laws
were ordained: and thereby in a common wealth most corrupt; laws upon laws
were multiplied. Then Cn. Pompeius being a third time Consul, and chosen for
reformation of manners; being more severe in punishing then the offense
deserved; was the author and ouerthrower of his own laws: and lost those
things by arms, which he had defended by arms. From that time forward there
was continual discord twenty years together: no custom; no law observed:
the most lewdest enterprises escaped unpunished: and many undone for well
doing. At length Augustus Caesar being the sixth time Consul, and settled in the
state, abolished those things, which being Triumuir himself had commanded: and
gave new laws to be observed in time of peace and under a Prince. Straighter
laws were made by him; and spies appointed to watch the tra^sgressors: and
many induced through reco^penses granted by the law Papia poppaea; that if
any forbear from the privileges of parents, ceast from marriage, and had no
children: that then the people who was the common father of all, should inherit
their goods. But the pickthanks went farther, and informed against many, not
only in the city, but also through all Italy, and where soever else the
citizens were: and overthrew many men's estates, and drove a terror into all: if
Tiberius in providing a remedy had not chosen by lot, five such as had been
Consuls, five as had been Pretors, and so many of the rest of the Senators,
which soluing many intricate quirks of this law, were some ease for the
present time.

VI. Nero is recomended by Tiberius to the Senate: and marries with Iulia,
Drusus daughter.
ABout the same time, he recomended Nero, one of Germanicus children, now
entered into his youth, to the Lords of the Senate: and requested that he might
be dispensed with for the office of Vigintiuirat: and (which to all men seemed
ridiculous) be lawful for him to demand the Questorship, five years sooner
then the laws did permit: pretending that the same was granted him and his
brother at Augustus request. But I doubt not, but at that time, some secretly
laughed at that demand. Yet these were the first beginnings of Caesar's rising;
and the ancient custom more in every man's eyes: and a lighter band of
alliance, held to be betwixt the father in law, and his wives children; then
the granfather and his nephew. The Pontifical dignity was likewise bestowed
upon him: and the first time he entered the place of common assemblies; he gave
the people a donatiue: very joyful to see Germanicus offspring now of full
age. Their joy was augmented by Neroes marrieng of Iulia, Drusus daughter. And
as these things were grateful to the people; so went it against their
stomachs, that Seianus should be destined father in law to Claudius son, as a
disparagement to their nobility: and that at their own motion they exalted
Seianus, who conceived over great hopes in his mind. In the end of that year
died L. Volutius, and Sal. Crispus, two noble personages. Volusius was
descended of an ancient stock; but never higher then a Pretors room:
himself obtained a Consuls room: and was made Censor for the choosing of bands
of horsemen; and the first gatherer of riches, whereby that house rose to that
greatness. Crispus was a gentleman borne, and so called and adopted by that
excellent writer of the Roman History C. Sallustius, because he was his
sisters nephew. But he, although he had a ready entrance for obtaining of
dignities; yet following the example of Maecenas never once being Senator, had
greater authority and power, then many which had triumphed and been Consuls.
Yet differed from his ancestors in manner of life; as being neat, fine, and
bountiful, very near riotousnes; and was of a great capacity, and in courage
able to perform great matters: and so much the more lively; by how much in
utter show he seemed drousie and heavy metled. Therefore whilst Maecenas
lived, next unto him his credit was best: and after his death, trusted with
greatest secrets of state; and privy to the murdering of Posthumus Agrippa;
and grown into years, held rather a shadow of the Princes friendship, then
the substance. Even so fell it out with Maecenas; either so by the course of
the heavens decreed, that Princes favor is seldom everlasting; or because
both have their fill: those when they have given all they can; these when there
is nothing left to desire. Now follows the fourth time Tiberius; and the
second that Drusus was made Consul: a thing worthy of remembrance, that the
father and the son were fellow officers: for two years before, Germanicus had
the same dignity with Tiberius: but that was no joy to the uncle; neither he
so near in blood unto him. In the beginning of that year Tiberius went to
Campania, under color of getting his health; yet indeed by little and little
to absent himself; or else that the father being away, Drusus might alone
manage the whole Consulship. It fell out by mere chance, that a matter of
small moment growing to a weighty contention, brought the young man to great
credit. Domitius Corbulo, who had been Praetor, complained before the Lords of
the Senate, on L. Sulla a noble young man, that he gave him not the place at a
play of fencers. For Corbulo, made his age; the custom of the country; and
the favor of the ancient men: on the other side, Mamercus Scaurus, and L.
Arruntius, and other of his kindred, stuck unto Sulla. Orations were made on
both sides: and examples of old times brought, sharply rebuking the
irreuerence of youth: until Drusus qualified the matter with a fit discourse;
and Corbulo satisfied by Mamercus the most excellent Orator of his time, and
uncle, and father in law to Sulla. The same Corbulo exclaiming that many high
ways of Italy were broken, and not passable; by reason of the fraud of the
undertakers of the work, and negligence of magistrates in great; accepts
willingly the finishing of that business. Which did not so much turn to a
public benefit, as the destruction of many: whose wealth and fame he
tyrannised by condemning them, and setting their goods to sale.

VII. Whether Captains and Governors of provinces should have their vviues
with them.
NOt long after, Tiberius sent letters to the Senate; aduertising them that by
Tacfarinas incursions, Affrike was again in arms: and that with the advice of
the Lords it were needful, that a Preconsull were chosen, skillful in matters
of war; of an able body, and a sufficient man for this war. Which entrance
Sextus Pompeius having gotten, of uttering his malice against M. Lepidus;
accused him to be a coward, beggarly, and a dishonor to his ancestors; and
therefore not to be admitted to lot, for the government of Asia. The Senators
were on his side; who thought Lepidus rather meek then a coward; and the small
wealth left him by his father; and his nobility past without reproach, rather
they judged a credit, then an ignominy. And therefore he was sent into Asia.
And touching Africa, it was decreed that Caesar should choose one himself for
that charge. Whilst these things were a doing, Seuerus Caecina was of
opinion, that no magistrate unto whom should fall the government of a Province,
should have his wife follow him: having first often repeated, the good
agreement betwixt him and his wife: that he had six children by her: and that
he propounded nothing publicly to be executed, which he had not observed at
home: not suffering his to go out of Italy, although he had had commanderie in
wars forty years in many provinces. It was not in vain, said he, ordained in
times past, that women should not be drawn to co^federates and foreign
nations. For it was incident where women followed, that in peace they were a
hinderance by riot and sumptousnes: in war by fear; and made the Roman
army, like the Barbarians going to war. That sex was not only weak and
unable to take pain; but if it got the bridle, cruel, ambitious and greedy of
rule. To march among the soldiers, to have the Centurions at command; we have
seen a woman of late: and to ouersee the cohorts exercise, and the legions
horseraces. That they should consider, that as often as any were accused of
extortion and polling, more was objected against their wives, then themselves.
That the lew dest persons of the provinces, did by and by cleave unto them.
They would intermeddle and conclude of all affairs: by this means two were
courted, and two judgment seats. Women being wilful, command proudly; and
brideled by the Oppian and other laws; now having gotten the raines in their
hands, rule houses, places of judgments, and armies. This was heard but with
the good likin of a few: many interrupting him, and saying, that that was not
the matter propounded: nor Caecina a fit censurer to swaie a matter of so great
importance. Valerius Messallinus, son unto Messalla, in whom appeared the
image of his fathers eloquence, answered immediately as follows. Many hard
and irksome customs of our predecessors, have been changed into the better
and pleasanter. Neither was the city besieged as in times past: or the
provinces at defiance with us; and some few things are granted to women's
necessities: which are so far from ouercharging the confederates; that they
are not burdensome to their husbands houses. Other things were common as well
to the husband as the wife; and no hinderance at all therein to peace. True it
is, that wars are to be undertaken by armed men: but unto such as return
after their labors, what more honester solace then a man's wife? But some have
fallen into ambition and covetousness. What? of magistrates themselves, are not
many of them subject unto sundry affections? yet it cannot be, that none should
be sent into the province. But oftentimes the husbands have been corrupted by
the naughtines of their wives: are therefore all single men vncorrupt? The
Oppian laws were once in use, the state of the common wealth so requiring; but
afterward somewhat of their rigor was remitted and mitigated, because it was
then expedient. It was in vain to cover our cowardlines with new names; for it
was the husbands fault, if the woman exceeded the mean. In fine, it were not
well done for the weakness of one or two, to take from husbands their companion
in prosperous and adverse fortune: and withal, a sex ^^^ake and frail by
nature, to be left alone, and exposed by her own licentiousnes, to the lust of
others. Matrimony could hardly be kept undefiled, their husbands being present:
what would become of them, if they should be forgotten for many years, as it
were by diuorcement? therefore they should so prevent faults committed abroad,
that they forget not the dishonors of the city. Drusus added somewhat of his
own matrimony, and that Princes most often visit the remotest parts of their
Empire. How often had Augustus of famous memory gone to the East and West,
accompanied with Liuia? That himself, had gone to Illyrium; and if it were
expedient, was ready to go into other countries: but yet not always
willingly, if he should be drawn from his most dear wife, and mother of so
many children, common between them both. And so Caecinas sentence took no
effect.

VIII. What abuses were committed by running to the Princes images. Wars in
Thrace.
THe next day that the Senate met, Tiberius having courtly rebuked the Lords of
the Senate by letters, because they did cast all the cares on the Princes neck,
nominated M. Lepidus, and Iunius Blaesus, one of them to be chosen Proconsull
of Affrike. And both of them being heard, Lepidus very earnestly excused
himself; pretending the feeblenes of his body; his childrens age; and a
daughter mariageable: respecting also (though thereof he made no mention) that
Blaesus was Seianus uncle; and therefore sure to carry it away. Blaesus
answered as though he would have refused, but not with the like asseueration as
the other; yet had a favorable hearing of flatterers. Then many secret
complaints were made known: for every lewd companion, if he could catch hold
on Caesar's image, might freely, and without punishment, injury honest men with
opprobrious speeches, and raise envy against them: yea, freed men and
bondslaues also, were feared, threatening with words and fists their patrons and
masters. Whereupon C. Cestius a Senator uttered these speeches: That in deed
Princes were like unto gods: but yet the gods heard no supplications but just:
neither had any refuge to the Capitol, or other temples of the city, that they
should use that as a defense against all misdemeanor. That the laws were
abolished and utterly overthrown: seeing that Annia Rufilla, whom he had
condemned of fraud before the judge, did threaten, and use reproachful
speeches against him, in the place of assemblies and before the Curia: he not
daring to try the law with her, because she had Caesar's image over against
her. Others muttered the like, or bitterer speeches then these; and besought
Drusus that he would show exemplarie punishment upon her: and being called and
convicted, was condemned to prison. Likewise Considius AEquus, and Coelius
Cursor Gentlemen of Rome, were by commandment of the Prince, and order of the
Senate punished, for forging crimes of treason against the Praetor Magius
Caecilianus. Both turned to Drusus commendation, because that by him who
conuersed in the city with all companies, in familiar communication; the
secret deseigments of his father were qualified. Neither did the young man's
riot greatly dislike them; reputing it a lesser fault, to employ the day in
buildings, and the night in banqueting; then given to no pleasures, alone
heavily to pass the day in lewd practices and devises. For Tiberius and the
accusers were not yet wearied. But Ancharius Priscus accused Caesius Cordus,
Proconsull of Creete, of powling the country: and added treason, which was a
supply when all other accusations failed. When Caesar perceived that Antistius
Vetus, one of the chief noble men of Macedonia, was acquitted of adultery laid
to his charge: having rebuked the judges, drew him in again, to purge himself
of treason; as being seditious and a confederate with Rhescuporis in his
counsels: when as having slain his brother Cotys, he intended war against
us. Whereupon he was banished into an Island; neither commodius for Macedonia,
nor Thrace. For Thrace, the kingdom being divided betwixt Rhoemetalces and
Cotys children; unto whom by reason of their infancy, Trebellienus Rufus was
made Tutor; through the strangenes of our manners, fell to rebel afresh: no
less blaming Rhoemetalces then Trebellienus, because they suffered the injuries
done to their people to escape unpunished. The Coelaletae, and the Odrusetae,
all strong nations; took arms under diverse Captains, for baseness of birth
not unlike: and therefore could not grow to any cruel battle. For some troubled
the present state; some passed the hill Haemus, to draw such to them as dwelt a
far off: most of them, and those of better government, besieged the King and
the city Philippopolis, built by Philip King of Macedon. Which when P.
Velleius understood, who was Captain of the next army: he sent a certain
company of horsemen, and a band of footmen lightly appointed, against those
which romed about for pillage; or to seek more succor: himself brought his
strength of footmen to raise the siege; all ending prosperously; the forragers
slain; and a dissension growing amongst the besiegers: the King sallied out
against these; the legions arrived in seasonable time. This deserved not the
name of an army or battle: in which a few unfurnished straglers were slain
without any bloodshed on our side.

IX. The Galli unable to pay their taxations rebel: Julius Florus and Julius
Sacrouir being their Captains.
THe same year the cities of Gallia, by reason they were greatly indebted,
began a rebellion: the chiefest firebrand among the Treueri being Julius
Florus, and with the Aedui Julius Sacrouir: both nobly descended, and whose
ancestors had achieved valiant acts; and therefore made citizens of Rome: then
a rare thing, and a guerdon only of virtue. They by secret conferences, having
drawn to them the most audacious; or such whose poverty, or fear of
punishments for their misdeeds, were ready to plunge themselves into any
enterprise: resolved that Florus should stir up the Belgi, and Sacrouir the
French nearer at hand. In their conuenticles therefore and meetings; they began
to cast out seditious speeches of their continual tributes; the greatness of
usury; the cruelty and arrogance of governors; and that the soldiers fell
together by the ears when they heard of Germanicus death. That that was a
notable time offered, of recovering their liberty: if now in their flourishing
estate they would weigh, how poor Italy was; how weak the city soldier;
and no strength in the armies, but what was in strangers. There was almost no
city which was not infected with the seeds of that commotion. The
Andecauians, and the Turonians were the first which burst out: of which the
Andecauians were subdued, by the Lieutenant Acilius Auiola; with a band of men
which lay in garrison at Lugdunum. The Turonians were overthrown by the
legionarie soldier; which Visellius Varro, Lieutenant of lower Germany, sent
under the same captain Auiola: and certain of the chief gentlemen of Gallia,
which brought him aid; the better thereby to cloak their revolt, and when
occasion served, rebel with more assurance. Sacrouir was seen to demand
battle of the Romans bare headed, as he said to show his valor: but the
captains said he did it to make himself the better known; thereby to be
spared from their darts. Tiberius being consulted upon that point, made no
reckoning of the disclosing of it; but nourished the war by doubting. Florus
in the mean time held on his purpose; enticed a wing of horsemen, enrowled at
Treuers, and trained up in our service and discipline; that having slain the
Roman merchants, which there used traffic; he might begin the war: few of
the horsemen were corrupted; but most continued in their allegiance. Other
rude indebted persons, or followers, took arms; and went toward the forest
called Arden: but the legions from both armies; which Visellius, and C. Silius
had set to cross them, drove them back. Julius Indus being of the same city;
and an enemy to Florus (and therefore more foreward to show his valor) being
sent before with a choice power; scattered and defeated that disordered
multitude. Florus escaped the conquerours hands, by uncertain lurking holes;
and at last perceiving the soldiers to set on his places of refuge, slew
himself with his own hands. And that was the end of the rebellion of those of
Treueri. It was a matter of great difficulty to suppress the Aedui; by reason
their city was more wealthy; and the aid which should have subdued them
farther off. Sacrouir had with certain armed cohorts, gotten possession of
Augustodunum, the chief city of the country; and taken the noblest men's
children of all Gallia, which there followed their studies; as a pledge to win
and bind their parents and kindred: and withal, secretly distributed weapons
which himself had caused to be made, to all the youth. They were in number
forty thousand; the fifth part armed as the legions were: the others with
hunting staves, hangers, and such other weapons, as hu^ters use. To these were
added certain slavish fencers; covered according to the country fashion, from
top to toe, in armor of iron; unapt and uneasy to strike; but to withstand
impenetrable, whom they call Crupellarij. These forces were augmented, though
not by any open consent of cities adioining; yet with every man's particular
good will: the Roman captains striving and doubting who should have the
conducting of the war; both desiring it. But Varro being old and feeble,
yielded to Silius, who was in his prime. It was current in Rome, that not only
the Treueri, and the Aedui, but also that threescore and four cities of Gallia
had revolted; and the Germans joined with them: that Spain was wavering; and
all (as the nature of a report is) believed, more then it was. Every good man
with a care of the commonwealth was greatly grieved: many disliking the
present state, and desirous of alteration, reioysed even in their own harms:
and blamed Tiberius that in so great a hurlyburly, he would still spend his
labor in hearing accusers libels. What (said they) shall Julius Sacrouir be
condemned of treason in Senate? at last some were found, which with arms
would suppress these bloody libels of accusers: that a miserable peace was
well changed for war. Tiberius so much the more composed to a careless
security, changed neither place nor countenance; passed over those days after
his accustomed wont, either through haughtines of courage; or because he knew
the matter to be lighter then the report. In the mean time Silius marching on
with two legions, having sent a power of allies before, wastes the villages of
the Sequans, which were borderers and confederates with the Aeduans. Anon after
he marches speedily with his army toward Augustodunum: the standard-bearers
striving who should make most haste: and the common soldier fretting, and
chasing likewise, least he should rest the night as he was wont: only that they
might see the enemy, and be seen, that would be enough for the victory.
Twelve miles off, Sacrouir appeared in the champian country. In the front he
had placed his men covered with iron: his cohorts on the wings: and those which
were half armed in the rereward: himself mounted on a goodly courser, amongst
the chiefest of the city; went to the soldiers, and put them in mind of the
ancient glory of the Galli; and how often they had defeated the Romans. How
honorable a thing liberty was to the conquerors: and how intolerable
servitude would be, if they should be vanquished again. This exhortation was
not long nor pleasing: for the legions drew near in battle array: the
townsmen wanting discipline, and ignorant of service, did neither see nor
hear what was best for them. Silius on the contrary side, although his hope
had taken away all occasions of encouraging them, yet cried: That it was a
shame for them, being conquerors over the Germans, to be brought against the
Galli, as against enemies: and that of late one cohort had vanquished the
rebellious Toronians; one wing the Treueri: a few troops of horsemen of this
same army, had put to flight the Sequans. By how much the richer the Aedui are
in money, and abounding in pleasures, the lesser courage they had. Break then
in upon them, and bind them, and flee to those which run away. At that all of
them giving an outcry, the horsemen compassed them in: the footmen set on the
point: and the wings made small resistance. Those in complet iron harnes, stuck
somewhat to it: their plates resisting, and beating back the darts and swords:
but the soldier snatching his hatchets and axes, as though he were to break
through a wall, hewed their covering and carcasses. Some with poles or forks
overthrew this sluggish lump: leaving them for half dead lying on the ground,
not once going about to rise. Sacrouir goes first to Augustodunum; then, for
fear least it should be yielded, to the next village, with a few of his
trustiest friends; where he slew himself with his own hands, and the rest one
another: and the village being set on fire over them, they were all burnt
together. Then at last Tiberius wrote to the Senate, that the war was begun
and ended: neither adding nor taking away from the truth. And that the
Lieutenants had behaved themselves faithfully and valorously; and himself
directed them with counsel. And withal yielded the reasons, why neither he
nor Drusus went to the war; magnifying the greatness of the Empire: and that it
was not meet that Princes, if some one or other town rebel, should forsake
Rome; from whence all other government was derived. Now because there was no
cause of fear, he would go see and settle the present estate of things. The
Lords of the Senate derceed vows and processions for his return, with other
convenient ceremonies. Dolabella Cornelius only whilst he went about to
exceed others, falling into absurd flattery, thought it meet that he should
from Campania enter into the city, ouant. Whereupon Caesar wrote, that he was
not so needy of renown, that having vanquished most stout and proud nations;
and received or refused in his youth so many triumphs; he would in his old age
hunt after a vain reward of a voyage near the city.

X. Lepidus makes an oration in defense of C. Lutorius accused of treason.
ABout the same time, he made request unto the Senate that Sulpitius Quirinius
death, might be solemnised with public funerals. Quirinius was not of the
ancient patritian family of the Sulpitians; but borne at Lanuuium a free
town: a valiant warrior; and forwards in all his charges: was Consul under
Augustus of famous memory. Then having won by assault the fortress of the
Homonadensians in Cilicia; the marks of triumph were awarded him; then given
as a guide to C. Caesar in the regiment of Armenia: and when Tiberius was at
Rhodes, showed him all duties of love; which Tiberius did open in Senate,
praising his dutifulnes toward him; and accused M. Lollius, to have persuaded
C. Caesar to seditions and lewdnes. But unto the rest, the memory of Quirinius
was nothing pleasing, by reason as I have said, of the danger he brought
Lepida into, and miserable niggishnes, and powerable old age. In the end of the
year a cari-tale, accused C. Lutorius Priscus a gentleman of Rome; who had
composed notable funeral verses upon Germanicus death, and received money of
Caesar for them: obiecting that he had made them in honor of Drusus being
sick: to the end that if he had died, they should have been published for
greater reward. Those verses Lutorius, upon vain glory had read in P.
Petronius house, in the presence of Vitellia, his mother in law, and many
other noble women. As soon as the pickthanke had showed himself; the rest
forced by fear to give witness: only Vitellia stood to it, that she had heard
nothing. But more credit being given to such as testified to his overthrow:
sentence of death was pronounced against him, by Haterius Agrippa Consul
elect. Against whom M. Lepidus began to speak in this manner. If we consider,
Lords of the Senate, with what a wicked tongue Lutorius Priscus has polluted his
mind, and men's ears: neither prison, nor halter, nor any servile torments,
could suffice to punish him. But if lewd and heinous facts be without mean:
yet the moderation of a Prince; your own and your ancestors examples do
mollify the punishments and remedies of them: vain things do differ from
wicked; and words from villainous deeds. And therefore judgment may be given;
by which neither this man's offense go scot-free; and we not repent us, either
of our clemency or severity. I have often heard our Prince complain, if any
by killing himself has prevented his cleme^cy; Lutorius life is yet in
safety: who being kept alive, will neither breed danger to the commonwealth;
nor put to death, serve for example to others. As his studies were full of
folly and without sense, so they are likewise vain, and quickly at an end.
Neither is there any cause to fear any great or serious matter in him; who
bewraying his own imperfections; does creep not into men's, but women's
breasts. Yet let him be expulsed the city. Which I judge to be all one as if
he had been convicted of treason. Among all the Consuls only Rubellius Blandus
agreed with Lepidus: the rest following Agrippaes opinion; Priscus was lead to
prison; and immediately deprived of his life. The fact Tiberius with his
accustomed ambiguitie of words, blamed in Senate: extolling the zealous
affection of severe punishments of princes injuries, though small: yet
entreated them that they would not so rashly punish words: praised Lepidus,
and rebuked not Agrippa. Whereupon a decree of Senate was made; that their
orders should not be carried to the treasury before ten days were expired:
and that so long the condemneds life should be prolonged. But the Senators had
no license to repent, and revoke their sentence; and Tiberius not to be
pacified by tract of time.

XI. Tiberius letter touching reformation of abuses.
THe year following, C. Sulpitius, and D. Haterius, were created Consuls: all
being quiet from foreign troubles: but severity against superfluities
suspected at home: which was grown to exceeding excess in all things, wherein
money is lauishly spent. Some of their expenses, although more unreasonable;
yet were cloaked, by dissembling their prices: but gluttony and belly-cheere,
every man commonly speaking of; put them in fear, least the prince should
rigorously proceed according to the ancient provident frugalitie. For C.
Bibulus beginning; the other Aediles showed also, that the law concerning
excess of expenses, was naught set by; and the sumptuousnes of moueables which
was forbidden, daily increased: and that it could not be redressed by any
reasonable means. And the Lords of the Senate being demanded their advise,
referred the whole matter to the prince. But Tiberius often pondered with
himself, whether such exorbitant lusts could bebrideled or not: whether the
brideling of them would not bring more hurt, then benefit to the commonwealth:
how unseemly and dishonorable it would be, to undertake that which could not
be effected: or if it could, with the ignominy or infamy of noble men: and in
the end he sent letters to the Senate to this purpose. It would be peradventure
convenient, Lords of the Senate, that in other matters, I should be demanded
my opinion in your presence: and speak what I thought to be behouefull for the
common wealth: but in this relation it was better to withdraw mine eyes; least
that you, noting the countenance, and the fear of every one of such, which
should be deprehended of this shameful lauishing; I should also see them, and
take them as it were in the fault. If the Aediles vigilant and careful men,
had before hand asked my advise; I know not whether I should rather have
persuaded them, to let pass strong and rooted vices, then go so far; that it
should be known how unable we be to redress some kind of abuses. But they
truly have done their duty, and I wish that other magistrates would also
fulfill theirs. To me it is neither honest to hold my tongue; nor easy to
speak: because I have neither the office of an Aedile, Praetor, nor Consul.
Some greater matter is required of a Prince, and of greater importance: and
when as every man attributes to himself the praise of things well done: the
faults of all men in general redounde to the dislike of the Prince alone. What
shall I begin first to forbid, and reduce to the ancient custom? your huge
and spacious country houses? the number of your seruitours of diverse nations?
the quantity of silver and gold? your painted tables, and brazen images of
marvelous and exquisite workmanship? superfluousnes of apparel both in men
and women? and those things which are proper unto women, as precious stones,
for which our money is transported to foreign nations, or enemies? I am not
ignorant that these things are blamed in bankets and meetings, and a mean
wished for. But if any would make a law, or lay down a punishment for them;
those themselves which complain, will exclaim that the city is overthrown;
that the ruin of the nobility is sought for: and that there is none free from
this crime. But we see that old inueterate diseases of the body cannot be
cured, but by sharp and rough remedies: the corruptor and the corrupted; the
weak and burning desire, is to be quenched with no lighter remedies; then the
disordinate appetites were, which kindled the mind. So many laws invented by
our ancestors; so many made by Augustus; those by oblivion, these (which is a
greater offense) abolished by contempt, have caused all superfluities, to be
more bold, and practiced. For if thou would do that which is not yet
forbidden, fear least thou be forbidden it. But if thou have without
punishment transgressed things forbidden, there is neither further shame nor
fear left. Why then in times past was provident sparing used? because every
man did moderate himself: because we were citizens of one city: and our
dominions not reaching out of Italy, we had not the same prouocations: by
victories had against strangers, we have learned to consume other men's goods;
by civil wars our own. How small a matter is that whereof the Aediles do
admonish us? how little to be reckoned of, if we regard other things? But truly
no man does put us in mind, that Italy does want the aid of foreign nations;
that the life of the people of Rome, is tossed with the incertaintie of sea and
tempest: and if the strength of the provinces should not aid and succor the
Lords, slaves, and possessions: our woods forsooth, and our farms, would they
maintain us? This burden, Lords of the Senate, the Prince does sustain: which
being omitted, the commonwealth would fall to the ground. In other things,
every man must give himself a law: let shame amend us: necessity the poor;
sacietie the rich. Or if there be any of the magistrates, which does promise us
so much industry, and severity, that he can prevent and redress these
things: I do both praise him, and confess that I shall be unburdened in part
of my labor. But if they will accuse faults; and having gotten glory thereby,
raise privy hatred, and leave it on me: believe me, Lords of the Senate, I am
not desirous of displeasures: which although I run into, and that very greatly,
and for the most part unjustly, for the common wealth: yet by good reason, I
refuse them, and entreat that those be not thrust on me, which will be neither
profitable for me, nor you.

XII. Examples do more then laws in reformation of abuses: the Flamines are
hindered for being governors of Provinces.
Caesar's letters being heard, the Aediles were discharged of that care: and the
sumptuousnes of their tables, which from the end of the war at Actium, until
the wars in which S. Galba got the sovereignty for an hundred years,
lauishingly used, began by little and little to be left off. The causes of this
chang it shall not be amiss to seek out. In times past, rich and great houses
of noble men fell to decay through their magnificence; being then lawful to
win the favor of the people, of confederates, and Kings, to court and be
courted. And as every man was most sumptuous in his house, furniture, and
provision: so he was accounted most honorable, and followed with a greater
train. But after they began to murder one another, for private quarrels,
proceeding of this pomp; and that their greatness was their ruin; the rest
took a wiser course. And withal, new men which were often taken out of free
towns, colonies, and Provinces, and chosen to be Senators; brought in with
them the frugalitie, which they had used before in their own houses. And
albeit, many of them either by fortune, or their own industry; grew to wealth
in their age: yet they kept the same mind and custom they brought with them.
But Vespasian was the chiefest author of this strict kind of life; himself
observing the ancient manner of living: for then a desire of pleasing and
imitating the Prince, wrought more, then either punishment of laws, or fear.
Unless peradventure, we think that there is in all things a certain change:
and as there is an intercourse and change of time; so also an alteration of
customs and manners. Neither were all things in ancient times better then
ours; but our age has left unto posterity many things worthy of praise and
imitation. But let such honest contentions between us and our predecessors,
still continue amongst us. Tiberius having gotten the fame of moderation, by
repressing the accusers: sent letters to the Senate, requesting the Tribuniciall
authority for Drusus. That term of highest dignity Augustus invented, to
avoid the name of King or Dictator: and yet under another title signified a
sovereignty above other magistrates. After this he chose M. Agrippa, as an
associat of that dignity: and after his death Tiberius Nero, lest the
successor should be unknown; thinking thereby to cut off others unlawful
hopes; trusting to Neroes modesty, and his own greatness. By which example,
Tiberius did then assure the sovereignty to Drusus, when as whilst Germanicus
lived, he held his judgment indifferent between them both, not preferring the
one before the other. But in the beginning of his letters, having humbly prayed
unto the gods, that they would prosper his counsels to the good of the
commonwealth: he spoke some few words, and those truly, of the young man's
behavior; as that he had a wife and three children; and was of the age that he
himself was called by Augustus of famous memory, to undertake the same
charge. Neither could it be said that hastily, but after eight years trial;
having suppressed seditions, and settled the wars, and triumphed, and been
twice Consul: he was taken to be an associat of a known labor. The Lords of
the Senate conceived the drift of his oration; whereby their flattery toward
him was the more artificial. Yet notwithstanding there was nothing newly
invented: but ordained only, that the images of the Princes; the altars of the
gods; Temples and arches; and such usual honors should be erected for him.
Saving that M. Silanus demanded and opined that in public and private
monuments, the Consuls names should not be prefixed; but theirs who had
Tribuniciall authority; a thing greatly dishonoring and debasing the Consulary
dignity. Q. Haterius, who had counseled that the decrees made that day in
Senate, should be written in letters of gold; was mocked for his labor: that an
old man should use to his infamy such filthy flattery. Whilst these things
were a doing, the government of Africa was continued in Iunius Blaesus.
Seruius Maluginesis a Flamen Dial, or Jupiters Priest; sued that he might draw
lots for the government of Asia: saying, That it was vainly spread abroad,
that it was not lawful for Jupiters Priests to go out of Italy. And that they
had no other law then the Priests of Mars and Quirinus. And if these had
governed the Provinces, why was it unlawful for the Diales? that there was no
law of the people, touching that matter, found in the books of ceremonies. The
high Priest had often celebrated Jupiters sacrifices; if the Flamen had been
hindered by sickness or public affairs. Seventy and two years, after that
Cornelius Merula was murdered, no man was put to supply the place; and yet the
ceremonies never ceased. And if his creation could be omitted for so many
years, without any hinderance to the sacrifices: how much easlier might a man
be absent, with the Proconsularie dignity for a year? In times past they were
forbidden to go out of the Provinces, through the private grudges of the high
Priest: now through the favor of the gods; the high Priest was the soueraign
above all men; not subject unto emulation, malice, or private affection. Against
which when Lentulus the Augur, and others had diversely spoken; in the end they
resolved to expect the censure of the high Priest. Tiberius having deferred the
hearing of the Flamins right, moderated the ceremonies, which were decreed in
honor of Drusus Tribuniciall dignity: rebuking by name the insolency of that
sentence, which would have had the decree written in letters of gold, against
the custom of the country. Drusus letters were also read; which although they
seemed to tend to modesty, yet were reputed most proud. They complained that
things were grown to that pass; that the young man having received so great
honor, yet vouchsafed not to visit the gods of the city; nor show himself in
Senate; or begin at least his authority in his own country. But forsooth, he
is let by war, or hindered in some strange country; when indeed he solaceth
himself at his pleasure, in the shores and lakes of Campania. This lesson had
the ruler of the world taught him; this did he first learn of his fathers
Counsels. Although the old Emperor should disdain, to come and show
himself to the citizens; and pretend his years, and travel for an excuse:
yet what impediment has Drusus, but only his arrogancy?

XIII. A reformation of Sanctuaries.
But Tiberius strengthening in himself the sovereignty: left the Lords of the
Senate a shadow of their ancient estate, by sending the requests of the
provinces to their examination. The license and impunitie of ordaining
Sanctuaries, and privileged places increased throughout the cities of Greece.
The temples were filled with most lewd bondslaues: in the same refuges, were
received debtors against their creditors; and suspected of capital crimes.
Neither was there any authority able to bridle the sedition of the people;
protecting all villainies, no less then the ceremonies of the gods. Whereupon
it was concluded, that the cities should send their Ambassadors with their
privileges, which some left off of their own accord as falsely usurped: many
trusted to old superstitions or pleasures done to the people of Rome. The pomp
of that day was great in show: in which the Senators considered of the
prerogatives of their predecessors; the agreements of confederates; the decrees
of kings, which had been before the Romans had gotten such great power and
authority: and the religions of the gods themselves, being yet in the
disposition of the Senate, to confirm or alter all; as in times past they
could have done. The first which showed themselves in Senate, were the
Ephesians; declaring that Diana and Apollo, were not borne in the Island Delos,
as the common people did believe: and there was in their country a river
called Cenchrius: and a wood called Ortygia, where Latona being great with
child; and leaning against an olive tree which is yet in the place, brought
forth those two gods: and that by the commandment of the gods that wood was
made sacred. And that Apollo himself did in that place flee from Jupiters
anger, after he had slain the Cyclopians. After that Bacchus the conqueror in
war, pardoned the Amazones, which humbling themselves there, caught hold of
the altar. And that the ceremony of that temple increased by Hercules
permission, when he inioyed Lydia: which was not diminished when the Persians
had dominion over it. After that the Macedonians; then we had maintained the
same privileges. Next unto those came in the Magnesians, building their
reasons on L. Scipio, and L. Sullaes constitutions: the one driving out
Antiochus; and the other Mithridates: and extolled the loyalty and virtue of
the Magnesians; and commanded that Diana Leucophrynes privileges should not
be violated. Then followed the Aphrodisienses, and Stratonicenses, alleging an
order made by Caesar the Dictator; and another later decree of Augustus of
famous memory, for the pleasures done them, in taking part with their side,
during the time of their faction: praising them, that they had sustained the
assaults of the Parthians; nothing at all changing their constancy toward the
people of Rome. But the Aphrodisienses maintained the privileges of Venus
temple: and the Stratonicenses Jupiter and Triuias ceremonies. The
Hierocaesarienses fetchte their matter from a farther beginning, inducing their
Dianapersica, and a temple dedicated by king Cyrus: and told a tale of
Perperna, of Isauricum, and many other Emperors; which granted that holiness
not only to the temple, but to two miles compass. Then followed the Cyprians,
declaring that they had three temples: whereof the most ancient was builded by
Aerias, and consecrated to Venus Paphia: the second by his son Amathus, and
dedicated to Venus Amathusia: the third to Jupiter Salaminius, built by Teucer,
when he fled from his father Telamon. The Ambassadors of other cities were
heard likewise: with whose multitude the Lords of the Senate being wearied,
some favoring one side; some another: and because they contended which had
merited most, they referred the matter to the Consuls: that looking into the
right of the cause, if they contained any secret abuse, they should bring the
whole cause again to the Senate. The Consuls besides those cities which I have
above named, spoke of another privileged place for malefactors, dedicated to
Aesculapius at Pergamum: affirming that the rest were grounded upon obscure
beginnings, in respect of their antiquity. The Smyrnaeans alleged an oracle
of Apollo, by which they were commanded to dedicate a temple to Venus
Stratonicis: the Tenians a verse of the same Apollo, commanding them to offer
an image and temple to Neptune. The Sardians brought in matters of later
memory; that to be Alexander the conquerors gift: and the Milesians did the
like, using king Darius name for their franchise; but both of these did worship
Diana and Apollo. The Cretensians made request that the image of Augustus might
have some privilege: and decrees of Senate were made, by which with great
honor, yet moderation was prescribed unto all; and commandment given in those
very temples to erect altars for a sacred memory: yet so, that under color of
religion, they should not fall into ambition.

XIIII. Iulia Augusta falls sick: Seianus called into question.
ABout the same time, a grievous sickness which Iulia Augusta fell into, caused
the Prince (perfect amity being yet betwixt the mother and the son, or else
secret hatred) to hasten his return to Rome. For not long before, when Iulia
had dedicated an image to Augustus of famous memory, not far from Marcellus
theater, she had set Tiberius name under her own: which he (as it was thought)
taking as an vnder-valuing of the majesty of a Prince, smothered up with a
great, but a secret hartburning against her. But then the Senate had decreede,
that there should be processions made to the gods, and the plays called Magni,
exhibited by the chief Priests, the Augurs, the fifteen, together with the
seven, and those of the fellowship of Augustus, called Augustales. L. Apronius
was of opinion, that the Heralds should be overseers of those plays: which
Caesar spoke against, making a difference in the rights of the Priests,
alleging examples for it. For the Feciales or Heralds never had such high
authority; and that therefore the Augustales were put to them, because it was
a peculiar Priesthood of that house, for which the vows were made. My meaning
is not to lay down any other opinions; but such as are either notable for
their honesty, or shameful for their infamy: which I suppose, to be the
chiefest point belonging to Histories; that virtues be not slightlie passed
over with silence; and that men have a fear of bad speaking and doing, least
he become infamous with posterity. But those times were so corrupted with
filthy flattery: that not only the chiefest of the city were forced in that
servile manner to keep their reputation; but all such as had been Consuls; the
greatest part of such as had bin Pretors; and also many pedary Senators rose up
and strove, who should propound things most base and abject. It is written,
that as Tiberius went out of the Curia, he was wont to say in Greek. O men
ready to servitude! as though he, who could of all things least suffer public
liberty; did yet abhor such base and servile submission: falling by little
and little from unseemly flatteries, to lewder practices. C. Silanus
Proconsull of Asia, being accused for polling the Province; was also prosecuted
by Mamercus Scaurus, who had been Consul; by Iunius Otho Praetor; by Brutidius
Niger Aedile; all of them layeng to his charge, that he had violated Augustus
divinity, and set naught by Tiberius majesty. Mamercus alleged old examples,
how L. Cotta had bin accused by Scipio Africanus: S. Galba by Cato the Censor:
and P. Rutilius by M. Scaurus. A matter very unlikely, that Scipio and Cato
should use any such revenge; or Scaurus great grandfather to this Mamercus, the
dishonor and reproach of his ancestors, by so dishonorable and infamous a
trade. Iunius Othos old occupation was to keep a school; then made a Senator
by Seianus authority, brought his obscure beginning, into obloquie by impudent
enterprises. Brutidius, a man well qualified; and if he had taken a right
course, likely to have come to honorable preferment; over much haste pricked
forwards: and at the first went about, to out go his equals; then his
superiors; and last of all to flee above his own hopes: which has been the
overthrow of good men; who contemning that which by a little patience, is had
with security; hasten to that which gotten before his time, breeds their
ruin and destruction. Gellius Poplicola, and M. Paconius, increased the number
of informers: the one being Silanos treasurer; the other his lieutenant. Little
doubt but Silanus was blame worthy for his cruelty, and ravenous dealing:
but many other matters came together, dangerous even to the innocent: for
besides that, he had so many Senators against him; he was to answer alone, the
eloquentest of all Asia: and for that cause chosen to accuse: being himself
unskillful, and appalled with his own danger: cause sufficient, to have dashed
the best practiced out of matter. Tiberius himself not refraining to press
him with words and countenance, asked him many questions; not giving liberty
to refell or reply: yea oftentimes he must confess, lest Tiberius should
seem to have asked in vain. And withal, the public actor had bought Silanus
bondmen, to the end they should be examined by torture. And because none of
his kinsmen nor friends might help him in his danger, accusations of treason
(a bond and necessity to stop every man's mouth) were thrust among. Whereupon
certain days of delay being demanded, he let fall his defense: and taking
courage sent letters unto Caesar, interlaced with entreaty and odious terms.
Tiberius, that the causes he charged Silanus with, might have an example of
excuse; commands Augustus records, touching Volesus Messalla, Proconsul of
the same Asia, to be recited, and a decree of Senate made against him. Then
demanded L. Pisoes opinion: who making a preamble of the princes clemency; was
of advise that he should be banished to the Island Gyarus. The rest gave the
like verdite: saving that C. Lentulus, thought it meet, that the goods which
came by Silanus mother (for he was by another mother) should be separated from
the rest, and given the son: Tiberius according thereto. But Cornelius
Dolabella, having rebuked Silanus for his behavior; followed the vain of his
flattery further: and added. That none, who lived a reproachful and infamous
life, should draw lots for the government of any province: and that the prince
should be judge thereof. The laws did punish crimes committed: but how much
better would it be for us, and our confederates, if we did provide that no
offenses should be committed? Against which, Caesar himself spoke; and said:
That he was not ignorant what the speech had been of Silanus: but that no
judgments ought to be given at the rumor of the people. Many had behaved
themselves in the provinces, better then was hoped for; and others not so bad
as it was feared: for some by managing of weighty matters, have been stirred
up to a better carriage and behavior: and others have become more slothful
and lasie. And that a prince could not comprehend all things in his own
knowledge: neither was it expedient, that he should be drawn to this, and
that, by others ambition. That laws were ordained against factes already
committed, because future things are uncertain. So it was ordained by our
ancestors, that when the offenses had gone before, punishment should follow:
Therefore they would not alter those things, which were invented by wisdom,
and always observed. That princes had charge sufficient, and power enough: if
their power grew great, the laws grew weak. That absolute authority was not
to be used; as long as the laws were open. By how much the seldomer Tiberius
showed any popular behavior; by so much the more joyfully it was accepted. And
being wise (if he were not carried away with anger) in moderating the rigorous
censures of others: added that the Island Gyarus was barbarous, and uninhabited:
and therefore that they would show so much favor to the Iunian family; and
to one who had been of the same college with them; that he should rather be
sent to the Island Cythera: which was also the request of Torquata, Silanus
sister, a virigin of good life: unto which censure they all condescended.

XV. More accusations prosecuted. A decree touching Jupiters priests.
Tacfarinas driven by Blaesus out of Affrike.
AFter this, the Cyrenenses were heard: and Caesius Cordus condemned of polling
the provinces, at the suit of Ancharius Priscus. L. Ennius a gentleman of Rome,
accused of treason, because he had converted the image of the prince, to common
uses in plate; Caesar forbad to be received amongst the criminal persons.
Ateius Capito openly complaining, and by a kind of liberty saying: That power
of determining such a matter, ought not to be taken from the Senate, nor so
heinous a crime pass unpunished. That the Emperor might be as slow as he
lusted, in punishing injuries done to himself: yet that he ought not to pardon
such as were done to the commonwealth. Tiberius understood these things as
they were indeed, rather then as they were spoken: and so persisted in opposing
himself. Capito was so much the more noted; because that knowing what
appertained to divine and humane laws; discredited the common good: and the
commendable arts he had learned at home. Then there grew a scruple: in knowing,
in what temple the gift should be placed, which the gentlemen of Rome had vowed
to fortune Equestris, for the health of Augusta. For although there were many
temples in the city, of that goddess: yet there was none which bare that
surname. In the end there was one so called found at Antium: and all the
ceremonies in the towns of Italy, and temples, and images of gods, to be
under the right, and empire of Rome: and thereupon the gift was placed at
Antium. And seeing the matter was debated touching the religions; Caesar
declared the answer: which not long before he had deferred, against Seruius
Maluginensis: and recited the decree of the chief priests; which was: That as
often as the Flamen, Dial, or Jupiters priest, fell into any sickness, he might be
absent from the city; with license of the chief priest: so as it were not
above two nights; or in days of public sacrifice: nor oftener then twice in
one year. Which being ordained in Augustus time, did manifestly show, that the
absence for a year, or administration of provinces, was not granted to the
Diales. And the example of L. Metellus the high pontife, was alleged, who in
the like case had kept Aulus Posthumus the Flamen in the city. And thereupon
the lot of Asia was bestowed upon him; who of the Consuls was next unto
Maluginensis. At the same time Lepidus made request unto the Lords of the
Senate, that he might at his own charges, reedifie, and adorn Paulus Aemilius
temple, the ornament of his memory: for at that time public munificence was
in use: neither did Augustus blame Taurus, Philippus, Balbus, for bestowing
spoils taken from enemies: or the overplus of their wealth, to the ornament of
the city, and glory of posterity. By which examples, Lepidus although he had
no great store of money, did renew the honor of his ancestors. Pompeius
theater, consumed by casual fire; because there was none left of the family,
of ability to perform it; Caesar promised to build at his own charges, and
leave it still the old name. And withal he highly extolled Seianus, as though
through his labor and watchfulnes, the violence of that fire had been stayed,
from hurting any more then that one thing: and the Senate ordained an image to
be erected in honor of Seianus in Pompeius theater. And not long after when
Caesar had honored Iunius Blaesus, proconsull of Affrike, with the ornaments of
triumph: he said that he attributed that to Seianus honor, whose uncle he was.
Yet Blaesus own acts deserved that honor. For although Tacfarinas had been
often put to the woorst: yet renewing his aid in the middle of Affrike, he
grew to that arrogancy, as to send ambassadors to Tiberius, and require a
place for himself, and his army to inhabit: or else threatened an endless
war. It was reported that Caesar never more grieved, at any disgrace done
unto himself, or the people of Rome; then that a traitor, and thief, should
deal like an enemy. There was never so much granted Spartacus; after he had
defeated so many armies of Consuls; and burnt Italy unrevenged; yea when the
commonwealth was greatly weakened, by Sertorius and Mithridates great wars:
that he should be received by covenant into safe conduct: and therefore much
less that Tacfarinas a thief; the Roman empire being in most flourishing
state, should be hired with a peace and lands to inhabit. He committed the
whole matter to Blaesus, with charge that he should induce the rest, to lay
down their arms; with warrant that they should sustain no hurt; yet that he
should lay hold on the captain by all means possible: through which pardon
many came in. Not long after they used the same manner of fight, against
Tacfarinas, as he had used against others: for because he, inferior to the
Romans in strength, though better in theeuery; made many inroades; by scattered
companies, deceived his enemy: and laid many trains to entrap him. Their
companies were therefore set in order, and marched against him: of which the
lieutenant Cornelius Scipio was the chief: who lay in wait in that coast
where Tacfarinas did waste and trouble the Leptins, and the Garamantes, places
of refuge: On another side Blaesus son lead his own power; least the
Cirtensien villages should be entised to take part with Tacfarinas, In the
middle, placing fortresses and strong holds, in convenient places; with choice
soldiers: the captain himself brought the enemy to a narrow straight, and
disadvantage: because that which way soever he should bend; some of the Roman
soldiers were in his face; some in his sides: and often some in his back, and
so, many slain and intrapped. Then divides the three armies again into many
other companies: with centurions of known valor over them. Neither did he as
the custom was; retire his forces in the end of summer; or put them in
standing camps of the old province: but as it had been in the beginning of
war; his fortresses well manned, by light horsemen, and skillful in those
deserts; he gave Tacfarinas often changing his cabbins small rest: until his
brother being taken, he retired in the end with more speed, then was for the
allies profit: such being left behind by whom the war might rise again. But
Tiberius taking this to be an end of this war, gave Blaesus that honor,
that he should be saluted Emperor by the legions: being an old custom toward
such Captains, as had shown valor for the commonwealth, with joy and
acclamations to be saluted by that name by the conquering armies. There were
many Emperors at one time, but none above an other. Augustus had granted that
name to some; and Tiberius at that time to Blaesus. That year died two notable
men, Asinius Salonius, nephew to M. Agrippa; and Pollio Asinius, and brother to
Drusus, and destined to be Caesar's neeces husband; and Capito Ateius of whom we
have spoken before; by the studies of the civil laws risen to the highest
dignity in the city: but his grandfather Sullanus was but a Centurion, and
his father Praetor. Augustus hastened the Consulship upon him; that by the
dignity of that office, he might be preferred before Labeo Antistius skillful
in the same study: for that age had at once two ornaments of peace. But Labeo
was more desirous of incorrupted liberty; and therefore held in greater
estimation: and Capitoes pleasing humor better accepted of Princes. To him, the
injury of not being higher than a Praetor, was a commendation: to this, because
he gate the Consulship, grew of envy hatred. And Iunia, whose uncle was Cato,
and was C. Cassius wife, and M. Brutus sister, died threescore and four years
after the Philippensen war. Her Testament was much talked of among the
people; because that being very wealthy, when she had named all the peers
and noblemen, and bestowed some legacy upon them, she omitted Caesar: which he
took in good part; not hindering but that her funerals should be solemnised
with an oration before the people assembled, with all other ceremonies. The
images of twenty noble houses, were carried before her; and the names of the
Manlians, the Quinctians, and others of like nobility. But Cassius and Brutus
did shine above the rest, because their images were not seen.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
I. Of Seianus beginning; his qualities; and by what means he aspired to the
Empire.
CAsinius, and C. Antistius being Consuls; Tiberius had nine years managed the
affairs; and advanced his house to a flourishing estate: (for the death of
Germanicus he reckoned amongst his prosperities) when as fortune began on a
sudden to work alteration: in him waxing cruel; or giving authority to such
as were. The beginning proceeded from AElius Seianus Captain of the guarde; of
whose power and authority I have before spoken. I will now lay down his
beginning, and qualities: and by what sinister means he went about to clime to
the sovereignty. He was borne at Vulsinium, son of Seius Strabo, gentleman of
Rome; and in his first youth followed C. Caesar, Augustus nephew: not without a
rumor, that for money he had suffered his body to be abused by Apicius, a rich
man and a prodigal. Then by sundry sleights he had so wrought Tiberius, that
being close and secret toward others: yet to himself had made him open and
uncircumspect. Not so much by his cunning and fraud (for such devises were his
own overthrow) as by the anger of the gods against the state of Rome; by whose
ruin and rising it fell alike. He was of body able to endure labor; of mind
bold; in his own actions secret; an informer against others; as proud as
flattering; in show modest; but inwardly greedy of aspiring: for which cause,
he used sometime largess and lauishing; but more oftener industry and
diligence; means dangerous alike, when they are dissemblingly used to win a
kingdom. His forces, which at the first were small, he augmented by reducing
the cohorts into one camp, which before were scattered abroad in the city;
that they might receive their charge together, and by their number and
strength, and seeing one another, breed a confidence to themselves; and a fear
to others. He pretended that the soldier living scattered, grew riotous: and
if any sudden attempt should be enterprised, their strength would be greater
united, then separated: and that they would live more severely, if their
garrison were lodged far from the wanton allurements of the city. As soon as
his trenches were finished, he began to creep into the soldiers minds by
going unto them, and calling them by their names: withal, made choice himself
of Centurions and the Tribunes. Neither did he abstain from ambitiously
courting the Senators; aduauncing his followers with honors, and rule of
Provinces: Tiberius being so facile and prone to allow of his doings, that not
only in private speeches; but in Senate also and before the people, extolled him
as an associat of his labors: and suffered his image to be set in the
Theaters, and public places of assemblies, and ensigns of the legions. But
Caesar's house being full; a young son; nephews of full age; hindered his
plots: And because it was not safe making away of so many at once by violence;
his treachery required time to accomplish his wickedness. He resolved then to
use the couertest way; and begin with Drusus; against whom through fresh
quarrels he was greatly incensed. For Drusus being impatient of a concurrent,
and therefore easily moved: a contention rising by chance between them, bent
his fist to strike Seianus; and he his to save himself: Drusus dashed him on
the mouth. Hereupon leaving nothing untried, he thought it the readiest way to
address himself to Liuia Drusus wife. She was Germanicus sister, in her youth
of a hard favor; but afterward excelled in beauty. Her Seianus counterfeiting
an ardent and burning love enticed to adultery: and after he had obtained the
first breach of honesty (for a woman having once lost her chastity, what will
she refuse to do?) put her in hope of marriage, and fellowship in the Empire;
and persuades her to kill her husband. Thus she, who was Augustus niece, and
Tiberius daughter in law; and had children by Drusus; defiled herself, her
ancestors, and posterity with adultery by a mean man; leaving an honest and
present estate for the hope of a wicked and uncertain. Eudemus a friend and
Physician of Liuias, was made privy to these plots; who under color of his
art was often used in secret conferences. He puts away Apicata his wife, by
whom he had three children, least his lemmon should have her in jealousy. But
the greatness of the enterprise drove them into a fear; bred prolongings; and
sometimes diverse sorts of counsels. In the mean space in the beginning of the
year, Drusus one of Germanicus children, was come to man's estate; and those
things renewed upon him, which the Senate had ordained for Nero his brother.
Tiberius made an oration tending to the great commendation of his son;
because he tendered his brothers children with a fatherly affection. For Drusus
(although it be a hard matter for rule and concord to dwell together) showed
himself indifferent to the young men; or at the least, was not an enemy to
them.

II. A survey of the legions and soldiers: Drusus poisoned by Seianus.
Tiberius old, but fained determination of going to the Provinces, is put on
foot again: pretending that there were a great number of old soldiers; and
that the armies were to be supplied with a new muster. For voluntary men now
wanted: or if there were any; they were not of so virtuous and modest a
carriage: because that for the most part, they are needy and vagrant persons
which voluntarily follow the wars. Withal, he took a short view of the
legions, and what Provinces they defended: which gives me occasion to declare,
what strength the Romans had then in arms; what Kings their confederates; and
how much less the Empire then was. Italy had in both seas two nauies; the one
at Misenum, and the other at Rauenna; and certain Galleies called rostratae to
defend the coast adioining to Gallia: which Augustus had taken in the victory
at Actium; and sent to Foroiuliense, well appointed with sea men. But the
principal strength consisted of eight legions near unto Rhene; a stay as
well to the Germans, as Galli. Spain newely subdued had three legions. King
Iuba had the Mauritanians, as a gift given him by the people of Rome: the rest
of Affricke had two legions; and Egypt the like number. Then all from the
beginning of Suria unto the river Euphrates, which contains a great country,
receives four legions: Hybero, and Albanus, and other Kings being borderers,
which by our greatness are protected against foreign Kings. Thrace was under the
government of Rhoemetalces, and Cotys children: and the banck of Danubium, two
legions guarded in Pannonia; and two in Maesia. The like number was in Dalmatia,
which by the situation of the country lie behind them: that if on the sudden
Italy should need aid they were at hand. Albeit the city had her proper
soldiers; three city cohorts, and nine Pretorian; almost all chosen out of
Etruria, Vmbria, old Latium, and old Romans, sent thither to dwell. The
Galleies of confederats lay in the most commodious places of the Provinces; the
companies of horsemen; and aides of cohorts; not much inferior in strength:
though not easily laid down, through their uncertain flitting hither and
thither; sometimes more, sometimes less; as time and necessity required. I
think it also expedient to discribe the other parts of the common wealth, and
how they had been governed until that day: being the year, in which the
state began to decline, by Tiberius growing worse and worse. In the
beginning, public and private affairs of greatest importance, were handled
before the Lords of the Senate: and the chiefest licenced to opine and debate
matters: Tiberius himself rebuking them if they fell to flattery. In bestowing
of offices he had regard to their ancestors merit in service abroad; or
lawdable acts at home: such only preferred: due authority reserved unto the
Consuls and to the Praetor: the meaner officers, each one exercising his own
function: and the laws, (matter of treason excepted) duly executed. But for
provision of corn, and leuying of tributes, and other public commodities;
certain societies of gentlemen of Rome had charge of. Caesar committed his
own affairs to honest and tried persons: and to some unknown, if they were
well spoken of: and such as were once chosen, continued still, and grew old in
the same charge. The people were distressed with a great dearth of corn; yet
no fault thereof in the Prince: but with as great care and diligence as he
could, remedieth the sterilitie of the ground, and rough passages of the sea:
and gave order that the provinces should not be oppressed with new taxations;
and the old be borne, without covetousness and cruelty of magistrates. Caesar
had small possessions in Italy; and a reasonable number of seruitours; and in
his house a few freed men; and if he had a suit against any private person, he
tried it by law in the place of judgment: all which he maintained, not with
any courteous and mild course, but sternely and feared; until by the death of
Drusus all was turned vpside down. For whilst he lived there was no
alteration; because Seianus beginning to rise, sought means to win credit, and
feared least Drusus would revenge, who never dissembled his hartburning, but
often complained: That his son being alive, he had another coadiutor in the
Empire: and what wants that he is not his companion? That the first steps to
sovereignty are hard; but once entered into, there will want no favorers, nor
followers: forts he had built as he liked best: charge given him over
soldiers: his image was placed amongst C. Pompeius monuments: and that he
should have his nephews common to the Drusian family: that hereafter Modesty
must be prayed unto, that he would be contented with his greatness. He did not
utter these speeches seldom or to a few; and his wife being corrupted, his
secrets were bewrayed. Seianus therefore thinking it time to make haste,
chooses a slow working poison; the better to father his sickness upon some
casual disease; which was given Drusus by Lygdus an Eunuch: as eight years
after it was known.

III. Germanicus children are in Senate recommended to the Lords by Tiberius.
Drusus funerals, and how he was empoisoned.
But Tiberius all the time of Drusus sickness, showed no sign of fear; perhaps
because he would show his constancy: yea being dead, but not buried, he
entered into the Senate, and put the Consuls which sat on a low seat, as a
token of their sorrow, in mind of their honors and calling. And having
mastered his own grief, comforted the Lords of the Senate, which powered down
tears with a continual speech, saying: That he knew well he might be blamed,
for showing himself in Senate, in so fresh a grief: when the communication of
dearest friends and kinsfolks was scarce seen, nor hardly the day, by many
which lamented and mourned. Neither were they to be condemned of weakness; yet
he for his part had sought for stronger comforts, out of the bosom of the
common wealth. And having compassion on the Empress old age, and tender years
of her nephews, and of his own decaying age, entreated that Germanicus
children, the only comfort of present miseries, might be brought before them.
The Consuls went out, and emboldening the young men in that which they should
say, brought them before Tiberius, who taking hold of them, said. Lords of the
Senate, I delivered these fatherles children to their uncle; and besought him,
although he had issue of his own, that he would bring them up and cherish
them, as if they were his own blood: and make them worthy for himself and
posterity. Drusus being taken from among us, I turn my prayers to you, and
beseech you in presence of the gods, and our country, that you would receive,
and govern Augustus nephews sons, descended of worthy progenitors; and
accomplish therein my duty and your own. These Nero and Drusus, shall be in
stead of fathers unto you. You are so borne, that all your good and evil
appertain to the common wealth. With great weeping were these words heard, and
prayers made that the young men might prosper: and if he had then ended his
oration, he had filled the hearts of the hearers with compassion toward
himself, and glory. But being fallen into vain discourses; as such as had
been often laughed at, of yielding up the government: and that the Consuls or
some other should take the care upon him, he discredited that which was both
honest, and true. The same solemnities which were ordained for Germanicus, were
appointed for Drusus; and as the manner is of the last flattery, somethings
added. His funeral in pomp of images was very magnificent: having before him
in a long procession Aeneas, the beginning of the Julian family: all the kings
of the Albani: and Romulus the founder of the city. After him followed the
nobility of the Sabins, Appius Clausus, and the images of the rest of the
Claudians. In delivering Drusus death, I have followed that which many true
writers have uttered: but I will not omit a very strong report of those times,
yet current in every man's mouth, which is, that Liuia being already corrupted
to all dishonestie of body by Seianus: he was said to have abused Lygdus body
likewise: in age and beauty highly pleasing his master, and of all his
seruitours of best credit; who being made privy to the practice, the place and
times agreed when the poison should be given, grew to that audaciousnes, that
he turned all upon Drusus head: and by secret advertisement, accused him to
have gone about to poison his father; and gave Tiberius warning, to take heed
of the first drink his son should offer him at the table. Whereupon by that
fraud, the banquet being begun, the old man presented Drusus the cup which he
had received; who ignorant of the practice, like a raw young man drank it up,
increasing thereby the suspicion, as though for fear and shame, he had
swallowed that death which he had prepared for his father. This was the common
rumor, which wanting a ground, and certain author, thou may easily refute:
for who is he though but of mean wisdom, much less Tiberius, experienced
and beaten in weighty affairs, not hearing his defense, would have offered
his son his death, and that with his own hands; a thing remediles if he
should repent it? Why had he not rather tortured the minister of the poison?
sought out the author, and used that delay, which usually he did even against
strangers, toward his own son; never before detected of any lewd fact? But
because Seianus was thought to be the inuentor of all bad actions, through the
great good will Caesar bore him, and the hate which the rest bare to both;
things were believed, although fabulous, and incredible; report speaking
always the worst of Princes deaths. The order of this fact has been otherwise
discovered by Apicata, Seianus wife, and by torturing of Eudemus and Lygdus:
and no writer found so great an enemy to Tiberius, although all has been
sought that may be said, and enforced against him, that has objected any such
matter. The cause why I laid down and blamed the common rumor, was, that under
a manifest example, I might discredit false reports; and pray such into whose
hands our labors shall come, that they would not esteem more of common,
incredible tales, greedily received, then of truth not falsified into miracles.

IIII. Seianus practices to destroy Agrippina, and Germanicus children:
stage-plaiers expulsed Italy.
But whilst Tiberius praised his son before the people assembled; the Senate
and the people rather for a show, then from the heart, put on a mourning
countenance: yet in their minds rejoiced, that Germanicus house began to
flourish again: which beginning of favor, and Agrippina their mother not well
dissembling her hope, hastened their overthrow. For when Seianus perceived that
Drusus empoisoners escaped unpunished; and no public mourning of the people
for his death; emboldned in wicked actions, because his first attempts had good
success; began to cast with himself, by what means he might extinguish
Germanicus children, the undoubted successors to the Empire. For all three
poison he could not, by reason of their keepers faithfulness, and Agrippinas
invincible chastity. He began therefore to inueigh against her obstinacy, and
stir Augusta hating her of old, against her; and incensed Liuia with the
memory of her late fact; suggesting that her pride; bearing it self upon her
fruitfulnes in children, by the favor of the people gaped after the
sovereignty. This plot of his he prosecuted by the help of crafty accusers;
amongst whom he had chosen Julius Posthumus, a man noted of infamous life with
Mutilia Prisca, a principal favorite of the grandmother, and fit instrument
for his practices, being highly in Augustas books: an old woman of her own
disposition desirous of rule, and therefore easily estranged from her daughter
in law Agrippina. He had likewise inueighled Agrippinas near kindred, to puff
up her haughty spirits, and use hard speeches of Augusta. But Tiberius
intermitting no care of public affairs; and embracing business for solace;
heard the causes of citizens, and the suites of confederates: and by his
persuasion, decrees of Senate were made, that the city of Cibyratica in Asia;
and Aegiris in Achaia, damnified by an earthquake, might be relieved by
remitting them three years tributes. And Vibius Serenus Proconsull of farther
Spain, being condemned for public violence, through the cruelty of the
time, was banished into the Island Amorgus. Carsius Sacerdos accused, as though
he had helped the enemy Tacfarinas with corn, was quit; and C. Gracchus for
the same crime. This Gracchus being very young, was carried by his father
Sempronius to the Island Cercina, as a companion of his exile: where growing to
man's estate amongst banished men, and ignorant of liberal arts; by turning
and winding base merchandise in Africa and Sicilia, he gained his living: and
yet he escaped not the dangers of greater fortune. And if AElius Lamia, and L.
Apronius, which governed Africa, had not defended his innocence; through the
nobleness of his unfortunate stock, he had tasted of his fathers calamities.
That year came Ambassadors from cities of Greece; requesting that the ancient
right of privileged places, might be confirmed at Iunos Temple at Samium, and
AEsculapius Temple, at Cois. The Samians grounded themselves on a decree of the
Amphictyons; to whom belonged the principal examination of all matters; when
the Grecians building cities through Asia, were Lords of the sea coasts. The
antiquity of the Coi was not unlike; having withal the merit of the place:
for when by King Mithridates commandment, all the Romans were slain
throughout all the cities and Islands of Asia: they saved in the Temple of
AEsculapius as many as they found. After this the Pretors having made many
complaints, though in vain against the stage players: at last, Caesar spoke of
their unruliness and immodest behavior; as having seditiously attempted many
things in public, and many indecently in private houses. And the Oscian play,
a light sport pleasing the peoples humor, grew to such insolency, that the
Lords of the Senate were feign to interpose their authority, for the
suppressing of it; and then the stageplayers were expulsed Italy. Caesar had
further grief the same year, partly by the death of one of Drusus children,
and partly by the death of Lucillius Longus his friend, and partaker of all his
fortunes, prosperous or adverse: and among the Senators, his only companion,
when he withdrew himself to Rhodes. In regard whereof, the Senate ordained,
that although he were but of mean parentage, yet that he should have the
funerals of a Censor, and an image in Augustus forum: at the charge of the
common purse. For at that time the Senate managed all the affairs; in so much,
that Lucillius Capito, Procurator of Asia; the Province accusing him, was
forced to purge himself before them: the Prince assuredly auouching that he
had given him no authority; but over slaves, and money matters between party
and party. But if he had usurped the authority of a Praetor, or used the
strength of soldiers, he had therein contemned his commandment; and
therefore that they should hear the allies: and so the matter being heard, he
was condemned. For which cause; and by reason that the year before C. Silanus
was punished: the cities of Asia decreed that a Temple should be built in
honor of Tiberius; his mother; and the Senate; which they performed after they
had license. And for the same cause Nero gave thanks to the Lords of the
Senate, and to his grandfather: with the joyful acceptance of the hearers; as
representing Germanicus, yet fresh in memory to their minds: thinking that
him they had both heard and seen. The young man was of great modesty, and
comelines, worthy of a Prince: the more grateful, through the danger he was
in, by Seianus known hatred against him.

V. How Jupiters Priests were chosen: Tiberius small affection to Germanicus
children.
ABout the same time of choosing a Flamen Dial, in Seruius Maluginensis place,
who was dead: and of making a new law, Caesar himself spoke. For the old
custom was, that three patriciens should be named together; borne of parents
which had been married with a solemnity called confarreation; of which one
should be chosen for the Priest. And it fell out that, that just number could
not be found, the use of confarrcation, or marriage with a cake of Wheat,
either not used, or only of a few: whereof he alleged many reasons, though the
chiefest was, the carelesnes of men and women: and withal the difficulties of
the ceremonies, which were willingly let slip. And when should he go out of his
fathers authority, which should obtain that Priesthood, or she who was
married unto him? therefore that was to be redressed by decree of Senate, or by
a law, as Augustus himself had changed somewhat of that rude antiquity, and
reduced it to the present use. Those things therefore being debated which
touched the ceremonies, it was determined that nothing should be altered in the
makings of those Priests: but a law was ordained, that she who was married unto
a Flamen, by reason of the sacrifices, should be under the power of her
husband: and that in other cases she should be as others were. And Maluginensis
son was chosen in his fathers place. And that the priestly dignity should
better be regarded, and they the readier to undertake the ceremonies; it was
ordained that to Cornelia the virgin, who was chosen in Scantias place, should
be given About seven score and sixteen pound, and five shilliugs.
L L. S. xx. sesterces: and that as often as Augusta entered the theater, she
should sit among the Vestals. Cornelius Cethegus, and Visellius Varro being
Consuls, when the Pontifes, and following their example, the other Priests,
made certain vows for the health of the Prince, they commended Nero and
Drusus to the same gods: not so much for love of the young men, as for
flattery, which in corrupt times is dangerous alike; either not at all, or too
much. For Tiberius never a friend to Germanicus house, grieved impatiently that
the young men should then be equalled unto him in his old age: and sending for
the chief Priests, asked them whether they had done that at Agrippinas
entreaties or threats: and although they denied it, yet were somewhat rebuked:
the greatest part being his nearest friends, and kin, or chief gentlemen of
the city. Nevertheless in Senate he admonished them in an oration, that none
should hereafter puff up the fickle minds of the young men to pride, by
untimely and ouer-hastie dignities. Seianus urged eagerly, that the city was
no less divided into factions, then in time of civil wars; some terming
themselves to be of Agrippinas side; and more would if they were not prevented:
and no way to redress a waxing division, but by cutting off some one or two of
the forwardest. Hereupon he begins with C. Silius, and Titius Sabinus,
Germanicus friendship being dangerous to both: to Silius, because that having
had charge of a great army seven years together, and vanquished Sacrouir in
Germany, and obtained the ornaments of triumph, the higher his fall, the
greater the fear in others would be. Many were of opinion that Tiberius was
the more vehemently incensed, by reason of his own lauishing tongue, overmuch
vaunting that his soldiers had always continued dutiful, when as others had
grown to mutinies: and that Caesar's state had been shaken, if those legions
had been desirous of innovation: which Caesar construed as an embasing to his
greatness, and disabling him of ability to requite: for good turns are no
longer well taken, then they may be recompensed: when they grow greater, then
hope of requital; in stead of thankfulness they breed hatred and ill will.
Sosia Galla, was Silius wife, badly thought of by the Prince, because she loved
Agrippina. It was therefore thought convenient to begin with these two, and not
meddle with Sabinus for a time. The Consul Varro being thrust in, to accuse
them, under color of a quarrel betwixt his father and Silius, became an
instrument to gratify Seianus with his own discredit. The defendants
entreating some delay, until the accusers Consulship were expired, Caesar
denied it, affirming it to be a usual matter for magistrates to call private
persons into question: and that the authority of the Consul was not to be
infringed, through whose watchfulnes the commonwealth was kept without danger.
That was a common trick with Tiberius, always to cloak new coined mischief
with old words. Therefore with great protestation, as though he had proceeded
with Silius by order of law; or the matter belonged to Varro as Consul; or
therein consisted the safety of the commonwealth: the Senate was called, the
party accused not once opening his mouth; or if he began to purge himself,
stuck not to utter by whose malice he was oppressed. He was accused to have had
intelligence with the beginners of the war: that he had discredited his
victory by his covetousness; and other things against Sosia his wife, nothing a
long time spoken of Sacrouir. And doubtless the accusation of polling the
province could not have served their turn, had they not prosecuted all under
treason: but Silius prevented his imminent condemnation, by his own voluntary
death. Nevertheless that contented not, but were greedy his goods should be
confiscate, not to pay the stipendaries; for none of them demanded ought: but
because Augustus liberality was at an end, he took a particular account of
all that was due to the public treasure: which was the first time that
Tiberius showed himself greedy of other men's money. Sosia was driven into
banishment by Asinius Gallus Consul: who also advised that part of the goods
should be confiscate; and part left unto his children. But Lepidus contrarily,
that the fourth part of the goods should be given to the informers, according
to the law; and the residue to his children. I find that this Lepidus was in
those days a grave and wise man: who altered into the better many things,
which others by cruel flattery had ordained: which he did with such
moderation, that he kept in, with Caesar in no less favor then authority.
Which causes me to doubt, whether it happen as in other things by fatal
destiny and nativity, that Princes are favorably inclined to some, and to
others hardly bent; or whether anything consist in our counsels, to single out
a course free from ambition and danger, between selfewill stubbornes, and
filthy flattery. But Messallinus Cotta being no less nobly descended,
differing from Lepidus, was of opinion; that by decree of Senate it should be
ordained, that governors of provinces, though faultles themselves; yet should
be punished for their wives crimes, no less then for their own.

VI. Calphurnius Piso accused and condemned. The last war with Tacfarinas,
and his death.
AFter this, they debated Calphurnius Pisos case, a noble man and of a fierce
courage. He as I have said, seeing what credit pickthanks were in, openly
protested in Senate that he would depart the city: and little regarding the
authority of Augusta, was so bold as to sommon Vrgulania, out of the princes
house: which Tiberius for the present seemed not to take in evil part. But
bearing it in mind although the heat of displeasure was cooled, yet he forgot
it not. Granius also accused Piso of secret speeches, used against the majesty
of the emperor: adding that he had poison in his house; and that he entered
the Senate house with a weapon. This of the weapon was past over as not
credible: but for other things aggreuated against him, he was arrained, but not
convicted; because he was prevented by death. Afterward Cassius Seuerus cause
was handeled; a banished man, of base parentage, and lewd life; but a great
Orator. Who had raised so many enemies against him, that by the judgment of
the Senate sworn, he was confined to Creet: where following the like
practices, drew on his head old and new hatred: and at last being deprived of
all his goods, and banished; spent the rest of his life in the Island
Seriphium. About the same time, Plautius Siluanus Praetor; the cause why, not
known; threw his wife Apronia down headlong from a high place. And being
brought before Caesar by L. Apronius his father in law, as a man troubled in
mind, answered as though she had killed hir-selfe, when he was a sleep, and
wholly ignorant of the matter. Tiberius goes forthwith to his house, and
searches the chamber; where he perceived by the print of her feet, tokens of
her striving against him, and the thrusting of her foreward: which he reported
to the Senate: And Judges appointed to examine the fact. Vrgulania Siluanus
grandmother, sent her nephewe a poniard to dispatch himself: which some
thought to have been done by the princes counsel; by reason of the league of
friendship betwixt Augusta and Vrgulania. Siluanus having tried in vain to
kill himself with the poniard, in the end caused his veins to be cut. Not
long after, Numantina his first wife accused, by charms and witchcrafts to have
put her husband out of his wits, found innocent, is quit by the prince. That
year the people of Rome was delivered of a long war against Tacfarinas the
Numidian. For the captains which till then had been sent against him, having
obtained the marks of triumph: sought no further how to extinguish the enemy.
For there were now three images in the city crowned with baies: and Tacfarinas
still continued spoiling and forraging Africa; and augmented his forces by the
aid of the Moors: which under Ptolemy, Iubaes son, a careless youth,
changed their servile state, and government of freed men, into war. The king
of the Garamantes was a receiver and partaker of his booties, and pillages: not
that he marched with an army, but only by sending light horsemen, which a
far off were thought to be more then indeed they were. And in the province it
self; some for need; and some of a turbulent humor joined with him: because
Caesar considering how well Blaesus had bestirred himself, called home the
ninth legion; as though there had been no enemies left at all in Africa. And
Dolabella Proconsull for that year, durst not stay them; fearing more the
commandment of the prince, then the incertaintie and danger of the war. Upon
this, Tacfarinas gave it out, that the Romans had their hands full; were
distracted with other nations: and therefore purposed by little and little, to
retire out of Affrike. And then that the rest might easily be overcome, if
all which preferred liberty before servitude, would join and courageously
bend their forces against them: and gathering more strength, encampeth before
Thubuscum, and lays siege to it. But Dolabella drawing all the forces he
could make into one: partly the name of the Romans striking a terror into their
hearts; partly because the Numidian is not able to endure the force of the
footmen; at the first encounter, levied the siege; fortified the most
convenient places: and withal, beheaded the chiefest of the Musulani, which
began to revolt. In the end taught by experience of so many battles, that this
fleeting enemy was not to be pursued with a maine camp; Dolabella sent for
King Ptolemy with his countriemen; and divided his forces into four companies;
under the charge of several Lieutenants and Tribunes. The out-riders and
forragers were conducted by certain chosen Moors: himself at hand to give
direction to all. Not long after tidings came that Tacfarinas had encamped and
erected cabins at an old ruinous fort, which himself had once burnt, called
Auzea; trusting to the place being environed with mighty great woods. Then the
light horsemen and wings; not knowing whither, were lead away withal speed.
And at the dawning of the day, with the sound of trumpets, and a dreadful
noise set on the enemies, half sleeping, half waking; their horses unready,
or dispersed abroad at pasture. The Romans footmen were close ranked; the
troops of horsemen in good order; all things in a readiness for battle. The
enemy on the other side in all things unprovided; had neither weapons, order,
nor counsel, among them: but were haled, taken, and slain like beasts. And
every soldier irked with the remembrance of his labors; and how often desirous
to cope with the enemy he had been deluded; filled himself with revenge and
blood. Advertisement was brought from one company to another, to pursue
Tacfarinas well known to them all: and that there would be no end of that
war, if the Captain were not slain. But he with a chosen guard about him;
seeing his son already taken, and the Romans on every side of him, rushing
in among their weapons, with the loss of his life, escaped captivity. And
that was the end of that war. Dolabella desiring the honor of triumph,
Tiberius denied it him: and gave it Seianus, least his uncle Blaesus
commendation should be obscured. But Blaesus was never the more esteemed; and
the denying of the honor to Dolabella, augmented his honor: because that with
a lesser army he had taken many notable prisoners; slain the Captain, and
carried away the fame of ending the war. The Ambassadors of the Garamantes, a
people seldom seen in the city, came after the death of Tacfarinas, all
astonished, as being of the conspiracy to satisfy the people of Rome. After
this, Tiberius understanding of Ptolemaeus diligence in his wars, renewing the
old custom, sent one of the Senators to him with an Iuorie staff, and
embrodered or wrought gown; which were wont to be the ancient gifts of the
Lords of the Senate; and to give him the greater honor called him King,
companion, and friend of the people of Rome.

VII. A rebellion of bond-slaues suppressed: Serenus accused by his own son.
THe same summer beginnings of war, attempted in Italy by bondmen, were
suppressed by mere chance. The beginner of this tumult was T. Curtisius,
sometimes a soldier of a Pretorian band; who at the first in secret
conuenticles, in Brundisium and towns adjoining; then by writings publikly
spread abroad, tolled to liberty, the rude and fierce bond-slaues dispersed in
the woods: when by the favor of the gods, there arrived three Galleies for the
use of passengers in that sea. And Curtius Lapius rent gatherer in those
countries; unto whom by lot fell the Province Cales, according to the ancient
custom, having in a readiness a power of sea soldiers; discomfited the
conspirators, who then did but begin their enterprise. Caesar sent out of hand
Staius a Tribune, with a strong Power; who brought the Captain himself, and
the ringleaders of this bold attempt to the city; greatly afeard of the
multitude of bondmen, which increased to a huge number; the free borne
decreasing daily more and more. The same men being Consuls, there happened a
bloody example of calamity and cruelty, the son accusing the father: both
called Q. Vibius Serenus; both brought before the Lords of the Senate: the
father out of banishment deformed, poor and unhandsome, bound in chains; and
his son pleading against him: who finely and featly attired with a cheerful
countenance; affirmed that secret practices had been wrought against the
Prince; and certain firebrands of war sent into Gallia to raise a rebellion;
himself being both accuser and witness. He charged Caecilius Cornutus once
Praetor, to have furnished them with money: who through the wearisomnes of
trouble, accounting the danger his bane, hastened his own death. But
contrarily the defendant, stoutly turning toward his son; shaking his irons,
called the gods to revenge; praying that they would send him to exile again;
to lead his life far from such customs; and inflict condign punishment upon
his son. And affirmed constantly that Cornutus was innocent, and frighted with
a false accusation; which should easily be perceived if some others were
appeached also: for himself could not practice the death of the Prince, and an
innovation with one only companion. Then the accuser named Gn. Lentulus, and
Seius Tubero: Caesar himself being ashamed, to hear the chief of the city,
and his dearest friends, Lentulus very aged, and Tubero of a weak body,
accused of raising a rebellion, and disturbing the commonwealth: and therefore
both were incontinently acquitted. The fathers bondmen were put to the rack,
which made against the accuser: who through the wickedness of his fact, growing
half frantic, and terrified with the speech of the people, which threatened
either to cast him headlong from the Robur, A place in the prison from whence
malefactors were thrown headlong. Festus.
or draw him in pieces; or punish him as a parricide, departed the city: but
brought back from Rauenna, was forced to end his accusation: Tiberius nothing
at all dissembling the old grudge he bare Serenus the banished. For after Libos
condemnation, by letters he vpbraided Caesar, that his service only was
vnrecompensed; with some other things, more peremptorily, then safely, to proud
ears, and ready to take offense. Eight years after, Caesar cast this in his
dish, many ways carping his actions in the mean space: although contrary to
his expectation, through the constancy of his bondmen, the rack could extort
nothing against him. When all had given sentence that Serenus should be
punished, according to the ancient custom; Tiberius to bleare their eyes, and
dissemble his grudge, would not allow of the sentence. Gallus Asinius was of
opinion, that he should be confined in Gyarum or Donusa; which he misliked
also, saying, that both those Islands wanted water: and that to whom life was
granted, things necessary for life ought to be granted: whereupon Serenus was
carried back to Amorgum. And because Cornutus had slain himself, it was
propounded in Senate whether the informers should loose their rewards; if any
arraigned only of treason and not condemned, slew himself. Which they had all
followed, if Caesar had not sharply and openly, contrary to his accustomed
manner, complained in defense of the informers, saying: that by that means the
laws would be brought to nothing, and the common wealth run to ruin; and that
it were more tolerable to abolish the laws themselves, then take away the
keepers of them. By this means the promooters, a race of men found out for a
common overthrow and destruction, and never duly punished, were allured with
rewards. These continual causes of sorrow, were sauced with some small
contentment: for C. Cominius a gentleman of Rome, convicted of scandalous
verses against Tiberius, was pardoned at the entreaty of his brother a
Senator. A strange case, that knowing what was best (for sottish or senseles he
was not) and what fame followed clemency; yet he desired rather cause of
heaviness and sorrow. Neither is it a matter of deep insight to know the
peoples affection, when they extol Princes actions from the heart; and when
from the teeth outward. And Tiberius himself at other times, cunningly
premeditating his words, and with staggering and stammering delivering his
mind: yet when he means good in deed unto any, finds his tongue ready and
loose. But when P. Suilius sometimes rent gatherer to Germanicus, was convict
for taking of money for giving judgment, and therefore expulsed Italy: his
opinion was that he should be banished into some Island, and that with such
vehemency, that he bound it with an oath, to be profitable for th ecommon
wealth. Which for the present time was taken for a rigorous sentence; but after
Suilius return, turned to his commendation; whom subsequent times saw
mighty, but a slave to money: a long time as he lusted, but never as he ought
using Prince Claudius friendship. The same punishment was ordained against
Catus Firmius a Senator, as falsely accusing his sister of treason. Catus as I
have already said, had inueighled Libo; then betrayed him and brought him to
destruction. Which service Tiberius not forgetting, though pretending other
causes, entreated that he might not be banished; but that he should be deposed
from the Senate, he hindered not. I am not ignorant that many of those things
which I have rehearsed, and which I shall rehearse hereafter, will seem of
small moment, and not worthy the writing. But I wish not that any should
compare our annals with the writings of the ancient historiographers of the
people of Rome: for they reported with a free discourse, of mighty great
wars, winning of towns, of Kings taken and slain: or if they came to
domestical affairs, they recorded the discords betwixt the Consuls and the
Tribunes; laws concerning distribution of lands among the common people; and
iarres between the communaltie and nobility. But the scope of our discourse
is straight, and our labor inglorious: the times I write of being peaceable
and quiet, or no great wars: the state of the city doleful; and the Prince
careless in dilating the Empire. Yet it shall not be lost labor to look
into those things, which at the first seem light; often yielding instruction of
greater matters. For all Nations and Cities are governed by the people; or
Peers; or one alone. A form of commonwealth constituted of one of these, may
better be praised, then found: or if it chance to be found, it cannot long
continue. Therefore as in times past the people bearing swaie, or the Lords of
the Senate; the humor of the communaltie was to be known: and the means how
with greatest discretion they were to be dealt withal: and they judged most
wise and experienced; who had deepliest entered into the disposition of the
Senators and nobility: so the state being now changed; and the regiment
consisting in one alone; it shall be convenient to note those things, which
unto that form of government does best appertain. For there are but few,
which by wisdom, distinguish honest things from dishonest; and profitable
from hurtful; but most men are taught by others events. And my writings bring
more profit then delight; for situation of countries; variety of battles; the
death of famous Captains; do feed and recreat the readers minds. But we
heap up bloody commandments; continual accusations; deceitful
friendships; the overthrow of innocent persons; and causes bringing the like
end; matters tedious for want of variety. The old writers had also this
advantage, that they had no detractors of their writing or few: not being
material to any, whether he had praised the Affrican or Roman armies. But many
are yet alive, whose predecessors suffered punishment or infamy under Tiberius
government. And although their family be extinguished; yet thou shall find
many, which for conformity of manners, think that others misdeedes are
objected against themselves. Glory and virtue have enemies likewise, according
to the disposition of every man's mind; framing reasons contrary to that
which his own inclination is nearest unto. But I will return to my first
purpose.

VIII. An oration of Cremutius in defense of his Annals: Tiberius would not
suffer the Spaniards to build a Temple in his honor.
Cornelius Cossus, Asinius Agrippa being Consuls; Cremutius Cordus was accused
of a new crime never before heard of, that in certain Annals by him
published, he had praised M. Brutus, and said that C. Cassius was the last of
the Romans. His accusers were Satrius Secundus, and Pinarius Natta, Seianus
clients, which was his overthrow. Caesar with a stern look hearing his
purgation; which Cremutius being assured to lose his life, began in this
manner. I am accused for words (Lords of the Senate) because in deeds I am
innocent. But they were neither against the Prince, nor his father, whom the
law of treason does comprehend. I am said to have commended Brutus and
Cassius; whose acts many have written, and all in honorable terms. T. Liuius
an excellent writer, as well for eloquence as truth; did so much extol Gn.
Pompeius, that Augustus called him a Pompeian: yet that no breach of friendship
at all. Scipio Afranius, did never call this self same Cassius, this Brutus,
thieves and parricides, as now adays they are termed, but often worthy and
famous men. Asinius Pollioes writings do deliver an honorable memory of them:
Messalla Coruinus extolleth Cassius as his Captain: and both flourished in
wealth and honor. When M. Cicero had in a book extolled Cato to the heavens;
what did Caesar the Dictator, but answer him in an oration as if he had been
before the judges? Antonies epistles, Brutus orations, have I confess many
untrue and bitter speeches against Augustus. Men read Bibaculus and Catullus
verses, which are stuffed with reproaches against the Caesar's. But yet Julius
and Augnstus of famous memory winked thereat: whether with greater moderation
or wisdom, I know not: for things of that quality neglected vanish of
themselves; but repined and grieved at, argue a guilty conscience. The
Grecians, whose not only liberty, but unrestrained license escaped
unpunished, I speak not of: or if any felt himself grieved, he revenged words
with other words. It has bin always a matter of free liberty, and least
subject unto detraction, to speak of those whom death had exempted from hatred
and favor. Do I incense the peope by orations to civil war, with Cassius and
Brutus already in arms, and masters of the Philippian fields? Do not they
(who ended their life above seauentie years agone) as they are known by their
images which the Conqueror himself has not pulled down, so retain some
remembrance of them by writings? Posterity does render unto every man the
commendation he has deserved. Neither will there want some if I be condemned,
which will make mention, not only of Cassius and Brutus, but of me also.
Having thus said, he went out of the Senate, and ended his life by abstinence.
Order was given by the Senators, that the Aediles should burn his books,
which notwithstanding were still extant; some secretly; some publicly: which
makes me the willinglier to laugh at the witles vncircumpection of such as
think with the power and authority they have in their own time, they can also
extinguish the memory of future times. But it falls out contrary, that when
good wits are punished, their credit grows greater: neither have foreign
Kings, or such as have used the like cruelty purchased any other thing, then
discredit to themselves, and to such wits, glory. This year accusations were
so hotly pursued, that even on the festival days of the Latins, Calphurnius
Saluianus went to accuse Marius before Drusus, Prouest of the city; as he was
entering into the Tribunal to begin his charge: for which cause Saluianus
being publicly blamed by Tiberius, was sent into banishment. Great negligence
was openly laid to the Cyzicenians charge, in not solemnising Augustus
sacrifices; and that they had used violence against the citizens of Rome. For
which cause they lost the freedom which they had gotten in the war when they
were besieged by Mithridates, chasing away the King, no less by their own
manhood, then Lucullus aid. But Fonteius Capito who had been Proconfull of
Asia, was quit of the accusation falsely forged against him by Vibius Serenus.
And yet Serenus escaped unpunished, being odious generally to all, and therefore
in greater safety. For the more bitter an accuser he was, the less touched,
and as it were a sacred person; but the light and base were punished. At the
same time farther Spain sent Ambassadors to the Senate, requesting that by the
example of Asia they might build a Temple in honor of Tiberius and his mother.
Tiberius taking hold of this occasion, though otherwise not greedy of honors,
thought it convenient to answer those who had rumored abroad that he was
carried away with ambition, as follows. I know (Lords of the Senate) that many
will accuse me of inconstancy, for not deniyng the same request unto the
cities of Asia. I will therefore now declare unto you the defense of my former
silence, and what I would have done hereafter. Seeing that Augustus of famous
memory did not hinder those of Pergamum to erect a Temple in honor of
himself, and the city of Rome: I who observe all his deeds and words in
steed of a law, did the willinglier follow that approved precident; because
the honor done unto me, redounded likewise to the Senate. But as it deserves
pardon, once to have accepted that honor: so throughout all the Provinces with
images like unto gods to be reverenced, sauoreth of ambition and pride: and
Augustus honor would come to naught, if it should by flattery used every
where be made common. I for my part (Lords of the Senate) protest before you
all, and desire that posterity know, that I am mortal, and do like unto men;
and take it for honor enough to be Prince. And they shall attribute enough to
my memory, which will believe that I have not degenerated from my ancestors;
that I have been careful in your affairs; constant in dangers; not fearful
of displeasure for the profit of the commonwealth. These things shall be for
me, temples in your minds; these beautiful and lasting images: for those
which are built of stone, if in judgment of posterity they become odious: are
contemned for sepulchers. Therefore I pray our allies, citizens, gods and
goddesses; these, that they would give me until the end of my life, a quiet
mind with the understanding of divine and humane laws; those, that whenever
I shall depart out of this life, they would have me in remembrance with an
honorable memory of my deeds, and renown of my name. And in private places
afterward disliked such adoration, which some interpreted to proceed of
modesty; many of distrust; and some for baseness of mind and want of courage;
because of mortal men the best aspire highest: so Hercules and Bacchus among
the Grecians; Quirinus among us, were added to the number of the gods. Augustus
had done better in hoping to be one. Princes have all other things at will; one
thing they should insatiably seek for, which is to leave a happy memory
after them: for by contemning of fame, they contemn the virtues which engender
it.

IX. Seianus requesteth of Tiberius that he might marry Liuia, Drusus vvidow.
And persuades Tiberius to withdraw himself from the City.
But Seianus sottishly mad with ouergreat fortune, and enflamed with a burning
desire of Liuia: importunately demanding a performance of a promised marriage,
inditeth and sends letters to Caesar: because the custom was, that although
the Prince were present, yet to present their petitions by writing: the
contents were as follows. That the good will of his father Augustus was such
toward him, and Tiberius also, by diverse signs did show him such favor, that
he would not sooner offer his hopes and vows unto the gods, then unto the
ears of Princes. That he never thirsted after high and eminent dignities; but
chose rather to watch and travel like a common soldier for the safety of the
Emperor: notwithstanding that he had obtained that which seemed to be of all
other the greatest honor: that is, that he should be thought worthy of Caesar's
alliance; from whence sprang the beginning of his hope. And because he had
heard that when Augustus in the bestowing his daughter, had thought even of
gentlemen of Rome; so he besought him, if a husband were thought upon for
Liuia, that he would have him as a friend in mind, who would be content with
the glory only to be allied to him: never purposing thereby to give up the
charge imposed upon him, nor relinquish his usual care: but would hold
himself satisfied, if his house might be assured against Agrippinas wicked
malice, and that in regard of his children: and as for himself, he desired to
live no longer then he could employ himself in the service of his Prince.
Tiberius having praised Seianus great love and zeal, and chiefly run over the
benefits he had received of him, demanding time as it had been fully to
deliberate on the matter, added; That other men consulted of that only which
was for their profit: but the conditions of Princes was of a different
quality, whose special drift was to direct their actions to fame: and
therefore would not fall into that which was easy for him to have written.
That Liuia could determine with her self whether she would marry again or
not, or remain in the same family: that she had a mother and grandmother as
nearer counselors: he therefore would deal more simply, and speak first of
Agrippinaes enmities, which would be far more incensed, if Liuiaes marriage
should divide Caesar's house as it were into parts, and breed emulation
between the women; and consequently the overthrow of his nephews. What if any
variance arise in that marriage? Thou art deceived Seianus, if thou think to
continue in the state thou art now in, if thou marry Liuia, who has been wife
unto C. Caesar, and afterward to Drusus; and imagine that she bears the mind
to pass the rest of her life with a Gentleman of Rome. And if I should agree
unto it, do thou think that they would suffer it, who have seen her
brother, her father, our auncetors in greatest dignities? Thou will continue in
the calling thou art now in; but those magistrates and noble men which maugre
thy teeth mount to authority, and determine of all matters, do report it, and
that not in hugger mugger, that a long time since thou have climed higher then
the degree of a gentleman, and gone beyond my fathers friendship; and for the
hatred they bear unto thee, blame me. But Augustus thought once to marry his
daughter to a gentleman of Rome. Truly it was to be marvelled, that being
distracted with so many cares, and foreseeing that he who should match in that
place, should by that alliance rise to great advancement, he would in familiar
conference think upon Proculeius and some others, which lived a notable quiet
life, not meddling at all with matters of estate. But if we be moved because
Augustus did doubt, only whether he should bestow her upon a gentleman, how
much more ought we to consider that he gave her to M. Agrippa, and then after
unto me. These things I would not hide from thee for the friendship which is
betwixt us: but I will not be against thine nor Liuiaes deseignments: and will
forbear at this time to speak what I had cast in mind, and how nearly I
purposed to link thee unto me. I will only say, that there is nothing so
excellent, but thy virtues and good will toward me does deserve it; and when
opportunity shall serve, I will utter it either in Senate, or before the
people. Seianus hearing this answer was nothing pleased, not so much in regard
of the marriage, as because he feared Tiberius secret suspicions; the rumor of
the people; and envy which grew fast upon him. Yet fearing if he should cast
off those great troops which daily came to court, him he should weaken his
authority; and by entertaining them, minister matter of crime: the mark he
shot at was, to persuade Tiberius to lead his life in some pleasant place far
from Rome; wherein he foresaw many things, as that there could be no access to
the Prince but by him; that all letters being conveyed by soldiers which were
at his devotion, should pass through his hands: that Caesar declining now to
age, and grown slothful and effeminat through the quietness of the place,
would disburden himself of cares of state, and commit them to another: and
that the envy borne to himself should be diminished, access to the Prince
being lesser: and by that means all vain shadows removed, he should grow
mighty in true power and authority. Therefore by little and by little he
finds fault with the business of the city, the concourse of people, the
flocking together of multitudes; extolleth highly a quiet and solitary life; a
life without anguish of mind, and free from envy: most fit to think on
important and weighty affairs. And falling out by chance that Votienus
Montanus cause was to be heard, a man of a ready wit; Seianus perceiving
Tiberius not resolved to leave the city, persuaded him to be a very
inconvenient matter to be present at the assemblies of the Senate; least he
should hear railing and reproachful speeches, but yet true, uttered of
himself in his own hearing. For Votienus being accused of contumelious words
against Caesar, whilst Aemylius a witness and a soldier labored earnestly to
prove his assertion, rehearsed from point to point, though the hearers buzzed
and made a noise about him, all Votienus words: in which Tiberius heard many
spiteful and reproachful speeches backbitingly uttered in secret against
himself: which so moved him, that he cried he would either presently, or when
the cause was heard, purge himself; and was hardly pacified either with
entreaty of his nearest friends, or flattery of all; and so Votienus was
punished as for treason. Caesar persisting stiffly and using hard and rough
dealing, though that was one of the crimes objected against him, condemned to
exile Aquilia, for adultery with Varius Ligur: although Lentulus Getulicus
Consul elect, had already condemned her by the Julian law: and put Apidius
Merula from his Senators room, because he had not sworn to observe Augustus
acts.

X. Acontrouer sie betwixt the Lacedaemonians, and Messenians touching the
rights of the Temple of Diana: Piso Praetor of Spain, slain by a villagois.
AFter that were heard the Embasies of the Lacedaemonians and Messenians,
concerning the right of the Temple of Diana Limenetidis; which the
Lacedaemonians auowed by the records of their Annals, and profices to have
been dedicated by their predecessors in their country: but taken from them by
Philip of Macedon, with whom they warred; and afterward restored unto them by
the sentence of C. Caesar, and M. Antonius. The Messenians on the contrary
side alleged an old division of Peloponesus between Hercules successors; and
that that territory Dentheliate wherein the Temple was, fell to their King;
whereof there remained ancient monuments engraven in stones and brass. And if
it were necessary to produce the testimony of Poets and Chronicles, they had
more then they of good credit: neither had Philip so done by force, but
according to equity. King Antigonus, and the Captain Mummius gave the like
judgment. So the Milesians being publicly made arbitrators of the cause; and
last of all, Atidius Geminus Praetor of Achaia determined the same. Whereupon
judgment was given on the Messenians side. The Segestani likewise demanded
that Venus Temple built on the hill Eryce, and fallen down with age might be
reedified: calling to remembrance many things of her beginning pleasing unto
Tiberius ears, which moved him to undertake willingly the charge, as being of
her blood. After that the Massiliens requests were heard, and the example of P.
Rutilius allowed, who, having by law been expulsed Rome, the Smyrnaeans
received and made a citizen in their city. By which right also, the Massiliens
received Vulcatius Moschus a banished man, who left all his goods to their
commonwealth, as to his country. Two noble men Gn. Lentulus, and L. Domitius
died the same year. It was to Lentulus a great honor, over and besides that
he was Consul, and triumped over the Getuli, that he endured his poverty
patiently; then that having gotten great riches without iniuriyng of any, he
used them temperatly. Domitius credit grew by his father, who was lord of the
sea in the civil wars; until he thrust himself into Antonies faction; and
after that into Caesar's. His grandfather was slain in the Pharsalian battle,
taking part with the nobility: and himself chosen to marry Antonia, Octauius
yoongest daughter. After that he passed over the river Albis with his host, and
entered farther into Germany, than any other before him; for which cause, he
obtained the honor of triumph. L. Antonius of great, but unfortunate nobility
died likewise: for his father Iulus Antonius being put to death for committing
adultery with Iulia: Augustus sent him being very young, and his sisters
nephewe, to Marsilles, where he cloked the name of banishment with the pretense
of study. Notwithstanding he had great honor done him at his funerals, and his
bones buried in the tomb of the Octauians by decree of the Senate. The same men
being Consuls, a bloody fact was committed in hither Spain by a pesant of
Termestine, who assayling upon the way L. Piso Praetor of the Province, at
unawares and unprovided, as being careless by reason of peace, killed him with
one stroke; then fled in post to the woods; and forsaking his horse, stealing
by dangerous bie-waies, beguiled his followers; though not long: for his horse
being taken and brought to the next villages, it was known whose he was. And
being found and put to the rack to bewraie his accomplices, cried alowde in his
country language, that that was a vain question to ask him; and that his
companions might boldly come, and behold him on the torture; for no torment or
grief should be able to draw the truth from him. And being the next day
brought again to the torture, by violent force breaking from his keepers, so
dashed his head against a stone, that immediately he yielded up the ghost. Some
were of opinion that Piso was slain by the treachery of the Termestines, by
reason he exacted more of those barbarous people, then they were able to bear.

XI. Poppaeus Sabinus defeateth the Thracians: and their obstinacy.
LEntulus Getulicus, and C. Caluisius being Consuls, triumphall ornaments were
awarded Poppaeus Sabinus for defeating certain Thracians, which wildly lived
in high mountains; and therefore more savage and fierce. The cause of their
rebellion, besides their natural disposition, was, because they would not that
any muster should be made of their strongest and ablest men for service: never
accustomed to obey their Kings farther then themselves listed; or if they did
send any aid, they appointed the conductor of them; and would make no war
but against the borderers. There was also a rumor then spread, that they should
be dispersed and brought into other nations and mingled with them. But before
they began to bear arms, they sent Ambassadors to Sabinus declaring their
amity and obedience to the people of Rome; and that they would so continue if
they were not oppressed with new taxations: but if like vanquished men they
should live in servitude, they had both weapons and youth, and a resolute
courage either to die or live in liberty. And therewithal, showed their
fortresses built on rocks, whither they had conveyed their parents and wives,
and threatened an intricat, hard and bloody war. But Sabinus giving mild
answers, until he had gathered his forces together: and when Pomponius Labeo
was come with a legion out of Moesia, king Rhoemetalces with the aid of his
countrymen, which continued still in their allegiance; with the forces he had
at hand, he marched toward the enemy possessed of the streights of the woods;
some of the forwardest showing themselves in open place: which, the Roman
captain having stole upon, were easily put to flight, with small bloodshed of
the barbarians, by reason of their refuges at hand. Then fortifying in the same
place, seaseth on the mountain, which was narrow and even ridged unto the next
fort: guarded with great, but unorderly and confuse strength; and immediately
sends before of his choice archers against the fiercest of them before the
trench, as the manner of the country is, singing ditties and verses. They
wounded many with shot a far off, and drawing near, by a sudden irruption of
the enemy had been driven to the worst; if the Sugambrien cohort which lay not
far off, in dangers venturous, and no less fierce and dreadful in noise of
songs and clattering of arms, had not received them at a pinch. After this,
Sabinus encamped nearer the enemy, leaving the Thracians, which (as I have
already said) came to our side at the first fort, with warrant to wast, burn,
carry away booties, so as they took no longer time then the day, and return
at night to set a sure watch and a vigilant over the camp. Which at the first
was observed: but afterward through riot, wantonness, and desire of riches,
neglecting their wards, hunting after belly cheer, and overtaken with wine,
fell heavily all to sleep. The enemy understanding their retchles negligence,
divided his men into two squadrons; the one to set on the forragers, and the
other to assail the Romain camp; not with hope of any surprise, but by their
clamors, and clashing of weapons, every man intentive to his own danger, they
should not hear the noise of the other skirmish: choosing the night withal to
make the fear the greater. But those which assaied the trench of the legion
were easily repulsed: the aid of the Thracians in the other fort terrified with
a sudden assault; part of them lying asleep within the trenches; and part
seeking provision and stouer abroad, were so much the more cruelly slain,
because they were reckoned to be as fugitives and traitors, which bare arms to
bring themselves and their country into servitude. The next day Sabinus
shows himself in a place without advantage to either side, to see whether
the barbarians, glad of the nights success, durst venture a battle. But seeing
they went not out of their fortresses or hills adjoining, he began to lay siege
to them with a strong company, casting a trench and a parapet four miles
compass about them: after that by little and little, to bar them of water and
forage, streightened his enclosure, the first enuironing the last: and raised
up a bulwark so near the enemy, that from thence they might throw stones,
darts, and fires into the enemies camp. But nothing annoyed the enemy more
then thirst, a huge multitude of raw fighting soldiers, having but one
fountain left them for their use: withal, their cattle (as the custom is
among barbarous people) shut up with them, died for want of stouer: dead
carcases of men lay along, as well with wounds as thirst; all corrupted with
putrefaction, stench, and infection. And to make their troubled estate more
miserable, they fell at discord among themselves; of all calamities, the full
measure: some ready to yield, some to die, some to strike and kill one
another: some persuading courageously to sallie out, and not perish without
revenge; and these not of the basest alloy, though divided in opinions. But
among the captains, Dinis, a man stricken in years, and who by long experience
had tried as well the strength as clemency of the Romans; counseled them to
lay down their arms, as the only remedy in their distress: and was the
first which yielded himself, with his wife and children, to the conquerors:
the rest which were weak, either through age, or sex, and desired rather life
then renown, did the like. But the youth between Tarsa and Turesis, both
resolved to die with liberty, were doubtfully distracted: but Tarsa crying
that death was to be hastened, and hope and fear to be cut off at once; and
giving example unto others, thrust himself through the breast, many following
the same death. Turesis with his company expected the night: our captain not
being ignorant thereof, and thereupon reenforced the watch. The night being
stormy and tempestuous, the enemy now making a fierce outcry, and on the
sudden using a marvelous silence; drove the besiegers into uncertainties: when
as Sabinus went about from one place to another, exhorting them not to lay
chance open to such as by their doubtful clamors, and fained silence, laid
trains to entrap them; but that every man should keep his standing, and take
heed he threw no dart in vain. In the mean space the barbarians clustering
together by troops, now threw hand-stones against the rampire, iauelins burnt
at the end, and troncheons of oak, now filled up the ditches with shrubs,
hurdles, and dead carcasses. Some of them having before made bridges, and
ladders, planted them before the bulwarks, catched hold of them, labored to
pull down the defense, grapled, fought hand to hand with such as resisted:
contrarily the Roman soldier beat them down with spears, thrust them back
with the pikes of their bucklers, lanced darts, and rolled heaps of stones
from the wall upon them. The hope of victory already gotten, and that if they
should now faint and be overcome, shame and reproach put life and courage into
our; in them desperate hope of life; many having their mothers and wives
bewailing and lamenting about them. The night animated some to boldness; drove
some into a fear: blows flew on all hands; wounds given and taken unlooked
for; no man knowing his fellow from the enemy, and the found of the voices as
if it were an echo rebounding behind them in the turning and winding of the
mountain, brought such a confusion, that the Romans abandoned their
standings and holds, as though they had been battered and broken down:
howbeit, a small number of the enemies escaped alive: the residue (the most
courageous either slain or wounded) at the opening of the day, were chased to
their fortresses, and at length forced to yield; willing to accept the first
conditions the winner would offer: to the rest, a cruel and timely winter by
reason of the hill Haemus was a safeguard, that they could neither be subdued by
force, nor siege.

XII. The sharp words which Agrippina used to Tiberius for accusing Claudia
Pulchra her cosen: what good will was borne the Smyrnaeans above the other
towns of Asia, and the cause.
But at Rome, the Princes house being greatly troubled, to begin the course of
Agrippinaes future ruin; Claudia Pulchra her cosen german was called into
question by Domitius Aser: who having been lately Praetor, of small reputation,
and eager by what means soever to win credit; laid to her charge that she
lead an dishonest life with Furnius, and practiced to poison, and used
enchantments against the Prince. Agrippina being of a fell and haughty
disposition, and then more then ever kindled through the danger of her near
cosen, hasteneth to Tiberius, whom by chance she found sacrificing to his
father: and taking hold of that of occasion, told him: it was two men's office
to offer sacrifice in memory of Augustus, and persecute his posterity: that
the divine spirit was not transfused into dumb statuaes and images: but the
true image descended of celestial blood felt the smart of his posterity: and
therefore she would take upon her the person of the party accused: that it was
in vain to take exceptions against Pulchra, whose only ruin was, that
vnconsideratly she had loved and reverenced Agrippina: forgetting what had
fallen to Sosia for the same cause. Those words provoked Tiberius, although
seldom using to open the secrets of his breast: and rebuking her in a Greek
verse, said, that therefore she was displeased, because she could not reign.
Pulchra and Furnius are condemned: and Afer, the excellency of his wit known;
and Caesar attributing unto him praise of eloquence, held among the chief
orators. After this practiced in accusing and defending of parties; he was
better known for eloquence, then honesty of life: saving that when his
eloquence in his latter age decayed, and his spirits failed; yet was never
quiet when if his tongue walked not. But Agrippina frowardly persisting in
anger, and encumbered with sickness, when Caesar went to visit her, pouring down
in a long silence many tears, at last burst into envy and entreatie; that he
would redress her solitary life: and being yet but a young woman, provide her
a husband: Marriage being the only comfort of minds honestly given: that there
were some in the city which would vouchsafe to receive Germanicus wife and his
children. But Caesar not ignorant of what importance this request was to the
commonwealth; yet least he should openly seem to displease or fear her, gave
her though most earnestly demanding, no answer at all. That I find not in
the writers of Annals, but in the Commentaries of Agrippina her daughter, who
being Neroes mother, has delivered to posterity her life and calamities which
fell to her friends. But Seianus in this dumpe, sent her a message unlooked
for, and under color of friendship; which was that there was, poison prepared
for her; and that she should avoid to eat or drink with her father in law.
But she not knowing how to dissemble, sitting by him at table could not be won
to look cheerfully, or speak a word, or touch any meat: until at last
Tiberius marked it either by chance, or because he had had some inckling of it.
And to try that more certainly, praising certain apples as they were served
in, gave of them with his own hand to his daughter in law; which augmented
Agrippinaes suspicion, and not once tasting of them, delivered them to the
waiters. Yet openly Tiberius spoke not one word; but turning to his mother,
said, that it was no marvel, if he had proceeded severely against her, seeing
she had an opinion, he went about to poison her. Thereupon a rumor was spread,
that her destruction was sought for; and that the Emperor durst not openly
attempt it: and therefore sought secret means to compass it. But Caesar to
stop that rumor showed himself often in Senate, and gave the Ambassadors of
Asia audience many days togeither, when they doubted in what city they
should erect a Temple in honor of him. A eleauen cities of different power,
strove with like ambition for that honor, alleging that there was not any
great difference betwixt them; in antiquity of time; love and affection to the
people of Rome; in the wars against Persus and Aristonicus, and other Kings.
The Hypaepeni and Tralliani, togeither with the Laodiceni, and Magnetiens were
sent away as not sufficiently grounded. No nor the Ilienses producing that Troy
was the mother of Rome, had any foundation of their reasonsauing only
antiquity. But some doubt was made of the Halicarnassi; because that for the
space of a thousand and two hundred years, their cities had never been shaken
with any earthquake; and that the foundation of their Temple was built upon
lively strong stone. The Pergameni were answered that they had received honor
enough, in that they had Augustus Temple amongst them; seeing that thereon they
grounded their reason. It seems that the Ephesians and Milesians had their
cities occupied, the one in the ceremonies of Apollo, and the other of Diana:
In so much that all the contention rested betwixt the Sardinians and
Smyrnaeans. The Sardinians recited a decree of the Etrurians, as being of their
blood: for Tyrrhenus and Lydus King Atyes sons, divided the land betwixt them,
by reason of the increase of the people. And Lydus remained in his country,
and Tyrrhenus went to seek new countries to inhabit; which were called by the
names of their Captains: they in Asia, and these in Italy: and in progress
of time the Lydians growing to farther wealth, sent people into Greece, which
were afterward called Peloponesians. They told us also of letters sent them by
our Captains, of treatise made with us in the war of Macedon; of the number
of rivers; the temperature of their country; and what a rich territory they
had round about them. But the Smyrnaeans fetching their antiquity a far off;
either that Tantalus from whence they came, was descended from Jupiter; or from
Theseus, issued also from the stock of the gods; or else that some one of the
Amazons had founded them: alleged farther the service they had done to the
people of Rome; in which they most of all relied, and that they had given them
su cour by sea; not only against foreign wars; but also the wars of Italy.
And that they first of all had dedicated a Temple in honor of Rome, M Porcius
being Consul. The people of Rome indeed then flourishing; but yet not lifted
up to the height of their greatness: the city of Carthage yet standing, and
many strong Kings living in Asia. They brought in L. Sulla for a witness, whose
army being fallen into great danger through the roughnes of the winter, and
want of apparel: when news was brought thereof to the Smyrnaeans as they were
assembled upon occasion; all which were present sent the apparel from their
own backs unto our legions. Thereupon the Lords of the Senats opinion being
demanded, they preferred the Smyrnaeans. And Vibius Marsus counseled farther,
that over and above his charge, M Lepidus unto whom the government of that
Province fell, should have a deputy appointed to take care of that Temple. And
because Lepidus through modesty refused to accept it, Valerius Naso who had
been Praetor, was by lot chosen and sent.

XIII. Why Tiberius absented himself from the City.
Whilst these things thus passed, Caesar having deeply thought upon, and
after protracted his determination, at last goes into Campania, under color
of dedicating a temple to Jupiter Capua, and another to Augustus at Nola: but
indeed resolved to lead his life far from the city. The occasion of his
departure, although following some authors, I have attributed unto Seianus
wiles: yet because that after Seianus death he continued six years in the
like retired life, I am often induced to doubt, whether the cause be more truly
to be referred to himself, as going about to cloak by the place, his cruelty
and loose behauior. Some were of opinion, that being through age, slender,
tall, and crooked, bald headed, and his face spect with plasters and
ointments, was therefore ashamed to show himself in public. And at Rhodes he
was wont to shun company, live secretly, and hide his lascivious dissolute
life. Some gave out that his mothers insupportable insole^cie drove him away,
whom as a companion in state he could not endure; nor yet be rid of her,
because the sovereignty it self was her gift. For Augustus was determined to
leave the Empire to Germanicus his sisters nephew, who had a good report of all
men: but being overcome by his wives importunate entreaty, he adopted
Tiberius; and Tiberius, Germanicus: which Augusta did upbraid unto him, and
demanded the Empire again which she had bestowed upon him. He departed with a
small train with him: one Senator who had been Consul, which was Cocceius
Nerua, skillful in the laws; one gentleman of Rome besides Seianus; and of
noble men only Curtius Atticus. The rest were men endued with liberal
sciences, most of them Grecians, with whose conference he purposed to pass the
time. Some Astrologers gave out that Tiberius departed Rome under such a
constellation, that he should return no more; which was cause of manies
overthrow, which coniectured and diuulged that he had not long to live: for
they could not foresee so incredible a matter, as that he should want his
country willingly eleven years together. Wherein did appear not long after
how near cosens their art and falsehood are; and how truth is disguised and
hidden under obscurity. For it was not spoken at aventure that he should not
return again, although they were ignorant of other things which should happen
unto him: or whether he should quickly die, or not, which was not signified by
those words of theirs; because he ended his latter years in some village not
far off, or on the sea shore, or near unto the walls of the city. At that
time a doubtful and dangerous peril, which by mere chance Caesar fell into,
augmented the vain rumor already sown; and gave him occasion to put more
trust in Seianus friendship and constancy, then ever he had done before. For
as they were eating in a country house called Spelunca, between the sea
Amuclanum, and the hills of Fundani, in a natural grot or cave, certain stones
falling suddenly from the mouth of it, slew some of his seruitors; which so
affrighted the rest, that they fled all away. But Seianus with his knees, his
face and hands leaning and hanging over Caesar, set himself against the other
stones which were falling, and in that plight was found by the soldiers which
came to succor them. This made him greater then he was: and although he should
have given most pernicious counsel, yet should have had favorable audience, as
one nothing caring for ought which might happen to himself. He took upon him
the office of a judge against Germanicus issue, suborning some to play the
parts of accusers, and inueigh especially against Nero next in succession;
although a modest young man, yet oftentimes forgetful of that which was
requisite for the present time, pricked forward by his freed men and followers,
which thought it long till he were Emperor, to show himself bold and stout of
courage: persuading him that that the people of Rome desired, the army
covered, and that Seianus durst do nothing to the contrary; though now he
insulted alike over the patience of the old man, and sloth and cowardlines of
the young. Nero hearing these or the like speeches, yet dreamt of no bad
practice: although some wilful and inconsiderate speeches slipped now and then
from him: which when the spies set over him had augmented and carried to
Caesar, and Nero not suffered to purge himself; drove many into sundry
doubts. Some shunned to meet him; some having saluted him, turned presently
from him; many brake off abruptly their talk. Seianus favorers on the other
side laughed in their sleeves to see it. Tiberius, whether the young man spoke
unto him, or held his tongue, cast a malicious eye, or smiled dissemblingly upon
him: and whether he spoke or held his tongue, it was always a crime in him.
Neither was he secure from treason in the night; his wife bewraying his
watchings; his dreams; his sighs to Liuia her mother, and she to Seianus: who
drew Drusus, Neroes brother, to his side with a hope of the Empire, if he could
remove his elder brother which was already down and out of credit. Drusus
was of a cruel and fell disposition; and besides the desire of rule, and
hatred which usually reigns betwixt brothers: he was incensed with envy to
see Agrippina their mother readier bent to do Nero good, then himself. And yet
Seianus did not so much tender Drusus, but that he proiected in his mind some
means of his ruin: knowing well that he was very fierce and headstrong; and
therefore easily intrapped. In the end of this year two famous men died,
Asinius Agrippa, rather of a renowned then ancient stock, himself not
degenerating from them; and Q. Haterius descended from Senators, whilst he
lived greatly esteemed for eloquence: but monuments of his wit there are none;
because he was esteemed rather for vehemency and quick delivery, then
diligence and premeditation. And as others industries and labors are had in
estimation after their days; so Haterius fluent vain was extinguished with
him.

XIIII. The falling of an Amphitheater, and the hurt which ensued: Tiberius
reedifieth certain houses burnt in the hill Caelius.
WHen M. Licinius, and L. Calphurnius were Consuls, a sudden and unlooked for
mischance as soon ended as begun, might have been compared to the calamity of
mighty wars. For an Amphitheater begun at Fidena, one Atilius a freed man,
to set forth a play offencers; as one having neither abundance of wealth, nor
ambitious in winning favor of the people; but by niggardly sparing to make a
base gain in the workmens hire; did neither lay a sound foundation, nor
fasten the timber frame erected upon the same. Thither flocked many, very
desirous of such shows, both men and women of all ages; partly by reason it
was so near unto them; and partly because that, during Tiberius empire, they
were barred from such pastimes; whereby the mischief was the greater. For the
pile being great, and filled full with a throng of people, then falling
asunder, whether it fell inwards, or spread outward, it carried down headlong,
and overwhelmed a huge multitude of people, intentive on the show within, or
gazing round about. Those which at the beginning were crushed to death by that
hap, escaped languishing torment. They most of all were to be pitied, which
being bruised and broken, yet lived, and in the day knew their wives and
children by sight, and in the night by lamentable howling and crying. Those
which were absent moved with this report, one lamented his brother; another his
near kinseman, another his parents: yea they were afraid if their friends and
cosens were out of the way, although for other occasion; doubting still they
had been there; and because it was not certainly known whom that violent
ruin had beaten down, the uncertainty spread the fear the farther. As soon
as they began to remove the frame, they flocked about the dead bodies, some
kissing, some embracing them; and fell often at debate, in mistaking one for
another, by reason they were dissigured, through some resemblance of
countenance, and likeness of years. Fifty thousand persons were slain or
maimed by that mischance: and a decree laid down by the Senate, that from
thence forward no man should exhibit the play of Fencers, who was less worth
then About 3130. pound.
four hundred thousand sesterces: nor that any amphitheater should be built
but in a firm and sound place: and Atilius was banished. After that fresh
calamity, the houses of the chief gentlemen were open; medicines and
physicians appointed for the bruised and mangled: and the citizens, although
heavy and sad, yet then were like their ancestors, which after great battles,
did relieve and comfort the wounded with all care and liberality. That
misfortune was scarce past, but the rage and violence of a fire consumed the
city more then ever, and burnt the hill Caelius. That was reported to be an
unlucky year, and that the princes absence was begun in a dismal hour; as
the manner of the people is, to draw casual mishaps to blame, if Caesar had
not prevented them, by bestowing of money to every man according to his loss.
For which liberality, thanks in Senate were given him by the noble men: and the
people gave him a good report, because that without ambition or entreaty of
friends, he had of his own motion helped and called strangers unto him. And
diverse were of opinion, that the mount Caelius should after that be called
mount Augustus: because that when all was wasted with fire round about; only
the image of Tiberius which was in Iunius a Senators house, remained untouched.
The same happened in times past to Claudia Quinctia; and therefore her image
twice escaping violent rage of fires, our ancestors did consecrate in the
Temple to the mother of the gods: an argument, that the Claudians are accounted
sacred, and received among the number of the gods: and therefore the ceremony
ought to be augmented in the place, where the gods have shown so great favor
toward so mighty a Prince. It shall not be amiss to show, how that hill was
in old time called Querquetulan, because it was fertile and abundant with
oaks: then Caelius of Caele Vibenna, who being Captain of the Etrurian
nation, and succored the Romans, obtained that seat of Tarquinius Priscus, or
of some other King; for in that point writers do vary. As for the rest, it is
without controversy, that those great companies of soldiers did inhabit also
the plains, and places adjoining to the place of assemblies: and thereupon
that was called the Thuscian street, of the name of the strangers which came
thither to inhabit. But as the benevolence of noble men, and largess of the
Prince, was a great comfort in their adversity; so the credit and authority
of informers more and more increasing, wrought the overthrow of many.
Domitius Afer accused Varo Quinctilius, a wealthy man and near kin to
Caesar, having before condemned Claudia Pulchra his mother: no man maruelling
that being long a needy companion, and having wastfully consumed his late
recompense, should arm himself to farther mischief. But that P. Dolabella
was his sellow picthanke, issued of noble kindred, and allied to Varus, was a
miracle ouerthowing by that action himself, and distained his nobility and
blood. Yet the Lords of the Senate would not agree thereto, but thought it
convenient to expect the Emperors coming: which for the time was the only
shift against imminent mischiefs. But Caesar having dedicated his temples in
Campania, albeit he had given warning by edict, that no man should disturb his
quietness; and hindered the concourse of townsmen by placing of soldiers in the
way: yet being awearie of towns and colonies, and all places situated in the
co^tinent, withdrew himself to the Island Capreas, three miles distant by sea
from the farthest part of the promontorie of Surrentum. I easily believe that,
that Island did fit his humor, having neither haven nor commodities, and those
conveyed in very little vessels: no man landing but the watch was presently
acquainted with it. The temperature of the air is in winter mild, by reason
that a hill opposite unto it, beats back the force of the winds. In the
summer season it is open to the Westernwinde, and has very pleasantly the sea
on every side, and a goodly prospect toward the hill Vesuuius, until by
fire the face of the place was changed. The report goes that the Greeks did
possess that place, and that the Theleboians inhabited the Island Capreas. But
at that time Tiberius occupied the place, and seated himself in twelve
country houses of pleasure: and how much more in former times he was earnestly
bent upon the public good, so much the more, now secretly he aba^doned himself
to loose life and naughty idleness. He was never more suspicious and credulous
then now: a quality which Seianus whilst he was abiding in the city whetted
on; and which did now more then ever disquiet him: and no longer using secret
treachery to entrap Agrippina and Nero, put over then soldiers as it were to
record in Chronicles what messages they received; who resorted to them; what
they did either secretly or openly. Farther there were others suborned to
counsel them to fly to the army of Germany; or when the place of assemblies
was best replenished with people, catch hold of Augustus image, and cry for
fuccour of the people and Senate. And albeit, they gave no ear to those
devises; yet they were laid to their charge, as though they had intended them.

XV. A treacherous practice of three Senators to entrap Sabinus a gentleman of
Rome, and Agrippaes friend: the death of Iulia Augustus niece.
IVnius Silanus, and Silius Nerua being Consuls, the year had a foul
beginning; by reason Titius Sabinus an honorable gentleman of Rome was drawn to
prison, only because he was a friend to Germanicus: never omitting to show all
tokens of duty to his wife and his children; and of all Germanicus followers
the only man which visited them at her house, and accompanied them abroad: and
therefore commended by the good, and disliked by the bad. Against him Latinius
Latiaris, Porcius Cato, Petitius Rufus, and M. Opsius, who had been sometimes
Consuls, bent their malice, through a greedines of the Consulship; which they
could not obtain but by Seianus means: and Seianus liking could not be
purchased, but by some notable piece of villainy. They had so complotted
between them, that Latiaris, who was somewhat allied to Sabinus, should lay
the snare; and the rest be present as witnesses; and then begin the accusation.
Hereupon Latiaris, at the first began to cast out speeches at randon; then to
extol his constancy, that he did not as others did, fawn in prosperity, and
shrink from a house in adversity; with other honorable speech of Germanicus;
and bewayling and pitiyng Agrippinaes estate. And seeing Sabinus (as men's minds
are soft and tender in calamity) to power down tears and complaints;
Latiaris began more boldly to touch Seianus cruelty, pride, and the hope he
gaped after: not forbearing vnreuerent speeches against Tiberius. These
speeches as though they had been sauced with somewhat which durst not be
avouched, made show of straight friendship between them: so far that Sabinus
often times sought out Latiaris; frequented his house; uttered his griefs unto
him, as to a must trusty and faithful friend. Those whom I spoke of before,
consulted of some means how these speeches mightbe heard of many; for the
place of their two meetings most be private: and if they should stand behind
the door, they were afraid of being seen, or of a noise; or least some
suspicion should grow by some chance. Between the roof and the seeling, the
three Senators (the place no less unseemly then the treason detestable) hid
themselves, and laid their ears close to holes and chinkes to listen what was
said. In the mean space Latiaris having found Sabinus in the market place, as
if he had some new matter to tell him, draws him home, and into his chamber;
begins to rip up things past and present, which yielded store of matter, and
inforceth new occasions of fear. Sabinus does as much, and more at large: the
nature of griefs being such, that when we once enter into the^, hardly can we
find an end. This done, they began immediately their accusation, and sent
letters unto Caesar, declaring the order of their own lewd practice, and
shameful act. The city was never in greater perplexity and fear, then at
that time; every man estranging himself even from his nearest kindred and
acquaintance: they avoided all meetings, conferences, eschuing as well known
friends, as strangers: yea they have an eye to mute and senseless things, and
searched the roofes and walls of their houses. But Tiberius requesting by
writing that the solemnities of the new year might be celebrated in the
Kalends of January; turned his talk to Sabinus, charging him that he had
corrupted some of his freede men, to attempt somewhat against his person; and
therefore boldly demands a revenge, which without delay was granted: and
being condemned, he was drawn and haled with his garments turned over his
head, and almost throtled, cried alowd. Is this the beginning of the new year?
be these the sacrifices which are slain in Seianus honor? which way soever he
did cast his eyes, or unto who^ soever he directed his speech, they al fled:
the place of assemblies and the streets were empty; some came back and showed
themselves again, afeard for that they were seen to be afeard. For what day
was past free from executions; if betwixt the sacrifices and the vows, at what
time the custom was to abstain from profane speeches, fetters and cords are
spoken of? And it was said that Tiberius could not through ignorance incur this
hatred; but contrary, that he sought to have it known, that without any let,
new magistrates might as well open the prisons, as Temples and altars. After
that he sent letters of thanksgiving, that they had punished an enemy to the
state; adding withal, that he stood in fear of his life, and was ielous of
his enemies practices, though naming none: yet no man doubted but he aimed at
Nero and Agrippina. If I had not purposed to declare the occurrents of the
years as they fell out, I could willingly in this place have set down before
his time, what ends Latinius, and Opsius, and the other contriuers of that lewd
practice had com unto; not only after that C. Caesar was come to the Empire,
but whilst Tiberius was yet alive: who, as he would not suffer the ministers
of his wickedness to be punished by others; so oftentimes having had of their
service his fill, and fresh offered to continue the trade; he sought all means
to extinguish the old, as persons odious unto him. But what punishment these
and others of the like conditions, endured, shall be declared in his place and
time. Then Asinius Gallus whose children Agrippina was aunt unto, thought it
convenient that Tiberius should utter unto the Senators of whom he stood in
fear, and suffer them to be removed. But as it was thought Tiberius of all
his virtues was fond of none so much as of his dissimulation: and therefore
disliked much that he should be urged to disclose that which he went about to
conceal. But Seianus tempered the matter; not for any love he bare Gallus; but
because he would have the Princes lingering delays come to light; knowing well
that he was slow in his deliberations: but if he had once set them abroch, that
his bad speeches were joined with cruel deeds. The same time Iulia died, whom
Augustus having convicted of adultery, had exiled into the Island Trimerus, not
far from the Apulian shores: where she endured twenty years exile, sustained
by Augusta; whose manner was by secret practices to subvert her sons in law
when they were in prosperity, and openly show them pity when they were in
misery.

XVI. The Frisians rebellagainst the Romans: Agrippina, Germanicus daughter is
married to C. Domitius.
THe same year the Frisians beyond Rhene forsook their obedience, rather
through our covetousness, then impatiencie of living under our subjection.
Drusus in regard of their small ability, had imposed a small tribute on them
which was a certain of ox hides for the war, no man respecting what strength
or largenes they were of; until Olennius a Captain of a principal ensign
and governor of the Frisians, made choice of the skins of the beast called
Vrus, and of that hignes. As that had been a heavy burden for other nations;
so the Germains could least of all others endure it: whose woods although full
of huge savage beasts; yet at their houses have but small herds: first
therefore they delivered these oxen; then their possessions; and lastly the
bodies of their wives and children into bondage. From hence grew their grief
and complaints: and seeing that no man relieved them, they sought a redress by
war; laid hands on such soldiers as received the tribute, and hanged them
up. Olennius escaped the fury of the enemy by flying to a Castle called
Fleuus, strengthened with no small power of citizens and consederats; which held
the coasts of the Ocean in subjection. Which when L. Apronius Propretor of
low Germany understood, he sent for the chiefest ensigns of the legions of
higher Germany, and aides as well of the horsemen as footme^, and brought both
the armies over Rheine, into the Frisian land: the rebels forsaking the siege
of the Castle to defend their own. Then Apronius makes causeies and banks,
and strong bridges over the next arm of the sea, for the huge army to pass
over. And in the mean time having found some foords, comma^deth the wing of the
Caninefates, and such footmen as served under us, to hem in the enemy behind.
Who raunged into battle array to fight, drove back the confederates, and
legionarie horsemen sent as an aid. After that were sent three cohorts lightly
armed; then two more: and a little after a strong company of horsemen. Strength
sufficient, if they had charged courageously together; but coming some after
some, and dropping in by companies; they neither gave courage to the fearful,
but carried away themselves with like fear, ran all away for company. The
residue of the aides he committed unto Cethegus Labeo, Lieutenant of the fifth
legion: who perceiving things to go doubtful on his side, sent to demand more
aid of the legions. The fifth legion courageously issuing first out with a hot
skirmish, put the enemy to flight; received into them the wounded and wearied
cohorts. The Roman Captain sought neither to revenge, nor bury the dead
bodies; although there had been slain many Tribunes, Prefects, and diverse
Centurions of mark and fame. It was after known by the fugitives, that the
fight held on until the next day, and that there were nine hundred Romans
slain in a wood called Baduhenna: and that another power of 400. which had
taken the village of Cruptorix, (which sometime had received pay of the
Romans) fearing treason, slew one another. This got the Frisians great
renown among the Germains: Tiberius dissembling his losses, least he should
commit the charge to some other: and the Senate, being possessed with
domestical fear, regarded not much whether the remote part of the Empire went
dishonorably to wrack or not: but stricken (as I have said) into a fear,
sought a remedy by flattery. And albeit they had propounded many matters to
deliberate on, yet they decreed, that all laid aside, there should be two
altars erected, one unto Clemency, and another unto Friendship: and that
Caesar's and Seianus images should be set about them: and entreated most
earnestly they would vouchsafe them so much favor as that they might see him.
Nevertheless they went neither to Rome, nor any place there about, but thought
it sufficient if they went out of the Island, and be seen in Campania next
adjoining unto it. Thither resorted the Lords of the Senate, Gentlemen, and
many of the common people, heavy for Seianus; unto whom, access was hardliest
obtained, and that with great crouching, by approouing and participating his
deseignments. It well appeared his arrogancy grew greater, seeing he blushed
not to see such open, base, and filthy seruilitie used. For at Rome it was a
usual matter for men to walk the streets, and by reason the city is great,
no man knew another business: but there some lying night and day in the field,
some on the sea shore, without any difference, endured either the pride of the
porters, or had favor as pleased them; until that that was also denied them.
Then they returned to the city with discontented fear: and Caesar not having
vouchsafed either to look, or speak unto them: and some, whose unfortunate
friendship with Seianus portended their imminent death, were glad in an ill
time. Tiberius having publicly given his niece Agrippina, Germanicus daughter
unto Gn. Domitius, commanded that the marriage should be solemnised in the
city. He made choice of Domitius, as well for the antiquity of his stock, as
neerenesse in blood to the Caesar's: for Octauia was his grandmother, and by
her, Augustus his uncle.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
I. The death of Iulia. Tiberius cruelty increases. His practices to make
away Nero, and Agrippina.
WHen Rubellius and Fusius, both of them surnamed Geminus, were Consuls, Iulia
Augusta died; being very aged, and of the noble family of the Claudians; and
besides, into the house of the Liuians and Iulians adopted. She was first
married unto Tiberius Nero, and had children by him: who being driven out of
his country in the war of Perusium, and a peace after confirmed betwixt
Sext. Pompeius, and the Triumuiri, returned to the city again. After that
Augustus ravished with her beauty (whether against her will or not it is
uncertain) took her from her husband, showing himself so lustful of her,
that not giving her time to be delivered of her first husbands child, brought
her great as she was to his own house. After that she had no issue, but being
united to Augustus blood, by the marriage of Germanicus and Agrippina, they had
nephews children common to them both. Her behauior was, according to the
carriage of ancient times; yet more courteous then women of former ages could
well allow; an intolerable mother, a tractable wife, with the subtletie of her
husband, and dissimulation of her soon, well meddled and composed. Her funerals
were not sumptuous, her testament long void. She was praised in a funeral
oration before the Rostra, by C. Caesar her nephews son, who not long after
succeeded in sovereignty. But Tiberius omitting no part of his pleasures,
excused by letters his absence from his mothers obsequies, as though he had
been hindered by important affairs; and under color of modesty, cut off many
honorable ceremonies, which the Lords of the Senate had decreed should be done
in memory of her; and especially that no divine ceremony should be ordained for
her, because (said he) such was her will. And in part of the same letters he
found fault with such as went about to win women's favor and good will: therein
covertly carping the Consul Fusius, a man highly in Augustus grace, and his
crafts-master in winning of women's favor, a jesting mate, and often accustomed
bitterly to skoffe at Tiberius; a thing which great pote^tates keep long in
memory. But now Tiberius began to grow worse and worse, and his rule tyranous:
for whilst his mother lived, there was some refuge left, because he had a long
time accustomed to show himself dutiful unto her; and Seianus durst not
cross her: but then having as it were the bridle in their own hands, they
brake loose at once, and letters were sent against Agrippina and Nero; which
the common people judged to have been sent before, but kept back by Augusta:
for not long after her death they were read in Senate, containing bitter and
sharp words; yet never objected that he had borne arms, or stirred any
rebellion against him, but only unnatural loves to young men, and incontine^t
life. But against his daughter in law he durst not object so much, but only her
arrogant and proud speeches, and obstinate mind. The Senators were stricken
into a fear and silence, until some few whose hopes depended not on honest
means, but made public calamities occasion of private benefits; demanded that
the matter might be referred to voices: Cotta Messallinus showing himself most
forward with a cruel sentence. But the other chief gentlemen, and especially
the magistrates were afraid; for although Tiberius had angerly inueighed
against them, yet he left other things in doubt. There was in the Senate one
Iunius Rusticus, chosen by Caesar to set down the acts of the Senators (and
therefore was thought to know best his intent and purpose) who either by fatal
destiny (for before he had given no token of his constancy) or subtle devise,
forgetting imminent perils, whilst he fears uncertainties, thrusts
himself among the Consuls yet wavering and doubting what to do; and advises
them not to put the matter to deliberation, saying: that greatest matters might
be turned in a moment: and that some space of time ought to be given the old
man to repent himself: and the people withal carrying Agrippinaes and Neroes
images with them, enuiron the Senate house, and wishing all prosperous fortune
to Caesar, cry, that those letters were false; and that the overthrow of the
Princes house was intended against the Princes will: and so there was nothing
concluded that day in prejudice of the parties. Certain counterfeit judgments
were spread abroad against Seianus under the Consuls names. Some men secretly,
and therefore the more saucily practicing their wits as their fancy lead them,
which yielded Seianus farther matter of calumniation, and kindled his anger:
saying, that the Princes displeasure was nothing regarded: that the commons
were at jar with the Senate: that new orations and new decrees of Senate were
heard and read now adays. What remains but to take arms in hand? and choose
those for their Captains and Emperors, whose images they had followed for
their ensigns? Whereupon Caesar reiterating his injurious speeches against his
nephewe and daughter in law, and rebuking the people by edict; complained to
the Senate, that the imperial majesty had been openly deluded and skorned
through the fraud of one of the Senators: and therefore required that the
hearing of the cause might be reserved wholly unto himself. They consulted no
farther on the matter, but condemned the parties, but not to death, because
they were forbidden: and protested they were ready to execute revenge, if the
Prince had not hindered them.*

* There wants very much of the story in this place, which has perished
through time.

II. The death of Seianus; of his friends and children. One faineth himself to
be Drusus Germanicus son.
WHether it be a more lamentable case to be accused for breach of friendship,
or to accuse his friend, I can not well judge: * no man's cruelty or clemency
will I try *: but free and bearing my self on my own conscience, I will
prevent danger. I beseech you, that you would not have me in remembrance rather
in mourning and sad then joyful manner and cherefull, reckoning me in the
number of those which have escaped public calamities by an honorable end. Then
talking now with one, now another, as by chance they were near unto him, he
spent a great part of the day either in entertaining, or taking leave of them.
And having many about him, which noted how resolute and assured he was in
countenance, no man dreaming any such matter, with a sword which he had hidden
under his garments, slew himself: and after he was dead, Caesar used no such
reproachful and injurious speeches, nor objected any such heinous matter
against him, as he did against Blaesus. After this, P. Vitellius, and Pomponius
Secundus cause was heard. Vitellius they accused, that he had offered the
cofers of the public treasury whereof he had charge, and the money which was
in them for soldiers pay, to stirrers up of new broiles. The other Considius,
who had been once Praetor, accused for having had great friendship and amity
with Velius Gallus, who after that Seianus was punished, fled to Pomponius
gardens, as to a place of safe refuge: both of them in their distress having
no other comfort left but the constancy of their brothers, who became bail
for their life. Shortly after, Vitellius through many delays betwixt hope and
fear wearied out, under color of using it in his study, asking for a
penknife, lightly pricked a vain; and ended his life, with grief and anguish
of mind. But Pomponius being a Gentleman of a gallant carriage and excellent
wit, bearing adverse fortune patiently, ouerliued Tiberius. Then was there
order taken though the peoples anger were mitigated, and many others pacified
with the former punishment, that the rest of Seianus children should be
punished. Whereupon they were carried to prison, the son having some feeling
of the danger which hung over his head; but the daughter was so simple, that
she often asked, whither they would lead her, and for what? that she would do
no more so; and that it was sufficient to chastise her with the rod like a
child. The writers of that time affirm, that because it was never heard of
before, that a virgin should be put to death according to the custom of the
Triumuiri: that she was deflowred by the executioner immediately before the
halter was put about her neck: and both strangled. The bodies of these young and
tender children were cast into the Gemonies, a place where condemned persons
were thrown down headlong. About the same time, Asia and Achaia were put into
a very great fright, though it continued not long, with a rumor that Drusus,
Germanicus son, had been seen first in the Islands Cyclades, and afterward
in the continent. But it was a young man of like age, whom some of Caesar's
freed men by a subtle practice followed, bearing men in hand, they knew it to
be him. Such as knew him not, were drawn by the fame of his name, and the
Greeks especially, prone to all new and strange wonders. It was reported he
had escaped out of prison and fled to his fathers army, some both faining and
believing withal that he would invade Egypt or Syria. Youth flocked already
to him very cheerfully; many signs of love publicly shown him, feeding
themselves with the present vain hope of what might happen. When as Poppaeus
Sabinus had tidings thereof, who was then occupied in the affairs of
Macedonia, had charge also over Achaia: he therefore, were the report true or
false, to prevent all things, hastening over the Toronaean and Thermaean cut,
and passing by Euboea, an Island of the Aegean sea, and Piraeum a coast of
Attique, the Corinthian shore, and the streights of Isthmum; by another sea
came to Nicopolis, a colonie of the Romans: and there after a careful
examination understands who he should be. He said he was M. Silanus son,
and that many of his followers having forsaken him, he embarked himself, as
though he meant to travel into Italy. These things he signified to Tiberius
by writing: neither have we found any thing more of the beginning or end of
this matter. Toward the end of the year a quarrel of certain Consuls burst
forth, which had been a long time a breeding. For Trio little regarding what
enemies he procured, and well practiced at the bar, underhand carped Regulus,
as being careless in oppressing Seianus ministers. Regulus, unless greatly
provoked, of a temperate and cold humor, did not only answer and quail his
fellow Consul, but brought him within the compass of conspiracy, and to be
examined for it. And although many of the Lords of the Senate entreated them
that they would surcease their quarrel, which would grow to their own
overthrow; yet they continued their grudge and menaces one against the other,
until they went both out of office.

The end of the fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
I. Of Tiberius lascivious life. Pursuing of Liuia and Seianus. Cotta accused.
CN. Domitius and Camillus Scribonianus entered the Consulship, when Caesar
having passed the straight betwixt Capreas and Surrentum, coasted Campania,
doubtful whether he should enter into the city or not: perhaps because he had
otherwise resolved in his mind, though making show he would come: oftentimes
approaching near the city, and to the gardens along Tiber, and returning back
again to the rocks, and deserts of the sea, to cover the shame of his
lascivious life: which so vnstayedly he wallowed in, that, as the manner of the
kings was, he defiled and abused noble men's sons under age; and not only the
welfauored and comelyest, but the modest and well nurtured, and whose modest
behavior showed the stock from whence they grew, served him for provocation of
filth. Then first of all were those unknown words of Sellaries and Spintries
found out of the filthiness of the place, and sundry sorts of sufferance of
abuse. Some of his slaves had charge to seek them out, and bring them to him;
alluring such by gifts as showed themselves willing and ready; and threatening
such as refused: and if either their near friends or parents went about to
detain them, they used violence, and carried them away perforce; and exercised
their wills on them as if they had been captives. But at Rome in the beginning
of the year severe judgments were given against Liuia, and against her
images, and other memories consecrated in her honor; as if her lewdnes had then
first come to light, and had not been already punished. The Scipioes gave
their opinion, that Seianus goods should be taken from the public treasury,
and put in the Princes private cofers. The Silanians and Cassians were of the
same opinion, and urged it with the same terms, or not greatly changed: when
on the sudden and unlooked for, Togonius Gallus among those noble men,
thrusting himself forward, being but of base and low calling, had the hearing
given him, as a matter to laugh at: for he desired the Prince to choose twenty
by lot out of a certain number of Senators, to guard and defend his person with
weapon, as often as he went to the Senate. He believed peradventure that Tiberius
had meant good earnest when he required that one of the Consuls might conduct
and aid him from Caprea to the city. Tiberius nevertheless accustomed
sometimes to interlace serious matters with skoffes, thanked the Lords for
their good will: yet demanded whom he might omit? or whom he might choose?
whether always the same, or sometimes others in their steed? such as had
borne office, or young men: private persons or magistrates? what a goodly sight
it would be to see them take a sword in hand at the entry of the council
house? neither would he make such account of his life, if he were to maintain
it by arms. This he answered to Togonius, tempering his words, and persuaded
no farther the disallowing of that opinion. But he rebuked Iunius Gallio very
bitterly, who propounded that the soldiers of the guard after their service was
ended, might have a room in the fortieth rank of seats: and asked him as it
had been in their presence, what he had to do with soldiers? for whom it was
not lawful either to receive commandment or gift, but of the Emperor: or
whether he had found out that which Augustus of famous memory could not provide
for? It was rather a matter of discord and sedition, sought for by one of
Seianus followers, to stir up rude minds under title of honor to corrupt the
custom of service. This was the reward which Gallio received for his
artificial flattery; and anon after was driven out of the council house, and
then out of Italy. And because it was objected that he could easily endure
exile, having made choice of the famous and noble I Will of Lesbos, he was
recalled to the city, and kept in the magistrates houses. In the same letters,
to the great contentment of the Lords of the Senate, Caesar touched Sestius
Pagonianus, who had been sometimes Praetor, to the quick: audacious, malignant,
and prying into all men's secrets; beloved of Seianus, and by him employed to
lay snares to entrap C. Caesar: which being once laid open, all the hatred a
long time hatched against him burst forth; and sentence of death decreed
against him, if he had not promised to bewray the accomplices. But when Acreus
had accused Latinius Latiaris hated both alike, it was a most grateful
spectacle unto all. Latiaris, as I have rehearsed before, was the principal
agent of circumuenting Titius Sabinus; and then the first that received
punishment for it. Among these accusations Haterius Agrippa sets upon the
Consuls of the last year, asking them why they are now so still, and cease
from the accusations begun the one against the other? it was fear, and guilt
of conscience which made them friends; but the Lords of the Senate would not so
put up that which they had heard. Regulus said, he would stay for a time of
revenge, and that he would prosecute the matter before the Prince. Trio
answered, that emulation and envy betwixt colleagues were better forgotten; and
injurious words if any had passed. Agrippa urging on still, Sanquinius Maximus
one of the Consuls, desired the Senators that they would not increase the
Emperors cares by hunting after matter of dislike, and that he himself was
able to redress these things; and so Regulus life was saved, and Trioes ruin
deferred. Haterius was so much the more odious, because that withered and
unlusty with sleep, or lascivious watchings, and through his dull drousie
disposition, nothing fearing the Prince, though cruel, even in his brothell
houses, and loosest lasciuiousnes, dreamt of nothing but how to subvert the
nobility. After that, Cotta Messalinus, the author of every cruel sentence,
and hated of old, as soon as occasion was offered, was accused to have uttered
certain things against Caesar; and among others, that he was in his secret
parts both man and woman, and after a banquet on the birth day of Augusta among
the Priests, he termed that a Nouendinale supper, or belonging to a mortuary:
and that repining at M. Lepidus, and L. Arruntius power and authority, having
a suit depending against them for a money matter, he should say, that them the
Senate would defend, but me my little Tiberius will support. The chief of the
city convicted him without any delay, and pursuing him eagerly, he appealed to
the Emperor. And not long after letters were brought from Tiberius, in which
in manner of a defense, calling to mind the beginning of friendship between
him and Cotta, and his many good turns and services, requested that words
might not be hardly wrested, and that the simplicity of table talk might not
be imputed to him as a crime. The beginning of these letters of Caesar's was
worth the noting, which was this: What I shall write unto you Lords of the
Senate, or how I shall write, and what I shall not write at all, at this time
the gods and the goddesses confound me worse then I feel and know my self
daily to perish, if I know. So far his villainous demeanor turned to his own
scourge and punishment. And therefore that most deep wise man did not say
without cause, that if tyrants minds were laid open, a man should see them
torn and rent in sunder: for as the body is rent with stripes; so the mind is
tormented with cruelty, wanton affections, and evil counsels. For neither his
great fortune, nor solitary places could defend Tiberius, but that himself
confessed the torments and punishment which lay hidden in his breast. Then the
Senators having received authority to determine of Caecilianus according to
their wills, who had uttered many things against Cotta: their judgment was that
he should receive the same punishment, that Aruseius and Sanquinius had, who
were L. Arruntius accusers. Then the which nothing ever happened more honorable
to Cotta: who being indeed of noble birth, but through riot needy, and
infamous for his vices, in honorable punishment is made equal to Arruntius, a
man of sincere and honest life.

II. Terentius defenses, why he should not be punished like unto other of
Seianus friends.
QVintus Seruaeus after this, and Minutius Thermus were brought in. Seruaeus
had been Praetor and Gerusanicus companion. Minutius a gentleman, and who in
Seianus friendship had carried himself modestly; and therefore both the more
pitied. But Tiberius contrariwise blaming them as principal agents, commanded
C. Caestius an old Senator, to report unto the Senators what he had written
unto him: whereupon Caestius undertook the accusation: a miserable calamity
of those times that the chiefest of the Senators, some openly, some secretly,
played the part of base promooters: and further, no man able to know the
stranger from the kinsman; nor friends from such as he never saw before; nor
things lately committed from such as through continuance of time were almost
forgotten. They were accused of all they had spoken wheresoever, either in the
place of assemblies, or at their table; every man making haste to prevent, and
be before another in carriyng of tales; some of them to save themselves; other
some infected as it were with a disease gotten by conuersing with others. But
Minutius and Seruaeus were condemned, and their goods given the accusers.
Julius Africanus borne at Santon a town in Gallia, and Seius Quadratus were
drawn into the like mishap; but the occasion why, I have not found. I am not
ignorant that the dangers and punishment of many have been omitted by writers
being ouer-wearied with multitude; or fearing least those things should be
tedious to the readers, which seemed superfluous and lamentable to themselves
in rehearsing. There have come many things to our ears worthy the knowledge:
although other have not once touched them. For at the self same time that the
rest colourablie seemed to shake off the amity they had with Seianus, M.
Terentius a gentleman of Rome, although arraigned for his labor, durst avouch
it, beginning his speech for his defense before the Lords of the Senate in this
manner. It would be peradventure less behoouefull for my estate to acknowledge,
then deny the crime I am charged with: but hap what hap may, I will confess
that I have been Seianus friend, and that I desired so to be; and that after I
had obtained his friendship I was glad of it. I had seen him joint officer
with my father in the government of the Pretorian cohort, and not long after in
managing of city affairs and matters of war. His kinsmen and allies were
advanced to honor: as every man was inward with Seianus, so was he grace by
Caesar. And contrariwise, such as were not in his favor, lived in fear and
distressed with poverty. Neither do I allege any man for an example of this:
all of us who were not privy to his last attempts, with the danger of my only
estate I will defend. Not Seianus the Vulsiniensis; but a part of the Claudian
and Julian family, which by alliance he had entered into; thy son in law
Caesar, thy companion in the Consulship, and him who took upon him thy charge
of administering the commonwealth, we did reverence and honor. It is not our
parts to judge of him whom thou do exalt above the rest, nor for what
considerations. To thee the highest judgment of things the gods have given;
and unto us the glory of obedience is left. We look unto those things which
we see before our eyes; whom thou do enrich; whom thou do advance to
honors; who have greatest power of hurting or helping; which Seianus to have
had no man will deny. The Princes hidden thoughts, or if he go about any
secret drift, it is not lawful to sound, and dangerous: neither shall thou in
the end reach unto them. Think not only (Lords of the Senate) of Seianus last
day, but of sixteen years; in which we did likewise fawn upon and court
Satrius and Pomponius: and to be known to his freed men and partners, was
reckoned as a high favor. What then? Shall this defense be general, and not
distinguished, but a confusion made of times past, and his later actions? No:
but let it, by just bounds and terms be divided. Let the treasons against the
commonwealth; the intentions of murdering the Emperor be punished: but as for
the friendship, duties, pleasures and good turns; the same end shall
discharge and quite thee (O Caesar) and us. The constancy of his oration, one
being found to deliver that, which they all thought in their minds: prevailed
so much, that his accusers by ripping up their old faults, were punished,
either with exile or death.

III. The occasion of making a Prefect at Rome: an examen of some of the Sibyls
books.
AFter that Tiberius sent letters against Sext. Vestilius sometime Praetor, and
well-beloved of Drusus his brother, and chosen to be one of his guard. The cause
of displeasure against Vestilius; was either because he had composed certain
writings against Caesar's unclean life; or falsely fathered upon him, gave
credit to the reporters: and thereupon being banished the Princes court and
familiarity, having first gone about with his own old feeble hand to slaie
himself bound up his veins: and in the mean space having entreated the
Princes favor, and received arigorous answer, did at last open them. Then at
once were accused of treason, Annius Pollio, Appius Silanus, Scaurus Mamercus
Sabinus Caluisius, and Vicinianus also brought in with his father for company,
all of them well descended and some in authority. The Lords of the Senate
quaked for fear; for how many was there which was not either allied, or a
friend of one of those noble men? But Celsus Tribune of the citie-cohort, and
then an informer delivered Appius and Caluisius from danger. Caesar deferred
Pollioes, Vicinianus, and Scaurus cause, that himself might have the hearing
of it with the Senators: having given out already tokens of heavy displeasure
against Scaurus. Not so much as women but were partakers of danger: and if not
attainted for attempting to aspire to the Empire; yet brought in question for
their tears: and Vitia an old woman Fusius Geminus mother was put to death,
because she bewailed the death of her son. These things were done in Senate.
And where the Prince was, the like was practiced: Vescularius Atticus, and
Julius Marinus two of his most familiar friends, which accompanied him to
Rhodes, and at Capreas never departed from him, were put to death. Vescularius
was the Messenger to and fro when the treachery was wrought against Libo.
Marinus was of Seianus counsel when he put Curtius Atticus to death; most men
being glad to see them taken in the snare they laid for others. About the same
time L. Piso high Priest died a natural death, which was a rare matter in
those times in a man of so great nobility: He never of himself propounded any
matter which smelled of flattery or base minds; and if he were forced thereto,
he used great moderation in doing it. His father, as I have already said, had
been Censor; he lived to the age of fowerscore; having in Thrace deserved the
triumphall ornaments. But his greatest credit rose in that, that being newly
created Provost of the city, he did govern exceeding moderately all the time
of his continual rule: irksome through vnwontednes of obedience. For in times
past when the Kings or Consuls went out of the city, least she should be left
without government, there was one chosen for a time able to give every man
right, and provide for all sudden accidents. And it is said that Dentres
Romulius had the same charge given him by Romulus; after that Numa Marcius by
Tullus Hostilius, and Spurius Lucretius by Tarquinius Superbus. Then that the
Consuls had the charge of committing this office; and a shadow of it continues
unto this day; as often as the Latin feasts are folemnised, one is appointed
over the rest to exercise the room of a Consul. But Augustus in the time of
civil wars, made Cilnius Maecenas a gentleman, Provost over Rome and all
Italy. Then being Lord and Master of the Empire, by reason of the greatness of
the people, and slow aid which the laws affoorded; he chose out one, of such
as had been Consuls, to bridle the bondmen and such citizens as through
audaciousnes would grow troublesome, unless they stood in awe. The first that
received that authority, but kept it but awhile, was Messalla Coruinus, as
unable to discharge it. Then Taurus Statilus although he were very aged, went
through it with great commendation. After that Piso was well liked for the
space of twenty years; and by order of the Senate honored with public
funerals. It was afterward propounded before the Lords of the Senate by
Quinctilianus Tribune of the people, concerning the Sibyls book, which
Caninius Gallus one of the fifteen, requested might be received among other
books of the same prophetess; and demanded it might be so established by
decree of Senate: which being given by common consent, Caesar sent letters
somewhat reprehending the Tribune, as ignorant of the old custom by reason of
his youth; and vpbraided Gallus that being old and practiced in the science and
ceremonies; nevertheless had demanded the opinion of the Senators not fully
assembled; the author being uncertain, and before the college had yielded
their judgment; neither as the custom was, the verses having been read and
waighed by the masters. Withal he advertised them, because that many vain
things were published under the name of famous men, that Augustus had under
penalty set down a day, within which such books should be brought to the
citie-Pretor; and that it was not lawful for any to have them in their private
possession. The like decree was established by our predecessors also; and after
that the Capitol was burnt in the civil war, their verses were sought in
Samum, in Ilium, Erythrum; through Affrike also, Sicily, and the colonies of
Italy, whether they were one or many: the business being committed to the
Priests to distinguish the true prophecies from the false, as near as might be
by the judgment of man. And then also the book was referred to the
examination of the fifteen. When the same men were Consuls, through a dearth
of corn and other provisions, they grew almost to a commotion: and many things
for many days together were in the Theater more licentiously demanded with
great eagernes, then the manner had been to demand things of the Emperor.
Whereat being moved, he blamed the magistrates and Senators that they had not
by public authority brideled the insolency of the people: and added withal,
how far greater quantity of corn he had caused to be brought then Augustus,
and out of what provinces. Whereupon a decree of Senate was enacted, to
restrain the people, according to the ancient severity, the Consuls being no
less forward to publish it: his own silence in the cause was not construed to
be a point of civility as he looked it should be, but was imputed to his
pride. In the end of that year, Geminius, Celsus, Pompeius, Gentlemen of Rome,
were put to death for conspiracies; among which, Geminius through prodigality
and loosenes of life, and a friend to Seianus, was a man of nothing. And Julius
Celsus a Tribune, loosing the chain he was bound with at large; then winding
it about, and forcing himself a contrary way, brake his own neck. But Rubrius
Fabatus despairing of the Roman affairs, and fleeing to the Parthians, and
brought back safe from the streights of Sicilie by a Centurion, had keepers
appointed him, not able to allege any probable causes of his long voiages; yet
he escaped unpunished rather through forgetfulness then clemency.

IIII. Tiberius marries his neeces. Usurers accused, and the inconvenience
that ensued.
SEr. Galba, and L. Sulla being Consuls, Tiberius having a long time bethought
himself what husbands he should provide his neeces, whose age now came on,
made choice of L. Cassius, and M. Vinicius. Vinicius kindred came out of a
small town, himself borne at Calls: but his father and grandfather were
Consuls: the rest of his kindred were Gentlemen: he was of a mild disposition,
and very eloquent. L. Cassius was descended of one of the common people at
Rome, but ancient and noble, and brought up under the severe discipline of his
father; and oftener commended for his courtesy, then industry. To him he
gives Drusilla; to Vinicius Iulia, both Germanicus children: and writes to
the Senate touching that matter, with a light commendation of the young men.
Then having yielded some causes of his absence, but very extrauagant, came to
matters of greater moment, and the displeasures and dislikes he had incurred
for the common wealth: and requested that Macro the Provost, and some few of
the Tribunes and Centurions, might, as often as he came to the Senate, enter into
the Curia with him. And albeit the Senate made a decree very general, without
prescribing any number, or quality of persons, he was so far from coming to
any public counsel, that he never came so much as to the city; coasting
about it, and for the most part in by-ways, and still avoiding his country as
much as he could. In the mean season, a great rabble of informers rose up
against such usurers as took more for consideration of their money, then they
might by the law made by Caesar the Dictator, concerning the manner of lending,
and holding possession within Italy; long neglected heretofore, because the
public good is less set by, then private commodity. Usury in very deed
has been an old disease in the city; and often a cause of seditions and
discords; and for that cause has been restrained in ancient and less
corrupted times. For first it was ordained by the law of the twelve tables,
that no man should take above one in the hundred; when as before that time, it
was as pleased the monied men. After that, by a Tribunitian law it was brought
unto half one in the hundred; and in the end usury was wholly forbidden: and
many laws made by the people to cut off all fraud; which often repressed,
revived again by strange sleights and devises. But then Gracchus being Praetor,
unto whom the examining of that question fell, constrained by the multitude of
such as were endangered thereby; propounded the matter before the Lords of the
Senate: who daunted thereat (for there was not one of them free from that
fault) craved respite of the Prince: he granted them a year and six months:
within which time, every man according to the prescript of law should settle
his estate, and make up his domestical accounts. Hereupon every man calling in
his debts, on a sudden ensued a great want and scarcity of money; and by
reason so many were condemned, and their goods sold, all the money ready coined
went either to the princes, or public treasury. Besides this, the Senate
ordained that two parts of the usury money should be bestowed upon lands in
Italy: but the creditors disliked that, and urged the payment of the whole, as
a matter impayring the credit of the parties conuented, to go from their word.
So at the first there was great running hither and thither, and entreaties:
then they flocked about the Pretors tribunal: and those things which were
found for a remedy, as selling and buying of such men's goods, turned to a
contrary effect, because the Usurers had hoorded up all their money to buie
land. And because the multitude of sellers, was cause that the value of lands
was rated at a very low and vile price: how much the more a man was indebted,
the loather he was to sell. And many were thrust out of all they had: and the
decaie of their wealth carried their credit and fame headlong after; until
Tiberius relieved them by putting a About 781250. pound.
hundred million sesterces in bancke, and lent it for three years space
without consideration or interest; if the debtor could give security to the
people of Rome in lands double the value of the debt. By that means their
credit was restored, and other particular creditors by little and little found:
neither was the buying of lands practiced according to the form of the decree
of Senate, hotly at the beginning pursued, as almost all such things are; but in
the end carelessly neglected.

V. C. Caesar marieth Claudia, daughter unto M. Silanus: what proof Tiberius
made of Trasullus skill.
AFter that, the old fears return again, Considius Proculus being accused
of treason: who celebrating his birth day not doubting any thing, was drawn to
the Curia, and at the same time condemned and put to death; and his sister
Sancia banished, Q. Pomponius being accuser; who being of an unquiet and busy
disposition, pretended he had done this and that, and all to currie favor with
the Prince, thereby to steed his brother Pomponius Secundus, who was then in
danger. Banishment is likewise decreed against Pompeia Macrina, whose husband
and father in law, the one of Argos; and the other of Lacedaemon, men of mark
and reputation among the Achaeans, Caesar had already afflicted and brought to
ruin. Her father likewise a famous gentleman of Rome, and her brother, who had
been Praetor; seeing that their condemnation was at hand, slew themselves. It
was imputed unto them for a fault, that Gn. Magnus made reckoning as of a
special friend of Theophanes Mytilenaeus their great grandfather: and that the
Grecian flattery after his death had given him divine honor. After these
Sext. Marius the richest man of all Spain, was accused to have committed
incest with his daughter, and was cast healong from the Tarpeian rock. And
little doubt but his exceeding wealth was his overthrow: for although his gold
mines were confiscated; yet Tiberius reserved them for himself: and by much
blood shedding growing more bloody, commanded al those to be executed which
were in prison, and accused of confederacy with Seianus. The butcherie was
great in all sexes, and all ages, noblemen, common people, scattered here and
there, or gathered into heaps. Neither was it lawful for near kinsmen and
friends to be present, to bewail their case; nor yet to come often to see them:
but there were watches and spies on every side, intentive to pry what
lamentation every man made; which followed the putrified bodies, until they
were thrown into the river of Tiber. And if any of them were found floting on
the water, or driven to the banks, no man durst burn them nor touch them: all
familiar society and intercourse of humanity was lost through fear and
violence: and how much cruelty increased; so far pity was banished. About the
same time C. Caesar bearing his grandfather company from Capreas, took to
wife Claudia daughter of M. Silanus, cloking his cruel and bloody disposition
with a counterfeit modesty; not once uttering so much as a word of the
condemning of his mother; the banishing of his brothers: but whatsoever mind
Tiberius had put on, of the like habit he showed himself; and not much
differing from him in words. Whereupon a witty saying of the orator Passienus
was commonly applied to him: That there was never better servant then he, nor
woorser master. I will not omit Tiberius prophecy of Sergius Galba then
Consul: who having sent for him, and sounded him of set purpose with diverse
speeches; at last in Greek uttered unto him this sentence: And thou Galba at
sometime shall taste of the Empire. Signifiyng that his rule should be long a
coming, and dure but a short time; as learning that skill of the Chaldaeans
art; for attayning of which he had idle time at Rhodes, and Trasullus for his
master; whose cunning he tried by this means. As often as he would consult with
them touching any matter, he went up to the highest part of the house with
only one freede man in his company, unlearned, but of a strong and able
body; whom he caused to lead him, the way over hard and difficult passages
and broken rocks (for his house did hang over the rocks) whose cunning and
art Tiberius did purpose to try: that in returning back, if any jealousy of
vanity or treachery had entered into his mind, he should throw him headlong
into the sea which was under him, least he should bewray his secrets. Trasullus
being then brought into those rocks, and moving Tiberius which moved him many
questions, and foretelling him very skilfully future things, and that he
should be Emperor; Tiberius asked him farther, whether he had found out the
hour of his own nativity; and what should happen to himself that year, and
that same day. Who having considered the aspects of the stars, and measured
their distances, began first to doubt; and then to fear: and the more he
viewed them; so more and more he was surprised with admiration and fear: and
at last cried out, that he was ready to fall into most doubtful and imminent
danger. Then Tiberius embracing him, rejoiced that he had foreseen his own
dangers, and promised he should escape them: and taking those things which he
had said for oracles, held him afterward among the number of his dearest
friends. When I hear of these and the like things, I can give no certain
judgment, whether the affairs of mortal men are governed by fate and
immutable necessity; or have their course and change by chance and fortune.
For thou shall find, that as well those which were accounted wise in ancient
times, as such as were imitators of their sect, do vary and disagree therein:
some do resolutelie believe that the gods have no care of man's beginning or
ending; no, not of man at all. Whereof it proceeds that the virtuous are
tossed and afflicted with so many miseries; and the vicious and bad triumph
with so great prosperities. Contrarily others are of opnion, that fate and
destiny may well stand with the course of our actions; yet nothing at all
depend of the planets or stars, but proeeede from a connection of natural
causes as from their beginning. And these grant withal, that we have free
choice and election what course of life to follow; which being once chosen, we
are guided after, by a certain order of causes unto our end. Neither do they
esteem those things to be good or bad which the vulgar sort do so call; for
many which seem to be oppressed with misery, are happy if they endure their
adversity with constancy: and many which flow in wealth, in most miserable
estate, if they use their prosperity unadvisedly. And yet of some it may be
said, that their destinies are known at their birth: and if they fall out
otherwise then has been foretold, it proceeds of the ignorance of the
deceitful reporter; and so the art is discredited; whose clear and evident
proofs, former and present times have tried: for by the son of the same
Trasullus, Neroes Empire was foretold, as in convenient time it shall be
declared, because I will not now digress from my purpose.

VI. Tiberius cruelty against Drusus: the death of Agrippina and others:
Iulia, daughter unto Drusus, is married unto Rubellius Blandus.
THe same men being Consuls, Asinius Gallus died; and no man doubting, but for
want of taking sustenance; but whether willingly, or of necessity, that is
uncertain. And Caesar being asked, whether he would suffer him to be buried,
was not ashamed to permit it; and further to accuse chance and fortune, that
had taken away the criminal person before he had been openly convinced; as
though that in three years space there wanted time of proceeding to judgment
against an old Consul, and father of so many Consuls. After that, Drusus was
made away, having sustained himself the space of nine days with a miserable
food, by eating the flocks of his bed. Some have written, that Macro had order
sent him, that if Seianus should attempt to take arms, the young man should be
fetched out of prison (for he was kept in the Palace) and made captain over
the people: but because it was incontinently rumored that Caesar would be
reconciled to his daughter in law, and nephew, he showed that he desired rather
cruelty, then be sorry for that he had done: yea and having inueighed against
him after he was dead, objected, he was loose of life, hurtful and dangerous
to his, and euilly affected toward the common wealth: and withal commanded
all that to be recited, which he had caused day by day to be put in writing,
both of his words, and deeds: a thing so cruel that nothing more, that he
should so many years have appointed spies to observe his countenance, his
lamentation, yea private murmurings: and scarce credible, that the grandfather
could endure to hear it, read it, and publish it, were it not that the
letters of Actius the Centurion, and Didymus his freed man did declare the
names of such bondslaues, which had either stricken Drusus, or put him in a
fright, as he went out of his chamber. Yea the Centurion added his own words,
full of cruelty against Drusus, as a matter worthy praise; and Drusus answer
again as he fainted and drew toward his end: in which, faining as though he
had been distracted of his wits, wished Tiberius all ill luck and misfortune:
and then seeing himself past all hope of life, cursed him most deadly, praying
the gods, that as he had slain his daughter in law, his brothers son, and
his nephews, and filled all his house with blood; so they would revenge and
punish him for an example to his name, his stock, predecessors, and posterity.
The Lords of the Senate were troubled with these speeches, making show of
detesting them, but they were stricken into a fear and admiration; that he,
who had been so cunning and crafty heretofore in cloking his lewdnes, should
now become so confident, that (as though the walls were thrown down) he durst
show that his nephew beaten by his Centurion, and strooken by his slaves,
should ask for meat in vain to save his life. This grief was scarce gone,
but the next news were of Agrippina, whom I think since Seianus death until
now lived with hope; and seeing that cruelty was no whit remitted, willingly
ended her life; unless that famished for want of sustenance, it was falsely
given out she died that death of her self. For Tiberius laid grievous crimes
to her charge, accusing her of uncleanness of life; and that Asinius Gallus was
the adulterer; and that seeing him dead, she loathed any longer to live. But in
very deed Agrippina not contented with reason, and greedy of rule, taking upon
her cares fit rather for men then women, had shaken off all vices incident to
her own sex. She died the selfsame day that two years before Seianus died;
which Caesar thought worthy of record; and vaunted that she had neither been
strangled, nor thrown headlong from the Gemonies. For this he had thanks given
him by the Senate; and order taken that the fifteenth Kalends of November,
which was the day they both died, some gift should be offered up to Jupiter.
Not long after Cocceius Nerua, who was continually at the Princes elbow; a man
very expert in divine and humane laws; being in perfect disposition of body,
resolved with himself to die: which when Tiberius understood, he went to visit
him, sat by him, and inquired the causes of his intention, and entreated him;
confessing at last that it would be a burden to his conscience, and a
discredit, if the chiefest of his friends should without cause of death show
himself weary of life. But Nerua disliking his speech, would take no more
sustenance. Those which best knew his meaning gave out, that deeply seeing
into what calamities the common wealth was like to fall into, moved with anger
and fear, whilst his credit was untouched, and his person unattempted, would
end his life with that honest death. Agrippinaes ruin drew with it (which is
scarce credible) Plancinaes destruction. She had been once wife unto Gn. Piso,
and reioysed openly at Germanicus death; and when Piso was slain, she was
saved no less by Augustaes prayers, then ill will she bare Agrippina. As soon
as hatred and favor failed, right took place; and being accused of known
crimes with her own hand received rather late then undeserved punishment.
Among other griefs in a doleful and sad city, this was one; that Iulia,
daughter unto Drusus, once Neroes wife, married again into Rubellius Blandus
family, whose grandfather Tiburtes a gentleman of Rome most men knew. In the
end of this year, the death of Aelius Lamia was celebrated with funerals
proper to a Censor, who at last being discharged of the government of Syria
which he had in show only, was made governor of the city. He was descended of
a noble stock, and was a strong lively old man; and the government of the
province denied him, augmented his worth. Then Flaccus Pomponius Propretor of
Syria being dead, Caesar's letters were recited, in which he complained, that if
there were any notable man, and fit to rule an army, he refused the charge:
and therefore he was forced through that necessity to entreat such as had
been Consuls, to take upon them the rule of the provinces; forgetting that
Arruntius had been hindered ten years from going into Spain. The same year
died M. Lepidus, of whose moderation and wisdom I have spoken sufficiently in
other books; and his nobility needs no farther proof: for the Aemilian
family has brought forth many good citizens; and although some of them have
been of corrupt manners, yet lived in good and honorable estate.

VII. A Phoenix seen in Egypt: how Getulicus escaped Tiberius cruelty.
WHen Paullus Fabius and L. Vitellius were Consuls, after many ages were past,
the bird Phoenix came into Egypt, and ministered matter to the most learned of
the country, and also Greeks, of disputing many things concerning that
miracle. Of which it seems good unto me to lay down such things as they
agree of, and many which rest doubtful; yet notwithstanding worthy the
knowledge. That that bird is consecrated to the sun; and that it differs
in the beak, and variety of feathers from other birds; all do accord which
have described her shape and form: but of the number of her years there are
diverse reports. The common opinion is that she lives five hundred years; some
affirm that she lives a thousand four hundred threescore and one year. And
the first of these kinds of birds flew to the city called Heliopolis, with a
great multitude of other birds with her, woondering at her new shape in
Sesostris time, after that in Amasis and Ptolemaeus reign, which of the
Macedonians was the third King of Egypt. But antiquity is dark and obscure.
Betwixt Ptolemaeus reign and Tiberius there were scarce two hundred and fifty
years. Whereupon some thought that this was no true Phoenix, nor come from the
land of Arabia; and that it had nothing of that which antiquity has
attributed and confirmed to be in that kind. For when they have ended the
number of their years, and that their end approaches, they build their nest
in their country, and in it cast seed of generation; of which a young one does
rise; whose first care is being grown to ripenes, to bury the old. And that
not at all adventures, but having taken up a certain weight of the stone
Murrha, and tried the carrieng of it a long journey: when she perceives her
self able to endure and carry such a burden, and to accomplish the voyage,
she lifts up her fathers body, and carries it to the altar of the sun,
and there does burn and sacrifice it. These things are uncertain, and
fabulously augmented. But that that bird is seen sometimes in Egypt is not
doubted. But murders continuing at Rome, Pomponius Labeo, whom as I have said,
was governor of Moesia, by cutting his veins, let out with his blood his life,
and Paxaea his wife followed his example. The fear they had of dying by the
hand of the hangman, did cause them thus so readily to kill themselves: because
such as were condemned, lost their goods and wanted burial: but their bodies
which slew themselves were buried, and their testaments stood good; which was
the gain and reward of making haste. But Caesar sent letters unto the Senate,
declaring it to be a custom among the ancients, that when they intended to
break off friendship with any, they forbad them their house, and that then the
friendship ended, which he had done to Labeo: who blamed for evil government
in the Province, and other matters, covered his fault by accusing others;
vainly putting his wife in fear, who was out of danger, though not without
fault. After this Mamercus Scaurus was accused again, of a noble house, and a
great orator; yet of reproachful life. His friendship had with Seianus did
nothing hurt him; but the hatred which Macro bare him was his overthrow; who
practiced the same arts that Seianus had done, but more covertly. The
accusation was an argument of a Tragedy written by Scaurus, containing verses
which might be wrested against Tiberius. But Seruilius and Cornelius his
accusers objected against him, that he had abused his body with Liuia, and
offered magical sacrifices. Scaurus as a thing worthy of the ancient
AEmilian family, preuenteth his condemnation by killing himself at the
encouragement of his wife Sexitia; who was both an encourager and partaker of
his death. Notwithstanding if occasion were given he punished the accusers
likewise: as Seruilius and Cornelius famous by the death of Scaurus, because
they had taken money of Varius Ligur to desist from the accusation, were
perpetually banished into certain Islands. And Abudius Ruso once Acdile,
whilst he went about to procure danger unto Lentulus Getulicus, under whom he
had charge of a legion, because he had purposed to marry his daughter to
Seianus son, was condemned without accusation, and driven out of the city.
Getulicus at that time had charge over the legions of higher Germany, and had
gotten exceeding love for his clemency and small severity; and of the next
army well-beloved by means of L. Apronius his father in law. Whereupon the
constant report was, that he was so bold as to write unto Caesar: That the
affinity betwixt him and Seianus was begun, not of his own motion and desire,
but through Tiberius counsel; and that as well he as Tiberius might be
deceived; and that the self same error could not be to him alone dangerlesse,
and to others utter ruin; for his part that his loyalty was trusty and sure,
and so would continue; if snares had not been laid to entrap him; that he
would accept of a successor in his charge no otherwise than of a messenger of
death: and therefore that they should strike as it were an agreement, by which
the Prince should be master of the rest, and that he would keep and hold the
Province. Although these things seem very strange; yet were they believed,
because he alone of all Seianus liesmen escaped without danger, and continued
in great favor and grace. The reason why, was, because Tiberius thought with
himself being now aged and hated of all men, that his estate would rather
continue by fame, then force.

VIII. The Parthians complained on Artabanus; in whose room Tiberius places
Phrahates: Pharasmanes gains a battle against Orodes King of Armenia.
WHen C. Cestius, and M. Seruilius were Consuls, certain noble men of Parthia
came to Rome, without the priuitie of Artabanus their King. He for fear of
Germanicus was faithful to the Romans, and just toward his subjects: but
after Germanicus death became proud toward us, and cruel toward his
subjects; confident by reason of prosperous success in wars had against his
borderers; and despising Tiberius as weak, old, and unfit for wars; and
greedy also of Armenia, into which after the death of King Artaxia he put his
eldest son Arsaces as governor, iniuring them with contumelious speeches. Then
sent to redemaund the treasury and riches left in Syria and Cilicia by
Vonones; and withal, vaine-gloriously bragged and threatened that he would
invade and conquer the ancient bounds and limits of the Persians and
Macedonians, and recover all that had been possessed by Cyrus and Alexander.
But the principal author and perswader of sending secret messengers to Rome
was Sinnaces, a man both noble and wealthy; and next unto him Abdus an Eunuch:
a matter of no disgrace among the Barbarians, nor bar to credit and
authority. These two drawing the principal noble men of the country to them,
because they could have none of the blood of the Arsacides to be their King;
most of them being slain by Artabanus, or under years; demanded Phrahates
King Phrahates son which was at Rome: for said they, there needed no more
but the name and consent of Caesar, and one of the blood of Arsacis to show
himself upon the banks of Euphrates. That did Caesar desire and provided for
him accordingly with preparations and necessaries to seat him in his fathers
kingdom, holding still his secret drift by entertayning foreign countries, by
sleights and policy in war, to keep all quiet at home. In the mean space
Artabanus understanding what was wrought against him, at the first was slow,
and lingered for fear; then boiled with desire of revenge. For barbarous
people count temporizing and delay, as base and servile; and to go through
presently their deseignments, a royal point. Yet profit took place, and
thereupon sending for Abdus under color of amity to a banquet, gave him a
lingering poison; and entertained Sinnaces with fained friendship and gifts, and
busied him in other employments. But Phrahates arrived in Syria, and laying
aside the Romans manner of living, in which he had been so many years
nourished, giving himself to the Parthian usage and unable to brook it, fell
sick, and died. Yet Tiberius held on his determination, and chose Tiridates
one of the same stock, and an enemy to Artabanus; and incited Mithradates
Hiberus to recover Armenia, and reconciled him to his brother Pharasmanes,
which then possessed that Empire; and makes L. Vitellius general over all this
preparation of the Orient. I am not ignorant what a sinister report ran of
him in the city, and with what infamous matters he was touched: yet in
governing of the Provinces he demeaned himself according to the virtue of
ancient times. But returning from thence, through the fear of Caesar, and
familiarity of Claudius being changed into a base and abject seruilitie, became
a pattern unto posterity of shameful flattery; and so his first virtues
gave place to his latter vices; and the virtuous acts of his youth, his
infamous old age defaced. Of these petty Kings Mithradates first induced
Pharasmanes to further his enduours by policy and force: and corrupters were
found which for great sums of gold entised Arsaces ministers to kill him; and
through Hiberus great power they entered Armenia, and took the city Artaxata.
When Artabanus understood of these dealings, he furnishes his son Orodes with
things necessary to revenge, and gives him the strength of the Parthians; and
dispatcheth others to levy hired soldiers to give him aid. On the other
side, Pharasmanes drew the Albanians and Sarmates to his party, whose Princes
(called Sceptruchi) having received gifts on both sides, according to the
manner of their country, gave aid to both sides. But the Hiberi being masters
of the passages, thrust sudde^ly the Sarmatian forces on the Armenians by the
Caspian way. But those which came from the Parthians were easily driven back,
because the enemy had shut up all the other passages, one excepted; which was
betwixt the sea and the hills of the Albani, which could not serve their
purpose, by reason it was summer: for the Eastern winds fill up the shallow
foordes and the shore: the South winter wind keeps back the flood, and
leaves the shallow shore bare and naked. In the mean space Pharasmanes having
reenforced his strength, challenges Orodes to fight, being destitute of allies
and unfurnished of men: and if he refused or shifted off, he braued him under
his nose; and hard by his camp, wasted his stouer; and often compassed him
about as if he had besieged him: till the Parthians not accustomed to endure
such brauados, came about their King, and demanded battle. Their strength
consisted in their horsemen, and Pharasmanes in footmen and horsemen both. For
the Hiberi and Albani inhabiting mountanous places, were better accustomed to
hardness and travel. They say they came out of Thessalia at such time as
Jason, after he had carried away Medea and begotten children by her, returned
to the empty court of AEeta, and uninhabited Colchos: and report many woonders
of his name, and the oracle of Phryxus. Neither dare any man sacrifice a ram,
because it is thought that Phryxus was carried on one, be it, this ram were a
beast or a shipe which bare those arms. The battle pitched in order on both
sides: the Parthian put his soldiers in mind of the Empire of the East; and
the renowned nobility of the Arsacides: and contrariwise debased Hiberus as
ignoble, and flying to mercenarie soldiers. Pharasmanes on the other side,
declared that he was never yet subject to the Parthian rule; and that the
greater their enterprise, the greater their glory if they were the conquerers:
or if they turned their backs, the greater dishonor, infamy and danger:
withal he showed them his own host dreadful, and the Medians painted with
gold: on his own side, men; on the other, booty. Among the Sarmates the
Captain only was not heard; but every man encouraged each other not to abide
the shot, but prevent the enemy rushing in courageously to handie strokes.
Diverse manners of fight were then seen in that battle: when as the Parthian
accustomed with like skill to fly and follow, severed his squadrons to make
way for the arrows to light. The Sarmates laying aside their bows which
steeded them but a short time, ran in to the enemy with their swords and
lances; sometimes were in the front, sometimes in their backs, as if they had
been horsemen: sometimes close ranked with their bodies and weapons thrust
back, and bare down the enemy, and were borne down again. The Albani also
and Hiberi behaved themselves in like manner; now catching hold of the enemy;
now thrusting him down; the battle growing doubtful on their side; the
horsemen and footmen pressing in and giving them many wounds. Whilst this
fight thus continued, Pharasmanes and Orodes, each encouraging his stoutest, or
comforting those which began to stagger and waver, being in sight the one of
the other: and therefore knowing the one the other, with a great clamor, armor
and horses ran one against another; but more fiercly Pharasmanes: for he
wounded his enemy through the headpeece: yet being carried away with his
horse, was not able to redouble his stroke; the stowtest of his followers
presently defending the wounded. Nevertheless, a rumor falsely believed that he
was slain, appaled the Parthians, and caused them to yield the victory.

IX. Sinnaces rebelleth against Artabanus King of Parthia: Tiridates is put in
his place.
Immediately after, Artabanus gathering together his whole strength out of all
parts of his country, pursues a revenge on the Hiberi, saying that they had
the better of the battle, through skilfulnes of place; and therefore would
never desist; if Vitellius by assembling the legions, had not given out that he
meant to invade Mesopotamia, thereby striking him into a fear of the Roman
forces. Then Artabanus leaving Armenia, left all good fortune behind him,
Vitellius entising his subjects to abandon their King, as one in peace cruel,
and in wars unfortunate. Sinnaces whom, as I have said, was utter enemy to
Artabanus, had secret conference with Abdageses his father and others: and by
continual overthrows and losses which they suffered, drew easily unto him
such as were most ready to revolt: they also repairing to him by little and by
little, which were subject unto Artabanus rather for fear then good will: very
glad they had found captains to follow, took courage unto them. By this time
Artabanus had no refuge left, save only a few strangers for the guard of his
person, banished from their own dwellings: a people not understanding what is
good, nor having a care of that which is naught; but hired for gain, are
instruments of what mischiese soever. Accompanied with these, he hastneth his
flight to the frontiers of his country, ioining upon Scythia; hoping for
succor, because he was allied to the Hircanians and Carmanians; having a hope
likewise, that the Parthians always indifferently bent to the absent, and
unconstant and fickle to the present, would in the mean space change their
mind, and receive him again. But Vitellius seeing Artabanus fled, and the
minds of the country people inclined to a new King, encouraging Tiridates to
take that which was offered; conducted the legions and allies to the banks of
Euphrates. And as they were sacrificing and offering according unto the custom
of the Romans, Suouetaurilia, a Boar, Ram, and Bull; the others made ready
a Horse, to pacify the god of that river: the inhabitants of Euphrates brought
word, that without any great rain, of his own accord the river was
exceedingly risen; and withal, that the white froth made circles as it were in
form of a diadem, which was a presage of a prosperous passage: but some did
interpret them more subtly, gathering thereby that the beginnings of their
attempts should be luckie; but have small continuance, because that there was
more credit to be given to those things which were portended by the earth and
heaven; and that the quality and nature of rivers was unconstant, and running
away; and would no sooner show a token of good luck, but take it away again:
but having made a bridge with vessels, and pasled over his army, the first
which came to the camp was Ornospades, with many thousand of horsemen. This
Ornospades once a banished man, brought no small aid to Tiberius when he made
war in Dalmatia, and for that service was made citizen of Rome. After this,
entering anew into the kings favor, he made him ruler of all that country
which lies between two famous rivers, Euphrates, and Tigris; and thereof
took the name of Mesopotamia. Not long after Sinnaces augmented his forces,
and Abdageses the stay of that side joined unto them the wealth and preparation
of the king. Vitellius thinking it enough only to have shown the Romans power,
advertised Tiridates and the chief nobles of Parthia, but especially
Tiridates; that he would always have in mind as things worth remembrance,
Phrahates his grandfather, Caesar his bringer up; the nobles to be dutiful to
their king; show a reverence unto us; and every man to have a care of his
credit, and fidelity: and from thence turned back with the legions into Syria.
I have joined together things done in two sommets, to recreate the mind of the
reader, wearied with domestical adversities. But Tiberius although three
years were past and gone since the death of Seianus, could not be appeased
neither by time, nor prayers, no nor by punishing his fill (things wont to
mollify other men) but would punish uncertain and stale things gone and past,
as manifest offenses, and newly committed. Whereupon Fulcinius Trio fearing
this dealing, and not able to endure the accusers which were now bruing matter
against him; in his last will and testament composed many cruel things against
Macro, and certain of the chief of Caesar's freed men: obiecting against
himself, that he had a fickle and unconstant head through age, and that by his
continual absence he differed little from a banished man. Which things being
concealed by Trios heirs, Tiberius commanded publicly to be recited; showing
thereby patience in another man's liberty, and small regard of his own
infamy: or else because he was ignorant of Seianus villainies until that time;
and content that all things howsoever they were spoken, should come to light,
and have the truth known (which flattery often hinders) rather to his own
shame and reproach, then not at all. The same time Granius Martianus a Senator,
being accused of treason by C. Gracchus, slew himself. Tatius Gratianus
likewise who had been Praetor, and condemned to die by the same law. Not unlike
deaths unto the former had Trebellienus Rufus, and Sext. Paconianus: for
Trebellienus killed himself with his own hands; and Paconianus was strangled
in prison, because he had there composed certain verses against the Prince.
Tiberius did not receive these news, divided from Italy by sea, or by
messengers a far off, as he was wont to do; but near unto the city, where
he might the same day or the next morning, answer the Senators letters, as it
were looking upon the blood of the citizens, flowing in their houses; and the
hand of the executioners. In the end of this year, Poppaus Sabinus gave up his
ghost; a man of mean parentage, yet through the favor of Princes had been
Consul and triumphed: and governor over the greatest provinces four and
twenty years: not for any excellent skill that was in him, yet able to
discharge the office, and no more.

X. The Clites rebel against Archelaus King of Cappadocia. Tiridates King of
Parthia his conquests. Artabanus being recalled, drives out Tiridates.
QVintus Plautius, and Sext. Papinius were Consuls the year following. This
year the people of Rome were so inured to calamities, that they thought it not
hard dealing that L. Aruseius and others were put to death: but they were
greatly dismayed to see Vibulenus Agrippa a gentleman of Rome immediately after
the accusers had ended their oration in the Curia, to draw poison out of his
bosom, and drink it: and being fallen down and yielding up his ghost, yet to
be in all haste carried by the sergeants to prison, and already half dead,
incontine^tly to be strangled. No not Tigranes, who had been sometimes King of
Armenia, but then arraigned, could with his royal title escape the same
punishment that was inflicted upon bare citizens. C. Galba sometime Consul,
and two of the Blaesi died of a voluntary death. Galba, because by Caesar's
hard and rigorous letters he was forbidden to cast lots for the government of
the province: the Blaesi, because that the priesthoodes which were destined
unto their house whilst it was in prosperity; and now being decayed deferred,
and bestowed upon others when they were vacant; which they construed as a
prognosticate of death, and therefore did execute it themselves. Aemilia
Lepida, whom as I have before told you, was married unto young Drusus, charging
him with diverse crimes, although she were most lewd and wicked, yet escaped
scotfree and unpunished whilst Lepidus her father lived; but afterward she
was convinced of manifest adultery with one of her bondmen: and therefore
laying aside all defense, ended her life with her own hands. At the same time
the Clites, being a people of Cappadocia, and subject to Archelaus, because
they were according unto our custom constrained to bring in the value of their
yearly revenues, and pay tributes, fled to the hill Taurus; and there by the
strong site of the place defended themselves against the weak forces of their
King; until M. Trebellius Lieutenant sent thither by Vitellius Lord president
of Syria, with four thousand legionaries, and certain choice ayd-souldiers,
had compassed and environed with engines and works two hills which the barbarians
possessed, the lesser called Cadra, the other Dauara; killing those which durst
issue out with the sword, and forcing the rest to yield for want of water. But
Tiridates aided by the Parthians, recovered Nicephorium, and Anthemusias, and
other towns, which lying in Macedonia, yet are called by Greek names: and
Halum, and Artemita, towns of Parthia, striving who had best cause to rejoice.
Artabanus being odious unto them for his cruelty, as brought up among the
Scythians: and hoping that Tiridates would be courteous and gentle, as trained
up and fashioned after the Roman behavior and education. The Seleucians used
great flattery: their city is very strong, environed with walls, and not
corrupted with barbarous fashions, but retained such as their founder Seleucus
gave them. Their manner is to choose three hundred either for wealth, or
wisdom, and of them make as it were a Senate. The people kept their part in
government, and as long as they agree among themselves the Parthian they fear
not, but falling to iarres and contentions, whilst each side calls for aid
against his adversary: he who is called by one of the parties, mastereth both.
That happened of late under Artabanus, who for his own commodity, made the
people subject to the chief gentlemen: where the people bear the sway, that
government approaches nearest unto liberty: but the rule of a few is nearest
unto the will and pleasure of a King. When Tiridates was come among them, they
honored him with all those inventions which Kings had been honored with in
times past, and with such as later ages have more abundantly invented. Withal,
they powered out many reproachful speeches against Artabanus; consessing that he
was indeed descended of the Arsacides on the mothers side, but in other points
nothing suitable. Tiridates committed the government of the Seleucians to the
discretion of the people; then consulting what day he should be crowned,
received Phrahates and Hieroes letters, which had two the strongest governments
of that kingdom, entreating him that he would defer it for some small time,
which to satisfy those great men he yielded unto. In the mean time he went to
Cresiphon the royal sear of the kingdom, and perceiving that they prolonged
from one day to another, Surena with the good liking of many, in a great
assembly crowned Tiridates, according to the custom of the country. And if he
had out of hand entered farther within the country, and other nations, those
lingerers had been put out of all doubt, and all yielded obedience unto one.
But staying too long at the Castle whither Artabanus had conveyed his money
and his concubines, he gave him time to leap back from their agreements. For
if Phrahates and Hiero and some others came not at the day appointed to the
coronation, some for fear, and some for malice and hate to Abdageses, who then
possessed the new King, and was the only fauorit in Court, turned to Artabanus,
whom they found in Hyrcania meanly and euilfauoredly attired, killing with his
bow food for his sustenance. At the first, he was greatly afraid, as though
some train had been laid to entrap him, but when they had given him their
credit and faith, that their coming was to restore him to his kingdom, his
spirits were revived, and inquireth what sudden change had happened. Then Hiero
finding fault with Tiridates, said, that he was but a child, and that the
Arsacides governed not the kingdom, but the vain name and title was in an
unwarlike person, softly and tenderly brought up among strangers, and that
Abdageses was he which ruled and commanded all. Artabanus knowing of old what
it was to rule, perceived well that those which found falsehood in friendship,
dissembled not: and therefore making no longer delay then he could assemble the
Scythians forces and aid, sets forward with all speed to prevent the wiles
of his enemies, and keep his friends from slipping back: yea, he did not so
much as wipe off the filth and uncleanness of his body, because he would move
the common people to compassion. There was no subtletie, no prayer, nor ought
else forgotten, whereby he might draw the doubtful to him; or confirm and
assure the willing and ready. He came then with a strong power unto the places
adjoining to Seleucia, when as Tiridates stricken into a fear with the fame and
person of Artabanus, was distracted in mind, whether he should encounter him,
or draw out the war by lingering. Such as desired battle and quick work,
persuaded that the enemy was dispersed, and stragled, and wearied with their
long journey, and scarce resolved to obey Artabanus being so lately traitors
and enemies unto him, though now his support and aid. But Abdageses thought it
best to return into Mesopotamia, that having the river as a defense between
him and the enemy; calling in the mean space, the Armenians and Elymaei, and
the residue which were behind them; and their forces augme^ted with allies and
friends, and such as the Roman captain would send them; then to try the
chance of war. That advise prevailed, because of Abdageses authority, and
Tiridates rawnes in matters of danger: yet that retiring differed not much from
fleeing: the Arabians first leading the dance, the rest drawing to their
houses, or to Artabanus camp; until Tiridates returning back into Syria with
a small company, acquitted them all of the infamy of treason.

XI. Tiberius repaireth with his own charges part of Rome which was burnt: how
Macro won C. Caesar's favor.
THe same year Rome was greatly damnified with fire; that part of the Cirque
which joined unto the hill Auentine, and all the buildings also upon Auentine,
being wasted and consumed to ashes; which loss Caesar converted to his glory
by giving the owners out of his purse as much as the loss of their houses and
buildings came unto, which munificence amounted to About 781250. pound.
a hundred millions of sesterces; which was so much the more acceptable to the
people, because that in his own buildings he was always moderate. Neither had
he ever made above two public buildings, the one a Temple to Augustus; the
other the stage of Pompeius Theater: which being finished, yet he left
vndedicated; either as despising ambition, or by reason of his age. And to make
an estimate of every man's loss, Tiberius four sons in law were chosen, Gn.
Domitius, Cassius Longinus, M. Vinicius, and Rubellius Blandus, and P.
Petronius joined with them by the Consuls appointment: every man inuenting new
honors for the Prince, as his wit and capacity would give him leave: which
whether he accepted or refused, was uncertain, by reason of his death which
followed shortly after. For not long after, the last Consuls in Tiberius reign,
G. Acerronius, and C. Pontius began their charge, when Macroes power and credit
was grown over great, which he increased more and more with C. Caesar,
although before he was never negligent therein. And after Claudiaes death (who
as I have already said was married unto that Caesar) he egged and persuaded
his own wife Ennia, to allure and draw the young man to her love, and entangle
him under promise of marriage, as one which would do whatsoever, to lay hold
on the sovereignty. For although he were of a turbulent and hot spirit;
notwithstanding he had as it were sucked out of his grandfathers bosom the
art of cunning dissembling. Tiberius knew this very well, and therefore was
not resolved which of his nephews he should first make successor to the state.
Of which the one was Drusus son, nearest unto him in blood, and whom he
tendered best; but was under age: and Germanicus son the other, in the flower
of his youth, and of the people well-beloved; and therefore the worse liked of
his grandfather. And bethinking himself of Claudius, seeing he was of stayed
and settled years, and desirous of learning; yet altered his deliberation,
because he was weak and slender witted. And yet if he should seek for a
successor out of his house, he feared least the memory of Augustus, and the
name of Caesar's should be had in reproach and contempt. For he was not so
careful to win the favor of the time present, as ambitious of fame with
posterity. But in the end irresolute what to conclude, and growing weak and
feeble of body, that which was out of the compass of his power he committed
to fate: having notwithstanding cast out speeches, whereby it might be
perceived that he had a care of things to come: for not going about the bush,
but in plain terms he vpbraied Macro, that he turned his back to the West,
and looked always toward the sunrising. And happening by chance that some
speech was had of L. Sulla, whom C. Caesar was wont to scoff and laugh at:
Tiberius foretold him that he should have all his vices, but not so much as one
of his virtues. And withal, embracing the youngest of his nephews with weeping
tears; the other looking on with an envious eye, said unto him; thou shall
kill him, and another shall kill thee. Yet his sickness growing more and more
upon him, he omitted not any part of his wa^ton and unclean lusts,
counterfeiting and putting on a face of courage even in his weakness and
infirmity: and was wont to mock at the Phisitio^s skill, that after 30. years
space they wanted other men's counsel to know what was good or hurtful for
their own bodies. In the mean time, at Rome there were certain seeds of
murders sown, to take effect after Tiberius death. Laelius Balbus had accused
Acutia, sometimes the wife of P. Vitellius, of treason, who being condemned;
when a recompense was to be ordained for the accuser, Iunius Otho Tribune of
the people withstood it; whereupon they two growing to a jar, Otho was sent
into banishment. Then Albucilla infamous for loose love with many, and once
wife to Satrius Secundus, the detector of the conspiracy, was accused of
certain impieties and enchantments against the Prince: and with her as
confederats, her adulterers Gn. Domitius, Vibius Marsus, L. Arruntius. Of
Domitius nobility I have spoken before. Marsus also was of an ancient stock,
and endued with many good virtues. But the memorial sent unto the Senate does
testify that Macro had charge of the examination of the witnesses, and torture
of the bondmen: and the Emperors letters gave no token of suspicion against
them; either because he was weak and feeble; or because he knew nothing of it:
and many crimes were forged by Macro known enemy to Arruntius. Domitius
therefore premeditating his defense; and Marsus as though he had purposed to
pine away by famishing himself, prolonged their lives. Arruntius whilst his
friends persuaded him not to be too hasty, but linger on; answers them; That
the same things do not beseem all men alike: and that for his own part, he had
lived long enough; and had no other thing to repent him of, but that he had
among so many vain mockeries and perils prolonged his heavy and careful old
age: having bin long hated of Seianus; now of Macro; and alwais of some one of
the mightiest: not through any fault of his; but because he could not endure
wickedness. True it is, he might linger out during the short time the Prince
has to live: but how should he escape the young Prince which is to come? If
Tiberius after such long experience in affairs, by the force of rule and
dominion has changed and altered: is it to be hoped that C. Caesar, who is yet
scarce out of his childhood, inexpert and unacquainted with all things; or
brought up and trained in the lewdest; should follow a better course, having
Macro for his guide? who being chosen to oppress Seianus because he was worse
than he, afflicted the commonwealth with greater calamity. I foresee (said
he) a heavier servitude; and therefore I will fly as well from that which is
already past, as that which is at hand. Speaking these things as it had bin in
manner of a Prophecy, he cut his veins. It shall appear by those things which
insued, that Arruntius died in good time. Albucilla having wounded herself
with a blow given without effect, was carried to prison. The ministers of her
whoredom Grasidius Sacerdos, who had been Praetor, was banished into an Island,
and Pontius Fregellanus condemned to be put from the Senate: the said
punishments were decreed against Laelius Balbus, by these themselves which were
glad of it; because Balbus was thought to use his eloquence cruelly, as one
alwais at hand and ready against the innocent.

XII. Tiberius death.
ABout the same time, Sext. Papinius descended of a Consularie family, chose a
sudden and euilfauoured death, by casting himself headlong from a high place.
The cause was attributed to his mother, who having bin long before put away
from her husband, by flattering speeches and lascivious wanto^nes, induced the
young man unto that villainy, that to avoid the discredit with her he could
find no remedy but death. She being accused in Senate, albeit she prostrated
hirselfe at the Lords feet and long showed her common grief, and women's
weakness, in such desires, and other lamentable and pitiful monings, witnessing
her dolor and grief; yet was banished the city ten years, until her yoongest
son was past the unconstant slipperines of his youth. Now Tiberius body and
strength began to forsake him; but not yet his dissimulation. He had the same
courage and vigor of mind; his countenance and voice was strong; and desiring
sometimes to be pleasant, cloked his manifest decay of strength. And often
changing, at last settled himself in a promontorie of Misenum, in a house which
sometimes Lucullus had bin Lord of; where it was known that his death was at
hand by this means. There was a Physician very skillful in his art called
Charicles; yet never accustomed to govern the Prince in his sickness, but to
assist him with his counsel. This Physician departing from Tiberius, as it had
bin about some business of his own, under color of duty taking him by the
hand, felt the pulse of his vains: but yet he could not use the matter so
cunningly, but the emperor perceived him. Whether Tiberius were offended with
him or not, it was uncertain; and if he were, so much the more suppressing his
anger, caused meat to be made ready, and otherwise than his custom had bin,
sits down, as it had been in honor of his friends farewell. Charicles
nevertheless assured Macro that his spirits decayed, and that he could not
live above two days. Whereupon great debating of matters passed among those
which were present; and messengers posted away to the lieutenants and armies.
The 17. of the Kalends of April, his breath being stopped, he was thought to
have ended this mortal life. Then C. Caesar with a great multitude flocking
about him, and congratulating his good fortune, went forth to take upon him the
Empire: when news came on the sudden that Tiberius was come to his speech and
sight again, and that meat was called for to put him out of his swouning: upon
this they were all stricken into a great fear; and dispersed themselves some
one way; some another; every man counterfeiting a sad cheer and ignorance of
all this. And C. Caesar stricken dumb in the top of his hope, expected his last
doom. Macro resolute and stout, commanded the old man to be smoothered, by
casting many clothes on him, and every man to depart from the door. And so
Tiberius ended his life, the 78. year of his age. He was Neroes son, and on
both sides extracted from the Claudian family; although his mother went by
adoption into the Liuian family, and after that into the Julian. He had
doubtful fortunes from his first infancy, for being a banished man, he
followed his father, who was proscribed; and being brought into Augustus house
as his son in law, was greatly maligned all the time that Marcellus and Agrippa,
and afterward Caius and Lucius Caesar lived. Yea his brother Drusus was better
beloved then he, of the citizens; but after he had married Iulia, his slipperie
estate was tied to two great inconveniences, which was either to endure the
incontinencie of his wife, or go from her. After that, returning from Rhodes,
he lived twelve years in the Princes house which had no children; then
possessed the Empire almost 23. years. He changed his manners diversely
according to the times. Whilst he was a private man, he was of good life and
credit, and had commendations under Augustus. He was close and crafty in
counterfeiting virtues whilst Germanicus and Drusus lived: and whilst his
mother lived he kept a mean, sometimes good and sometimes bad. For cruelty he
was infamous; but in lascivious lusts, as long as he loved or feared Seianus,
secret. In the end he burst into all wickedness, dishonestie, and reproach; after
that having cast away shame and fear, he governed himself wholly according
unto his own disposition and nature.

THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
I. The death of Asiaticus, and Poppaea.
* The beginning of this Book is wanting.
FOr he believed, that Valerius Asiaticus who had been twice Consul, had in
times past committed adultery with Poppaea: withal, greedily gaped after those
gardens which he bought of Lucullus, and beawtified and trimmed most stately.
Suilius was suborned to accuse them both: Sosibius, Germanicus bringer up, was
joined with him; who under color of friendship, counsels Claudius to beware
of such as were strong and rich, as men dangerous unto the state: and that
Asiaticus the principal author of murdering Caesar, feared not to avouch it in
a full assembly of the people of Rome, and challenge the glory of the fact
unto himself. He was famous in the city for it, and a rumor spread throughout
the province, that he prepared a voyage toward Germanicus army, because that
being borne at Vienna, and strengthened with strong and great kindred, he
thought it an easy matter to stir up his country men. But Claudius making
no farther inquiry, sent Crispinus the captain of the guard with a band of
ready soldiers, as though it had been to suppress a war: who finding him
at Baias, laid yrons upon him, and drew him to the city, where he was not
licensed to be heard of the Senate, but in the Emperors chamber, in the
presence of Messallina. There Suilius accused him, that he had corrupted the
soldiers, and won them by money and loose life to all wickedness. Then
charged him with adultery with Poppaea, and unnatural dishonestie of body. At
that, although he were commanded to silence, he burst forth, and said: O
Suilius ask thy children, and they will confess me to be a man. And entering
into his defense, Claudius being wonderfully moved, drew tears likewise from
Messallinaes eyes; who going out of the chamber to wipe them, gives Vitellius
warning not to suffer the party arraigned to escape. She makes haste to
overthrow Poppaea, sending some through the terror of prison, to persuade her
to kill her self: Caesar being so ignorant thereof, that a few days after he
asked her husband Scipio as he sat at table with him, why he had sat down
without his wife? who made him answer, that she was dead. But whilst Claudius
consulted of Asiaticus deliverance, Vitellius with tears declaring how long
time their friendship had continued, and how they two did reverence and honor
Antonia the Princes mother: then running over briefly his services toward the
common wealth, and that so lately done in Britannia, and what else might seem
to move compassion; left it in the end to his own choice what death he would
choose; Claudius yielding him the like clemency with like words. After this
some persuading him, that to die with famine and abstinence was an easy death;
he answered, that he rejected such favor: and therefore having done those
exercises he was usually wont to do, washed his body, and fed daintily, saying,
that it had been a more commendable death to have died by Tiberius slienes and
cunning, or C. Caesar's violence, then now by the treachery of a woman, and
Vitellius unclean mouth: cut his veins, and having first seen the fire
wherein his body was to be burned, commanded it to be removed to another
place, least the thick tuffed trees should be marred with the smoke: so small
reckoning did he make of death.

II. Certain Romans accused for a dream. A treatise of advocates.
AFter this, the Lords of the Senate were called together, and Suilius goes
on, and accuses certain noble and renowned gentlemen of Rome surnamed Petra.
The cause of their death was, because they had lent their house unto Mnester
and Poppaea, when they had any cause of conference. But there was a dream also
objected against one of them, which was, that he dreamed he had seen Claudius
crowned with a crown of ears of corn, and the ears turned backwards;
interpreting that vision to signify a dearth of corn. Some report it to have
been a garlande of vine branches with white leaves; which he saw in his
dream; and interpreted it to foretell, that the death of the Prince should
follow at the end of Autumn. Whatsoever the dream was, it is not to be
doubted, but that he and his brother were both put to death. Crispinus had
given him by decree of Senate About 11781 pound 15. shil.
fifteen hundred thousand sesterces; and ornaments of the Praetor. Vitellius
added About 7812. pound. 10. shil.
ten hundred thousand sesterces to be given to Sosibius, because he had been
Britannicus Schoolmasters, and Claudius Counselor. Scipio being demanded his
opinion, said: Seeing I do think of Popaeus faults, that which all you do
think; persuade your selves that I do say that which all you do say; which was
an excellent moderation and mean, showing the love he bare her as his wife, and
necessity of giving sentence, being a Senator. Suilius never ceased from
accusations, but prosecuted them with all cruelty: and many followed his
audacity: for the Prince drawing unto himself all the duties of laws and
magistrates, opened the way to robbery. Neither was there any merchandise more
publicly bought and sold, then the perfidiousnes of advocates: insomuch, that
Samius a worthy gentelman of Rome, having given Suilius About 3130. pound.
four hundred thousand sesterces, to plead his cause; and after perceiving
his preuarication and collusion; ran upon his sword in Suilius own house. Then
C. Silius Consul elect (of whose authority and fall I will speak in
convenient time) beginning to speak, the rest of the Senators rose up, and
demanded earnestly that the law Cincia might be set on foot: by which it is
provided of old, that for pleading of causes, no man should take either money
or gift. Then they whom that injury seemed to touch, making a noise; Silius
was eager and earnest against Suilius, and contradicted him, alleging the
example of Orators in times past. Which esteemed fame with posterity, to be
the fairest reward of eloquence: otherwise, that the princess of good arts
should be distained with the servitude of base lucre; and that no faith could
be sincere and inuiolate, where excess of gain is regarded. And if causes
should be defended without reward, there would be fewer of them; where as
now, enmities, accusations, hatred, and injuries are fostered; and that as the
multitude of diseases brought the Physicians gain; so the pestilent infection
of the bar, serves now to enrich the lawiers. Let them call to mind C.
Asinius, and Messalla; and of later memory Arruntius, and Eserninus, which
were lifted up to the highest degree of dignity, by their upright life, and
uncorrupted eloquence. The Consul elect uttering these speeches, the others
approouing the same; they went about to give judgment, that such should be
condemned unto the like punishment as they were; who had by briberie and
extortion polled and oppressed the commons. When as Suilius and Cossutianus and
others, which perceived that there should be no general decree set down, but
a punishment for those which had been openly convicted; came about Caesar, and
besought him pardon of that which was past. And after a little silence, nodding
with his head unto them, they began as follows. Who was he so puffed up with
pride, that would presume or hope for eternity of fame? that it was expedient
men should provide for necessary maintenance, least through the want of
advocates, the poor be oppressed by the rich and mighty. Neither did
eloquence come by chance, and gratis unto any without pain and labor: the care
of a man's own family was neglected, if he were occupied in another man's
business: many maintained their life by war; some by tilling the earth; no man
labored to attain to any knowledge unless he had seen some commodity in
it. It was an easy matter for Asinius and Messalla, which were enriched with
great rewards between Antonies and Augustus wars, to show a gallant and brave
mind: and for Eserninus and Aruntius, heirs of rich houses, to do the like.
Examples were as ready for them to show, for what great rewards P. Claudius,
and C. Curio were wont to plead. As for themselves, they were but mean
Senators, which expected no gain of the commonwealth, but such as grew of
peace. The meanest of the people endeavored what he could to better his estate;
the reward of studies being taken away, studies do also decay, as having
neither glory nor honor. The Prince thinking that this was not spoken without
ground of reason, moderated the sum which they should take unto About 78. pound
2. 1. 6. d.
ten thousand sesterces, and that they which passed this sum, should be
condemned of extorsion.

III. Mithradates recouereth his kingdom. Wars between Gotarzes and
Bardanes for the kingdom of Parthia.
ABout the same time, Mithradates, who as I have showed, governed Armenia, and
was brought to Caesar, returned into his kingdom at Claudius persuasion;
trusting in the power of Pharasmanes, King of the Hiberi, and Mithradates
brother; who told him that the Parthians were at variance among themselves,
doubtful what would become of the Kingdom, and matters of smaller importance
utterly neglected. For whilst Gotarzes practiced great cruelties (going about
to kill his brother Artabanus; his wife and his son; whereby the rest were
afeard) they called in Bardanes, who being a man of action and able to go
through great enterprises, in two days invaded three thousand Eight Stadia make
an Italian mile.
stadia, and chased out Gotarzes, all amazed and dismayed, not once dreaming of
his coming: and without any lingering seized on the next governments, the
Seleucians only refusing to obey him. Whereupon inflamed with greater anger
then the present occasion ministered cause, because they had revolted from his
father; he besieged their city which was strong, and well fortified with a
wall, environed with a river and furnished with victuals and munition. In the
mean time Gotarzes strengthened with the Daharian and Hyrcanian power, renueth
the war. And Bardanes enforced to abandon Leleucia, removed his camp to the
champion country of the Bracteri. Then the forces of the Orient being divided
and uncertain which way to lean, Mithradates had opportunity offered him by
chance to sease upon Armenia; and with the force of the Roman soldier, raze
and beat down the strong fortresses: the Hiberian camp at once wasting and
spoiling the champion. Neither did the Armenians make head at all against
them: Demonactes their governor being slain, who only durst have waged
battle against them. Cotys King of lesser Armenia did somewhat hinder them:
some of the nobles joining with him. But afterward being rebuked by Caesar's
letters, all turned unto Mithradates side, more cruel then was expedient in a
kingdom newly gotten. But the Parthian Emperors making preparation to fight,
suddenly conclude a peace, having discovered the treachery of their subjects,
which Gotarzes bewraied unto his brother. At the first meeting they had a
ielous conceit the one of the other; then taking one another by the right hand
before the altars of the gods, they promised and couenanted to revenge the
treason of their enemies; and agree and help one another. Bardanes seemed most
meet to possess the kingdom. And Gotarzes because there should remain no
sparkle of emulation went to Hyrcania. And Bardanes returning again: Seleucia
yields the seventh year after her revolt: not without discredit to the
Parthians, whom one bare city had so long deluded. Then he inuadeth the
strongest Provinces, and began to recover Armenia; if Vibius Marsus Lieuetenant
of Syria, had not hindered him by threatening to war against him. In the mean
time Gotarzes repenting that he had yielded the kingdom; and the nobility
unto whom obedience in peace seems hardest, calling him back again,
assembleth his forces together, whom Bardanes met at the river Erindes; where
skirmishing long on both parts for the passages: Bardanes had the upper hand,
and with prosperous battles subdued all the middle countries, unto the river
Gindes, which divides the Dahas from the Arij. There his fortunate successes
had an end: for the Parthians although they were conquerers; yet liked not to
make war so far off. Wherefore building monuments in token of his wealth and
power: and that none of the Arsacides had ever before levied any tribute of
those nations, he returned with great glory: and therefore so much the more
fierce and intolerable to his subjects; who having long before laid a snare
to entrap him, killed him at unawares as he was a hunting in the Prime of his
youth: few of the old Kings to be matched in renown with him; if he had as
well sought the love of his subjects, as to be feared of his enemies. By the
death of Bardanes, the Parthian affairs were in a hurly burly; whilst they
wauered, whom they should receive for their King, Many inclined to Gotarzes,
son to Meherdates, son to Phrahates, who was given us in hostage. In the
end Gotarzes prevailed; who inioying the Kings seat through cruelty and
dissolute life, forced the Parthians to send secretly to entreat the Roman
Prince to release Meherdates, and inuest him in his fathers kingdom

IIII. Messalina falls in love with Silius.
THe same men being Consuls, the plays called Seculares, were exhibited eight
hundred years after the foundation of Rome, and threescore and four years
after those which Augustus had caused then to be represented. I omit the
reasons which moved both these Princes, as sufficiently declared in my books
which I have composed of the acts of Domitian the Emperor: for he likewise did
set forth the same plays, which I was present at, so much the more carefully,
because I was then one of the fifteen Priests, and Praetor. Which I speak not
to vaunt or brag thereof, but because that charge in times past was committed
to the college of the fifteen, and magistrates did chiefly execute the office
of ceremonies. Claudius sitting to see the race, when the noble men's children
represented on horseback the play of Troy; and among them Britannicus the
Emperors son, and L. Domitius, anon after adopted to the Empire, and
surnamed Nero. The favor of the people was more affectionat to him then
Germanicus, which was taken as a prefage of his future greatness. And it was
rumored abroad, that in his infancy dragons were found about him in manner of
a guard, which are fables, not unlike unto strange miracles: for he himself,
who never derogated from himself, was wont to report but of one serpent which
was seen in his chamber. But that affection of the people was a relick of the
memory of Germanicus, who left no other male behind him but he: and the
commiseration toward Agrippina his mother was increased, by reason of
Messallinaes cruelty, who always hating her, and now more then ever kindled
against her, was hindered no way from forging of crimes, and suborning accusers
against her, saving only by a new love, and next cosen unto madness. For she did
so burn in love with C. Silius the fairest youth of all Rome, that to content
her lust, she caused him to put from him his wife Iunia Syllana, an honorable
dame, to enjoy wholly to her self the adulterer, now untied from the bands of
matrimony. Neither was Silius ignorant how lewd the practice was, and what
peril he might incur: but if he refused, certain of his destruction, and
having some hope to bleare the eyes of the world, and enticed with great
rewards, he took it for the most expedient, to expect what might fall, and
enjoy the present. She not by stealth, but with a great retinue frequented his
house; was always at his side; bestowed wealth and honor bountifully upon him;
and at last, as though fortune had transferred the Empire; slaves, freed men,
and all princely ornaments, and preparations were seen at the adulterers
house. But Claudius not knowing what rule was at home, usurped the office of a
Censor; reprehended with severe edicts the ouergreat license the people used in
the Theater; using opprobrious speeches against P. Pomponius, who had bin
sometime Consul (and gave verses to the stage) and other noble women. He made
a law to restrain the cruelty of creditors, forbidding them to lend money to
interest unto men's sons subject to the fathers power, to be paid after their
death. He brought water to the city from the Simbruan hills. He added and
published new letters and characters; being a thing most certain that the
manner of the Greeks writing was not begun and perfected at once. The
Egyptians first of all expressed the conceptions of their mind by the shape of
beasts; and the most ancient monuments of man's memory are seen graven in
stones: and they say, that they are the first inue^ters of letters. Then the
Phoenicians because they were strong by sea, brought them into Greece, and had
the glory of inuenting that, which they received of others. For there goes a
report, that Cadmus sailing thither in a Phoenicean ship, was the inuentor of
that art among the Greeks, when they were yet inexpert and rude. Some record
that Cecrops the Athenian, or Linus the Theban, and Palamedes the Grecian, at
the time of the Trojan war, invented 16. characters; then others and
especially Simonides found out the rest. But in Italy the Etrurians learned
them of Corinthius Damaratus, and the Aborigenes of Euander the Arcadian: and
the fashion of the latin letters are like unto the old greek letters; but we
had but a few at the beginning, the rest were after added. By which example
Claudius added three letters, which during the time of his reign were in use,
and afterward forgotten: and are yet to be seen engraven in brazen tables
hanged up in temples and places of assembly to show the peoples laws. Then he
propounded in Senate touching the college of southsayers, least that the most
ancient discipline of Italy should come to naught by slothfulnes, seeing that
in the hard and adverse times of the common wealth they have been sent for; and
by their advise the ceremonies have been renewed, and better afterward looked
into. And the chiefest noble men of Etruria, either of their own motion, or at
the persuasion of the Lords of the Senate, have continued their science, and
propagated it to their families, which now is very carelessly accomplished by a
sloth used toward commendable arts, and because strange superstitions
prevail and take deeper root. All well for the present; thanks were to be
rendered to the goodness of the gods therefore, and heed taken, that sacred
rites in doubtful times had in reverence, be not in prosperous forgotten.
Whereupon a decree of Senate was made, and order taken, that the high Priests
should consider what was meet to be retained and established concerning the
southsayers.

V. The Cherusci crave Italus for their King.
THe same year the Cherusci came to Rome to demand a King, all their
nobility being extinguished by civil wars, and one only left of the blood
royal, called Italus, then being at Rome. He was son unto Flauius, Arminius
brother; his mother was the daughter of Catumerus Prince of the Catti; and was
of a comely personage; practiced in arms and riding, as well according to the
manner of our country, as his own. Caesar therefore having furnished him with
money, and appointed him a guarde; encourages him stoutely to take upon him
the honor of his house and ancestors: putting him first in mind that he was
borne at Rome; where he remained not as an hostage, but citizen: and that now
he was to go to a strange Empire. At the first the Germans were glad of his
coming; and so much the rather, because he was not nusled in factions and
discords: and therefore would bear like affection unto all. He was reverenced
and honored of all men; sometimes using courtesy and moderation misliked of
none; and oftentimes quaffing and drunkenness with other wanton behavior, which
well pleased these barbarous people. Now he had gotten reputation with his
neighbors, and began to be famous among strangers; when as such as bare
greatest swaie in time of factions, suspecting his power and greatness, go from
him to the borderers of the kingdom; openly declaring that the ancient
liberty of Germany was taken from them, and that the Roman strength mastered
al. Was their country so barren, that they could find none borne among them
to fill the place of the Prince; but that Flauius the spies brood must be
lifted up above them all? It was in vain to make Arminius the pretense; whose
son being brought up in the enemies land, might well be feared if he came to
be King; as depraved and infected with education, seruilitie, attire, and all
other strange vsages. And if Italus bare the mind his father had done, no man
ever has borne arms more ragingly against his country, and household gods
than his parents. By such and the like speeches they gathered great forces
together; and there did no fewer follow Italus: All of them affirming that he
had not thrust himself among them against their wills; but that he was sent for
by them: and seeing he was more noble than the rest, they should make a trial
of his virtue; and whether he would show himself worthy of Arminius his
uncle, and Catumerus his grandfather. Neither could his father be a shame and
reproach unto him, because he would never violate his faith, which by consent
of the Germans he had promised the Romans. That the name of liberty was falsely
pretended by them, who being base and degenerate of themselves, and dangerous
to the whole state; have no hope but in time of trouble and garboile. The
common sort came cheerfully about him, and the King became victorious in a
great battle against the Barbarians: then through this prosperous fortune
falling into pride, he was chased out of his country; and again reenforcing
his army with the aid of the Lombards, now with luckie, now with unlucky
success, molested and annoyed the Cherusci.

VI. The Chauceans are ariuen back out of Germany by Corbulo a Roman
Captain: his severe discipline.
ABout the same time, the Chauci living in peace at home, and encouraged by the
death of Sanquinius; whilst Corbuloes coming was expected, made some
incursions upon lower Germany under Gannascus: who being a Caninefian by
birth; an aide-souldier, and long receiving pay under the Romans; and afterward
become a fugitive with light vessels robbing and piracing; especially wastes
the coast of Gallia, because he knew them wealthy and cowards. But Corbulo
entering into the Province, first with great care, then credit, especially
gotten by that service, thrust into the river of Rhene certain Galleies, and
other shipping as they were fit, into other arms and ditches of the sea. And
having with them suncke the small vessels of the enemy, and driven out
Gannascus: after he had settled the present estate of things, he reduced the
legions which knew not what work and labor meant, but desirous to hunt after
pillage and forreies, to the ancient discipline of service: commanding that
none should depart from the camp, nor enter battle without commandment:
that the watch and ward; all charges both by day and night should be executed
in arms. And it is reported that one soldier was put to death, because he
dug at a trench without his sword by his side; and another, because he had
nothing else but his dagger: which being ouer-hard and rigorous, and
uncertain, whether falsely spread abroad; yet had their beginning of the
Captains severity. Whereby thou may know that he was inexorable in great
faults, seeing it was thought he used such rigor in small. But that terror
wrought different effects in the soldiers and enemies: we thereby increased
our valor; the Barbarians abated their courage. The Frisian nation which
rebelled after the overthrow of L. Apronius, and ever after showed themselves
enemies unto us, or nothing faithful, having given hostages; inhabited the
country allotted and appointed them by Corbulo. He gave them also a Senate,
magistrates and laws. And because they should not fall from their obedience,
left them a strong garrison, and sent some to draw the chiefest of the Chauci
to yield; and withal, by a wile to surprise Gannascus. Neither were those
wiles employed in vain, or thought cowardly and ilbeseeming us, against a
fugitive and faith-breaker. But the Chauci were much troubled with his death,
and Corbulo sowed some seeds of rebellion among them: which as some construed
to the best; so others reported badly of it: for why should he provoke an
enemy? If the success were bad, the hurt would redownd to the commonwealth:
if fortune went on his side, he was a man to be feared in time of peace; and
being valiant and courageous, and under a cowardly Prince, not to be suffered.
Whereupon Claudius was so far from forcing Germany anew; that he commanded
the garrisons to be brought back on the hither side the Rhene. And whilst
Corbulo went about to encampe in the enemy land, these letters were delivered
him. He understanding of so sudden a countermaunde, although many things at
once troubled his brains; fear of the Emperor; the contempt the Barbarians
would have him in; the jest his confederats would make at it: yet making no
more words, but saying only; O how happy some Roman Captains were, sownded a
retraite. Nevertheless least the soldiers should grow lazy, he cast a ditch
between Mosa and Rhene, three and twenty miles long, to bear off the
uncertain inundations of the Ocean. Yet Caesar granted him the honor of
triumph, although he denied him license to make war.

VII. How soldiers were employed out of war.
NOt long after Curtius Rufus had the same honor given him, who in the country
of Mattiacum had found a silver mine, of small profit and short continuance:
but to the legions besides the loss, it was great labor to dig the rivers,
and mine under the earth, and draine waters, which in plain grounds was
laborious. The soldiers wearied with these toils, and because they had
endured the like in many provinces; sent letters secretly to the Emperor in
the name of the whole army, and besought him that from thence forward, he
would bestow the marks of triumph before hand, on such, as he purposed to make
commanders of the army. As for Curtius Rufus birth, whom some have reported
to be a fencers son, I will neither utter any thing falsely, and am ashamed
to tell the truth. After he was come to man's estate, he was a follower of the
Quaestor of Africa; and in a town called Adrumetum, as he walked secretly
about midday in a gallery where were no people, there appeared unto him the
likeness of a woman, greater then the stature of any other, and a voice was
heard, saying: Thou art he, Rufus, which shall come Proconsul into this
province. Puffed up with hope of this presage of good fortune, he returns to
the city, and by the bounty of his friends, and his own wit and industry,
obtains the Quaestorship; and anon after the Praetorship, among many men of
note which sued for the same, only by the suffrage and favor of the Prince:
Tiberius hiding the baseness of his birth, with these words: Curtius Rufus
seems to me to be borne of himself. After this, living until he was very
aged, ^n odious flatterer to his superiors, arrogant to his inferiors, crabbed
among his equals; he became Consul, obtained the honor of triumph, and in the
end the government of Affrike; and there dying, fulfilled his fatal destiny.
In the mean space, for no cause then openly known, nor afterward discovered,
Gn. Nouius a worthy gentleman of Rome, was found with his sword by his side in
the assembly of those which came to salute the Prince: for being broken on the
torture, he confessed nothing either of himself or others; not known whether
he purposed obstinately to conceal the matter, or whether he were innocent.
The same men being Consuls, P. Dolabella propounded in Senate, that the show of
Fencers might be every year set forth at the charges of those which obtained
the Questorship. Which was a charge in our ancestors times, given as a reward
of virtue; and was then lawful for all citizens which trusted to their merits
and virtues, to sue for all kind of offices, without any regard had of their
age; being a thing lawful for young men to be Consuls or Dictators. But the
Quaestors were instituted when the Kings bare the sway, as the law of the
Curies declare, renewed by L. Brutus: and the power of choosing them continued
in the Consuls, until the people would also have a share therein; who first
created Valerius Potus, and Aemilius Mamercus, threescore and three years
after the Tarquines were driven out, to the end they should follow the wars.
Then affairs multiplying more and more, two were added for the business of the
city. Not long after, the number was doubled, when Italy and the provinces
were subject to pay task and tallage. After that, by Syllaes law twenty were
created to furnish the Senate, unto whom he had given authority of judgment.
And although the gentlemen of Rome had recovered their power of judgment,
notwithstanding the Quaestorship was granted according to the worth of the
suitors, or courtesy of the giuers, and that gratis, until that by Dolabellaes
advise it was as it were put to sale.

VIII. Certain gentlemen of Gallia made Senators. How the Senate was purged of
naughty men.
A. Vitellius and L. Vipsanius being Consuls, when the matter was debated
concerning the furnishing of the number of Senators, and that the chief
gentlemen of Gallia called Comata, who long before were in league with the
Romans, and inioyed the privileges of a citizen, desired also the right of
bearing offices in the city: great rumors were spread, and the matter was
debated before the Prince by men diversely affected: some affirming. That Italy
was not fallen to so low an ebb, that it could not furnish their city of a
Senate: that the home-borne with their kinsemen did in times past supply that
want, and no cause why they should be sorry to imitate the custom of the
ancient common wealth. Yea, there might examples be alleged, by which it
might appear that the virtuous inclination of the Romans at this day, was not
inferior to the virtue and glory of their ancestors. Is it a small matter that
the Venetians and Iusubrians have thrust into the Curia, unless a company of
strangers be also put in, as it were to keep us in captivity? what other
dignity is there left for the residue of the nobles? or if any of the Latian
Senators fall to decay? that those rich men would fill and possess all, whose
grandfathers and great grandfathers being captains of enemy nations, have
slain with the sword, and violence our armies, and besieged Julius of famous
memory at Alesia. These things are fresh in memory. What if we should call
those to memory which besieged the Capitol, and broke down the altar of Rome
with their own hands? That it was sufficient to enjoy the name of a citizen:
and that the ornaments and marks of the Lords of the Senate; the dignity of
Magistrates ought not to be made common. But with these and the like speeches
the Prince was nothing moved, but immediately spoke against it, and calling the
Senate together, began as follows. My ancestors (among which the most
ancient was Clausus, taking his beginning of the Sabins, and was at once made
citizen of Rome, and received into the family of the Patricians) gave me
counsel to govern the common wealth with such counsels and cares as they had
done, and transfer into it all that is good and commendable, from whence soever
it be brought. Neither am I ignorant that the Iulij came from Alba, the
Coruncani from Camerium, the Porcians from Tusculum; and that we may not search
out farther antiquities, there has been men called into the Senate from
Etruria, Lucania, and all Italy. At last the city was extended even to the
Alps, in so much that not only men severally, but countries and nations united
themselves to our name, and grew as one whole body. Then had we a sure and
firm peace at home, and flourished against foreign nations, when the
Transpadani received the freedom of the city; when under color of leading
our legions throughout the world, and adding unto them the strongest forces of
the provinces, we eased the weak and wearied Empire. Does it repent us, that
the Balbians came out of Spain, and the worthiest men of Gallia Narbonensis to
us? Their posterity remain with us, neither do they give place unto us in
love toward this our country. What other thing was the destruction and
overthrow of the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, although they were strong and
puissant in arms, but that they rejected those they conquered, as strangers?
But our founder Romulus carried himself so discreetly, that he had many which
the same day, were his enemies and citizens. Strangers have ruled over us:
offices have been given to the sons of such as have bin freed from bondage,
and not as some have bin deceived as a new precident, but it has bin
practiced by our first people. But we have fought with the Senonians. I pray
you, have the Volci and Aequi never prepared an army against us? we have been
taken of the Galli: and we have given hostages likewise to the Tusci, and
passed under the yoke of the Samnites. If thou will reckon up all the wars,
none has been sooner ended than that against the Galli: since that time we
have had a continual and faithful peace. Now that in conformity of manners,
arts, and alliances, they are mingled with our people, let them rather bring
to us their gold and wealth, then enjoy it by themselves. All things (Lords of
the Senate) which are thought now to be most ancient, have been new. The
Patricians had first all offices in their hands; after them the people; after
the people, the Latins; after the Latins, all the nations of Italy. This
will grow old likewise, although it seem new; and that which to day we
maintain by example, shall be reckoned amongst examples. A decree of the
Senate given according unto the Princes oration, the Eduans first of all
received the rights and privileges of Senators in the city. This was granted
them in consideration of their ancient alliance: and because they only among
the Galli, called themselves brothers of the people of Rome. The same time
Caesar made the auncientest of the Senators patriciens, or such whose fathers
were famous; few of those families remaining, which Romulus called of the
greater; and L. Brutus, of the lesser family: those also being decayed and
extinguished, which Caesar the Dictator substituted by the law Cassia: and
Prince Augustus by the law Senia. All these things were grateful unto the
people; and done with the good liking of Caesar. It troubled him very much how
he might remove such from the Senate, as were notoriously infamous; and at
last bethought himself of a new and gentle course; yet grounded on the rigor
of ancient time: which was to admonish every man to examine his own
conscience: and crave license to give up his room, if he thought himself
touched; which should easily be granted; and promised them to propound
together, as well those as were removed, as those as resigned their rooms;
that the judgment of the Censors, and the moderation of those which willingly
renounced interlaced together, might cover the discredit. For this cause the
Consul Vipsanius propounded, that Claudius might be called the father of the
Senate: because that the title of father of the country, being common, new
merits toward the commonwealth, should not be honored with old titles. But
he himself brideled the Consul as overmuch flattering; and appointed a view
to be taken of the city which is called Lustrum, and the number of the
citizens to be enrolled, which came to threescore eight hundred, and four and
forty thousand. Then began he to have better intelligence how matters went at
home: and not long after he was constrained to know, and punish the dissolute
and licentious life of his wife, immediately after to burn in an unlawful
desire of incestious matrimony.

IX. Messallinaes looseloues: her marriage with Silius.
NOw Messallina through the easy inioying of her adulterers, as it were
loathing them, grew more licentious in unknown and strange sensuality: when
as Silius himself, either by a fatale sottishnes, or thinking dangers
themselves to be the remedy against imminent dangers; began earnestly to urge
her to break off all dissimulation: and make that known, which until then he
went about to keep secret; For the matter was not come to that, that they
should expect the princes death. Harmless counsels were good for the
innocent; but in open and manifest villainies there was no hope of safety, but
in audacious attempts. There were others in the same fault and feared the like
punishment: he was a single man without children, ready to marry her, and
adopt Britannicus. Messallinaes authority would continue the same, and with
greater security, if they could prevent Claudius; as uncircumspect against
snares and wiles, so hasty and soon moved to anger. These speeches she
seemed not much to like of: not for the love of her husband; but least Silius
having gotten the sovereignty, would reject her as an adulteress, and fall to
a just consideration of her lewd life, which with his danger he had tried.
Nevertheless she desired the name of matrimony, because of the greatness of
the infamy; which with prodigal and dissolute persons is the last
contentment. They expected no longer, then Claudius went to Hostia to do
sacrifice, but she accomplished all the solemnities of marriage. I am not
ignorant, but it will sound like a fable, that there should be any man so
blockish and careless; much less that a Consul elect should in a city where
all thing is known, and nothing kept secret; a day appointed; company
assembled to seal the agreement; contract marriage as it were for issue and
children, with the Princes wife: and that she should hear the words of the
Auspices, or hand-fasters; attire herself bride-like, sacrifice unto the gods;
sit down amongst the guests, kiss, embrace; and in the end pass the night
in all liberty of marriage. But there is nothing fained, to make the thing
seem miraculous; but I will deliver you that which has been heard and written
by ancient writers. Then the Princes house began to quake for fear; and
especially those which were in highest credit and favor: and if there should
fall an alteration more afeard; they began now not in secret whisperings, but
openly to murmur, saying: That as long as the adulterers did use the matter
secretly, true it was that the Prince was dishonored; but yet he was in no
danger of his estate: where as now this young man of a noble birth, of a manly
representation, in the prime of his youth and shortly to be Consul, aspired no
doubt to greater hope. For it was easily known what was to be expected after
such a marriage. Doubtless a fear possessed them to think how blockish
Claudius was, how thrall unto his wife, and how many murders had been
committed by Messallinaes commandment. On the other side, the facility of
the Princes nature emboldned them, and gave them hope, that if they could beat
into his head the enormitie of the fact, she might as one already condemned,
be brought to confusion before she were arraigned. But the danger was, that if
she should be admitted to her defense, yet the Princes ears would be buttened
and deaf, although she should confess. And first of all Calistus, of whom I
have spoken in the death of C. Caesar, and Narcissus the contriuer of Appius
death, and Pallas the greatest favor it at that time, debated: whether
dissembling all other matters by secret threats they should dissuade
Messallina from Silius love; but they altered their minds, least they should
draw on, their own ruin; Pallas for want of courage; Calistus as practiced in
the estate of the former court, and knowing that credit and authority was
safelier maintained with circumspect, then rash counsel; Narcissus persisted
in his purpose, altering that only point, which was, to take heed, least by
any word she should have an inkling who was her accuser, and of what.

X. Narcissus, Claudius freed man aduertiseth him of the marriage. The
sottishnes of the Emperor.
NArcissus then earnestly watching all opportunities, during Caesar's long stay
at Hostia, induced two concubines with whom the Emperor licentiously
conuersed, by fair promises and gifts, and especially showing them to what
greatness and credit they might come unto, if his wife were put from him; to
undertake the discovering of this crime. Then Calphurnia (for so one of them
was called) as soon as she found him alone, falling at Caesar's knees, cries
out that Messallina had married Silius; and withal asks Cleopatra who was
there present of purpose, to be asked the question; who nodding with her head
in token that she had, commands Narcissus to be called for: he, craving
pardon of that which was past, and that he had concealed the adultery between
Messallina and Vectius, and between her and Plautius; added further, that the
best way was not to reproach him of his adulteries, nor demand his house, his
servants, and other princely ornaments embezeled away; but let him (said
Narcissus) enjoy them, so as he would restore thee thy wife, and cancel the
writings of marriage. Do thou know (says he further) of thy diuorsement?
for Silius marriage the people saw, the Lords of the Senate, and the soldiers,
and if thou make not haste, the new married man will be Lord of the city.
Hereupon Claudius calls for the chiefest of his friends, and first of all for
Turranius chief officer for provision of corn; then Lusius Geta captain of
the guard, asking them what they knew of the matter: who confessing it, all the
rest came cluttering about him, crying that he should haste away to the camp,
strengthen his guard, provide first for his safety, then revenge. Sure it is
that Claudius was so surprised with fear, that he did eftsoons ask whether
he were yet sovereign of the Empire? whether Silius were yet a private man
without charge? But Messallina never more loose and dissolute in lusts, the
Autumn being well spent, celebrated in her house the feast of grape gathering;
the presses were wrung, the vessels flowed with wine, women danced about girt
with skins, like unto mad women, solemnizing the feasts of Bacchus; she her
self, her hair hanging loose about her ears, shaking a iauelin wrapped about
with vine leaves; Silius hard by her covered with Iuie, with buskins on his
legs, casting the head hither and thither, with a shameless company of
dancers shouting and singing about them. It is reported that Vectius Valens
toying and jesting, climed up a high tree; and being demanded what he saw
there, made answer; a cruel tempest coming from Hostia. Whether any such
thing did appear, or whether it were a word slipped by chance; it was turned to
a presage of future danger. Not a rumor any longer, but messengers come from
all parts, bringing them tidings that Claudius knew all, and was coming,
ready to revenge. Messallina then conueyeth her self into the gardens which
sometimes belonged to Lucullus: Silius dissembling his fear, went to his
business in the Forum. The rest, some slipping one way, some another, the
Centurions laid hold on and bound with yrons, as they were found either abroad
or in corners and lurking places. Messallina albeit this sudden crossing had
almost put her besides her self, yet thought it best as a shift which never
failed at a pinch, to meet her husband, and show her self unto him; and
commanded Britannicus and Octauia to go before, and cast themselves betwixt
their fathers arms; and prayed Vibidia the auncientest of the virgins Vestall
to go to the high Priest, and entreat him he would show clemency in her
behalf. And in the mean time accompanied with three persons only (so naked
was she left on the sudden) having gone afoote over all the city, at last in a
tumbrell which carried away the riddings of gardens, she takes her way toward
Hostia, no one pitying her, because the filthiness of her wicked life swayed
down all compassion. Nevertheless Caesar trembled, because he distrusted Geta
captain of his guard, a man as lightly carried to bad as to good. Whereupon
Narcissus, having taken those with him which had the like fear, assured
Caesar, he had no other hope of safety left, then to transfer the whole
commaundery of the soldiers that one day unto some one of his freed men; and
offers himself to be the man. And fearing least, whilst he were brought
unto the city, he might be induced by L. Vitellius or P. Largus Caecina, to
repent him, he desires and takes a place in the same chariot with the
Emperor. The fame was common afterward, that among diverse of the princes
speeches, now blaming his wives lightness, now calling to mind the band of
matrimony, and infancy of his children; Vitellius never used other speech,
then o wickedness, o shame. Narcissus urged him to speak plainly, and go no
more about the bush; yet he could not win so much of him, but would still
answer in doubtful terms, and such as might be construed as every man
listed to draw them; and Largus Caecina did the like.

XI. Silius and Messallina punished, with others her adulterers.
NOw Messallina was in sight, and cried that he would hear Octauia and
Britannicus mother: when as the accuser made a noise on the other side naming
Silius and the marriage: and withal presented unto him certain writings,
bewrayers of her lusts and lasciuiousnes, to the end he might turn Caesar's
sight from her. And not long after, the children had between them, had been
presented unto him, as he entered the city; if Narcissus had not commanded
them to be conveyed away. But Vibidia could not be driven away, but requested
importunately with nipping terms, that his wife unheard might not be put to
death. Hereupon Narcissus answered that the Prince should hear her, and that
she should have liberty to purge herself. In the mean space, that she should
depart, and attend her sacrifices. Claudius used a wonderful silence whilst
all those speeches past. Vitellius was as one that knew little; all obeyed the
freed man: he commanded the adulterers house to be opened, and the Emperor to
be brought thither. And there first of all in the entry he showed the Emperor
the image of Silius father, defaced by decree of Senate. Then told him that
whatsoever the Neroes or Drusi had, rich and Princely, had been given to
Silius for a reward of his reptochfull adultery: then seeing Claudius inflamed
and bursting into threats, leads him to the soldiers camps, very ready to
hear an oration: unto whom as Narcissus had before advised him, he used some
few words. For although he had just cause of grief; yet shame hindered him.
Immediately all the bands cried together continually, demanding the names, and
punishment of the offenders. And Silius brought to the bar, neither went
about to justify himself, nor crave respite; but entreated that his death
might be hastened. The same constancy made other famous gentlemen of Rome
desire the hastening of their death. He commanded Titius Proculus guard unto
Silius and Messallina, and Vectius Valens offering to detect other crimes, and
confessing the same, and Pompeius Vrbicus, and Saufellus Trogus, all of
counsel to the fact, to be brought to execution. Decius Calphurnianus likewise
Captain of the watch, Sulpicius Rufus ouerseer of the plays, Iuncus
Virgilianus a Senator, received the like punishment. Only Mnester delayed his
punishment, renting his clothes and crying, that he would look upon the marks
of the stripes, and call to mind his own words, which were that he should be
ready to obey Messallinaes commandments. Alleging that others had offended
for rewards and hope of advancement, but he of necessity: and that no man's
case should have been harder than his, if Silius had become Emperor. Caesar
moved with these speeches and prove to mercy; yet the freed men altered his
mind, affirming that seeing so many notable personages had been put to
death, he should not spare a stage player: and that it was all one whether
constrained or voluntarily he had committed so lewd a fact. Traulus Montanus a
gentleman of Romes defense, was not received. This young man being of modest
behavior, and comely feature of body, not thinking on any such matter, was
sent for by Messallina, who inioying him only one bare night, would afterward
no more of him, being of nature as ready to loath, as to like and lust.
Suilius Cesoninus, and Plautius Lateranus only had pardon granted them. This
in regard of his uncles great merits: Cesoninus through his impuritie and
unnatural abusing of his body. All this while Messallina in Lucullus gardens,
prolonged her life; made her supplications; sometimes with hope, and sometimes
with anger: so proudly she showed her self even in her extremest danger. And
if Narcissus had not hastened her death, she had turned the mischief upon the
accusers head. For Claudius being returned home again, and his choler well
cooled in a banquet; after he had waxt warm with wine, commanded that one
should go and tell that wretch (for that term they say he used) that she
should appear the next day to plead her cause. Which being understood, and
fearing least his anger should relent; and his love, (if they should defer the
matter that night which was already come) and the remembrance of his wives
chamber should revive and return: Narcissus rusht out, and told the Centurions
and the Tribune which were present, that they should put her to death; and that
the Emperor had so commanded: and Euodius one of his freed men, was appointed
to assist and see it executed. Who hastening to the gardens, found her along on
the earth, and Lepida her mother sitting by her; always at jar with her
daughter whilst she flourished in prosperity; yet in her last extremities
overcome with compassion, persuaded her not to tarry for the executioner; that
her life was past; and that she should look for no other honor, then by
killing her self. But her mind corrupted with filthy sensuality, there was
no spark of honesty left; her tears and lamentations were in vain: Then the
doors being violently broke open: the Tribune stood in amaze, and in a great
dumpe without one word speaking; and the freed men rebuked her with many
servile reproaches. Messallina then first of all considering of her estate,
took a sword, which in vain through trembling fear, she put to her throat,
and then to her breast; which at last was thrust through with a blow which the
Tribune lent her, and her body granted her mother. Then word was brought
Claudius as he was a banqueting, that Messallina was dead, not telling him
whether by her own hand, or any man's else: neither did he ask so much; but
called for the cup, and went forward as he was wont to do at his banquet.
Neither the days following gave he any tokens of hate, joy, anger, sorrow, or
of any other humane affection; not when he saw the accusers joyful; not when
his children sad. The Senate helped him to forget her, by giving order that her
name and image should be pulde down from all public and private places. It
was ordained that the ornaments of the Questorship should be bestowed upon
Narcissus; the lightest point of his authority, seeing he was the chiefest
after Gallus and Calistus, an honest degree and privilege; but of which rose
very many lewd actions, which escaped unpunished.

THE TWELFTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
I. Three of Claudius freedmen deliberat upon a wife for him.
THe Emperors house being divided through the death of Messallina, his freed
men fell into contention, which of them should choose Claudius a wife, already
thundering against a single life, and thrall to his wives will. The women on
their side burnt with no less ambition, each of them comparing their
nobility, beauty, and wealth, set forth themselves and vaunted they were
worthy of so great a match. But the chiefest doubt was betwixt Lollia
Paullina, daughter to M. Paullinus once Consul, and Iulia Agrippina,
Germanicus daughter: Pallas favored her, and Calistus the other. AElia Petina
of the house of the Tuberoes was favored of Narcissus. The Emperor himself
was easily carried, now hither, now thither, according as he had heard every
of their persuasions; and disagreeing the one from the other, calls them to a
consultation; and commands each of them to utter and yield a reason of his
opinion. Narcissus begins with his old marriage, and family common to them
both (for he had had Antonia by Petina) and that he should have no new change
in his house, if his old wife should return again; who would not with the
eye of a step mother look upon Britannicus and Octauia, the nearest pledges
unto her own children. Calistus shows that being rejected by a long
diuorsement, if she should be taken again, she would become proud and
haughty: therefore it were far better to take Lollia, seeing she was without
emulation and children; and therefore would be in steed of a mother to her
husbands children. But Pallas extolled in Agrippina above other qualities, that
she should bring with her Germanicus nephewe, worthy in all regards of the
imperial highness; extracted of a noble race, and Claudian family, which
should unite their posterity; least a woman fruitful in childbearing, and in
the flower of her youth should carry with her the glory of the Caesar's to
another house. This persuasion with some help of Agrippinaes allurements
suncke deepest: who often coming to visit him under color of kindred, so
won her uncle; that being preferred before all others, though yet not his
wife, took upon her the authority of his wife. For as soon as she was
assured of the marriage, she began to lay plots for greater matters, and
undertook a match between Domitius, whom she had had by Gn. AEnobarbus, and
Octauia, Caesar's daughter: which without shame and discredit could not be
accomplished, because Caesar had betrothed Octauia to L. Silanus a young man,
besides other virtues, of noble parentage; and on whom Caesar had bestowed the
marks of triumph, and licenced to set forth a play of fencers withal pomp
and magnificence, to win the love and favor of the people. But nothing seemed
hard to the Princes mind, who had neither judgment nor malice, but what was
put into him or commanded. Vitellius therefore cloking under the name of a
Censor base and servile devises; fore seeing into whose handeling rule and
dominion would shortly come, to win Agrippinaes favor, began to intermedle
and thrust himself into her counsels, and carry tales against Silanus: who
had a sister in deed comely, but a shameless dame, called Iunia Caluina: who
not long before had been Vitellius sons wife. From hence rose the beginning of
his accusation, by drawing her into suspicion, not of incest with her brother;
but of other loose loves redounding to their shame and infamy. Caesar gave
ear unto him, as one ready through the love he bare his daughter, to harken
to all suspicions against his son in law. But Silanus doubting nothing what
snares were laid for him; and by chance that year Praetor, was on the sudden
by an edict published by Vitellius, put from his Senators room; although the
roll of the Senators were made up, and the number taken not long before.
Claudius thereupon brake off his alliance with him; and Silanus was forced to
renounce his office by oath; and the rest of the time of his Pretorship was
bestowed upon Eprius Marcellus.

II. Vitellius oration for the marriage of the uncle and the niece. The
marriage between Claudius and Agrippina. The death of Silanus.
C. Pompeius, and Q. Verannius being Consuls, the marriage was concluded
between Claudius and Agrippina, and held as certain in every man's mouth
through tokens of unlawful loves, though they durst not as yet celebrate the
solemnities, having no precident that the brothers daughter should be brought
into the uncles house as wife; for it was incest: and if not looked into, it
was to be feared that it would turn to a public mischief. Neither was that
doubt out of Caesar's head, until Vitellius by his drifts and sleights
undertook the matter. And asking the Emperor whether he would yield to the
commandment of the people, or authority of the Senate? and he answering that
he was one of the citizens, and not able to withstand their agreement,
Vitellius willed him not to stir out of his palace, but goes himself to
the Curia, and protesting that he had a matter to debate which touched the
welfare of the whole state, craves license to speak first, and began as
follows: That the heavy and great toiles of the Prince in governing the
whole world, wanted support; that being unburdened of domestical cares, he
might the better provide for the common good. And what honester solace of a
Censors mind, then to take unto him a wife, a companion in prosperous and
doubtful fortune? unto whom he might impart his inward thoughts, commit his
small children; he especially not nuzled up in riot and wanton lusts, but who
had been obedient to laws from his first youth. After he had made this
preamble with a glosing speech, and that it was accepted with great flattery of
the Lords of the Senate, he began anew and said. Seeing that all of them did
exhort the Prince to marry, it was convenient a wife were chosen for him,
renowned for her nobility, childbearing, and honesty of life. Neither was it
needful to go far for such a one, seeing Agrippina did excel the rest in
noblenes of blood; and had given a proof of her fruitfulnes, and was endued
with other honest qualities. That was a matter worthy remembrance, that by the
providence of the gods, a widow should be joined to a Prince, who had tried no
matrimony but his own. They had heard of their forefathers, and seen
themselves, men's wives to have been taken by force at the will of the
Emperor; a thing far from the modesty of the present time: yea he should be
a precident how hereafter the Emperor should take a wife. But it is a strange
precident to marry our brothers daughters: but it is a usual matter among
other nations, and by no law forbidden. And marriages between cosen germans
a long time not known, in progrosse of time grew common. A custom is to be
applied according as it is profitable and expedient: and this marriage likewise
in time to come will be among things commonly practiced. There wanted not some
which protested, if Caesar would protract his resolution, they would force him
to it, and so rusht who first might out of the Curia: and afterward by
multitudes flocked together, crying that the people of Rome desired the same.
Claudius expected no longer, but went and met them at the Forum, and showed
himself to such as were glad thereof. And entering into the Senate, demanded
that a decree might be inacted, by which, marriage between the uncles and
nieces, daughters to their brothers, should from thence forward be accounted
just and lawful. Yet for all that only one there has been, called Talledius
Seuerus, a gentleman of Rome, who has greatly desired to marry in that sort,
whom most men think to have done it to win Agrippinaes favor. By that
marriage all was turned vpside down in the city, and al men obeyed this
woman; yet not as when Messallina abused the government through licentiousnes:
but as it were with as great and severe subjection, as if they had been under
a man. Openly she showed severity, and often pride; nothing done in her house
dishonorably, unless it were so expedient for the furthering of rule and
government: her exceeding greedines in raking of money had a cloak, which was
the maintenance of the state. The day of the marriage Silanus killed himself,
either because until that time he had hope of prolonging his life; or else
chose that day to make the marriage more odious. Caluina his sister was
expulsed Italy. Claudius added certain sacrifices according to the laws of
King Tullus, and certain satisfactions by the chief priest in Dianaes wood,
all men laughing Claudius to skorne, that punishment and purging sacrifices of
incest should be sought at that time.

III. Betrothing of Domitius Agrippinaes son with Octauia, Claudius daughter.
Seneca is recalled out of exile. The Parthians demand that Meherdates may be
their King.
But Agrippina, least she should be famous only for infamous actions, got
remission of Annaeus Senecaes banishment, and withal obtained him the
Pretorship; persuading herself it would be gratefully accepted of the
communaltie, by reason of his great fame in learning, and because Domitius
childhood might be trained up under such a master, and use his advise and
counsel to attain to the Empire which she hoped after. Because it was thought
Seneca would be trusty to Agrippina, for the remembrance of this benefit
received of her, and an enemy to Claudius for the grief of his injury. Then
thinking it convenient not to delay the matter any longer, Memmius Pollio
Consul elect was induced through great promises to propound, and persuade
Claudius to handfast Octauia to Domitius, a thing nothing inconvenient, both
their ages considered; and might be an entrance to greater matters. Pollio gave
his opinion in words, not unlike unto those which Vitellius of late used, and
thereupon Octauia was betrothed. Now Domitius besides the kindred which was
between them before, being betrothed and son in law to the Emperor, began
to be made equal to Britannicus, by his mothers practices, and policy of
such as feared the son would revenge upon those which procured Messalinaes
accusation. About the same time the Ambassadors of the Parthians sent as I have
said before, to demand Meherdates for their King, entered into the Senate,;and
began to utter their charge as follows. They came thither not ignorant of the
league between them and the Romans, nor disloyal to the family of the
Arsacides; but to ask for Vonones son, Phrahates nephew; against Gotarzes
tyranny, alike intolerable to the nobility and communaltie. Now that his
brothers are extinguished by murder, his nearest kinsemen, and such as were
farthese off; he would do the like to women with child, and small children;
thinking it a means being unfortunate in wars abroad, to cover with that
cowardlines his cruelty at home. That their amity with us was ancient, and
publicly confirmed; and therefore reason we should aid our allies, which might
in strength compare with the Romans, but in deed yield for reverence.
Therefore the Kings children were given for hostages, that if they grew weary
of their domestical government, they might have recourse to the Prince and
Lords of the Senate, under whose manner of living the King being brought up,
should be presumed to be the better. When they had uttered these and the like
speeches, Caesar began his oration with the greatness of the Roman Empire, and
dutifulnes of the Parthians, and makes himself equal to Augustus; declaring
that a King had been demanded of him also, not mentioning Tiberius at all,
notwithstanding he had sent aid likewise. He gave certain precepts to
Meherdates, who was there present, aduertising him that he should not think
himself a Lord and master to command over his subjects as slaves; but a
guide; and they citizens: and that he should use clemency and justice, virtues
so much the more grateful unto these barbarians, by how much the less known
among them. Then turning himself to the Ambassadors, he highly commended the
youth which had been brought up in the city, as one, whose modesty had been
well tried: that the dispositions of Kings were to be borne withal, because
often changes are not profitable. That the Roman estate was grown unto that
height with fulness of glory, that it desired peace and quietness even to foreign
nations. After he had thus said, he commanded C. Cassius governor of Syria, to
conduct the young man to the river of Euphrates. Cassius at that time did excel
the rest in the knowledge of the laws. For military skill is unknown in time
of rest and quietness: and peace esteems alike of the coward and courageous.
Nevertheless, as much as those quiet times gave him leave, he renewed the
ancient discipline; kept the legions in practice with care and foresight, as
if the enemy had been at hand; thinking it a thing worthy of his ancestors,
and Cassian family, renowned among those people. Having therefore sent for
them, through whose consentment the King was demanded, and planted his camp at
Zeugma, where the river is most passable: after that the noblemen of Parthia,
and the King of the Arabians called Abbarus was come, he showed unto
Meherdates, that the first brunt of the barbarians was fierce and hot; but by
delay and lingering became cold, or turned into treason; and therefore he
should courageously go through his enterprise. But his advise was contemned
through Abbarus fraud, who detained him like an unexperienced young man in the
town of Edessa; as though the highest degree of fortune and princely felicity
had consisted in riot and wantonness. And when Carrhenes called them in, and
assured them, that all was in a good readiness if they would make haste, they
did not march straight to Mesopotamia, but turned to Armenia in an unseasonable
time, because the winter was begun. Then wearied with snowes and mountains,
coming near to the plain, they joined with Carrhenes forces. And having
passed the river of Tigris, they entered into the country of the Adiabeni;
whose King Iuliates in open show professed himself a confederate of
Meherdates, but underhand was more faithfully bent to Gotarzes.

IIII. Gotarzes overcomes Meherdates, and cutteth off his ears: Mithradates
usurps the kingdom of the Dandarides: and goes about to drive out Cotys.
Nevertheless in passing by, Meherdates took the city of Ninos, the most
ancient seat of Assyria, and a famous Castle; because that in the last battle
betwixt Darius and Alexander there, the Persian power was brought to utter
ruin. In the mean time Gotarzes at a hill called Sambulos, offered vows to
the gods of the place, among which Hercules was chiefly honored: who at a
certain time admonishes his Priests in a dream, that near unto the Temple,
they should have horses ready prepared for hunting: the horses laden with
quiuers full of arrows prawnsing up and down the woods, return at night
breathing and panting with their quiuers empty. The god again declares to
them in a dream what woods they have coursed up and down in; whither they go
and find wild beasts killed in many places. But Gotarzes not having
sufficiently strengthened his army, uses the river Corma for a defense. And
although he were summoned by diverse messe^gers and hard speeches to battle: yet
he sought delays; changed place; and sent some to corrupt the enemy, and draw
them to forsake their obedience. Among which Ezates Adiabenus, and anon after
Abbarus King of the Arabians, with their army began to shrink through a
certain lightness incident to that nation: and because it is tried by
experience that the Barbarians had rather come to Rome to demand a King, then
when they have him keep him. Now Meherdates seeing himself stripped of his
strongest succor, and suspecting least the others would betraye him,
determined for his last refuge to commit the matter to chance, and hazard it
in a maine battle. Gotarzes being very fierce, that his enemies forces were
diminished, refused not to fight. They met with great slaughter and a doubtful
issue; until Carrhenes making clear way before him, and driving and pursuing
the enemies too far, was compassed behind with a fresh company and slain.
Then all hope being lost, Meherdates trusting the promises of one Parrhacis a
follower of his father, by his falsehood was taken prisoner, and delivered to
the Conqueror. Who entreated him not like a kinsman, or one of the Arsacis
stock; but reviled him like a stranger and a Roman: and having cut off his
ears, gave him his life, as a show of his clemency; and dishonor and reproach
unto us. Not long after Gotarzes died of a disease; and Vonones then governor
of the Medes, was called to be King. There happened nothing in his reign
either prosperous or unprosperous, worthy the telling: he lived but a short
and an inglorious time; and the kingdom of the Parthians was translated to his
son Vologeses. But Mithradates the Bosphoran wandering up and down after he
had lost his forces; understanding that Didius the Roman Captain with the
strength of his army was departed: and that only Cotys a raw and rude youth,
was left in the new kingdom with some few bands under the conduct of Julius
Aquila gentleman of Rome; contemnig both of them, began to solicit the
countries about him, and allure fugitives: and at last, having assembled an
army, chaseth out the King of the Dandarides, and inioyeth his kingdom. Which
being understood, and looking every hour that he would invade the Bosphoran:
Aquila and Cotys distrustring their own forces, because Zorsines King of the
Soraci had taken arms again, sought for foreign aid, and sent Ambassadors
to Eunones King of the Adorsian nation: being no hard matter to draw him to
their fellowship, after he had declared what odds there was between the Roman
forces, and the rebel Mithradates. Whereupon they agreed that Eunones should
have charge of the horsemen, and the Romans besiege towns. Then having
mustered their army in order, they march in battle array; the Adorsi
defending the front and the rereward; the cohorts and Bosphorani the middle
battle, armed after our fashion. And so driving back the enemy, we came to
Soza the chief town of Dandarica, which Mithradates forsook; where we left a
garrison, as being doubtful of the inhabitants fidelity. From thence they
marched to the Soraci: and having passed the river Panda, they besieged the
city Vspe, situated on a high place, and fortified with walls and ditches;
saving that the walls not being made of stone, but of hurdles joined together,
and earth in the middle, were too weak against the besiegers: who having
erected towers higher than the walls, with fire and darts disordered they
besieged: and had not the night broken off the battle, the town had been
assaulted and taken the same day. The next day they sent Ambassadors to entreat
for the free men; but of slaves they offered ten thousand, which the
Conquerours refused. And because that to slaie such as yielded, would be a
cruel part; and to keep so great a multitude, hard; they thought it best to
hold on the siege, and kill them by right of war: and thereupon the sign was
given to such soldiers as had scaled the walls to put them to the sword.

V. Mithradates being forsaken by Zorsines King of the Soraci, ye eldeth to
Eunones King of the Adorsi, and came to Rome after he had made a peace.
THe slaughter of the Vspensiens stroke the rest into a fear, thinking now
that there was no safety in any thing: seeing their arms; their fortresses;
high and hard places; rivers and towns, were forced alike. Zorsines then long
waighing with himself, whether he should succor Mithradates desperate case;
or provide for his fathers kingdom: at length the love of his country swaying
him, having given pledges, he prostrated himself before the image of Caesar,
to the great glory of the Roman army; which without any loss of bloodshed on
his side came (as it is most manifest) victorious, within three days journey
of the river Tanais. But in returning fortune was not alike; because some of
the ships carried on the Taurian shores, were by the Barbarians surprised,
and the prefect of the cohorts, and most of the Centurions slain. In the mean
time Mithradates finding no safety in arms, debateth with himself whose
mercy he should try: He feared his brother Cotys, because he betrayed him
once, and was now his enemy. There was none of the Romans of such authority,
that their promises should greatly be regarded: in fine, he addresseth himself
to Eunones his enemy for private grudge; but great, and of better credit
through the friendship newely contracted with us. Therefore composing his
countenance, and attiring himself suitable to his present estate, goes to the
Kings palace, and casting himself at his knees, says: Behold here
Mithradates, whom by sea and by land you have so many years sought. Behold I
am here of my own voluntary will. Use as thou will the son of great
Achemenes, which is the only thing which the enemies have not taken from me.
But Eunones moved with the nobility of the man and the change of his fortune;
at his prayer which argued no base mind; lifts up the suppliant, and
commends him that he had chosen the Adorsian nation, and his right hand for
obtaining of pardon. And withal sends Ambassadors and letters to Caesar with
these contents. That the first friendship, betwixt the Emperors and Kings of
other mighty nations, proceeded of conformity and likeness of fortune: but
Claudius amity and his, of a victory common to them both. That the end of
war were most notable, when peace was made with pardoning. So when Zorsinus
was conquered nothing was taken from him: for Mithradates although he had
deserved worse; no power, no kingdom was entreated for; but only that he
might not be lead in triumph, and lose his life. Nevertheless Claudius,
although he were mild and gentle toward foreign nobility; yet doubted,
whether it were best for him to receive the captive under condition of life, or
demand him by force of arms. For on one side the grief of injuries received,
and desire of revenge pricked him; and on the other, reasons to the contrary:
That he should take a war in hand in a hard conntrey, and a hauenlesse sea:
withal that the Kings were fierce and the people scattered, and the soil
fruitless, and needy of victuals; then that lingering would bring tediousnes,
and haste danger: the praise should be small to the conquerers; the infamy
great if they took the repulse: therefore it were best to take the offer, and
keep the exiled: who being poor, how much the longer he lived; so much the
more punishment he should endure. Moved with these reasons he wrote to
Eunones. In very truth, that Mithradates deserved examplarie punishment;
neither wanted he power to execute it: nevertheless it has seemed best unto
our predecessors, to use as great benignity toward humble suppliants, as hard
and rigorous dealing toward the enemy: for triumphs were gotten of whole
nations and kingdoms. Then Mithradates was delivered and carried to Rome by
Iunius Celo Procurator of Pontus; and thought to have spoken more boldly to
Caesar, then his estate required. His speech was carried to the people in these
terms. I am not sent back unto thee, but am come; and if thou believe me not,
let me go and try. There appeered no sign of fear in his countenance, when
as guarded with keepers near unto the court, he was shown unto the people. The
Consularie ornaments were given to Colo; and the Pretorian to Aquila:

VI. The death of Lollia Paulina, through Agrippinaes jealousy. Calpurnia
driven out of Italy.
Under the same Consuls Agrippina boiling with deadly hatred and malice against
Lollia, because she had contended with her for the marrying of the Prince, left
no means unsought, until she had stirred up some to accuse her of conference
had with the Chaldeans, and Magicians, and counsel asked of the idol of
Apollo Clarius, concerning the Emperors marriage. Hereupon Claudius, the
defendant unhard, having spoken much before the Senate of her noblenes of
birth, that she was L. Volusius sisters daughter; that Cotta Messallinus was
her great uncle; and she once wife to Mennius Regulus, (for of purpose he left
out that she had been married to C. Caesar) added in the end; that she had
practiced dangerous things against the state; and that all occasion and matter
of evil was to be taken away: therefore he was of advise that she should lose
her goods, and depart out of Italy; leaving the banished woman of the infinite
wealth which she was mistres of, but About 39062 pound 10. shil.
fifty hundred thousand sesterces. And Calpurnia, a woman of great birth was
overthrown, only because the Prince had praised her beawtie; not for any
amorous affection, but by chance: yet Agrippina stretched not her malice to
the uttermost against her, but sent a Tribune to make away Lollia. And Cadius
Rufus was condemned for bribery, and extorsion, at the instance of the
Bithynians. And in consideration of the great reverence the inhabitants of
Gallia Narbonensis bare the Lords of the Senate, it was granted to the Senators
of that province, that without license of the Prince they might go visit their
houses, and dispose of their goods with the like privilege, as they which were
of the province of Sicilia. The Ituraei and Jews, after their Kings Sohemus
and Agrippa were dead, were joined to the province of Syria. It was ordained
that the ceremonies of the auguration of health, intermitted five and twenty
years, should be renewed, and continued from thenceforth. Caesar enlarged the
circuit of the city, according to the ancient custom; by which license was
given them which had enlarged the bounds of the Empire, to enlarge the bounds
of the City. Nevertheless none of the Roman captains L. Sylla and Augustus
excepted, although they had subdued mighty nations, had undertaken to do it:
but whether the Kings which then ruled the city did it for ambition or
vainglory, there run diverse reports. But it shall not be impertinent, as I
think, to lay down the beginning of the foundation of Rome, and what circuit
Romulus first assigned. He therefore began the circuit at the ox market called
forum boarium, where we see set up a picture of a brazen Bull (because that
kind of beast is broken to the plough) from thence drawing a furrow as a plat
of the circuit of the city, which contained within it the great altar of
Hercules. From thence by certain distances stones were put by the foot of the
hill Palatine, unto the altar of Consus; then to the old Curies; then to the
chapel of the household gods. For some have thought, that the forum Romanum,
and the Capitol, were not added to the city by Romulus, but by T. Tatius.
After that, the circuit or pomoerium was augmented, according to the fortune
and riches of the Kings. And for the limits that Claudius then put, they are
easily known, and are written in the public acts.

VII. Domitius son of Agrippina is adopted by Claudius. The Catti send
hostages to Rome. Vannius driven out of his country, goes to Rome.
CAntistius, and M. Suilius being Consuls, the adoption of Domitius was
hastened through Pallas credit, who being wholly at Agrippinaes devotion, as a
principal mean of working the marriage between Claudius and her, then bound
unto her, for unlawful company of her body; urged Claudius to provide for
the common wealth, and strengthen Britannicus estate whilst he was young. So
Augustus wives children did flourish, although he had nephews of his own for
a stay to his house: and Tiberius having issue of his own, adopted Germanicus:
therefore that he should also strengthen himself with this young man, who would
take part of the care upon him. Claudius yielding to this persuasion,
prefers Domitius being but two years elder, before his own son; and
makes an oration before the Lords of the Senate, which he received of his
freed man Pallas. The skillful and wise did note, that there had never been
any adoption before that time in the Patrician family of the Claudians, and
that the succession had never failed from Atta Clausus. Nevertheless great
thanks were rendered the Prince, and exquisite flattery used to Domitius, and a
decree set down, by which he should be accounted one of the Claudian family,
and be called Nero. Agrippina also was magnified with the surname of Augusta.
Both which done, there was no man so void of pity, which was not grieved and
sorry for Britannicus fortune: for by little and little he was abandoned and
skorned of his basest servants, by showing an unseasonable duty to his
stepmother, which he well perceived, as not dull witted, but of good conceit,
as it is reported; either because he was so indeed, or attributed to him in
his distress, the same and opinion continued without trial. Agrippina to make
her credit and power known among the confederates also, commanded the old
soldiers, and a colonie to be brought to the city of Vbiumw, here she was
borne, which was afterward called of her name Agrippina. It happened by chance,
that when that nation passed the Rhene, her grandfather Agrippa took them into
his protection. About the same time upper Germany quaked with fear, through
the coming of the Catti, which robbed and spoiled all where they came.
Whereupon L. Pomponius Lieutenant, gave advertisement to the aid Vangiones,
and Nemetians, adding unto them a company of horsemen, to get before those
forragers; or if they slipped away, compass and surprise them on a sudden. The
diligence of the soldiers followed the captains counsel, and dividing
themselves into two companies, those which took the left hand came upon them,
and slew them, as they newly returned from pillage, riotously abusing their
booty, and heavy asleep. Their joy was increased, because they had delivered
from servitude some of their fellows, which forty years before had been
taken when Varus was defeated. But those which took the right hand, and the
nearest way, meeting the enemy in the face, and daring to encounter, made a
greater slaughter, and laden with booty and fame, returned to the hill
Taunus; where Pomponius was expected with the legions, if the Catti desiring a
revenge, would offer occasion to sight. But they fearing least the Romans
would set on them on one side, and the Cherusci with whom they are always at
jar, on the other; sent Ambassadors and hostages to Rome; where the honor of
triumph was awarded Pomponius, a small part of his fame with posterity, being
more renowned for skill in poetry. About the same time Vannius made King of
the Sweuians by Drusus Caesar, was driven out of his kingdom: in the beginning
of his rule well liked and accepted of the people; but in the end growing
proud, partly by the hatred of the borderers, and partly by civil discords,
was put to the worst. The authors of this practice were Iubillius King of the
Hermunduri, and Vangio, and Sido, Vannius sisters children: yet Claudius
although often entreated, whilst these barbarous people were together by the
ears, would no way intermeddle; only he promised Vannius refuge if he were
driven out: and wrote unto P. Attilius Histrus governor of Pannonie, to lodge a
legion, and all the aid he could levy in the province, on the bank of
Danubium; as an aid to the conquered, and a terror to the conqueror, least
puffed up with prosperous fortune, they would so disturb our peace. For an
infinite power of the Ligians and other nations were coming, drawn with the
fame of the wealth of Vannius kingdom, which for thirty years space he had
enriched with pillages and tributes. Vannius own forces consisted in footmen,
his horsemen were of Sarmates, called Iazygiens, unable to encounter the
multitude of the enemies power, and therefore defended himself in fortresses,
and purposed to protract the war. But the Iazygiens not able to endure to be
besieged, but wandering and wasting the champion adjoining, drove Vannius to a
necessity of fighting, because Ligius and Hermundurus were pressing in, on the
backs of them. Vannius therefore issuing out of his fort, lost the battle, but
not without honor, even in his distress: because in person he shunned not the
battle, and face to face received wounds in his body; and at last fled to his
shipping which waited for him in Danubium: by and by his vassals following him,
having received land to dwell in, planted themselves in a part of Hungaria. The
kingdom Vangio and Sido parted between them, showing great loyalty toward
us. Their subjects either for their desert, or such being the disposition of
those which are kept under, whilst they were yet a getting the kingdom,
showed them all tokens of love and affection: but after they had gotten it, as
the greater their love before, so the greater their hatred after.

VIII. Ostorius governor of great Britannia, gains a battle against the
Iceni, and took Caractacus King of the same country, and sent him to Rome.
The wars of the Romans against the Siluri.
POstorius Propretor of Britannia, at his landing found all in an uproar: the
enemy ranging the allies country, and using so much the greater violence,
because he thought the new captain, as unacquainted with his army, and the
winter also begun, would not come forth to encounter him. But he knowing well
that the first success breeds either fear or confidence; gathered with
speed his readiest cohorts, made toward the enemy, slaying those which made
head against him; pursued the residue stragled abroad, for fear least they
should join again: and least a faithles and cloaked peace should neither give
the captain nor the soldier any rest, he disarmed those he suspected, and
hemmed them in with garrisons between Antona and Sabrina Nen, at Northhampton
and S^uerne. Vice Camdenum
. Which the Iceni Sffolke, Norfolk, Cambrid eshire, and Hunting onshire.
first of all refused, a strong people, and unshaken with wars; because that
of their own motion they had sought our alliance and amity: and at their
instigation the people adjoining chose a place to fight, compassed in, with a
rude and common trench, and narrow entrance, to hinder the coming in of
horsemen. That fence the Roman Captain, although he wanted the strength of the
legions, went about to force with the aid of the allies alone: and having
placed his cohorts in ranks, sets the troops of horsemen in alike readiness
to their business: then giving the sign of battle brake the rampire, and
disordered the enemies in their own fortresses. Who stricken in conscience with
a remorse for their rebellion; and seeing all passages of escaping stopped up;
showed great courage and valor in defending themselves. In which fight M.
Ostorius the Lieutenants son, deserved the honor of saving a citizen. But by
the slaughter of the Iceni, those which wauered between war and peace were
quieted, and the army lead against the Whether So^^mersetshire men or
Chesshire, Consul. Camd.
Cangi. Whose country they wasted and spoiled; the enemy not daring to show
himself in field: or if privily and by stealth they attempted to cut off any
which dragged behind, they paid for their coming. Now the Roman army was
come near unto the sea coast which looks toward Ireland, when as certain
tumults sproong up among the Yorkshire, Lancashire, B. of Durham Westmerla^d,
Cumberland,
Brigantes brought back the Captain, certainly resolved not to attempt any
new matter, until he had settled the old. But as for the Brigantes, some few
put to death which first began to take arms; the residue being pardoned, all
were quieted. The Southwales as Herefordshire, Radnorshire, Brecknockshire,
Monmouthshire, and Glamorganshire,
Siluri could neither by cruelty nor fair means, be hindered from making
war: and therefore no remedy left to keep them under, but with a garrison
of legionarie soldiers. The which to perform more easily, a colonie called
Maldon in Essex,
Camalodunum, of a strong company of old soldiers, was brought into the
subdued country, as an aid and safeguard against the rebels; and inducement to
the confederates, to the observation of laws. From thence they marched against
the Siluri; besides their own courage trusting to Caractacus strength: who
having waded through many dangers, and in many adventures prosperous and
luckie, had gotten such reputation, that he was preferred before all the
British Captains. But in craft, and skilfulnes of the country, having the
advantage on us, but weaker in strength, remoueth the war to the Northwales
Montgomery shire, Merionythshire, Carnaruonshire, Denbighshire, and Flintshire
Ordouices: and there all those joining to him which feared our peace, resolved
to hazard the last chance; choosing a place for the battle, where the coming
in and going out was very incommodious to us; and to his, great advantage.
Then they got to the top of a hill: and if there were any easy passage unto
them, they stopped it up with heaps of stones, as it were in manner of a
rampire. Not far off, ran a river with an uncertain foord, where a great
troop of his best soldiers were ready in order before the rampire. Besides
this, the leaders went about, exhorted and encouraged the soldiers, taking all
occasion of fear from them, and putting them in hope, with all other
inducements of war. And Caractacus coursing hither and thither, protested:
That that day, and that battle should be either the beginning of the
recovering of their liberty, or perpetual servitude. He called upon the names
of his ancestors, which chased Caesar the Dictator out of the I Will; by whose
valor they were delivered from hatchets, and tributes; and inioyed freely
their wives and childrens bodies undefiled. Whilst he uttered these or the
like speeches, the people made a noise about him; and every man swore
according to the religion of his country, that he would yield, neither for
wounds nor arms. That courage and cheerefulnes greatly astonished the Roman
Captain: and considering the river before his face; the forte they had cast
up; the high hills which hanged over them; all things deadly to the^, and
commodious for the enemy; drove him into a doubt of the success.
Nevertheless the soldier demanded battle, crying that there was nothing
which valor could not overcome. The Prefects and Tribunes using the like
speeches, greatly incensed the ardour and courage of the rest. The Ostorius
having viewed what places were of hard passage, and which of easy; leads his
army boiling with choler, with small difficulty over the river. But when we
were come to the rampire, as long as we fought with throwing of darts, we
received most wounds, and many of our men were slain: but after we had made
our target fence Vide annot in hist. lib. 3. number. 7.
thick, and broken down those rude compacted heaps of stones; and that the
fronts of both the armies came close to handie strokes, without ods the
Barbarians fled to the hill tops. But thither also as well the light harnessed
soldier, as the corslets brake in: after whom the one galding them with darts
and Iauelins; and the others marching thick and close together, brake the
ranks, and disordered the Britains; having neither head-peece, nor coat
offense. If they thought to resist our aid-souldiers, they were beaten down
with swords and Iauelins by the legionaries; if they turned to make head
against them, they were slain with the pikes and two ha^ded swords of the
auxiliaries. That victory was famous; Caractacus wife and daughter were taken,
and his brothers yielded themselves. He himself (as generally all succor
fails in adversity) craving defense and protection of Cartismandua, Queen of
the Brigantes was by her taken prisoner and delivered to the conquerers, nine
years after the war was begun in Britannia. Whereupon his fame being carried
over the Islands, and spread abroad throughout the Provinces adjoining, was
also renowned in Italy: and they desired to see who he was, that so many
years had contemned our forces. Neither was his name meanly esteemed of at
Rome. And whilst Caesar extolled his own worth, he made the conquered more
glorious. The people was assembled, as to see a notable spectacle. The
Emperors guard was all in arms, and good order, in the field before their
camp: then Caractacus vassals and retinue going before, the caparissons, his
chains and all other things gotten in war against strangers, were brought
after; then his brothers; his wife and daughter; and last of all, he himself
was shown to the people. The prayers of the rest were base for fear: but
Caractacus neither hanging down the head; nor in words craving mercy, when he
stood before Caesar's tribunal, spoke as follows. If my moderation in
prosperity had been as great as my nobility and fortune, I had come rather
as a friend into this city, then a captive: neither would thou have
disdained to have received me with couena^ts of peace, being descended of
ancient progenitors, and commanding over many nations. My present lot, as it
is to me dishonorable; so is it to thee magnificent. I have had horses, men,
arms, wealth: What marvel is it if unwillingly I have lost them? for if you
will command all men, it follows that all men become bondmen. If presently I
had yielded and been delivered into thy hands; neither my fortune, nor thy
glory had been renowned; and oblivion would have followed my punishment. But
if thou keep me alive, I shall be for ever an example of thy clemency. Having
spoken these words, Caesar pardoned him, his wife, and his brothers. And being
all unbound, they did their reverence likewise unto Agrippina, who sat aloft
in another high chair; and gave her the like praises and thanks, as they had
given the Prince. Surely a new and strange thing, and of our ancestors never
used, that a woman should sit and command the Roman ensigns; but she carried
herself as a fellow and associate of the Empire gotten by her ancestors. After
this the Lords of the Senate being called together, they made long and glorious
discourses touching Caractacus captivity: affirming it to be no less
honorable then when P. Scipio showed Siphaces unto the people, and L. Paullus,
Perses; or if any other had exhibited to the view of the people Kings,
vanquished and overcome. Then public honors of triumph were ordained for
Ostorius, his fortunes until then prosperous; but not long after doubtful:
either because that Caractacus being removed, as though thereby all had been
vanquished and subdued, service was carelessly entertained; or else because that
the enemies having compassion of so mighty a King, were more fervently
enflamed to revenge. For they environed the campe-master, and the legionarie
cohorts, which were left behind to build fortresses in the Silures country:
and if they had not been speedily rescued by the villages and fortes adjoining,
they had been put to the sword every man. Nevertheless the campe-master, and
eight Centurions, and the forwardest common soldiers, were slain: and anon
after they put to flight our forragers, and the troops of horsemen which were
sent to rescue them. Then Ostorius sends abroad certain light harnessed
companies; which yet could not stay their flight, if the legions had not
undertaken the battle. By their strength they fought with small odds on
either hand, till at length we had the better of it; and the enemy betook him
to his heels with small loss, because the day began to fail. After that
time they had diverse skirmishes, though for the most part in woods and
marshes, according as occasion was given, in manner of roades, either by
chance, or of valor; sometime rashly, sometimes with foresight; now for
anger, now for booty; sometimes by their captains commandment; and sometime
without warrant: but principally by the obstinacy of the Siluri, exasperated
with a speech which the Roman Emperor should have used: which was, that as the
Sugambri were destroyed, and transported into Gallia; so the name of the Siluri
should utterly be extinguished. And in this heat they intercepted two
aidebandes, uncircumspectly wasting and spoiling through the avarice of the
captains; and by distributing the spoils and prisoners, drew the residue of
the nations to revolt; when as Ostorius wearied with care and travel yielded
up his ghost: the enemy rejoicing thereat, as at the death of a captain not
to be despised, though not in battle, yet spent by reason of the war. But
Caesar being advertised of the death of his Lieutenant, least the Province
should be destitute of a governor, sent A. Didius in his place. He being gone
thither with great speed, yet found not all quiet: Manlius Valens in the mean
space having had with a legion committed to his charge an unlucky fight. The
fame whereof the enemy made greater then it was, to terrify the captain
which was coming: and he used the like policy, and augmented the fame of
that which he had heard, to win more praise by appeasing the sturres; or if he
could not, to purchase pardon more easily. The Siluri did therein endomage us,
and waste and spoil far abroad, until by Didius coming they were driven
back. But after that Caractacus was taken, Venutius a very expert man in
military affairs, borne at the city of the Iugantes; E(...)itate Brigantum
says Camd.
and as I have said before, a long time trusty unto us, and defended by the
Roman power, as long as the marriage betwixt him and Cartismandua continued;
rebelled against us, by reason of a divorce and war between them. But at the
first the strife was only between them two, until Cartismandua by policy
had taken prisoner Venutius brother and nearest kinsmen. Whereupon the enemies
kindled with rage, and ignominy pricking them forward, least they should be
brought under the yoke of a woman, they invaded her kingdom with a strong
power of armed and choice youth. Which was foreseen by us, and the cohorts
sent to second her, fought a hot battle; which at the beginning was
doubtful, though the end more joyful. A legion also which Cesius Nasica
commanded, fought with the like success: for Didius being stricken in years,
and having received many honors, thought it sufficient to execute his charge,
and drive away the enemy by the help of others. These exploites although they
were achieved by two Propretors Ostorius and Didius in many years; yet I
thought good to join together, least being severed, they should not so well
have been remembered.

IX. Nero Agrippinaes son, is preferred before Britannicus, son to Claudius.
NOw I will return to the order of times. Ti. Claudius being the fifth time
Consul, and Ser. Cornelius Orfitus, great haste was made to make Nero of full
years, Toga virilis in opposition to praetexta, which noble men's children wore
till 17. then took togam virilem: tenes vtique memoria quantum senseris
gaudium, cum praetexta posita, sumsisti virilem togam. Senec.
that he might seem more capable of the government. And Caesar willingly
yielding to the flattery of the Lords of the Senate, consented that Nero should
be Consul at twenty years of age: and being elect, in the mean season, have
the Proconsulary authority out of the city; and be called prince of youth.
There was also given in his name a donatiue to the soldiers, and a liberality
to the people. The Circensian plays being exhibited to win the favor of the
people, Britannicus in his pretext, and Nero in triumphing attire; because the
people should see the one in the magnificence of an Emperor, and the other in
the habit of a child; thereby to presume what fortune to either of them should
hereafter fall. Withal, if any of the Centurions or Tribunes bewailed
Britannicus hap, they were removed either by fained pretenses, or under color
of preferment: yea of the freed men, if any were faithful he was not suffered
about him. As these two met upon occasion, Nero saluted Britannicus by his
name, and Britannicus rendered him the like by the name of Domitius. Which
Agrippina taking hold of, as a beginning of a quarrel, carries to her husband
with a grievous complaint, saying: that the adoption was naught set by, the
decree of Senate, the ordinance of the people broken and abrogated in his own
house: and if such contemptuous frowardnes of Britannicus teachers were not
severely looked unto, it would burst out into some public mischief. Claudius
moved with these complaints, as though they had been faults indeed, either
banished, or put to death the chiefest bringers up of his son, and placed
such over him as his stepmother would appoint. Nevertheless Agrippina durst
not level at her chiefest mark, which was, that her son should succeed in
state, unless Lusius Geta, and Rufus Crispinus captains of Caesar's guard were
first discharged; whom she thought would be mindful of Messallinaes favors
toward them, and therefore bound unto her children. Agrippina therefore
bears the Emperor in hand, that the guard was divided into factions through
ambition of the two captains striving for superiority; that the discipline of
service would be better kept if the soldiers were commanded by one alone. The
charge of the cohorts was transferred unto Burrhus Afranius, a man of great
fame for matter of service, yet knowing well by whose practice and favor he
came to the place. Agrippina began also to raise her own estate to a higher
degree, by entering into the Capitol in a chariot, which in times past was a
custom only lawful for the Priests in sacred rites; which augmented the more
the state of this woman, because she was the only example unto this day of any
one, who being daughter of an Emperor, has been also sister, wife, and mother
of an Emperor. In the mean season her chiefest buckler Vitellius, being in
highest favor, and very old (so slipperie is the state of great personages)
was accused by Iunius Lupus Senator, of treason, and aspiring to the Empire;
and Caesar ready to give ear to the accusation, if he had not rather changed
his opinion by Agrippinaes threats then entreaties, and so to banish the
accuser, which was the punishment Vitellius best liked. That year many
prodigious sights happened: as that many birds portending evil luck lighted upon
the Capitol; many houses ruined by often earthquakes, and the fear spreading
among the astonished people, many in throngs were smothered. The want of corn,
and the famine which insued thereof was also construed as a presage of evil
luck. Neither did they complain in secret only, but came about Claudius as he
gave audience, with turbulent clamors, and having thrust him to the end of the
forum, followed him, until that with a band of soldiers he brake through the
prease. It was most certain that the city was not victualled for above
fifteen days: but by the great goodness of the gods, and mildnes of the
winter, the city was relieved in necessity. But truly in times past provision
of corn has been transported out of Italy into other provinces far
distant. And at this present we stand not in want through the barrennes of the
country, but we do rather manure Afrike and Egypt, and hazard the life of the
people of Rome by sea, whereof depends want or abundance.

X. Wars between the Romans and the Parthians.
THe same year a war begun between the Armenians and Hiberi, was cause of
great troubles betwixt the Romans and the Parthians. Vologeses was King of the
Parthians, descended by his mothers side of a Greek concubine, yet got the
kingdom by consent of his brothers. Pharasmanes has a long time possessed the
Hiberians country as a King; and his brother Mithradates the Armenians through
our forces. Pharasmanes had a son called Rhadamistus of a comely tall
stature, and of a very strong and able body, trained up in the qualities and
practices his father before him had been, and greatly renowned among his
neighbors. He was wont to say that the kingdom of Hiberia was small; and yet
kept from him by his father, who was very old: and so often he did cast forth
those speeches, and so fiercely, that it was easily seen how greedy a desire
he had to reign. Pharasmanes then seeing this young man so desirous and ready
to rule, misdoubting the peoples affection bent toward him, by reason of his
declining years; thought it best to feed him with some other hope, and set
Armenia before his eyes, telling him that he had given that kingdom to
Mithradates, having first expulsed the Parthians. Yet that it was not his best
course to set on it by force; but use policy against Mithradates and entrap
him when he least looked for it. Rhadamistus under color of some discontent
with his father, through the insupportable dealing of his stepmother, goes to
his uncle: where being entreated with all courtesy as if he had been his own
child, solliciteth the chief noble men of Armenia to rebellion: Mithradates
knowing nothing, but still entertaining him with all favor and kindness.
Rhadamistus under color of reconciliation returned unto his father, and
declared unto him, to what a forwardnes he had brought matters by policy; and
that the rest was to be accomplished by arms. In the mean time Pharasmanes
seeks occasions of war: and faineth that when he made war against the
King of the Albani, and demanded succor of the Romans, his brother was
against him, which injury he would revenge to his utter ruin and overthrow.
And therewithal gives his son a strong power; who having terrified
Mithradates with a sudden irruption and driven him out of the field, forced him
to flee into a forte called Gorneas, strong by situation, and guarded with a
garrison of soldiers: Caelius Pollio being their Captain, and Casperius their
Centurion. The barbarous people know nothing less then engines and subtle
devises in besieging and assayling of fortresses: and to us that part of
service is most familiar. And Rhadamistus in vain, yea with his loss having
tried to approach the forte begins the siege; and seeing how little good was
to be done that way, tries what merchandise he could make with the Captain
for money: although Casperius protested that a King confederate, or Armenia the
gift of the people of Rome, ought not to be bought and sold by corruption and
money. In the end, because Pollio pretended the multitude of enemies, and
Rhadamistus his fathers commandment; Casperius having agreed to a suspension
of arms, departed: with intention that if he could not withdraw Pharasmanes
from making war against Mithradates, he would inform T. Vinidius Quadratus
president of Syria in what state Armenia stood. By the departure of the
Centurion, the prefect being as it were delivered of a keeper, began to exhort
Mithradates to make a peace: Showing him the unity that should be between
brothers, that Pharasmanes was his elder brother; with other respects of
friendship and alliance; as that he had married Pharasmanes daughter, and how
he was Rhadamistus father in law. The Hiberi refused not to make a peace,
although at that time they were strong, and the perfidiousnes of the Armenian
well known; and Mithradates had no other refuge but the Castle destitute of
munition: and therefore that he should not doubt rather to accept conditions of
peace without blood, then try the hazard of war. Mithradates resolved not on
the sudden, suspecting the Captains counsels; because he had lewdly behaved
himself with the Kings concubines, was a man easily corrupted with money to
all lewdnes. Casperius in the mean space goes to Pharasmanes, and is very
instant that the Hiberi should depart from the siege of Gorneas. But the King
giving him openly uncertain answers, and for the most part gentle and mild;
by secret messengers aduertiseth Rhadamistus by all possible means to hasten
the assault. The price of the treason is augmented, and Pollio secretly
corrupting the soldiers, persuades them earnestly to demand a peace, and
threaten that they would abandon the fortress. Through which necessity
Mithradates takes a day and place to treat of a peace, and goes out of the
fortress. Rhadamistus running immediately to embrace him; faineth great
obedience; calls him father in law, and father; and swears he would use no
violence toward him, neither by sword, nor poison. And withal draws him
into a wood hard by, saying: that there he had caused a sacrifice to be
provided, to conclude and confirm the peace in the presence of the gods. The
custom of those Kings is, that when they make any atonement, to join their
right hands, and bind their thumbs together, and draw them hard with a knot;
then when the blood is run to the outward parts, with a small prick let it
out, and then lick the one the others: that atonement is counted secret, as
it were hallowed with their mutual blood. But he which should have tied their
thumbs together, faining as if he had fallen, catches hold of Mithradates
knees, and overthrows him: immediately many ran in and bound him in chains
and fetters, and so drew him away, which the Barbarians repute a great
ignominy and dishonor. The common people whom he had rigorously tyrannised,
reviled him, and offered to strike him. But contrariwise there were some which
had compassion of so great a change of fortune: and his wife following with
her little children filled all with lamentation; who were all thrust into
sundry covered wagons, until Pharasmanes pleasure was known. But the
Kingdom was deerer unto him, then his brother and daughter; and therefore his
mind was ready bent to all wickedness: only he took order that they should
not be murdered in his sight. And Rhadamistus as it were mindful of his oath,
used neither sword nor poison against his sister and uncle; but laying the^ on
the ground covers and stifeleth them with a heavy burden of clothes. And
Mithradates children were slain likewise, because they wept and bewailed the
murdering of their parents. But Quadratus understanding that Mithradates was
betrayed, and that the murderers inioyed the kingdom; calls a council,
declares the matter, and consulteth whether he should revenge or not. Few had
care of the public credit; most were of opinion that they should embrace the
surest way. That they should be glad of all wickedness committed among foreign
nations: yea that they should cast seeds of sedition and hatred among them: as
often the Roman Princes had bestowed the same Armenia under color of
liberality, now to one, now to another, as an occasion to put those Barbarians
together by the ears. That Rhadamistus might enjoy his ill gotten kingdom, so
as withal he be odious and infamous: seeing that it was better so for the
Romans, than if he had gotten it with credit. They all condescended unto this
advise. And yet least they should seem to approve that wicked fact, and least
Caesar should command the contrary, messengers were sent to Pharasmanes,
aduising him to depart Armenia, and withdraw his son away likewise. At that
time Julius Pelignus a dastardly coward, and no less despicable a jesting
stock for mishape and deformity of body, was Procurator of Cappadocia; but
of inward familiarity with Caesar; when being a private man in times past, in
his company he spent his idle time with delight and contentation. This
Pelignus having gathered together the forces of the Provinces, as if he would
recover Armenia, but wasting and spoiling the allies more then the enemies; his
own reuolting from him, and the Barbarians making incursions; being without
succor came to Rhadamistus, who with gifts so won him, that of his own
motion he exhorted him to crown himself King, and assisted him as the author
and approouer of the action. Which dishonest fact being bruted abroad, least
the credit of the rest should be measured according to this fact of Pelignus;
Heluidius Priscus, Lieutenant was sent with a legion to redress those sturres
as the present occasion required. Who having withal convenient speed passed
over the hill Taurus, and settling the affairs there, rather with moderation,
then force; was commanded to return to Syria; least he should be a beginning
of war against the Parthians. For Vologeses thinking there had fell out just
occasion of inuading Armenia, which possessed of his ancestors, a foreign King
now occupied by a lewd practice, assembleth his power: and because none of his
house should live without rule and sovereignty, goes about to inuest his
brother Tiridates in the kingdom. By the coming of the Parthians, the Hiberi
were driven out without stroke striking: and the cities of the Armenians,
Artaxata, and Tigranocerta, submitted themselves to the yoke. But the sharp
and hard winter, or else scarsitie of victuals and other provision, and the
sickness proceeding of both; constrained Vologeses to forsake his pretended
enterprise: and Rhadamistus inuadeth Armenia a fresh, having none to resist
him; more cruel then before, as against rebels, ready at all times to rebel
if occasion were offered. In so much that they, though accustomed to bondage:
yet break all patience, and besiege the Kings house; Rhadamistus having no
other refuge, then the swiftnes of his horses, saved both himself and his
wife. But his wife being great with child, endured the first flight so so, for
fear of the enemy and love of her husband: afterward by continual haste and
overmuch iogging and shaking, she began to pray her husband, that with an
honest death she might be delivered from the reproach of captivity. He at the
first embraced her, comforted her, encouraged her; then admiring her stoutnes,
then sick with grief, least leaving her behind him, any should enjoy her: at
last overcome with love; and being no babe in wicked atrempts, draws his
cymetter; and having given her a wound, drew her to the bank of Araxis, and
committed her to the river, least her body should be carried away; and
posteth himself to Hyberia his fathers kingdom. In the mean time the
shepherds espied Zenobia (for so was Rhadamistus wife called) drawing breath
and alive, upon the quiet shore of the river: and judging her by the comelines
of her person of some noble race, bound up her wound, and applied such
medicaments as the country affoordeth. Then understanding her name and
chance, carried her into the city Artaxata: from whence at the charge of the
common purse she was conducted to Tiridates, who entertained her with such
courtesy as beseemed a Kings wife.

XI. A decree against the Mathematicians. Cumanus and Felix, governors of
Iudaea be at variance: War against the Cli^tes.
WHen Faustus Sylla, and Saluius Otho were Consuls; Furius Scribonianus was
banished, as searching out by the Chaldeans the time when the Prince should
die. And Iunia his mother who before exiled was touched with the same crime, as
bearing impatiently her former fortune. Camillus, Scribonianus father had
heretofore stirred up wars in Dalmatia: and therefore Caesar thought it a
point of clemency to keep alive the progeny of his enemy. Nevertheless the
banished man enjoyed not any long life after this: but ended his days, either
by natural death, or by poison; every man giving out as he believed.
Ofbanishing the Astrologers out of Italy, there was a straight decree of Senate
made, but took no effect. After this the Prince commended such in an oration,
who knowing their own estate decayed, gave up their Senators room of their own
accord; and those put from it, which continuing in it, joined impudency to
their poverty. Among other things the matter was debated in Senate touching the
punishment of such women as married with slaves: and an order set down that she
who without the priuity of his Lord, had fallen into that folly, should as if
she had consented thereto, become herself a bond-slaue, and the children borne
of them be taken as Libertini. And Pallas whom Caesar publickely confessed to
have been author of this relation, was by the advice of Barea Soranus Consul
elect, honored with the Pretorian ornaments, and received further About 11718
pound 15. shil.
a hundred and fifty hundred thousand sesterces: and it was added by Scipio
Cornelius, that thanks should be publicly given him, that being descended
from the Kings of Armenia, he would prefer the public good before his ancient
family, and vouchsafe to be accounted one of the Princes officers. Claudius
affirmed that Pallas was contented with the Pretorian dignity only, and would
continue in his former poverty. Whereupon a decree of Senate was publicly
engraven in brass in commendation of this freed man, who being possessor of
About 2343750. lib.
three hundred millions of sesterces, was content to live according to the
provident manner of sparing of our ancestors. But his brother surnamed Felix of
late made governor of Iudaea, used not the same moderation; but bare himself
upon his authority as a sufficient warrant for all lewdnes whatsoever. The
Jews made show of a rebellion through a sedition * after they understood of
the death of Caius: they were still afearde least some other Prince, should
command them the like things. In the mean season, Felix going about to
redress all by unseasonable punishments, exasperated them the more. And
Ventidius Cumanus unto whom part of the Province was committed, and was his
secret enemy, egged him forward. For the country was so divided, that the
Galileans were governed by Cumanus; and the Samaritans by Felix, enemies of
old; and now more then ever showing themselves through the contempt of the
governors. And therefore made inroades one against the other; set in companies
to rob and spoil; laid ambushes: and sometimes they met in battle, and
carried the booties and spoils to their governors. Who at the first were glad
of it; but in the end perceiving the mischief to grow greater, they sent in
soldiers to quiet them, which were all slain. And the whole Province had been
in an uproar; if Quadratus the governor of Syria had not found means of
redress: who stayed not long until he had revenged the death of the Roman
soldiers, which the Jews had slain. Cumanus and Felix drew the matter at
length, because Claudius having understood the occasions of the rebellion had
given authority to the Governor to determine, and punish the Procurators
Cumanus and Felix, if their demerit had so required. But Quadratus caused Felix
to sit among the judges, and received him into the tribunal to him, to the end
the heat of the accusers should thereby be cooled: and condemned Cumanus for
all the misdemeanor which both of them had committed; and by that means he set
the Province at quietness. Not long after the peasants of the Cilician nation
surnamed Clites, which at diverse other times had rebelled, having Trosobor for
their Captain, encamped on a rough and high hill. And from thence running
down to the sea shores and cities, ventured on the husbandmen and citizens;
and often set on merchants and sea men. And then having besieged the city of
the Anemurienses; the horsemen sent out of Syria to aid them, were put to
flight with Curtius Seuerus their Prefect, by reason the difficulties and
uncleanness of the place round about fit for footmen, was most incommodious for
horsemen to fight. Then Antiochus King of that quarter, using fair words to the
country people, and craft and subtlety toward the Captain, when he had
severed the forces of the Barbaria^s, having slain Trosobor, and a few of the
ringleaders; appeased the residue by cleme^cy. The same time between the lake
Fucinus and the river Lyris, the better to behold the sight and magnificence of
the spectacle, a mountain was cut thorough, and in the very lake a sea fight
was represented. Augustus in times past had done the like, by making a standing
poole on this side Tibris, but with light boats and fewer in number. Claudius
armed galleies with three and four oars on a seat, and nineteen thousand men,
and environed the lake with frames of timber work, because they should not
run out at random, yet left space enough for the rowers and pilotes to show
skill, and such encounters as had been accustomed in a sea fight. On the
buildings about the lake stood certain companies of footmen and troops of
horsemen of the Emperors guard, with fences before them to shoot with warlike
instruments and engines. The rest of the lake, sea soldiers occupied with
covered ships: the shore and small hill tops as it had been a Theater, an
infinite number of people filled, as well out of the towns adjoining, as the
city, through desire of seeing the pastime, or to please the Prince. He
himself in a rich and princely cote armor, and Agrippina not far off sat
aloft, in a garment wrought with gold. They fought although they were
malefactors and condemned persons, with great courage and valor; and after
many wounds, were parted and hindered from killing one another. But after that
the show was ended, and the water let out: the insufficie^cie of the work which
was not thrust down, nor dug deep enough to the bottom, was discovered.
Whereupon not long after the ditches were dug deeper, and to draw the people
again together, a show offencers was made on bridges built over the lake to
represent a land-fight. And at the mouth of the lake a banquet prepared, drove
them all into a great fear through the violent gushing out of the water, which
carried with it all that was by, and things farther off breaking down, with
the crash and noise, stroke them all into amaze. Whereupon Agrippina taking
advantage of the Princes fear, rebuked Narcissus who had charge of the work,
of couetuousnes and theft. And he for his part held not his tongue, but cast in
her teeth her intolerable pride, and over haughty hopes.

XII. Nero marries with Octauia: the inhabitants of Cous exempted from
subsidies: the like is granted to Bysance.
WHen D. Iunius and Q. Haterius were Consuls, Nero at the age of sixteen,
married Caesar's daughter, Octauia. And to win credit and reputation by
honorable studies and glory of eloquence, undertaking the Ilienses cause,
declared that the Romans were descended from Troy, and that AEneas was the
root of the Julian family, and many other matters, not far unlike old
fables; which being delivered with a good grace and fit words, obtained that
the Ilienses should be released from all public duties and charges. He
pleaded also for the Bononian colonie which was wasted with fire, and obtained
for their relief About 78125. pound.
ten millions of sesterces. The inhabitants of Rhodes are restored to their
liberty, often taken from them, or confirmed, according as they had merited by
service abroad, or demerited by sedition at home. The Apameans ruined by an
earthquake were discharged of tribute for five years. Claudius was incensed
to much cruelty by Agrippinaes practices; who gaping after Statilius Taurus
gardens, esteemed very rich, never ceased until she had overthrown him,
Tarquitius Priscus being his accuser. This Priscus had been Taurus Lieutenant,
when he was Proconsull in Affricke: and when they returned, objected that in
some things he had used extorsion and bribery; and withal, that he consulted
with Magicians. But he not able to endure such an indignity by a false
accuser, slew himself before the Senators had given sentence: yet
notwithstanding all the suit Agrippina could make, this Tarquitius was expulsed
the Curia: so odious he was to the rest of the Lords of the Senate. The same
year the Prince was often heard to say, that the causes adjudged by his
Procurator, should be of the same validity, as if himself had given sentence.
And least those words might seem to have escaped him by chance, a decree of
Senate was inacted thereon, fuller and amplier then before any had been
conceived. And Augustus of famous memory had granted, that all causes might
be heard before the gentlemen which governed Egypt; and commanded that the
sentences set down by them should be kept, as if they had bin given by a
magistrate of Rome. After that, in other Provinces and in the city, many
things were granted, which in times past belonged to the hearing only of the
Praetor. Claudius yielded them all the right and jurisdiction, for which there
had been such wars and sedition: as when the order of gentlemen by the
Sempronian laws, were established in the possession of Judicature; or when the
Seruilian laws on the other side, had given the Senate power iudicially to
determine causes: and for which Marius and Sylla in times past more then all
the rest, made wars the one against the other. But in those days factions
reigned among the citizens; and the conquerers bare public sway, having all
power in their hands. C. Oppius and Cornelius Balbus were the first, which with
authority from Caesar could handle conditions as well of peace, as of ware. It
were to small purpose to speak of the Matians and Vedians after these, which
were gentlemen of mark, and of noble families: seeing that Claudius has made
freed men, unto whom he had committed the charge of his household affairs
equal to himself, and to the laws. After that, Caesar propounded, whether
those of Cous should be released of tributes, alleging many things concerning
their antiquity: as that the Argiui and Ceus, Latonaes father, were the old
inhabitants of the I Will; and that after by Aesculapius arriving there, the Art
of Physic was brought in; a man highly esteemed of posterity; naming them by
their names, and in what age every one of them flourished. Further, he
affirmed that Xenophon whose skill himself used in Physic, descended from
the same family; and that in regard of his desire, the I Will of Cous devoted to
the service of so great a god, should be discharged of all tributes. Neither
was it to be doubted, but there might be alleged many merits of theirs,
toward the people of Rome; and many victories obtained by their alliance. But
Claudius according to his accustomed facility and simplicity, went not about
to shadow that with external helps, which he had bestowed in favor of one
alone. The Byzantines having obtained audience, delivered how grievous their
impositions and tributes were; and desired they might be released; and ripped
up all reasons they could, even from the first alliance which they made with
us, when we warred against the king of Macedonia; who for baseness of mind, and
want of courage, was called the false Philip. How after that, they had sent
their power against Antiochus, Perses, Aristonicus: and how they succored
Antonie, in the wars against the pirates: calling to mind likewise that which
they offered Sylla, or Lucullus, or Pompey: then the late good turns and
services done to the Caesar's, when they came into those parts; where there is a
most convenient passage both by land and by sea, for the captains and armies;
with all carriages of necessary prouisio^s. For the Greeks sited Byzance in the
utmost part of Europe, in a very narrow straight, which divides Europe from
Asia: for having consulted with Pythius Apollo, in what territory they should
build their city; the oracle answered them that they should seek out a seat
which was opposite to the land of Blind-men. By that dark speech, the
Chalcedonians were pointed at; because that having first arrived in that place,
not judging aright of the commodiousnes of it, made choice of the woorst: for
Byzance is seated in a fertile soil, and a plentiful sea; because great
abundance of fish going out of Pontus, and frighted with the rocks and stones
under the water, forsaking the creekes of the other shore, is brought all to
these havens. Whereby, first all the city became rich and wealthy: but then
oppressed with charges and impositions; and therefore entreated they might
either have an end or a mean of so heavy a burden. The Prince was ready to
do them good, alleging that they were to be helped, as people wearied with
late wars against the Thracians, and Bosphorans: and thereupon they were
exempted from tributes for five years space.

13. Why Agrippina seeks Claudius death: the Emperor dies empoisoned by the
Physician Xenophon.
WHen M. Asinius, and M. Acilius were Consuls, a change of state to the worse
was portended, and foreknowne by many prodigious signs. For the ensigns and
soldiers tents were burnt with fire from heaven. A swarm of Bees lighted on
the top of the Capitol: monsters and children borne with two shapes: and a Sow
brought forth a Pigge with talons of a hawk. It was accounted a prodigious
matter, that the number of magistrates was so small; a Questor, Aedill,
Tribune, Praetor, and Consul dying but a few months before. But Agrippina of
all others was most afeard, by reason of a word which Claudius cast forth
being drunk; which was, that it was fatal unto him, first to bear the
lewdnes of his wives; then to punish them. Thereupon she bestirreth hir-selfe,
and that with all speed: but first having made away Domitia for light cause,
and women's quarrels. For Domitia Lepida, being daughter to the yoonger Antonia,
and niece to Augustus, and cosen germane to Agrippina, and sister to Gn.
Agrippinaes first husband; thought hir-selfe to be of as great nobility as
Agrippina, and as well descended: neither was there any great difference
between them in beauty, age, and wealth. And being both unchaste, infamous,
peremptory and proud; they no less hated one the other for their vices, then
for the graces and gifts of fortune. The ground of this bitter and deadly hate
was, which should have more credit, and greater interest in Nero, the aunt or
the mother. For Lepida had woone the young man's heart by gifts, and fair words:
Agrippina contrariwise cruel, and threatening, could give her son the
Empire; but not endure that he should rule. The crimes imputed to her were,
that she went about to destroy the princes wife by incantatious, and deuilish
inuocations: and that by not brideling and punishng her swarms of slaves in
Calabria, she had disturbed the quietness of Italy: for these causes she was
commanded to die: Narcissus mightily repining and grudging at it, who began
more and more to suspect Agrippina; and was said to have uttered unto his
nearest friends, that he was sure to die, whether Britannicus or Nero came to
be Emperor. Yet he had received so much good at Caesar's hands, that he
esteemed more of the princes safety then his own life: Messallina and Silius
had been convicted; the like occasions of accusations will be offered again,
if Nero should reign. If Britannicus should succeed, he had deserved no
favor of him; and the whole house would be shaken, and utterly overthrown
with the devilish devises of his stepmother; and with more wicked practices,
then if he had concealed the impudicitie and unclean life of his other wife:
although the house be as shamefully defiled by Pallas adultery as then it was;
because no man should doubt what small account she made of her credit,
reputation, shame, body and all whatsoever, so as she might rule and command.
After he had uttered these or the like speeches he embraced Britannicus, wished
he were come to ripe years, lifts up his hands sometimes to the gods,
sometimes to him; praying that he might grow in years, drive out his fathers
enemies, and revenge on the murderers of his mother. Claudius in this great
heap of cares was stricken with sickness, and to recover his strength with the
temperatenes of the city, and wholesomnes of the waters, went to Sinuessa.
Then Agrippina long before resolved in her villainous deseignments, and desirous
to hasten the occasion offered, wanting no ministers, began to think with her
self what kind of poison she were best to use: for by a speedy and quick
working poison, she feared least her wickedness should be discovered; yet if she
should choose a lingering slow working one, least Claudius drawing by little
and little to his end, and understanding the treachery, should turn his
mind, and show love and affection to his own son: in the end she resolved
to think on some singular thing which should trouble his brains, and not
work his death ouer-hastely. A schoolemistris of such practices was chosen of
purpose, called Locusta of late condemned for empoisoning, and long reserved
among other instruments of state. The poison was prepared by this woman's skill,
and the minister to give it was Halotus, an Eunuch, one accustomed to carry in
and taste his meat: all came afterward so clearly to light, that the writers
of those times have affirmed, that the poison was infused into a Mushrome which
Claudius took pleasure to eat of; which then he perceived not, either by
reason of his blockishnes, or overmuch quaffing of wine; and having a
solublenes of body withal, it was thought the receipt would not work his
effect. Whereupon Agrippina greatly astonished, and fearing her utter
destruction, nothing regarding what envy she might presently incur,
conferreth with Xenophon the Physician, whose conscience beforehand she had
wrought to serve her turn. He as though he would help the Prince, endeavoring
to vomit, was thought to have put down his throat a feather dipped in a strong
and speedy poison; knowing well that foul attempts are begun with danger, and
accomplished with reward. In the mean time the Senate was assembled, and the
Consuls and Priests made vows for the health of the Prince: and being already
dead, he was covered and cherished with clothes, whilst things necessary to
assure the Empire upon Nero were a preparing. And first of all Agrippina, as
one overcome with grief, and seeking comfort, held Britannitus between her
arms, calling him the very image of his fathers face, and by diverse policies
entertained him, for fear he should go out of the chamber: and with like
practices held Antonia and Octauia his sisters; and at every door and passage
placed a strong guard: and often gave out that the Prince waxed better and
better, to the end the soldier should live in good hope, and she enterprise her
attempt at such a time as the Magicians should think luckie and prosperous.
Then about the midst of the day, the third before the Ides of October, the
Palace gates being suddenly laid open, Nero accompanied with Burrhus, goes
forth to the cohort, who kept ward according to custom; where at the
commandment of the captain of the guard he was received with shoutes, and
acclamations of joy, and put into a Chariot. It is reported that some were in a
doubt, and looking about them, and asking where Britannicus was? then seeing no
beginner of any attempt to the contrary, they followed that which was offered:
and so Nero being brought to the rest of the guard, and having made a speech fit
for the time, and promised a donatiue according to the example of his fathers
largess, was saluted Emperor. A decree of Senate confirmed the sentence of
the soldiers; neither was there any doubtmade of it in the provinces. After
that, honor due to the gods was ordained for Claudius, and the funerals as
solemnly celebrated as when Augustus of famous memory was buried, Agrippina
imitating the magnificence of her Grandmother Liuia. Claudius testament was not
publicly read, least the people should be incensed to disdain and envy
against Nero, by seeing him who was only a son in law, to be preferred
before the Emperors natural son.

THE THEIR TEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
I. Silanus is put to death, and Narcissus. Neroes good beginning.
THe first whose death was contrived in this new government, was Iunius Silanus
Proconsull of Asia, and that without the priuitie of Nero, by Agrippinaes
treachery and malice; not because he had by any seditious demeanor procured his
own ruin: for he was so heavy and dull spirited, and the other Emperors did
so smally regard him, that C. Caesar was wont to call him a golden sheep. But
Agrippina having wrought the ruin of his brother L. Silanus, feared revenge;
being a common speech among the people that this man deserved to be preferred
to the Empire before Nero, yet scarce out of his childhood, and having gotten
it by wicked means: for he was a man of a settled age, sincere and just in his
dealing, noble of birth, and which at that time was greatly esteemed, descended
of the Caesar's, being in the fourth degree to Augustus. This was the cause of
his death, the ministers being P. Celer, a gentleman of Rome, and Aelius a
freed man, both having charge of the Princes peculiar revenues in Asia. By them
the poison was given the Proconsull in his meat, and that so openly, that it
could not be denied. With no less speed Claudius freed man, Narcissus (of
whose iarring with Agrippina I have already spoken) was brought to his end, by
hard imprisonment, and extreme necessity, against the Princes will; whose
vicious humors yet unknown, he did exceedingly well fit in covetousness and
prodigality; and had gone forward in murders, if Afranius Burrhus, and Annaeus
Seneca had not stayed them. These two were the young Emperors guides and
governors; and in equal authority, well agreeing, bare equal stroke in
diverse faculties. Burrhus in military discipline and gravity of manners;
Seneca in precepts of eloquence, and courteous carriage; helping one the other
in their charge, the easier to bridle the youths slipperie age with honest and
lawful pleasures, if he contemned virtue. Their care was both alike in keeping
under Agrippinaes fierce humor, who boiling with all desires of wicked rule and
dominion, had Pallas for her counselor; by whose advise Claudius through his
incestuous marriage, and pernicious adoption, wrought his own ruin. But Neroes
disposition was not to be ruled by a slave; and Pallas with an odious
arrogancy exceeding the moderation of a freed man, bred his own dislike.
Nevertheless, all honors were openly heaped upon Agrippina, and the Tribune
according to the order of service asking the watchword, had this given him by
Nero, Of the very goodmother. The Senate decreed she should have two
sergeants, and Claudius a college of Priests called Claudians: and withal,
that he should have the funerals of a Ce^sor, and be after deified and put
among the gods. The day of his funerals, Nero made the oration in his praise,
and as long as he spoke of the antiquity of his stock, of the Consulships, and
triumphs of his ancestors, he and the rest were attentive: and likewise whilst
he spoke of the love he bare to liberal sciences, and that during the time of
his government the common wealth was not molested by foreign powers, all men
gave good ear: but after he descended to his providence and wisdom, no man
could forbear laughing; although the oration composed by Seneca showed the
exquisite skill of that man's pleasant vain, fitted and applied to the ears of
that time. The old men (which were at leisure to compare things past with the
present) noted that Nero was the first Emperor that needed another man's
eloquence. For Caesar the Dictator, was equal with the famous orators: and
Augustus had a ready fluent and eloquent speech, such as well becommed a
Prince. Tiberius had great skill in waighing his words, uttered much in few
words, but was obscure of set purpose. Yea, C. Caesar's troubled mind hindered
not his eloquence: neither wanted Claudius elegancie when he had premeditated.
Nero in the beginning of his childish years bent his lively spirit to other
matters, as to ingraue, to paint, to sing, to manage horses, and sometimes in
composing a verse he showed some smattering of learning. When the funerals were
ended, he entered the Curia, and having first spoken of the authority of the
Lords of the Senate, love and concord of the soldiers, he reckoned up certain
deseignments and precidents he intended to follow in the governing of the
Empire, adding: that not having been nusled up in civil wars, nor
domestical discords, he would bring with him neither hatred, nor grudge, nor
desire of revenge. Then he laid down a platform of his future regiment,
especially avoiding those things, the hate whereof did yet freshly boil in
men's hearts; that he would not be the judge of all matters, least the accusers
and defendants being as it were shut up in one house, the power of a few might
have full sway to work their will: there should nothing be set at sale in his
court, or exposed to ambition; his house should be divided from the common
wealth; the Senate should retain his old pre-eminence; Italy and public
provinces should make their appearance before the Consuls tribunal, and they
give audience like Lords of the Senate, and he himself would look to the
army committed to his charge. Neither did he fail in his promise. For many
things were ordained by the arbitrament of the Senate: As that no man should be
bought for reward or gift to plead a cause. That the Questor elected should
not be constrained to set forth the show of Fencers, which was a matter the
Senators obtained contrary to Agrippinaes will, under color that Claudius acts
were thereby infringed. And thereupon she caused the Senate to be called to the
Palace, to the end that she might stand in a secret place, separated from the
Lords by some veil, which might not hinder the hearing of them, and yet not be
seen. Yea, when the Ambassadors of Armenia came to plead the cause of their
nation before Nero, she was ready to perch up to the chair of audience, and
by his side to give answer with him, if (the rest surprised with a great
fear) Seneca had not advised him to meet his mother, as she came; and so
under color of doing his duty, prevented the discredit.

II. Neroes preparatiues to defend Armenia.
IN the end of the year, it was a common rumor that the Parthians had burst
out again, and wasted Armenia, driven out Rhadamistus, who having been first
King, and after a fugitive, had then given up this war. Whereupon in the
city greedy of talk, they began to enquire, how the Prince which was yet
scarce past seventeen years of age, could either undertake or acquit himself
of so great a burden: what help could be expected at his hands, who was led by
a woman: whether battles and wars also, and besieging of towns, and other
duties of service, could be accomplished by his masters? Contrariwise others
said it had fallen out better, then if Claudius a weak and cowardly old man,
should have been called to the labors of war, ready to obey the
commandments of his slaves. Yet Burrhus and Seneca had been proved by
experience of many matters: and what wanted to the Emperors full strength?
seeing that Cn. Pompeius at eighteen years of age, and Caesar Octauianus at
nineteen, sustained civil wars. Most things in high fortune are achieved
rather by good luck, conduct and counsel, then weapons and hands. That he
should give an evident proof, whether he used honest friends or not, if he
would rather make choice of a notable and valiant captain, envy laid aside,
then a rich, graced and favored by ambitious suit. Whilst the people thus
discoursed, Nero commanded a muster to be made of the youth in the provinces
bordering upon the Parthians, to supply the legions of the East; and the
legions themselves to be planted near unto Armenia: and withal, wrote to the
two old Kings, Agrippa, and Iocchus, to prepare their forces, and enter the
bounds of Parthia, and make bridges over the river Euphrates: and gave charge
of lesser Armenia to Aristobulus, and the Sophenian nation to Sohemus, honoring
them both with royal marks and ornaments. And in very good time, it fell out
that Vardanes son began to rebel and beard Vologeses, which caused the
Parthians to depart Armenia, as though they would defer the war. But all
things were made more then they were to the Senate, amplified by those who gave
advise that Processions should be made in honor of the Prince: and that that
day he should wear a triumphall garment, and enter into the city ouant: and
that his image of the same greatness that Mars the reuengers was, should be
placed in the same temple; being besides their ordinary flattery, joyful and
glad, that he had made Domitius Corbulo governor of Armenia: persuading
themselves, that the way was now made open to virtue. The forces of the East
were so divided, that part of the aid-souldiers with two legions should remain
in the province of Syria, with the Lieutenant Quadratus Vinidius; and that the
like number of citizens and allies should be under Corbuloes charge, with other
cohorts and cornets of horsemen, which wintered in Cappadocia. The Kings which
were confederate with the Romans, were warned to be in a readiness as occasion
of war should require. But their affections were bent more upon Corbulo, who
to purchase fame (which in new enterprises is of great importance) making a way
with all speed at Agas, a city of Cilicia, met Quadratus; who was come so
far, least if Corbulo should have entered into Syria to receive the forces,
all men's eyes would have been cast upon him, being of a comely and tall
stature, magnificall in words; and besides his experience and wisdom, in show
of vain hope and promises, won the people to what he lusted. In fine, both of
them by messengers admonished King Vologeses to desire rather peace then war;
and giving hostages, continue the like reverence to the people of Rome as his
predecessors had done. And Vologeses to make preparations of war with more
advantage, and such as might match the Romans, or to remove those he suspected
as concurrents under the name of hostages; delivers the noblest of the
Arsacides family, whom Hostorius the Centurion sent before by Vinidius for
other occasions received. Corbulo understanding this, commands Arrius Varus,
captain of a company of footmen, to go and receive them: from whence grew a
quarrel between the Captain and Centurion (which because they would no
longer be a jesting stock to the strangers) they referred to the arbitrament of
the pledges themselves, and Lieutenants which conducted them: who preferred
Corbulo before the other, partly through the fresh renown which was yet in
every man's mouth; and partly through a certain inclination which the enemies
themselves bare him. Hereupon grew a jar between the captains, Vinidius
complaining, that, that was taken from him which was compassed by his advise:
Corbulo protesting on the contrary part, that the king was never drawn to
offer pledges, until that he being chosen captain of the war, had turned his
hopes into fear. Nero to set them at one, caused it to be published: that
Quadratus and Corbulo, for their prosperous successes, should have baies added
to the bundle of rods, which was carried before great captains of war. I
have joined these things together, although they were done under other Consuls.
The same year Caesar demanded of the Senate that there might be an image
dedicated to his father, and the Consularie ornaments given Asconius Labeo, who
had been his tutor; and forbad that any image of massiue gold or silver,
should be offered in honor of himself. And although the LL. of the Senate had
decreed, that the year should begin on that day of December that Nero was
borne: yet he retained the old ceremony of beginning the year the Kalends of
January. Neither were Carinas Celer a Senator, accused by a slave, or Iultus
Densus gentlemen, called into question, although it was laid to their charge,
that they favored Britannicus.

III. Nero begins to hate his mother: and falls in love with Act.
Claudius Nero and L. Antistius being Consuls, when the magistrates took an
oath of observing the ordinances of the princes; he would not suffer Antistius
his fellow officer to swear to the observation of his: which the LL. of the
Senate did highly commend in him; to the end, that the youthly mind of the
prince being sturred up with the glory of small things, should continue in
matters of greater moment. After this followed his lenity toward Plautius
Lateranus, who being removed from the order of Senators, for adultery
committed with Messallina, was restored by him to his room; binding himself
to continue this clemency, with many orations: which Seneca, to testify in
what honest precepts he instructed him, or for a brag of his own wit,
published by the voice of the prince. But Agrippinaes credit and authority by
little and little began to waine: and Nero cast a liking to a freed woman
called Act: two comely youths, Otho descended from a Consularie house; and
Claudius Senecio, son of one of Caesar's freed men, being partakers of his
counsels: his mother being at the first a stranger to the matter, and in vain
at last striving to the contrary. So far she had possessed him by dissolute
behavior, and riot and secret conversation, that his greatest friends and
seuerest, seemed not to know it: considering that this woman satisfied his
lusts, without the offense of any. For Octauia his wife, a woman of noble
birth, and of approved good life, either by some secret destiny, or because
things unlawful are most greedily desired, he utterly disliked. And some
feared also that if he were brideled of that love; he would lust after the
defiling of noble women. But Agrippina fretted and fumed that a freed woman
should beard her, and a bond woman become her daughter in law; with other such
like womanish complaints; not having patience to see whether her son would
either repent or be filled: and the more opprobriouslie she vpbraided him, the
more she inflamed him; till at last overcome with the rage of love, he shaked
off all duty and reverence toward his mother, and committed himself wholly to
Seneca. Amongst his familiars was Annaeus Serenus, who faining love to the same
freed woman, covered and cloked with his own name, the first heats of this
young prince: and such things as the prince had bestowed on her by stealth, he
openly aduouched to be his gifts. Then Agrippina changing her style seeks to
win the young man by fair alluring speeches, offers rather her own chamber
and bosom to hide those things which his youth and high fortune desired. Yea
she confessed her untimely severity; and offered him the use of al her wealth,
which was little inferior to the Emperors: as before too severe in correcting
her son; so now unreasonably humbled and cast down in courage. The which
change did neither deceive Nero, and gave his nearest friends cause of fear;
and prayed him to beware of the treachery of this woman, always fell and
cruel; and then false and dissembling. Nero having by chance seen the
wardrop where the apparel lay, which Princes wives and parents were wont to
shine in, made choice of a garment and jewels, and sent them his mother most
bountifully: seeing he sent of his own the chiefest, and which by others were
most of all desired. But Agrippina exclaimeth that these ornaments were not so
much given her to adorn and trim her self, as to exclude her from the rest;
and that her son would divide those things with her, which came wholly from
her. Neither wanted there some to carry these speeches, and make them worse
then they were. Whereupon all such growing odious unto Nero, upon whom this
woman's pride chiefly relied, displaceth Pallas from the charge which Claudius
had given him; in which he carried himself as if he had been chief Lord and
master of all. It is reported that when Pallas departed with a great retinue
following him, Nero very aptly said that Pallas went to resign his office.
True it is, that Pallas had couenanted with the Prince not to be called in
question for any act past; and that he had made even with all accounts of the
commonwealth. Agrippina, after this, more mad and wilful then ever, gave out
threatening and thundering speeches: yea not forbearing the Princes ears, but
criyng, that Britannicus was now grown to man's estate: a true and worthy
plant to receive his fathers Empire, which a graffed sun by adoption now
possessed by the injury and trumperie of his mother. There should be no let in
her, but that all the villainous practices of that unfortunate house should be
laid open: and first of all her own marriage, and her impoisoning of
Claudius. That only thing was provided by the gods to her good, that her son
in law was alive. She would go with him to the camp, where on one side
Germanicus daughter should be heard: on the other side that base companion
Burrhus, and Seneca the banished; the one his hand cut off; and the other with
his professors eloquence quarelling and debating of the rule and government of
the whole world. In uttering of this she bent her fist toward him; heaped one
injury upon another; called Claudius, and the infernal ghosts of the
Silaniens; and so many fruitless wicked attempts, which she had been author
of. Nero troubled with these speeches, and the day now at hand, on which
Britannicus had accomplished the full age of foureteen years; began to ponder
with himself, sometimes the violence of his mother; sometimes the towardlines
of Britannicus known of late by good proof; and which has won him great
favor and good will. On a festival day dedicated to Saturn, amongst other
pastimes of his equals, drawing lots who should be King; the lot fell to Nero:
who commanding diverse things unto others, which could not turn to their shame;
commanded Britannicus to rise up and stand in the middle and begin a song,
hoping the child should be laughed to skorn, as one ignorant how to carry
himself in sober company; much less in drunken. But he very constantly
began a verse, which signified that Nero had thrust him from his fathers seat,
and government of the Empire: which moved them all to open compassion; because
the night and lascivious wantonness had taken away all dissimulation.

IIII. Britannicus empoisoned. Agrippina chased from the Emperors house.
NEro feeling himself touched, augmented his hatred; and incensed with
Agrippinaes threats, because he could lay no just cause against him, nor openly
durst not command the murdering of his brother, practices secret means, and
commands poison to be prepared; Pollio Julius tribune of the Pretorian
cohort being his minister in the action. Under whose charge Locusta, a woman
infamous for lewd practices, and before condemned for empoysoning, was kept
prisoner. For it was long before provided that such as were nearest about
Britannicus should have no regard either of honesty or faith. He took the
first poison of his bringers up; which not being strong enough, he voided by
siege; or else because it was tempered, least it should work immediately. But
Nero impatient of lingering and long working wickedness, threatened the Tribune,
commanded the poisoneresse to be put to death, because that whilst they
respect the rumor, and forge excuses for their own safty, they drove off his
security. They then promising as spedy a death, as if he should be slain with a
sword, near unto Caesar's chamber a poison was sod strong and violent, by
proof of poisoning. The custom was for Princes children to sit with other
noble men's, of the same age, in presence of their near kindred, with a spare
diet at a table by themselves: Britannicus there taking his repast, because one
of the seruitours did taste his meats and drinks, least the custom should be
omitted, or the villainy disclosed by both their deaths, this policy was
devised: A drink yet not hurtful, but very hot, and tasted of, was presented
to Britannicus; then that being refused by reason of the heat, the poison was
powered into cold water, which so spread throughout all the parts of his body,
that his speech and spirits were at once taken from him. Those which sat about
him were in a maze; the other which knew nothing ran away: but they which were
of deeper judgment stirred not, but looked Nero in the face; he leaning on the
table like one that knew nothing of the practice, said: he was often wont to
fall into such fits, through the falling sickness, which Britannicus had been
grievously afflicted with from his infancy; and that his sight and speech by
little and little would come to him again. But Agrippina was possessed with
such a great fear, and an astonishment of senses, although she endeavored to
hide it in countenance, that she was easily judged to be as ignorant of the
fact, as Britannicus sister Octauia: for she saw that she was bereaved of her
greatest stay, and perceived well that it was a beginning of parricide. Octauia
also although of young years, yet had learned to hide her grief, her love and
all affections; and so after a little silence, the mirth of the banquet began
again. Britannicus body was burnt the same night he died, all funeral
preparation having been provided before hand, which was but small: nevertheless
he was buried in Campus Martius, in such storms and showers, that the people
believed they portended the wrath of the gods against so heinous a fact: which
yet many excused in Nero, calling to mind the ancient discord of brothers in
terms of sovereignty, and how Kings admit no companions. Many writers of that
time do deliver, that Nero many days before had abused Britanicus body; and
therefore that now his death could not seem either untimely or cruel,
although it happened in the sacred liberty of his table, his sister not having
so much as time to embrace him, hastened before his enemies face against the
last of Claudius blood, and his body defiled before he was poisoned. Caesar
excused the hastines of the obsequies by an edict, saying, that the custom of
ancient times was to celebrate in secret manner, and not openly doleful and
bitter funerals, without either solemnities or praises. As for himself having
lost the aid and comfort of his brother, the rest of his hopes were anchored
wholly in the common wealth: and that the Lords of the Senate and people should
so much the more favor and maintain that Prince, which was only left of the
family borne to rule and absolute dominion. Then he enriched with gifts the
chiefest of his friends. Neither wanted there some which blamed men pretending
gravity, that they divided houses and possessions, as though they had been
booties. Some thought the Prince forced them thereto, as guilty of his fact,
and hoping for pardon if he could bind unto him the mightiest and strongest in
power. But his mothers wrath could by no munificence be appeased, but she
embraced Octauia, and had often secret conference with her friends: and besides
her natural covetousness, scraping money together of all hands as it were for
some purpose on a pinch, she entertained the Centurions and Tribunes with all
courtesy: she honored the names and virtues of the nobility which then were
in town, as though she had sought for a head to make a faction. Nero
perceiving that, commands the guard of soldiers which heretofore was
appointed to guard the Emperors wife, and now her, as his mother, to be taken
from her; and certain Germans which she had, besides the former appointed to
guard her, to depart and be gone. And least she should be frequented with
multitudes of saluters, he deuideth his house, and sends his mother to that
which was Antoniaes; and as often as himself came thither, guarded with a
company of Centurions, after a short salutation, departed again.

V. Agrippina accused for conspiring against Nero. Silana punished. Pallas, and
Burrhus accused.
THere is no mortal thing more mutable and flitting, then the fame of
greatness, not sustained by his own force and strength. Agrippinaes house was
now utterly forsaken; no man went to comfort her; no man to visit her, saving
a few women: and uncertain of them, whether for love or hatred. Among which
Iunia Silana was one, who as I have already declared, at Messallinaes
instigations was separated from her husband C. Silius; a woman of great
parentage, of alluring and wanton beauty, and a long time well-beloved of
Agrippina. Yet afterward there was a privy grudge between them two, because
Agrippina had dehorted Sext. Africanus a noble young gentleman from marriyng of
Silana: saying, she was unchaste and grown into years; not because she meant
to reserve him for her self; but fearing least he should enjoy Silanaes goods
if she died without issue. Silana having a hope of revenge offered, solicited
Iturius and Caluisius, followers of her own, to accuse Agrippina: yet not for
any old and stale matter, as that she bewailed the death of Britannicus, or
published the injuries done to Octauia; but that she intended to stir up
Rubellius Plautus (by the mothers side, as near to Augustus, as Nero was) to
new enterprises against the state, and by marriyng, of him and Empire gotten by
her means, afflict and invade the commonwealth afresh. These things Iturius
and Caluisius discovered to Atimetus a freed man of Domitia, aunt unto Nero.
Who glad of the occasion offered (for between Domitia and Agrippina there was
deadly hatred) urged the stage player Paris a freed man likewise of Domitia, to
go withal speed to Nero, and inform most bitterly against her. The night was
well spent, and Nero well tippled, when Paris enters as one accustomed at
other times to entertain the Prince with sports and iestes: but then his
countenance settled to sadness, and declaring the whole order of Atimetus tale,
did so terrify and daunt the Prince, that he determined to kill not only his
mother, and Plautus; but discharge Burrhus of his office, as advanced by
Agrippinaes favor; and ready therefore to requite her with as good a turn.
Fabius Rusticus reports, that letters were written to Caenina Tuschus, to
come and take charge of the guard; but that Burrhus credit was saved, and kept
in his office by Senecaes means. Pliny and Cluuius seem there was no doubt
made of Burrhus loyalty: and in very deed Fabius inclines much to the
commendation of Seneca, as one of his preferment. But our meaning is to follow
the consent of authors; and if any affirm contrary, we will deliver it under
their names. Nero trembling for fear, and exceeding desirous of the death of
his mother, could not endure the delay, until Burrhus had promised to perform
it, if she were convicted of the crime. But every man might allege what he
could for his defense; much more a mother. Neither were there any accusers
present, and nothing to ground on but one man's report out of an enemies house.
He was to consider that it was night, and that spent in banqueting; and
therefore all would seem to smell of rashness and folly. The Princes fear
somewhat lightened by these speeches and the day come, one went to Agrippina to
let her understand of the accusation, and to purge her self, or look to
suffer. Burrhus was to do the message in presence of Seneca, with some freed
men as witness of the speeches. Then Burrhus having declared the accusation, and
the authors of it, used threatening terms: and Agrippina not forgetting her old
fiercenes, returned him his answer: saying, I marvel not if Silana never
having had child, know not what the affections of mothers are: neither are
children changed by their parents, as adulterers by shameless women. Neither
if Iturius and Caluisius, having wasted their substance, bestow this their last
labor in undertaking this accusation: therefore am I to sustain the infamy
of parricide, or Caesar have scruple of conscience, that I would commit it: as
for Domitia I would thank her for the hate she bears me, if she would
likewise in good will and love toward my Nero, strive with me. Now by her
concubine Atimetus, and Paris the stage player she does as it were compose
fables for the stage. She was busy about her fish pooles of Baia, when by my
counsels, Neroes adoption; proconsularie authority; election to be Consul;
and other steps to mount to the Empire were procured. Or else let some one be
brought forth to make it appear, that I have practiced with the
citie-cohorts; corrupted the loyalty of the Provinces; or solicited bondmen,
or freedmen to rebellion. I might have lived if Britannicus had been
sovereign: but if Plautus or some other should get the rule of the
commonwealth, forsooth there should want accusers to lay to my charge, not
words sometimes unadvisedly escaped thorough feruencie of love; but such
crimes also from which I could not be acquitted, but as a mother by her son. The
assistance moved with these speeches and endeavoring to appease her anger; she
requires to speak with her son: before whom she spoke nothing in defense of
her innocence, as if she had distrusted; or of her benefits, as to upbraid
him: but obtained revenge of her accusers; and rewards for her friends. The
charge and office of provision of corn was given to Senius Rufus; the
commission of plays which Caesar was a preparing, to Aruntius Stella: Egypt
to C. Balbillus: Syria was appointed to P. Anteius, then abused with diverse
devises, and in the end detained in the city. But Silana was banished;
Caluisius also and Iturius: Atimetus was executed: Paris being in greater
credit (by reason of pleasures ministered to the Prince) then that he should be
put to death. Plautus was sent away for the time with silence. Pallas after
this and Burrhus were accused to have practiced to call Cornelius Sylla, for
noblenes of birth and affinity with Claudius, whose son in law he was by
marriage of Antonia, to the Empire. The author of that accusation was one
Paetus, a man infamous, by causing debtors to forfeit their goods: and then
manifestly convicted of vanity and falshoode. Neither was Pallas innocence so
grateful, as his pride insupportable: for when some of his freed men were
said to have been privy to the practice; he made answer that in his house he
appointed nothing to be done, but with a nod of his head or hand; or by
writing, if he had much to say, least if he should have spoken unto them, he
should seem to have made them his fellows. Burrhus although accused, yet gave
sentence among the judges. Paetus the accuser was banished, and the writings
burnt, by which he went about to renew the records of the treasury already
cancelled. In the end of the same year, the guard of the soldiers which was
wont to be at the plays, was taken away, for a greater show of liberty: and
because the soldier being absent from the disorder of the Theater, should be
less corrupt; and the people show by proof, whether they would use modesty
if the guarde were away. The prince hallowed and purged the city with
sacrifices, by advise of the southsaiers, because Jupiters and Mineruaes
temples were set on fire with lightning.

VI. Neroes disorders: the case of the franchised debated: an order for
certain magistrates.
Q. Volusius and P. Scipio being Consuls, there was peace abroad, and filthy
lasciuiousnes at home: during which, Nero gadded up and down the streets, to
infamous brothell houses, and by-corners, in slaves attire, to be unknown;
accompanied with such as snatched away wares from men's stales, wounded such as
met them, and with such small regard whom, that Nero himself has received
and carried away blows and marks on the face. And when it was known to be
Caesar which played those pranks, the disorder grew greater against both men
and women of account; and with like licentiousnes abusing Caesar's name, many
practiced the same insolences, gathered together in particular companies, and
so spending the night as it had been in taking a town, and captivity. One
Julius Montanus a Senator, who had not yet taken upon him the dignity, by
chance coping with the Prince in the dark, and rudely thrusting him back as
he offered him violence; then knowing him, and craving pardon, was enforced to
die, as though thereby he had reproched him of folly. Nero more wary and
fearful after that, went not without a rabble of soldiers and fencers; which
meddled not at the first, and whilst the prince made his party good: but after,
if he were ouermatched, by such as he abused, they laid hands immediately on
their weapons. He turned the disordered license at plays, and part-taking in
favor of stage players, almost to a mutiny, by giving impunitie and rewards,
himself privily or for the most part openly looking on; until the people
growing to sedition, and fearing greater stirs, no other remedy was found
then to expel the stage players out of Italy, and place a guard of soldiers
again on the theater. At the same time the deceit and ungrateful behauior of
freed men was debated in Senate; and instant suit made that the patrons might
have authority to revoke the freedom given to such as deserved it not: for
many there were of that opinion. But the Consuls not daring to determine the
matter; without the priuitie of the Prince; yet wrote the common consent unto
him: And that he should be the author of the decree, few being of a contrary
opinion, and some grudging that the irreuerence of their late bondmen, by
reason of liberty was grown to that, that they cared not whether they carried
themselves toward their patrons dutifully or not: nothing at all waying what
they said unto them: yea, bend their fists toward them; thrust and elbow such
as would have any law made to bridle them. For what other redress was there
granted unto patrons offended, but to banish his freed man above twenty miles
off, to the coast of Campania? all other actions were indifferent and equal to
both. Some weapon therefore should be given the patron, which the freed man
should not despise. Neither could it seem hard if the manumised should with
the same obedience keep their liberty, by which they got it. And such as were
openly convicted of crimes, were woorthily brought again to servitude; that
such might be brideled by fear, whom benefits could not change. Some spoke to
the contrary, saying: That, that fault of a few should be prejudicial but to
themselves; and not derogate from the privileges, common to them all; because
it was a body far spread abroad. From them were taken many Tribes and
Decuries, fit men for magistrates and priests, and city cohorts: and many
gentlemen and Senators could derive no beginning but from thence. If the freed
men should be severed from the rest, the number of the free borne would
appear very small. Not without cause our ancestors when they divided the
citizens into degrees and callings, left liberty in common. Yea they had
instituted two kinds of manumising their bondmen, because it might be in their
choice to repent or yield new favor. Those whom the patron did not manumise
Vindicta before the magistrate, remained still as it were in the bonds of
servitude. That every man should look into the merits of his slave; and
grant that slowly, which being once given could not be taken away. This
opinion carried it away. And Caesar wrote to the Senate that they should
privately examine the cause of the freed men, as often as they were accused by
their patrons: and derogate nothing from the whole body of them. Not long
after, Paris the late bondsman was taken from Domitia, Neroes aunte, under
color of civil law; not without a disgrace to the Prince: by whose
commandment judgment of free condition was given him. Nevertheless there
remained a certain show of a free commonwealth. For a contention being grown
between Vibullius the Praetor, and Antistius tribune of the people, for
releasing out of prison certain unruly favorers of the Stage-plaiers,
committed by the Praetor: the Lords of the Senate approved the Pretors fact,
and blamed Antistius boldness. Withal the Tribunes were forbidden to usurp
any thing belonging to the Pretors or Consuls authority; or call such before
them out of Italy, whose right was to be determined by law. L. Piso Consul
elect added further, that they should not exercise their authority in
punishing of any in their own houses: and that the Quaestors of the treasury
should not enter into record before four months were past, the mercements
adjudged by them: and that in the mean time it might be lawful to speak
against them; and the Consuls determine the matter. The authority of the
Aediles is also restrained, and order set down how much the Curules, and the
people might take to pawn, and how far they might punish. Thereupon
Heluidius Priscus, Tribune of the people, showed his private grudge against
Obultronius Sabinus Quaestor of the treasury, as though he had too severely
enforced the execution of open sales of goods against the poor. Then the
Prince transferred the records of public debts from the Quaestors to the
Prouosts of the city: albeit, the form of that office has been diversely
used, and often changed. For Augustus gave the Senate license to choose the
Prouostes; then canuasing of voices being suspected, they were drawn by lot
out of the number of the Pretors. Neither did that long continue, because the
lot fell often upon the vnmeetest. Then Claudius restored again the Quaestors to
the office, and bestowed extraordinary promotion upon them, least for fear of
offense they should be slack in their duty. But because there wanted
authority of age in many which were in that office, as being the first they
were possessed of; Nero chose such as had been Prouostes, and tried by long
experience. Vipsanius Lenas was condemned under the same Consuls, for behauing
himself too rauenously in the Province of Sardinia. Cestius Proculus was
acquitted of extorsion, his accusers letting fall the suit. Clodius Quirinalis,
Captain of the galli-slaues at Rauenna, accused for molesting Italy with riot
and cruelty, as the least of all nations, prevented his condemnation by
poisoning himself. Aminius Rebius a principal man for the skill of the laws
and of great wealth, escaped the griefs of sickely old age by letting
himself blood in the veins, although he was thought to be too cowardly to
kill himself; by reason he was given too effeminately to lusts. But L.
Volusius died with great fame, having lived ninety three years, very rich by
good means, and never once hurt by any of those unjust Emperors, under whom he
lived.

VII. What Annals ought to entreat of: plays forbidden.
NEro being the second time Consul, and L. Piso, few things happened worthy of
memory; unless some would think it well done to fill up volumes in praising
the foundations and timber employed by Caesar in the huge building of the
Amphitheater in Campus Martius, seeing it is meet for the dignity and honor of
the people of Rome to commit famous acts to their annals, and such as those
to the diurnall of the city. Capua and Nuceria both colonies, were reenforced
with a supply of old soldiers. There was bestowed a gift of Six shil. 3. d.
forty sesterces by powle to the people, and About 31250. pound.
four hundred thousand sesterces to the public treasury to maintain the
people faithful unto him. The tribute of the fifth, and of the twentieth for the
sale of slaves was released in show rather then in deed: for when the seller
was commanded to pay it, he enhansed the price still to the buiers loss.
Caesar commanded by an edict, that no magistrate, procurator of any province,
should set forth a show of fencers, or wild beasts, or any other pastime. For
heretofore the subjects were no less endomaged by such-liberalities, then by
taking their money from them, whilst they cloaked with favor gotten by such
spectacles, their faults committed by robbing the people. A decree of Senate
was made as well for revenge as security, that if any man had been slain by
his bondmen, those also who being manumised by testament, and continued in the
same house, should be punished as the other bondmen. L. Varius sometimes Consul
was restored to his dignity, removed before for covetous dealing and
extortion. And Pomponia Graecina a noble woman, and wife to Plautius, who
returned with a small triumph out of Britannia, and accused of strange
superstition, was remitted to the judgment of her husband; and he according to
the ancient custom, in the presence of her nearest kindred, heard her cause
of life and death, and pronounced her innocent. This Pomponia lived long, and
in continual sorrow: for after that Iulia, Drusus daughter was murdered by
Messallinaes treachery, she was not seen for forty years but in mourning
apparel, and very sad and doleful. Which she might lawfully do whilst Claudius
reigned, and afterward turned to her glory. Many citizens were accused that
year, of which number P Celer being one, at the information of the inhabitants
of Asia, because Caesar could not acquit him, he prolonged his cause till he
died of age. For Celer (as I have already said) having besturred himself in
the murdering of Silanus the Proconsull, cloaked all other villainies under the
greatness of that lewd action. The Cilicians accused Cossutianus Capito,
criminally noted and discredited with many vices, thinking he had had the same
privilege of using insolent behavior in the province, as he had done in the
city. But turmoiled and molested with an overthwart accusation, in the end
letting fall his defense, was condemned of extorsion. Great suings prevailed so
much for Eprius Marcellus, of whom the Lycians demanded restitution, that some
of the accusers were banished, as though they had endangered an innocent man.

VIII. A liberality of Nero toward certain decayed gentlemen. The war of
Armenia renewed. Tiridates departs the country.
WHen Nero was the third time Consul, Valerius Messalla entered the same
office, whose great grandfather Coruinus an orator, some old men remember to
have been companion in office with Augustus of famous memory, Neroes great
grandfathers father. But the honor of this noble family was bettered by giving
Messalla by year About 3906. pound 5. ^.
five hundred thousand sesterces to relieve his harmless poverty. To
Aurelius Cotta likewise, and Haterius Antoninus, the Prince granted that an
annual sum of money should be given, although they had wasted riotously the
wealth their ancestors had left them. In the beginning of that year, the war
which was drawn at length with soft and mild beginnings until then, between
the Parthians and the Romans for obtaining of Armenia, was now hotly pursued:
because Vologeses would neither suffer his brother Tiridates to be deprived of
the kingdom in which he had invested him, nor that he should enjoy it as a
gift from another Lord; and Corbulo thought it worthy of the greatness of the
people of Rome to recover that which by Lucullus and Pompey had been once
gotten. The Armenians being doubtful, and faithful to neither side, invited
both: yet by the site of their country and conformity of conditions, being
more near unto the Parthians, and intermingled with them by marriages, and not
knowing what liberty was, inclined rather to that servitude. But Corbulo had
more ado with the slothfulnes of the soldiers, then perfidiousnes of the
enemies: for the legions removed from Syria, by a long peace grown lazy and
idle, could hardly endure the labor and pains of the Roman discipline.
Certain it was there were old soldiers in that camp, which had never kept
watch nor ward; a rampire or trench they gazed at, as at a new and strange
devise: without head-peeces; without curasses; neat and fine; hunting after
gain; having spent all their service in towns. Whereupon the old and feeble
being dismissed, he desired a supply, which was had out of Galatia and
Cappadocia. And to them was added a legion out of Germany with wings of
horsemen, and all the army kept in camp; although the winter were so hard,
and the earth so covered with ice that they could not pitch their tents,
unless they had first dug the ground. Many of their limbs grew starcke
with extremity of cold; and many died in keeping the watch. And there was a
soldier noted carriyng a faggot, whose hands were so stiff frozen, that
sticking to his burden, they fell from him as though they had been cut from
his arms. Corbulo slightly apparailed, bare headed, was with them when they
marched; when they labored, praised the stout; comforted the feeble; and gave
example unto them all. Then because many refusing to endure the hardness of the
season, and such rigor of discipline, forsook him; he sought a redress by
severity: for he did not pardon the first and second fault as in other armies,
but he suffered death presently who forsook his ensign: which by experience
proved more profitable, then clemency. For fewer forsook that camp, then
where there was much mercy shown. In the mean season Corbulo having kept the
legions in camp until the spring, and disposed the aydcohorts in convenient
places, charged them not to give the onset. The charge of the garrisons he
committed to Pactius Ophitus, once Captain of the first ensign: who although
he wrote to Corbulo that the Barbarians were careless and disordered, and a
fit occasion offered of atchieuing some exploite; yet he was commanded to
keep within his garrison, and expect greater power. But breaking his
commandment when he saw a few troops of horsemen issue out of a castle hard
by, and unskillfully demand battle; he encountered the enemy, and went away
with the loss. And those which should have seconded them, terrified with that
discomfiture, fled as fast as they could every man to his hold; which to
Corbulo was an exceeding grief. Who rebuking Pactius and the Captains, and
the soldiers, commanded them all to pitch their tents out of the camp: and
there kept them in that disgrace, until they were delivered by the intercession
and suit of the whole army. But Tiridates besides his own followers, succored
by his brother Vologeses; not now by stelth, but with open war molesteth
Armenia, spoiling all such he thought faithful to us: and if any forces were
brought against him, he deluded them, by flying hither and thither, terrifiyng
more by fame then fight. Corbulo therefore seeking occasion to join battle,
but in vain; and constrained to make war now in one place, now in another, as
the enemy did; severed his forces, to the end that the Lieutenants and
Captains might invade diverse places at once. Withal, he advertised King
Antiochus to set on the government next adjoining to him. For Pharasmanes, his
son Rhadamistus being slain, as a traitor toward him, to testify his
loyalty toward us, showed more willingly his inueterate hatred against the
Armenians. Then the Isichians, a nation never before confederate with us, being
now brought to our side, invaded the hardest passages of Armenia; whereby all
Tiridates deseignments were crossed. He sent Ambassadors to expostulate in his
own, and the Parthians name, Why having of late given hostages, and renewed
amity, which opened the way to new benefits, he should be driven from the
ancient possession of Armenia? therefore Vologeses was not yet moved to war,
because he had rather debate the matter by reason, then by force. But if they
would persist in war, the Arsacides should neither want courage nor fortune,
often experimented to the loss of the Romans. Hereupon Corbulo knowing well
that Velogeses was troubled with the Hircanians rebellion, persuades Tiridates
to deal with Caesar by entreaty; that he might obtain a firm possession of
a kingdom without bloodshed; if leaving of a long and slow hope, he would
embrace that which was present and more sure. Then they resolved, because by
intercourse of messengers they profited nothing, for the full knitting up of
peace, to appoint time and place for a parlie. Tiridates said, that he would
come with a thousand horse for his guard: how many of whatsoever sort of
soldiers Corbulo should bring, he weighed it not; so as they came without
curasses and helmets, as a better show of peace. The barbarous treachery was
palpable to all men, much more to an old circumspect captain: therefore a small
number was limited on one part, and a greater permitted to the other, that the
treason might be the better effected: for to oppose against practiced horsemen
archers, unarmed men, the multitude would avail nothing. Yet Corbulo making as
though he had not perceived the treason, answered, that public affairs would
better be debated in the face of both the whole armies. And for the purpose
chose a place whereof the one part had hills of an easy ascent fit for ranks of
footmen; the other stretched out into a plain, convenient to display troops
of horsemen. And the day agreed on, Corbulo appeared first in this order: He
placed the cohorts of allies, and succors sent by Kings, in the wings: and in
the middle, the sixth legion; among which he had intermingled three thousand of
the third, sent for by night from other garrisons, with one ensign, as if all
were but one legion. Tiridates the day being well spent, showed himself
aloof, where he might better be seen then heard: so the Roman captain
without parlie, commanded his soldiers to depart every man to his own camp.
The King either suspecting fraud, because our men went at once to diverse
places, or to intercept our provision of victuals, coming from the sea of
Pontus, and the town Trapezunt, makes away with all speed. But he could not
hinder the coming of the victuals, because it was brought through mountains
possessed by our own garrisons; and Corbulo because the war should draw to
an end, and the Armenians constrained to defend their own, goes about to raze
their Castles.

IX. Corbulo having taken the Castles, destroys Artaxata the chief town of
the country.
COrbulo chose to himself the strongest place of the country called Volandum
to assault; the lesser he commits to Cornelius Flaccus Lieutenant, and
Isteus Capito camp-maister. Then surueying his forces, and seeing all things in
a readiness for the assault, incourageth his soldiers to vnnestle the vagabond
enemy, neither ready for peace nor war; acknowledging by his fleeing away
his perfidiousnes and cowardice; and so win at once both glory and wealth.
After this, having divided his army into four parts, he lead some close and
thick ranked together, for a target fence to undermine and beat down the
rampire: others to scale the walls: others to let flee fire and darts out of
engines of war: the sling-casters and stone-throwers had a place appointed
them, from whence they might a far off throw pellets of iron and stone, that
the besieged might have no refuge or comfort of one another, all places being
full of like fear. The courage of the assailants was so great, that within the
third part of the day the walls were naked of defendants; the gates broken
down; the fortress scaled; and all of lawful years put to the sword; no one
soldier lost on our side, and very few hurt: the weak and unable people were
sold in a portsale and made slaves; the rest of the booty fell to the
Conquerours share. The Lieutenant and camp-master had the like fortune; three
castles taken in one day; the rest for fear and by consent of the inhabitants
yielded: which encouraged the Romans to set on Artaxata the chief town of the
country. Yet the legions were not brought the next way, because that passing
the river Araxis which washes the walls, by the bridge they should have come
under the danger of blows; but went over a far off at broad foordes. But
Tiridates assailed with sear and shame, least if he should suffer the
besieging, he might seem not to be able to succor it; if hinder it encomber
himself and his horsemen in dangerous and difficult places, resouled in the
end to show his army in battle array, and a day appointed, give the onset; or
making as though he would flee, dress an ambush. Whereupon on a sudden he
enuironeth the Romans; our Captain not ignorant thereof, who had marshalled
his army in such array, that it might both march on, and fight. On the right
side the third legion; on the left the sixth marched; in the middle a company
chosen out of the tenth; the carriages between the ranks, and a thousand
horsemen in the rereward, with commandment that they should resist and make
head against the enemy if they passed in; but if they sled, not to follow. In
the wings went the footmen archers with the residue of the horsemen; the left
wing stretched somewhat longer to the bottom of the hills; that if the enemy
should enter on them, he should have been received both in the front and
middle. Tiridates on the contrary side, came about the Romans freely; yet not
within a darts cast; now threatening; now making as though he were afraid; and
so retiring, to see whether we would open or break our ranks to follow, and
so entrap us being scattered. But not seeing any thing disordered, nor any
rank broken by rashness; and only one under Captain of horsemen ventring
boldlier then the rest to have been slain with an arrow, and the rest by his
example to obey, the night being almost come, he departed. Corbulo having
pitched his camp in the same place, considered with himself, whether he
should go by night to Artaxata, and besiege it with light and vncumbered
legions, supposing that Tiridates had retired thither. Then the scouts having
brought intelligence that the King had taken a longer journey, doubtful
whether to the Medes or Persians, he stayed until it was day: sending before a
company lightly armed, to enuiron the walls, and begin the assault a far
off. But the townsmen opening the gates of their own accord, yielded
themselves and all they had to the Romans; whereby their lives were saved. But
Artaxata was burnt and raced to the ground, because it could not be kept
without a strong garrison, by reason of the compass of the walls; and our
forces were not so great that we could leave there a sufficient garrison, and
withal, keep the field: or if she should be left standing and unguarded, there
would be neither profit nor glory that she had been taken. There is a miracle
reported, as it were by some divine power happened: for all things out of the
houses were lightened by the sun; but that which was environed with the walls,
was on such a sudden covered with a dark cloud and separated with lightning,
that it seemed the will of the gods was, it should be destroyed. Hereupon Nero
was saluted Emperor, and processions made by decree of Senate; and images and
triumphall arches set up, and the Consulship continued on him: and ordained
that the day the victory was gained, the day of the news, the day wherein they
talked of it in Senate should be kept holy, and other such like; so far beyond
measure, that C. Cassius co^senting unto the rest of the honors given him,
touching the processions; said, that if they would give the gods thanks for so
many favors of fortune, all the year would not be enough to make them
processions. And therefore they should distinguish working days from holy
days, in such sort that the gods might be honored, and temporal business not
hindered.

X. Suilius is banished. Octauius tribune of the people kills Pontia, with
whom he was in love.
ABout that time, P. Suilius, a man crossed with many adversities, and justly
incurred the hatred of many, was called in question, and condemned; not without
some touch of Senecaes credit. This Suilius in Claudius reign was both cruel
and corrupt, and by alteration of times brought low, though not so much as his
enemies desired; and who rather would seem culpable, then as a suppliant crave
pardon. For it was thought that the penalty of the law Cincia, against such as
pleaded causes for money was set on foot again, only to subvert and overthrow
him. Yet Suilius never forbear complaints and hard speeches, besides his
natural fiercenes, more free by reason of his old age: laying in Senecaes dish
that he was an enemy to Claudius friends, under whom he had sustained a most
just banishment: withal, that with his idle and dead studies, applying
himself to the unskillfulness of raw youth, he envied such as used a lively and
vncorrupt eloquence in defending the citizens. He had been Questor to
Germanicus; and Seneca, an adulterer of his house. Was it to be judged a
greeuouser offense to receive a suitors reward freely offered for a man's honest
travel, then to defile the beds of Princes wives? with what wisdom, with
what precepts of Philosophers within four years friendship with the King, had
he gotten About 2343750. lib.
three thousand times three hundred thousand sesterces? At Rome he coozened men
of their legacies, and such as died without children, as if he had laid a snare
to entrap them. Italy and the provinces were drawn dry by his excessive
usury. As for himself, he had but small store of wealth gotten by his labor
and sweat. He would suffer the accusation, peril, and what else might fall,
rather then subject his old credit and estimation to a new vpstart. Neither
wanted there such as reported these or worser speeches to Seneca again: and
other informers were found, which accused Suilius that he had pouled and pilled
the allies when he was governor of Asia, and purloined the common treasure.
Then because he had obtained a years space for to make inquiry of these
matters; it seemed to be the shorter course, to begin with crimes committed
near about the city, because of such, witnesses were at hand. They objected
against him, that the bitterness of his accusation drove Q. Pomponius to a
necessity of civil war: that he had brought Iulia the daughter of Drusus, and
Sabina Poppaea to destruction; and falsely accused Valerius Asiaticus, L.
Saturninus, and Cornelius Lupus: yea a great company of gentlemen of Rome had
been condemned by his means: in fine, all Claudius cruelty was imputed to
Suilius. He for his defense answered, that he had undertook none of those
things of his own will, but to obey the Prince, until Caesar caused him to
hold his tongue, saying, that he was assured by his fathers memorial, that he
never enforced any man to accuse another: then he pretended Messallinaes
commandment, and his defense began to fail him. Why was there no other
chosen to speak for that cruel unchaste dame? the instruments of cruel
actions are to be punished, when as having received the reward of their
lewdnes, yet go about to lay it to others charge. Therefore part of his goods
being taken from him (for part was left his son and his niece, and that also
was excepted which was given them by their mothers or grandfathers testament)
he was banished into the Islands of Baleares, never losing courage either in the
time of his danger, or after condemnation. And it is reported that he suffered
that separation from company, living both abundantly and delicately. The
accusers had overthrown his son Nerulinus, for the envy they bare the
father, and his own extortions, if the Prince had not opposed himself, as
though the revenge had been sufficient. About the same time Octauius Sagitta,
Tribune of the people, mad in love with Pontia a married wise, by great gifts
brought her unlawful love, and use of her body; then to forsake her husband,
promising her marriage, and inducing her to the liking of him. But when this
woman was free from her husband, she began to find delays, shifting it off
that her father was unwilling, and in the end finding a hope of a richer
husband, went from her promise. Octauius on the contrary side sometimes
complained, sometimes threatened, protesting his credit was lost, and his money
consumed; finally put his life which only remained in her hands. But being
rejected, craves one nights pleasure for his satisfaction, then promised he
would desist. The night was appointed, and Pontia gave charge of watching the
chamber to a maid which was privy to their dealings. He with one freed man
conueyeth in a weapon under his garment, Then as the manner of lovers is,
sometimes angry, sometimes chiding, sometimes entreating, sometimes
vpbraiding, and spending some part of the night in voluptuous pleasures, at
last kindled with grief and complaints, with his sword ran through this woman,
which feared no such thing, and wounded the maid which ran in, and so rusheth
out of the chamber. The next day the murder was known, and the murderer not
doubted of, being known manifestly that they had been together. But a freed
man protested it was his doing, in revenge of the injuries done to his patron,
and moved some with the strangenes of that example to believe him, until the
maid, recovered of her wound, discovered the truth. Then Octauius accused of
the murder before the Consuls by Pontias father, at the end of his Tribuneship
was condemned by the Senate, according to the law Cornelia against murderers.

XI. Nero takes away Sabina Poppaea from her husband.
THe same year, an intemperate life, no less infamous then the former; was a
beginning of greater mischiefs in the common wealth. There was in the city
one Sabina Poppaea, daughter of T. Ollius: but she had taken the name of
Sabinus Poppaeus, her grandfather by the mothers side; a man of worthy
memory, honored with the Consularie dignity, and ornaments of triumph: for
Seianus friendship did overthrow Ollius before he came to any dignities. This
woman was graced with all things saving an honest mind: for her mother
surpassing other women of her time in beauty, gave her both glory and
beauty: wealth she had sufficient to maintain her nobility: her speech
affable and gracious, nor no gross wit; but knowing well how to pretend
modesty, and live lasciously: she came little abroad, and then part of her
face covered with a veil; either not to fill the eye of the beholder, or
because it beco^med her best: of her credit regard she had never; making no
difference between her husbands and adulterers: neither subject to her own
will, nor another; but where profit was offered, thither she carried her
affection. This woman then being wife to Rufus Crispinus, a gentleman of Rome,
by whom she had a son; Otho seduced through his youth and riot; and because
he was most inward in friendship with Nero: It was not long but they joined
marriage to adultery. Otho either because he was uncircumspect in love, or
because he would inflame the princes lust; praised his wives beauty and comely
feature in his presence; that both enjoying one woman, his credit and
authority might by that bond grow greater. He has bin often heard to say, as
he has risen from banqueting with Caesar, that he would go to her in whom
was all beauty and nobility; and to her who kindling all men's desire, was
able to make them most happy. Through these and the like prouocations, there
was no long delaie made. Nero then finding access unto her, Poppaea at the
first by allurements and cunning, began to inueigle him; saying, that she was
not able to withstand his love, and that she was overcome with his beauty.
Then perceiving the princes lust to be grown hot; she began to grow proud; and
if she entertained him above a night or two, it was all she could affoorde
him; saying, she was a married wife, and that she could not abandon her husband
as being bound unto Otho, for his manner of carriage and behavior, which few
came near unto: that he was in courage and demeanor magnificent; and in all
respects worthy of highest fortune. As for Nero using a bond-slaue for his
concubine, and tied to Acts familiarity, he had learned nothing of that
servile company, but baseness and niggardice. Otho after this was barred of the
accustomed familiarity with the Prince; then of his company and retinue: and
last of all, least he should be his concurrent in the city, he made him
governor of the province of Portingall. Where he lived until the civil wars,
not as before disorderly; but honestly and incorruptly, as one loosly given
when he had little to do; but in office and rule more stayed and temperate. All
this while Nero sought to cloak his vitiousnes and licentious life. Afterward
he began to be jealous of Cornelius Syllaes dull and heavy disposition,
interpreting it contrary to that which it was, deeming him a crafty and
subtle dessembler. Which jealousy Graptus a freed man of Caesar's by age, and
experience and time, until then well practiced in Princes houses, augmented
with this lie. The Miluian bridge in those days was notorious for a haunt, of
dissolute and unruly persons in the night. Whither Nero resorted also to enjoy
his licentious pleasures more freely, being out of the town: and returning
back by the Flaminian way; Graptus put him in the head that there had bin wait
laid for him, which he escaped by destiny, because he went another way to
Sallustius gardens, and falsely accused Sylla to be the author thereof: Because
that some of the Princes seruitors returning that way by chance, were, by some
licentious behavior of youth, which in that place was very common, put in
greater fright than danger. Yet there was no one of Syllaes seruitours or
vassals known. His faint heart and not daring any enterprise being well known
to be far from any such fact: yet nevertheless as though he had been
convicted, he was commanded to depart his country, and live within the walls
of Marsiles. Under the same Consuls the Embasies of the Puteolanians were
heard, which the Senators on one side, and the communaltie on the other, sent
to the Senate: the Senators charging the communaltie with insolency; and the
people charging the magistrates and chief gentlemen with couetuousnes. And
when the sedition was already grown to throwing of stones, and threatening to
fire one another, and like to draw on murder and war, C. Cassius was chosen to
order the matter; but knowing that they could not endure his severity at his
request, that care was committed to the brothers the Scribonians, with a band
of the Emperors guarde: through the terror of which, and punishment of a
few, the townsmen were set at quietness again. I would not speak of the very
common decree of Senate, by which the city of Syracusa was licensed to exceed
the number prefixed in the show of Fencers: If Paetus Thrasea had not spoken
against it and given matter unto backbiters to reprehend his judgment: For
said they, if he believed that the commonwealth wanted the liberty of
Senators, why did he meddle in such trifles? He should rather have persuaded or
dissuaded matters of war or peace; of tributes, of laws, and other things
wherein consisted the estate of Rome. It was lawful for the Lords of the
Senate as often as they thought convenient to give their opinion, to propounde
what they listed, and ask for a consultation upon it. Was it only worthy of
correcting, that at Syracusa the plays should not be so long? Be all other
things in the Empire, as well as if, not Nero, but Thrasea had the government
thereof? The which if they were let pass with great dissimulation; how much
more should they forbear vain trifles? Thrasea on the contrary, his friends
demanding him a reason why he contradicted the decree, made answer; that he
did it not as being ignorant of the present estate of things; but for the
greater honor of the Lords of the Senate: and show manifestly that they would
not dissemble in important affairs, which would look into such small matters.

XII. Matters of policy redressed. The Senators withstand Nero touching
subsidies.
THe same year, through the often and importunate suit of the people, blaming
the covetousness of the farmers of the common rents; Nero doubted whether it
were best to command that there should no more subsidies and tributes be
levied; and give so fair a gift to the world. But this sudden pang, having
first commended the bounteousnes of his mind; the LL. of the Senate stayed,
affirming it to be the dissolution of the Empire, if the revenues by which it
was sustained should be diminished: for if custom were taken away, it would
follow that the abolishing of tributes would be demanded. Many societies of
tributes and tallages were established by the Consuls and Tribunes of the
people, even when the communaltie had greatest liberty. Things afterward were
so proportioned, that the receipts and revenues should be answerable to the
layings out. Indeed the covetousness of the farmers was to be moderated; least
things tolerated so many years without complaint, should turn to further
mischief and hatred, by their strange greedines. The prince therefore by edict
commanded, that the taxation of every custom which hitherto has bin
concealed, should now be published: and that the farmers should not after the
year was expired demand any thing, let slip, or forgotten, during that time.
That in Rome the Praetor; in the provinces, those which supplied the places of
the pretors and Consuls, should extraordinarily determine against the farmers
of common rents. That soldiers should keep their immunitie: those things
excepted wherein they trafficked: and many other just things, which observed a
short time, afterward came to nothing. Nevertheless the abolishing of one in
forty, and one in fifty continues, and what other names the farmers had
invented for their unlawful exactions. The carriage of corn to parts beyond
the seas was moderated. And ordained that merchants ships should not be valued
in the general estimate of their goods, nor tribute paid for them. Caesar
discharged Sulpitius Camerinus, and Pomponius Siluanus, who had been
Proconsuls in Affrike; and accused by the province; obiecting against
Camerinus, rather cruel dealing against a few private men, then extortion in
general. A great number of accusers came about Siluanus, and required time to
produce witnesses: but the defendant desired his defenses might presently be
heard: which being rich, childlesse, and old, he obtained; and ouerliued those
by whose suite he had escaped. The estate of Germany was quiet until then,
through the industry of the captains, who seeing the honor of triumph common,
hoped for greater glory if they could continue peace. Paullinus Pompeius, and
L. Vetus had charge of the army at that time: yet least they should keep the
soldier in idleness, Paullinus finished a bank begun threescore and three
years before by Drusus, to keep in the river of Rhene. Vetus went about to
join Mosella and Araris by a ditch cast between them, that the armies
conveyed by sea, then by Rhodanus and Araris by that ditch, anon after by Mosa
into Rhene, in the end should fall into the Ocean: that all difficulties of the
passages taken away, the west and north seas might be nauigable from the one to
the other. Aelius Gracilis Lieutenant of Belgia envied the work, dehorting
Vetus, least he should bring the legions into another province, and seek to
win the hearts of the Gallois, affirming it to be dangerous to the Emperor: a
pretext which often hinders honest endeavors. Through the continual rest of
the armies a rumor was spread, that the Lieutenants were forbidden to lead them
against the enemy. Whereupon the Frisians placed their youth in the woods and
marshes; sent their feeble old men to the banks of Rhene, planting them in
void grounds appointed out for the use of soldiers; Verritus and Malorigis
being the authors thereof, who then governed the country which the Germains
were Lords of. Now they had built houses, sowed the ground, and tilled it, as
though it had been their native country: when Dubious Auitus having received
the province of Paullinus, threatening to send the Roman forces, unless the
Frisians would return to their old homes, or obtain a new place of habitation
of Caesar; enforced Varritus and Malorigis to fall to entreaty. And taking
their journey to Rome whilst they attended for Nero, busied in other matters,
among other things wont to be shown to barbarous people, they went to
Pompeius Theater to behold the multitude of people. There at their leisure (for
being unskillful in those plays, took no great delight in them) whilst they
inquired of many things touching the assembly, skaffolds, differences of
degrees, which were gentlemen, where the Senators sat, they perceived some in
a strange attire in the Senators rooms: and asking who they were, when they
understood that that honor was done to the Ambassadors of those countries
which excelled in virtue, and friendship with the Romans; they cried that There
were none in the world more valiant and faithful than the Germans; and so went
and sat among the Lords of the Senate, which was courteously taken of the
beholders, as a forwardnes of their old good nature, and a commendable
emulation of virtue. Nero gave them both the privileges of a citizen of Rome,
and commanded the Frisians to depart the country they had possessed: who
refusing to obeie, a troop of aid horsemen sent on the sudden forced them to
it, and those taken and slain which most obstinately resisted. The Ansibaria^s
entered the same territories, a stronger nation then the other: not only by
their own strength, but by the pity their neighbors take on them; because
that being driven out by the Chauci, and wanting dwelling places, they desired
they might have it as a sure place of exile. They had for their conductor a man
of great reputation in that country, and unto us likewise trusty, called
Boiocalus: who declared, how by the commandment of Arminius he had been
taken prisoner, when the Cheruscirebelled: then how he had served the Romans
fifty years under Tiberius and Germanicus. He said further, He would put his
nation under our dominion. What need was there of such spacious waste grounds,
to put at sometimes only the soldiers herds and cattle to feed? That they
might reserve those grounds they had received for their stocks (albeit men died
with famine) so as they desired not rather a wilderness than an habitation of
people their confederates. In times past those fields belonged to the
Chamauorians; then to the Tubantians; and in the end to the Vsipians. As the
heaven was given the gods, so the earth to makind; and that which was not
possessed, was common. Then beholding the sun, and calling upon the rest of
the stars, he asked as it were in their presence, whether they would see the
land naked? That they would rather ouerwhelme the takers away of the earth with
the sea. Auitus moved with these speeches; answered that the commandment of
their betters was to be obeyed. It was the will of the gods whom they called
upon, that the arbitrament should belong to the Romans, what they should give,
and what take away; neither would they suffer any judges but themselves. These
things he answered the Ansibarians in public, to Boiocalus he would give
grounds in memory of his friendship. Which he as if it had been a reward of
treason contemning added: We may want land to live in; but to die in we cannot:
and so they parted both discontented. They called the Bructeri, and Tencteri,
and other nations further off, their confederates to join in war with them.
Auitus having written to Curtilius Mancia Lieutenant of the upper army, that
he should pass over Rhene, and show the forces behind them; conducted the
legions himself into the Tencterans country, threatening their destruction
unless they would break with the Ansibarians. These therefore desisting, the
Bructeri daunted with the like fear, and the rest fleeing from others perils,
the Ansibarian nation alone retired back to the Vsipians and Tubantians: from
whose territories being expulsed, as they went to the Catti, then to the
Cherusci, by long wandering, strangers, poor, enemies, in a strange country,
that youth that was left was slain: those that for age were unfit for war,
divided for a pray. The same summer there was a great battle fought between
the Hermunduri, and Catti, each side striving by force to be master of a river
which yielded abundance of salt, sited in the confines of both their
countries. And besides a desire of ending all strifes by war, they had a
religion rooted in them, that those places are above others near heaven; and
the prayers of mortal men no where sooner heard, then from thence. For they
were of opinion, that by the goodness of the gods in that river, and in those
woods came increase of salt, not as in other countries, of the wooes of the
sea, when the water is dried up; but by that water cast upon a pile of wood set
on fire, by the virtue of two contrary elements, fire and water, which
becomes thick and congealed. The war was prosperous on the Hermundurians
side, but the utter ruin of the Catteans, because of a vow they made, that if
they were conquerors, they would dedicate the contrary army to Mars and
Mercury, protesting, horses, men, all things overcome, should be put to the
sword; and truly those deadly threats were turned against themselves. But the
city of the Iuhonians confederate with us, was afflicted with a sudden
disaster: for fires issuing out of the earth, burned towns, fields, villages
every where, and spread even unto the walls of a Colonie newly built; and
could not be extinguished, neither by rain, nor river water, nor any other
liquor that could be employed, until for want of remedy, and anger of such a
destruction, certain peasants cast stones a far off into it; then the flames
somewhat slakning, drawing near, they put it out with blows of clubs, and
other like, as if it had been a wild beast. Last of all, they threw in clothes
from their backs, which the more worn and fouler, the better they quenched the
fires. The same year, the Fig tree called Ruminalis, in the place of
assemblies, which above eight hundred and forty years before had covered
Remus and Romulus infancy, having his boughs dead, and the body beginning to
wither, was held as a prodigious sign, until it began to flourish again, and
thrust out new shootes.

THE FOUR TEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
I. Nero abused by Poppaea, determines to put to death Agrippina his mother.
Agrippinaes unchaste life to maintain her greatness.
CVipsanius and Fonteius being Consuls, Nero deferred no longer his long before
intended wickedness; his boldness by long rule being increased, and his lust to
Poppaea more and more enflamed: who casting off all hope of marrying Nero, or
seeing a divorce between him and Octauia whilst Agrippina lived, sometimes
tauntingly, and sometimes merrily, began to find her self grieved with the
Prince, and calling him a ward, and subject unto others controulement, said he
was so far from the government of the Empire, that he wanted his own liberty.
For why was the marrying of her delayed? forsooth her beauty did not please
his eye, nor the noblenes of her grandfathers, who had so often triumphed? Or
did he misdoubt her childbearing and true affection? or least being his wife,
she should discover the injuries done to the Senate, and the anger of the people
against the pride and covetousness of his mother. But if Agrippina could endure
no daughter in law but such as her son can worst away withal, let her be
restored again to Otho her husband. She was content to go any whither, where
she should rather hear of the contumelies done to the Prince, then see them,
and take part of his dangers. These and the like pearcing speeches with tears
and cunning by the adulteress uttered, no man hindered: all men desiring that
the mothers authority were taken lower; and no man believing that the sons
hate would extend to her death. Cluuius does report that Agrippina through a
burning desire of continuing her authority and greatness grew to that
shamelesnes, that in the midst of the day, when Nero was well tippled and full
of good cheer, she offered herself to him drunk as he was, trimly decked,
and ready to commit incest: and the standers by noted her lascivious kisses,
and other allurements, messengers of her unchaste meaning: And how Seneca having
recourse to another woman for a remedy against these intisments, sent Acts a
freed woman privily to him; who careful as well of her own danger as Neroes
infamy, gave aduertisment, that the incest was commonly spoken of, by reason
his mother bragged thereof; and that the soldiers would not endure the
government of so profane a Prince. Fabius Rusticus reported that not Agrippina,
but Nero lusted after that: but was discouraged by the cunning of the same
freed woman. But what Cluuius had reported, is confirmed by other authors: and
the fame inclines that way; either because Agrippina had conceived indeed so
heinous a fact in her mind, or that an intention of strange lust seemed more
credible in her, who in her yongyeeres blinded with hope of rule, forfeited her
honesty with Lepidus; and with the like lust abandoned her body even to
Pallas will, as one hardened and shameless in all loosenes of life, by marrying
her own uncle. Therefore Nero eschued her secret company. And when she went
to her gardens, or to Tusculanum, or Antiates, he praised her that she drove
away idleness. At last, wheresoever she bestowed her self, thinking her
troublesome to him, determined to make her away, whether by poison or by the
sword, or any other violence, that only was his doubt; and first he resolved to
do it by poison. But if it should be given her at his table, it could not be
attributed to chance, Britannicus already dying the same death: and to sound
the minds of her servants, seemed dangerous; and being a woman long practiced
in wickedness, was always armed against the like; and by taking counterpoisons
before hand, it was to be feared it would take no effect. To kill her with the
sword, there was no invention how to conceal the murder; and Nero feared least
any chosen to so dangerous attempt, should refuse to obey.

II. Anicetus works a means how to make away Agrippina Neroes mother.
ANicetus a freed man, captain of the navy at Misenum, one which had brought
up Nero in his childhood, hating, and hated of Agrippina, found out an
invention for the purpose: which was, that there might a gallie be made loose
by art in the bottom, that should let her fall into the sea when she
suspected least. There is nothing more subject to chance then the sea, and if
she should perish by shipwreck, who is so unreasonable as to ascribe that to
any ungracious invention, which was the fault of the winds and waves? And to
color the matter withal, the Prince should build a temple in honor of the
dead, erect altars, and institute other ceremonies, to show a love and
reverence toward her. This subtle invention pleased the Princes humor, and
fell out at a fit time, because Nero then celebrated the feast of Minerua five
days together at Baias. Thither by fair words he brought his mother;
affirming, that the displeasure of parents was to be borne with, and means to
be sought to pacify their anger: which he did to give out a reconciliation
between them, and so receive Agrippina (as women by kind are of easy
belief) willing enough to see the sport. Then going to meet her on the shore
of Antium, took her by the hand and embraced her, and lead her to Baulos,
which was a country house betwixt the promontorie of Misenum and the Baian
lake, hard by the sea side, where a gallie trimmer than the rest was ready
prepared, as a thing among others to honor his mother: for she had been
accustomed to the gallie, and to be carried by force of rowers. After that, she
was invited to a banquet, because the night might the better cloak the device.
But sure it was some one or other had bewraied the plot, and Agrippina
understanding the practice, and doubtful whether she should believe it, caused
herself to be carried to Baias in a bearing-chaire: there Neroes caresses
lessened her fear, being courteously entertained, and placed above him;
entertayning her with much communication; sometimes with a youthful
familiarity, again as it were recalling himself, and interlacing it with
serious talk, made the banquet hold a long time: and his eyes fixed on her as
she departed, embraced her more straightly then he was accustomed; either
because he would omit no complement of dissimulation; or else because the last
sight of his mother even ready to perish, did mollify his heart though fell
and cruel. A bright starlight night and quiet with a calm sea, as it were to
manifest the wicked practice, the gods themselves did yield. The gallie not
far gone, and Agrippina having only two of her own persons with her, the
one Crepereius Gallus, which stood not far from the stern, and Aceronia lying
at Agrippinaes feet, with great joy discoursed of her sons repentance, and
the favor she had recovered. But the watch-woord being given the covering of
the place heavily laden with lead, fell down upon Crepereius and pressed him to
death immediately. Agrippina and Aceronia, the uppermost bearing of the
covering, by fortune being stronger then the rest though it shrunk with the
weight, were saved, and the vessel not loosed asunder: all being amazed, and
some which were ignorant of the practice, hindered others which were privy to
it. Then the rowers thought best to way the gallie on one side, and so to
sincke her. Yet they could not agree upon so sudden an advise; but some swaying
to the contrary way, caused the vessel not to sink on the sudden, but by
little and little. But Aceronia unadvisedly crying that she was Agrippina, and
that they should help the Princes mother, with poles and oars, and such
implements in the gallie as came first to hand, was slain. Agrippina not
speaking a word, therefore not known, received only one wound in the
shoulder: then swimming toward the bank, was succored by small barks, and
carried by the lake Lucrinus to her own house. There casting in her mind how
she had been sent for by craft and false letters, entertained with especial
honor: how the vessel neither tossed by winds, nor carried upon rocks, the
upper part fell as it had been a land-frame: noting Accroniaes death, and
beholding her own wound, thought it the only remedy against the treachery, to
make as though she perceived it not. And thereupon sent Agerinus a freed man to
tell her son, how by the goodness of the gods and his good fortune, she had
escaped a great danger: and prayed him that although he were affrighted with
his mothers danger; yet that he would forbear a time from visiting her,
because that for the present she had need of rest. And in the mean while
making show of security, heals her wound, and chearisheth her body. And
commanded Aceroniaes testament to be sought for, and her goods to be sealed
up, which was the only thing wherein she showed no dissimulation. But whilst
Nero expected messengers to certify him that his plot had taken effect;
tidings came that she had escaped lightly wounded, but passed through great
danger, the author thereof not once doubted. Nero stricken dead with fear, and
crying she would revenge out of hand, either by arming her slaves, or sturring
up the soldiers, or run to the Lords of the Senate, or people, there complain
of the shipwreck, her wound, and the murder of her friends; knew no shift,
unless Burrhus and Seneca would bestur themselves, whom immediately he sent for,
doubtful whether they had understood the matter before or not. They stood
mute a long time, fearing least their persuasions should take no effect; in the
end concluded, that unless Agrippina were prevented, Nero should perish. Then
Seneca hitherto forwarder of the two, looked upon Burrhus, as though he should
have asked, whether the soldier should be commanded to execute the murder?
but he answered, that the guard being bound to all Caesar's house, and so
mindful of Germanicus, would not undertake so cruel an enterprise against his
progeny, and that Anicetus should accomplish his promise. He nothing at all
staggering, demands the whole charge of the execution. At which speech, Nero
professed openly, that that day the Empire was bestowed upon him, and that the
author of so great a gift was his freed man; and therefore that he should make
speed, and take with him such as were readiest to fulfill his commandment.
He hearing that Agerinus, Agrippinaes messenger was come, makes a color of
his enterprise in this sort: Whilst Agerinus delivered his message, Anicetus
let fall a sword between his legs, and as it were taking him in the manner, as
though he had come to kill the Prince, commands him to be cast in prison,
that he might make the world believe that the mother had pretended her sons
death, and killed her self, for shame that the plot was discovered. In the
mean season, Agrippinaes danger being spread abroad, as though it had happened
by chance, every man as he understood it, ran to the sea shore; some
clammered up the sea dammes, some gate into the next boats, some waded as
far as they could into the sea, some stretched out their hands to her. The
coast was filled with complaints, vows, and cries, of such as either asked
diverse questions, or answered doubtfully. And a great multitude flocked thither
with torches, who understanding that she was escaped, set themselves in a
readiness, as it were to have welcomed her, until they were dispersed by the
sight of a threatening armed company of soldiers. Anicetus besetteth her house
with a guard, and having broken the gate, lays hand on all the servants he
meets, until he came to the chamber doors, where there stood but a few, the
residue terrified with those which burst in. There was but little light in the
chamber, and one maid only, Agrippina more and more perplexed that she heard
not from her son, no nor of Agerinus. The face of the shore was now almost
quite changed, every man gone, and on the sudden a great noise, and tokens of
extreme danger. Then that one maid going away, speaking these words, Thou
do also for sake me, she espieth Anicetus, accompanied with Herculeus
captain of the gallie, and Oloaritus a Centurion of sea soldiers, unto whom
she said, that if he came to visit her, he should go and say that she was well
recovered; if to execute any villainy she suspected her son no way, and that
the parricide was not by him commanded. The murderers came about her bed, and
the captain of the galley first stroke her on the head with a cudgel. For to
the Centurion drawing his weapon to kill her, thrusting out her belly she
cried; strike my belly, and so having received many wounds, she was slain.
Thus many report with one consent. Whether that Nero beheld his mother when she
was dead, and praised the feature of her body, some there are which affirm,
some which deny. She was burnt the same night in a banketting bed with base
funerals; and whilst Nero reigned, never buried. Not long after by the care of
her friends, she had a tomb of small expenses near the Misenian way, and
Caesar the Dictators house, which from a high place looked upon a gulphe of the
sea underneath. When the funeral fire was kindled, Mnester her freed man
thrust himself thorough; but whether for love of Agrippina, or fear of death,
doubtful. That this should be her end Agrippina many years before did
believe, but contemned it. For consulting of Neroes fortune, the Chaldaeans
told her that he should be Emperor, and kill his mother: and she answered,
let him kill her, so as he be Emperor.

III. Neroes excuses in Senate for murdering his mother: the flattery of the
people.
But after this unnatural fact was committed, Caesar began to weigh how
heinous it was: and the rest of the night, now in dumme silence, often rising
up as affrighted, and out of his wits, looked for day as if it had been a
messenger of death. But at Burrhus persuasion the first flattery of the
Centurions and Tribunes did animate him to hope: who taking him by the hand,
rejoiced that he had escaped an unlooked for danger, and his mother wicked
practices. Then his friends frequented the Temples, and the example begun the
free towns adioining to Campania, witnessed their joy with sacrifices and
Ambassadors. He counterfeiting the contrary, sad and as it were an enemy to
his life, wept and bewailed the death of his mother. Yet because the face of
places is not changed like unto the countenances of men, the grievous sight of
that sea and shore coming often to his remembrance (and some there were which
believed that there was heard a sound of a trumpet in those high hills
adioining, and lamentations at his mothers tomb) he went to Naples and sent
letters to the Senate, with contents as follows. That Agerinus one of
Agrippinaes dearest freed men, was found with a sword to kill him, and that she
with the same remorse of conscience, had suffered the punishment, with which
she had prepared her lewd enterprise against him. He added far fet crimes, as
that she would have been equal with him in the Empire, and that his guarde
should have sworn allegiance to her being but a woman, hoping to have done the
same dishonor to the Senate and people. And that perceiving these devises to
want effect, offended with the soldiers, the Senators, and the people; she
hindered a gift which should have been given the people, and sought the ruin
of many noble men. How greatly labored he, that she should not rush into the
Senate, and give fortaine nations their answers? And by a by-glancing at
Claudius reign, cast upon his mother all the lewd actions of his government,
affirming that she was dead for the common good of the estate. He declared her
shipwreck likewise; the which to have happened by chance, who was so blockish
as to believe? or that one man alone should be sent from a woman that had
suffered shipwreck to force a guarde and Emperors navy? Therefore now not
Nero whose cruelty surpassed all complaints, but Seneca was hardly spoken of,
as one confessing the fact by that oration. Nevertheless processions were
ordained with a wonderful strife of forwardnes in every Temple, and a bed
made in the Temples in honor of their gods; and also that the five days
feasts of Minerua called Quinquatrus, in which the trecheries were discovered,
should be celebrated every year. And that an image of gold of Minerua should
be set in the Curia and the Princes by it. And that the day of Agrippinaes
nativity should be accounted among the dismal days. Thrasea Paetus with
silence or short assent accustomed to pass over others flatteries, went out of
the Senate, and procured danger to himself, and opened not the way of liberty
unto others. Many prodigions signs happened likewise, but of no effect. A
woman brought forth a snake, and another companying with her husband, was
stricken dead with lightning. The sun was darkened on a sudden, and fourteen
places of the city damnified with tempest from heaven: which chanced so
without the care of the gods, that Nero many years after continued the Empire
and wickedness. But to make his mother more odious, and show his own lenity
was augmented by her death, he recalled from banishment two noble women Iunia
and Calpurnia, and Valerius Capito, and Licinius Gabolus, who had been Pretors
long before, banished by Agrippina. He permitted also that Lollia Paullinaes
ashes should be brought back, and a sepulcher to be built her, and released
the punishment of Iturius and Caluisius, whom not long before he himself had
banished. As for Silana she died in coming back at Tarentum; Agrippinaes
malice which was her overthrow, either appeased, or her credit beginning to
waine. Whilst he lingered in the towns of Campania, doubtful how he should
enter into the city: whether his best way were to seek the favor of the
Senate, or good will of the people; the lewdest conditioned, whereof there was
no court better stored, persuaded him that the name of Agrippina was odious,
and that by her death the favor of the people was more bent toward him than
ever: therefore that he should go boldly, and with his presence try how he
should be reverenced. And withal they earnestly entreated him to set forward:
and found all things in a greater readiness than they had promised: the Tribes
came to meet him; the Lords of the Senate in their holy-daie robes, wives and
children placed according to their age and sex: and all the way he should go
builded with stairs as in public shows or triumphs. Thereupon puffed up
with pride, as a conqueror of public servitude, he went to the Capitol, and
gave thanks to the gods: letting loose the raines to all lusts and
licenciousnes of life, which before badly restrained, yet the reverence toward
his mother such as it was, did in some sort bridle.

IIII. Neroes exercises.
IT was an old practice of his never to be absent from the race of chariots:
and no less unseemly was that other delight of his, at supper to sing to the
harp as minstrels did, which he said to have been a custom of ancient Kings
and Captains; and a thing highly commended by Poets, and attributed to the
honor of the gods. For melody is sure dedicated to Apollo, and in that attire
he does stand, not only in the cities of Greece, but also in the temples at
Rome: a principal deity, and knowing things to come. Neither could he now be
removed, seeming good also to Seneca and Burrhus to yield him the one, least he
should persist in both. And thereupon a space was enclosed in the valley of the
Vatican to manage his horses, and not to be seen indifferently of every man:
and not long after of his own accord he called the people to see it, who
highly extolled him; as the manner of the people is, to be desirous of
pastimes, and very glad if the Prince draw them to it. And his shame published
abroad, brought him not as it was thought it would, any loathing therein, but a
farther provocation, thinking that the discredit would be shaken off, if he
could dishonor many with the like. He brought to the skaffold many descended of
noble houses, bought for poverty, which because they be dead, I will not name,
as having regard unto their ancestors: being rather his fault to give money
for ill doing, then least they should commit that which is naught. He
constrained also the chief gentlemen of Rome with mighty gifts to promise
their labor in the Theater: unless you say that a reward given by him who may
command, brings a necessity in obeying. Yet least he should be discredited
by the public Theater, he instituted Plays called Iuuenalia, as it were for
the health of youth, to which every man willingly gave his name; not any ones
nobility, not his age, or office borne, being any hinderance unto them, but
that Greeks and Latins exercised the art of a stage player, even unto
gestures and measures unseemly for men. Yea noble women practiced many
gestures, and unseemly to their calling. And in the wood which Augustus
planted about the lake, where he represented a sea fight, Tauernes and meeting
places were built, where all prouocations of wanton lusts were sold, where
money was given to the good to spend of necessity, and to the intemperate to
glory and brag of. From thence sprang all lewdenes and infamy, never at any
time (not when there was great corruption in manners in times past) more
dissolute lasciuiousnes used then at those impure assemblies. Shame is scarce
retained among men of honest example; much less among such which striued who
should have most vices, can chastity and modesty, or any good behauior be
maintained. Last of all, Nero himself enters on the stage, tuning and
playing on his instrument with great care, and premeditating what to say; his
familiars assisting him, and besides them a cohort of soldiers, Centurions and
Tribunes, and Burrhus, both grieuing, and praising him. Then also were first
inrowled the gentlemen of Rome called Augustani, men for their age and strength
of body highly esteemed: part of them shameless and saucy in behauior, and
part hoping thereby to rise to greater authority, day and night with clapping
of hands made all to ring of them, commending the feature, and voice of the
Prince with terms attributed to the gods, and were respected by him as
honorable personages for their virtue. And yet least the Emperors skill on
stage only and music should be published, he desired to be well accounted of
for versifying, having gathered about him such as had any cunning therein, much
more such as were excellent. They sat together *, and made those verses hang
together which he made there or elsewhere, and supplied his words howsoever
they were uttered, which the fashion it self of his verses does declare, not
running with one and the same vehemency, and vain of writing. He bestowed
also some time after meat with Philosophers, taking pleasure to hear how
every man defended his own opinion, and overthrew the contrary. Neither
wanted there some, which with their voice and grave countenance desired to be
thought pleasant with the Emperor.

V. A strife between the inhabitants of Nuceria, and the Pompeians.
ABout the same time, of a light quarrel rose a great murder between the
inhabitants of Nuceria, and Pompeians at a show of fencers, which Liuineius
Regulus put from the Senate as before I have rehearsed, represented to the
people. For first provoking one another with bitter terms, as it is often
seen in malapert and saucie townsmen, they came to stones, and last of all to
weapons; the Pompeians being the stronger, with whom the show was set forth.
Many of the Nucerians were brought lame and wounded to the town, and many wept
for the death of their children and parents: the determining of which the
Prince referred to the Senate, the Senate to the Consuls. And the cause being
again brought to the Senators, the Pompeians were forbidden to assemble any
such companies for ten years, and their corporations erected against the
laws dissolved. Liuineius and such others as raised the stir, were banished.
Pedius Blaesus also was put from his Senators room, at the information of the
Cyrenensians; who laid to his charge that he had robbed the treasure of the god
Aesculapius, and mustered soldiers for money and suite. The same Cyrenensians
accused Acilius Strabo sometime Praetor, and sent by Claudius as arbitrator of
certain lands which once belonging to King Apio, and left to the people of
Rome with the kingdom, their neighbors possessed and occupied, and by long
license and injury defended them to be theirs by right and equity. The lands
therefore being given from them by sentence, they envied the judge: and the
Senate answered they were ignorant of Claudius pleasure, and that they should
ask the Princes advise. The Prince approving Straboes sentence, wrote
nevertheless that he would aid the allies, and give them that which they had
usurped. There died not long after, Domitius Afer, and M. Seruilius, two
notable personages, which flourished with great honors and eloquence: he in
pleading of causes, Seruilius famous for long frequenting the Forum, and then
for writing the Roman histories, carriage of himself, and neatnes of life,
which made him more renowned; as equal to the other in wit, yet different in
conditions.

VI. Whether it be convenient to have often plays to entertain the people.
NEro being the fourth time Consul, and Cor. Cossus, the play called
Quinquennale was ordained to be played at Rome, after the manner of the Greek
combat, whereof there went diverse reports, as almost it happens in all new
things: for some there were which said that Gn. Pompeius was blamed by the
ancient men for building a permanent Theater. For in times past the plays were
wont to be set forth on a skaffold built for that time, and seats to continue
no longer then the play lasted. Or if thou will look into more ancient times,
the people beheld them standing, least if they should sit, they would continue
in the Theater whole days in idleness. Neither should the ancient fashion of
plays be observed, when, * as often as the Pretors should set them forth; no
necessity was laid upon any of the citizens to fight, or look on. But the
customs of the country being by little and little abolished, were now utterly
overthrown by disorders set from strange countries; that whatsoever elsewhere
might corrupt, or was corrupted, was seen in the city; and the youth unlike
to that it has been, through strange manners, wrestling naked, idleness, and
licentious love, the Prince and the Senate being authors thereof, who have not
only given license to vices, but also given them strength and force. The
noblemen of Rome under color of making orations and verses are discredited by
stage-playing. What remains then but only to unclothe themselves stark
naked, and take the caesti in hand, and practice that fight in stead of arms,
and exercises of war? Or do they think they shall better understand the
knowledge of southsaying, be more skillful in the decuries of gentlemen,
accomplish the honorable charge of Judicature, if they understand cunningly
broken tunes, and sweerenes of voices? whole nights also were added to those
shames, because no time should be left honest: but in that confuse multitude
what every person most dissolute desired by day, durst venture on by night. That
license pleased many, and yet they cloaked it with honest terms. That the
ancients likewise did not abhor the delight of plays and shows according to
their calling at that time, and that stage players were sent for, from Thuscia.
The horse-race was represented by the Thurians: but since Achaia and Asia was
possessed by us, plays have been more exactly set forth. Neither has there
been any one in Rome nobly descended, which by reason of stage plays has
discredited the stock from whom he came these two hundred years, since L.
Mamius triumphed, who first set forth that kind of show in the city. Farther,
there was a regard had unto thrift, in erecting a continual standing Theater,
rather then with infinite charges every year set up and build a new. Neither
should the magistrates waste their goods as they have done; on the people have
cause to be importunate with them for the combats according to the Greeks
manner, seeing the commonwealth did defray the charge. The victories of
orators and poets would be an encouragement unto wits: neither could it be
offensive to any judge to lend his ears to honest studies, and allowable
pastimes. To mirth rather then lasciuiousnes, a few nights in five years were
given, in which there is such great light of fires, that no unlawful act can
be hidden. In very deed that show past without any notable dishonest part
committed, neither did the people show any great insolency, although the
common vices were restored to the stage, and forbidden to show themselves in
such plays as were represented in honor of the gods. The praise of eloquence
none carried away, but Caesar was pronounced victor: and the Greekish attire
which many wore in those days, was laid aside.

VII. Nero falls sick.
DVring these things, there appeared a blasing star, which in the opinion of
the common people, betokens the change of a Prince. Therefore as though Nero
had already been driven out, they were busy to know who should succeed
him: Rubellius Plautus being famous in every man's mouth, by the mothers side
descended from the Julian family. He was an obseruer of the old manner of
living, upright, grave and severe, living with all honesty, as one retired in
his own house: and the more secret he was for fear of being accounted of; so
much the more his reputation increased. An interpretation of a lightning begun
by the like vanity, augmented the rumor. For Neroes meat being stricken with
lightning, and the table thrown down at the lakes of Simbruinum, in a place
called Sublaqueum, in the confines of Tiburtum, from whence Plautus had his
beginning by his fathers side; all men believed that he was destined by the
providence of the gods to the Empire: and thereupon many fawned and courted
him: which by a greedy and for the most part deceiptfull ambition, admire new
things, doubtful and uncertain. Nero moved with these rumors writes to
Plautus, aduising him to look to himself and his assemblies, and rid his hands
of those which lewdly defamed him: and that in Asia he had possessions by
descent from his ancestors, in which he might pass his youth safely and
without troubles. Whereupon he went thither with Antistia his wife, and a few
of his familiars. At the same time too greedy a desire of pleasing his will in
all he liked, bred Nero both infamy and danger: for swimming in the fountain
of the Martian water which was brought to the city; it was construed that he
had defiled the holy drinks, and ceremony of the place with his whole body;
and falling dangerously sick thereupon, it was constantly believed that it
proceeded as a punishment from the wrath of the gods.

VIII. Corbulo conquereth all Armenia; over which Nero sends Tigranes to be
King.
But Corbulo after the rasing of Artaxata, thinking it his best to make profit
of the fresh terror: for the easilier forcing of Tigranocerta, by destroying
of which, he should augment fear in the enemy; or by sparing it, purchase the
reputation of clemency: marches thither, using no hostility by the way,
least he should take from them all hope of pardon: yet with no remisnes or
careless proceeding, as one knowing that that nation is easily subject to
change: as slow to peril, so faithles when occasion is offered. The
Barbarians every man according to his wit, some entreated; some forsook their
villages and conueighed themselves to inaccessible places; some hid themselves,
and the things they made most reckoning of in caves. The Roman Captain
therefore, using diverse policies, showed mercy toward the humble; used
celeritie in pursuing those which ran away; and cruelty against those which
fled to the dens and caves, stopping the mouths of them with vine branches
and small wood, and after set them on fire. And passing by the confines of the
Mardians, a people well practiced in theeuing and robbing; they set on him, but
fled to their mountains for their defense, when they saw he turned toward
them. But Corbulo sent an army of Hiberians to waste them, revenging by that
means with the blood of strangers the audaciousnes of the enemy. Himself and
his army, albeit he received no hurt by the battle; yet began to faint for
want of victuals and over great travel, having no means to drive away hunger,
but with the flesh of beasts. All this, with the want of water, fervent heat,
long iournies, was mitigated by the only patience of the Captain; himself
enduring more than a common soldier. Then we came into tilled grounds, but
where harvest was in: and of two castles into which the Armenians had fled, the
one was taken by force; and the other which had resisted the first assault was
forced with siege. From thence passing into the country of the Taurantians he
escaped an unlooked for danger: for not far from his pauilion, there was
found a Barbarian of no small reputation with a weapon; which by torture
discovered the order of a treason (himself the inuentor of it) and all his
accomplices: and they were convicted and punished which under color of
friendship went about treason. Not long after Ambassadors sent from
Tigranocerta, bring tidings that the gates are open, and the inahbitants
willing to obey the Romans. Withal, they presented him a crown of gold as a
gift to honor a stranger: which honorably he accepted, and took away no
privilege from the town, because they should more faithfully retain their
obedience. Nevertheless the Kings fortress, which the fierce youth had shut
themselves in, was not gotten but by fight: for they came forth and skirmisht
before the walls, but driven into their rampires, and no longer able to resist,
at the last yield to the forces of the assailers. All which the Roman achieved
so much the easlier, because the Parthians were hindered with war against the
Hyrcanians: who had sent to the Roman Prince to crave their alliance,
declaring that for a pledge of their frindship, they had stopped Vologeses.
Corbulo fearing least those Ambassadors in returning back, having past
Euphrates should be surprised by the ambushe of the enemy, with a good guard
conducted them to the red sea: whereby having escaped the confines of the
Parthians, they retuned safe to their country. Besides this, Corbulo drove
away Tiridates far off: and from all hope of wars entering the confines of
Armenia by the Medes; by sending before the Lieutenant Verulanus with the
confederates, himself following with vncombred legions: and having wasted with
fire and sword those he knew to be our enemies, and adhere to the King, put
himself in possession of Armenia: when as not long after came Tigranes chosen
by Nero to take the kingdom, one of the nobility of the Cappadocians, and
King Archelaus nephew: but by being kept a long time an hostage in the city,
was humble and lowly even unto servile patience: neither accepted by consent,
some still favoring the Arsacides: but the most part hating the pride of the
Parthians, desired rather the King given by the Romans. He had also a garrison
sent him by the Romans, a thousand legionarie soldiers, three bands of allies,
and two wings of horsemen. And to the end he might the easlier defend the new
kingdom, part of Armenia, as it adjoined to Nipolis *, Aristobolus, and part
Antiochus had charge of. Corbulo came into Syria, which by the death of the
Lieutenant Vinidius was without a governor and committed to his charge.

IX. An earthquake in Laodicea. An order for appellations.
THe same year, Laodicea one of the most famous cities of Asia, destroyed by
an earthquake, without any help of ours by her own wealth, recovered her
self again. But in Italy the ancient town of Puteolum, got of Nero the
privileges and surname of a colonie. The old soldiers assigned to inhabit
Tarentum and Antium, did not furnish the lack of people in those places: many
of them being sent into Provinces, where they ended their service. And not
accustomed to marry, nor bring up children, they left their houses without
posterity: for whole legions, were not brought as in times past with Tribunes
and Centurions and soldiers of the same band, that by consent and love they
should make a commonwealth: but strangers the on to the other, of diverse
companies, without a governor, without mutual love, as it were gathered on
the sudden, of another kind of people, rather a number than a colonie. The
election of Pretors wont to be chosen at the will of the Senate, which was now
done by suite and briberie; the Prince assumed to himself, and gave the charge
of a legion to each one of the three which sued extraordinarily. And augmented
the honor of the Senate, by ordayning that such as from ordinary judges
appealed to the Senators should incur the same penalty, as they did which
appealed to the Emperor: for before, that was free for every man, and not
punishable. In the end of the year Vibius Secundus a Roman gentleman, at the
suite of the Moors, was condemned of extortion and banished Italy, and
supported by the favor of his brother Vibius Crispus, that he had no
grieuouser a punishment.

X. War in England. Suetonius Paullinus conquered the I Will of Anglesey. The
Queen Boudicea abused by the Romans.
WHen Cesonius Paetus, and Petronius Turpilianus were Consuls, there was a
very great overthrow received in Britannie: where neither the Lieutenant
Auitus as I have already said, could do no more but keep that which was
already gotten; and his successor Verannius with small inrodes having wasted
the Siluri Southwales.
, was hindered by death from making any long war: a man whilst he lived,
famous for severity, but in his last will showed himself openly ambitious.
For after much flattering of Nero, added, that he would have subdued the
Province to his obedience, if he had lived the two next years. At that time
Paulinus Suetonius governed Britannie, in skill of service, and opinion of the
people (which suffers no man without a concurrent) comparable with Corbulo,
desiring to match his honor of recovering Armenia by subduing the enemy of
this country. He makes all preparation to invade the I Will of Mona Anglesey.
strong with inhabitants, and a receptacle of fugitives; and builds flat
bottomde vessels, because the sea is shallow, and landing uncertain. So the
footmen having passed over, the horsemen followed by the foord, or by
swimming, if the waters were high. Against them the enemies army stood on the
shore, thick in array, well appointed with men and weapons, and women running
among, in mourning attire, their hair about their ears with firebrarnds in
their hands like furies of hell: and the Druides round about, lifting up their
hands to heaven, and pouring out deadly curses: with the newnes of the sight
amazed the soldier, and stood stock still close together, not once moving a
foot, as though they had presented themselves to the wounds. Then by the
encouragement of the Captain, and animating each the other, that they should
not fear a flock of women, and frantic people, they displaied their
ensigns and marched on; overthrew such as encountered them, and thrust them
among their own fires. Which being done, they placed garrisons in their
towns, and cut down their woods; which through their execrable superstitions
among them were reckoned holy. For they accounted it lawful to offer
sacrifice at their altars with the blood of captives, and ask counsel of
their gods by the aspect of man's intrailes and fibers. News came to Suetonius
as he achieved this enterprise, of a sudden rebellion of the Province.
Prasutagus King of the Icenians Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgeshire
Huntingtonshire.
, very famous for his riches a long time gotten, made Caesar with two of his
daughters his heir by will, thinking that by that flattery his kingdom and
house should have been warranted from injury, which fell out otherwise: for
his kingdom by Centurions, his house by slaves was wasted and spoiled as
lawful booties. And to begin withal, his wife Boudicea was whipped, and his
daughters defloured. And the chiefest of the Icenians as though they had
received the whole nation for a pray, were dispossessed of al their ancient
inheritance, and the Kings kindred reputed as slaves. By reason of which
contumely and fear of worse (after that they were reduced into a form of a
province) they take arms again: the Middlesex and Essex.
Trinobantes being sturred to rebellion also, and others not yet broken to the
yoke of servitude, by secret conspiracies had vowed to recover their liberty,
bearing a bitter hatred against the old soldiers. For those which were lately
brought into the colonie of Maldon in Essex.
Camalodunum, thrust out of their houses the ancient inhabitants, took their
livings from them, calling them captives and slaves: the new soldiers favoring
the insolent fiercenes of the old, as well for likeness and conformity of
life, as hope of like license. Besides, a temple erected in honor of Claudius
of famous memory, was an eye sore, and an altar of perpetual dominion over
them: and the Priests which were chosen under color of religion, wasted all
the wealth of the inhabitants. Neither did it seem any hard matter, to
extirpate that colonie vndefensed and unfortified, which was not circumspectly
foreseen by our captains, whilst they had a greater care of pleasure then
good government. Amongst these things the image of Victory set up in
Camalodunum fell down without any apparent cause why, and turned back, as
though it would give place to the enemy. And the women distempered with fury,
went singing, that destruction was at hand. And strange noises were heard in
their court, and the Theater gave a sound like to a howling, and a strange
apparition in an arm of the sea was a foretelling of the subversion of the
colonie. Further, the Ocean bloody in show, and dead men's bodies left after an
ebb, as they brought hope to the Britains, so they drove the old soldiers
into a fear; who because Suetonius was far off, craved aid of Catus
Decianus procurator. He sent not above two hundred men, and those badly armed,
and the number not great which was there before, trusted to the franchise of
the temple. And those hindering which were confederates of the secret
conspiracy troubled their deseignments: for they neither made trench nor
ditch, nor sending away the old men and women, and keeping the young men only,
being as secure as it had been in a full peace, they were surprised with a
multitude of barbarous people, and all overthrown, and wasted with violence,
or consumed with fire: the temple only excepted, into which the soldiers had
fled, which also within two days was besieged, and taken. And the Britain
being thus conqueror, and meeting with Paetus Cerealis Lieutenant of the ninth
legion which came to succor them, put to flight the legion, and slew all the
footmen. Cerealis with the horsemen escaped to the camp, and defended
himself in the fortresses. Through which overthrow, and hate of the province,
driven to take arms through the avarice of the Romans, Catus the procurator
being afraid, sailed to Gallia. But Suetonius with wonderful constancy
passing even among the enemies, went on to London, not greatly famous by the
name of a colonie, but for concourse of Merchants, and provision of all things
necessary, of great fame and renown: and being come thither, stood doubtful
whether he should choose that for the seat of war or not: and considering
the small store of soldiers he had, and how Petilius had well paid for his
rashness, he determined with the loss of one town to preserve the rest whole.
Neither was he won by weeping and tears to give aid to such as demanded it,
but gave sign of removing, and received such as followed as part of his army.
If imbecillitie of sex, or wearisomnes of age, or pleasantnes of the place
kept any back, they were all put to the sword by the enemy. The free town of
S. Albons.
Verulamium received the like overthrow, because the barbarians forsaking their
Castles and forts, and being well manned, spoiled the richest and fattest, and
carrying it to a sure place, glad of the booty, went on to places more
notable. It is certain there were slain in those places I have spoken of, to
the number of seventy thousand citizens and confederates. Neither did they
sell or take any one prisoner, or use any intercourse of traffic of war, but
kill, hang, burn, crucify, as though they would requite the measure they had
suffered, and as it were in the mean time hasten to anticipate revenge.

XI. Suetonius vanquished the Britains, which Boudicea conducted: her
stoutnes and death.
NOw Suetonius having with him the foureteenth legion, with the Standard
bearers of the twentieth, and the aides from places adjoining, which came all to
the number almost of ten thousand armed men, resolved to lay aside all delay,
and try the chance of a maine battle. And chooses a place with a narrow
entrance, and enclosed behind with a wood, being well assured that he had no
enemies but before him; and that the plain was wide without fear of ambush.
The legionarie soldier then marshalled together in thick and close ranks,
and the light harnessed closely about them, the horsemen made the wings. But
the Britains forces triumphed abroad in troops and companies, by such
multitudes that the like had not been seen; and of such fiercenes of courage,
that they brought their wives with them, and placed them in carts in the utmost
parts of the plain, as witnesses of the victory. Boudicea having her
daughters by her in a chariot, now going to one, now to another: Told them that
the Britains were wont to make war under the conduct of women. But at that
time not as though she had descended of such noble ancestors, she sought
neither for kingdom nor wealth, but a revenge as one of the common people, of
their lost liberty, of her body beaten with stripes, and the chastity of her
daughters violated. That the desire of the Romans was grown to that pass,
that they left none, of what age soever, nor any virgin undefiled. Nevertheless
that the gods favored just revenge; that the legion which durst undertake the
battle was slain; the rest had either hid themselves in their camp, or fought
means by flight to save themselves: that they could not endure the noise and
cry of so many soldiers, much less their fury and strength. If they would
weigh with themselves the strength of the soldiers; if the cause of the war,
they should resolve either to vanquish in that battle or die. That, for her
own part being a woman, was her resolution, the men might live if they
pleased, and serve. Suetonius held not his tongue in so great danger, who
although he trusted in the valor of his soldiers, yet enterlaced exhortations
and prayers. That they should contemn the loud and vain threats of the
barbarians; that there were more women seen in their army then young men; that
being unwarlike, and unarmed, they would presently yield when they should once
come to feel the weapons and valor of the conquerors, who had so often
overthrown them: yea where many legions have been, a few have carried away the
glory of the battle; and it should be an augmenting to their glory, if with a
small power they could win the praise of a whole army: that they should only
continue the slaughter and butcherie close together, by throwing of darts; then
with their swords and pikes of their bucklers, not thinking on booty; for the
victory once gotten, all should fall to their share. Such a feruencie and edge
followed the captains words; the old soldier experienced in many battles so
besturred himself, and showed such forwardnes in lancing his darts, that
Suetonius assured of the event, gave the sign of battle. And first of all the
legion not stirring afoote, but keeping within the straight, as in a place of
defense; after that the enemy was come nearer, and had spent his darts to good
purpose, the legion in the end sallied out in a pointed battle. The auxiliarie
soldier was of the like courage, and the horsemen with long lances breaking
before them all they met, or made head against them. The residue showed their
backs, hardly fleeing away, by reason the carts placed about the plain had
hedged in the passages on every side. And the soldiers spared not from killing
so much as the women; and their horses and beasts thrust through, increased the
heap of bodies. That was a day of great renown, and comparable to the
victories of old times: for some there are which report, that there were slain
few less in number then fourscore thousand Britains, of our soldiers four
hundred slain, and not many more hurt. Boudicea ended her life with poison. And
Poenius Posthumus, Campemaister of the second legion, understanding of the
prosperous success of the foureteenth and twentieth legions, because he had
defrauded his legion of the like glory; and contrary to the order of service,
refused to obey the Captains commandment, slew himself. After this
gathering the army together, they encamped again, ready to end the residue
of the war. And Caesar augmented his forces by sending out of Germany two
thousand legion aries, eight cohorts of auxiliaries, and a thousand horse; by
whose coming the ninth legion was supplied. The cohorts and wings were lodged
in new winter garrisons, and all those which were either openly against us, or
doubtful, were wasted with fire and sword. But nothing so much distressed that
nation as famine, being negligent in sowing of corn, and of all ages given to
war: and assuring themselves to live on our provision, being a fierce nation
slowly gave ear to any peace. For Julius Classicianus sent to succeed Catus,
and at variance with Suetonius, hindered the common good with pruate grudges:
and had bruted abroad that the new Lieutenant was to be expected, who without
any hostile rancor, and pride of a conqueror, would entreat such as would
yield with all clemency. He sent word likewise to Rome that they should
look for no end of the wars, unless some other should succeed Suetonius,
attributing his adverse luck, to his own ouerthwartnes; and the prosperous, to
the good luck of the commonwealth. Whereupon to see what state Britannie
stood in, Polycletus a freed man was sent, Nero greatly hoping, that by his
authority there should not only an agreement be made between the Lieutenant
and Procurator; but also the rebellious minds of the Barbarians be won to a
peace. Neither failed Polycletus with his great host to seem burdesome to
Italy and Gallia; and after he had passed the Ocean sea, show himself
terrible even to our soldiers. But to the enemies he was but a laughing
stock, who being in full possession of liberty, knew not what the power of
freed men was: and began to marvel that a Captain, and an army which had
achieved so many great exploits could yield to obey a bond-slaue: all things
nevertheless were made the best to the Emperor. And Suetonius being occupied
in dispatching of business, after he had lost a few galleies on the shore, and
the gallie-slaues in them, as though the war did continue, was commanded to
deliver the army to Petronius Turpilianus, who had lately given up his
Consulship: who neither provoking the enemy, nor egged by him, gave his lasie
and idle life, the honorable name of peace.

XII. Balbus a Senators testament forged: and Pedanius Rufus killed by his
bondmen.
THe same year two notable lewd parts were committed at Rome: the one by a
Senator; the other by an audacious bondsman. Domitius Balbus sometime Praetor,
being aged, without children, and of great wealth, lay open to much treachery.
One of his nearest kinsmen, Valerius Fabianus, and Consul elect, forged a
false testament in his name, having called thereunto Vicius Rufinus, and
Terentius Lentinus gentlemen of Rome: and they associated unto them Antonius
Primus, and Asinius Marcellus. Antonie was ready and bold; Marcellus nobly
descended, and nephewe to Asinius Pollio, of a good carriage and behavior;
saving that he thought poverty the woorst of all things. Fabianus then sealed
the testament with those which I have named, and others of lesser calling:
whereof he was convicted before the Lords of the Senate, with Antonius, and
Rufinus, and Terentius, and condemned by the law Cornelia against forgerie. But
Marcellus the memory of his ancestors, and Caesar's entreatie, acquitted rather
from punishment, than infamy. The same day overthrew Pompeianus Aelianus, a
young man, who had been Quaestor and privy to Fabianus practice, and was
banished Italy and Spain his native country. Valerius Ponticus sustained the
like ignominy, because that eschuing the judgment of the Provost of the
city, he had informed against some before the Praetor first under color of some
laws, then by preuarication to escape punishment. Whereupon a decree of Senate
was ordained, that he who should either buy or sell any such actions, should
sustain the same punishment, as he who was publicly condemned for forging of
crimes in false accusations. Not long after Pedanius Secundus Provost of the
city was slain by his bondsman, either because he had denied him his liberty,
which for woney he had couena^ted; or hating him for the unnatural lust of a
youth, as not enduring his lord to be his rival. But when all the bondslaues
of the house according to the old custom should have bin condemned for that
fact; through the flocking thither of people, which defended so many innocent
persons, they grew almost to a mutiny, and even in the Senate it self; among
which there was a faction, some contemning that ouergreat severity; and many
on the contrary side holding it necessary that nothing should be changed. Among
which, C. Cassius uttered his opinion as follows. I have oftentimes been
present in this aslemblie, Lords of the Senate, when new decrees have been
demanded, contrary to the laws and ordinances of our ancestors: neither have
I ever gainesaide them; not that I doubted but that in times past they foresaw
and took better and more upright order for all affairs then now; and that
those things which were altered were changed into the worse: but least I should
seem by sticking too much to old customs, to extol the thing I affected:
with all I thought it not convenient with often contradiction, to overthrow
this our authority whatsoever it be, to the end it might remain strong and
entire, if at any time the common wealth should need of counsel. Which this
day has appeered, a Consul being murdered in his own house, by treason of
his slaves, which none either hindered or bewraied, although the decree of
Senate be yet in force, which in this case threatened punishment to the whole
family. Decree in good truth impunitie. But whom shall any man's dignity
warrant, seeing the Prouostship of the city auailed not? whom shall a
multitude of slaves defend, seeing four hundred have not protected Pedanius
Secundus? Whom shall any ones family help, if standing in fear of laws our
servants care not what danger we fall into. Shall we say, as some are not
ashamed to invent, that this murderer revenged his own private injury, because
he had compounded for his fathers inheritance; or that some old slave had been
taken from him? Let us pronounce sentence without any further ado, that
Pedianus seems to us to have bin justly slain. Give me leave to reason of
that point, that has been determined by wiser men: If we were now first of all
to consider of the matter, do you think that a slave had had the heart to
murder his Lord, if no threatening word had before escaped him? if he had
uttered nothing rashly? forsooth he concealed his intention, he prepared a
weapon amongst such as knew nothing of it. Could he pass the watch, open the
chamber doors, bring in light, commit the murder, all of his fellows ignorant
of it? If slaves would bewraye such attempts, they can give many signs: which
if they discover, we alone may be safe among many lewd persons: in the end if
we must needs dye, yet not unrevenged of the wicked. The disposition of slaves
has always been feared by our ancestors; yea although they were borne in
the same country and houses, and have just occasion presently to love their
lords. But seeing we have nations of them in our families, using diverse rites
and customs, strange or no ceremonies of religions at all, this rascalitie
thou shall not be able to bridle but by fear. But some innocents shall be cast
away. When an army is discomfited, and every tenth soldier is culled out and
beaten with a cudgel, the lot falls also upon the valiant. Every exemplarie
punishment has somewhat in it which is unjust, which being in particular to
the prejudice of some, yet is recompensed by the general good of the whole. As
no one man durst gainsay Cassius opinion, so many confusedly answered together,
that there should commiseration be taken, of the number, age, sex, and
undoubted innocence of many. Yet that opinion prevailed, which concluded they
should be punished; but it could not be executed, a multitude being flocked
together, threatening with stones and fire. Then Caesar rebuked the people by an
edict, and beset all the way, by which the condemned parties were lead to
punishment with a guard of soldiers. Cingonius Varro advised that the freed men
which lived under the same roof with their master slain, should be banished
Italy. But that was withstoode by the Prince, least the ancient custom which
clemency had not diminished, should by cruelty be made worse. The same men
being Consuls, Tarquitius Priscus was condemned for extortion, at the suite of
the Bithynians, the Senators greatly rejoicing thereat, who bare in mind that
Statilius Taurus their Proconsull had been accused by him. The people were
numbered and valued in Gallia by Q. Volusius, and Sext. Africanus, and
Trebellius Maximus; and whilst Volusius and Africanus contended for worth and
nobility, and both disdaining Trebellius, they preferred him before
themselves. That year died Memmius Regulus, in authority, constancy, fame,
as much as might be, the imperial highness shadowing him, greatly renowned: in
so much that Nero being sick, and such as were about him flattering him, and
saying that the Empire was at an end if he should miscary, made answer; that
the common wealth had a support and stay. Then they demanding him in whom
especially? he added, in Memmius Regulus. Nevertheless Regulus lived after this,
shrouded by his quiet life, and because he was of new nobility, and not envied
for his wealth. The same year, a place of all kind of exercise called
Gymnasium was dedicated by Nero, and oil given when they wrestled naked to the
gentlemen and Senate, according to the courtesy of the Greeks.

XIII. Libellers punished: of Veiento which sold Neroes favor.
P. Marius and L. Asinius being Consuls; Antistius the Praetor, who as I have
said before behaved himself licentiously when he was Tribune of the people,
made opprobrious verses against the Prince, and published them in a solemn
banquet at Ostorius Scapulaes house. Whereupon he was accused of treason by
Cossutianus Capito, not long before received into the number of Senators at the
request of his father in law Tigellinus. It was thought that then first of all
that law was put on foot, which wrought not so great an overthrow to
Antistius, as glory to the Emperor: by which the condemned party, by the
Senate was delivered from death, by the negative voice of the Tribune. And
albeit Ostorius protested he had heard nothing to bear witness off; credit was
given to the testimony of his adversaries, and Iunius Marullus Consul elect
gave his censure, that he should be deprived of the Pretorship, and put to
death according to the ancient custom. The rest after that yielding their
assent, Paetus Thrasea having said somewhat in the commendation of Caesar,
sharply rebuked Antistius, and declared: That it was not expedient, that the
extremity of punishment should be used under a good Prince, and when the Senate
was by no necessity bound to ordain it: that there was no use now of an
executioner and halter: and that there were penalties ordained by laws, and
punishments inflicted without note of the severity of the judges, and infamy of
times. With the loss of his goods he should be confined in some Island, where
by how much the longer he drew his guilty life, by so much the more miserable
it should be to himself in particular; and in time to come a notable example
of public clemency. Thraseas liberty of speech broke the silence of the
rest. And after that the Consul had permitted the going aside to agree in
their opinions, all of them (a few excepted) condescended to Thrafeas opinion:
amongst whom the forwardest in flattery was A. Vitellius, brauling and
contending with every one of the better sort, but never replying to an
answer: a certain note to know a timorous and faint heart. But the Consuls not
daring to put the decree in execution, with common consent wrote to Caesar: who
wavering betwixt shame and anger, in the end wrote again: That Antistius no
injury before offered him, had used most contumelious speeches against the
Prince: whereof a revenge was demanded of the Senate. And it was convenient
that a punishment should be ordained answerable to the greatness of the offense.
As for himself, as he would have hindered the severity of their resolution,
so he would not be against the moderation of the punishment: therefore they
might determine as they thought good, giving them power if they lusted to
acquit him. These or the like speeches recited, and his dislike manifestly
perceived: yet for all that neither did the Consuls alter their relation, or
Thrasea shrink from his opinion; or the rest go from that which they had once
allowed; part of them least they should seem to have exposed the Prince to
envy; many shrowding themselves under the number of voices; Thrasea by his
accustomed stoutnes of courage, and because he would not fall from his glory
already gotten. Fabricius Veiento was accused of the like crime, for uttering
many slanderous speeches against the Lords of the Senate, and Priests, in those
books which he called Codicillos. Talius Geminus his accuser added further of
him, that he had sold offices and favors of the Prince, and the right of
obtaining honors: which was the cause why Nero undertook the hearing of that
judgment. Who after conviction banished Veiento out of Italy, and commanded
his books to be burnt, which as long as the reading and getting of them was
dangerous, were much sought for; then liberty of having them granted they
were forgotten.

XIIII. The death of Burrhus: and who Tigellinus and Rufus his successors
were. The decay of Senecaes credit with an oration of his to Nero, with Neroes
answer.
AS public calamities daily increased; so the remedies against them grew
scarce. And Burrhus ended his life, but whether by sickness or poison,
uncertain. It was coniectured by sickness, because that his winde-pipe within
swelling by little and little, and in the end stopped, he yielded up the ghost.
Most men affirm that by Neroes commandment, making as though he would have
applied a remedy to the palate of his mouth anointed it with poison: and that
Burrhus understanding the practice, when Caesar came to visit him, turned his
face from him: and asking him how he did, answered only, I am well. He was
much lamented in the city for the memory of his virtue: and harmless sloth
of one of his successors, and enormous wickedness, and adulteries of the other.
For Caesar had made two Captains of the guard: Fenius Rufus through the favor
of the people, because he dealt in corn matters without gain; and Sofonius
Tigellinus, who held on his old course of unclean and infamous life, which by
custom was another nature in him. Tigellinus was more inward with the Prince,
chosen as one privy to his secret pleasures. Rufus was of good reputation and
fame with the people, and accepted of the soldiers, which he found by
experience to breed Neroes mislike. The death of Burrhus weakened Senecaes
authority, because his good arts wanted the strength they had: having lost
one as it were of their guides; and Nero inclined to the worser sort. Which
with sundry sorts of calumniations set upon Seneca, saying: That he
continually heaped up wealth above the calling of a private man, and sought to
win the peoples hearts; that in pleasant gardings, and stately buildings he did
almost exceed the Prince. They objected also that he attributed to himself
only, the praise of eloquence, and made verses often, after he saw that Nero
took a liking to them. For showing openly a dislike of the princes pleasures;
he detracted from his skill in riding, and scoffed at his voice when he sang; to
what other purpose, but that nothing should seem excellent in the
commonwealth, which was not thought to be his invention? Nero was now out of
his childhood, and in the strength of his youth; he should shake off his
master, being already instructed with sufficient teachers, to wit his
ancestors. But Seneca knowing of these accusations, by some which had a care of
honesty; and Caesar more and more estranging himself from his familiarity:
desires a time to be heard; and having obtained it, begins thus. It is
fourteen years Caesar, since I have been put to thee as a guide to thy
hope; and eight since thou have governed the Empire. From that time until
this, thou have heaped on me so many dignities and so much wealth, that there
wants nothing to my felicity, but the moderation of them. I will allege
great examples; not of mine own calling, but of thine. Augustus thy great
great grandfathers father, licensed M. Agrippa to withdraw himself to
Mitylenum to live a private life, and C. Maecenas to abide in the city; yet at
ease as if he had been in a foreign country. Whereof the one a companion of
his wars; the other tossed and wearied with many travels at Rome, had
received large rewards, but answerable to their manifold deserts. As for my
self, what was there in me for the requital of thy munificencie, save only
my stuas I may say, nourished in the shadow? By which I have gotten credit and
reputation, because I seemd to have been at hand and directed thy youth with
instructions: a great recompense in very deed of my travel. But thou have done
me besides this, great favors, and enriched me with infinite wealth; in so
much that I do often debate the matter with my self, saying: Am I, being but a
gentleman only, and borne out of the city, reckoned among the chiefest peers
of the city? Can it be that my new rising can shine among noble men honored
with the marks of ancient antiquity? Where is that mind of mine which once was
contented with a little? What, does he make such goodly gardens and walk in
such manner houses near the walls of the city: does he abound in such scope of
grounds, and usury in so many places? One defense comes to mind for all,
that is, that it was not my part to strive against thy gifts, but both of us
have filled our measure, thou by giving as much as a Prince could bestow upon a
friend, and I in taking as much as a friend could take of a Prince. That which
is above this augmenteth envy, the which no doubt, as all mortal things does
lie under thy greatness, but lie heavily on my shoulders; therefore I need
help: and as weary in service of war, or on the way, I would crave succor;
so in this journey of my life, old and unable to wade through the smallest
cares, seeing I cannot sustain the burden of my riches any longer, I crave thy
aid and helping hand; command them to be managed by thy procurators, and be
received as thy own goods. Neither will I thrust my self into poverty, but
give up those things, whose brightness dimmed and dazeled me: that time which I
was wont to bestow in my gardens and houses of pleasure, I will employ in
recreation of mind. Thou art in the flower of thy age, and the regiment of thy
Empire established and settled many years, and we thy old friends may betake
our selves to rest. This also shall redound to thy glory, that thou have
raised such to great honors as could have contented themselves with a mean
estate. Unto which, Nero answered almost as follows. That I am able extempore
to answer thy premeditated oration, I am principally indebted to thee, who
has instructed me how not only to acquit and discharge my self of things
premeditat, but also of such as happen on the sudden. My great great
grandfathers father Augustus suffered Agrippa and Mecenas after great labor to
take their ease; but in such an age, that his authority might maintain
whatsoever had been bestowed; yet he never took those rewards from them he had
once given them. In war and dangers they had deserved them, for in these
things Augustus youth was employed: neither would thy weapons and hands have
been wanting, if I had been in arms. But as the present state of times
required, thou did with reason, and counsel train up first my childhood,
then my youth: and therefore the gifts which thou bestowedst upon me, whilst
life lasts shall remain with me. Those things which thou have received of
me, thy orchyards, usury, country houses, are subject to casualtie; and
although they seem much, yet many not equal with thee in knowledge have
possessed more. I am ashamed to speak of such as have been slaves, which seem
richer then thou. And therefore I blush that thou, who in affection art dearest
unto me, do not surpass all men in wealth and fortune. And thou art of thy
age a lusty man, and able to enjoy thy wealth and commodity thereof, and we
enter into the first steps of the Empire; unless pardie thou do prefer
thy self before Vitellius thrice Consul, or me before Claudius. But how much
Volusius scraped by long sparing, so much my liberality cannot fulfill toward
thee. If the slipperines of our youth be ouerprone to that it should not, thou
drawest it back, and temperest carefully with advise our unseemly and unruly
courage. Not thy moderation if thou should restore thy wealth, not thy ease
if thou should forsake the Prince: but my covetousness, and the fear of my
cruelty shall be in every man's mouth. And although thy continency should be
highly commended, yet were it not seemly for a wise man, from whence he
procures infamy to his friend, from thence to seek glory to himself. To
these his speeches he joined embracements and kisses, framed by nature, and
practiced by custom, to cloak hatred with false flattering speeches. Seneca
(which is the conclusion of all speeches had with Princes) gave him thanks, but
changed the course and manner of life which he used in authority, forbidding
the multitudes which came to salute him, and avoiding such as would follow him;
showing himself seldom in the city, as though he had kept home, either
through sickness, or busy at his study.

XV. Tigellinus credit. Plautus and Syllaes death.
SEneca being thus pulled down, it was an easy matter to abate Rufus Fenius
credit, by accusing him of the friendship he had with Agrippina: but Tigellinus
credit daily grew greater, and thinking that his lewd practices, wherein only
he was his craftsmaister, should be more acceptable, if he could oblige the
Prince by a league of naughty dealing; he began diligently to search out all
his fears, and perceiving that Plautus and Sylla were suspected above others,
Plautus being banished of late into Asia, and Sylla into Gallia Narbonensis, he
enters into the consideration of their nobility, and how the one was too
near the army of the East, and the other that of Germany. That he for his
own part had not in his head as Burrhus had, contrary hopes to the Emperors,
but regarded only his safety, which in some sort might be secured by his
presence from city practices: but by what means could tumults far off be
redressed? The Galli became prechant at the name of a Dictator, and the people
of Asia no less to be suspected through the renown of Drusus, Plautus
grandfather. Sylla was poor and needy, and therefore bold and venturous, and
counterfeiting a lazines, until he found a fit opportunity to show his
rashness. Plautus abounding in wealth, did not so much as pretend a desire of a
quiet life, but made open show of imitating the old Romans: having taken upon
him the arrogancy and sect of the Stoics, which makes men busy headed, and
desirous to be set aworke. Neither was there any further delay used but Sylla
(those which were to do the feate arriving at Marsils the sixth day) before
fear or rumor, was slain being set at table, and Nero skoffed when his head
was brought him, as euilfauored by untimely hoarines. But it was not so
secretly kept that Plautus death was intended, because many had a care of his
safety, and the distance of the journey and sea, and the time between, had
spread it abroad; and given out among the common sort, that he went about to
stir up Corbulo then lord general over great armies, saying, that if noble
and innocent personages were thus murdered, he was most likely to come into
danger. Further, Asia had taken arms in favor of this young man, and the
soldiers sent to go forward with the enterprises, being neither strong in
number, nor in courage stout, seeing they could not perform that which they
were enjoined, turned altogether to new hopes. These speeches were common in
idle persons mouths. But Plautus freed man having a prosperous wind, prevented
the Centurion, and delivered him a message from L. Antistius his father in
law, which was. That he should avoid a cowardly death, and not trust a lazy
life, nor seek starting holes; as to think that he should be pitied for his
nobility: he should find good men and of courage ready to take his part: in
the mean time that no aid was to be rejected. If he had driven back
threescore soldiers (for so many came) whilst the messenger could return to
Nero, and another power be sent back, many things will follow, which may
prosper and grow even to a war. To be short, either he must provide for his
safety by such counsel, or at all adventure there can come no worse to him by
stoutnes then cowardice. But those persuasions did nothing move Plautus, either
foreseeing he wanted sufficient means, as being unarmed, and a banished man, or
for the irkesomnes of doubtful hope, or for the love of his wife and children,
to whom he thought the Prince would be more mild, if he troubled him not with
care. Some report, that other messengers came to advertise him, that there was
no cruel matter intended; and that two Philosophers Coeranus a Greek, and
Musonius a Tuscane borne, persuaded him to abide a constant death, for an
uncertain and fearful life. True it is, as he was found naked in the middle
of the day, exercising his body, the Centuturion killed him in the presence of
Pelago an Eunuch, whom Nero had made ouerseer of the Centurion, and of a band
of men which served for the retinue of him which executed the Kings
commandment. His head being brought to Nero, at the sight thereof he uttered
these very words: Why do thou not Nero (quoth he) hasten the marriage of
Poppaea hitherto deferred by such fears, and put from thee thy wife Octauia,
although of good and modest behauior, yet for the memory of her father, and
affection of the people disliked and ill thought of? Nevertheless he wrote
letters to the Senate, not confessing the murdering of Sylla and Plautus, but
that both of them were of a busy and turbulent humor, and that he had a care
of the safety of the common wealth. Thereupon Processions were ordained, and
that Sylla and Plautus should be put from the Senate, a matter of greater
skorne and mockery then hurt.

XVI. Nero puts away Octauia and marries Poppaea: and her complaints
against Octauia: and her death.
Having thus received a decree of Senate, and perceiving that all his
ungracious acts were taken for worthy exploites, he puts away Octauia,
saying she was barren, and marries Poppaea. She, long a concubine, and having
power over him as an adulterer, then as her husband, procures one of Octauiaes
seruitors to accuse her that she was in love with one Eucerus a bondsman, a
minstrell, borne at Alexandria. Thereupon many bondwomen were tortured, some of
them overcome by extremity of torment, yielded to falsehood; and many stood
stoutly in defense of their mistres innocence. Amongst whom, one of them,
Tigellinus earnestly urging her, answered, that Octauiaes secret parts were
chaster then his mouth: yet at the first she was put from him under color of a
lawful divorce, and Burrhus house and Plautus possessions assigned her, both
presages of ill luck. Then she was driven into Campania, with a guard of
soldiers; whereof grew many complaints and lamentations, and those not in
secret among the people, as having small wisdom, and little to lose, so
subject to fewer dangers: by reason whereof, though no whit sorry of that he had
done, Nero recalleth his wife Octauia, and the people very joyfully went up to
the Capitol, and worshipped and thanked the gods, threw down Poppaeas images,
and bare Octauiaes on their shoulders, strawed flomes on them, and placed them
in the Forum and Temples, praised and honored the Prince for taking her again.
And now they had filled the palace with multitudes and cries, when as
companies of soldiers sent, with blows and threats, thrustand scattered them
some one way, some another; and changed all that the people had done by
sedition, and restored Poppaeas images to their places again. Who always fell
and cruel with hatred toward Octauia; and then with fear, least a more
forcible violence of the people should fall upon her; or Nero be changed,
seeing how the people were affected, casting herself at his knees, said: That
she stood not now on those terms that she might reason of her marriage,
(although she esteemed it more then her safty) but that she was brought into
danger of her life by Octauias clie^ts and slaves, which shadowing themselves
under the name of the people, durst venture that in peace, which could hardly
have happened in war. Those arms were taken against the Prince: there wanted
only a Captain, which in a tumult would easily be found. Octauia might now
leave Campania, and go to the city, seeing that at a beck in her absence such
tumults were raised. What fault had she committed? whom had she offended?
Whether is it because she was likely to bring forth a true and lawful progeny
to the house of the Caesar's? would the people of Rome there should be rather
brought into the imperial highness the issue of a minstrell of Egypt? To be
short, if that be convenient for the state, he should rather willingly then
constrainedly call his mistres, or look to his safety with just revenge. The
first tumults are appeased by easy means: but if they did despair of having
Octauia for Neroes wife, they would provide her a husband. This doubtful
speech appliable to fear and anger, did both terrify Nero, and incense him.
But the suspicion of the slave was of small credit, and the torture of the
bondwomen had made the matter clear: therefore it was thought convenient, to
have the confession of some one, which might be charged with some practice
against the state. Anicetus the executioner of his mothers death seemed to be a
fit instrument for the purpose, as I have already said, Captain of the navy
at Misenum, in some small favor after the villainy committed, but anon after
most odious, because the ministers of great villainies are looked on as
vpbraiders of the same. Caesar then causing him to be sent for, puts him in
mind of the former service, and tells him that he only had been the safeguard
of his estate against his mothers treason, and that there was now an
opportunity of no less favor, if he could rid him of his wife, which greatly
disliked him. Neither should he need hand or weapon, but only confess he had
committed adultery with Octauia: and promises him great rewards, though for
the present the world should not know them, and pleasant dwellings; or if he
should deny it, threatened him death. He like a blockhead as he was, his first
villainy making an easy way to this, inuenteth more then was commanded, and
confesses it unto such of the Emperors friends, whose counsel as it were he
had used in the plot. Then he was banished into Sardinia, where he endured no
poor exile, and died naturally. But Nero accused her that she had corrupted
the captain of the galleys, in hope of winning him to her devotion: and
forgetting that not long before he had accused her of barrennes, publishes by
edict, that to hide her licentious life, she had destroyed the children she had
had by others then by him, and that thereof he was assured, and therefore
banished Octauia to the Island Pandateria. No banished woman did ever move the
beholders to greater pity then she. Some did yet remember Agrippina exiled by
Tiberius; and Iulia banished by Claudius was fresher in memory: but both
besides the strength of age, had tasted of some pleasure, and comforted their
present cruel hap with the remembrance of a better estate. Unto this woman,
her first day of marriage was in stead of a grave, being brought into a house
in which she could find nothing but what was doleful and lamentable: her
father poisoned, and her brother anon after. Then the maid greater then the
mistres, and Poppaea married for no other end, but to ruin her; and last of
all a crime objected more grievous then any death. But this young princess of
the age of twenty years, being between the Centurions and soldiers as it
were already deprived of life, with the presage of so many miseries, yet could
not yield to death. A few days after she was commanded to be put to death,
although she protested she was no wife, but a widow only, and a sister of the
Emperors, calling to Germanicus ghost to aid her, and Agrippinaes likewise, in
whose lifetime she should indeed have endured an unhappy marriage, but
without danger of death. Notwithstanding she was shut up in prison, and all the
veins of her body opened; but because the blood stopped with fear issued
forth slowly, she was killed with the vapor of a very hot bath. And a deadlier
cruelty also added, that Poppaea saw her head cut off, and brought to the
city; for all which it was decreed, that gifts should be offered in the
temples. Which we have uttered, that who soever shall either by us, or other
writers, understand the events of those times, may be assured, that as often as
the Prince commanded either banishment, or murder, so often thanks were given to
the gods; and those things which in times past were marks of prosperity, were
then badges of public calamity. Yet nevertheless we will not hold our tongue if
any decree of Senate has been ordained, new and strange by flattery, or by
base and abject sufferance. The same year, it was thought he empoisoned his
chiefest freed men, Doryphorus as being against Poppaeas marriage, and Pallas
because he kept from him infinite wealth by living too long. Romanus by secret
informations accused Seneca as a confederate of Pisoes: but he was touched more
near the quick by Seneca for the same fault, which drove Piso into a fear,
and that commencement of great, but unprosperous treasons against Nero.

THE FIFTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
I. Vologeses King of Parthia crowned King of Armenia by his brother.
Tiridates is hindered by Corbulo to enjoy it, and expulsed by Tigranes.
Whilst these things thus passed, Vologeses King of the Parthians,
understanding what success Corbulo had in his affairs: and how Tiridates his
brother being expulsed, and Tigranes a stranger made King of Armenia; resolved
to revenge the contempt offered the greatness of the Arsacides: yet considering
the great power of the Romans, and alliance a long time continued, was diversely
perplexed, as one of his own disposition slow and lingering; and then
entangled with many wars by the revolt of the Hyrcanians, a strong and
mighty nation. And as he thus wauered, he was further exasperated by the news
of fresh injury: for Tigranes gone out of Armenia, had wasted and spoiled the
Adiabenians, a nation bordering, farther and longer than any rodes of enemies
heretofore. Which grieved not a little the chief noble men of that nation,
that they were grown to that contempt, that they should be forraged and robbed
not of a Roman Captain, but by the rashness of an hostage, so many years held
and esteemed no better than a bond-slaue. Monobazus governor of the
Adiabenians augmented their grief, asking them what remedy, or from whence?
Armenia was already gone, and the country adjoining would go shortly after:
and unless the Parthians would defend them, those which yielded to the Romans
should find an easier servitude, then those which were taken. Tiridates chased
out of the kingdom, by silence complaining not a little; was no small grief,
telling them that great Empires were not maintained by cowardlines; but they
must try the valor both of men and arms. For among great Princes, he seemed
to have most reason and right, who had most strength. And it was the praise of
private houses to keep their own; but the glory of a King to war for other
nations. Vologeses being moved with these speeches, calls a Council, and
placed Tiridates hard by him, and thus began. This man, borne of the same
father that I am, having yielded unto me the name of the King in regard I am
his elder, I did put in possession of Armenia, which is reckoned the third part
of my kingdom. For the Medes Pacorus had before possessed; making account that
in so doing I had taken away the inueterate hatred which reigns between
brothers, and fully settled the state of our family. The Romans hinder this,
and now break the peace also to their own ruin, which they never yet
disturbed but to their own destruction. I will not deny but I had rather hold
things gotten by my ancestors, by equity then blood, by reason then arms. If
I have offended by lingering, I will amend it with valor. Your strength and
glory is entire with fame of modesty; which neither ought to be contemned of
the highest, and is esteemed of the gods. Having thus said, he put the Diadem
on Tiridates head; and gave Moneses a noble gentleman a gallant company of
horsemen, which usually followed the King, and withal the aid of the
Adiabenians; and commanded Tigranes to be chased out of Armenia: Whilst he
pacifiying the sedition of the Hyrcanians, draws his whole forces together,
and utmost power of war, threatening the Roman Provinces. Whereof Corbulo
being advertised by certain messengers, sends two legions with Verulanus
Seuerus, and Vectius Bolanus to aid Tigranes, with a secret charge they should
proceed rather orderly and advisedly, then hastily: for he had rather
entertain, than make war. And wrote to Caesar that it was needful to have a
Captain of purpose to defend Armenia; and that Syria by Vologeses approach
was in greater danger. And in the mean time he lodges the rest of the legions
by the bank Euphrates: leuieth and armeth in haste a power of the country
people, and intercepteth the enemies passages with a garrison. And because the
country is scarce of water, he fortified hard by the fountains, and covered
certain small brooks with mounds of sand. Whilst Corbulo used this
preparation for the defense of Syria, Moneses because he would prevent the
rumor of his coming, marched with all speed: but yet found not Tigranes
vnaduertised or unprovided; who had put himself into Tigranocerta, a very
strong town, well manned and walled. Besides this, the river Nicephorius of a
reasonable breadth, enuironeth part of the walls, and a huge ditch cast in
length, where the river was distrusted as not sufficient. There were soldiers
within to man it, and provision of necessaries: for conueiyng whereof, some
having been too forward in venturing, and on the sudden surprised by the
enemy, enflamed the rest rather with anger, than fear. But the Parthian
wanting courage to perform the assault at hand, spent a few arrows a loofe;
lost his labor; and put the besieged into no fear at all. The Adiabeni, as
they began to raise ladders and other engines, were easily thrust back, and by
a sallie made by our men, hewd in pieces. Yet Corbulo, notwithstanding things
prospered on his side, thinking it his best to use fortune moderately, sent
some to Vologeses, finding himself grieved, that violence should be offered
the Province: and that a King confederate and a friend should besiege the Roman
cohorts; therefore that he should give up the siege, or else he would incampe
in the enemies country. Casperius a Centurion chosen for that Embassy, went
to the King at a town called Nisibis, seven and thirty miles distant from
Tigranocerta, and delivered his message very stoutly. Vologeses had long
resolved with himself to avoid wars with the Romans: neither went things
currantly with him for the present; the siege took no effect; Tigranes was
strong in men and provision; the besiegers put to flight; certain legions were
sent to Armenia; and others in a readiness for Syria to assail him in his own
country. That he had but a weak company of horsesmen; want of stower; for a
multitude of Locusts had eaten up all grass and leaves. Therefore concealing
his fear, and making show of more mildenes, answers that he would send
Ambassadors to the Emperor of Rome, to demand Armenia and establish a peace.
And commands Moneses to depart from Tigranocerta, and himself turned back.
These things many extolled as proceeding from the Kings fear, and Corbuloes
threatenings. Some construed it that they had privily agreed to forbear war
on both sides; and that Vologeses departing, Tigranes should also depart from
Armenia. For why (said they) went the Romans forces from Tigranocerta? Why
were those things abandoned in time of rest, which they had defended in war?
Could they have wintered better in the remote parts of Cappadocia, in cabbins
erected on a sudden, than in the chief seat of the kingdom lately possessed?
Doubtless the wars were put off, that Vologeses might rather fight with some
other, then Corbulo. Corbulo would not endanger his glory so many years
already gotten. For as I have already said, he had demanded a special
Captain to defend Armenia; and notice came that Cesennius Paetus was at hand,
and by that time he was come. Their forces were so divided, that the fourth and
twelfth legions, and withal the fifth which was lately called from the
Moesians, and the aides of Pontus, Gallatia, and Cappadocia should obey Paetus:
the third, sixth, and tenth legions, and the soldiers which before remained in
Syria should continue with Corbulo. The rest they would join or divide as
occasion served. But neither Corbulo could endure a concurrent, and Paetus unto
whom it was sufficient glory, if he were reckoned the second, made small
account of the service already done, saying: that there has been no
slaughter made, no booty gained; and that he had won towns only with words,
and not with deeds. He would impose tributes and laws upon them, and instead
of a shadow of a King, he would force them to live like conquered people under
the Roman law. About the same time Vologeses Ambassadors, as before I have
rehearsed sent to the Prince, returned and nothing done. And the Parthians
openly made war; neither did Paetus draw back, but with two legions,
whereof the fourth Famisulanus Vectonianus conducted, and the twelfth Calauius
Sabinus, he entered Armenia with an unlucky presage. For having made a bridge
and passing over Euphrates, without any manifest cause, the horse which bare
the consularie ornaments fled backward, and escaped. And the beast ready for
sacrifice, near to the winter camps which were a fortifiyng, the work half
finished, brake loose, and leapt over the trench: and the soldiers iauelins
and darts were on a fire; the wonder so much the more to be noted, because the
Parthians fight with weapons thrown with the hand.

II. Paetus goes into Armenia: and his unskillfulness in service.
But Paetus setting naught by ominous signs, nor having sufficiently fortified
his wintering camps, nor provision of corn made, conducteth his army in all
have over the hill Taurus, to recover (as he said) the Tigranocertians, and to
forage the countries which Corbulo had left untouched. And some castles he
took, and some glory and some booty he wanne, if he had used his glory with
moderation, and his booty with circumspection. Having by long iourneies
ouerrun those places which he could not keep, and that the provision of
victuals was spoiled and corrupted which he had taken, and the winter now at
hand, he brought his army back again: and sent letters to Caesar as though
the war had been ended, in words magnificent; but void of matter. In the
mean season Corbulo having had always a special care of the banks of
Euphrates; lodged on them now a greater strength of garrisons, then before he
had: and least the enemy troops should hinder the making a bridge (for they
braued it with a gallant show in the champion which lay under them) he brought
up the river vessels of huge bigness, joined together with timber work, and
built towers on them; beating off the Barbarians with stones and spears out of
Balistas and other engines, let fly farther, than that the country shot of
arrows, could match us with the like again. The bridge continued and
finished, the opposite hills were seized by the cohorts of allies, and afterward
possessed by the camp of the legions, with such great celeritie and show of
puissant forces, that the Parthians, all preparation of inuading Syria omitted,
turned all their hope against Armenia. There Paetus ignorant what was at hand,
had the fifth legion far from him in Pontus: and had weakened the rest by
inconsiderate licensing the soldiers to depart, until news was brought that
Vologeses came with a great army resolutely bent to do great mischief. The
twelfth legion was sent for, hoping that thereby it would be noised that his
forces were increased; but indeed that bewrayed his weakness, with which never
thelesse he might have encamped: and the Parthian deluded by drawing the war
in length, if P^ato had been constant, either to follow his own, or others
counsels. But he by men experienced in war being counseled what was best
against imminent casualties, least he should seem to have need of there is
advise, would do quite contrary and much worse. And then forsaking his
standing camps, crying that he had no trench and rampire given him against the
enemy, but bodies and weapons, issued out with the legions, as though he would
fight a field. And having lost a Centurion and a few soldiers, sent before to
view the enemies forces, came back again greatly affrighted. And because
Vologeses came on but coldly, resuming again a vain hope, lodged three
thousand choice men on the top of the hill Taurus hard by, to hinder the King
to pass. He placed also certain cornets of Pannonians, which were the
strength and sinews of his horsemen, in one part of the plain. His wife and
son were shut up in a castle called Arsamosata, and a cohort appointed to
guarde them; and thus dispersed the soldiers, which united in one, would much
better have made head against the stragled and rouing enemy. It is reported
that he was hardly brought to confess unto Corbulo that the King was at hand:
neither did Corbulo make any great haste, to the end that the dangers growing
great, his own praise in succouring might be the greater. Nevertheless he
commanded three thousand to be set forward out of the three legions; eight
hundred horse, and the like number out of the auxiliarie cohorts. But Vologeses
although he had understood that the passages were shut up by Paetus on the one
side with footmen, and on the other with horsemen, nothing altering his
determination; what with violence, what with threatenings, having put the
horsemen to flight, broke the legionaries; one only Centurion Tarquitius
Crescens having courage to defend himself in a tower wherein he had a
garrison: making often sallies, and slaying such Barbarians as came near,
until he was forced by fire to yield. Of the footmen if any was unhurt he
fled to bye-places a far off, the wounded returned to the camp; extolling
the valor of the King; the cruelty and number of his soldiers, and all else
for fear; such easily believing them as were in the like perplexity. The
Captain himself not once endeuoruing to remedy the calamity, neglected all
duties of service, and sent again to entreat Corbulo, that he would come away
in all post haste, to defend the ensigns and standarts, and the only name
left of the unfortunate army: he for his own part would whilst life lasted
remain faithful.

III. Corbulo goes to Syria to aid Paetus: who in the mean space makes a
dishonorable peace with Vologeses.
COrbulo daunted nothing at all, leaving part of his forces in Syria to defend
the fortresses built upon the shore of Euphrates, took his journey as the
nearest way and plentifullest of victuals, by the Comagenians, then by
Cappadocia, and from thence to Armenia. There followed the army, besides the
usual furniture and provision of war, a multitude of camels laden with
corn, to drive away both the enemy and hunger. The first he met of those
which were thoroughly affrighted was; Pactius the Centurion of the first
ensign; then many other soldiers, who pretending diverse and sundry causes of
their flying away, he admonished to return to their ensigns, and trust to
Paetus clemency. As for himself he was rigorous to none, but to the
conquerers. Withal, he went to his legions, encouraged them, put them in mind
of their old valor, and what occasion they had to win new glory. That they
sought not now villages and towns of Armenia for a reward of their travels,
but Roman camps, and amongst them two legions. If unto every common soldier,
the crown was given by the Emperors hands, as a special honor to him who had
saved one citizen only, how great and worthy an honor shall it be when the
like number shall be seen of the succourers and succored. And with these and
the like encouragements generally cheered, (and some there were whom their
brothers perils and near kindred inflamed of their own proper motions) they
hastened their journey day and night. Vologeses so much the more eagerly
pursues the besieged, now assailing the trench of the legions, now the fort,
where the fearful or aged had fled for defense, approaching nearer then the
Parthians custom is, to allure by temeritie his enemy to battle. But the
Romans hardly haled out of their cabins, did but defend their rampires, part at
the commandment of the captain, and others by their own cowardlines,
looking for Corbulo; and if they should be put to any distress, purposed to
shift for themselves by the example of the overthrow at Caudina and Numantina.
Neither had the Samnites people of Italy, nor the people of Carthage which
contended for greatness with the Romans, so great power as the Parthians. Their
ancestors also, both valiant and commended of all, when fortune crossed them
provided for their safety. By which desperation Paetus, the general of the
army utterly cast down, yet sent not his first letters to Vologeses in humble
sort, but in manner of a complaint: That he used hostility against the
Armenians, subject always to the Romans, or to a King chosen by the Emperor.
That peace was alike profitable to both. That he should not regard things
present only. That he was come against two legions with all the power of his
kingdom, but the Romans had the whole world besides at commandment to aid
the war. Vologeses answered nothing touching the matter, but that he was to
expect his brothers Pacorus and Tiridates, and that that place and time was
appointed to consult of Armenia. * And that the gods had favored them so much,
being a matter worthy of the Arsacides greatness, that withal they could
determine of the Roman legions. After that, Paetus sent messengers to entreat
a parley with the King, who commanded Vasaces captain of the horse to go. Then
Paetus begins with the Luculli, Pompei, and such other Captains as had
conquered and given away Armenia. Vasaces answered, that the Romans had but a
shadow of holding and giving away of Armenia, and that the right and power was
with the Parthians. And having sufficiently debated the matter on both sides,
Monobazus Adiabenus the next day was called a witness of their agreement: which
was, that the legions should no longer be besieged, and all the soldiers
depart out of the bounds of Armenia, and all forts and provisions to be
delivered to the Parthians: which done, that Vologeses should have license to
send Ambassadors to Nero. In the mean space Paetus built a bridge over the
river Arsamites, which ran by the camp, under color of passing that way: but
the Parthians had commanded it to be done as a token of the victory, for it
served their turn, and our men went another way. And the rumor went, that the
legions were sent Spears pitched acrosse like gallows, under which, enemies
vanquished were forced to go in despite. Sed vt exprimatur tandem confessio,
subactam domitamque esse gentem sub iugum abituros, etc. Liu. lib. 3.
sub iugum, with other disgraces which the Armenians were wont to use against
the vanquished. For they entered the trench before the Roman camp was
departed, and beset the way, challenging and leading away their horses, and
such as had been their slaves. Their apparel also and weapons were taken from
them, and the soldiers yielded them for fear, least any occasion of quarrel
should be given. Vologeses having gathered together our weapons and dead
bodies, to witness the overthrow of our people, forbear from seeing the running
away of the legions. A fame of moderation was sought for, after he had
satisfied and filled his pride. He passed the river Arsamites on an Elephant,
and every man near the King on horseback, because a rumor was spread that the
bridge would fall under the burden, by the deceit of the makers. But such as
ventured to go over it, found it strong and sure.

IIII. Paetus cowardlines. Corbuloes diligence to succor him. An agreement
with the King of the Parthians.
MOst certain it was, the besieged had such store of corn left, that they
fired their storehouses; and on the other side Corbulo declared, that the
Parthians were in want of all necessary provision, and their stouer all
consumed, ready to have forsaken the siege, and himself but three days
journey off. He added farther, that Paetus had promised by oath before the
ensigns, in the presence of such as the King had sent to bear witness, that no
Roman should enter into Armenia, until it appeared by Neroes letters whether
he agreed to the peace or not. Which things as they have been invented to
increase infamy, so the rest is not unknown, that Paetus went in one day
forty miles, leaving the wounded scattered behind him: which fear of the
fleers away was no less ignominious, then if in fight they had turned their
backs to the enemy. Corbulo meeting him at the bank of Euphrates with his
forces, made no such show of his ensigns and arms, that he should seem to
vpbraide him of his cowardlines. For his common soldiers sad, and bewailing
the case of their fellows, could not forbear weeping. They scarce saluted the
one the other for tears. Strife of valor there was none, no ambition of
glory, the only desire of men in prosperity. Pity only bare sway, and most
of all with the meaner sort. The captains used few words, and those
complaining that their labor was lost, that the war might have been ended
with the flight of the enemy. Paetus answered, that all was whole and in good
state to them both, that they should turn their ensigns, and jointly invade
Armenia, weakened by Vologeses absence. Corbulo answered he had no such
commission from the Emperor: that he had gone out of the province moved with
the danger of the legions; and seeing that the Parthians attempts were
uncertain, he would return to Syria. And that he was to pray for good
fortune, that his footmen wearied with traveling so far afoote, might
overtake the Kings horsemen going before cheerfully, having the advantage of
the country. From thence departed Paetus to winter in Cappadocia. But
Vologeses Ambassadors sent to Corbulo, warned him to pull down his forts
beyond Euphrates, and leave the river indifferent to both. Corbulo demanded on
the other side, that the garrisons should depart out of diverse parts of
Armenia. And in the end the King yielded to it, and the fortresses which
Corbulo had made beyond Euphrates were pulled down, and the Armenians left to
their will. But at Rome, trophies and triumphant arches were erected in sign
of victory over the Parthians, in the middle of the Capitol, by order of
Senate, the war yet fresh and not finished, only for a fair show, no
conscience made whether by desert or not. Yea Nero, to dissemble the cares of
foreign affairs, did cast corn into Tyber, corrupted by the peoples ouer-long
keeping it, to show thereby a security and plenty of victuals: the price
nothing enhanced, although almost two hundred ships were cast away by tempest
in the very haven, and a hundred brought up Tyber consumed by casual fire.
After that, he appointed three Consuls, L. Piso, Ducennius Geminus, Pompeius
Paullinus, to take charge of the tribute, with an inuectiue against other
Princes, which by excess of expenses, spent more then the revenues came to,
and he would bestow yearly on the common wealth * threescore millions of
sesterces. There was a very bad custom commonly practiced at that time when
the About 68750. pound.
choosing of officers was at hand, or casting lots for government of provinces;
which was, that many which were without children, colourably adopted some, and
being thereby admitted amongst the Lords to draw lots for Pretorships and
Provinces, immediately after manumised those they had adopted. Whereupon, those
which had children went to the Senate with a great complaint, declaring the law
of nature, the labor in bringing up of children, against the fraud and deceit
and short time of adoption. That it was a sufficient recompense to the
childelesse, that with great security, without charge, they had credit,
honors, and all things else offered them. That to them the promises of laws
long expected were turned into a jest, when a man without care, a father,
without mourning, childlesse, would on the sudden be equal with the long
desires of fathers. Whereupon a decree of Senate was made, that fained adoption
should not benefit in any part to any public charge, nor yet to succeed in
others inheritances.

V. Magistrates sent into Provinces no more rewarded. The Gymnase burnt.
Pompeius town suncke with an earthquake.
AFter this Claudius Timarchus of Candie, was accused of all the crimes, that
rich governors of Provinces are wont to be touched with; and grown insolent
with over great wealth to the oppression of the meaner sort. One speech of his
reached to the disgrace of the Senate, which was, that it lay in him whether
the Proconsuls of Candie should have thanks given them, or not. Which occasion
Paetus Thrasea turning to the common good, after he had given his opinion that
the accused should be banished Candie; added these words. It is proved by
experience, Lords of the Senate, that most excellent laws, and honest examples
have their beginning by good men, from others offenses. So the license of
orators was cause of the law Cincia; the suing of competitors of the Julian
laws; the couetuousnes of magistrates of the Calpurnian decrees. For the fault
goes before the punishment, and the remedy comes after the offense.
Therefore against the new pride of Provinces, let us take some advise worthy
of the Roman integrity and constancy, that nothing may be derogated from the
protection of the allies, or the opinion conceived of us weakened, or a citizen
be else where judged, than before us, or reputed other than he is esteemed by
us. In times past not only a Praetor or Consul, but private men also were sent
to visit the Provinces, which should report, what was thought of every ones
duty and loyalty: and the people were afraid of a particular man's estimation
and judgment. But now we adore strangers and flatter them; and as at the
pleasure of one, thanks are now a days given, so the accusation of one more
redily received. Let the decree contiuue, and let the Provinces have power to
show their authority by such means: but let false praise, and wroong out by
prayers be restrained, no less than malice and cruelty. For there are more
offenses committed whilst we go about to win favor, than whilst we do
offend: yea some virtues are odious, obstinate severity, and an invincible
mind against favor. Hereupon the beginnings of our magistrates are for the
most part better, and the end declineth, whilst we hunt after suffrages: which
if they were forbidden, the Provinces would be governed more justly and
constantly. For as couetuousnes is brideled through fear of being accused of
briberie and extortion; so thanks giving being forbidden, ambition would be
restrained. This opinion was appooued with great consent of all: yet a decree
of Senate could not be established, the Consuls denying the matter to have
been propounded. Anon after by authority of the Prince they ordained, that
none should propound it in the council of the allies, that thanks should be
given before the Senate, the Propretors or Proconsuls, and that no man should
do that message. Under the same Consuls the place of exercise called Gymnasium
was burnt with a flash of lightning, and Neroes image melted to a shapelesse
lump of brass. And by an earthquake, the famous town of Pompey in Campania
was ruined in a great part. And Laelia a virgin Vestall died; in whose place
was chosen Cornelia of the Cossian family.

VI. The birth of Nero and Poppaeas child. The death of the same daughter. The
Parthian Ambassadors receive no answer: and Corbulo made Lieutenant general
of the war.
MEmmius Regulus, and Verginius Rufus being Consuls, Nero had a daughter by
Poppaea, which he took as a matter above all mortal joy, and called her
Augusta, and gave the same surname to Poppaea. The place where she was brought
to bed was Antium a colonie, where he himself was borne. The Senate had
already commended Poppaeas womb to the gods, and had made public vows;
which were multiplied and performed. And there were added processions, and a
Temple to the goddesses Fecunditati; and combat ordained to the imitation of
the Athenians. And that the golden images of Fortunes should be placed in the
throne of Jupiter Capitoline: and that as the Circensian play should be
exhibited in the honor of the Julian family at Bouillas; so at Antium of the
Claudian and Domitian: all which were vain and fleeting things, the girl
dying within four months. Which gave occasion of new flatterings; some being
of advise that she should be honored like a goddess, with a bed, a Temple, and
a Priest. And Nero himself as before he was without measure glad; so now most
sorrowful. It was noted that when all the Senate ran to Antium at the new
birth of the child, and Thraseas forbidden: he took the contumelious repulse
with a stout courage, as a presage of his imminent overthrow. It was reported,
that Caesar bragged to Seneca, that he was reconciled to Thrasea, and that
Seneca was glad thereof. From whence grew at once glory and danger to worthy
men. In the mean time in the beginning of the spring, the Ambassadors of the
Parthians brought King Vologeses message and letters to the same effect. That
he would now forgo all the former challenges so often debated for obtaining of
Armenia: because the gods, although arbitraters of puissant nations, had
delivered the possession to the Parthians, not without the ignominy of the
Romans: that having of late besieged Tigranes, then Paetus, and the legions;
when he could have ruined them, yet suffered them to depart in saftie. His
force was sufficiently tried, and a proof given of his lenity. Neither would
Tiridates refuse to come to the city to receive the Diadem, if he were not
hindered by a religion of priesthood: he would go to the insignes and images of
the prince, where in presence of the legions he would luckily begin his
government. Vologeses letters being of this effect, because Paetus had written
the contrary, as though al had bin well, the Centurion which came with the
Ambassadors was demanded, in what state Armenia stood? He answered that all the
Romans were departed from thence. Then the Barbarians scoff beingvnderstood,
who demanded that which they had already taken by force; Nero consulted with
the chiefest of the city, whether it were best to make a doubtful war with
the enemy, or peace. It was not doubted but war. And Corbulo so many years
practiced in wars, knowing the soldiers and the enemies, had the general
charge given him, least there should be a new error committed by some others
unskillfulness: for of Paetus bad government, they were sorry and repented.
Whereupon they were sent back without any conclusion, yet with gifts; whereby
it might be hoped that Tiridates should not ask in vain, if he came by way of
entreaty. The government of Syria was committed to Cintius; the strength of
war to Corbulo; and the fifteenth legion under the conduct of Marius Celsus
was brought out of Pannonia. Letters were sent to the Tetrarches, Kings,
Prefects, and Procurators, and Pretors, which ruled Provinces adjoining, that
they should obey Corbulo: augmented almost like unto that, that the people of
Rome gave Pompey, when he was to war against the Pirates. When Paetus at his
return feared greater matters; Caesar thought it enough to scoff and jest at
him almost with these words. That he would pardon him presently; least being so
easily brought into a fear, he should be sick with longer pensiuenes. But
Corbulo sent the fourth and twelfth legion, which seemed unable for war,
because they had lost the valiantest among them, and the rest affrighted, into
Syria; and conducteth the sixth and third from thence into Armenia, all entire
and whole, and accustomed to often and prosperous success: and added the fifth
legion, which was in Pontus not daunted with the overthrow of the others:
Withal, the fifteenth newely arrived, and some chosen in Illyricum and Egypt,
and all horsemen and footmen with aides of Kings allies, drawn together to
Melitenes, where he purposed to pass the river Euphrates. Then having taken a
survey of the army making an oration unto them, begins with many stately
and magnificall discourses of the Emperors government, and his own exploits,
avoiding the memory of Paetus unlucky unskillfulness; which he uttered with
great authority, that it served a warlike man in steed of eloquence. Then
takes his journey that way which Lucullus had once passed, opening the
passages which long continuance of time had shut up. And not disdayning
Tiridates and Vologeses Ambassadors coming to entreat of peace, sent
Centurions to accompany them with no rough charge: For matters were not yet
grown to that head, that they should need a maine battle. That to the Romans
many things had sorted luckily, and some to the Parthians; a lesson against
pride. Therefore it behooued Tiridates to accept as a gift the kingdom
unwasted: and that Vologeses should better further the Parthians being
confederate with the people of Rome, than mutually endomaging the one the
other. He knew what discord they had within themselves, and what a fierce and
unruly nation he had to rule: contrariwise, that his Emperor had every where
a firm peace, and no war but that. Besides his counsel he stroke them into
a fear, drove the Megistanas Armenians which first revolted, out of their
houses: battered down their castles; filled with like fear the plains; the
hills; the strong and weak. Corbuloes name was not yet hateful unto the
Barbarians, much less did they pursue him like an enemy, and therefore
credited his counsel as faithful. Vologeses therefore was not implacablie
headstrong *, and demanded truce unto some gouerments. Tiridates requires
place and day of parley. A short time was assigned; the place, where of late
the legions were besieged with Paetus, seeing it was chosen by the Barbarians
in remembrance of their joyful hap, was not refused by Corbulo; that the
diversity of fortune might augment his glory. Neither was Paetus infamy
increased; which appeered plainly, in that he commanded his son who was
Tribune, to appoint certain bands to bury and cover the dead bodies of the
unfortunate conflict.

VII. Tiridates speaks with Corbulo: and yields up the crown of Armenia
in the Roman camp.
THe day appointed, Tiberius Alexander, a noble gentleman of Rome, given as an
aid to the war, and Viuianus Annius, Corbuloes son in law, not yet of age
to be Senator; but assigned in the place of the Lieutenant of the fifth legion,
came to Tiridates camp to do him honor: and that having such pledges he
should fear no treachery. And then were taken twenty horsemen on each side.
And the King seeing Corbulo, lighted first from his horse; and Corbulo did the
like immediately, and both of them on foot, joined right hands. Then the Roman
praised the young Prince, that leaving dangerous uncertainties, he would
embrace sure and wholesome counsel. Tiridates having spoken much of the
noblenes of his stock, in the rest was temperate, saying: that he would go to
Rome, and bring Caesar new glory: Arsacides humbly entreating, the Parthians
being daunted with no adverse encounter. Then seemed it good that Tiridates
should lay his royal crown before Caesar's image, and not take it again but
at the hand of Nero; and so the speech was ended with a short salutation. A few
days after, with a great pomp on both parts, they showed themselves, his
horsemen ranged into troops on one side, with the ensigns of his country;
and on the other the army of the legions marshalled in order with glittering
standards, and ensigns and images of the gods in manner of a temple. In the
middle was planted a tribunal, and in it a chair of estate, with Neroes
image; unto which Tiridates went, and sacrifices offered according to the
custom, takes the crown from his head, and laid it under the image; which
troubled the minds of such as had yet before their eyes the slaughter and
besieging of the Roman armies. But now fortune was changed, and Tiridates a
spectacle to the people; how much better then a captive? Corbulo added to his
glory courtesy and feastings: and as the King marked any strange thing, and
asked the cause; as the beginnings of the watches brought by the Centurion, the
banquet ended with a trumpet, the pile of wood before the Augural altar lighted
with a torch: Corbulo made him answer, extolling every thing more then it was,
to draw the new Prince into an admiration of the old custom. The last day when
he was to take his journey, he desired time to visit his brothers and mother
before his departure, and left his daughter for an hostage in the mean space,
and letters of submission to be sent to Nero. And departed thence, he found
Pacorus with the Medes, and Vologeses at Ecbatanes, not unmindful of his
brother: for he had requested of Corbulo by special messengers, that Tiridates
might not show any token of servitude, or deliver up his weapons, or be barred
from embracing the governors of provinces, or attend at their doors; but have
the same honor at Rome that the Consuls had. Being accustomed to foreign pride,
he was unacquainted with our manners, with whom the law of rule and dominion
bears sway, vanities being laid aside. The same year Caesar honored the
nations of the sea Alps with the rights and privileges of the Latians, and in
the Cirque placed the Gentlemen of Rome before the people. For until that day
they sat indifferently, because the law Roscian had taken no order but for
fourteen orders. A show of Fencers was represented that year with like
magnificence as others before: but many noble women and Senators wives were
discredited in the Theater.

VIII. Nero sings on the stage. The fall of the same stage. Torquatus Silanus
death. Nero attired like a woman weddeth Pythagoras.
C. Lecanius, and M. Licinius being Consuls, Nero more and more desired to
frequent the stage without any respect: for as yet he had not song but in his
house, and gardens in plays of youth, which now he despised as not frequented,
and too mean for such a voice. Yet he durst not begin at Rome, but chose
Naples as a Greek city, thinking that that might serve for a commencement to
go to Achaia, where having obtained the famous, and in times past reputed
sacred crowns, and by that means grown in credit, he thought he should stur a
great desire in the citizens of Rome to hear him. The common rabble flocked
together, or such as the fame of those plays had drawn from the next colonies
and towns, and such as followed him either to do him honor, or sundry other
occasions; yea companies of soldiers filled the Theater of Naples. There
happened as most men thought, a doleful chance, but yet as he construed it,
foretokening good luck, and sent by the favorable providence of the gods. For
the people were no sooner gone, and the Theater empty, but it fell down,
without hurt done to any. Therefore with songs composed for the purpose,
thanking the gods, and celebrating the fortune of the late chance, going to the
Adriatike sea, he stayed in the mean time at Beneuentum, where, by Vatinius
was exhibited a notable play of Fencers. Vatinius was one of the shamelest
monsters of his court, brought up in a cobblers shop, misshapen of body, and a
scurrile iester: and therefore first employed in that practice; then by
pickthanking and informing against the better sort, grew to such authority,
that in credit and wealth, and power of doing hurt, he was worse then the
worst. Nero then coming to the play he had set forth, no not at their pastime
did they abstain from doing of mischief. For the selfsame day Torquatus
Silanus was constrained to dye, because that besides the noblenes of the Iunian
family, he said, that he was in the fourth degree lineally descended from
Augustus of famous memory. The accusers were commanded to lay to his charge,
that he was prodigal in gifts, and that all his hope lay in the alteration of
the state. And that he had noble men about him which he called his Secretaries,
masters of requests, and Auditors, which were names of imperial dignity, and
deseignments of great attempts. Then the chiefest of his freed men were bound
and carried away. And when Torquatus condemnation was at hand, he cut the veins
of his arms, and Nero as his manner was, made an oration after: that although
he had been culpable, and worthily distrusted his purgation, yet he should
have had his life granted him, if he would have expected the Judges clemency.
Not long after forsaking Achaia for the present (the causes were uncertain) he
came again to Rome, hammering greatly with himself of going to the provinces
of the East, and especially Egypt. Then by an edict witnessing his absence
should not be long, and that all should go well with the common wealth, he went
to the Capitol to worship the gods. And as he entered the temple of Vesta,
taken suddenly with a shaking over all his body, either the goddess of the
place terrifying him; or the remembrance of his villainies always accompanying
him with fear, he changed his determination; affirming, that all cares, were
nothing to him, in regard of the love of his country; that he had seen the
sad countenances of the citizens, heard their secret complaints, why he should
go about so great a journey, whose short and reasonable absence they could not
endure; as men wont to be comforted with the sight of the Prince against all
crosses and adversities. Therefore as in private friendships, the nearest
pledges and kindred are most dearest; so the people of Rome had great power
over him, and that he must obey them, seeing they kept him from going. These
and the like speeches were pleasing to the people, desirous of pastimes, and
which was their chiefest care fearing want of corn if he should be absent. The
Lords of the Senate and the nobility knew not whether he were more cruel
far off, or near: then as the nature of all great fear is, they believed
that which happened to be worst. He to win an opinion that he was no where so
merry as in the city, made bankets in public places, and used the whole
city as it had been his own house. Those bankets were most spoken of for
riot and fame, which Tigellinus prepared, which I will lay down as a parerne
of all, least the same wastfulnes should be often repeated. In Agrippaes lake
therefore he built a boat, whereon the banquet was drawn with other boats.
The boats were beset with gold and Iuory. The rowers were stale Catamites,
placed according to their age and skill of unnatural uncleanness. He had
prepared Foul, and wild beasts out of diverse countries, and out of the Ocean.
On the brinke of the poole were brothell houses, filled with noble women: and
over against them were common strumpets naked, using filthy gestures and
behavior. And when the night was come, all the wood and houses about rang with
singing, and shined with lights. Nero himself defiled with lawful, and
unnatural lusts, left no wickedness undone, because he would be most corrupt.
And a few days after, he was wedded as it had been solemnly to one of that
polluted crew, called Pythagoras. The Emperor was covered with a yellow veil.
There went before him those which gave him in marriage, the wedding bed was
prepared, and wedding torches: all was seen, which even the night does hide in
a married woman.

IX. Diverse parts of Rome burnt by chance, or by the malice of Nero.
THere followed a great misfortune, but whether by chance, or devise of the
Prince, uncertain: for authors have affirmed both: but of all, the greatest
and most grievous that ever chanced to this city, by violence of fire. It
began in that part of the Cirque that joins to the hills Palatine and Caelian:
then taking in the warehouses wherein was merchandise, which nourished the
fire, increasing more and more by the blowing of the wind, burnt all the
length of the Cirque. Neither were the houses compassed with any defenses, or
temples walled, or any thing else to stay the fury of it. But spreading with
violence, consumed first the plain, then rising to the hills, again wasting
the low places, by swiftnes of hurt prevented the remedies, the city being
subject to it by reason of the narrownes of the streets, turning and winding
lanes on every hand, and unorderly as it was in old Rome. Therewithal the
lamentations of fearful women, of aged men, and unskillful youth, helping
themselves, and succouring and leading the weak and impotent, or tarrying for
them, some hastening, some abiding, encombred, and hindered all the rest: and
often whilst they looked behind them, the fire had hold on them, either on
the side, or before them: or if they had escaped to the next places, there was
all on a light fire likewise: yea, those places which were thought far from
danger, were found to be in the same case. In the end, doubtful what to
eschew, or whither to flee, they filled the streets, and lay in the fields:
some all their goods lost, and wanting daily food; other for love of some
which they could not save, cast themselves away, although they had easy means
to escape. Neither was there any man which durst to quench it, through the
often threatening of many which hindered them: yea some openly threw burning
firebrarnds into it, and cried alowd, that they had a warrant for it, either
because they might rob and steal more licentiously, or because they were so
commanded. Nero being then at Antium, came not to the city until the fire
was come near his own house, on that side that it joined with the palace and
Maecenas orchardes. Yet it could not be hindered from burning his house and
palace, and all else round about. But to give some comfort to the chased and
fugitive people, he opened Campus Martius, and the momuments of Agrippa, and
his own gardens: and erected buildings in haste to receive the needy
multitude. Vtensiles were brought from Hostia and other near towns, and the
price of corn brought down unto Five pence b. q.
three nummos. All which although done in favor of the people, yet was not
accepted; because a rumor was spread, that at the very time that the city was
on fire, he went to the stage in his house, and sang the destruction of Troy,
comparing present calamities with old disasters. At last, on the sixth day, the
fire ended at the bottom of the Esquilin hill, by beating down a huge number
of buildings, that the field and as it were the open heaven, might withstand
and encounter the continual rage. And before the fear was past, it began
afresh, but not so terriblie in open places of the city, and therefore the hurt
of people the less: but the Temples of the gods, and galleries devoted to
pleasure, were almost all ruined. The obloquie of that fire was the greater,
because it burst out to Tigellinus houses of pleasure, sometimes belonging to
the Aemylians. And it seemed that Nero sought the glory of building a new
city, and calling it by his name. For Rome was divided into fourteen wards:
whereof four were untouched; three consumed to the ground: of the other
seven, some marks of buildings remained, but rent and half burnt. It were no
easy matter to reckon the number of houses, and buildings standing by
themselves, called Isles, and Temples which were consumed: but the auncientest
in regard of religion, as the Temple which Seruius Tullius built in honor of
the Moon; and the great altar and Temple which Arcas Euander consecrated to
Hercules; the Temple of Jupiter Stator, vowed by Romulus; Numaes palace; and
the Temple of Vesta with the peculiar gods of the people of Rome, were consumed
and burnt to ashes. Now wealth gotten in so many victories, excellent works of
the Greeks inventions, then old and perfect monuments of rare wits, which in
so beautiful a city, and flourishing more and more, with many other notable
antiquities, ancient men have observed and spoken of, which could not be
recovered. Some there were which noted, that this fire began the fourteenth
Kalends of Iulie, on which the Senones burnt the city after they had taken it.
Some were so diligent therein, that they counted just so many years, and
months, and days between both the fires.

X. Nero builds a sumptuous house. Order taken for the building of houses.
Nero punished the Christians as though they had set the city a fire.
YEt Nero used the destruction of his country to his benefit; and built a
house, in which precious stones and gold were not so much woondered at (as a
thing long used, and by superfluous riot common) as for the fields and pooles,
in manner of wildernesses; on one side woods, on the other spacious fields, and
prospects. The masters and contriuers of the work were Seuerus and Celeris,
men of wit and audacitie to enterprise that by art which nature had denied,
and foolishly cast away the Princes wealth. For they had undertaken to make a
nauigable ditch from the lake Auerne, unto the mouth of Tyber alo^g the rough
and hard shore, or through the opposite mountains. Neither is there any other
moisture to feed the waters, but the marshes of Pomptina: other places being
uneven craggie grounds, or dry; and if they could be wrought through, it would
be an intolerable labor, and no cause why. Nero notwithstanding, desirous to
bring incredible things to pass, labored to dig the hills adjoining to
Auerne: where remain the marks of his vain hope to this day. But the houses
which were ruined were not built without order, here and there as when the
Galli had fired them: but the streets drawn by measure and proportion, with
spacious and large ways; the buildings restrained to a certain height, and
the courts made wide, and galleries added to defend the front of the houses
called Isles: which galleries Nero promised to build at his own charges, and
deliver them to their masters, the courts and floores made clean. And gave
rewards according to every man's degree and wealth: and prefixed a time,
within which the housings finished, or Isles, their masters should receive them.
The marshes of Hostia were appointed to receive the rubbish: and that the
vessels which brought corn up the river Tibris, should be laden down with
rubbish: and that some part of the buildings themselves, without timber should
be built with stone of Gabi and Albanum, which cannot be damnified with fire.
Now, that water intercepted by private men to their own use from the city,
might more abundantly flow in many public places, there were watchmen
appointed to ouersee it: and that every man should have some provisions to
quench fires: and that every house should be environed with his own walls, and
not common to his neighbor. Which being ordained for the public commodity,
brought ornament to the new city. Yet some were of opinion that the old
fashion of building was more wholesome, because the narrownes of the ways, and
height of the houses, could not so easily be pierced with the heat of the
sun. But now the streets being open and wide, and undefended from shadow
they are scorched with greater heat. And these things were provided by man's
counsel. Anon after, purging sacrifices were sought for of the gods, and the
Sibyls books perused; by advertisement of which, prayers were offered to
Vulcane and Ceres, and Proserpina; and Juno made favorable by the matrons,
first in the Capitol, then at the next sea. From which having drawn water,
the Temple and the image of the goddess was sprinkled, and the married wives
prepared banqueting beds, and watched in the Temple in honor of the same
goddess. But the infamy was not wiped away, neither by man's help, nor
largess of the Prince, or pacifiyng of the gods; but that it was thought the
fire came by commandment. Therefore to extinguish the rumor, Nero falsely
accused and punished most grievously certain people, hated for their wickedness
The author being no Christian, calls Christian religion Maleficium.
, which the common sort called Christians. The author of that name was Christ,
who in Tiberius reign was put to death under Pontius Pilat, Procurator of
Iudaea. And their dangerous superstition suppressed for the time burst forth
again: not only thorough Iudaea where it first began, but in the city also:
whither all wicked and shameful things run from all parts, and are
solemnised and esteemed. First they were apprehended which confessed that
religion; then by their detection, an infinite multitude were convicted, not so
much for setting the town on fire, as for the hate of all men against them.
Such as were condemned, were skorned and mocked, and covered in wild beasts
skins, and torn in pieces with dogs; or fastened on crosses; or burnt in fire:
and when the day failed, they were burnt in the night to give light. Nero had
made the prospect of his gardens fit for that spectacle, and caused shows to
be set forth in the Cirque, and himself either apparailed like a wagoner,
shuffeld among the people, or ran the race with them. Whereupon pity was
taken on those persons, though guilty and deserving exemplarie punishment;
seeing they suffered not for any public good, but to satisfy one man's
cruelty only.

XI. Nero raketh money on all hands, and robs the Temples. Prodigious
sights, and their meaning.
IN the mean time Italy was wasted by contributions and borrowing of money;
the Provinces ruined; and the confederats of the people of Rome empouerished;
and the cities which were called free. Yea the gods themselves were not
priuileged from being made a pray: but the Temples in the city were robbed,
and the gold carried away, which the people of Rome in all ages, either in
triumphs or vows, in prosperity or fear, had dedicated to the gods. Yea in
Achaia and Asia, not only gifts, but the images of the gods were taken away,
Acratus, and Secundus Carinates being sent thither of purpose. The one a freed
man ready to all villainies: the other exercised in the Greekish learning, in
words only, but his mind not seasoned with any good arts. It was reported
that Seneca, because he would shake from himself the infamy of sacrilege,
desired license to depart to some country house a far off: which not being
granted, he fained himself sick of the gout and kept his chamber. Some have
given out that poison was prepared him at Neroes commandment, by a freed man
of his own, called Cleonicus, and avoided by Seneca, as forewarned by the
freed man, or by his own fear, sustained his life with a simple diet,
Crabbes, and if he were a thirst with running water. About the same time the
Fencers at Preneste offering to make an escape, were hindered by a guarde of
soldiers which watched them: the people both fearful and desirous of
novelties, and now muttering and whispering of Spartacus, and calling to mind
the hurts which happened in times past. Not long after news came of a great
misfortune by sea; not by war (for a more firm peace was seldom seem) but
Nero had commanded the navy to return by a certain day to Campania, not
excepting the hazards of the sea. The Pilots therefore although the sea were
rough put from Formium; and the Southweast wind blowing strongly, whilst they
strove to win the Promontorie of Misenum, they dashed against the Cumanian
shores, and lost almost all the galleies, and many other smaller vessels. In
the end of the year prodigious woonders were noised as messengers of imminent
misfortunes. Great and often flashes of lightnings, and a blazing star
always purged by Nero with the blood of noble men. Monsters of men and beasts
borne with two heads and cast into the streets, or found in the sacrifices
when the custom is to slaie them when they be great with young. And in the
territory of Placentia near the way a calfe was brought forth with a head in
the leg. The Soothsaiers interpretation of it was, that the Empire was to have
another head, but neither strong nor hidden, because stifeled in the panche,
and brought forth by the way side.

XII. A conspiracy against Nero by L. Pisoes friends.
AFter that Silius Nerua, and Atticus Vestinus entered the Consulship, a
conspiracy was begun, and grown strong against Nero: unto which Senators,
gentlemen, soldiers, and women gave their names auie, as well for the hatred
they bare Nero, as good will to L. Piso. He was descended from the Calpurnians,
and of great nobility by the fathers side; in high reputation with the people
for his virtue, or apparances like unto virtue: his eloquence he had employed
in defense of the citizens: used liberality toward his friends; and to
strangers courtesy and affability. He had also the gifts of fortune: was of a
tall stature, and comely countenance; but gravity in behauior he was far
from, or moderation in pleasures. He gave himself to courtesy, bounty, and
sometimes to dissolutenes: which many allowed of, thinking it not necessary,
that in so great sweetness of vices, he, who was destined to highest rule,
should be streight-laced, or over severe. The beginning of the conspiracy
proceeded not from his own desire: yet can I not easily tell, who was the first
author, or at whose instigation that was begun, which so many enterprised. The
forwardest to have bin Subrius Flauius, Tribune of the Pretorian cohort, and
Sulpitius Asprus, a Centurion, the constancy of their end does show. And
Lucanus Annaeus, and Plautius Lateranus, Consul elect, came with deadly hatred
against him. Peculiar causes enflamed Lucan, because Nero suppressed the fame
of his verses, and had forbidden him to publish them, vainly comparing his
own unto them. Lateranus Consul elect, no injury, but love of the common
wealth associated unto them. But Flauius Sceuinus, and Afranius Quinctianus,
both Senators, undertook the action, contrary to the opinion which was had of
them. For Sceuinus bare a lascivious mind, and therefore led a lazy and drowsy
life: Quinctianus infamous of his body, and defamed by Nero, by reproachful
verses, sought to revenge his injury. Therefore discoursing among themselves,
or with their friends, of the Princes wickedness; that the Empire drew to an
end; and that choice was to be made of one to support the afflicted state,
associated unto them Tullius Senecio, Ceruarius Proculus, Vulcatius Araricus,
Julius Tugurinus, Munatius Gratus, Antonius Natalis, Martius Festus, gentlemen
of Rome: among which Senecio having been of Neroes inward familiarity, and
then retaining a shadow of friendship, was perplexed with the imagination of
many dangers. Natalis was a partaker of all Pisoes secrets. The rest hoped
after a change. Besides Subrius and Sulpitius, whom I have spoken of for
greater strength, there were drawn in Granius Siluanus, and Statius Proximus,
Tribunes of the Pretorian cohorts, Maximus Scaurus, and Venetus Paullus
Centurions. But for chiefest strength, they relied on Fenius Rufus, captain of
the guard, who being for life and reputation worthy praise: Tigellinus through
his cruelty and unclean life, surpassed in credit and favor with the Prince,
and charging him with many false accusations, brought Caesar often into a fear,
as if he had played the adulterer with Agrippina, and therefore for love of
her, carefully plotting a revenge. Therefore when the conspirators were fully
assured by his own often speeches, that the captain of the guard was one of
their faction, they were now more ready to consult of the time and place of
the murder. It is reported that Subrius Flauius had a sudden motion to set upon
Nero singing on the stage, or running hither and thither in the night unguarded,
his house being on fire: on the one side the opportunity of finding him alone;
on the other, the company of people, witness of so worthy an exploit pricked
forward his most valiant courage, if the desire of escaping (an enemy to all
great attempts) had not kept him back. In the mean time, between hope and
fear lingering and deferring, one Epicharis, unknown by what means she came
to the knowledge of the attempt (and before that time careless of all that
honest was) began to incense and blame the conspirators: and in the end grieved
with their slacknes, being then in Campania, went about to corrupt the chief of
the navy which lay then at Misenum, and bind them to consent to the practice
with this beginning. There was in that navy one Volusius Proculus, a coronell
of a thousand men, and among others an instrument in murdering Neroes mother,
and as it was judged not sufficiently rewarded according to the greatness of the
fact. He acquainted of old, or newly grown into friendship with this woman,
and showing how much he had deserved of Nero, and yet how his labor was lost,
complaining much, and declaring a purpose of revenge, if means were offered;
put Epicharis in hope he might be induced to conspire and draw others with him
to the same confederacy. Neither was the help of the sea small, but offered
many occasions, because Nero took great pleasure on the sea at Puteolum and
Misenum. Whereupon Epicharis added more, and opened all the Emperors
villainies: and that the Senate * had provided, how he should be punished for
overthrowing the common wealth: that he would only prepare himself, bestow all
endeavor, draw to his side the valiantest of the soldiers, and assure himself
of worthy recompense. Nevertheless, she concealed the names of the
conspirators, whereby Proculus betraying the matter, took no effect, although
he had carried all he had heard to Nero. For Epicharis sent for, and brought
face to face before the appeacher, supported by no witnesses, easily confounded
him. Nevertheless she was kept in prison, Nero suspecting that those things were
not false which were not proved true. Yet the conspirators, for fear of being
betrayed, thought it convenient to change the place of the murder, and execute
it at Baias, in a house of Pisoes; whither Caesar came often, as delighted with
the pleasantnes of it; and there used to bathe and to banquet without any guard,
careless of the greatness of his estate. But Piso refused, pretending it would
breed him envy, if the solemnities of his table, and gods of hospitality
should be distained with the murder of any Prince whatsoever. Therefore that it
might be better performed in the city, in that hateful house built with the
spoils of the citizens, or in public place, seeing it is undertaken for the
public weal. Thus they debated the matter in common, but yet with secret
fear, least L. Silanus, a man of great nobility, and by C. Cassius
discipline, under whom he was brought up to all renown, should lay hold on
the Empire; all which were free from the conspiracy ioining to help him, and
such also as would pity Nero as slain by treachery. Some believed, that Piso
would not meddle with Vestinus the Consuls fierce courage, least he should
attempt the bringing in of liberty; or if another Emperor should be chosen,
ascribe the bestowing of the state to himself: for he was not privy to the
conspiracy, although Nero to satiate his inueterate hatred laid it to his
charge, though guiltles. At last, they resolved to accomplish their
deseignments on that day that the Circensian plays were represented in honor
of Ceres; because Caesar showing himself then little abroad, or shut up in his
house or gardens, came to the plays at the Cirque; and therefore might
easilier be come unto, because he took delight in the pastime.

XIII. The order of the conspiracy. How it was discovered. Epicharis
constancy: and cowardlines of some of the conspirators.
THey concluded the order of their conspiracy to be, that Lateranus under
color of making request for some aid of maintenance of his estate, should
fall at the Princes knees; and being of a stout courage, and great stature
overthrow him unawares, and keep him down. Then as he lay along and hindered
from rising, that the Tribunes and Centurions according to each man's boldness
should run in and murder him: Sceuinus requesting to be first, who had taken a
rapier out of the Temple of Health in Etruria; or, as others report of Fortune,
in Ferentanum; and carried it about him as some sacred thing to do some notable
act. Piso in the mean time should stay in Ceres Temple, from whence the
Captain Fenius and the rest should carry him to the camp; and Antonia,
Claudius Caesar's daughter followed him, to win the peoples favor, as C.
Plinius does report. Our meaning was not to conceal this, howsoever it has
been left us; although it should seem absurd and frivolous (unless the
desire of dominion surpass all other passions and affections) that Antonia
should lend her name, or endanger herself for him, or that Piso (the love
toward his wife so well known) should bind himself in marriage to any other
whatsoever. But it was strange how all was kept close, among so many of diverse
callings, degrees, ages, sexes, rich and poor; until the detection began in
Sceuinus house: who the day before the feate should be effected, long
conferring with Antonius Natalis; then returning home, sealed his testament:
having drawn the rapier (of which I have spoken) out of the scabberd; and
angry that it was dull with long keeping, commanded it to be sharpened at the
point and scoured; giving the charge of that care to his freed man Milichus.
Withal he made a more sumptuous banquet than his custom was: and made some of
his bondmen he best liked free; and unto others gave money. And he himself was
sad and easily seen, his head was fraighted with great imaginations, although
he dissembled mirth with impertinent talk. In the end warned the same
Milichus to prepare rowles to bind up wounds, and things necessary to stanch
blood; either as one knowing the conspiracy, and until then trusty; or
ignorant of it, and then first took hold of suspicions, as some have thought
by the consequents. For when this servile mind, waighed with himself the
rewards of his falsehood, and represented to his own imagination huge sums of
money and great authority, honesty gave place; and his masters safety, and
the memory of his received liberty. He took also the counsel of his wife (a
woman's counsel in deed, and the woorser) which drove him into a further fear,
affirming that many freed men and slaves were by, which saw as much as he:
the silence of one auailed nothing; but ones should be the recompense, if he
prevented the rest in detecting it. Whereupon as soon as it was day, Milichus
goes to the Seruilian gardens: and being driven from the doors, said, he
brought heinous and great matters to discover, and thereupon lead by the
porters to Epaphroditus Neroes freed man; and anon from him to Nero, declares:
that there was imminent and dangerous strong conspiracies at hand, and all the
rest which he had either heard or coniectured. He shows also the weapon
prepared to kill him, and commanded the party accused to be sent for: who
drawn by the soldiers, and beginning his purgation, answered: That for the
rapier he was accused of, his father in times past made great reckoning of it,
and therefore he had it in his chamber, and that it was stolen away by the
fraud of his freed man. That his testament had been often sealed by him, not
keeping the days when in memory. Money and liberties he had hereto fore given
to his slaves: but then more bountifully, because his estate was decayed, and
his creditors being eager on him, he distrusted his testament. Indeed he was
always wont to make liberal bankets, and lead a pleasant life, not well liked
of severe and hard judges. He commanded no medicaments for wounds, but because
the rest of his accusations were plainly vain, he thought good to add this
crime, and make himself accuser and witness. He confirmed his speech with
constancy, and rebuked Milichus as one not to be admitted to bear witness,
being a lewd and naughty person; and that with such a resolution in words and
countenance, that the accusation had come to nothing, if his wife had not put
him in mind, that Antonius Natalis had had much secret conference with
Sceuinus, both of them being most inward familiars of Piso. Natalis therefore
was sent for, and both of them severally examined what their speech was, and
touching what matter. Then grew a suspicion because their answers agreed not.
And being put into irons, they were not able to endure the sight and
threatenings of the torture. Yet Natalis as better acquainted with the whole
conspiracy, and withal skilfuller in accusing, first confesses of Piso: then
added Annaus Seneca, either because he was a messenger between him and Piso,
or because he would purchase Neroes favor: who bearing deadly hatred to
Seneca, practiced all inventions to bring him to destruction. Natalis
confession known, Sceuinus with the like imbecillitie, or believing that all
had been discovered, and that no profit could rise by keeping counsel,
appeached the rest. Among which Lucanus, and Quinctianus, and Senecio long
denied the matter. And afterward corrupted by promise of impunitie, to excuse
their backwardnes, Lucanus named Atilla his mother; Quinctianus, Glicius
Gallus; Senecio, Annius Pollio their chiefest friends. And Nero calling to
mind in the mean while that Epicharis was in indurance through Volusius
Proculus information, thinking that a woman's body was not able to endure much
grief, commands her to be rent with tortures: but her; neither stripes, nor
fires, nor the rage of the tortures, which so much the more cruelly racked her
least they should be contemned by a woman, could overcome: but she denied the
crimes objected, and so the first day of torture was contemned. The next day
when she was brought to the same tortures in a bearing-chaire (for her members
out of joint and broken, she could not put foot to ground) fastening a lace
which she drew from her breast to the bow of the chair, in manner of a sliding
knot, put her neck into it: and weighing down with the heft of her body
stopped that little breath she had left. A notable example that a freed woman
should defend in such great cruelty of torture strangers, and almost unknown
to her; when as men, and freeborn, and gentlemen of Rome, and Senators not
touched with tortures, detected the dearest of their kindred. For Lucanus,
Senecius, and Quinctianus, stuck not indifferently to bewray their
confederates; Nero growing more and more fearful, although he had doubled his
guard. Further, he filled the city and the walls with bands of soldiers, and
beset both sea and river with watch and wards. And to and fro, by the Forum,
the houses, the fields, and towns adjoining, footmen and horsemen scoured up
and down, intermingled with Germans, whom he best trusted, because they were
strangers.

XIIII. Accusations continued. Piso would not take arms: his death with
Lateranus and Seneca.
AFter that, continual troops one after another were drawn to their answer,
which lay before the gates of the gardens. And when they had entered in, to
defend themselves every man triumphed over the conspirators. If they had
spoken together by chance; if met on another on the sudden; if at a show, or
banquet, they had been seen together, it was accounted a crime: and besides
Neroes and Tigellinus bloody interrogatories, Fenius Rufus not yet detected,
urged also vehemently: and to win an opinion that he had not been consenting
to the attempt, was cruel against his confederates. The same Fenius held back
Subrius Flauius then present, and nodding with the head, whether in the very
hearing of the matter he should draw his sword, and execute the murder; and
brake his heat even then putting his hand to his weapon. Some there were which
seeing the conspiracy detected, whilst Milichus was examining, and Sceuinus
doubts whether he should confess or not, persuaded Piso to go to the fort
of the guarde, or go up to the Rostra, and found the affection of the
soldiers and people, saying: That if the confederates would join together,
the rest which were not privy would follow them: that the fame of an attempt
was a great matter, and could do much in new enterprises. That Nero had made no
provision to withstand him: stoutmen were daunted with sudden enterprises; much
less would that stage player, accompanied with Tigellinus and his concubines
take arms against him. Many things are done by venturing, which to the faint
hearted seem hard. It was a folly to hope for silence and fidelity in so many
minds and bodies of partakers: by torment or reward all things are made easy.
And some would come to clap irons on him, and put him to a shameful death. How
much more commendable were it for him to die, embracing the commonwealth, and
seeking aid for liberty. Although the soldier should sail him, and the
people shrink from him, if it should cost him his life, his death would be
glorious as well to his ancestors, as his posterity? But nothing moved with
these speeches, showing himself little abroad, then keeping within doors,
confirms his mind against death: until a band of soldiers came, which Nero
had chosen among the young soldiers, and such as lately were received into
service: suspecting that the old were made on Pisoes side. And cutting his
veins, yielded up the ghost. His testament was full of filthy flatteries
toward Nero, through the love of his wife, whom commendable only for her
beauty, and nothing suitable to his calling, he took from a friend unto whom
she was married. Her name was Arria Galla; her first husband, Domitius Silius:
he by patience, she by unchasteness spread abroad Pisoes infamy. Next followed
the death of Plautus Lateranus Consul elect, and that with such haste, that he
suffered him not to embrace his children, nor have so much as that short time
of chosing his death: but lead away to a place where slaves were executed, was
killed by the hand of Statius the Tribune: full of constant silence, never once
reproching the guilt of the same fact to the Tribune. Then followed the death
of Annaeus Seneca most ioiful to the Prince; not because he had found him
manifestly privy to the conspiracy, but because he would show cruelty with
the sword, seeing poison took no effect. Only Natalis this far did utter:
that he was sent to Seneca being sick to visit him and complain, why he
barred Piso from having access to him: and that it would be better to
entertain their friendship by familiar conversation. And Seneca to have
answered, that their interchaung of speech, and often communication was
profitable for neither of them: yet that his safety did depend on Pisoes
welfare. These things Granius Siluaenus Captain of the guarde, was commanded
to carry to Seneca, and ask him whether he acknowledged Natalis speeches, and
bring Senecaes answer. Seneca by chance, or of purpose, returned that day
from Campania, and remained in a country house four miles from the city.
Thither came the Tribune the next evening, and besetteth the house with a
company of soldiers: then opens unto him the Emperors charge as he sat at
meat with Pompeia Paullina his wife, and two other friends. Seneca answered,
that Natalis had been indeed sent to him, and complained in Pisoes behalf
that he was forbidden to visit him: and that he excused himself with sickness,
as being desirous of quietness. Why he should prefer the welfare of a private
man before his own safety, he had no cause. Neither was his inclination much
given to flattery, as Nero best knew: who had oftener tried Senecaes liberty
of speech, then servile pleasing. When these speeches were brought back by the
Tribune in presence of Poppaea, and Tigellinus, who was of the cruel Princes
inward counsel, he asks whether Seneca prepared himself any voluntary
death? The Tribune affirmed, he found no signs of fear in him, nor token of
sadness in words or countenance: and thereupon he was commanded to go back, and
give him warning he should die. Fabius Rusticus does report, that he returned
not the same way he came, but turned aside to Fenius the captain: and having
imparted unto him Caesar's commandment, asked him whether he should obey it or
not; who advised him to do his commandment; which was a cowardlines fatal
unto them all: for Siluanus was one of the conspirators, and was now a
furtherer of the cruelty, to whose revenge he had before consented: yet he
spared both his tongue and presence, and sent to Seneca one of the Centurions,
to denounce him the last necessity. He nothing amazed, called for his
testament, and the Centurion denying it, turned to his friends, and said: That
seeing he was not suffered to requite their merits, he protested he left them
yet one thing which of all other he held most precious, which was the pattern
of his life: of which if they were mindful, they should carry away the fame of
good learning, and of so constant friendship. Withal, hinders their tears,
now with speech, now more earnestly as it were rebuking them, and calling them
back to constancy, Asking where were the precepts of wisdom? where the
resolution so many years premeditated against imminent dangers? unto whom was
Neroes cruelty unknown? neither did there remain any thing to be done after
he had murdered his mother and his brother, but that he should add the death
of his bringer up and master. When he had discoursed this or the like, as it
were in general, he embraced his wife, and having somewhat confirmed her
against present fear, prays and entreats her to temper her grief, lament
no longer, but in the contemplation of her former life spent in virtue, bear
the lack of her husband with honest comforts. She on the contrary side assured
him, that she was resolved to dye, and demands the hand of the executioner.
Then Seneca loath to hinder her glory, and dearly loving her, least he should
leave her, whom so tenderly he affectioned to the injuries of others, said: I
had taught the comforts of life, but thou had rather the glory of death. I
will not envy thy example; let there be of this so short a death, an equal
constancy in both; but thy renown will be far greater. After which words
they both cut the veins of their arms at one time. Seneca because his old
body, and lean with a slender diet, gave the blood slow passage, cut also the
veins of his legs, and hams; and being wearied with cruel torments, least he
should discourage his wife with his grief, and himself descend to
impatiencie, by seeing the torment she endured, persuades her to go into
another chamber. And in the very last moment, his eloquence not failing him,
calling some to dictat his speech, delivered many things, which published in
his own words, I purpose not to alter or change with other terms. But Nero,
having no peculiar hatred against Paullina, least the odiousnes of his cruelty
should grow greater, commands her death to be hindered. Whereupon her bond
and freede men at the soldiers commandment, bound her arms, and stopped the
blood. But whether she knew it or not, is uncertain: for (the common people
being always ready to speak the worst) there wanted not some which believed,
that as long as she feared Nero to be implacable, she sought to have the glory
of accompanying her husbands death; then a milder hope offered, that she was
overcome with the sweetenes of life, unto which she added a few years after,
with a lawdable memory toward her husband: but her face and other parts of
her body were grown so pale and wan, that it easily appeared her vital
spirits were much diminished. Seneca the mean time perceiving himself to
linger and pine away with a long death, entreats Statius Annaeus his known
friend, and expert Physician, to give him of that poison with which the
condemned by public judgment at Athens are put to death, whereof long before
he had made provision: which being brought him he drank in vain, the parts of
his body already cold, and the conduits stopped against the force of poison.
In the end he went into a bath of hot water, and sprinkling his slaves next
about him, saying, That he offered up that liquor to Jupiter the deliverer.
Then put into the bath, and with the vapor of it having yielded up the ghost,
was burnt without any funeral solemnity, as he had commanded in his last
will, when very rich and in authority he disposed of his mind. The report
was, that Subrius Flauius, with the Centurions in secret counsel, yet not
without Senecaes priuitie, had determined, that after Nero should have been
slain by the help of Piso, Piso should also have been slain; and the Empire
delivered Seneca, as one just and upright, chosen to that high authority only
for the excellencies of his virtues: yea, and Flauius own words were published
to be these. It skilleth not for the shame of the matter, if a minstrell be
removed, and an actor in a tragedy succeed him: for as Nero had sung with the
instrument, so Piso in tragical attire.

XV. Many soldiers punished. Fenius death. Flauius Subrius, and Sulpitius
Afers answer to Nero.
THe conspiracy of the soldiers could be no longer kept close, the detecters
being very eager to bewray Fenius Rufus, whom they could not endure should both
be of counsel to the plot, and an examiner of others. Therefore urging and
threatening * Sceuinus, showing himself obstinate, told him that no man knew
more then himself: and exhorted him, that he would show himself willing to
requite so good a Prince. Fenius could neither answer this, nor hold his
tongue, but entangling himself in his own words, showed a manifest fear; and
the rest, but especially Ceruarius Proculus a gentleman, laboring all they
could to convict him, by commandment of the Emperor, Cassius a soldier which
stood by, and was of exceeding strength of body, laid hold on him, and bound
him. Not long after, by their appeaching, Subrius Flauius Tribune was
overthrown, first alleging the dissimilitude of his manners and life for his
defense, and that he being a man of arms, would never in so dangerous an
enterprise, associate himself with unarmed effeminate persons: after that
farther pressed, embracing the glory of confession, and demanded of Nero for
what reasons he had proceeded so far as to forget his oath. I hated thee
(quoth he:) neither was there any of the soldiers more faithful unto thee
then I, whilst thou deseruedst to be loved. I began to hate thee after thou
becamest a parricide of thy mother, and wife; a wagoner, a stage player, and a
setter of houses a fire. I have reported his very words, because they were not
published as Senecaes were: neither was it less convenient to know the
unpolished, but weighty words of this soldier. It is certain there happened
nothing in all that conspiracy more grievous to Neroes ears: who as ready
and prompt to all mischiefs, so unaccustomed to hear of that he had done. The
punishment of Flauius was committed to Veianus Niger, Tribune. He in the next
field commanded a pit to be dug, which Flauius finding fault with as not
deep enough, said to the soldiers standing by, This is not according to the
order of service. And being willed to stretch out his neck stoutly, I would to
God (said he) thou would strike so stoutly. Who quaking very much, when he
had scarce cut off his head at two blows, bragged to Nero of his cruelty,
saying, that he was killed with half a blow. The next example of constancy
the Centurion Sulpitius Asper did show; for Caesar asking him why he had
conspired his death? answered briefly: That so many his villainies could not
otherwise be redressed. Then he sustained the punishment commanded. Neither did
the rest of the Centurions degenerate in bearing their punishments. But Fenius
Rufus had not the like courage, but set down his griefs and lamentations in
his testament. Nero expected that Vestinus the Consul should also be drawn
into the action, judging him violent, and an enemy to him: but the
conspirators would not communicate their deseignments with him; some by reason
of old grudges; but more, because they thought him rash, headie, and
insociable. Furthermore, Neroes hatred against Vestinus proceeded of their
inward familiarity, the one contemning the Princes known cowardlines; and the
other fearing the fell courage of his friend, often jesting at him with bitter
skoffes: which when they carry much truth with them, leave behind them a
biting memory. Besides, there was a fresh cause of malice between them,
because Vestinus had married Statilia Messallina, not ignorant that Caesar kept
unlawful company with her. Therefore no crime, no accuser appearing, because
he could put on no show of accusation, he fled to his absolute power, and
sends Gerelanus the Tribune with a band of soldiers, and inchargeth him to
prevent the Consuls deseignme^ts, seize upon his house, which was as it were
his fortress: and slew his chosen company of youth, because Vestinus had his
house looking over the market place, and handsome slaves all of one age. He had
fulfilled that day all the duties of a Consul, and making a banquet, fearing
nothing, or else dissembling his fear, the soldiers entered in; and when word
was brought him that he was called by the Tribune, he rose without any delay,
had all things prepared him in a trice, shut himself up in his chamber, and had
his Physician at hand which cut his veins; and being yet lusty, was carried to
a bath, put in hot water, not once uttering a word, which could argue either
grief, or compassion on himself. Those which were at table with him, were in
the mean time beset with a guard, and not dismissed till the night was far
spent; and then Nero imagining and laughing at the fear they were in, as
looking for their imminent ruin, said, they had paid enough for the Consuls
good cheer.

XVI. Lucanus and Quinctianus death. Neroes liberality to the soldiers. Who
Nymphidius was. The Senators flattery toward Nero.
AFter that, he commanded the death of M. Annaeus Lucanus, who perceiving as
his blood went out, his feet and hands to wax cold, and his spirits by
little and little to forsake the exterior parts of his body: his heart yet
strong, and his wit fresh, remembering verses made by himself, in which he
represented a soldier wounded, and dead with the like kind of death,
rehearsed the verses themselves, which were the last words he spoke. After that
Senecio and Quinctianus, not according to their former effeminat life, and the
residue of the conspirators, were put to death, neither speaking nor doing any
thing worthy memory. But in the mean time the city was filled with
funerals, the Capitol with sacrifices, one having his brother, another his
son put to death, or friend, or near kindred, gave thanks to the gods, decked
his house with Bays, fell down at the Emperors knees, and wearied his right
hand with kisses. And he thinking it to be done for joy, rewards with
impunitie Antonius Natalis, and Ceruarius Proculus speedy detection: and
Milichus enriched with recompenses, took unto him a name, which in the Greek
signifies a savior. And Granius Siluanus the Tribune, although quit, yet slew
himself. Statius Proximus frustrated the pardon which he had received of the
Emperor by the vanity of his death. After this, Pompey, Cornelius Martialis,
Flauius Nepos, and Statius Domitius, were deprived of the Tribuneship, not
because they hated the Prince, but yet supposed so to do. Nouius Priscus, for
the friendship he had with Seneca, and Glitius Gallus, and Annius Pollio,
diffamed rather then convicted, were sent into banishment. Antonia Flacilla
Priscus wife followed him: Egnatia Maximilla did the like with Gallus: at the
first all their wealth which was great, left them: then taken away, both which
increased their glory. Rufus Crispinus was banished also, under color of the
conspiracy; but hated of Nero, because he had been Poppaeas husband.
Verginius Rufus great reputation was cause of his exile: for Verginius
furthered the studies of youth with eloquence; and Musonius with precepts of
Philosophy. Cluuidienus Quietus, Julius Agrippa, Blitius Catulinus, Petronius
Priscus, Julius Altinus, as it were an army to make up a number, were banished
to the Isles of the Aegaean sea. But Cadicia Sceuinus wife, and Cesenius Maximus
were banished Italy, knowing by the punishment only that they were called in
question. Annaeus Lucanus mother Atilla, though not acquitted, yet was let go
without punishment. These things done by Nero, and calling the soldiers
together to an oration, he bestowed by pole upon every soldier under bands two
thousand Nummi About 15. li. 12, s. 6. d.
; and corn without any price, which they had before, according to the rate it
was sold. Then as though he would declare some exploit done in war, assembled
the Lords of the Senate, and bestowed the ornament of triumph upon Petronius
Turpilianus Consul; Cocceius Nerua, Praetor elect; Tigellinus captain of the
guard: and so extolling Tigellinus and Nerua, besides their triumphall images in
the Forum, he placed their images also in the Palace. He gave Nymphidius also
the ornaments of a Consul, of whom I will speak a little, because now is the
first occasion offered: for he also was part of the Roman miseries. He
therefore son of a freed woman, which had abandoned and made common her
comely body to Princes bond and freede men, affirmed he was begotten by C.
Caesar, because by some chance he was tall of personage, and of a stern grim
countenance: or else C. Caesar being desirous of lightwomen, had abused his
mother also. But Nero, the Senators assembled, and an oration made among them,
published an Edict to the people; and added the informations and confessions of
the condemned; because he was often diffamed in the peoples mouth, as though he
had executed innocent persons for envy or fear. Nevertheless, those which
had a care of knowing the truth, did neither then doubt, but the conspiracy
was begun, grown to ripenes, and set on foot again; as those which returned
to the city after Neroes death confessed. But in the Senate, all of them
according to each man's grief, abiecting themselves to flattery: Alienus
Clemens bitterly inueighed against Iunius Gallio, amazed with the death of his
brother Seneca, and entreating for his own life, calling him enemy and
parricide: until the whole Senate showed their dislike therein; least he
should seem to abuse public calamities, and make them occasion of his
private grudge; or draw the Prince to new cruelty, forgotten, and tempered
with clemency. Then order was taken, that gifts and thanks should be rendered
the gods, and peculiar honor done to the Sun, unto whom there is an old
temple in the Cirque, in which the enterprise should have been accomplished;
who disclosed by his divine power, the secrets of the confederacy: and that
the Circensian pastime in honor of Ceres should be exhibited with more horse
races; and that the month of April should bear the surname of Nero: that a
Temple should be built to Salus, in the place from whence Sceuinus had taken
the rapier, which he himself had offered up in the Capitol, and wrote under
it, To Jupiter the revenger. Which presently was not noted, but after that
Julius Vindex had taken arms, it was interpreted as a foretelling and presage
of future revenge. I find in the commentaries of the Senate, that Cerealis
Anicius Consul elect, gave his censure, that a Temple should be built with all
speed at the common charge to divine Nero; which he thought convenient, as
though exceeding the highest mortal degree, he had deserved to be worshipped
of men: which after was known to be a token and foretelling of his end. For
the honor of the gods was never given the Prince until he were dead, and gone
out this mortal life.

THE SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
I. Nero consumes much in seeking out a hidden treasure which Cesellius Bassus
dreamt of. The death of Bassus. Nero contendeth on the Stage for the prise of
playing on the Harp.
AFter that time, Fortune began to delude Nero through his own vanity, taking
hold of a promise made by Cesellius Bassus: who being an African borne, and
busy headed, built an assured hope upon the shadow of a dream which he had in
the night. And come to Rome, having bought access to the Prince, declares
that there was a cave in his ground of a huge depth, wherein was contained
great quantity of gold uncoined and unwrought in a mass, as in old time it
was wont to be hidden! For there lay a wall of very heavy bricks on the one
side; and on the other, pillars standing upright: all which had lain hidden
many years to increase the wealth of the present time. And as conjecture does
show Dido the Fenissian, fleeing from Tyrus, after she had built Carthage, hid
that treasure there; least the new people with ouer-great wealth should become
wanton and riotous: or the King of the Numidians their old enemy, for
greedines of their gold sometime be incensed to make war against them.
Whereupon Nero, not well assured of the credit of the Author, or certainty of
the business, nor any sent to view and learn whether a truth were reported: of
himself increases the rumor, and sends some to bring away all, as it were
a pray already gotten. Galleies and choice vessels were appointed to help to
hasten the matter: the people having no other speech in their mouth, but that
treasure, through the credulousnes of the discouerer, though not reporting of
it all alike. And it fell out by chance that the Quinquennale pastime, which
every fifth year being represented, was then the second time celebrated: which
ministered the orators their chiefest subject to commend the Prince; saying:
That the earth did not now bring forth only the usual fruits, nor gold mingled
with other metals; but a new plenty: and that the gods themselves bestowed
wealth in all abundance: and many other things with great eloquence, and no
less servile and base flattery they fained; being assured of easy belief in
the hearer. Riotuousnes in the mean time grew greater by vain hope, and the
old wealth was consumed, as though the other had been offered, prodigally to
waste many years. Yea from thence largesses were bestowed: and the expectation
of that wealth, was a cause in part of the public poverty. For Bassus having
dug his ground, and large fields round about; auouching boldly this or that
to be the promised cave: not only soldiers followed him; but the country
people were taken to dig and labor; at length leaving his sottishnes, and
maruelling that his dreams never proved false before, and that he was never
deceived until then, rid himself of shame and fear by killing himself.
Some have reported that he was imprisoned, and set at liberty again
incontinently, his goods first taken to the Princes treasure. In the mean time
the Senate, the Quinquennale pastime drawing near, to shadow his shame,
offers him the victory of singing, and withal the crown of eloquence to
color the reproach of his singing on the Stage. But Nero, saying that he needed
not the authority and favor of the Senate in that respect; as able of himself
to make his party good with his concurrents, and little doubting but that by
the vprightnes of the judges he should obtain his deserved praise; sang first
of all a verse on the Stage: then the people instantly craving that he would
publish all his studies (for those were their words) he enters the Theater,
and observes all the orders of the Harpers: as that being weary, yet he
should not sit down; that he should not wipe off his sweat, but with the
garment he wore; that no excrements should be seen at his mouth or nose. And
last of all kneeling, and showing a reverence to the assembly with his hand,
expected the judges sentence with a counterfeite fear. And the citie-people
accustomed also to approve the gestures of the players, answered him with a
certain measure and artificial applause. Thou would have thought they had
rejoiced, and perhaps they did, for the injury of the public discredit. But
those which from towns far off, retaining as yet the ancient severity and
custom of Italy; and from remote Provinces unacquainted with dissolute
behavior, came either as Ambassadors, or for private business, could neither
endure that sight, nor applaude any way so dishonorable a labor: but awearie
with their unskillful clapping of hands, and troubling the skillful, were often
beaten by the soldiers, placed in thick array, least any moment of time should
be lost by an untuned and disproportionable cry, or slothful silence. It is
certain that many horsemen which labored to pass through the crowd and
thick multitudes were trodden under feet; and others whilst they continued
day and night in their places, were stricken with deadly sickness. And yet if
they should have been absent their fear was greater; many openly, and more
privily observing the names and countenances, cheerefulnes and heaviness of the
lookers on. Whereupon punishments were inflicted upon the poorer sort
forthwith; the hatred against noble men dissembled for the time, showed it
self within a short space after. And it is reported that Vespasian was rebuked
by Phoebus a freede man, as though he had been somewhat drousie with sleep,
and was hardly defended by the entreaty of the better sort: and afterward
escaped imminent ruin by a greater chance.

II. The death of Poppaea. Banishment and death of others.
AFter the pastime was ended, Poppaea died by a sudden anger of her husbands,
striking her with his foot being with child. Neither do I believe that she
was poisoned, although some writers do so report, of hatred rather than truth:
for he was desirous of children and blinded with the love of his wife. Her
body was not burnt as the Roman manner was, but embalmed according to the
custom of foreign Kings, stuffed with sweet odors, and buried in the tomb
of the Iulians. Yet public funerals were solemnised, and he himself praised
her beauty before the people assembled; that she had been the mother of a
divine daughter; and other gifts of fortune he commended in steed of virtues.
The death of Poppaea as in show sorrowful; so to the remembrers of her loose
life and cruelty joyful; Nero made more odious by giving new matter of
hatred, by hindering C. Cassius from being present at her exequies; which was
the first token of his ruin, not long deferred. And Silanus bare him company
for no crime committed, but because Cassius for his ancient riches, and
gravity of manners, Silanus for noblenes of birth, and modest youth, were
worthy praise above the rest. Having therefore sent an oration to the Senate,
declared that they were both to be removed from the commonwealth. And laid to
Cassius charge, that among the images of his ancestors, he had done honor
also to the image of C. Cassius, which had this written under it: To the
Captain of the parts. For seeds of civil war, and a revolt from the house
of Caesar's might have been intended by those words. And least he should use
the memory only of a hateful name to ground a quarrel on; he joined L.
Silanus a young man of a noble stock, rash and headie, under a pretense and
color of moving new broiles. Further, he rebuked Silanus for the same
matters, as before he had done his uncle Torquatus, as though he did already
dispose of the cares of the Empire, and give his freed men charge of the
accounts, requests and secretariships: things both vain and false. For Silanus
was wary and fearful, and by the death of his uncle circumspect in his
actions. After this he induced some under the name of accusers, which falsely
charged Lepida, Cassius wife, Silanus aunt, of incest with her brothers son;
and with certain execrable rites of sacrifices. There were drawn in as privy
thereto, Vulcatius Tullinus, and Marcellus Cornelius, Senators; and Calpurnius
Fabatus, a gentleman of Rome: who appealing to the Prince, and disappointing
the present condemnation; anon after Nero being busied about some great
mischiefs, were forgotten as men of small reckoning. Then banishment was
decreed against Cassius and Silanus by order of Senate; and that Caesar
himself should dispose of Lepida. Cassius was exiled to the Island Sardinia, *
exspecting their further order from the Lords of the Senate. Silanus conueighed
to Hostia, as though he should be carried to Naxus; was after shut up in a
town of Apulia, called Barium. And there, wisely bearing his most unworthy
adversity, a Centurion sent to kill him laying hands on him; persuaded him to
cut his veins: who answered, that he had a mind resolute and ready to die,
but he would not permit an executioner to have the glory of the service. But
the Centurion, although seeing him unarmed; yet strong, and more inclining to
anger than fear, commanded his soldiers to dispatch him. Neither did Silanus
omit to resist, and lay on blows as well as he was able with naked hands,
until he fell down ouermatched with the Centurions wounds on his face as it
had been in a skirmish. With no less courage died L. Vetus, and Sexia his
mother in law, and his daughter Pollutia: hateful to the Prince, as though by
living, they should vpbraid him with the murder of Rubellius Plautus, L. Vetus
son in law. But the first discouerer of his cruelty toward them, was one
Fortunatus a freed man of Vetus, who having pilfred away his masters goods and
fearing an inquiry, began to accuse him, associating Claudius Demianus with
him, who emprisoned by Vetus Proconsull of Asia for his misdeeds, Nero
delivered in recompense of the accusation. Which being understood by the party
accused, and that there was no difference made betwixt him and his freed man,
hedeparteth to Eormianum, where a secret guarde of soldiers watched him. His
daughter was with him, who besides the imminent danger, through long grief,
fell and cruel, as soon as she had seen the murderers of her husband Plautus,
grew to further extremity: and having cast herself about his neck embrued
with blood, kept still the blood, and her apparel besprinkled with it,
remaining a widow, drowned in continual grief, using no other food, than was
necessary to keep off death. Then her father exhorting her, she goes to
Naples. And, because she was kept from the speech of Nero, lying in wait for
his going abroad, she cried alowde that it would please him to hear the
innocent, and not commit one who had been his companion in the Consulship to
the disposition of a freed man, sometime with a womanish lamentation, sometimes
going beyond her sex, with angry and bitter terms: until the Prince showed
himself inflexible; and no way moved, either with prayers or hatred he might
incur. And warns her father to cast away hope, and resolve himself to the
present necessity. Withal news came, that the matter should be heard before
the Lords of the Senate, and a cruel sentence intended. Thereupon some advised
him to pronounce (...)ar his heir for the most part of his goods, and so help
his nephews with the rest; which he refused, least he should dishonor with
this last servile act his life past almost in liberty: and gave all his money
among his bondmen, and if any thing could be carried away, that every one
might serve himself; three beds only reserved for his funeral obsequies.
Then in the same chamber, with the same knife they cut their veins, and with
speed each one covered with a simple garment, for modesty sake, they were put
into bathes. The father looking on the daughter, the grandmother on her niece,
she on both, praying a-uie for a speedy end to leave the others alive, though
to follow incontinently after. And fortune herein kept the order, the eldest
dying first, then the next in age. And being accused after their burial, and
ordained they should be punished according to the ancient manner: Nero was
against it, suffering them to make choice of their manner of death, for such
kind of scoffs were used after the murders committed. P. Gallus a gentleman
of Rome, because he was inward with Fenius, and not an enemy to Vetus, was
banished: the freed man and accuser rewarded for his pains, and a place given
him in the Theater among the beadles of the Tribunes. And the month of May
which followed April, and called Nero, was changed into the name of Claudius,
and July into Germanicus: and Cornelius Ofitus, whose censure that was, said
that therefore the month of June was past over, because two of the Torquatus
already executed for their misdemeanors, had made the name of June unlucky. A
year continued with so many lewd actions, the gods have marked and made
notorious by tempests and diseases. Campania was destroyed with boisterous
storms of winds, which did every where beat down houses, woods, and grain,
and brought the violence of it to places adjoining to the city. Where the rage
of the pestilence spared none, although there was no manifest show of
corruption of the air to be seen. Yet the houses were filled with dead
bodies, and the ways with funerals; no sex, no age, free from danger; as well
bond, as free borne indifferently perished: amidst the lamentations of their
wives and children; who whilst they sat by them and bewailed, were often burnt
in the same funeral fire. The death of gentlemen and Senators although in
different with others, less lamented, as though they had by a common
mortality prevented the Princes cruelty. The same year they mustered in
Gallia Narbonensis, Afric, and Asia, to supply the legions of Illyria, which
worn out either with years or sickness were freede from their oath. The
Prince relieved the oalamitie of Lugdunum with About 31250 pound.
forty hundred thousand sesterces to recover the losses of their city: which
sum of money the Lugdunenses had before bestowed in troubled times.

III. The death of certain noble men, for desire of their wealth or other
iealousies.
C. Suetonius, and L. Telesinus being Confuls, Antistius Sosianus banished, as
I have said before, for making slanderous verses against Nero, understanding
that pickthankes were so honored, and the Prince so forward to murders, busy
minded, and not slow in taking hold of occasions, insinuates himself through
conformity of fortune, into the favor of Pammenes a banished man of the same
place; and for his skill in the Chaldean art, supported by the friendship of
many. This Antistius supposing that messages and consultations came not to him
in vain, understands withal that he had money yearly supplied him by P.
Anteius. Neither was he ignorant that Anteius through the love he bare to
Agrippina was hateful to Nero; that his wealth, as it had been of others,
might be a motive to procure his destruction. Whereupon having intercepted
Anteius letters, and stolen his writings wherein the day of his nativity and
things to come, were hidden among Pammenes secrets, and withal found those
things which had been composed of the birth and life of Ostorius Scapula:
writes to the Prince, that he would bring him great news touching his own
safety, if he might obtain a short intermission of his banishment: for
Anteius and Ostorius watch for opportunity to lay hold on the sovereignty,
and searched out their own and Caesar's destinies. Thereupon swift vessels were
sent and Sosianus brought with all speed. And his accusation diuulged, Anteius
and Ostorius were reckoned rather among the condemned than accused; in so much
that no man would have sealed Anteius testament, if Tigellinus had not been
their warrant. Anteius was first admonished not to delay the making of his
testament: but he having drunken poison, weary of the slow working of it, by
cutting his veins hastened his death. Ostorius at that time was far off in
the confines of Liguria, whither a Centurion was sent to make him away with all
speed. The cause of the haste proceeded of that, that Ostorius being for matter
of war of good reckoning, and deserved in Britannie a ciuicall crown, of a
mighty strength of body and skillful in arms, drove Nero into a fear least
he should assail him; always timorous and fearful, but then more then ever,
through the conspiracy lately detected. The Centurion therefore when he had
beset al escaping places, opens to Ostorius the Emperors commandment. He
converted against himself his courage often tried against the enemy. And
because his veins when they were opened, yielded but little blood, using the
hand of his slave only to take out a rapier and hold it steadfast: he drew his
right hand to him, and ran himself through the neck. If I should have
written of foreign wars, and deaths sustained for the commonwealth, with
diverse other accidents and chances: yet I should not only have seemed tedious
to my self; but to others also: abhorring the deaths of citizens, being
doleful and continual, although honorable. But now a servile patience, and so
much blood lost at home, does trouble my mind and oppress it with grief.
Neither do I require any other defense or excuse of those who shall know these
things, but that they hate them not, for dying so cowardly. That was certainly
the anger of the gods against the Roman state, which ought not so easily be
run over with once writing, as in the overthrow of armies, or taking of
towns. Let this prerogative be given the posterity of worthy personages,
that as how they are distinguished from the confuse multitude in the solemnity
of their funerals: so in the delivery of their last ends, that they may
receive and have a proper and peculiar memory. For within a few days by the
same violent course, Annaeus Mella, Cerialis Anicius, Rufus Crispinus, and C.
Petronius perished. Mella and Crispinus were gentlemen of Rome, and equal in
dignity with Senators. Crispinus once Captain of the guarde, and honored with
Consularie ornaments, and of late through the conspiracy, exiled into
Sardinia, having received tidings he should die; slew himself. Mella borne of
the same parents as Gallius and Seneca, forbear purchasing of dignities, by a
preposterous ambition, to the end that a Roman gentleman might be equalled in
authority to the Consuls. Withal he thought it a shorter course of getting
wealth, to manage the affairs of the prince in quality of a Procurator. The
same Mella was Annaeus Lucanus father, which was a great credit to him: but
after his death, seeking out too narrowly his goods, stirred up an accuser
against him, one Fabius Romanus, one of Lucans familiar friends: which falsely
fathered upon him and the father, the priuitie of the conspiracy, by
counterfeiting of Lucans letters: which Nero having perused, commanded to be
carried him, gaping after his wealth. But Mella, which was then the readiest way
to death, loosed his veins, having bestowed in his testament a huge sum of
money upon Tigellinus, and on his son in law Cossutianus Capito, that the
rest might stand good. He added to his will as it were a complaint of the
injustice of his death: That he died for no causes deserving punishment: but
Rufus Crispinus and Anicius Cerialis enjoyed their life, being the Princes
enemies. Which words were thought to have bin forged, of Crispinus because he
was already slain; of Cerialis because he should be slain. Who not long
after killed himself, less pitied than the rest: as bearing in mind that he
had discovered a conspiracy to C. Caesar.

IIII. The constant death of C. Petronius, and what life he led.
OF C. Petronius, a few things above recited are here again to be repeated.
He passed the day in sleep, and the night in delightful sports, or other
affairs of life. And as others, industry; so this man, sloth had raised to
fame: a riotous and wastfull spender he was, not accounted like many, which run
through all, but using riot to his credit. And his words and deeds how much
the freer, and showing a certain carelesnes; so much the more gratefully
received, as savoring somewhat of simplicity. Notwithstanding being Proconsull
of Bithynia, and anon after Consul, he showed himself quick and stout, and
able to wade through great matters. Then falling again to his vices, or else
show of vices, was received amongst Neroes familiar friends, as a judge and
arbitrator of his daintiest delights, esteeming nothing pleasant or
delightful, unless Petronius had approved it. Thereupon grew Tigellinus
malice against him, as against a concurrent, or one more skillful in pleasures
then himself, whetting Neroes cruelty (unto which all other lusts gave place)
against him: obiecting the friendship he had with Sceuinus, corrupting a slave
to be his accuser: taking from him all means of defense, and the greatest part
of his family drawn into prison. By chance about that time Caesar went to
Campania, and Petronius gone as far as Cumas, was there stayed; and not able
any longer to endure the lingering between hope, or fear, yet did not rashly
kill himself, but cutting his veins, and binding them up as pleased him,
opened them again, and talked with his friends, though not of any serious
matter, or worthy to purchase the glory of constancy: but gave ear to those
which discoursed with him, yet nothing of the immortality of the soul, or
opinions of wise men, but of light verses, and easy songs. On some of his
slaves he bestowed gifts, and on some stripes. He went sometimes abroad, and
gave himself to sleep, that although his death was constrained, yet it should
be like a casual death. Neither in his testament (as most men were wont to do)
did he flatter Nero or Tigellinus or any other favorite, but wrote down the
unclean life of the Prince, under fained names of stale catamites, abused
against nature, and of women, with the strangenes of the abuse of either of
them; and sealed up, sent it to Nero, and brake his seal, least afterward it
might serve to breed danger to others. And Nero doubting how the invention of
his night pleasures should come to light, Silia by being the wife of a Senator
not unknown, and abused in all his licentious lusts, and very familiar with
Petronius, came to his mind, whom he thrust into banishment, as not having
kept secret those things she had seen and suffered: moved thereto by his own
particular hatred rather then rest occasion. He delivered Numicius Thermus once
Praetor, to Tigellinus privy hatred, because Thermus freed man had laid some
criminal matter to Tigellinus charge, which he should pay for by torment of
torture, and his master by undeserved death.

V. Neroes hatred against Thraseas Paetus, and Bareas Soranus.
SO many worthy men being murdered, in the end Nero coueted to destroy virtue,
it self, by killing Bareas Soranus, and Thraseas Paetus, of old enemy to
both; and new occasions rising against Thraseas, because he went out of the
Senate, as I have already said, when Agrippinaes cause was debated; and because
that in the pastime of youth called Inuenales, he showed not so acceptable
endeavor as was expected: which grudge pearsed the deeplier, because the same
Thrasea at Padua where he was borne in the Cestian plays, instituted by
Antenor the Trojan, sang in tragical attire. The day also that Antistius the
Praetor was condemned for outrages against Nero, he gave a milder sentence, and
obtained it: and when the honor of the gods was ordained for Poppaea, absent
of set purpose, was not at the conuoy of the funeral. Which things Capito
Cossutianus did not suffer to be forgotten, besides his ouer-readie inclination
to naughtines, enemy to Thrasea, because that by his authority, countenancing
the deputies of Cilicia, he lost his cause, when they pursued Capito for using
injustice and extortion in his office. He objected farther: That in the
beginning of the year Thrasea did avoid the oath; was not present with the
rest at the offering up of vows, although he were one of the fifteen Priests,
yet he never offered sacrifice for the health of the Prince, or heavenly voice:
that heretofore he has been often present, and diligent, showing himself a
fauorer or an adversary to the ordinary consultations of the Lords of the
Senate, but has not once entered the Curia this three years: and very lately
when every man ran who first might, to punish Silanus and Vetus, he attended
rather on his clients private business: that was now a reuolting, and a faction,
and if many durst do the like, it would breed to a war. As in times past
(said he) the city desirous of garboile, spoke of C. Caesar, and M. Cato; so
now of thee o Nero and Thrasea, and has his adherents or rather followers,
which imitating, though not his obstinacy of opinions, yet his behauior and
countenance, severe and stern, do cast thy lasciuiousnes in thy teeth. This
man only is careless of thy health, no way procuring thy honor, he little
regards the Princes prosperous successes. What, is he not filled with thy
griefs, and sorrows? It proceeds from the selfsame mind not to believe
Poppaea to be agoddesse, and not swear to observe the ordinances of Augustus
and Julius of famous memory. He despises holy things, abrogateth laws. The
diurnals of the people of Rome are curiously read in the provinces and camp,
that it might be known what Thrasea has not done. Either let us condescend to
his ordinances if they be better: or let the captain and author be taken away
from desires of novelties. This sect brought forth the Tuberones and Fauonians,
unpleasing names to the ancient common wealth. That they may overthrow the
state, they pretend liberty: but if they should overthrow it, they will give
an assault to overthrow libertis likewise. Invaine thou have extinguished
Cassius, if thou will suffer the followers of Brutus to grow and take head. In
fine, write thou nothing of Thrasea; leave us the Senate arbitrator of the
cause. Nero extolleth Cossutianus stoutnes, whet on with choler, and joins
with him Marcellus Eprius, of a quick and lively eloquence. As for Barea
Soranus, Ostorius Sabinus, a Roman gendeman had required he might accuse him
for matter committed in the Proconsulship of Asia: in which he augmented the
displeasure the Prince bare him for justice and industry: and because he had
been very careful in opening the haven of the Ephesians; and had left
unpunished the violence of the city Pergamena, which hindering Acratus Caesar's
freed man to carry away their images and pictures. But the fault indeed laid
to his charge, was his friendship with Plautus, and ambition in alluring the
province to new hopes. The time chosen to condemn him, was, when Tiridates
came to take the kingdom of Armenia: that domestical wickedness might be
obscured and hidden with the rumors of the strangers arriving; or else that he
might show the greatness of an Emperor by the death of worthy men, as a royal
act. Whereupon all the city being run out to receive the Prince, and behold
the King, Thrasea forbidden to go to meet him, lost not courage therefore; but
wrote to Nero, demanding his accusations, boldly affirming that he would purge
himself, if he might have knowledge of the crimes, and license to clear them.
These writings Nero received very greedily, in hope that Thrasea being
terrified and dejected, would have written somewhat sounding to the
magnificencie and excellency of the Prince, and discredit of his own
reputation: which falling out otherwise, fearing the countenance, and courage
and liberty of the innocent, commanded the Lords of the Senate to be
assembled. Then Thrasea consulted with his friends, whether he should adventure
his purgation, or let it pass. Those which thought it best he should enter
into the Senate house, said, they were assured of his constancy, and that he
would say nothing but what should augment his glory. Cowardly and timorous men
did shut themselves in secret places at the time of their death. The people
should see a man offering himself to death; the Senate should hear words more
then humane, as it were of some divine power, that Nero himself might also be
moved with the miracle: but if his cruelty should continue, certes the memory
of an honorable death should be distinguished with posterity from the
cowardlines of such as perished with silence. Contrariwise, such as thought it
convenient to expect within doors what might happen, said the same of Thrasea:
But yet that skoffes and injuries were at hand: he should therefore withdraw
his ears from checks and reproachful speeches: not only Cossutianus and Eprius
are prompt to naughtines: some there are which peradventure would let their
hand walk and strike, through the cruelty * of Augustus: yea the good do the
like for fear. That he would rather deliver the Senate whom he had always
honored, of the infamy of so great a villainy: and leave it doubtful, what,
having seen Thrasea, the Lords of the Senate would determine. That Nero
should be ashamed of his wickedness, was to trouble himself with a vain hope:
and that it was much more to be feared, least he should grow cruel against his
wife, his family, and the rest of his children. Therefore that undefiled and
uncorrupted, whose steps and studies he had imitated in his life, theirs also
he should follow in the honor of his death. There was present at this
consultation Rusticus Arulenus, Tribune of the people, a hot yongman, who for
desire of praise, offered to oppose himself to the decree of Senate. Thrasea
coold his courage: Least he should begin a vain enterprise unprofitable to the
criminal, and dangerous to the opposer. As for himself he had ended his
years, and that he ought not forsake the manner of his life so many years
continued: but he entered now into offices, and was in his choice to accept or
refuse such as are behind. That he should weigh well and ponder with himself
what course of governing he should enter into, of taking charge in the common
wealth in such a time as this. Whether it were fit for him to come into the
Senate, or not, he would have it rest in his own consideration.

VI. Thraseas accusation and death.
THe next day two armed Pretorian cohorts, beset the Temple of Venus the
mother: the ways to the Senate a company of gownd-men had filled, not hiding
their weapons: and a thick array of soldiers dispersed in the place of
assemblies and Temples; amidst whose looks and threats the Senators went into
the court; where the Princes oration was heard by his Quaestors mouth. None
noted by name, he blamed the Senators; That they neglected public duties, and
that by their example the gentlemen of Rome were become lazy. For what marvel
was it, if from Provinces far off they came not to Rome, when as the most
part having obtained the Consulship and priestly dignities, gave themselves
rather to pass the time withal pleasures in their gardens? Which the accusers
took hold of as it were of a weapon. And Cossutianus leading the dance, and
Marcellus with greater vehemency: Cried that this touched the whole state,
that through the disobedience of the inferiors, the lenity of the commander
was made lesser. The Lords of the Senate until that day had been too mild in
suffering Thrasea to forsake their side, his son in law Heluidius Priscus in
the same madness; Paconius Agrippinus, heir of his fathers hatred against
Princes, and Curtius Montanus composing destable verses to scoff and abuse men
without punishment. He found a lack of a Consul in the Senate, of a priest in
vows, in an oath a citizen: but against the ordinances and ceremonies of our
ancestors, Thrasea had openly put on the person of a traitor and an enemy.
Finally, that he should come and play the Senator, and as he was wont, protect
the backbiters of the Prince, and give his censure what he would have amended
or changed: for they could more easily endure one finding fault with all
things, then endure his silence now, condemning all things. Does peace
throughout the world displease him, or victories without loss of the armies?
That they would not suffer him have the desire of his overthwart ambition, who
grieved at the common prosperity, thought the place of assemblies, the
Theater, and Temples, solitary places, and threatened his own banishment.
These things unto him seemed not decrees, not magistrates: nor this the city
of Rome: that he would abandon, and separate his life from that city, whose
love in time past, and now whose sight he had cast off. When with these and the
like speeches Marcellus had inueighed, grim and threatening, in voice,
countenance and eyes kindled with rage: not that known, and by often use of
dangers, usual heaviness, but a new and a deeper fear seized the Lords of the
Senate, beholding the hands and weapons of the soldiers. Besides that, the
reverent representation of Thrasea came to their imagination: and some there
were which had compassion that Heluidius should suffer punishment in regard of
harmless affinity. What was objected against Agrippinus, but the lamentable
fortune of his father? When as he innocent also, was ruined by Tiberius
cruelty. Montanus, a virtuous young man was banished, because he made show of
his wit, though not with any diffamatorie verses.

VII. Soranus daughters oration in Senate, and his death.
IN the mean season Ostorius Sabinus, Soranus accuser, comes in, and
begins with his friendship had with Rubellius Plautus: and that being
Proconsull of Asia, he carried himself rather as fitting his own nobility,
than the common good, by entertayning and nourishiug sedition among the
citizens. These were stale matters, but as if they were fresh he joined the
daughter to the fathers alleging that she had bestowed money upon Magicians.
So it was indeed, through the love and affection Seruilia (so was she called)
bare her father, and vndiscretion of age; yet she consulted of nothing but of
the safety of their house; or whether Neroes wrath would be pacified; or the
Senators hearing of the cause, would be to the prejudice of her father. She was
called into the Senate, and stood one from the other before the Consuls
tribunal; the father very aged, the daughter under twenty years, a widow, and
desolate, her husband Annius Pollio of late banished; and not so much as
looking toward her father, whose dangers she imagined she had increased. Then
the accuser asking her whether she had sold her dowry ornaments, and taken
her jewel from her neck, to get money to practice magical superstitions?
first prostrating her self on the ground, with a long silence and weeping,
then embracing the altars, said: I have not called upon any wicked gods, I have
made no devilish inuocatio^s, nor any thing else by my unhappy prayers, then
that this my very good father, thou o Caesar, and you Lords of the Senate, would
save alive. So I have given my jewels, and apparel, and ornaments of my
dignity, even as I would have done my blood and life, if they had demanded
it. Let these men heretofore unto me unknown, look what names they carry,
what arts they practice: I made no mention of the Prince, unless it were
among the gods. Yet my most unfortunate father knows it not: if it be an
offense, I alone have offended. Soranus took the words out of her mouth as she
was yet speaking, and cried, that she went not with him into the province: for
her age Plautus could not know her; she was not confederate with her husbands
crimes; she was guilty only of ouer-great and tender love: and therefore
whatsoever should sort to his lot, he besought them that they would separate
his cause from hers; withal, hastened to cast himself in the arms of his
daughter which came to meet him, if the serieants putting themselves between
them, had not hindered both. By and by the witnesses were heard; and how much
pity the cruelty of the accuser had moved, so much anger P. Egnatius the
witness sturred. This man being a client of Soranus, and then hired to oppress
his friend, pretended gravity of the Stoicall sect, in demeanor and
countenance to represent the pattern of honest exercises; but in mind was
traitorous, and deceiptfull, covering avarice, and a lewd mind: which being
discovered, and made known by money, has taught us to beware of such, as
under color of liberal sciences, are false in friendship: no less then of
those which are notoriously noted for vice, and treacherous dealing. The same
day was showed a notable example by Cassius Asclepiodotus, who for wealth,
being the chiefest among the Bithynians, used the same tokens of kindness
toward Soranus in his adversity, as before he had done in time of
prosperity: for which cause being deprived of all his goods, and cast into
banishment, by the justice of the gods * which lay before us a precident as
well of good as of bad. Thrasea, Soranus, and Seruilia had their choice given
them what death they would have. Heluidius and Paconius were banished Italy.
Montanus was granted to his father, with condition that he should bear no
charge in the common wealth. To the accusers Eprius and Cossutianus, to each
were given About 39062 pound 10. shil.
5. millions of sesterces; to Ostorius 12. hundred thousand About 9375. pound.
, and the ornaments of a questor. Then toward the evening, the Co^suls Questor
was sent to Thrasea, being then in his garde^s, visited with a great company
of noblemen and women, very attentively hearing the doctor Demetrius, one of
the Cynicall sect, of whom as it was to be coniectured by his countenance, and
heard if they speak any thing loud, he demanded sundry questions of the
nature of the soul, and of the separation of the spirit from the body; until
Domitius Cacilianus, one of his familiarest friends came, and declared what the
Lords of the Senate had decreed. Those which were present, bewailing and moning
Thrasea with all speed were exhorted to depart, least their lot should be to
partake the dangers of a condemned person, and persuades his wife Arria, who
would have died with him, to follow the example of her mother Arria, to keep
her self alive, and not bereave their daughter of them both, and of her only
stay and support. From thence he went to his gallery, where the Questor found
him, rather cheerful then sad, because he had understood that Heluidius his
son in law was only banished Italy. Then having received the order of the
Senate, he brought Heluidius and Demetrius into a chamber, and stretching out
the veins of both his arms, after he saw the blood gush out, sprinkling it on
the ground, and calling the Questor nearer, said: Let us sacrifice to Jupiter
the deliverer. Behold, young man, yet the gods preserve thee from the like
luck: nevertheless thou art borne in those times, in which it is expedient to
strengthen thy mind with constant examples: then the slow going out of the
blood, causing grievous torments, turning to Demetrius. *

The rest of the Latin is lost.

FINIS.
THE DESCRIPTION OF GERMANY: AND CUSTOMS OF THE PEOPLE, BY CORNELIUS TACITUS.
ALL Germany is divided from the Galli, the Rhaetians, and Pannonians, with
two rivers, Rhene and Danubius; from the Sarmatians and Dacians by mutual
fear of one the other, or high hills. The rest the Ocean does enuiron,
compassing broad and wide gulphes, and large and spacious Islands; the people
and Kings of which has been of late discovered by war. The river of Rhene
having his beginning on the top of the inaccessible, steep Rhaetian Alps, and
winding somewhat toward the West, falls into the North Ocean. Danubius
springing from the top of the hill Abnoba, not so steep, passing by many
nations, falls by six channels into the Ponticke sea: the seventh is lost in
the marshes. I may think that the Germans are homebred and the natural
people of their country, and not mixed with others, coming from other places;
because such as in times past sought new habitations, came by sea and not by
land: and that huge and spacious Ocean, and as I may term it, different from
the other, is seldom traveled by our men. For besides the danger of the
rough and unknown sea; who (unless it were his native soil) would leave
Asia, or Affricke, or Italy, and plant himself in Germany? Being a country
of it self rude, and the air unpleasant and rough, to look on ill-favored;
not mannured nor husbanded. They give it out as a high point in old verses
(which is the only way they maintain the memory of things, as their Annals)
that the god Tuisto, son of the earth, and his son Mannus, were their first
founders and beginners. To Mannus they assign three sons; whose names the
Ingaeuones took, a nation near the Ocean: the Istaeuones, and Herminones
lying between them both. But some through a license which antiquity does
give, affirm that the King had more sons, from which more nations took their
names; as the Marsi, Gambriui, Sueui, Vandali, all true and ancient names. As
for the name, Germany, it is a new name lately coined: for those which first
past the river of Rhene and drove out the Gallois, were now called Tungri, now
Germani: so the name of one people, not of the whole nation, growing great by
little and little: as they were all at the first called for fear, as best
liked the Conqueror; so at last, Germans, being a name of their own
invention. And they record that Hercules, came amongst them of all that ever
was the valiantest person. They go singing to the wars. And have certain
verses, by singing of which, calling it Barditus, they encourage their people,
and by the same song foretell the fortune of the future battle: for they both
strike a fear into others, and are themselves stricken with fear, according to
the measure and tune of the battle: seeming rather an harmony of valor than
voices; and do affect principally a certain roughnes of the voice, and a
broken confuse murmur, by putting their targets before their mouths, to the
end their voice by the reuerberation might sound bigger and fuller. Yea some
are of opinion, that Ulysses in his long and fabulous wandering, being brought
to this Ocean, came into Germany, and built the town Asciburgium upon the
bank of Rhene and inhabited at this day, which he called (...). And that an
altar consecrated to Ulysses has been found in the same place, with his
fathers name Laertes: and that there are yet monuments extant, and certain
tumbes inscribed with Greek letters, in the confines of Germany and Rhaetia:
which I intend not to confirm by reasons, or confute; and therefore I leave it
to every man's judgment to believe or not. For mine own part I hold with
them, which think that the people of Germany, not changed and altered by
marrying with other nations, have continued the true and pure nation like unto
none, but themselves. And therefore you see they have all one feature and
making, though they be infinite in number: fiery and gray eyes, yellow hair,
great bodies, and strong at a push only. Travel and pain they cannot endure:
nor yet thirst nor heat; but to hunger and cold the air and the country has
inured them. The soil, although differing somewhat in kind, yet generally is
wild with woods, or unpleasant and ill-favored with marshes: moister toward
Gallia: more windy toward Noricum and Pannony: batfull enough; but bad for
fruit-bearingtrees; cattle plenty, but for the most part harletry runts: their
kine and laboring beast has no beauty in him: all their joy is in plenty
of them: and therein consists their wealth; and the wealth they chiefly
desire. Silver and gold whether the angry or fauourablegods have denied them, I
doubt. Neither will I affirm that there is no vain in Germany which yields
silver and gold: for who has sought it? the possession of these metals or use,
they do not greatly affect. Yet vessels of plate you may see among them
presented to their Ambassadors and Princes; but as smally accounted of, as if
they were of earth: although the borderers for commodity of traffic, like
gold and silver well; and do acknowledge and choose some coin, bearing our
images. Those which dwell further in the land, go more simply to work, and
according to the old manner, have no buying and selling, but by exchange of
commodities. The older the money, and longest known, the better liked, as that
which is toothed about like a saw: or has the picture of a chariot drawn
with two horses. They desire rather silver then gold: not for any liking unto
it; but because that, being in smaller money, it is easlier put away in buying
and selling of small wares. Iron they have little among them, as by their
weapons it may be gathered. Few of them use swords, or great lances: but carry
Iauelins, or as they term them Frameas, with a narrow and short iron, but so
sharp and handsome, that as occasion serves, with the same weapon they can
fight both at hand, and a far off: and the horseman is contented with a
shield and a framea. The footmen use weapons, to throw one man a great many,
and that a great way off: naked, or covered with a light cassocke. Handsomnes
and neatnes in attire they do not brag of, but trim and distinguish their
shields only with variety of colors. Brigantine or cote of fence few have.
Salet or head-peece scarce any one uses. Their horses are neither beautiful
to the eye, nor swift, nor managed to the carrire according to our fashion;
but to go on straight, or turn on the right hand so close and round, that not
one drags behind another. All things well considered, their greatest strength
consists of footmen: and therefore in their fight they mingle the one with
the other; the footmen which are a chosen number out of the youth, and placed
before the battle, neither going too hastily before the horsemen, nor drailing
after, but marching in proportionable measure with them. There is a certain
number set down, that is, of every towneship or borough an hundred, for so
they term themselves: and that which was but a number at the first, is now a
name and an honor. Their battles be pointed: to give ground, so as they charge
lustely after, they think rather a point of good policy then cowardlines. The
bodies of their soldiers they carry away, even in doubtful battles: to
abandon his shield is the chiefest disgrace and offense: an ignominious person
is barred from their sacrifices, and from their assemblies; and many which have
fled from battles, have for shame hanged themselves. Their Kings they choose by
noblenes of birth, and their Captains by valor. The Kings power is
restrained, and not to do what he lists; and their Captains if they be
forward in sight, and in the point of the battle, are admired and reverenced
rather for their example, then commanderie. Power to punish, to emprison or
beat, none have but Priests: yet that not as a punishment, or at the Captains
commandment; but as it were by the commandment of God, whom they believe
does assist warriors in battles; and carry before them certain images, and
monuments taken out of the woods. And which is the chiefest encouragement of
all, they make not their pointed battle at hap hazard, of all persons as they
come; but of their family and friends, and kinsfolk, with their children not
far of; from whence they may hear the howling of their wives, and crying of
their children: which are to all, sacred witnesses of their valor, and best
commenders. They go when they are hurt to their mothers and wives; which are
not afeard to number or suck their wounds; and carry the soldiers meat, and
encourage them to stand to it. It is reported that some battles, even ready as
it were to be lost, and discomfited, have been by the women's earnest prayers,
exposing their bodies to the danger, and by showing how near at hand their
captivity was, recovered again: which in regard of their wives is a greater
grief and hart-breake unto them; in so much that those cities are more
straightly bound, which amongst other hostages have delivered also noblemens
daughters: for they dream that they have in them I know not what holiness and
foresight of things; which makes them regard their counsel, and give credit
to their oracle. Under Vespasian of famous memory, we have seen Velleda a
long time and with many nations counted as some divine thing: and in times past
did adore Aurinia, and many others, not of flattery, or as though they would
have made them goddesses.

II. Their religion and policy.
OF all the gods, they adore especially Mercury; unto whom they think it
lawful certain days, to offer men in sacrifice: but Hercules and Mars they
pacify with beasts, lawfully killed to that use: and some of the Sueuians
sacrifice to Isis. What reason they have to use that strange sacrifice, I know
not: unless it be that the image of that goddess, being fashioned in form of
that kind of boat, does declare that their religion has been brought them
from a strange country. They think it a matter il beseeming the greatness of
the gods, to enclose them within walls, or paint them in man's shape. They
consecrate woods and forrestes; which secret places they call by the names of
gods: which they see only by apprehension and reverence.

Soothsaying and lots they observe above all others. Their custom in casting
of lots is without fraud: for they cut a branche from a fruit-bearing-tree,
into many pieces; and distinguished with several marks cast them upon a white
garment, at adventure: then if the matter belong to a communaltie, the Priest;
if to a private person, the master of the house having prayed the gods, and
looking up to the heaven, takes up every of them three times: and
interprets them according to their marks. If the lots fall contrary to
their minds, they consult no more that day, the same matter. But if they do,
yet they will try what further credit there is in Soothsaying: for they are
not ignorant in this country of observing the singing of birds and their
flying, consulting with their gods of both. And it is a thing peculiar unto
that country to try the presages and warnings of horses; which are bred and
maintained in those woods and forests, white, vnbacked, or unlabored: which
harnessed and put to a sacred chariot, the Priest, King, or Prince of the city
do follow; observing their noise and neying. Of all presages this is of
greatest credit with the Priests, noblemen, and common people: thinking
themselves ministers of the gods; and the horses privy to their secrets. They
have another observation among them, by which they search out the event of
great and weighty battles; which is this. They get some one, how they can, of
that nation with whom the war shall be; and take another choice man of their
own, and arm them, each according to his fashion; and so try their valor:
and by that prejudice, conjecture on whose side the victory shall fall. In
small matters, the Princes themselves determine of them: but if they be of
importance, they all in general consult: but yet so, that those things whose
determination belong to the people, are concluded before the Prince. And
unless some casual or sudden accident fall out, they make their assemblies
certain days, either in the first quarter or full moon; thinking that to be
the luckiest time to begin their works. The number of days they reckon not,
as we do, but of nights; and in them make their appointme^ts, and sommonces to
appear, thinking that the day is governed by the night. Their liberty is
cause, that they meet not togeither, nor as they are commanded, but spend two
or three days in expecting one another. They sit armed as they come, and the
Priest, who has authority to punish, commands silence. Then the King or
Prince, or every man according to his age, nobility, and renown of war, or
as he is eloquent, begins to speak. Using rather persuasion then authority
of commanding. If their opinion mislike them, they reject it with a murmuring
noise: if it liked, they shake their iauelins: but the most honorable manner of
liking is to approve it by their weapons. It is lawful in their council to
accuse, and arraigne in criminal causes. Punishments are distinguished by the
offense: traitors and fugitives they hang on trees: the cowardly and unwarlike,
and such as were unnaturally lewd of their bodies, they did drown in mud and
marrishes, and cover them with hurdles. The drift of that diversity of
punishments was; to declare that it was expedient to show offenses as they
were, in punishing, but hide heinous crimes. But in lesser trespasses,
according to the quality of the punishments, the parties convicted, are fined,
in some number of horses, or other cattle; whereof part goes to the King, or
city; part to the party damnified, or to his kindred. In the same councels
they choose rulers, to administer justice in towns and villages: which have an
hundred chosen out of the people, to accompany them, which are as their
counsel, and authority. They consult neither of public nor private affairs
but armed: but yet it is not the manner for any to take weapons, unless he have
been judged before by the city able to use them: and then in the council,
either one of the governors, or his father, or some one of his kindred, does
honor the young man with a shield and a Framea. This is with them a gown;
this is the first honor given to young men: before reputed a part of their
particular house, but from thence forward, of the common wealth. High
nobility, or merit of predecessors, makes their children although they be but
young, worthy of dignity, which associat themselves to the stronger, and
long tried: and take it for no disgrace, to be seen among their followers:
among which there be likewise degrees according to his discretion of whose
train they be. And there is a great emulation among the followers who should
be in greatest favor with his Prince: and amongst the Princes, who should have
the greatest number following him, and most courageous. This is their honor,
this their strength; to be guarded always with a company of choice youth: which
is a credit and reputation, in peace; and in war, a defense. And it is not
only an honor and glory in ones own nation to have a gallant number, and a
valiant in his train; but is also a matter of reputation with cities
adjoining: as men sought unto by Ambassadors: and presented with gifts: and do
oftentimes by their only fame end wars. When they come to join battle, it
is a dishonor to the Prince, to be overcome in valor: and to his followers,
not to go as far in prowess as their Prince. Now to return alive from that
battle, in which his Prince is slain, is a perpetual infamy and reproach:
being the principallest part of their oath, to defend and maintain him, and
ascribe their own exploits to his glory and honor. Princes fight for
victory; the followers, for the Prince. If the city wherein they are borne,
grow lazy with a long peace, and idleness; most of the young noblemen, go of
their own will to those nations, wherein there is wars: because that nation
disliketh rest and quietness: as winning greater renown in doubtful and
hazardeous attempts; and not able to entertain so great number of followers,
but by violence and war: sometimes by the liberality of their Prince getting
that horse of service, and bloody and conquering sword. Their bankets, and
large, but rude diet, is insteede of pay: but matter to minister liberality
comes by war and rapine. To manure the ground, or expect the season, thou
can not so easily persuade them; as to provoke the enemy, and deserve
wounds: to get that with the sweat of thy brows, which thou may win by
the loss of thy blood, they hold as an idle and slothful part. When they are
not busied in wars, they give not themselves much to hunting: but spend more of
their time in idleness, as a people much given to sleep and feed. When the
valiantest and warlikest are idle, they commit the care of household affairs
and tillage, to women and old men, and to the weakest of their family; and do
themselves grow heavy and lazy: a strange diversity of disposition, that the
same men should so much love sloth, and hate quietness. The custom is in
cities to bestow by pole upon the Princes, either of their cattle or grain,
which is received as an honor, yet supplieth their wants. But above all, they
are exceeding glad if any thing be presented them by neighbour-nations, which
do send sometimes in particular, sometimes in common: as choice horses, great
weapons, furniture for horse, and chains; and now we have taught them also to
receive money. It is well known that the Germans dwell in no cities, nor will
not suffer their houses to join together, but asunder, the one from the other,
as they liked best of their fountains, fields, or wood. They build not their
villages as we do, one house close to another: but every man leaves a space
about his house, either as a remedy against misfortunes of fire, or by
unskillfulness in building. Parget and mortar they use not, nor tiles: and use to
all buildings vnsquared and unwrought timber, without any beauty or delight,
but do daube some places very diligently with such a clear and shining earth,
that it resembles a picture, or draught of colors. It is a fashion amongst
them to dig deep caves under ground, and cover them over with dung, as a
succor in the winter, and garner for their grain; tempering the rigor of the
cold by such places: and if at any time the enemy come upon them, he forrageth
all open places, but hidden under ground, are either not found, or else are
saved, because they are driven to seek them. They all wear a kind of cassock
called sagum, clapsed, or for want of one, fastened with a thorn, and having no
other garment, but naked, lie all day in the harth, or by the fire. The richer
sort are distinguished from the others by their garments, which are not large
and wide as the Sarmates and Parthians use to wear them, but strait, and
showing the proportion of every part of the body. Besides, they wear certain
pelts made of beasts skins; those near the Rhene-banke carelessly; but those
which are farther off more curiously, as never trimming themselves with far-fet
merchandise. They make choice of certain beasts, and here and there specke
their skins with spots: and the like with the skins of beasts taken in the
farthest Ocean, or unknown sea. The man and woman's attire differs in
nothing, saving that the women often use linen garments trimmed and interlaced
with purple: and the upper parts of their bodies without sleeves, their arms
bare, and their bosom naked and uncovered. Yet matrimony is severely kept
among them: the thing most commendable of all their manner of life: for of all
barbarous people, they alone content themselves, every man with one wife,
except some very few: which not for unruly lust, but for their nobility are
sued unto for sundry marriages. The wife gives not a dowry to her husband, but
the husband to the wife. Their parents and near kinsmen are present, when they
give any gifts the one to the other: which are not exquisite as to dainty
dames, or for to beautify and trim the new married wife; but oxen, and a horse
with furniture, and a shield with a sword, and lance. With these gifts the wife
is taken, and she also does bring her husband some arms: this is the greatest
bond: these are the secret ceremonies: these they think to be the gods of
marriage. And least the woman should think herself exempt and free from bonds
of virtue, or hazards of war, in the very beginnings and first speech of
marriage, she is put in mind, that she comes as a companion of his labors
and dangers: and that she shall suffer and venture the fame in peace and war
that he does: that is the signification and construction of the oxen yoked, of
the horse with bridle and furniture, this the meaning of the weapons and arms
given on one side and the other: thus she must live, thus she must die: she
receives that which she must deliver unviolated and pure to her children,
which their daughters in law do receive as worthy things, and yield again to
their nephues. They live therefore in most strait chastity, uncorrupted with
the allurements of shows and spectacles, or prouocations in banketting. As
well men as women are ignorant of the secrets of learning. Adultery is seldom
committed in so populous a nation, and the punishment for it incontinently
inflicted, as best likes the husband: who having cut her hair, turns her
naked out of his house in the presence of her kinsfolks, and drives and
beats her throughout all the town: no pardon given to her that has violated
her chastity: neither for her beauty, nor age, nor wealth, can she ever after
find another husband* No man laugheth at vices: neither when any is corrupted,
or does corrupt, do they say, it is the time. Yet there is one thing more
commendable in those cities, that only virgins do marry, and that only once,
and the man the like, contracting with the hope and desire of one wife. As they
have but one body, one life; so they take but one husband: that they might
have no other thoughts, no farther desires, nor love him as so deserving it,
but because of matrimony. To prescribe a certain number of children, or kill
any of their near kindred, they count it a heinous crime. Good manners are of
greater authority and force among them, then elsewhere good laws. They grow
to have these great lims and bodies which we marvel at, naked, and slouenly in
every house. Every mother nurseth her own children with her own breasts, and
send them not to nurses or other women. Thou shall not know the Lord from the
slave, by any note of deintie and nice education: for they live amongst the
same cattle, and on the same ground, until age does distinguish the (...) his
valor make him known. Young men give not themselves too (...)e with women; and
therefore decay not so soon: neither are (...)ed to marry: they are of the
same years, of like growth: they are (...) with such as are of like strength;
and the children express and show the strength of their parents. Sisters
children are as much set by in their uncles house, as in their fathers. Some
are of opinion, that this bond of blood is the straitest and holiest, and most
of all required, in taking of hostages: as those which are of a more constant
mind, and in the family the greatest part: yet every man's children succeed
as heirs: and testament they make none at all. If there be no children to
succeed, the next in degree are brothers, uncles by the fathers side and by
the mothers. The more kindred, the greater affinity, the more an old man is
honored: and to be without children, is of no reputation. They must as well
become enemy to their fathers enemies or kinsmens, as friend to their friends.
Their hatred is not implacable: for man's slaughter it self is satisfied and
redeemed with a certain number of beasts, which contenteth the whole family,
and is profitable for the common good: for where liberty is, there private
enmities are dangerous.

III. Their domestical life and behavior.
GReater hospitality and entertainment is no where more bountiful than there,
being a cursed deed to bar any man his house: and not give him meat and
drink according to his ability. When all is spent, the last host will be a
guide and companion unto him to the next house vninuited: for that skilleth
not; but are received with like courtesy: in respect of hospitality making no
difference whether he be of acquaintance or not. If any thing be demanded of
him which is going away, the manner is to grant it; and he may with like
facility ask again. Gifts are things which please them well: but those which
give them do not think they do you a benefit therein, and those which receive
them not bound or beholden for them. They entertain their guests courteously:
immediately after they rise (which for the most part is very late and the day
well spent) they wash, and most commonly in warm water, as having long
winters: and when they have washed, they fall to eat, eurie man his stool and
his mess to himself: then they fall to their business; and as often to banquet
and make good cheer all armed. To sit a tippling a day and a night, is no
disgrace to any. There arise many quarrels (as commonly it happens where
drunkards meet) which seldom end with brawling and injurious terms, but
oftener with murder and hurt. In their bankets they consult of peace and war,
make attonements betwixt such as are at debate, make marriages, and choose
their Princes: as a time when the mind is never more open to plain dealing; or
more sturred up to great attempts. The people being neither crafty nor subtle,
through the liberty of the place does the^ most discover the secrets of his
breast. Every man's mind then being open and discovered, the next day, they
weigh and examine it; with a regard had to both the times. They deliberate when
they cannot dissemble; and resolve when they cannot err. Their drink is a
liquor made of barley and corn, corrupted into the likeness of wine. But those
which dwell near the bank of Rhene, buie wine: their meats are simple; wild
Apples; fresh venison; or curds or cream: they drive away hunger without any
solemn service, ordainties: but against thirst they use not the like
temperance. If thou will please their humor in drunkenness, in giving them what
they ask: they will be as easily overcome with vices as arms. They have but
one and the same kind of: pastime in every assembly. Young men, which know
the sport cast themselves naked, and leap between swords and lances.
Practice bred the art of doing it, and art the grace; yet neither for gain
nor recompense: albeit the reward of bold and rash toies is the delight of the
beholder. And (which thou would marvel at) fresh and fasting, they play at
dice, as a matter of serious and earnest business, with such a rash desire of
winning and losing; that when all else is lost, they lay their liberty and
body upon the last throw: and he who is overcome enters a voluntary
servitude: and although he be yoonger, and stronger; yet suffers himself to
be bound and sold. Such is their obstinacy in a bad matter; which they call
faith: but slaves of this condition, they make away by merchandise, to rid
themselves of the shame of such a victory. Their other slaves they employ not
in certain affairs of house, as we do ours; but every one governs his own
house and household. The Lord inioyneth him to pay a certain of corn; or
cattle, or apparel, as he does his tenant, which the bondslaue performs and
no more: other duties of house belong to the wife and children. It is a rare
matter to beat their slaves, or ouer-labour or emprison them: yet they are
wont to kill them; not by discipline and severity, but carried away with
sudden anger, as against an enemy, saving that it is unpunished. The freed men
are not much above the slave; they seldom bear any sway in the house or city,
saving in those countries which have a King. For there they are in greater
authority, then either free borne or noblemen: in other countries freed men
being of unequal condition, make liberty better known. To practice usury,
and in rich themselves with it, they know not what it means: which is better
kept then if it were forbidden. All the ground the inhabitants about do
possess, according to their number: which they divide among themselves,
according to their calling; which is easily done by reason the fields are so
spacious. Their earable land they change by years: and let only; not
laboring to overcome the fertilnes and largenes of it by industry; by
planting of orchardes; enclosing their meadows; and watering their gardens:
only they use much tillage. Hereupon they divide not the year into so many
seasons, as we do: the winter, spring time, and summer, they understand, and
have names for: but as for the autumn, as well the name, as the commodities it
brings, are unknown. Ambition they use none in their funerals: only that
one thing is observed; that the bodies of noblemen are burned with a certain
kind of wood. The pile of the funeral fire, they do neither fill up with
apparel nor sweet odors: every man's arms, and somes horse was burnt
likewise. The toombe is raised up with turns of earth: great works and
laborious monuments they despise as heavy for the dead: lamentation and tears
they quickly forbear; but grief and sorrow slowly. It is seemly enough for
the women to mourn; and for men to remember the dead. This is it which we have
learned in general, of the beginning and customs of the Germans. Now I will
lay down the ordinances and customs of every people in particular; and how
they differ; and what nations have gone out of Germany, to the Gallois.

IIII. What Gallois have passed into Germany.
IVlius of famous memory, the chiefest of all authors does deliver, that the
state of the Gallois has in times past been of greater force and power, then
now it is: and therefore not unlike, but the Gallois went into Germany. For
what great hinderance could the river be; that, every nation as he was strong,
should not set himself in possession and change seats, yet unoccupied, and
not divided by any power of kingdoms? Therefore the Heluetians held that which
lies between the Hercynian forest, and the two rivers Rhene and Moene: and
the Boij that which is beyond, both nations of Gallia. The name of the Boiemi
does yet continue, and does signify the old memory of theplace, although the
inhabitants be changed: But whether the Arauisci from the Osi, a people of
Germany, came into Pannonia; or the Osi from the Auarisci into Germany, is
yet uncertain: considering they use the same language, laws, and customs:
for being equal in times past in poverty and liberty; the commodities and
discommodities of both the banks were common to them alike. The Treueri and the
Neruij ambitiously seem to have their beginning from the Germans: as though by
this glory of blood, they should be unlike, and differ in cowardlines from the
Gallois. Without all doubt the bank of Rhene is inhabited with the people of
Germany, the Vangiones, Treboci, Nemetes. The Vbij, albeit they have deserved
to be a Roman colonie: and desire to be called rather Agrippinians by the name
of their foundresse, though not ashamed of their beginning, have heretofore
past over; and for good proof of their fidelity, have been planted upon the
bank of Rhene, to keep off others, and not for any safety of their own. Of
all these nations, the chiefest in valor are the Batauians, which inioye small
part of the bank of Rhene, but inhabit an Island of the river ofRhene; in
times past a people of the Catti, and went by reason of civil sedition into
those countries to be a part of the Roman Empire. The honor and marks of
ancient alliance do yet continue, for they are neither contemned by paying
tributes, nor oppressed by the farmer of public revenues. They are exempted
from charges and contributions, as reserved for use of war, as it were arms
and weapons. The Mattiaci do the like allegiance: for the greatness of the
people of Rome has been enlarged further then the old bounds of the Empire did
extend, and beyond the Rhene. Therefore in regard of their habitation and
bounds, they inhabit the bank, but in heart and mind dwell with us: in other
things like the Batauians; saving that by reason of their soil and air, they
are more forward and stout. I will not account them among the people of
Germany, albeit they are planted beyond Rhene, and the Danube, of whose land
the tenth is raised. The lewdest of all the Gallois, and whom need has driven
to venture, have possessed that country as doubtfully holden. Not long after,
having enlarged their bounds, and placed fortresses farther, they are within
the compass of the Empire, and are a part of the province. Beyond these, the
Cattians begin from the Hercynian forest, but have not so wide and marish a
country, as the other cities in which Germany does open and spread itself:
for the hills are one by another, and continue a certain space, and then by
little and little wax thinner: and the Hercynian forest does contain the
Catti, and is the bounds of their territory. They are a people hardened to
labor, well set, stern countenanced, and of greater courage. As Germans go,
they are sensible wise men, and considerate: they prefer choice men, harken
to their leaders, know their ranks, know where advantages are, bridle their
heat, dispose of the day to their benefit, entrench in the night, hold fortune
among things doubtful, and esteem of valor as of certainty: and which is
most rare, and understood only by discipline, they repose more assurance in
their leader, then in the army. All their strength consists in footmen,
whom besides their arms they load with iron tools and provision. Thou may
see others go to skirmish: but the Catti march to war. They seldom skirmish,
or fight at adventure. Their horsemen are of this property, that they either
quickly win the victory, or yield. Suddennes is near unto fear; lingering
draws nearer constancy. And that which is seldom used among other people of
Germany, through their boldness and hardines it is grown to a common consent
among the Catteans: that is, when they come to ripe years, they suffer their
hair and beard to grow at length; and never put off that vowed ornament of the
face, and as it were a bond of virtue, until they have killed an enemy. Upon
blood and spoil, they uncover their forehead, and say, they have paid back
the price of their birth; and think themselves worthy of their country and
parents: the cowardly and unwarlike remain in their ilfauourednes. Besides
this, every man as he is most valiant, wears an iron ring (an ignominious
thing to that people) as it were a bond, until they rid themselves of it, by
killing an enemy. This quality pleases many of the Catteans. And then they
grow graye, respected of their own people and enemies: these begin every
battle: these make always the first rank; strange to behold: for in time of
peace, they are altogether as fierce in countenance. There is not one of them
that has a house, or living, or care of any thing. As they come to every man's
house they are maintained: prodigal of other men's; and contemners of their
own: until through feeble old age, they are no longer able to endure so hard
a labor.

V. Of the Tencterians, Chamauians, and Frisians.
NExt unto the Catti, the Vsipij and Tencteri do inhabit the Rhene, running in
a certain channel, and which may suffice for a bound. The Tencteri besides
their ancient renown of wars, excel the rest in service of horse: and the
Catteans deserve no greater commendation for footmen, then the Tencterians for
horsemen. So did their predecessors ordain it, and successors follow it. These
are the childrens pastimes; this the emulation betwixtyong men; and old men
continue the same; and horses are delivered, as rights of inheritance among the
family: and the sons receive them, though not the eldest, but he who is most
courageous, and likeliest to make a marshall man. Hard by the Tencteri, in
times past the Bructeri did inhabit; but now it is reported that the
Chamauians, and Angriuarians, are entered into that country, and wholly rooted
out and chased the Bructerians, by agreement of nations adjoining: either as
hating them for their pride, or for sweetness of pray, or some favor of the gods
toward us; as not denying us the spectacle of the battle, wherein there were
slain threescore thousand, not by the Roman arms and weapons: but, which is
more glorious, to show us pastime, and please our eye. I wish that if those
people cannot love us, that they would hate one another, seeing that the state
of the Empire fatally declining, fortune can do us no greater favor, then sow
sedition among the enemies. The Angriuarians and Chamauians, have behind them
the Dulgibini and Chasuari, and other nations not greatly spoken of; and before
them the Frisians. The Frisians are called great or small, according to their
strength: the Rhene bordering both unto the Ocean, and besides that, do
comprehend huge and spacious lakes, which the Roman navy has past: yea and
the Ocean itself we have entered into and tried on that side. And the fame
goes, that Hercules pillars are yet there to be seen; either because Hercules
went so far, or else because by common consent all that is any where
magnificall, is attributed to his renown. Drusus Germanicus wanted not
courage: but the Ocean hindered us for being over inquisitiue of him or
Hercules. After that, no man assayed to do it, as being an act of greater
devotion and reverence, to believe the actions of the gods, rather then know
them. Hitherto we have seen the West part of Germany: toward the North it
goes bowing with a great compass. And first of all the people of the Chauceans,
although they begin at the Frisians, and possess part of the shore, coast all
those nations I have made mention of, until they wind into the Catti; and so
spacious and huge country the Chauci do not only hold, but fill likewise: of
all the German nation the noblest; and desirous to maintain their greatness by
justice: without covetousness or unbridled lust, quiet and retired; stir up
no wars, never waste, spoil, nor rob. And which is a special mark of their
valor and strength, they got not their superiority over others by any wrongs
offered. Yet they are all ready for war, and if occasion require to make an
army, wanting neither horse nor men: and although they lie quiet, yet their
reputation is never the lesser. On the side of the Chauci and Catti, the
Cherusci have nourished long, being never provoked, an idle and lazy peace:
which was more sweet than safe unto them, because there is no sure peace
between stirring and strong people. For when the matter is come to
hand-strokes, modesty and good dealing be terms which belong to superiors. So
the Cherusci in times past good and just, are now called cowards and fools:
and the fortune of the Catti being favorable, is cause that they are counted
wise. The Fosi, a people bordering upon the Cherusci, are touched with their
ruin, companions in their adversity, though in prosperity they were
inferior unto them. Near unto the same coast of the Ocean, the Cimbrians
inhabit; now a small people, but highly renowned: having yet remaining
certain marks of their old glotie; to wit, on both the banks, trenches and
lodges: by the circuit of which, thou may yet measure the greatness and
strength of that nation, and believe the number of so great an army. It was
six hundred and forty years after the foundation of our city, before the
Cimbrians arms were heard of, when Caecilius Metellus, and Papirius Carbo were
Consuls. From that time, unto the second time that the Emperor Traian was
Consul, by just account, are two hundred and ten years: and so many years we
were a conquering Germany. In the middle time, there were many losses on both
parts. Not the Samnites, not the Carthagineans, not the Spaniards, or the
Gallois; no, not the Parthian have so often troubled us: the liberty of the
Germans being more earnest, than the kingdom of the Arsacides. For what can
the East object against us, saving the death of Crassus, when he had defeated
Pacorus, before trodden down by Ventidius? But the Germans, having either
slain or taken Carbo and Cassius, and Scaurus Aurelius, and Seruilius Cepio,
and M. Manlius, have defeated also five Consularie armies, and Varus with three
legions in Caesar's time: neither have C. Marius in Italy, or Julius in Gallia,
Drusus, and Nero, and Germanicus, molested them in their houses without blows.
After that C. Caesar's great threatenings were turned to a jest. Then there was
quietness, until our civil wars gave them occasion, when they had taken the
standing camps of the legions, to have a desire to enter Gallia: from whence
being again driven out, in late times, they have been rather triumphed over
then vanquished.

VI. The Sueuians and other people.
NOw we will speak of the Sueui, which are not one nation as the Catti and
Tencteri: and possessing the greater part of Germany, and severed by peculiar
names and countries: although by one general name they be called Sueui: whose
mark is to curle their hair and tie it on knots. By that the Sueuian is
distinguished from the other Germans: and the free borne Sueuian from the bond
man. That in other countries is used also but seldom times, either for
affinity with the Sueuians; or as it often happens by imitation, and whilst
they be young: but the Sueuians even until they be old and gray, have their
hair standing an end, and often tie it on the crown only: princes wear it
after a finer fashion. That is the harmless care they have of their beauty.
For they use it not, either to win love, or be beloved: but turn it up to a
certain height, to seem to the enemy more terrible, when they go thus
trimmed to the war. The Semnones say, they are the most ancient of the
Sueuians, and the most noble. The credit of their antiquity they confirm with
this ceremony. At certain times, all of one blood meet by their deputies in a
wood, reputed holy by the auguration of their forefathers, and ancient
reverence; where publicly killing a man, they celebrate the barbarous
beginnings of their ceremony. Yet there is another reason why the wood is had
in reverence. No man enters into it, but bound with somewhat as an inferior
person, and acknowledging the power of the god. If he fall by chance; it is
not lawful for him to rise, or get up: but is rolled out: all their
superstition tending to this that from thence the nation had his beginning:
that there dwells the God, ruler of all others; and unto whom all other
things are subject and obedient. The fortune of the Semnones gives this
authority: their country is inhabited by an hundred villages: and by their
great body, they take themselves to be the head of the Sueuians. Contrarily,
the Longobards are renowned, by reason their number is so small: that being
hemmed in with many, very puissant nations; yet maintain themselves, not by
doing any duty to any but by wars and dangers. After them the Reudigni, and
Auiones, and Angli, and Varini, and Eudoses, and Suardones, and Nuithones, are
defended by rivers or woods: having no notable thing particular in any; saving
that generally they adore Herthum, that is, the mother-earth, whom they believe
to be present at men's affairs. There is a wood called Castum in an Island of
the Ocean, and a chariot dedicated in it, covered with apparel, which one
Priest only may lawfully touch. He knows that the goddess is in some secret
part of the house, and follows her with great reverence as she is lead by
Kowes: and make those holy days and places of joy which she vouchsafes to
honor with her presence. War they make none, nor put on any armor, nor show
any weapon: but peace and quietness is only known and loved: until the same
priest, bring back the goddess to her Temple, filled with the conversation of
mortal men. Then the chariot and the apparel, if you will believe it, the
divinity itself is washed in some secret lake: bond men minister unto her,
which the same lake does incontinently swallow up. Whereof arises a secret
terror, and an holy ignorance, what that should be, which they only see which
are a perishing. And this part of Sueuia, reaches far within the country of
Germany: the nearer (that I may describe that part which lies by Danub, as I
have done that which lies along the Rhene) is the city of the Hermunduri,
faithful to the Romans: and therefore of all the Germans traffic, not only
upon the bank of Rhene, but even within the heart of the country, and in the
most famous colonie of the Province Rhaetia. These go all over without a
guard: and whereas we show other nations, sometimes our arms, sometimes our
camp; to these we lay open our houses, and villages, as people not desiring
them. In the country of the Hermunduri, the river Albis has his beginning, in
times past a famous river and well known; but now only heard of. Near unto
the Hermundurians dwell the Narisci, the Marcomani, and Quadi. The greatest
renown and strength that the Marcomans have, is in that they got their
dwellings by valor and driving out in times past the Boiens. Neither do the
Narisci, and the Quadi degenerate. And that is as it were the frontier of
Germany, on that side which the Danube borders. The Marcomani and the Quadi,
had even until times of our memory, Kings of their own nation, of the noble
stock of the Marobodui, and Tudri: but now they suffer strangers; which have
their strength and power, by the authority of the Romans: and seldom use our
arms, but are often helped with our money. Neither are the Marsigni, Gothini,
Osi, Burij, which are behind the Marcomani and Quadi, of lesser valor: among
which the Marsigni, and Burij, resemble the Sueuians in speech and attire. The
Gallican tongue does convince the Gothinos, and the Pannonicall the Osos, not to
be Germans: and that they endure to pay tribute; part of the tribute the
Sarmates, part the Quadi charge them with, as strangers. The Gothini, the more
to their shame, dig for mines of iron: and all these people inhabit small
store of plain ground, but wood-landes, and hill tops. Sueuia is divided by a
continual ridge of hills, beyond which dwell many nations: amongst which, the
name of the Lygians is farthest spread into many cities. It will suffice to
reckon the strongest, as the Arios, Helueconas, Maninos, Elysios, Naharualos.
Among the Naharualians there is a wood long agone consecrated to religion, over
which a Priest apparelled in woman's attire is superintendent: but the Romans
interpret them to be the gods Castor and Pollux. The name of the god is
Alcis. Images there are none, nor sign of strange superstition: yet they are
reverenced as brothers, and two young men. But the Arij besides their strength,
wherein they go beyond the other people I have made mention of, fell and
cruel, do set forth their natural fiercenes with art, and time: for they use
black targets, and die their bodies with the same color, and choose the
darkest nights to fight in, striking a terror with the shadow of so deadly an
army, into the enemies; none of them able to endure so strange and as it were
hellish sight, the eyes being first overcome in all battles. Beyond the Lygians
the Gothones live under Kings in a more severe government then the other people
of Germany, and not in full liberty. Then from the Ocean follow the Rugij,
and Lemouij, all of them bearing for their mark round bucklers, and short
swords, and living under the subjection of Kings. After those are the cities of
the Suionians, situated in the Ocean; besides men and armor, strong in
shipping; which in making differ from other vessels, in that both ends are
foreparts, ready to land at each end, without sail, or oars in a rank in
the sides, but the mariners are at liberty ready to change hither and
thither, as occasion serves, as in some other rivers. Those people esteem of
riches: and therefore one has amongst them absolute rule and government, and
not at the will of the subject. They are not all licensed to wear weapons as
in other parts of Germany, but their weapons are shut up under a keeper, and
that a slave, because the enemy can make no sudden incursion against them, by
reason of the Ocean. If the soldiers be idle and at rest, they easily grow
insolent: and in deed it is not for the Kings profit to commit the charge of
armor to noblemen, or free borne, or freed men. Beyond the Suionas, there is
another sea so slow and almost immovable, that many think it to be the bounds
which compass in the whole world, because that the Sun continues so clear
and bright from his setting till the rising, that it darkneth the stars. And
some are further persuaded, that the sound of him is hard as he rises out of
the sea: and many shapes of gods seen, and the beams of his head. So far
the fame is true, and that there was the end of nature and the world. Now on
the right shore of the Sweuian sea the Aestyans inhabit, whose manner of life is
like the Sweuians, but their language more like the Britains language. They
adore the mother of the gods: for a skutchion of their superstition, they
carry the pictures of wild Boares. That serves them for all weapons and all
defense, and assures all those which worship that goddess, even amongst the
enemies. They have small use of iron, but great, of clubs. They sow corn and
plant fruits, more painefully, than ordinarily the slothful German is
accustomed to do. They search out what the sea will yield: and only amongst
all, gather on the flattes, and on the very shore Rosin or Amber.
, which they call Glesum. Yet they have not sought out (so barbarous they are)
what is the nature of it, or by what means it is engendered. Yea a long time i^
lay as naught worth, like other purgings of the sea, until our wantonness gave
it a name. They have no use of it themselves: but gather it foul and filthy;
and so bring it, and marvel at the price we give for it. But it is the juice
of trees: for there shine in them some birds or foul, which wrapped in the
humor, and afterward waxt hard, are so shut in it. And as in the secret places
of the East, there are fertile woods and forests, which sweat Frankincense and
Balmes: so may I believe that in the Islands of the West, there are others,
which being near to the sun beams, yield an humor, which melted runs
into the next sea, and by force of tempest is carried to the opposite shore. If
by fire thou will make proof what the nature of Amber is, it will burn like
unto wood pitched and rosened: and nourishes a fat and strong savoring fire:
then waxes pliant and clammie like Rosin or Pitch. Hard by the Suionians, be
the Sitones: alike in all things, saving one, which is, that a woman is their
ruler: so far they degenerat, not only from liberty, but also from bondage:
and there is the end of Sueuia. I am in doubt, whether I should reckon the
Peucinians, Venedians, and Fennians, among the Germans, or Sarmates: although
the Peucinians, which some call Bastarnas, resemble the Germans in language,
behavior, housing, and dwelling: but all are generally, slouenly and lazy:
and the noblemen allied by marriage with the Sarmates, are somewhat transformed
into their usage: and the Venedians have learned many of their fashions also.
For they scowre and rob all the hills and woods which lie between the
Peucinians and Fennians. Yet these may rather be accounted Germans; because
they build houses, carry targets, and are good footmen. None of which the
Sarmates do use, but always ride in chariot, or on horseback. The Fennians are
very barbarous and beggarly: having neither arms, horses, nor houses; no food
but herbs; no apparel but leather pelts; no bedding but the ground: having all
their hope in their arrows, which for want of iron, they head with bones. Man
and woman lives by the same hunting: for the women follow, and ask for part
of the pray. Young children have no other succor against wild beasts, and hard
weather, but some couerture made of boughs: that is the lodging of young and
old. That they think to be more glorious and magnificall, than toil in
manuring the earth; and trouble themselves in building; and turmoile betwixt
hope and fear, about their own and other men's goods. Thus secure against men
and gods, they have won this hard point, that they need make no vows at all.
The rest is fabulous, as that the Hellusij, and Oxionae, have the visage and
countenance of men, but the bodies and members of beasts: which I leave as a
thing to me unknown.

FINIS.

