AN Arrant Thief, Whom Every Man may Trust:
In Word and Deed, Exceeding true and Just.
WITH A Comparison between a Thief and a Book.

Written by John Tailor.

LONDON. Printed by Edw: All-de, for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold in
Panier-Alley. 1622.

THis Water Rat, The Annagram of Rat is Art.
(or Art) I would commend,
But that I know not to begin or end:
He read his Verses to me, and which more is
Did move my Muse to write Laudem Authoris,
If for his Land Discoueries I touch not his Travails to Scotland Germany, or
Bohemia or the Paper Boat.
she should praise him,
Whether would then his liquid knowledge raise him?
Read his two Treatises of Thief and Whore,
You le think it time for him to leave his Oar.
Yet thus much of his worth I cannot smother,
It Is well for us when Thieves peach one another.
This Preface is but poor, it is by a Boy done,
That is a Scholar of the School of Croydon,
Who when he has more years and learning got,
He Will praise him more or less, or not a jot.
Given upon Shroue Tuesday from our seat, in the second Form of the famous
free School of Croydon. By RICHARD HATTON.

WHen a Fresh Waterman does turn Salt Poet,
His Muse must prattle all the world must know it:
Of Whores and Theiues (he writes two merry Books)
He loves them both, I know it by his looks.
Alas I wrong him: blame my Muse not me,
She never spoke before, and rude may be.
Given from the low estate of the fifth Form near to the School door at
Croydon beforesaid, By GEORGE HATTON.

TO THE HOPEFVLL PAIR OF BRETHREN, and my worthy Patrones, Master RICHARD, and
GEORGE HATTON, Love, Learning, and true Happiness.
YOur Muses, the one a Youth, and one an Infant,
Gave me two Panegericks at one Instant:
The first Pen, This Gentleman was pleased Annagra^matically to call me
Water-Rat, or water Art, Wc I do Annagrammatize Water-Rat, to be A true Art.
the first line it pleased to walk in,
Did make my Art a Rat, and like Grimalkin,
Or a kind needful Vermin-coursing Cat,
By Art I play, but will not eat your Rat.
I thank you that you did so soon determine,
To Annagram my Art into a Vermin,
For which I vow, if e're you keep a Dayrie,
Of (now and then) a Cheese I will impair ye.
Kind Mr. George, your Muse must be exalted,
My Poetry you very well have salted.
Salt keeps things sweet, and make them relish sauory
And you have powdered well my honest kna etc.
I thank you to, nor will I be ungrateful,
Whilst Rhyme or Reason deignes to fill my patefull,
You truly say that I love Whores and Thieues well,
And half your speech I think the world belieues well,
For should I hate a Thief, Thieves are so Common,
I well could neither love my self or no man,
But for Whores love, my purse would never hold out,
They Will heat and pick the Silver and the Gold out.
You both have graced my Thief, he bath confessed,
You (like two Shrieues) conuay'd him to be Pressed.
In mirth you write to me, on small Requesting,
For which I thank you both, in harmless Jesting,
And may your Studies to such goodness raise you,
That God may ever love, and good men praise you.
Yours, when you will, where you will, in what you will, as you will, with your
will, again your will; at this time, at all time, at all times or some^times,
in pastimes. JOHN TAILOR

To any Reader He or She,
It makes no matter what they be.

WHen you open this first leaf, Imagine you are come within the door of my
house, where according as you behave your selves you are Courteously welcome,
or you may lay down the Book, and go the same way you came: the flattering
of Readers, or begging their acceptance is an argument that the ware is scarce
good which the Author means to utter, or that it is a Cheap year of wit, and
his lies upon his hands, which makes him pitifully, like a Supliant to begin
Honorably Complains to your Humblenes, ('it is but mistaken, the first should
be last.) Some men have demanded of me, why I do write upon such slight
Subjects, as the Praise of Hempseed. The Travails of Twelue-pence. Tailors
Goose. The Antiquity of Begging. A Cormorant. A Common Whore. And now an arrant
Thief? ^o whom I answer here, that many Grave and excellent Writers have
employed their Studyes to good purposes in as triuiall matters as my self; and
I am assured that the meaner the subject is, the better the Invention must be,
for (as Tom Nash said) every Fool can fetch Water out of the Sea or pick
Corn out of full Sheaues, but to wring^ Oil out of Flint, or make a
plentiful Harvest with little or no Seed, that is the Workman, but that is not
I. And Gentlemen, as I lately sent you a Whore that was honest, so I have now
sent you a Thief, that will never Rob you nor pick your Pockets of more then
you are willing to part with all.

Yours at all good times JOHN TAILOR

A THIEF.
I Lately to the world did send a A Book I writ called a Whore.
Whore
And she was welcome, though she was but poor
And being so, it did most strange appear
That poverty found any welcome here,
But when I saw that many Rich men sought,
My Whore, and with their coin her freedom bought
I mused, but as the cause I out did ferrit
^ found some Rich in Purse, some poor in merit
Some learned Scholars, some that scarce could spell:
Yet all did love an honest Whore, right well,
It Was only such as those that entertaind her,
Whilst scornful Knaves, and wides Fools disdaind her.
Now to defend her harmels Innocence,
I send this Thief to be her Just defense:
Against all truemen, and i will undertake
There are not many that dare answer make.
Then Rowze my Muse, be valiant, and be brief,
Be confident my true and constant Thief:
Thy Trade is scatt'red, universally,
Throughout the spacious worlds Rotundity,
For all estates and functions great and small,
Are for the most part Thieues ingenerall.
Excepting Millers, Weauers, Taylers, and
Such true trades as no stealing understand.
Thou art a Thief (my Book) and being so
Thou findst thy fellows wheresoeu'r thou go,
Birds of a feather still will hold together
And all the world with thee are of a feather:
The ods is, thou art a Thief by nomination,
And most of men are Thieues in their vocation.
Thou neither do cog, Cheat, steal swear or lie
Or gather'st goods by false dishonesty,
And thou shall live when many of the Crew
Shall in a Halter bid the world Adue.
And now a thought into my mind does fall
To prove whence Thieues have their original:
I find that Jupiter did wantonly
On Maya get a son called Mercurye,
To whom the people often did Sacrifice,
Accounting him the God of Merchandise:
Of Elloquence, and rare invention sharp,
And that he first of all deuisd the Harp.
The God of Tumblers, Iuglers, fools and Iesters,
Of Thieues, and fiddlers that the earth bepesters,
Fair Venus was his Sister, and I find
He was to her so much unkindly kind,
That he on her begat Hermophrodite
As Ovid very wittily does write:
His wings on head and heels true Emblems be
How quick he can invent, how quickly ^lee:
By him are Thieues inspirde, and from his gift
They plot to steal and run away most swift:
In their conceits and sleights, no men are sharper,
Each one as nimble fingered as a Harper.
Thus Thieuing is not altogether Base
But is descended from a lofty Race.
Moreover every man, himself does show
To be the Son of Addam, for we know
He stole the Fruit, and ever since his Se^de,
To steal from one another have agreede.
Our Infancy is Theft, it is manifest
We cry and Rob our Parents of their Rest:
Our Childe-hood Robs us of our Infancy,
And youth does steal our childe-hood wantonly:
Then Manhood pilfers all our youth away,
And middle-age, our Manhood does convey
Unto the Thieuing hands of feeble age,
Thus are we all Thieues, all our Pilgrimage,
In all which progress, many times by stealth
Strange sicknesses does Rob us of our health.
Rage steals our Reason, Envy thinks it fit
To steal our Love, whilst Folly steals our wit.
Pride filcheth from us our Humillity,
And Leachery does steal our honesty,
Base Avarice, our Conscience does purloin,
Whilst sloth to steal our minds from work does Join
Time steals upon us, whilst we take small care,
And makes us old before we be a ware:
Sleep and his brother Death conspire our fall
The one steals half our lives, the other all.
Thus are we Robbed by Morpheus, and by Mors
Till in the end, each Corpse is but a Coarse,
Note but the seasons of the year, and see
How they like Thieues to one another be
From Winters frozen face, through snow and showers
The Spring does steal roots, pla^ts, buds and flowers,
Then Summer Robs the Spring of natures suit,
And harvest Robs the Summer of his fruit,
Then Winter comes again, and he bereaues
The Harvest of the Grain, and Trees of Leaves,
And thus these seasons Robs each other still
Round in their course, like Horses in a mill.
The Elements, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire
To rob each other daily do Conspire:
The fiery Sun from the ocean, and each River
Exhales their Waters, which they all deliver:
This water, into Clouds the Air does steal
Where it does unto Snow or Hail Conicale,
Until at last Earth Robs the Air again
Of his stolen Treasure Hail, sleete, snow or Rain.
Thus be it hot or cold, or dry, or wet,
These Thieues, from one another steal and get.
Night Robs us of the day, and day of Night:
Light pilfers darkness, and the darkness light.
Thus life, death, seasons, and the Elements
And day and Night, for Thieues are presidents.
Two Arrant Thieues we ever bear about us
The one within, the other is without us,
All that we get by toil, or Industry
Our Backs and Bellies steal continually,
For though men labor with much care and Carke,
Lie with the Lamb down, rise up with the Lark.
^weare and forswear, deceive, and lie and Cog,
And have a Conscience worse then any Dog,
^e most ungracious, extreme vile and base,
And (so he gain) not caring for disgrace:
Let such a Man or Woman count their gains
They have but meat, and Raiment for their pains.
No more have they that do live honestest
Those that can say their Consciences are best,
Their Bellies and their Backs, day, night and hour,
The fruits of all their labors do deuower:
These Thieues do rob us, with our own good will,
And have dame natures warrant for it still,
^omtimes these Sharks do work each others wrack
The Ravening Belly, often Robs the Back:
Will feed like Dives, with Quail, Rail, and Pheasant
And be attired all tattered like a Peasant,
^ometimes the gaudy Back, Man's Belly pines,
^or which he often with Duke Humphrey dines:
^he whilst the mind defends this hungry stealth
And says a temperate diet mainetaines health,
^et Corland cry, let Guts with famine mourn,
The maw's unseen, good outsides must be worn,
Thus do these Thieues Rob us, and in this pother
The mind consents, and then they Rob each other:
Our Knowledge and our Learning (often by chance)
Does steal and Rob us of our Ignorance:
Yet Ignorance may sometimes gain promotion
Where it is held the Mother of devotion)
But knowledge joined with learning, are poor things
That many times a man to begg'ry brings:
And fortune very often does Justly fit
Some to have all the wealth, some all the wit.
Tobacco Robs some men, if so it list
It steals their Coin (as Thieues do) in a Mist:
Some men to Rob the Pot will neu'r refrain
Until the Pot Rob them of all again,
A prodigal can steal exceeding Brief,
Picks his own purse, and is his own dear Thief:
And thus within us, and without us we
Are Thieues, and by Thieues always pillagde be.
First then unto the greatest Thieues of all
Whose Thecu'ry is most high and Capital:
You that for pomp, and Titles transitory
Rob your Almighty maker of his Glory,
And give the Honor due to him alone
Unto a Carved block, a stock or stone,
An Image, a Similytude, or feature
Of Angel, Saint, or Man, or any creature,
To Alters, Lamps, to Holly Bread, or Waters,
To shrines, or tapers, or such Iugling matters,
To Relliques, of the dead, or of the living
This is the most supreamest kind of Theiuing.
Besides they all commit this Fellonie
That break the Saboath day malliciouslie,
God gives us six days and himself has one,
Wherein he would (with thanks) be called upon:
And those that steal that day to bad abuses,
Robs God of Honor, without all excuses:
Unto these Thieues, my Thief does plainly tell
That though they hang not here, they shall in Hell
^xcept Repentance, (and unworthy Guerdon
through our Redemers merits) gain their pardon.
^hen There Is a Crew of Thieues that pry and lu^ch
and steal and share the livings of the Church;
^hese are Hells factors, Merchants of all Evil,
^obs God of Souls, and give them to the Devil.
^or where the Tithe of many a Parish may
^llowe a good sufficient Preacher pay,
^et Hellish pride, or lust, or Avarice,
^r one or other foul licentious Vice,
^obs Learning Robs the people of their teaching
who in seven years perhaps does hear no preaching
When as the Parsonage by accounts is found
^earely worth two, 3. or 4. hundred pound,
^et are those Souls served, or else starved I fear
^ith a poor Reader In the 93. page of a Book, called the Spirit of
Detraction the Author cites 12. Parishes in one Hundred in Wales in this
predicament.
for eight pounds a year.
Preacher breaks to us the Heavenly Bread
^hereby our straying Souls are taught and fed:
and for this heavenly work of his, 't is sense
that men allow him earthly Recompense.
^ shall he give us food that is spiritual
and not have means to feed him Corporal?
(...); (of all men) it is most manifest,
^ainefull Churchman earnes his wages best.
^^ose that keep back the Tithes, I tell them true
(...) arrant Thieues in Robbing God, of'is due:
(...) he that robs Gods church ('t encrese their pelse)
^is most apparent, they Rob God himself.
The Patron often deals with his Minister
As Dionisius did with Jupiters Idol in Scracusa in Sicitia.
Jupiter
He stole his Golden Cloak, and put on him
A Coat of Cotton, (nothing near so trim)
And to excuse his theft, he said the Gold
was (to be worn) in Winter time, too Cold,
But in the Summer, it was too hot and heavy,
And so some Patrones use the Tribe of Leuy:
That for the Winters cold, or Summers heat,
They are so pold, they scarce have clothes and meat.
Amongst the rest, there may some pastors be,
Who enter in through cursed Simonie:
But all such are notorious Thieues therefore
They climb the wall, and not com through the The door is Christ.
door,
Thus Menelaus did the Priesthood win
From Jason by this simonayck sin,
For he did pay three hundred Tallents more
Then Jason would (or could) disburse therefore.
And many a mitred Pope and Cardinal
This way have got their State Pontifical:
These Rob and steal, (for which all good Men grieu^^
And make the House of Prayer, a den of Thieues.
But though the Hangman, here they can outface
Yet they shall all hang in a worser place.
Then there are Thieues who make the Church their gains
Who can Preach well, yet will not take the pains:
Dumb dogs, or rau'ning wolves, whose careless care
Does fat themselves, and keep their flocks most bare.
Besides Churchwardens, with a griping Fist
Like Thieues may Rob their Vestry, if they list.
The Poores neglector (O I pardon crave)
Collector I should say, may play the Knave,
The Thief I would have said, but choose you whether
He may be both, and so he may be neither.
So leaving Church- Thieues, with their cursed stealth,
He now descend unto the Commonwealth.
And yet me thinks I should not pass the Court,
But sure Thieues dare not thither to resort.
But of all Thieues in any Kings Dominion,
A Flatterer is a Cutpurse of opinion,
That like a Pick-pocket, does lie and wait,
To steal himself into a man's conceit.
This Thief will often dawbe a great man's vice,
Or rate his Virtue at too low a price,
Or at too high a pitch his worth will raise,
To fill his ears with flattery any ways.
^urueyors, and Purueyors, now and then
May steal, and yet be counted honest men.
When men do for their living labor true,
^e's a base Thief that pays them not their due.
They are all Thieues, that live upon the fruits
Of Monnopollies if ungodly Suites.
^he Judge or Justice that do Bribes desire
Like Thieues, deserve a halter for their hire.
^ Reverend Father, worthy of believing,
said taking bribes was Gentleman like Thieuing.
^ Merchant now and then his goods may bring,
And steal the Custom, and so rob the King.
Thieues they are all, that scrape and gather treasures,
By Wares deceitful, or false weights or measures.
That Landlord is a Thief that rackes his Rents,
And mount the price of rotten Tenements,
Almost unto a damned double Rate,
And such a Thief as that One that 8 years since bought many houses, where I
and many poor men dwelt, and presently raised our Rents, from 3. l. to 5. l.
but I changed him quickly for a better.
, my self had late.
A pair of Lovers, are stark Thieues, for they
Do kindly steal each others hearts away.
Extortioners, I Thieues may truly call,
Who take more Interest, then the principal.
Executors, and Ouer-seers Thieuing,
Have often wronged the Dead, and Robbed the liuin^
All those within the rank of Thieues must be,
That trust their Wares out from 3. months to thre^
And makes their Debtors thrice the worth to pay,
Because they trust them, these are Thieues I say,
That do sell Time, which unto God belongs,
And beggar who^ they trust most, with these wron^
He is a Thief, and basely does purloyne,
Who borrows of his neighbors goods, or Coyn^
And can, but will no satisfaction give,
These are the most notorious Thieues that live,
Upon such Thieues (if Law the same allowed)
A hanging were exceeding well bestowed.
A Farmer is a Thief, that hoards up Grain
In hope of Dearth, by either Drouth or Rain,
He steals Gods treasures, and does quite forget,
That over them he is but a Steward set,
And for his Rob'ry he deserves to wear
A riding Knot an Inch below his Ear.
Of Drinking Thieues exceeding store there are,
That steal themselves Drunk e're they be aware
These are right Rob-pots, Rob-wits, and Rob-purses,
To gain Diseases, Begg'ry, and Gods curses.
Drawers, and Tapsters too, are Thieues I think,
That Nick their Pots, and cheat men of their Drink,
and when Guests have their Liquor in their brain,
^^eale Pots half full, to fill them up again.
Though this be Thieu'ry yet I must confess,
^is honest Theft to punish Drunkenness.
and of small Thieues, the Tapster I prefer,
^e is a Drunkards Executioner,
^or whilst his money lasts he much affects him,
^hen, with the Rod of poverty Corrects him.
^ Chamberlain unto his Guests may creep
and pick their Pockets, when they are Drunk asleep*
^ut amongst Thieues, that are of low Repute
^n Hostler is a Thief, most absolute:
^e with a Candles end Horse teeth can Grease,
^hey shall eat neither Hay, Oats, Beans, or Pease,
^esides a hole ith Maunger, and a Bag
^ang'd underneath may Cozen many a Nag,
and specially, if in a Stable dark,
^one do not the Hostlers knau'ry mark.
^e will deceive a man, before his face,
^n the Peck's bottom, some few Oats he will place
Which seems as if it to the brim were full,
and thus the Knave both Man and Horse will Gull.
^he break Horsebread, he can thus much do,
amongst five loaves, his Codpiece swallows two,
^he Hostler says the Horse has one good trick,
^uicke at his meat, he needs must travel quick.
If men, at full Rack for their Horsmeat pay,
So hard into the rack he will tread the Hay,
That out, the poor Beasts cannot get a bit,
And th'Hostler held an honest man for it,
For who would think the Horses want their right,
When as the Rack is still full, day and night?
With bottles, if men will have Horses fed,
To each a Groates worth ere they go to bed,
The Thieuish Hostler can rob Horse and Men,
And steal the bottles from the Rack again,
And put in Hay that is pist upon, I wot,
Which being dried, no horse will eat a jot,
And all such Hostlers, wheresoever they be,
Deserve a Horses nightcap for their Fee.
One stole a Wife, and married her in post,
A hanging had bin better stolen, almost:
By her he night and day was long perplexed,
Cornuted, scolded at, defamed, and vexed,
He cannot steal truly, or truly he cannot steal.
That (in comparison of all his pain)
A friendly hanging had bin mighty gain.
There Is an old speech, a Tailor is a Thief,
And an old speech he has for his relief,
I Will not equivocate, I Will give him's due
He (truly) steals not, or he steals not, true,
Those that report so, mighty wrong does do him,
For how can he steal that, that is brought unto him
And it may be they were false Idle speeches,
That one brought Cotton once, to line his Breeches
And that the Tailor laid the Cotton by,
And with old painted Cloth, the room supply,
which as the owner (for his use) did wear,
Nail, or sceg, by chance his breech did tear,
(...) which he saw the Linings, and was wroth;
^r Dives and Lazarus on the painted Cloth,
^he Gluttons Dogs, and Hels fire hotly burning,
^ith Feinds and fleshooks, whence there is no returning,
^e ripped the other breech, and there he spide,
^he pampered Prodigal on Cockhorse ride:
^here was his fare, his Fiddlers, and his Whores,
^is being poor, and beaten out of Doors,
^is keeping Hogs, his eating husks for meat,
^is Lamentation, and his home retreat,
^is welcome to his Father, and the Feast,
^he fat Calfe killed, all these things were expressed.
^hese Transformations filled the man with fear,
that he Hell fire within his breech This fellows Breches were not lynde with
Apochri^ha.

I heard of one that had the picture of the Devil in the back linings of his
Dublet witness at the Swan in St. Mar^ids.


should bear,
^e mused what strange enchantments he had bin in,
that turned his linings, into painted Linen.
^is fear was great, but at the last to rid it,
(...) Wizard told him, 'twas the Tailor did it.
^ne told me of a This Miller kept a Windmill not many years since at Purflet
in Essex.
Miller that had power
^ometimes to steal 5. Bushels out of four:
^s once a Windmill (out of breath) lacked wind,
^ fellow brought Four bushels there to Grind,
and hearing neither noise of Knap or tiller,
^ayd down his Corn, and went to seek the Miller:
^ome two flight-shoot to th'Alehouse he did wag,
and left his Sack in keeping with his Nag,
^he Miller came a by-way up the hill,
And saw the Sack of Corn stand at the Mill,
Perceiving none that could his Theft gainsay,
For toll took Bag and Grist, and all away.
And a Cross way unto the Alehouse hy'd him,
Whereas the man that sought him, quickly spide him
Kind Miller (quoth the man) I left but now
A Sack of Wheat, and I entreat that thou Will walk up to the Mill where it does lie,
And Grind it for me now the wind blows hye.
So up the Hill they went, and quickly found
The Bag and Corn, stolen from the ground vngrown
The poor man with his loss was full of grief,
He, and the Miller went to seek the Thief,
Or else the Corn, at last all tired and sad,
(Seeking both what he had not, and he had)
The Miller (to appease or ease his pain)
Sold him one Bushel Some say that he sold him the 4. Bushels again, and
then stole one bushel for toll.
of his own again.
Thus out of 4. the man Five Bushels lost,
Accounting truly all his Corn and cost.
To mend all of this Thieuing Millers brood,
One half hours hanging would be very good.
But there is a kind of stealing mystical,
Pickpocket wits, silch lines Sophistical,
Villains in Vearse, base Runagates in Rhyme,
False Rob-wits, and contemned slaves of time,
Purloyning Thieues, that pilfer from Desert
The due of Study, and reward of Art.
Pot Poets, that have skill to steal Translations,
And (into English) filch strange tongues and Nation
And change the Language of good Wits vnknown^
These Thieuish Rascals print them for their own.
^istake me not good Reader any ways,
^ranslators do deserve Respect and praise,
^or were it not for them, we could not have
^ Bible, that declares our souls to save,
and many thousands worthy works would lie
^ot understood, or in obscurity,
^ they by Learned men's Intelligence,
Were not Translated with great diligence:
honor such, and he that does not so,
^ay his soul sin^ke to everlasting woe.
speak of such as steal Regard and Fame,
Who do translate, and hide the Authors name,
Or such as are so barren of Invention,
That cannot write a line worth note, or mention,
^et upon those that can will belch their spite,
And with malicious Tongues their Names backbite.
^o this effect I often have wrote before,
and am enforced now this one time more,
^o take my Pen again into my fist,
And Answer a deprauing Emblemist,
^ spare to Name him, but I tell him plain,
^e're he dare abuse me so again,
^e whip him with a yerking Satyrs lash,
^ang'd like th'inuectiue Muse of famous Nash.
That he shall wish he had not been, or been
Hanged, e're he moved my Just incenced spleen.
He has Reported most maliciously,
(...) sundry places amongst company,
That I do neither Write, nor yet Invent
The things that (in my Name) do pass in Print.
But that some Scholar spends his Time and brain,
And let me have the Glory and the Gain.
Is any Poet in that low Degree,
To make his Muse work Iourney-worke to me?
Or are my Lines with Eloquence Imbellish'd,
As any Learning in them may be relished?
Those that think so, they either Judge in have,
Or else their Judgments pallat's out of taste.
My pen in Hellicon, I never did dip,
And all my Schollership is Schullership,
I am an Englishman, and have the scope
To write in mine own Countries speech (I hope)
For Homer was a Grecian, and I note
That all his works in the Greek tongue he wrote*
Virgill, and Ovid, neither did Contemn
To use that speech, their Mothers taught to them.
Du Bartas, Petrarcke, Tasso, all their Muses,
Did use the Language that their Country uses.
And though I know but English, I suppose
I have as many tongues as some of those.
Their Studies were much better, yet I say
I use my Countries speech, and so did they.
Because my Name is Tailor, some do doubt,
My best Invention comes by stealing out
From other VVriters works, but I reply,
And give their doubtful diffidence the lie.
To close this point I must be very brief,
And call them Knaves, that calls me Poet Thief.
But yet a Poets theft, I must not smother,
For they do often steal from one another:
They call it borrowing, but I think it true,
To term it Stealing, were a style more due.
There is a Speech, that Poets still are poor,
^ut never till now I knew the Cause wherefore:
Which is, when their Inventions are at best,
Then they are daily robbed, it is manifest,
For noble Thieues, and poor Thieues all Conjoyne,
From painful Writers studies to purloyne,
And steal their Flashes, and their sparks of wit,
Still vtt'ring them at all occasions fit,
As if they were their own, and these men are
For their stolen stuff esteemed wise and Rare.
They call it borrowing, but I tell them plain
^Tis stealing, for they never pay again.
The use of Money's ten in the Hundred still,
And men in Bonds bound, as the owner will,
But wit and Poetry (more worth then treasure)
Is from the Owners borrowed, at men's pleasure,
And to the Poets lot it still does fall,
To loose both Interest and principal.
This is the cause that Poets are poor men,
They Are Robbed, and lend, and never are paid again.
It Is said that Jacob (counseled by his Mother)
Did steal his Fathers blessing from his Brother,
This was a Theft which few will imitate,
Their Fathers blessings are of no such rate,
For though some Sons might have them for the craving,
Yet they esteem them scarcely worth the having,
Their Fathers money they would gladly steal,
But for their blessings they regard no deal.
And by their Waters, you may guess and gather;
That they were sick, and grieved of the Father:
But on such Thieues as those, I plainly say
A hansom hanging were not cast away.
Some Thieues may through an Admirable skill,
An honest Common wealth both poll and pill:
These fellows steal secure as they were Millers,
And are substanciall men, their Countries Pillars:
Purloyning polers, or the Barbars Rather,
That shave a Kingdom, Cursed wealth to gather;
These Pillars, or these Caterpillars swarms
Grow Rich, and purchase Goods by others harms*
And live like Feinds, extremely feared, and hated
And are, and shall be ever execrated.
A King of Britain once Catellus He was the 40.th King after Brute and he
Reigned before Christs' birth 171. years.
named
Upon Record his Charity is famed:
His Justice, and his memory was so Ample
He hanged up all opressors, for example.
If that Law once again were in request
Then, of all trades a Hangman were the best.
These are the Brood of Barrabas, and these
Can Rob, and be let loose again at ease,
Whilst Christ (in his poor members) every day,
Does suffer (through their Theaft) and pine away.
And sure all men, of whatsoere degree
Of Science, Art, or Trade or mystery,
Or occupation, whatsoere they are
For truth cannot with Watermen compare.
I know there is some objections may be made,
How they are Rude, uncivil in their trade,
^ut that is not the question I propounde
^ say no Theaft can in the Trade be found,
Our greatest foes by no means can Reveal,
Which way we can deceive, or cheat, or steal:
We take men in, and Land them at their pleasure,
And never bate them half an Inch of measure,
Still at one price our selves we waste and wear,
Though all things else be mounted double dear,
And in a word, I must Conclude and say
A Waterman can be a Thief no way. The Annagram of Waterman is A TRUE MAN.

Except one way, which I had half forgot
He now and then perhaps may Rob the pot,
Steal himself Drunk, and be his own Purspicker,
And Chimically turns his Coin to Liquer:
This is almost a Universal Theaft
A portion Fathers to their Sons have left,
Men are begot, and do like their begetters
And Watermen do learn it of their betters.
There Is nothing that does make them poor and bare,
But cawse they are such true men as they are:
For if they would but steal, like other men
The Gallows would devour them now and then
Whereby their number quickly would be less,
Which (to their wants) would be a good redress,
Their poverty does from their truth proceed
Their way to thrive were to be Thieues indeed,
If they would steal and hang as others do
Those that survive it were a healpe unto,
Truth is their trade, and truth does keep them poor
But if their truth were less their wealth were more,
All sorts of men work all the means they can,
To make a Thief of every Water-man:
And as it were in one consent they join,
To trot by land in the dirt, and save their Coin.
Carroaches, Coaches, Iades and Flanders Mares,
Do rob us of our shares, our wares, our Fares.
Against the ground we stand and knock our heels,
Whilst all our profit runs away on wheels,
And whoseuer but observes and notes
The great increase of Coaches, and of Boats:
Shall find their number more then e're they were,
By half and more within these Thirty year.
Then Watermen at Sea had service still,
And those that stayed at home had work at will,
Then vpstart Helcart-Coaches were to seek,
A man could scarce see Twenty in a week,
But now I think a man may daily see,
More then the Whirryes on the Thames can be.
When Queen Elizabeth, came to the Crown,
A Coach in England, then was scarcely known,
Then 'twas as rare to see one, as to spy
A Tradesman that had never told a lie.
But now, like plagues of Aegipt, they do swarm,
As thick as Frogs, or Lice, unto our harm.
For though the King, the Counsel, and such States,
As are of high Superior ranckes, and rates:
For port or pleasure, may their Coaches have,
Yet it is not fit that every Whore or Knave,
And fulsome Madams, and new scuruy Squires,
Should Iolt the Streets in pomp, at their desires,
Like great Tryumphant Tamberlaines, each day,
Drawn with the pampered Iades of Belgia,
That almost all the streets are choked outright,
Where men can hardly pass from morn 'till night.
Whilst Watermen want work, and are at ease,
To Carry one another, if they please,
Or else sit still, and poorly starve and dye.
For all their livings on four Wheels do fly.
Good Reader think it not too long, or much
That I thus amply, on this point do tutch,
Now we are Borne, we would our work apply
To labor, and to live until we Dye,
And we could live well, but for Coaches Thieuing.
That every Day do rob us of our living.
If we, by any means, could learn the skill
To rob the Coachmen, as they rob us still:
Then in the Sessions book it would appear,
They would be hanged five hundred in a year.
Besides it is too manifestly Known,
They have the Sadlers Trade almost o'rethrowne,
And the best Leather in our Kingdom they
Consume and waste; for which poor men do pay.
Our Boots and Shoes to such high price they rear,
That all our profit can buy none to wear.
^ in Bohemia saw, that all but Lords,
Or men of worth, had Coaches drawn with Cords:
And I my Neck unto the Rope would pawn,
That if our Hackney Ratlers were so drawn,
With Cords, or Ropes, or Halters, choose ye whether
It quickly would bring down the price of Leather.
Then Watermen should have more work I hope,
When every Hireling Coach drawn with a Rope,
Would make our Gallants stomach at the matter
The Wher^yes were wont to have all the Whores Till the Coaches Robbed them of
their Custom.
And now and then to spend their Coin by water.
Without all flattery, here my mind I break,
The Proverb says, give loosers leave to speak:
They Carry all our Fares, and make us poor
That to our Boats we scarce can get a Whore,
Some honest men and women, now and then
Will spend their moneys amongst Watermen,
But we are grown so many, and again
Our fares so few, that little is our gain.
Yet for all this (to give the Devil his due)
Our honest trade can no ways be untrue.
If some be rude amongst the multitude
It Is only want of work that makes them Rude,
It Is want of money and of Manners to
That makes them do as too too often they do
And every good thing that in them is scant
It still must be Imputed to their want.
But leaving true men, I must turn my style
To paltry Thieues, whose Glory is their guile:
For thrice three hundred of them from one took
Some of them ready money, some a Book,
And set their hands to Bills, to pay to me
When I from Scotland should returned be.
Crouns, Pounds or Angels, what thy pleased to writ
I have their fists to show in black and white.
And after that, I to Bohemia went,
And gave out money, and much money spent:
And for these things, those Thieues Ingenerall,
Will neither give me gain or Principal. It is called a Kicksie winsie, or a
Lerrio cun^ ^wang.

^ lately wrought a Pamphlet to the Crew,
that spoke their due, for keeping of my due:
Wherein I gave them thanks that had me paid,
and pardond, those that in their graves were laid:
^o those that were exceeding poor, or fled,
Except good words) I very little sed,
^ praid for them that only would and could not
and I inueigh'd at those that could and would not.
and let those shifters their own Judges be
^f they have not bin arrant Thieues to me,
^or first and last they took (with their good) wills
^eere fifteen hundred books upon their bills,
and all their hands (If I the truth may utter)
^re worse then obligations sealed with butter:
^or I have in my store (not worth a Lowse)
^s many Bills as well may thatch a House,
and there I have the hands of Knights and Squiers:
and Omnium gatherum Cheating knaves and liers,
^eauen hundred in a Galleymawfrey, Close
Which I would sell for fifteen pence the Groce,
^hei'le neither pay, with coming, nor with sending
and are like old Boots, past all hope of mending.
^^rst they did Rob me of my expectation
and made me walk along perambulation,
and as my Royal Master To whom I in all humillity must ever, acknowledge my
obedience and dutiful Thankfulness and service.
when I came
^he good Prince, and my Lord of Buckingham
With many more of Honor, Worship, and
^en of inferior callings in this land,
Were bountiful to me at my Return,
Yet I like one, that does one Candle burn
In seeking of another, spent their gifts
To find out Sharkes, and Complements and shift
Theft is the best Name I can give their Crime,
They rob me of my Books, my Coin, and time,
Of others Bounty, and mine own good Hopes,
And for this Theft I leave them to the Ropes,
I speak to those that can and will not pay,
When in the Streets I meet them every day,
I have 700. Bills of their hands which in all co^^es to near; 00. l.
They do not much mistake if they do think
I wish them hanged, for keeping of my Chinke.
Thus have I touched a Crew of Thieuing fellows,
That Rob beyond the Compass of the Gallows:
Whilst many little Thieues are hanged up dead
That only Steal for need, to find them Bread,
As Pharaoh's fat Kine, did the Lean devour,
So great Thieues swallow small ones by their power
And sure I think, that Common Burglaries,
Pick-pockets, Highway Thieues, and Pilferies,
And all that thus Felloniously do Thieue,
Are Thieues whose labors The trade of Thieuing is very profitable to many men.
many do Relieve.
Who but poor Thieues do Iaylors wants supply?
On whom do under Keepers still rely?
From Thieuing, money still is gotten thus,
For many a Warrant and a Mittimus,
And if men were not apt to Filch and Thieue,
'Twere worse for many a High, and vnder-Shrieue
The Halter-maker, and the Smith are getters
For fatal Twist, and ponderous Bolts and Petters.
^e Carman has a share amongst the rest,
though not voluntary, yet he is Pressed.
(...) Ballad-maker does some profit reap,
(...) makes a Tiburne Dirge, exceeding Cheap,
(...) whilst the Printers, and the doleful Singers,
(...) in these gainefull business dip their fingers.
(...) very Hangman has the slight and skill,
(...) extract all his goods from others Ill,
(...) is the Epilogue unto the Law,
(...) from the jaws of Death his life does draw.
(...) last, the Hangmans Broaker reapes the fruit,
(...) selling to one Thief another Suit.
^^sides Thieues are sit members, for it is known,
^hey make men careful how to keep their own,
(...) were it not for them, we still should lie
^^ck'd in the Cradle of security.
^ll'd in base Idleness, and sluggish sloth,
(...) to all ill, and to all Goodness loath.
which would infect us, and corrupt the blood,
and therefore for our health's sake, Thieues are good.
and some men are so prone to steal, I think
(...) as Natural as their meat and drink,
^hey are borne to it, and cannot do withal,
and must be filching still, what e're befall.
^wispe of Rushes, or a Clod of land,
(...) any wadde of Hay that is next to hand
^hey'l steal, and for it have a good excuse,
^hey do it to keep their hands in ure, or use.
^ut not t'excuse a Thief in any case,
(...) there are some Crimes, as void of Grace,
On whom men scarce have feeling or a thought,
Nor e're like Thieues are to the Gallows brought
Those that obey false Gods commit offense,
Against The Eternal Gods Omnipotence.
Those that do graven Images adore,
Are worse then Thieues, yet are not hanged therefo^^
It Is Treason high, to take Gods Name in vain,
Yet most men do it, through frailty, or for Gain*
The Saboth is profaned continually,
Whilst the offenders pay small Or none at all.
penalty.
And Parents are dishonored, without Awe,
The whilst the Children do escape the Law.
And Murder, though it be never so foul and dead
Is often times made Manslaughter or Chance-med
Adultery's neighborhood, and Fornication,
May be Conniu'd at, with a tolleration.
A Witness, that false Testimony bears,
It Is a great wonder if he loose his Ears,
But sure, the Proverb is as true as brief,
A Lyer's ever worser then a Thief,
And it is called Thrift, when men their minds do
To covet how their Neighbors goods to get.
To be vainglorious, and Ambitious proud
Are Gentleman-like parts, must be allowed.
To bear an Envy base and secretly,
It Is counted Wisdom, and great Policy.
To be a Drunkard, and the Cat to whip,
Is called the King of all good Fellowship.
But for a Thief, the whole world does Consent
That Hanging is the fittest punishment.
(...) if that Law were put in Execution,
^hinke it would be Mankindes Dissolution:
and then we should have Land and Tenements
(...) nothing, or for very easy Rents,
^hereby we see that man his wealth esteems,
(...) better then his God, his soul it deemes:
^or let God be abusde, and let his soul
^^nne greedily into offenses foul,
(...) scarcely shall be questioned for it, but if
amongst his other sins) he play the Thief
and steal men's goods, they all will sentence give,
(...) must be Hanged, he is unfit to live.
(...) the Low Countries, if a wretch do steal
(...) Bread, or Meat, to feed himself a meal,
^hey will unmercifully beat and Clowt him,
^^le, pull, and tear, and spurn, and kick, and flowt him,
^ut if a Drunkard be vnpledg'd a Kan
^^awes out his Knife and basely stabs a man,
(...) run away the Rascal shall have scope,
^one holds him, but all Cry Run thief Run.
Lope Scellum Lope,
^hus there is a close Conniuence for all Vice,
^xcept for Theft, and that is a Hanging price.
^ne man's adicted to Blaspheme and swear,
^ second to Carowse, and Domineere:
^ third to Whoring, and a fourth to Fight,
and Kill and slay, a fifth man to Backbite,
^ sixth and seventh, with this or that Crime caught,
and all in general much worse then naught.
and amongst all these sinners general,
^he Thief must win the Halter from them all,
When if the matter should examined be
They do deserve it all, as much as he.
Nor yet is Thieuery any vpstar sin,
But it of long Antiquity has bin:
And by this Trade Great men have not disdained,
To win Renown, and have their states maintain
Great Alexanders Conquests, what were they
But taking others goods and Lands away:
(In manners) I must call it Martial dealing,
But truth will term it Rob'ry, and flat stealing,
For unto all the world it is well known,
That he by force, took what was not his owre.
Some Writers are with Tamberlaine so brief,
To style him with the Name of Scithian Thief.
Platarch.
Licurgus loved, and granted gifts beside
To Thieues that could steal, and escape vnspide:
But if they taken with the manner were,
They must restore, and buy the bargain dear.
Thieues were at all times ever to be had
Exampled by the good Thief and the Bad.
And England still has bin a fruitful Land
Of Valiant Thieues, that durst bid true men stand
One Bellin Dun Hen. 1.
, a famous Thief suruiu'd,
From whom the Town of Dunstable's derived:
And Robin Hood Rich. 2.
with little John agreed
To rob the Rich men, and the Poor to feed.
Edw. 3.
The Priests had here such small means for there^o^
That many, of them were enforced to Thieuing.
Once the Fifth Henry could Rob exc'llent well,
When he was Prince of Wales, as Stories tell.
^hen Friar Tucke a tall stout Thief indeed,
^ould better Rob and steal, then Preach or reed.
(...) Gosselin Deinuill, Edw. 2.
with 200. more,
(...) Friars weeds, Robbed, and were Hanged therefore.
^hus I in Stories, and by proof do find
that Stealing's very old, time out of mind,
^re I was Borne, it through the world was spread,
and will be when I from the world am Dead.
But leaving thus, my Muse in hand has took,
To show which way a Thief is like a Book.
A Comparison between a Thief and a Book.
COmparisons are odious, as some say,
But my Comparisons are so no way,
In the Pamphlet which I wrote before,
Compared a Book most fitly to a Whore:
and now, as fitly my poor Muse alludes,
^ Thief to a Book in apt similitudes,
A good Book steals the mind from vain pretenses,
From wicked Cogitations, and offenses:
(...) makes us know the worlds deceiving plesures,
And set our hearts on never ending Treasures.
So when Thieues steal, our Cattle, Coin or Ware,
It makes us see how mutable they are.
Puts us in mind that we should put our trust,
Where Fellon cannot steal, or Canker rust.
Bad Books through eyes and ears do break and enter,
And takes possession of the hearts frail Center.
Infecting all the little Kingdom Man,
With all the poyso'nous mischief that they can,
Till they have Robbed and ransacked him of all
Those things which men may justly goodness call,
Robs him of Virtue, and Heavenly grace
And leaves him Beggered, in a wretched case.
So of our Earthly goods, Thieues steal the best,
And richest Jewels, and leave us the rest.
Men know not Thieues from true men by their look^
Nor by their outsides, no man can know Books.
Both are to be suspected, all can tell,
And Wisemen e're they trust, will try them well.
A Book may have a Title good and fair,
Though in it one may find small goodness there:
And so a Thief, whose actions are most vile,
Steals good opinion, and a True man's style.
Some Books (profane) the Sacred Text abuse,
With common Thieues, it is a common use.
Some Books are full of lies, and Thieues are so,
One hardly can believe their yea or no.
Some Books are Scurrilous, and too obsceane,
And he is no right Thief that loves not a Queen.
Some Book's not worth the Reading for their fruits
Some Thieues not worth the Hanging, for their suits
Some Books are brief, and in few words declare
Compendious matter, and Acuteness rare,
And so some Thieues will break into a House,
Or cut a Purse whilst one can crack a Lowse.
Some Books are arrogant and Impudent,
So are most Thieues in Christendom and Kent.
Some Books are plain and simple, and some Thie^^^
Are simply Hanged, whilst others get Reprieues.
Some Books like foolish Thieues, their faults are sp^^
Some Thieues like witty Books, their faults can hide
^ome Books are quaint and quick in their Conceits*
^ome Thieues are active, nimble in their sleights.
^ome Books with idle stuff the Author fills,
^ome Thieues will still be Idle, by their wills.
^ome Books have neither Reason, Law, or sense,
No more have any Thieues for their offense.
^ Booke's but one, when first it comes to th'Presse,
(...) may increase to Numbers Numberless,
And so one Thief perhaps may make threescore
And that threescore may make ten thousand more,
Thus from one Thief, Thieues may at last amount
Like Books from one Book past all men's account.
And as with Industry, and Art, and Skill,
One Thief does daily Rob another still,
So one Book from another (in this Age)
Steals many a Line, a sentence or a Page.
Thus amongst Books, good fellowship I find,
All things are common, Thieues bear no such mind.
And for this Thieuing Books with Hue and Cry
Are sought, (as Thieues are) for their Felony.
As Thieues are chasde and sent from place to place,
So Books, are always in continual Chase.
As Books are strongly Boss'd, and Clasped and bound,
So Thieues are Manacled, when they are found:
As Thieues are often examined, for their Crimes,
So Books are used, and have bin at all times.
As Thieues have often at their Arraignment stood,
So Books are tried if they be bad or good.
As Iuries and Graund Iuries, with much strife.
Give up (for Thieues) a Verdict, Death or Life.
So as men's fancies Evidence do give,
The shame or fame of Books, to dye or live:
And as the veriest Thief may have some friend,
So the worst Books, some Knave will still defend.
As Thieues their Condemnation must abide,
Books are deemed true sometimes, sometimes belied.
As Thieues are Judged, so have Books again,
As many Censures (almost) as are men.
And as their faults are different in degree,
Some Thieues are hanged, some Books are burnt w^ (...)
Some Thieues are for their small offenses whip't,
All Books are Pressed, except a Manuscript.
As Thieues are buried, when the Law is paid,
So some Books in obliuions Grave are laid.
The Iaylors keep the Thieues, and much regards
The strength of Fetters, Locks, bolts, grates and wards
And will know when and how abroad they go,
And unto Books the Stacioners There is od^ betwixt a Keeper and a Iaylor the
Stationer keeps Books against his will, the Iaylor holds Thieues with his
will.
are so.
Still Books and Thieues in one Conceit do join:
For, if you mark them, they are all for Coin.
Some Thieues exceeding brave a man may find
In Satin, and their Cloakes with Velvet linde:
And some Books have gay Coats unto their back
When as their insides, goods and goodness lackes.
Some Books are all bet^tterd, torn and (...),
Some Thieues endure a rugged punishment*
Some Thieues may come (their sorrows to increase)
Before a shallowe Officer of Peace,
One that can Cough, call kn^ue, and with non sense
Commit, before be know for what offense:
A Book sometimes does prove a Thieues true friend,
And does preserve him from a hanging end:
For let a man at any Sessions look,
And still some Thieues are saved by their Book.
And so some Books to Coxcombs hands may come,
Who can cry Pish, and Mew, and Tush, and Hum,
Condemn ere they have read, or thoroughly scand,
Abusing what they cannot understand.
Some Thieues are like a Horne-booke, and begin
Their A. B. C. of filching, with a Pin;
Their Primer is a Point, and then their Psalter
May pick a Pocket, and come near a Halter.
Then with long practice in these Rudiments,
To break a House may be his Accidence,
And using of his skill (thus day by day)
By Grammar he may Rob upon the way,
Until at last, to wear (it be his hap)
A Tiburne Tippet, or old Stories Cap.
That is the highest degree which they can take,
An end to all their Studies there they make:
For amongst Thieues, not one amongst a score,
^f they be raised so high, they will steal no more.
Thus the Comparisons holds still you see,
To Whores and Theiues, Books may compared be.
All are like Actors, in this wavering Age,
They Enter all, upon the worlds great Stage:
Some gain Applause, and some do Act amiss,
And exit from the Scaffold with a Hiss.
Now if my Whore or Theife play well their Parts,
Give them their due, Applaud their good deserts.
If ill, To Newgate hiss them, or Bridewell,
To any place, Hull, Halifax or Hell.
And thus the Thief and Book join both in one;
Both having made an END, they both have
DON.
Thus having Treated sufficiently of Whores and Whoring, and Thieues and
Thieuing, I do purpo^^ shortly, to set forth a Pamphlet, in the Commendat^^ons
of Iaylors and Iayles, with the necessity of Hangiing, and the Hangmans Art or
Mystery, Compend^^ously described.

FINIS.

