A New Discovery by Sea, with a VVherry from London to Salisbury. OR,

A Voyage to the West,
The Worst, or the Best.
That e're was expressed.
By JOHN TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed by Edw: Allde for the Author. 1623.

TO THE NOBILITY, Gentry, and Communaltie, Who are inhabitants, or
wel-willers, to the welfare of the City of Salisbury, and County of Wiltshire.
Right Honorable,
Worshipful, and loving Countrymen, I have named my Book and Voyage, The
Worst, or the Best, which I ever undertook and finished, and it lies in your
pleasures, to make it which you please; I am sure for toil, travail, and
danger, as yet I never had a worse, or a more difficult passage, which the
ensuing Discourse will truly testify; yet all those perils past I shall
account as pleasures, if my infallible Reasons may move or persuade you to
clear your River, and make it Nauigable from the Sea to your City; I have in
part touched what the proffit and Commodities of it will be unto you, and I
have briefly showed the Inconveniences which you have through the want of it: I
have also declared, that the maine intent or scope of my coming unto you with
a Wherry; was to see what lets or Impediments were the hindrances unto so good
and beneficial a work. All which I have (according to my simple Survey, and
weak Capacity) set down, which with the merrines of my most Hazardous
Sea-progresse, I humbly Dedicate to your Noble, Worshipful and worthy
Acceptances, ever acknowledgling my self and my Labor in your services oo be
commanded in all duty.

John Tailor.

A Discovery by Sea, from London to Salisbury.
AS our account in Almanacks agree,
The year called sixteen hundred twenty three:
That Iulyes twenty eight, two hours past dinner,
We with our Wherry, and five men within her,
Along the crystal Thames did cut and curry,
Betwixt the Counties, Middlesex and Surry:
whilst thousands gazed, we past the bridge with wonder,
Where fools and wise men go above and under.
We thus our Voyage bravely did begin
Down by St. Katherines, where the Priest fell in,
By Wapping, where as hanged drowned Pirates dye;
(Or else such Rats, Any Ra^ that eats Pie, is a Py^rat.

When past down the River there was not any Post or Horn there, bu^ since it
is most worthily Repaired.


I think as would eat Pie.)
And passing further, I at first observed
That Cuckolds-Hauen was but badly served,
For there old Time, had such confusion wrought,
That of that Ancient place remained naught.
No monumentall memorable Horn,
Or Tree, or Post, which has those Trophies born,
Was left, whereby Posterity may know
Where their forefathers Crests did grow, or show.
Which put into a maze my musing Muse,
Both at the worlds neglect, and Times abuse,
That that stout Pillar, to Obliuions pit
Should fall, whereon Plus vltra might be writ,
That such a mark of Reverend note should lie
Forgot, and hid, in black obscurity*
Especially when men of every sort
Of countries, Cities, warlike Camps or Court,
Unto that Tree are plaintiffs or defendants,
All estates or degrees do either love or fear this Haven.
Whose loves, or fears, are fellows, or atendants:
Of all estates, this Haven has some partakers
By lot, some Cuckolds, and some Cuckold-makers.
And can they all so much forgetful be
Unto that Ancient, and Renowned Tree,
That has so many ages stood Erected,
And by such store of Patrones been protected,
And now Ingloriously to lie unseen
As if it were not, or had never been?
Is Lechery waxed scarce, is Bawdery scant,
Is there of Whores, or Cuckolds any want?
Are Whore-masters decaide, are all Bawdes dead,
Are Panders, Pimps, and Apple-squires, all fled?
No surely, for the Surgeons can declare
That Venus wars, more hot then Marses are.
Why then, for shame this worthy Port maintain,
Let Us have our Tree, and Horns set up again:
That Passengers may show obedience to it,
In putting off their Hats, and homage do it.
Let not the Cornucopiaes of our land,
Unsightly and unseen neglected stand:
I know it were in vain for me to call
That you should raise some famous Hospital,
Some Free-schole, or some Alms house for the poor
That might increase good deeds and open heavens door
It Is no taxation great, or no collection
Which I do speak of, for This great erection,
For if it were, men's goodnesses, I know
Would prove exceeding barren, dull, and slow:
A Post and Horns, will build it firm and stable,
Which charge to bear, there is many a beggar able;
The place is Ancient, of Respect most famous,
The want of due regard to it does shame us,
For Cuckolds Haven, my request is still,
And so I leave the Reader to his will.
But holla Muse, no longer be offended,
It Is worthily Repaired, and bravely mended,
For which great meritorious work, my pen
Shall give the glory unto Greenwich men.
It was their only cost, they were the Actors
Without the help of other Benefactors,
For which my pen, their praises here adornes,
As they have beautified the Hau'n with Horns.
From thence to Debtford we amain were driven,
Whereas an Anchor unto me was given
With parting pintes, and quarts for our farewell
We took our leaves, and so to Greenwich fell.
There shaking hands, adiews, and drinkings store
We took our Ship again, and left the shore.
Then down to Erith, against the tide we went
Next London, greatest Mayor town in Kent
Or Christendom, and I aproue it can,
That there the Mayor was a Waterman,
Who gouernes, rules, and reigns sufficiently,
And was the Image of Authority:
With him we had cheap Reck'nings and good cheer,
And nothing but his friendship we thought dear.
But thence we roused our selves and cast off sleep
Before the daylight did begin to peep.
The tide by Grauesend swiftly did us bring
before the mounting Lark began to sing,
And e're we came to Lee, with speedy pace
The Sun began rise with most suspicious face,
Of foul foreboding weather, purple, red,
His Radient Tincture, East, Northeast o'respread,
And as our Oars thus down the River pulled,
Often with a Fowling-peece the Gulls we gulled,
His name is Arthur Bray a Waterman of Lambeth, and a good Markman.
For why the Master Gunner of our ship,
Let no occasion or advantage slip,
But charged and discharged, shot, and shot again,
And scarce in twenty times shot once in vain.
Foul was the weather, yet thus much I Will say
If It had been Fair, foul was our food that day.
Thus down along the spacious Coast of Kent
By Grane, and Sheppeies Islands down we went,
We past the Nowre-head, and the sandy shore
Until we came to The East end of the Nowre,
At last by Ramsgates Peer, we stiffly Rowed
The wind and tide, against us blowed and flowed,
Till near unto the Haven where Sandwich stands,
We were enclosed with most dangerous sands.
There were we sowsd and slabberd, washed and dashed,
And grauell'd, that it made us We were five men and two of us were afraid two
were not afraid, and I was half afraid.
half abashed:
We looked and pried, and stared round about
From our apparent perils to get out,
For with a Staff, as we the depth did sound,
Four miles from land, we almost were on ground.
At last (unlooked for) on our Larboord side
A thing turmoyling in the Sea we spide,
Like to a Meareman; wading as he did
All in the Sea his nether parts were hid,
Whose Brawney limbs, and rough neglected Beard
And grim aspect, made half of us afeard,
And as he unto us his course did make
I courage took, and thus to him I spoke.
Man, monster, fiend or fish, what e're thou be
That trauelst here in Neptunes Monarchy,
I charge thee by his dreadful Three-tin'd Mace
Thou hurt not me or mine, in any case,
And if thou be'st produced of Mortal kind
Show us some course, how we the way may find
To deeper water, from these sands so shallow,
I which thou see our ship thus wash and wallow.
With that (he shrugging up his shoulders strong)
Spoke (like a Christian) in the Kentish tongue,
Quoth he, Kind sir, I am a Fisherman
Who many years my living thus have wan
By wading in these sandy troblous waters
For Shrimps, Wilks, Cockles, and such useful matters,
And I will lead you, (with a course I Will keep)
From out these dangerous shallowes to the deep.
Then (by the nose) along he led our Boat
Till (past the flatts) our Bark did bravely floate,
Our Seahorse, that had drawn us thus at large
I gave two groates unto, and did discharge.
Then in an hour and a half, or little more,
We through the Downs at Deal went safe on shore.
There did our Hostess dress the Foul we killed,
With which our hungry stomachs well we filled,
The morrow being Wednesday (break of day)
We toward Dover took our weary way:
The churlish winds awaked the Seas high fury,
Which made us glad to land there, I assure ye.
Blind Fortune did so happily contriue,
That we (as sound as bells) did safe ariue
At Dover, where a man did ready stand
To give me Entertainment by the hand.
A man of mettle, mark and note, long since
He graced was to lodge a gracious Prince,
And now his speeches sum, and scope and pith
Is Jack and Tom, each one his Cousin Smith,
That if with pleasant talk you please to warm ye
He is an Host, much better then an Army,
A goodly man, well fed, and corpulent
Filled like a bag-pudding with good content,
A right good fellow, free of cap and leg,
Of complement, as full as any Egg:
To speak of Him, I know it is of Folly,
He is a mortal foe to Melancholy,
Mirth is his life and trade, and I think very
That he was got when all the world was merry:
Health upon health, he doubled and redoubled,
Till his, and mine, and all our brains were troubled,
Unto our absent Betters there we drank;
Whom we are bound to love, they not to thank,
By us mine Host could no great proffit reap
Our meat and lodging, was so good and cheap,
That to his praise thus much I Will truly tell,
He used us kindly every way and well.
And though my lines before are merry writ,
Where ere I meet him I Will acknowledge it.
To see the Castle there I did desire,
And up the Hill I softly did aspire,
Whereas it stands, impregnable in strength
Large in Circumference, height, breadth, and length,
Built on a fertile plat of ground, that they
Have yearly growing twenty loads of Hay,
Great Ordnance store, pasture for Kine and Horses,
Rampires and Walls, t'withstand inuasiue forces,
That be it well with truth and courage manned,
Munition, victuall'd, then it can withstand
The powers of twenty Tamberlaines (the Great)
Till in the end with shame they would Retreat.
It Is governed by a grave and prudent The right Ho: the Lo: Zouch Lord Warden of
the Cinque ports.
Lord,
Whose Justice does to each their right afford,
Whose worth (within the Castle, and without)
The five Ports, and the country all about,
The people with much love, do still recite,
Because he makes the wrongers render Right.
The kindness I received there was such,
That my remembrance cannot be too much.
I saw a Gun thrice eight foot length of Brass,
And in a Wheel I saw a comely Ass
(Dance like a Dog) that is turning of a Spit,
And draw as it were from the infernal pit,
(Whose deep Abisse is perpendicular
One hundred fathom (or well near as far)
So christaline, so clear, and cool a water,
That will in Summer make a man's teeth chatter,
And when to see it up, I there had stood,
I drank thereof, and found it sweet and good.
So farewell Castle, Dover, Dover Peer,
Farewell Host Bradshaw, thanks for my good cheer.
My bonny Bark to Sea was bound again;
On Thursday morn, we launchd into the maine,
By Folstone, and by Sangates ancient Castle,
Against the rugged waves, we tugge and wrestle
By Hyde, by Rumney, and by Rumney Marsh,
The Tide against us, and the wind blew harsh,
'Twixt Eolus and Neptune was such strife,
That I n're felt worse weather in my life.
Tossed and retost, retost and tossed again;
With rumbling, tumbling, on the rolling Maine,
The boystrous breaking Billows curled locks
Impetuously did beat against the Rocks,
The wind much like a Horse whose wind is broke,
Blew thick and short, that we were like to choke,
As it outragiously the billows shaues
The Gusts (like dust) blown from the bryny waves,
And thus the winds and seas robustious gods
Fell by the ears stark mad, at furious ods.
Our slender Ship, turmoyld 'twixt shores and Seas,
Aloft or Iowe, as storms and flawes did please:
Sometimes upon a foaming Mountains top,
Whose height did seem the heavens to underprop,
When straight to such profunditie she fell
As if she diu'd into the deepest Hell,
The Clouds like ripe Apostumes burst and showrd,
Their mattery watery substance, headlong powered;
Yet though all things were mutable and fickle
They all agreed to souse us in a pickle,
Of waters fresh and salt, from Seas and sky,
Wihch with our sweat joined in triplicitie,
That looking each on other, there we saw
We neither were half stewd, nor yet half raw,
But neither hot or cold, good flesh or fishes
For Canniballs, we had been ex'lents dishes.
Bright Phoebus hid his golden head with fear,
Not daring to behold the dangers there,
Whilst in that straight or Exigent we stand,
We see and wish to land, yet durst not land,
Like rolling Hills the Billows beat and roar
Against the melancholy Beachie shore,
That if we landed, neither strength or wit
Could save our Boat from being sunk or split.
To keep the Sea, stern puffing Eols breath
Did threaten still to blow us all to death,
The waves amain (vnbid) often boorded us,
Whilst we almost three hours beleaguerd thus
On every side with danger and distress
Resolved to run on shore at Dengie Nesse.
There stands some thirteen Cottages together,
To shelter Fishermen from wind and weather,
And there some people were as I suposd,
Although the doors and windows all were closd:
I near the land, into the Sea soon leapt
To see what people those same houses kept,
I knockd and called, at each, from house to house,
But found no form of mankind, man or No dwelling within near three miles of
those Cottages.
Mouse.
This news all sad, and comfortless and cold
Unto my company I straightwaies told,
Assuring them the best way I did think
Was to hale up the Boat, although she sink.
Resolved thus, we altogether please
To put her head to shore, her stern to Seas,
They leaping ouerboord amidst the Billows
We plucked her up (vnsunke) like stout tall fellowse.
Thus being wet, from top to toe we stripped
(except our shirts) and up and down we skip'd,
Till wind and Sun our wants did well supply The towns name is Lydd, two
miles from Rumney in Kent.

And made our outsides, and our insides dry.
Two miles from thence, a ragged town there stood,
To which I went to buy some drink and food:
Where kindly over reckoned, well misused,
Was, and with much courtesy abusde.
Mine Hosts did account it for no trouble,
For single fare to make my payment double:
Yet did her mind and mine agree together
That I (once gone) would never more come thither.
The Cabbins where our Boat lay safe and well,
Belonged to men which in this town did dwell:
And one of them (I thank him) lent us then
The Key to o'pe his hospitable Den,
A brazen Kettle, and a pewter dish,
To serve our needs, and dress our flesh and fish,
Then from the Butchers we bought Lamb and sheep
Beer from the Alehouse, and a Broom to sweep
Our Cottage, that for want of use was musty,
And most extremely rusty-fusty-dusty.
There, two days space, we Roast, and boil and broyle
And toil, and moyle, and keep a noble coil,
For only we kept open house alone,
And he that wanted Beef might have a Stone.
Our Grandam Earth (with beds) did all befriend us
And bountifully all our lengthes did lend us,
That laughing, or else lying Our beds were Cables and Ropes every feather at
the least 20. fatham long.
down did make
Our backs and sides sore, and our ribs to ache.
On Saturday the winds did seem to cease,
And brawling Seas began to hold their peace,
When we (like Tenants) beggarly and poor,
Decreed to leave the Key beneath the door,
But that our Landlord did that shift prevent
Who came in pudding time, and took his Rent,
And as the Sun, was from the Ocean peeping
We launched to Sea again, and left housekeeping.
When presently we saw the drisling skies
Began powt and lowre, and Winds and Seas began rise,
Who each on other played their parts so wild
As if they meant not to be Reconcilde,
The whilst we leap upon those liquid hills
Where Porposes did show their finns and Gills,
Whilst we like various Fortunes Tennis ball
At every stroke, were in the Hazard all.
And thus by Rye, and I walked to Winchelsey, where I thank my Couzin Mr.
Collins, the Mayor there, he made me kindly welcome.
Winchelsey we past
By Fairleigh, and those Rockie cliffs at last.
Some two miles short of Hastings, we perceived
The Lee shore dangerous, and the Billows heau'd,
Which made us land (to escape the Seas distress)
Within a harbor, almost harbourlesse.
(We give God thanks) amongst the Rocks we hit,
Yet were we neither washed or sunk, or split.
Within a Cottage nigh there dwells a Weauer
Who entertained us, as the like was never,
No meat, no drink, no lodging (but the floor)
No Stool to sit, no Lock unto the door,
No straw to make us litter in the night,
Nor any Candlestick to hold the light,
To which the Owner bid us welcome still
Good entertainment, though our cheer was ill.
The morrow when the Sun with flushed face
In his diurnall course began to trace,
The wind exceeding stiff and strong and tough,
The Seas outrageous, and extremely rough,
Our Boat laid safe upon the Beachy sand
Whilst we to Hastings went or walked by land.
Much (to that Town) my thankfulness is bound,
Such undeserved kindness there I found.
Three nights we lay there, and three days we spent
Most freely welcomed, with much merriment.
Kind Mr. Mayor his love above the rest;
Me and my crew, he did both feed and feast,
He sent us Gold, and came himself to us;
The Mayors name was Mr. Richard Boyse, a Gentleman whose laudable life, and
honest government is much beloved and aprou'd.
My thanks are these, because his love was thus.
Mine Host and Hostess Clayton both I thank
And all good fellows there, I found so francke,
That what they had, or what could there be got
They neither thought too heavy or too hot.
The winds and seas continued still their course
Inueterate seemed their rage, untamed their force,
Yet were we loath to linger and delay:
But once again to venture and away.
Thus desperately resolud, twixt hope and doubt
Half sunk with launching, madly we went out,
At twelve a clorke at noone, and by Sun set
To Miching, or New Haven, we did get.
There almost sunk (to save our Boat at last)
Our selves into the shallow Seas we cast:
And pluck d her into safety to remain
Till Friday that we put to sea again.
Then among our old acquaintance (storms and flaws)
At every stroke near deaths devouring jaws:
The weary day we past through many fears,
And land at last quite sunk ore head and ears.
All dropping dry, like five poor Rats half drowned
From succor far, we halde the Boat on ground:
Cast out our water, whilst we bravely dropped,
And up and down to dry our selves we hoped.
Thus we our weary Pilgrimage did wear,
Expecting for the weather calm and clear:
But storms, flawes, winds, seas, took no minutes rest,
Continual fiercely blowing, West Southwest.
A Town called Goreing, stood near two miles wide
To which we went, and had our wants supplide:
There we relieved our selves (with good compassion)
With meat and lodging of the homely fashion.
To bed we went in hope of rest and ease,
But all beleaguered with an host of Fleas:
Who in their fury nip'd and skip'd so hotly,
That all our skins were almost turned to motly.
The bloody fight endured at least six hours,
When we (oppressed with their increasing powers)
Were glad to yield the honor of the day
Unto our foes, and rise and run away.
The night before, a Constable there came,
Who asked my Trade, my dwelling, and my name:
My business, and a troop of questions more,
And wherefore we did land upon that shore?
To whom I framed my answers true, and fit
(According to his plenteous want of wit)
But were my words all true, or if I lyde,
With neither I could get him satisfide.
He asked if we were Pirates? we said no,
(As if we had, we would have told him so.)
He said that Lords sometimes would enterprise
T'escape, and leave the Kingdom in disguise:
But I assured him on my honest word,
That I was no disguised Knight or Lord,
He told me then that I must go six miles
T'a Justice there, Sir John, or else Sir Giles:
I told him I was loath to go so far,
And he told me, he would my journey bar.
Thus what with Fleas, and with the several prat
Of th'Officer, and his Ass-ociates,
We arose to go, but Fortune bad us stay:
The Constable had stolen our Oars away.
And borne them thence a quarter of a mile,
Quite through a Lane, beyond a gate and style,
And hid them there, to hinder my depart,
For which I wished him hanged with all my heart.
A Plowman (for us) found our Oars again,
Within a field well filled with Barley Grain:
Then madly gladly out to Sea we thrust,
Against winds and storms, and many a churlish Gust:
By Kingston Chapel, and by Rushington,
By little Hampton, and by Midleton,
To Bognors fearful Rocks, which hidden lie
Two miles into the Sea, some wet, some dry,
There we supposed our danger most of all,
If we on those remorcelesse Rocks should fall,
But by The Almighty's mercy, and his might,
We Rowed to Selsey, where we stayed all night.
There, our necessity could have no Law,
For want of beds we made good use of Straw,
Till Sol, that old continual Trauailer
From Thetis lap, began mount his flaming Car.
The weather kept it is course, and blowed, and raged,
Without appearance it would e're be swag'd,
Whilst we did pass those hills, and dales, and Downs,
That had devoured great Ships, and swallowed Towns.
Thus after six or five hours toil at least,
We past along by Wittering, West and East,
Upon the Lee shore still the wind full South,
We came near Chichesters fair Havens mouth.
And being then half sunk, and all through wet,
More feared then hurt, we did the Haven get.
Thus in that harbor we our course did frame
To Portsmouth, where on Monday morn we came.
Then to the Royal Fleet we Rowed abord,
Where much good welcome they did us afford.
To the Lord General, first my thanks shall be,
His bounty did appear in gold to me,
And every one abord the Prince I found,
In sted of want, to make their loves abound,
Captain Penrudduck there amongst the rest,
His love and bounty was to us expressed,
Which to requite, my thankfulness I Will show,
And that I Will ever pay, and ever owe.
On Tuesday morning we with maine and might,
From Portsmouth crossed unto the I Will of Wight:
By Cowes stout Castle, we to Yarmouth hasted,
And still the winds and Seas fierce fury lasted.
On Wedn'sday we to Hursts strong Castle crossed,
Most dangerously sowsd, turmoyl'd and tossed:
Good harbor there we found, and nothing dear,
I thank kind M. Fig, Matthew Fig, a right good fellow.
the Porter there,
He showed us there a Castle of defense
Most useful, of a round circumference:
Of such command, that none can pass those Seas
Vnsunk, or spoiled, except the Castle please.
On Thursday we, our Boat rowed, pulled and haled
Unto a place which is Key Haven called.
The wind still blowing, and the Sea so high,
As if the losty waves would kiss the sky,
That many times I wished with all my heart,
My self, my Boat, and Crewe, all in a Cart;
Or any where to keep us safe and dry,
The weather raged so outragiously.
For sure I think the memory of man
(Since winds and Seas to blow or flow began)
Cannot remember so stormy weather
In such continuance, held so long together
For ten long weeks ere that, it is manifest,
The wind had blown at Sowth or west Southwest,
And raised the Seas: to show each others power,
That all this space (calm weather) not one hour,
That whether we did go by Sun or Moon,
At any time, at midnight, or at noone:
If we did launch, or if to land we set,
We still were sure to be half sunk, and wet.
Thus toyling of our weary time away,
That Thursday was our last long looked for day:
For having past, with peril, and much pain,
And plowed, and furrowed, over the dangeroas maine,
Over depths, and flats, and many a ragged Rock,
We came to Christ-Church hau'n at five a clock.
Thus God, in mercy, his just judgment sparing
(Against our presumption, over bold, and daring)
Who made us see his wonders in the deep,
And that his power alone aloft did keep,
Our weather-beaten Boat above the waves,
Each moment gaping to be all our Graves.
We sinking escaped, then not to us, to Him
Be all the Glory, for he caused us swim.
And for his mercy was so much extended
On me (whose temptings, had so far offended)
Let me be made the scorn and scoff of men,
If ever I attempt the like again.
My love, my duty, and my thankfulness,
To Sir George Hastings I must here express:
His deeds to me, I must requite in words,
No other payment, poor men's state affords.
With fruitless words, I pay him for his cost,
With thanks to Mr. Templeman mine Host.
So leaving Christ-Church, and the Haven there,
With such good friends as made us welcome cheer:
Some serious matter now I must compile,
And thus from verse to prose I change my style.
GOD, who of his infinite wisdom made Man, of his unmeasurable mercy redeemed
him, of his boundless bounty, immense power, and eternal eye of watchful
providence releeues, guards, and conserues him; It is necessary, that every man
seriously consider and ponder these things, and in token of obedience and
thankfulness say with David: What shall I render, and the man having thus
searched considerately, the causer of his being, then let him again meditate
for Men should consider why God has given them a being in this life.
what cause he has a being: indeed it may be objected that almost every
thing has a being, as stones have being, trees, herbs, and plants, have being
and life: Beasts, fowls, and fishes, have being, life, and sense: but to man
is given a Being, life, sense, and reason, and after a mortal an immortal
ever being; this consideration will make a man know that he has little part
of himself, which he may justly call his own: his body is Gods, he made it;
his soul is his, who bought it; his goods are but lent him, by him that will
one day call him to a reckoning, for the well or ill disposing of them: so that
man having nothing but what he has received, and received nothing but what is
to be employed in the service of God, and consequently his Prince and Country,
it is plainly to be perceived, that every man has, No man is owner of
himself.
the least share or portion of himself to boast of.

I have written this Preamble, not only to inform such as know not these
things already; but also to such whose knowledge is, as it were fallen into a
dead sleep, who do live as though there were no other being then here, and
that their life and being was ordained only of themselves, neither God,
Prince, or Country, having no share or portion of them or of what they call
theirs. But oh you Inhabitans of Salisburie, I hope there are no such crawling
Cankerwormes, or Commonwealth Caterpillars amongst you. Nay, I am assured of
the contrary, that there are many who (with religious piety open hands and
relenting hearts) do acknowledge that your goods are but lent in trust unto
you, and do patiently bear the ouer-burthensome relieuing of many hundreds of
poor wretches, which (were it not for your charity) would perish in your
streets.

This being entered into my consideration, that your City is so much
ouercharged with poor, Here is an honest course set down for the enriching of
your rich, and the relieuing of your poor.
as having in three Parishes near 3000. besides decayed men a great many, and
that those few which are of the wealthier sort, are continually ouerpressed
with sustaining the wants of the needy, the City being as it were at the last
gasp, the poor being like Pharaohs lean Kine, even ready to eat up the fat
ones: I have made bold to write this Treatise ensuing, both to entreat a
constant perseuerence in those who have begun to do good works, and an
encouragement or animating of all others, who as yet seem slow in these good
proceedings. And if any thing here written by me, be either impertinent,
extrauagant, rude, harsh, or over bold, I humbly entreat you to impute it
rather to my want of judgment, learning, and capacity, then to any
presumption, or want of love and duty to the City and cause, which is
hereafter handled.

It is sufficiently known that my intent and purpose at this time, was not to
make any profit to my self upon any adventure (as it is deemed by many) by my
passage from London to Salisbury with a Wherry, His name is Gregory Bastable,
and his ordinary place where he plyes, or attends his labor, is at the Temple,
and there also plyes Thomas Estman another Wiltshire man, which went with me.
but I was entreated by a Waterman, which was borne in Salisbury, that I would
bear him company for the discovery of the sands, flats, depthes, shoales,
Mills, and Wears, which are impediments and lets, whereby the River is not
Nauigable from Christ-Church, or the Sea to Salisbury. Which after many
dangerous gusts, and tempestuous storms at Sea, (which I have recited in verse
before) it pleased God that at the last we entered the River, which in my
opinion is as good a River, and with some charge may be made as passable as the
River of Thames is upwards from Brentford to Windsor, or beyond it; the shallow
places in it are not many, The Mills need not be removed, and as for the
Wears, no doubt but they may with conscience be compounded for. By which
means of Navigations, the whole City and Country would be relieved, loyterers
turned into laborers, penury into plenty, to the glory of God, the dignity
and reputation of your City, and the perpetual worthy memory of all
benefactors, and well-willers unto so noble a work.

If you will but examine your own knowledges, you shall find that in the
whole dominion of England, there is not any one Town or City which has a
Nauigable River at it, that is poor, nor scarce any that are rich which want a
River with the benefits of Boats: The Town of Kingston upon Hull in
Yorkshire, the River there was cut out of Humber, by men's labors 20. miles up
into the Country, and what the wealth and estate of that Town is, (by the
only benefit of that River) it is not unknown to thousands: but you men of
Sarum may see what a commodity Navigations is, nearer hand; there is your
neighbor Southampton on the one side, and your dear friend Poole on the
other, are a pair of hansome looking-Glasses for you, where you may see your
want in their abundance, and your negligence in their industry.

God has placed your being in a fertile soil, in a fruitful valley,
environed round with Corn, and as it were continually besieged with plenty:
whilst you within (having so many poor amongst you) are rather lookers upon
happiness then enioyers: moreover (by Gods appointment) Nature has saved you
the labor of cutting a River, for I think you have one there as old as your
City ready made to your hands, if you will be but industrious to amend those
impediments in it, I dare undertake to be one of the 3. or 4. men which shall
bring or carry 16. or 20. Tons of goods betwixt the Sea and your City* Now,
with extreme toil of men; Horses and Carts, your wood is brought to you 18.
or 20. miles, whereby the poor which cannot reach the high prices of your
fuel, are enforced to steal or starve in the Winter, so that all your near
adjoining woods are continually spoiled by them: which faults by the benefit of
the River would be reformed, for the new Forest stands so near to the
water, that it is but cut the wood and put it into a Boat, which shall bring
as much to your City as 20. Carts, and fourscore Horses: besides, by this
River you might draw to you a trade of Sea-coale, which would enrich you, and
help the plain and inland Towns and Villages where no wood grows. And for
the Exportation of your Corn from Port to Port, within our own Country, as
it is well known what abundance of your Barley is continually made into Malt
amongst you: which if you had carriage for it, might be brewed into Beer,
wherewith you might serve diverse places with your Beer, which is now served
with your Malt: besides cariages of Brickes, Tyles, Stones, Charcoales, and
other necessaries, which is now carried at dear rates by Horse or Carts, which
now you send in Carts, or on Horses backs, to Southampton, to Bristow, and to
many other places: so that the deerenesse of the Cariages eats up all your
commodities and profit, which discommodity may be avoided, if your River be
cleansed: and what man can tell what good in time may redownd to your City
from the Sea, by foreign goods, which may be brought into Christ-Church Haven
by Shipping? nor can it be truly imagined, what new and useful profitable
businesses may arise in time by this means.

Our Forefathers and Ancestors did in their lives time in former ages do many
worthy and memorable works, but for all their industry and cost, they did not
(or could not) do all; but as there was much done to our hands, so there was
much left for us to do, and very fitting it was that it should be so, for it
is against common sense and reason our Fathers should toil in good works like
drudges, and we spend our times loytring like Drones: no, what they did was
for our imitation. And withal, that we should be leaders of our posterities
by our examples into laudable endeavors, as our progenitors has before showed
us: we are their sons and offspring, we have their shapes and figures, we
bear their names, we possess their goods, we inherit their lands; we have
materials of stones, Timber, Iron, and such necessaries which they had, (if not
in greater abundance) and having all these, let us withal have their willing
and liberal hearts, and there is no question to be made, but that our River of
Auon will quickly be cleansed to the honest enriching of the rich, and the
charitable relieuing of the poor.

I am assured that there are many good men in the City and Country of
Wiltshire, and others of worth and good respect in this Kingdom, who would
willingly and bountifully assist this good work: but (like Gossips near a
Style) they stand straining courtesy who shall go first: or the Mice in the
Fable, not one will adventure to hang the Bell about the Cats neck, So that if
one good man would begin, it would be (like a health drank to some beloved
Prince at a great feast) pledged most heartily, and by Gods grace effected most
happily.

You have already begun a charitable work amongst you, I mean your common
Town Brewhouse, the profit of which you entend shall be wholly employed for the
supply of the poor and Impotents which live in your City; from which sort of
people (being such a multitude) the Brewers there have found their best
custom; for no doubt but the meanest beggar amongst you, is (in some sort)
more valiant then the richest man: because the one dares to spend all he has
at the Alehouse, so dares not the other; for the poor man drinks stiffly to
drive care away, and has nothing to loose, and the rich man drinks moderatly,
because he must bear a brain to look to what he has. And of all Trades in the
world a Brewer is the Loadstone, which draws the customs of all functions unto
it. It is the mark or vpshot of every man's aim, and the bottomless
whirlepoole that swallows up the profits of rich and poor. The Brewers Art
(like a wild Kestrell or vnmand Hawke) flies at all games; or like a Butlers
box at Christmasse, it is sure to win whosoever looses: In a word, it rules and
reigns (in some sort) as Augustus Caesar did, for it taxes the whole earth.
Your Innes and Alehouses are Brooks and Rivers, and their Clyents are small
Rills and Springs, who all (very dutifully) do pay their tributes to the
boundless Ocean of the Brewhouse. For all the world knows, that if men and
women did drink no more then sufficed Nature, or if it were but a little
extraordinary now and then upon occasion, or by chance as you may term it; if
drinking were used in any reason, or any reason used in drinking, I pray ye
what would become of the Brewer then? Some make a profit of quarelling, some
pick their lyuings out of contentions and debate, some thrive and grow fat by
gluttony: many are bravely maintained by Bribery, theft, cheating, roguery,
and villainy: but put all these together, and join to them all sorts of people
else and they all in general are drinkers, and consequently the Brewers
Clients and Customers.
Surely we do live in an age wherein the seven deadly sins are every man's
Trade and living. Pride is the maintainer of thousands, which would else
perish; as Mercers, Taylers, Embroyders, Silk-men, Cutters, Drawers, Sempsters,
Laundresses, of which functions there are millions which would starve but for
Madame Pride with her changeable fashions. Leachery, what a continual crop of
profit it yields, appears by the gallant thriuing, and gaudy outsides of many
he and she, private and public sinners, both in City and Suburbs.
Covetousness is Embroidered with Extortion, and warmely lined and furred with
oppression. And though it be a devil, yet is it most Idolatrously adored,
honored, and worshipped, by those simple Sheepe-headed fools, whom it has
undone and beggered. I could speak of other vices, how profitable they are to
a Commonwealth; but my invention is thirsty, and must have one carouse more at
the Brewhouse, who (as I take it) has a greater share then any, in the gains,
which spring from the worlds abuses: for Pride is maintained by the humble, yet
one kind of Pride does live and profit by another: Leachery is supported by
the cursed swarm of Bawdes, Panders, Pimps, Applesquires, Whores, and Knaves,
and so every sin lives and thriues by the members, Agents, Ministers, and
Clyents, which do belong unto them: but Drunkenness plays at all, all
trades, all qualities, all functions and callings can be drunk extemporie, not
at any great Feast, or but at every ordinary dinner or supper almost, when men
are well satisfied with sufficiency, that then the mystery of quaffing begins,
with healths to many an unworthy person (who perhaps would not give the price
of the Reckoning to save all them from hanging (which make themselves sick
with drinking such unthankful healths) I my self have oftentimes dined or
supped at a great man's Board, and when I have risen, the servants of the house
has enforced me into the Seller or Buttry, where (in the way of kindness)
they will make a man's belly like a Sowse-tub, and enforce me to drink as if
they had a commission under the devils great seal to murder men with
drinking, with such a deal of complementall oratory, As, off with your Cup,
wind up your bottom, up with your taplash, and many more eloquent phrases,
which Tully or Demosthenes never heard of; that in conclusion I am persuaded
three days fasting would have been more healthful to me, then two hours
feeding and swilling in that manner.

If any man hang, drown, stabbe, or by any violent means make away his life,
the goods and lands of any such person, is forfeite to the use of the King: and
I see no reason but those which kill themselves with drinking, should be in the
same estate and be buried in the highwayes, with a stake drove through them:
And if I had but a grant of this suite, I would not doubt but that in seven
years (if my charity would but agree with my wealth) I might erect
Almes-houses, Let these Lines be considered if I lie or not.
Free-schooles, mend highwaies, and make Bridges; for I dare swear, that a
number (almost numberless) have confessed upon their deathbeds, that at such
and such a time, in such and such a place, they drank so much which made them
surfeit, Let these Lines be considered if I lie or not.
of which surfeit they languished and dyed. The maine benefit of these
superfluous and manslaughtering expenses comes to the Brewer, so that if a
Brewer be in any office, I hold him to be a very ungrateful man if he punish a
Drunkard, for every stiff pot-valiant drunkard is a Post, beam, or Pillar
which holds up the Brew House: for as the bark is to the tree, so is a good
drinker to a Brewer.

But you men of Salisbury, wisely perceiving how much Evil to your City, has
come by the abuse of Good drink, you would now work by contraries, to draw
Good for your poor out of these forepassed and present Evils. To draw evil
out of good is deuillish, but to work or extract goodness out of what is
evil is godly, and worthy to be pursued. The abuse of good drink, and
excessive drinking has made many beggars amongst you, to the enriching of a
few Brewers, and now you would turn the world off from the Barrels, as I would
off from the Coach-wheeles, that the benefit of your new built Town Brew House
might relieve many of those poor amongst you, who have formerly been
impouerished by the enriching of your Towne-Brewers. It is no doubt but they
will oppose this good work of yours, as the Image-makers in Ephesus did Paul,
when (...) preached against their Idolatrous worshipping Diana; Tobyah.
Arabians. Amonites.
but be not you discouraged, for Nehemiah (in time) did build the Temple,
although Sanballat and many others did oppose him, for as your intents are
Pious, so no doubt but God will make your events prosperous.

Now to turn from Beer and Ale to fair water, (your River I mean) which if
it be cleansed, then with the profit of your towne-Brewhouse, and the commodity
of the River, I think there will be scarce a beggar or a loyterer to be found
amongst you: I have written enough before concerning the benefit of it, and to
encourage such as seem slow toward so good a work, which had it been in the
Low Countries, the Industrious Dutch would not so long have neglected so
beneficial a blessing, witness their abundance of Nauigable Rivers, and
ditches, which with the only labor of men they have cut, and in most places,
where never God or Nature made any River; and lately there is a River made
nauigable to St. Yeades in Huntington-shire, wherein stood seven Mills as
impediments in the way. And now the City of Canterbury are clearing their
River that Boats may pass to and fro betwixt them and Sandwich haven: the
like is also in hand at Leedes in Yorkshire; Now, if neither former or present
examples can move you, if your own wants cannot enforce you, if assured
proffit cannot persuade you, but that you will still be neglectiue and stupid,
then am I sorry that I have written so much, to so little purpose, but my hopes
are otherways; (...) blind, lame, and covetous excuses be laid aside, then
those who are willing will be more willing, and those who are slack or
backward, will in some reasonable manner draw forward: And there is the mouth
of an uncharitable objection which I must needs stop, which is an old one, and
only spoken by old men, for (say they) we are aged and stricken in years, and
if we should lay out our moneys, or be at charges for the River, by the course
of Nature we shall not live to enjoy any proffit to requite our costs; this
excuse is worse then Heathenish, and therefore it ill becomes a Christian, for
as I wrote before, man was not created, or had either the goods of mind, body,
or Fortune bestowed on him by his Maker, but that he should have the least part
of them himself, his God, Prince and Country, claiming (as their due) almost
all which every man has. The oldest man will purchase land, which is subject
to barrenness, and many inconveniences, he will buy and build houses, which
are in danger of fire, and diverse other casualties, he will adventure upon
Wares or goods at high prises, which to his loss may fall to low rates: he
will bargain for cattle and Sheep, who are incident to many diseases, as the
Rot, the Murraine, and diverse the like, and all this will he do in hope to
raise his state, and leave his heirs rich; at his death perhaps (when he can
keep his goods no longer, when in spite of his heart he must leave all) he
will give a few Gowns, and a little money to Pious uses, a Groce or two of
penny loaves, and there is an end of him, so that there remains no more memory
of him.

But this good work of your River is not subject to barrenness or sterilitie,
but contrarily it will be a continual harvest of plenty, it is not in danger
of being consumed, or wasted, but it is assured of a perpetual increase. The
names and memories of contributors toward it, shall be conserved in venerable
and laudable remembrance, to the eternizing of their fames, the honor of their
posterities, and the good example of succeeding times to imitate. Therefore you
men of Salisbury I entreat you in this case to be good to your selves. Or else
you may say hereafter, If we had been Industrious we had been happy: If we
had not been covetous, we had been Rich.

Now, to return to my travels and entertainements: as I passed up the River at
the least 2000. Swans like so many Pilots swam in the deepest places before me,
and showed me the way: When I came to the Town of Ringwood (14 miles short of
Salisburie). I there met with his Majesty's Trumpeters, and there my fellows
Mr. Thomas Underhill, and Mr. Richard Stock, Mr. Thomas Ramsey, Mr. Randall
Lloyd, with others, which I name not, did walk on the bank and gave me two
most excelent flourishes with their Trumpets, for the which I thank them in
print, and by word of mouth. At last I came to a Town called Forthing Bridge,
where (not many days before) a grievous mischance happened, for two men being
swimming or washing in the River, a Butcher passing over the bridge (with a
Mastiffe Dog with him) did cast a stone into the water and say a Duck, at
which the Dog leapd into the River and seasd upon one of the men and killed him,
and the Butcher leaping in after thinking to save the man, was also slain by
his own Dog, the third man also hardly escaping, but was likewise bitten by
him.

From thence I passed further, to a place called Hale, where we were welcomed
by the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Penrudduck Knight, whom we carried there in
our Boat, and who I am assured will be a forward and a liberal Benefactor
toward clearing of the River.

So passing on our course by the Villages of Burgate, Breamer, Chartford,
Downton, and Stonelye, we came at last to Langfoord, where we were well
entertained by the Right Honorable the Lord Edward Gorge, (Lord barron of
Dundalke, and Captain of his Majesty's strong and defencible Castle of Hurst,
in Hantshire) to whom in love and duty we profferd the gift of our tattered
windshaken and weatherbeaten Boat, which (after our being at Salisbury, being
but two miles from thence) his Lordship accepted. And though he knew she was
almost unserviceable, yet his noble bounty was such, that he rewarded us with
the price of a new Boat. I had some conference with his Honor concerning the
impediments and clensing of the River, and I know he is most forwardly and
worthily affected toward it, and no doubt if it be pursued, that then he will
do that which shall become a Gentleman of his Honorable calling and Rank.

So on the same Friday at night we came to Salisbury where we brought our Boat
through Fisherton Bridge, on the West side of the City, taking our lodging at
the sign of the Kings head there, with mine Host Richard Estman, whose brother
Thomas, was one of the Watermen which came in the Boat thither from London; on
the morrow I with my company footed it two miles to Wilton, where at the Right
Honorable the Earl of Pembrooks, my Lord Chamberlaines house, I was most
freely (and beyond my worth and merit) kindly welcomed, by the Right
Worshipful Sir Thomas Morgan Knight, with whom I dined, and by whose command I
was showed all or the most part of the admirable contrived Rooms, in that
excellent, and well built house, which Rooms were all richly adorned with
Costly and sumptuous hangings; his Majesty some few days before having dined
there with most magnificent Entertainment, as did express the love of so noble
a Housekeeper for so Royal a Guest: upon the sight of which house with the
Furniture, I wrote these following verses.

If Wholesome Air, Earth, woods, and pleasant springs
Are Elements, whereby a house is graced:
If strong and stately built, contentment brings,
Such is the house at Wilton, and so placed.
There Nature, Art, Art-Nature has embraced;
Without, within, below, aloft complete:
Delight and state, are there so enterlac'd
With rich content, which makes all good, and great
The Hangings there, with Histories repleate
Divine, profane, and Morrall pleasures giving
With work so lively, exquisite, and neat,
As if man's Art, made mortal creatures living.
In brief, there all things are composed so well,
Beyond my pen to write, or tongue to tell.
Then was I showed a most fair and large Armorie, with all manner of provision
and Furnitue, for Pike, Shot, Bills, Halberts, Iauelins, with other Weapons and
munition, which for goodness, number, and well-keeping, is not second to any
Noblemans in England: Afterward I went to the Stables, and saw my Lords great
Horses, whom I saw such and so good, that what my vntutour'd Pen cannot
sufficiently commend, I am forced with silence to ouerpasse. But amongst the
rest, the pains and industry of an ancient Gentleman Mr. Adrian Gilbert, must
not be forgotten, for there has he (much to my Lords cost and his own pains)
used such a deal of intricate Setting, Grafting, Planting, inocculating,
Railing, hedging, plashing, turning, winding, and returning circular,
Trianguler, Quadranguler, Orbiculer, Ouall, and every way curiously and
chargeably conceited: There has he made Walks, hedges, and Arbours, of all
manner of most delicate fruit Trees, planting and placing them in such
admirable Artlike fashions, resembling both divine and morrall remembrances, as
three Arbours standing in a Triangle, having each a recourse to a greater
Arbor in the midst, resembles three in one, and one in three: and he has
there planted certain Walks and Arbours all with Not a Tree stands there, but
it bears one good or rare fruit or other.
Fruit trees, so pleasing and rauishing to the sense, that he calls it
Paradise, in which he plays the part of a true Adamist, continually toyling
and tilling. Moreover, he has made his Walks most rarely round and spacious,
one Walk without another, (as the rindes of an Onion are greatest without, and
less toward the Center) and withal, the hedges betwixt each Walk are so
thickly set, that one cannot see through from the one walk, who walks in the
other: that in conclusion, the work seems endless, A round work is
endless, having no end.

I touch not the matchless adjoining wood and walks of Rowlington here, whose
praises co^sists in it self, my pen being insufficient.


and I think that in England it is not to be fellowed, or will in have be
followed. And in love which I bear to the memory of so industrious and
ingenious a Gentleman, I have written these following Annagrams.

Adryan Gilbert, Annagrams Art redily began A breeding trial.


Art redily began a breeding trial
When she inspired this worthy Gentleman
For Natures eye, of him took full espiall,
And taught him Art, Art redily began,
That though Dame Nature, was his Tuteresse, he,
Out-workes her, as his works apparent be.
For Nature brings but earth, and seeds and plants,
Which Art, like Taylers, cuts and puts in fashion:
As Nature rudely does supply our wants,
Art is deformed Natures reformation.
So Adryan Gilbert, mendeth Natures features
By Art, that what she makes, does seem his creatures.
THus with my humble thanks to Sir Thomas Morgan, and my kind remembrance to
all the rest of my Lords Servants there, My legs and my laboring lines
return again to Salisbury, and from the next day (being Sunday) to Langford
to my Lord Gorge his house, with who^ I dined, and left my humble thanks for
the reckoning. In brief, my fruitless and worthy lip-labor, mixed with a
deal of Ayrie, and non-substantiall matter I gave his Lordship, and the like
requital I bestowed on the right Worshipful M. Thomas Squibb, Mayor of Sarum,
with M. Banes, M. John Iuy, M. Windouer, with all the rest; and more then
thanks, and a grateful remembrance of their Honorable, Worshipful, and
friendly favors, I know they expect not, and less then such a common duty as
Gratitude I must not, or cannot pay. To shut up all in few words, I know his
Majesty's pious inclination is so ample, that he will be graciously pleased
with any of your laudable endeavors for your welfare and commodity, if you take
good and speedy advice, then no doubt but the effects will be according to your
honest intendments.

So farewell Salisbury till we meet again, which I hope will be one day: in
the mean space I pray thee take this poor Pamphlet as a loving pledge of my
return. Me thinks I see already, Men, Horses, Carts, Mattocks, Shouels,
Spades, Wheelebarrowes, Handbarrowes, and Baskets at work for the clearing of
your River: But if my thoughts do deceive me, and my expectation fail, I
shall ever hereafter give small credit to their intelligence. So once more
Salisbury I wish thee thankfully well to fare.

On Thursday the 21. of August, I took Winchester in my way homewards; where I
saw an ancient City, like a body without ^ soul: and I know not the reason of
it, but for aught which I perceived, there were almost as many Parishes as
people. I lodged at the sign of the Cock, being recommended to the Host of the
house, by a token from Salisbury, but mine Host dyed the night before I came,
and I being weary, had more mind to go to bed then to follow him so long a
journey, to do my message, or deliver any commendations: but the whole City
seemed almost as dead as mine Host, and it may be they were all at Harvest
work: but I am sure I walked from the one end of it to the other, and saw not
30. people of all sorts: So that I think if a man should go to Winchester for
a Goose, he might lose his labor for a Trader cannot live there, by venting
such commodities.

On Friday I galloped a foot pace one and twenty miles, from Winchester to
Farneham; where I and one of my company hired a couple of Hampshiere Ienets
with seven legs, and three eyes betwixt them, upon whom we hobled seauenteene
miles, to Stanes, whence on Saturday the 23. of August we footed it to
Brentfoord, and Boated it to LonDON.


