



An Armado, or Navy, of 103. Ships and other Vessels; who have the Art to Sail
by Land, as well as by Sea.

Morally Rigd, Mand, Munition'd, Appointed, Set forth, and Victualled, with 32.
sorts of Ling: with other Provisions of Fish and Flesh.

By John Tailor.

The Names of the Ships, are in the next Page.

Anno Millimo, quillimo, trillimo.

LONDON, Printed by E. A. for H. Gosson. 1627.

The names of the Ships, with the number of their Squadrons.
1 The Lord-SHIP whose Squadron were of Ships and other Vessels, 12. in all. 2
The Scholler-SHIP with 10. others in all. 3 The Lady-SHIP, with 12. others. 4
The Goodfellow SHIP, with 12. others. 5 The Appprentice SHIP, with 4. others. 6
The Court-SHIP, with 11. others. 7 The Friend-SHIP, with 4. others. 8 The
Fellow-SHIP, with 5. others. 9 The Footman-SHIP, with 5. others. 10 The
Horsman-SHIP, with 4. others. 11 The Surety-SHIP, with 7. others. 12 The
Wor-SHIP, with 3. others. 13 The Wood-man-SHIP, with 7. others.
Besides, there were 7. other needless Ships which were in the nature of
voluntaries, or hangers on upon the Navy, ^s namely, The Mary Cary-Knaue, the
Knaves-(...), the Superfluous, the Careless, the Idle, the Coxcombe* the
Braggard. And what man soever he be, that has, or does not sail in some one
Ship of this my Fleet, Let him come to me and I will Ship him, and allow him
double wages

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLLL, AND truly Generous Sir JOHN FEARNE Knight.
Noble Sir,
THe world sufficiently knows that you ^nowewhat Ships and shipping are; that
you have pl^w^d the dangerous O can, and surrowed over the rugged bosom of
Neptune: yet nevertheless I know that you never (...) notice of my old and
weather-beaten (...), being bu^lt without either timber or Iron, rig'd without
ropes or ^^rdage, whose Ordinance are discharged without (...) or powder, whose
victuals are ^^the bread, drink, fish, flesh, or good Red-^erring, whose
voyages are (...) performed with wind and water, yet ever in action like a
perpetual motion; but when you shall please to savor me so much as to peruse
and suruay my strange Fleet or Armado, you will then perceive that your self
has sailed in (or at the least) boarded most of my Ships of note: for you are
well acquainted with the LORDSHIP, you are a friend to the SCHOLLERSHIP, you
have laid the LADYSHIP aboard, you have entered the APRENTISHIP, you are well
known in the COVRTSHIP, you have saild in the Good- FELLOWSHIP, you love the
FRIENDSHIP, you affect the FELLOWSHIP, you know the Foote-man- SHIP, you are
skild in the HORS-MAN-SHIP, you have had a principal Cabin in the SVRETISHIP,
you have surprised and taken the WORSHIP, and you know what belongs to the
WOOD-MANSHIP, the WARDSHIP, and STEWARDSHIP; I due for some reasons not meddle
with all, and I think you have sildome or never had any dealings with them:
the some of all is, I most humbly desire your Worships pardon, for my abrupt
Dedication, assuring you that it was only my love and duty that put me on,
without any expectance of Patronage, protection or reward: and so with my best
wishes for the perpetuity of your present and ever future felicity, I rest,

Your Worships to command whilst I have being, IO: TAILOR.

The description how the whole Navy is victualled with thirty two sorts of
Ling, besides other necessaries.
FIrst, thirty thousand couple of Change-LING, appointed only for the diet of
such fellows who had honest parents, and are themselves changed into very
Rascals. Secondly Dar-LING, this fish was dearer then fresh Salmon (for it was
consecrated to the Goddess Venus) it was of that high price that some men have
consumed their whole Lordships, Manners and credit, in two or three years
only in this kind of diet, therefore it is not a dish for every man's tooth,
for none but brave Sparks, rich heirs, Clarissimoes and Magnificoes, would
go to the cost of it. Thirdly, Shaue-LING, which was only for the diet of
Priests, Monks, and Friars. Fourthly, Fond-LING, this fish was for Cockneys,
and other pretty youths, over whom their parents were so tender, that a man
might perceive by their manners, they had been better fed then taught. Fi^tly,
Tip-LING, a dish for all men. Sixthly, Vnder-LING, this fish was shipped for
witty younger brothers, poor Scholars that has neither friends or money.
Seauenthly, Starue-LING, this Ling was only for the Bark beggarly, which was
manned with old discarded Seruing-men, and maimed cassiered Soldiers and
Mariners. Eighthly, Strip-LING, provided for Pages, Lackeyes, and Foot-boyes.
Ninethly, Foo-LING, a dish for every man's diet, Tenthly, Swad-LING, against
stomach, but yet a dish of good use. Eleventh, Grumb-LING, a discontented kind
of fish for the poorer sort of people to chaw upon, for when they do think
themselves wronged by their Superiors and dare not utter their minds openly,
then they feed upon Grumb-LING. Twelfth, Wrang-LING, this Ling was salted by
16. Pettifoggers, in a long troublesome Term: it is held to be a lasting
dish, and will serve the whole Fleet with their posterities, to the second and
third generation. Thirteenth, Troub-LING was provided by certain double
diligent Constables, to the mollestation of their sleepy watch, and the charge
of many a man that would quietly have gone to their lodging. Fourteenth,
Prowe-LING, is a plentiful fish, upon which many thousands do live, but by
using it too much, it choakes a great number: and as fishermen do bait their
hooks with one fish to catch others, so is this Ling (for the most part) taken
with three other sorts of Ling, as with Iug-LING, Brab-LING, Braw-LING, until
by hook or by crook it is taken with Ang-LING; I have seen many of these
Prowle-LING fishermen end their lives like Swans (in a manner singing) and
sometimes making their wills at Wapping, or looking through a hempen window at
St. Th^mas Waterings or the three legged instrument near ^adamg^^n. There were
many other sorts of Ling sent to the Navy which (to avoid prolixiti^) I will
but name, as Quarrell-LING was for the diet of some of the Noble Science, some
for Roaring boys, and Rough-hewd Tittery tues. The nineteenth sort of Ling
was Fumb-LING, which is for their dyets who have been long married and can get
no children. The twenteeth was Ming-LING, which was for Wine-marchants,
Vintners, Brewers, and Apothecaries. Iumb-LING and Tumb-LING, for the keepers
and Cupid^an haunters of vaulting houses. Fid LING, Fud-LING, and Stumb-LING
from the Schools of Dancing, and Drinking. The twenty sixth sort of Ling was
Bung LING, which was the fare of Quack-s^lu^r^, Mountebanckes Ratcatching
Watercasters, and also for all bo^^hing Artificers and cobling Tradesmen.
Mumb-LING was for those that had no need of the Tooth-drawer. Ster-LING money
was at such a Scant-LING,

Why these Ships are called SHIPS.
I have little to say to the Reader, because I neither know him or his
conditions, therefore to avoid lying and slattry in putting the styles of
Christian, Gentle, courteous, friendly, learned or honest, upon the Atheiste,
barbarous, hateful, Ignorant, or dishonest, the Reader gets no Epistle at all
of me: If he be good and well inclinde it is the better for himself, and if
otherwise, it shall not be much the worse for me, there is the point: now the
reasons why all these words or names of my Morrall Navy are called SHIPS, or
do all end with the word or syllable SHIP, as Lord SHIP, Lady SHIP, Friend
SHIP and the like etc. The reasons I take to be these which follows, and as I
imagine most significate; first the whole life of man is as a SHIP under sail,
for, be it either day or night, storm or calm, light or dark, hot or cold,
winter or summer, yet the SHIP is in her course ever going on her voyage: so
likewise Man, let him go, sit, stand, ride, run, work, play, sleep or wake,
yet he is still going onward in his mortal passage. A SHIP is ever in need of
repayring, so is a man either in body, mind or goods. A Ship is ever unsteady;
a Man is always mutable: Some SHIPS are hard to be steered; some men are
harder to be guided. Some Ships bear so great a sail that they bear their
Masts by the Board and make all split again; some Men do spread such a Clue
in a calm, that a sudden storm half sinkes them and tears all. Some SHIPS
are so favored by the wind that they make rich voyages, and quick returns;
some men are so fortunate that wealth and promotions do fall in their mouths.
Some SHIPS runs through many a storm, with much danger, and yet are so unlucky
that they do never make good voyage; some Men (being borne under a three penny
plannet) can neither by pains, watching, labor or any industry be worth a
groat. Some SHIPS by being ouerladen have been cast away, some men by taking in
too much have been forced to cast all away. SHIPS do wallow and heave and set
upon the Sea; Men do stumble, reele and stigger on the land. Some Ships have
their cracks and imperfections gayly hid with painting; some Men have their bad
intents coulourd over with hippocrisie, and their diseased carkases covered
with good clothes. Some SHIPS do bring profitable commodities, and some bring
bables, toys and tri^les; some Men do enrich a kingdom with their wisdom,
authority, and practice in virtue: and some men do disgrace and Impouerish a
Monarchy by solly, ill employed power, and sottishnes in vanity. Some SHIPS
will run to leeward extremely if the wind be scant, and some again will
bravely beat it out to windward and weather it, so some Men will shrink from
their friends or from themselves, in a storm of trouble or poverty, and some
few again will bear up stiff, constantly contemning and opposing the brunts of
fortune. Some SHIPS are taken by others and made prizes; some Men are captived
by others and made slaves. Some SHIPS are commended more for their Bulk and
beauty, then for any good service; and some Men are more applauded for their
fortunes, then for any good conditions. If I would insist longer on these
comparisons, I could enlarge my Induction to the bounds of a Pamphlet:
therefore I will conclude it with King Solomon's similitude, wisdom 5. C. 10.
that man's life passes as a SHIP that passes over the waves of the water:
therefore I wish all men to be provided, as good SHIPS should be: let HOPE be
their Anchor, let Faith be their Cable, let charity and love be their Card and
Compass, till they come happily to the Haven of GRAVESEND, and from thence to
that blessed harbor which has no END.

John Smith of his friend Master JOHN TAILOR and his Armado.
Arm, Arm, Arm, Arm, great Neptune rowze, awake
And muster up thy monsters speedily:
Boreas unto thy blustering blasts betake,
Guard, guard your selves, from Tailors policy,
Rocks, shoales, Lee-shores, oh help them Goodwin sands,
For this new Fleet runs over Seas and Lands.
And's now so victua'ld, rigd and yarely plyes,
It threatens all the waters, air and skies,
Truth in his Navy such a power does lead,
The Devil, Hell, vice and all, the Fleet may dread.
And well it may, if well you understand,
So rare a Fleet, was never made nor manned.
The Masters name was Petrus Vainglorious, his Mate Hugo Hypocrisy, men that
have Steered the course in the Lord-SHIP many hundred years: The Boatswaine
and his Mate were Scoff and Derision, with Gripe the Steward, Avarice the
Purser, and Lawrence Delay the Paymaster; kinsman to Tom Long the Carier: which
three last are thought to be very arrant Knaves, who have spoyld the Government
of the whole Ship. In Brief, the Gunner, Cockswaine, Swabber, and Ship-boyes
were plentifully stored with pride, flattery and other the like Gentlemen like
virtues.

The Ships that went in the same Regiment or Squadron with the Lord-SHIP, were
these that follow. Namely.

1 The Ambition, 2 The Presumption, two stout Ships of very lofty Sail and
great Burden. 3 The Oppression, a Ship of Account and Estimation. 4 The
Costly, a Ship of great Charge. 5 The Mutable, a brave Ship, but in no course
steady. 6 The Selfeloue, a great Ship, but of small service. 7 The Delight, a
fair Ship to the eye. 8 The Hopewell, a Ship of great expectation. 9 The Debt,
a Ship of great Burden and much Receipt. 10 The Satisfaction, a large long
Ship, a very cart, a slugg and slow of sail. 11 The Promise: a Ship very
unsteady, yet her sails euerful.
The Scholar- SHIP with her Regiment.
THis Ship is a very Ancient Ship, and was built at the first, and has bin
ever since Repaired with Infinite cost, pains and Study. She has been of
that worthy Estimation, that the greatest Monarks, Kings, Princes, and Estates
of the world, have made it their chiefest felicity to sail in her: all famous
Divines and Philosophers have steered her and been steered by her. Some of her
greatest Mariners have been much troubled with plurifies, pluralities I would
say, and some have been great Merchants a Steeple fair, but it was in the old
time when Si- Money, was as good as ready Money. The Arts Mathematical and
metaphysicall have been the Rich Prizes and Purchases of her Painful Voyages:
and now at this present (though the world be much altered with her) She tryes
her fortunes in this aduentrous Navy. The Captains name was Sapience, the
Master Experience, his mate Knowledge, and every other officer Correspondent,
being muniti^nd and victualled for the enterprise she set sail, with her
squadron or Regiment of Ships here under named.

1 The Serious a Ship laden with Gravity. 2 The Foresight a Ship worthy of
much regard. 3 The Desert a Ship of great service and small payment. 4 The
Industrious* a good profitable Ship.
Then there attended her five small Pinnaces and Frigots, namely, the
Dogmatist, the Captious, the Preiudicate, the Carper, and the Critic. These
five were manned with young Bachelours of Art, Puny Inns of Courtmen, and
humorous Poets, who with their continual cudgelling one another with broken
verses, had almost beaten Priscians brains out.

All these three were of most especial use and service for the Ladyship whose
chief charge and employment was to wear, eat, and drink the best; and
withal not to pester, wrong or oppress the Fleet, with good examples of
directions,

The Goofellow- SHIP with her Regiment.
THis Ship is very old, and much out of reparations: She has been of such use
and employment, that she has sailed into all Countries of the inhabitable
world; she only is the greatest traveler, for there is not a Haven or Harbor
under the Sun, but she has cast Anchor in it. Wine Merchants, Vintners,
Brewers and Victuallers, have thrust themselves into whole Lordships, by the
often returns, lading and vnlading of this Ship; yet now she is so
weather-beaten with the storms of Time, and so windshaken with too much use,
that through want she is not able to bear half the ^ayle which she formerly
has done.

In the golden age, when Saturn reigned, (long before the two wrangling words
Thine and Mine, had set the world together by the ears) then was the
Goodfellow-SHIP in such request, that all estates and conditions sailed in her,
then her voyages and quick returns (her lading being for the most part hearty
love and true affection) did maintain and keep such unity, that whosoever was
not a Mariner or Sayler in her, was esteemed as a Branded stigmatizd infamous
person.

But at last her Nauigators began to steer another course: for some of them
had learned the Art of covetousness, and with a deuillish kind of Bawdrye,
called usury and extortion, made gold and silver engender and beget yearly so
much and so much in the hundred, when Tailors, like so many wicked Spirits,
flew from one Country to another, bringing home more fashions then would kill a
hundred thousand horses; when for the maintenance of those fashions, the Earth
was equally shared and divided amongst the people, (some all, and some not a
foot) with Hedges, Ditches, Bownds, Mownds, Walls and Marks; when my Lady
Rustye began to take such a thrifty order, that all the meat in the Kitchen
should be cheaper, then the washing and Painting of her Visage, (if you allow
the powdring of her bought or borrowed Periwig into the bargain) when the world
came to this pass, then this Good ship, this Goodfellow Ship being forsaken of
her best Pilotts, Masters, and Mariners, all her Saylors in little time
declined to be no better then Swabbers, so that through want of skillful
managing and reparation, and with extreme age, she is nothnig so serviceable
as she has been, yet as she is, she sets forward with her best ability in
this Voyage. The Captains name was Hercules Dumplin, a Norffolke Gentleman,
the Master Giles Gammon, was borne at Rumford, the rest of the Mariners it were
needless to name them.

The other Ships and vessels that were in the same Regiment with the Good
fellowship, were these.
1 THe Drunken Sisse, a great Ship, it is though she was built at Midleborough;
but howsoever, she has made many voyages into England: she is so beloved,
that she needs not press any man to serve in her: for all sorts of people do
daily come aboard of her, and freely, and voluntarily offer ster their best
seru,ce, so that it is a wonder to see how bravely she is manned; and (many
times) women do take their turns at helm, and steer their courses as well
as men. She is a Ship contrary to all other Ships, for she rowles, reeles and
tumbles, most of all when she is in a calm harbor; and the more lading she
takes in, the more vnstedy she is; for if the Sea be as calm a milke-pan, ^et
is she ever tossing, which makes her Mariners Sea-sicke, and subject to much
casting. Her Ordinance are Gallons, Pottles, Quarts, Pintes, and the mizers
Gallon: with three hoop'd pots, Kannes, Goddards: in the which Artillery,
almost every one has the skill to charge and discharge, maintaining the fight
as long as they can either stand or understand. The Master of her is an
Amsterdam'd man, his name is Cornelius van Broaken gulch; the Master Gunner was
one Denis Whirl^poole, a man of Doepe, with Gulf the Purser Swallow the
Bot-swaine, and Swill the Steward.

2 The second Ship in the Regiment with the Good-fellow-SHIP,, was the Sow of
Flushing, she was a vessel unseemly to the eye, but yet serviceable.

3 The Carowse, a Ship of hot service, and as the Spider suckes the sweetness
of the fairest flowers, converting their juice into poison, so the Saylors in
this Ship have taken a use to drink other men's healths, to the amplifying of
their own diseases.

4 The Quaffe, a quick smart Ship, much of the bulk and carriage of the
Carrowse.

5 The Biss^e of Breda, a small Ship, yet in continual service, her worst
fault is, she is so low built, that her Mariners can hardly keep themselves
dry.

6 The Sleeper of Roterdam, a great Ship of exceeding necessary use, and much
employment, she is to the whole Regiment, in the nature of an Hospital or
Spittle, for when any of them are wounded, Pot-shot, Iug-bitten, or Cup-shaken,
so that they have lost all reasonable faculties of the mind, and in a manner
are so mad, that they dare speak felony, whistle treason, and call any
Magnifico a mungrell; in such desperate cases as this, the distracted parties
are brought aboard the Sleeper, where Time like a good Cloath-worker, with
setting a good nap upon their threedbare eyes, their wits that were spent and
like Notherne Cloth shrunk in the wetting, are speedily recovered.

So likewise for the limbs and members of the body, she is the only,
Aesculapian Tabernacle; and to speak the truth, St. Winifrides Well, the Bath
of Spa^^, are not to be compared to this Ship, for speedy ease and cure: for I
have seen many that were so dimsighted, that they could not see their way at
noonday, and others have been so defective in their speech, that they could
not speak one wise word; and others so lame of their legs, that they could
neither go or stand, and with a few hours lying aboard of this easy Ship,
their sights, speech, and legs have been all recovered.

7 The Whiffe, a small Pinnace of Varina.

8 The Puff, a Bark of Virginia.

9 The Vapor, a Frigotte of Trinidado.

10 The Snuff, a Caruell of Bermoodoes.

11 The Bark Beggarly, before mentioned, manned with old cashired Soldiers,
Mariners, and Seruingmen, Negligent Tradesmen, with some few Courtiers, whose
diet is only Statue- Ling.

The Apprentice- SHIP.
THis Ship is very slow of sail, so that a man may make two East India
voyages, or girdle the terrestrial Globe twice about (as Sir Francis Drake did
once) before she can make a return; The Compass whereby she shows her
course is for (the most part) in our Troynouantine Ocean, within the sound of
Bowe-Bell; instead of a Map or Carte, she is directed by an Indenture, whereby
she has more knowledge in the time to come, then any Witch or Conjurer; for
by only looking on it, the least Ship-Boy that is in her can tell when her
voyage will be done; she is a vessel that is both singular and single, for
none but single persons must board her; and (to avoid double dealing), she has
banished Matrimony out of her quarters for seven years or more; her Mariners
do (against their wills) endure much hardness, as hunger, thirst, heat, cold,
watching, toil and travel; yet many times they are allowed more Lamb and
Ribroste then they would have; yet by patience and long suffering, many of them
do chance to be preferred (in time) to sail in the Lord-ship, Court-ship,
Surety-ship, or some other bottom of Honor or eminency; for they claim a
freedom of all Trades whatsoever, and are so mystical in their diversities of
mysteries, that no one man living can describe them: yet for the most part)
weight and measure are their guides, by weight from the Scruple to the Dram, to
the Tun, to the three Tons, and to the three hundred thousand millions: and
by measure from the half quarter Pint to the whole quarter Sack; from less
then the Inch to the Ell, to the Furlong, to the Firmament, and down to the
bottom of the Celler, to the Ocean and the Tayle^s hell, who indeed are
accounted the best bread men in the Ship, and such as go through stitch with
what they take in hand. There are diverse functions which never do come aboard
of this Ship, as Cuckolds, Wittols, and others which I could name: but to
supply these wants, she is seldom unfurnished of young lying Knaves, Whores,
and Thieves, who (as the cockle grows among the wheat) do sail in the
Apprentice-SHIP, and share as much benefit as most of her laboring Mariners.
She has small attendance, for indeed she is the only bounden servant in the
Navy, only there is a sluggish vessel called the Tedious that sails with
her, with four small Pinnaces, as 1 The Lodge. 2 The Diet. 3 The Wash. 4 The
Wring.


And sometime double, single; or no apparel is allowed to the Saylors when the
voyage is ended.

The Court- SHIP with her Regiment.
COurt-SHIP, is a vessel of Royal and magnificent burden, of eminent
Command, and invincible force, if she be well manned, carefully rig'd,
discreetly ballac'd and wisely steerd; she is of that impregnable strength,
that neither the storms of saucy censure, the Gusts of Mallapart babbling, the
flawes of Envy, the Tempests of Temporising tale-bearers, or the smooth calmes
of Flattery, can make her sail to any other Harbor then the famous Ports and
Havens of Virtue, Honor and perpetual hapines.

But (to use Sea-tearmes and Phrases) there are a Crew of unprofitable
Steale-sharers, peremptory Hotshots, idle Flat-sheates, and unserviceable
vseles Loose-guise, that do attempt to board this worthy admired Ship, and so
having boarded her, (like Drones) they eat and live upon the labors and
deserts of the painful industrious Mariners; these are the youths that after
they have foysted themselves into so^e mean place or Office, though it be but
a Swabber, Liar or Liars Mate (always provided that they have sworn
themselves into good clothes) then let all their acquaintance and friends stand
further off, for the^^ (...): themselves to be no more mortal, so that a man
ha^ fair better speak to the Material owner of the Ship himself, then to
any of these Pucke-foysts: yet there is (...) show of zeal in their salutation
to any one they meet, for the word God s^^e ye, is as common as the Air
(...) them, b^t (...) ^^f^ct they neither mind God nor the (...) ^hey speak
to, and (like an Ape for an Aple) they (...) kiss their pawe, inuiting a man
to their Cabin, but whosoever takes them at their word, they hold him to want
manners, and to be a fellow of no breeding. The ignorant Ass that carried the
Egyptian Goddess Isis in procession, ^hen the more ignorant people kneeled
down to adore the (...), the witless Ass thought it had been in reuer^^^ ^o
him: so in like manner these vpstart Ship-boyes. (...) once crept into any
inferior Office in the Ship, and (...) being covered with silk and good
borrowed beaten Satin, ^^nde and buttered through with Plush or Velvet, they
arrogantly imagine, that all the reverence or respect that men do either for
their undeserved place, or gaudy outside, is done to their persons; but I
would have them understand that they are honored and worshipped, with the same
devotion as the barbarous Brasilians, Americans and Virginians do adore the
Devil withal, which is not for the hope of any good which they evpect, but
for fear of the hurt which they suppose the Devil can do them. The
conclusion is, that when a storm or tempeste comes, the Noble, stout, skillful
Nauigator stands to his Tackling, and courageously applies himself either to
Top and yard, Helm and Lead, from Post to stem, and from Prow to Quarter, when
all the service Monsier Mushrome and his Mate can do, is either to eat,
sleep, spewe, and stink, and at last for some notorious or meritorious work,
they are duck'd from the yeard arm of State, into the deep sea of disgrace,
and turned a shore like Caines Imps, preferred to their due estates of Runagates
and Vagabonds.

The Squadron of Ships that went under the command of the Court- SHIP.
1 THe Renown, a Ship of worthy port, strength and burden, manned with
approved and experienced Soldiers and Saylors.

2 The Courage.

3 The Resolution.

4 The Fore^^^ght.

5 The Expedition.

6 The Loyalty.

The Perseverance. Six tall Ships of most excellent service and performance.

7 The Complement.

8 The Brisbe.

9 The Strange. Three Gallant Pinnaces, but of very small use, profit or
service.

10 The Obliuious. A Ship of great burden and most plentifully manned, with
those that had forgotten their Parents, kindred, friends, birth, estate,
breeding, and indeed such as were so far out of knowledge to know any man,
that they had no acquaintance of themselves, and being mere strangers to their
own qualities and conditions; and thus was the Court-SHIP appointed and
attended; much of her great Ordinance, were Promises, the Powder breath, and
ayry performance were the Shot, which by reason of the tossing of the billows
and unquiet surges of the Sea, did often miss the mark.

The Friend- SHIP
WAs a Vessel of great account and estimation, David and Jonathan, Damon and
Pithias, Pilades and Orestes, Alexander and Lodowicke, Scipio and Lealius, did
most lovingly and unfeignedly sail in her: indeed she was ever free for all
comers of what Country, sex, age or estate soever, for the word Friend
importes free end, which is as much as the end and intention of Friend-SHIP is
free: In these latter times, she should have gone to Sea, but there were not
men to be gotten to man her, so for a shift they were feign to furnish her with
Kindred, Nunkles, and Couzins, with here and there a false Brother: Herod, and
Pilate went aboard this Ship (with a shameful deal of love from the teeth
outward) but their purpose was to destroy innocent blood. It was a merry world
when Fidelity was Master of this Ship, Constancy his Mate, and Plaine-dealing
the Botswaine: but those worthy Mariners are dead, and an old Proverb as sure
as Check with them: in a word, the old Ship is decayed and rotten, having only
the bare name left, for she is so much past service, that she can hardly steer
or bear sail, with an adverse contrary gale, she will fall to Leeward most
abominably, yet with a prosperous and fortunate wind, she will spread all her
Canuasse exceeding fair and hipocriticall, and so I Will describe no further,
because she is grown to that cheap rate, that a man may have her a
Bellingsgate for a box on the care.

The Friend-SHIP had two very small Pinnaces in her Squadron: named, (...) he
is called and esteemed a man of good Foote-man-SHIP, which word Annagramatiz'd
is Foe to Man-SHIP, importing that running away is an enemy or foe to Manhood,
valor and resolution, (thus much by way of Paradox.)

Let the wind blow where it will, yet all weathers this Ship sails a Trot,
her light-footed, nimble-hee^d Mariners (like so many dancers) capring in the
Pumpes and vanities of this sinful world, sometimes a Morrisca or Trenchmore
of 40. miles long, to the Tune of Dusty my dear, Dirty come thou to me, Dun
out of the mire, or I wayle in woe and plunge in pain, all these daunces have
no other music, except now and then he chance to hear an oath, or a curse
or two from the Coachman.

These Saylors, the most part and best of them are bred in a Kingdom of much
fertility and plenty, called Realdine, where after they have all their youth
been accustomed to wear Brogues and Tru^es, their fare being many times
shamrookes, oaten-bread, beans and butter-milke, armed upon stark naked, with
a Dart or a Skeene, steeld with the spirit of Vsquabath, then they cross a
ditch of eight hours sail, and land in the most flourishing Kingdom of
Triabnie, where by their good Foot-man-SHIP they are turned out of their old
habits, into Iackets of good Preterpluperfect Velvet, plated with silver or
Argentum vi^um, (for the quickenesse) and all to be embrodered back and side,
with the best gold twist, and the best of the silke-worme, sometimes with a
Court (a Coat of Guard I should say,) or a Coat of Regard, being well
guarded, vnreguarded, with such a deal of feather Ribbands, and points, that
he seems to be a running Habberdashers shop of small wares.

Yet are those men free from Pride, for their greatest Ambition is not to ride
but to foot it, or else to sweep Chimneis, or turn Costermongers; this is
the altitude of their aim, and the profundity of their ^elicitie, nevertheless
they know themselves to be Great men's Trappings, courageous Torch-bearers,
ill^strious Firedrakes, glorious and sumptuous Turmoylers, they are far from
the griping sins of Usury and Extortion, and are such Philosophical
contemners of the world, that every day they tread it under their ^^ete and
trample on it; and they are such haters of wickedness, that they leave it in
all places where they come: they are not covetous of other men's land, for they
make all the have they can every day to leave it behind them; they are so much
to be trusted, that their words are as good as their bonds, yet in this their
humility they may compare with Emperors, for they are as brave as Nero, and
can drink with Tiberius: To conclude, the Foot-man-SHIP is manned with well
breathed Mariners, who after all their long, painful, and faithful service,
are shipped in-the Barke-beggerly, and brought to an Anchor in the Haven of
Cripplegate.

There were in the R^giment with the Foote-man-SHIP 4. small Pinnaces.

1 The Sweat, a vessel of warm employment or hot service. 2 The Moyle, a
Fregate that will endure much foul weather. 3 The Toil, a Bark for all
weathers, Winter or Summer. 4 The Cripple, an old Drumler, quite past service.
The Horseman- SHIP with her Squadron.
HOrsmanship had not so fair a beginning as Footman-SHIP, for Cayno who was
the first vagabond and runnagate in the world, was also the first that backed
and mannadge a Horse (as Polador Virgil says, (...) doubt after he had murdered
his brother, seeing he could not run from the horror of his conscience,
therefore he practiced Horseman-SHIP, because perhaps he tho^g^t to ride from
himself. This Ship has more p^ces then (...) has; and the comparison may
hold well for in long vacations, quarter days, against payment of Bon^s
absence of true friends, or protracting of Maids marriages, after the Banes
has been thrice asked, in these cases the Lawyer* the Landlord, the Usurer,
the friends, and the Contracted couple, do think time to be soundred, stark
lame, or quite tired, and that his best pace is after 14. miles in 15. days;
whilst many a poor (lyent, an unprovided Tennant, or unfurnished debtor, or a
fellow going to be hanged, they think time is all upon the spur, and that he
run^ at full speed a wild galloppe. And as a Ship at sea sails sometimes by
the wind, sometimes before the wind, sometimes with a quarter wind, sometimes
with a stone sheate, and sometimes with tacke hard a board, and Bolin st^e^chd
and sheate close a^te, by all which winds she sails several paces: So
Horseman-SHIP has the Trot, the Amble, the Rack, the pace, the false and wild
Gallop, or the full speed, and as several vessels at sea do make up a Navy, as
Carracks, Argoseys, Hulkes, Ships, Barks, Pinnaces, Hoyghs, Drumlers,
Fregates, Briga^dines, Carnels, Catches, Galleys, Gallions, Gall^^ (...)
^oysts, Galley-Asses, and Asses-Galleys: so this Horseman-SHIP, has to attend
her, her (...), her Barbary ho^^e, her Naples Courser, her Germ^ne S^e^de her
(...) Mare, her Galloway Nagge, her (...) Hobby, her French C^^uaia, her Welsh
Pal^ray, her English All, her Smithfield lade, and her Barthlomew Hoby-horse,
and (...) to all other Ships, which have their Bridle, H^lme or Rudder in their
stern or tail, Horseman SHIP is altogether directed and steered by the head,
whereby, ^^r want of good managing, many times the Rider makes a headlong
voyage (like a man of good forecast (...) the horse head. And as Horseman are
none of the best Mariners, so Mariners are commonly the worst Horsemen, as one
of them being upon a tired Hacken^y once, (his companions prayed him to ride
faster, he said he was becalmed.

Another mounted upon a foundred ^ade, that stumbled 3. or 4. times hea^^ong,
the Saylor imagined that his horse was too much (...) a head, or ^^t^ward on
(as the sea phrase is) and therefore to b^l^^^e him, that he might go or sail
with an even keele, he aligated and s^l'd his ^erkin slee^^^ full of stones,
and tied them fast to his horse cro^p^r, supp^sing to make his s^eme as deep
laden as his head to an ^yd stumbling.

Indeed this Horseman-SHIP is never unfurnished of a lad^^ trick or two at a
pinch or time of need, (and contrary to any other ship in the fairest weather
it will heave, set, wi^ce, kick, fling, and ^uruet, like a Mi^^ommer Morris
dauncer, or as if the Devil were practicing a French (...) or ^^rran^o* but I
cannot blame them to be lusty, (...) they we not put to such hard allowance as
many poor who had taught their Iades no better manners, then to take the wall
of his Majesty's Horse, he dismissed them from their Offices, and made two of
his own stable Grooms, Senators in their rooms, and after proceeded to the
funeral of his Horse, in manner and form following.

First, a 100. poor gald Hackneies, and next 300. laboring Asses, all covered
with black Cotton, going 2. and 2. every one having 2. bottles of ^^aye on
their backs, the only gift of the deceased: then 100. hunting Nags, and 50.
Coache-horses, with 10. Horses of State, with each two horse-loaues for diet
bread. Then followed the Pleybeians in mourning habit 200. in number; next the
stable Grooms, Puruayers, Chikes of the stable, Farryers, Horse-leeches, and
Gentlemen of the stable, 300.

Then went the Sadlers, Charioteeres, Waggoners, Carters, Sumptermen, Littermen
and Coachmen, 300.

After them Singers, Pagan Priests, Flammines and Archslammines. 70.

Then the H^arse richely behung with Scutcheous devices, Mottoes, and Impresses.

After them, the Emperor Nero chief mourner, and his Train borne up by Otho,
and young Sporus.

Next went two old Asses all in black Velvet, as mourners of State or Cheuals
de du^il.

Then followed Agripina ( Nero his mother) with the fair Popeia and the
beautiful Act, (two of his Concubines) and after them Galba Nimphid^us
Vittelluss, with others: it i^ t^ought that Seneca ^at all the while in his
study laughing at the Funeral.

Lastly a great Troop of straggling attendants: The Hearse being set down in
Campus Martius, Otho began this speech which follows, in blancke Verse.

INintious death to make an Emperor mourn
Fleabit ten Otho's tymeles Exequies,
Who might have hu'd, and borne great Conquerours
And been the father of most valliant Coltes;
Lament ye Meades, whereon this Palsray grazd
Ah! strew the streets of Rome with rotten hay.
Let Pease, Beans, Oats, and horse-bread must with grief
Rust Curry-combes, and Saddles rend in sunder,
Break stirrop-leathers girths and bridle, break,
Fall rack and manger, plankes split all in twain,
For you shall never support his weight again,
You stable Grooms that combed his crisped mane,
And often were graced to make up Otho's train,
Sigh, groan, and weep, lament and howl and cry,
In litter and horse-dung everlastingly:
Think how brave Otho did his breath respire,
Who with his heels has often struck sparkling fire.
Hear Nero speaks.
THe brauest beast that ever Emperor backd
That thump'd the field of Mars with greater grace
Then P^gasus bearing Tritonia
About the valleys near the Muses Hills,
In battle swift^r then the Northern wind
But in a triumph flout and f^ll of state,
Listing his hooses, as if he scorned the ground,
And (...) cant to make the air support his weight.
As mannerly and moderate at his meat
As is a Bride groom on his wedding day,
For never would he touch a lock of hay,
Or smell unto a heap of prouender
Until he heard a noise of Trumpets sound,
Whereby he knew our meat was served in.
But after meals, how he would meditate
Upon his Tutors reverend documents,
And by himself would practice what was taught him,
Offering to run the Ring, and fetch Curuets,
To trot in state as we were on his back,
And to out do his schole-master in Art,
The thought of these things (Otho) kills my heart.
Otho speaks to the two Asses.
THen these poor Animals have cause to weep,
Most reverend Asses you have lost a friend,
A friend, a father have your worship lost,
Who would have given you pensions in your age,
And made you Beads-men, free from Cariages.
When he lay speechless, on his death bed, then
He pointed to the hay-loft with his heels,
As who should say, if I dye give it them:
Then to the Wardens of his Company,
(For he was made free of the Blacke-smiths Craft)
He turned about, bade them pull off his shoes,
And take them as true token of his love.
And as he dying showed his love to them,
Because his Master did delight in Plays,
He wil'd that of hi^ mane should beards be made,
And of his tail, a head-tire for a Devil.
One Ass he made his sole Executor,
The other Ouer-seer of his will:
Grant Jupiter they may perform the same
To do and ouer-see, that men may say
They were Just Ouer-seers another day.
Epitaph.
HEre lies the Horse, whose four foot Progeny
Did trot in blood before the walls of Troy:
Yea in the bowels of the Greeks perdye,
And on his breast this Morto, Par ma foy,
Kin (by the Sire) to winged Pegasus,
And by the Mother to the King of Mules,
Whose Uncle was the great Bucephalus,
Whose Arms, four Horse shoes, and the fiel was Gules.
To conclude, this Horsemanship after many storms, tempests, gusts, and
flawes, came at last home to her ancient haven the Beare-garden, richly laden
with these commodities following.

The Chinegall, the Nauellgall, Windgall, Spurgall, Lightgall, and Shacklegall,
the worms, the Staggers, the Mallenders and Sallenders, Scratches, Pole-euill,
the Anticote and the Pompardye, the Dropsy, the Fever, the Palsy, the
Glaunders, the Frenzy, the Cough and the Colt-euill, the Yellowes, the
Fashions, the Splinters, the Spa^ines, the Ring-bones, the Quitter-bones, the
Curbes, the Rotten-frush, and the Crowne-scabb, the Hide-bound, the Hawes, the
Crestfall, the Viues, the Bloody-riffes, the Crampe, and the Canker, the
howkes, the Toothake, the Surfeit, the Tonghurte, the Paps and the Bladders, the
Tyrednesse, the Lowsinesse, the Surbate, the Farley, the Pose and the Strangle,
the Broaken-winde, the Hoofe-bound, the Botch, the Bots, the Wen in the Groyne,
the Rot in the Lungs, the Kybes, the Pearl, and the Pin and Web, the Cloyde,
the Blood-shot, the Wrung in the Withers, the strain, the Prick in the sole,
the Loose in the Hoof, the Graueld, the foundring, and the shedding of the
hair, the Horse-hipped, the Wrench, the Neckecricke, and the Shoulder splat.

These are the commodities wherewith the HorsemanSHIP was sraight, which are so
shared and divided, that a man cannot light of any horse, young or old, but he
is furnished with one, two or more of these excellent guistes.

The Ships that attended in the Squadron or Regiment with the HorsemanSHIP,
were these, 1 The Rac^, an aduenturous vessel of much expectation, and
admirable, swiftness. 2 The Post, a vessel of much use, quick return, and
exceeding hazard, toil and travel. 3 The Hackeney, a most serviceable
Pinnace, that endures all weathers, and is so common, that she is to be hired
by any or used by all.


The Surety- SHIP with her Squadron or Regiment.
THis is a Ship of great antiquity, and makes more voyages then all the rest
of the Navy, she is the only Merchant aduenturer under the Sun, for they
that ^ayle in her, do hazard goods, lands, money reputation* friends, kindred,
credit, liberty and life; of all which rich commodities (always at her
returns) she is so provident* that she makes one Iayle or other her
weatehouse, where it is more safely kept under lock and key, then the golden
apples of the Hesperides were guarded by the Dragon; she is so easy to be
boarded, that a man need not trouble his feet to enter her, or use any boat
to come to her, ^or if all her Mariners should go to her by water, then were a
Water-man the richest trade below the Moon; only a dash with a pen, the
writing of a man's name, passing his word, or letting his mark (though it be
but the form of a pair of Pot-hookes, a Cross, a crooked billet, or a W. for
Ihon Tompson, any of these facile ways has shipped a man into the Surety-SHIP,
during his life and his heirs after him, and though the entrance into her be
so easy, yet she is so full of impertinent and needy courtesy, that many men
will lend a man a hand into her, with more fair entreaties, requests and
inuitations, then are commonly used to a Mask at the Court, or a groce of
Gossips in the Country, and being once entered, a ten penny nail driven to the
head may as soon leap out of an Oaken poast, as a man may get a shore
again: she is painted on the outside with vows and promises, and within her
are the stories of the t^tter'd Prodigal, eating Husks with the Swine, the
picture of Niobe, with Allecto, T^siphone and Megera, dancing lachtimae: Her
Arms are a Goose quill or pen, couchant in a sheepe-skin field ^able, the
Motto above Nouerint vniuersi, the supporters a Usurer and a Scriuener, the
crest a Wood-cocke, the Mantles red wax, with this other Motto beneath, Sealed
and delivered, this Ship has the Art to make parchement the dearest stuff in
the world; For I have seen a piece little bigger then my two hands, that has
cost a man a thousand pound, I my self paid a hundred pound once for a small
rotten remnant of it. She is rig'd most strangely, her ^opes and Cables are
Conditions (...) whether or to what Port a man would have her.

3 The Fool, a Ship of great burden, and for sail and steerage much like the
Kind heart.

4 The Negligence, an Argosey that through want of good foresight, brought the
Surety-SHIP in great danger.

5 The Decay, a Ship much broaken.

6 The Scape-thrift, a small ragged Catch, that hangs or depends upon the whole
Regiment.

The Worcester- SHIP with her Squadron or Regiment.
THough the first syllable of this Ships name be, Worse, whereby she is called
Worse-SHIP, yet she is a better Ship then many are aware of and indeed she is
far too good for every* or for any Knave to come aboard of her. In my opinion
she does not belong to any mortal man, for God himself is both Owner and
Master of her.

Yet many there are who claim an interest in her, as first the Devil would
have her belong to him, for which cause he makes many barbarous Nations to
adore and WorSHIP him, and to sacrifice themselves, their children, and all
that they esteem dearest unto them, to his infernal Hell-hood, and for his
better holding and keeping of this Worship, he has his Ministers and Agents,
in the most Kingdoms of Christendom, who with their juggling leager-demaine,
has guld, blinded and besotted many thousands of all Estates, ages and sexes,
that they will fall down and Worship Stocks, Stones, Blocks, Idols, Images,
Relics, dead men's bones, or a piece of bread, as the heathen Idolatrous
Egyptians did formerly adore and Wor-SHIP Oynions and Garlic.

And as there are many that for desert are worthy Pilots, Steeremen and
Mariners in the Worship, and are shipped into her only for their merits, so
there are a great many, and more then a good many, that by falsehoode and
indirect courses, have shipped themselves into her: for as Cornelius Agrippa
says in his Vanity of Sciences, some have gotten the Wor-SHIP by cutting
throats in the wars; some by being Great men's Bawdes, or Cuckolds in peace;
some for marying of cast Stale Concubines, or Bastards; some by bribery,
extortion or oppression; some by false weights and measures; some by the
excessive drunkenness of others; some by theft, some upon credit, some for
ready money, and some for favor; which is a word crept into the place of
merit since the days of Quintillian the Orator: the most corrupted Justice
will board her; the slothfullest Divine will have a Cabin in her; the carpet
Knight will be shipped in her; the most cowardly Captain will enter her; and
many of least faith and conscience will lay claim to her: she having store of
such false owners, I say no more of her, but commit her to the mercy of Wind,
Tide, and Time.

There went with her in her Regiment, these that follow.

1 The Abuse, an old Ship, too much in use. 2 The Purchasse, a vessel all for
Simony or ready money. 3 The Mittimus, a dangerous Bark, whose word is, At
your peril.
after four or five days preparation, and some ten pound charge among men and
horses and dogs, besides an infinite deal of toil and trouble, and an
innumerable number of oaths and curses: after all this great deal of do, the
maine purchase can be no more then a poor silly Hare, which is but a dry
meat, and will take more butter in the basting, then her carcass is worth.

Our ancient Progenitour or first King of this Island (Brute) was so expert in
this Woodman-ship, that he killed his own father Siluius, shooting him with an
arrowe, mistaking him for a Heart, a Stagge or a Bucke: and William the second
surnamed Rufus, King of England, was by the like mischance, of a shot made at a
Dear, by Sir Walter Tirrell Knight) slain with the glaunce of an Arrow
against a tree, in the New-forrest in Hampshire.

I thank Coopers Dictionary that tells me that Venator is a Hunter, and
Venatrix a Huntresse or a Woman Hunting, and that Meretrix is a Whore or a
Woman Hunted: all these words having deriuation from, or Allusion to Venereus
Alias Le che-reous, for though Diana the hunting Goddess of Chastity be a
Constant Venatrix* yet Venus the Queen of Love never fails a right Woodman of
a Meretrix. But if Venator and Venatrix should Hunt as much as Meretrix is (or
has been) hunted, I think verily that there had not been (or in time would
not be) one Dear left in many of the greatest Forests, Parkes and Chases of
Christendom.

Besides, there is not a perfect Mariner in the Woodman-SHIP but he has
ingrafted in him a most Abundant gift of promising, for one of them will
swear and vow to give more Dear away to sundry persons* then there are under
the keeping and command of six or seven of them: and I have heard that one
White Buck in a small Park (in a place which I could name within the Walls of
Christendom) has been given away at the least to a 1000. several persons, by
one keeper, and the said keeper is so kind that he will never deny a Buck to
whosoever will Ask. A Dear friend (whom I love Dear) did promise me a Dear,
four years since and four dear Iourneyes I made for my Dear, and still
with Delaves and Demurres I was put off from my Dear, with promises, that at
such and such a time I should have my Dear, but now I am in despair of my
Dear, and I mean to take no more care for my Dear; And so Adue my Dear; but
indeed he that had the bounty to promise me this Dear, has the grace to blush
whenever he sees me, and therefore I do love him for his modesty and
shamefastnes, and had it not been for that, and that I do love him indeed, I
would long before this time have Sung him A Kerry-Elison that should have made
him been glad to have promised me a Brace of Bucks more to have stopped my mouth
withal, although in performance my dear had been non est inuentus.

In a word, of all sort of Dear I hold stolen Venison to be the most honestly
gotten, because the theiues are so quiet, close, private, and silent at their
work, that they have no leisure to swear and curse as men do when it is
lawfully taken, and my conceit is that where oaths and curses are most
restraind, there most honesty and piety remains. But commonly swearing,
execrations, and drinking, are the ceremonious Rites of a Bucks or a Hares
death and obsequies.

With the cry of the Hounds; And the Echo resownds
Through the Meade, through the sallow,
With the Horn, with the hallow,
With the Horse loud neigh, and the Buck at a Baye.
And with the Deers fall; And Hornesounding Knell,
My Pen bids Hunting Woodman-SHIP farewell.
The Ships and Pinaces that served in the Regiment under the Woodman-SHIP, were
these.

1 The Chaunter. 2 The Boweman. 3 The Ringwood. 4 The Slut. 5 The Bewtye. 6 The
Daysie. 7 The Kilbuck, with diverse others, all of them being for course or
chase.
FINIS.

