Christian Admonitions, against the two fearful sins of Cursing and
Swearing, most fit to be set up in every house, that the grieuousnesse of those
sins may be both remembered, and avoided, whereby the hatred of them may
possess the heart of every Christian.
Against Cursing.
FIrst, (if thou will live in a holy fear and reverence of the Name of God)
thou must consider what thou art, and learn to know thy self; for he that
truly knows himself, is a man of very happy acquaintance, for by this thou
shall know thy self to be Earth, Genesis 2. 7. conceived in sin, Psalm 51. 5.
Borne to pain, Job, 5. 7. Evil, Eccles. 9. 3. Wretched Romans 7. Filthy, Job
15. Corrupt, abominable, and doing nothing good, Psalm. 14. Mortal, To. 6.
Vain, Psalm. 62. Wicked, Esaias 9. Unprofitable, Romans 3. Vanity, altogether more
light then Vanity, Psalm. 62. Sinful, 1 Kings, 8. Miserable, 1 Corinthians. 15.
Dust and Ashes, Genesis 18. Gods enemy, Romans 8. A child of wrath, Ephesians 2. 3.
A worm, Job 25. Worms meat, Esaias 51. Nothing, yea less then nothing, Esaias
40. 17.

Having thus by the Touchstone of Gods Word tried, and examined thy miserable
estate and condition, and therewithal knowing thy self, then on the other
side, consider (as near as thy frailty will permit) the power of God in
creating thee, his mercy in Redeeming thee, his love, in preserving thee, his
bounty, in keeping thee, his promise to glorify thee in heaven, if thou honor
him on earth, and his Judgments to condemn thee, if thou blaspheme and
dishonor him.

Our Savior Christ, being the Head of Blessedness, and of all that are or
shall be blessed, how is it possible, that any Accursed or Cursing person can
be a member of that Blessed Head; who has expressly forbidden us to Curse,
but to bless them that Curse us? Luke, 6. Math. 5. Romans 12 And in the 109.
Psalm, It is said of him that accustomes himself to Curse, Cursing was his
delight, therefore shall it happen unto him, he loved not blessing, therefore
it shall be far from him.

And seeing no man can merit the least part of blessings temporal; how, or
with what face can one that lives accursedly, or uses cursing (here,) hope for
a Kingdom of Eternal blessedness hereafter?

It is fearful to hear how, and with what cold dullness, many men do pray
for blessings either for themselves or for others, and (contrarily) with what
vehemence they will Curse: as some have willed and wished themselves Gods
Plague, the Pox, and other mischiefs, and some have too often bid the Devil
take them, God Sink them: Renounce, Confound, Consume, Refuse, and Damn them:
and yet these silly graceless earth-wormes, have an ambicious deceitful aim
to be blessed, partakers of the blessed Kingdom of Heaven.

Therefore, if thou have a desire of Eternal blessedness, know that the way
thither, is not by Cursing: if thou have a hope to escape the dreadful
sentence of, Go ye Cursed, Math. 25. Then give thy mind to prayer and
blessing, and then shall thou have the joyful welcome of, Come ye blessed
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. To the
which God of his mercy bring us all.

Amen.
Against Swearing.
Having with a Christian humility considered thy own base and contemptible
estate and condition, then think with thy self, what an Incomprehensible,
Glorious, Infinite and Almighty Majesty thou offendest and blasphemest with
thy ungodly Swearing, who has said, that he will not hold him guiltless, that
takes his Name in vain.

And much better were it at the last day, for that miserable wretch, that he
had been created a Toade, a Viper, or the most loathsome creature, then to
appear before that great and dreadful Tribunal, and there to be accused by
the Devil and his own conscience, for Swearing and for Forswearing, and
Blaspheming the blessed Name of the Eternal God, where no excuse can serve, no
Advocate can plead, no Proxey or Essoyne is to be granted, but presently the
guilty Caitif is commanded to utter darkness and perpetual torments.

There is some excuse for the ignorant Jews, that crucified our Savior,
because they knew not what they did: but for a prosessed Christian, who knows
God to be his Creator, and that Jesus Christ paid no less then the peerless
and most precious blood of his heart for man's Redemption, how can any one that
knows and believes these things, hope for salvation by that blood, wounds,
heart and body, which he so much, and so often blasphemes and tears betwixt
his accursed teeth? So that there is no Traitor so bad, or treason so great, as
is against the Majesty of heaven, nor has the Devil any that does him more
pleasing service, then an odious and common Swearer does, and herein he goes
beyond all the Devils in hell, in impiety and contempt of God: for Saint James
says, Chap. 2. 19. That the Devils do believe there is a God, and that they
also tremble in fear of his mighty power; but the Swearer, though he do know
and believe there is a God, yet he believes not his Word, or fears or trembles
at his Judgments.

Besides these endless torments ordained in hell for odious Swearers, God has
promised to afflict them in this life: for he says, The plague shall never go
from the house of the Swearer, Ecclesiasticus 23.

So that the gain of a Swearer is nothing but the eternal wrath os God, the
hatred of all good men, the ill example to others, and the vexation and
discredit of himself, his kindred and friends, with a fearful reward
hereafter, (except true repentance obtain mercy.) What a foolish absurdity is
it for a man (being crossed in any worldly affairs, or gaming, or other
business, either material or triuiall) to revenge himself upon God, and
carelessly and blasphemously fly in the face of his Maker, with Oaths and
Execrations?

If we did consider what God has done for us, we would not so unthankfully
requite him: if we called to mind his gracious promise of glory everlasting,
to those that love and fear him, we should then hold his Name in such
reverence as becomes Christians: if his fearful threatenings against the
takers of his Name in vain, could terrify us, (no doubt) but we would be more
careful and circumspect in our lives and conuersations, as that we would be
allured by his mercies, or restrained by his Judgments.

GOd has naturally placed and enclosed the tongue of man within the stone
walls of his teeth, and without those walls there are also the two earthen
Bulwarks or Rampieres of his lips: he has appointed Reason to be the
tongues guide and guardian, and he freely offers his Grace, to be Reasons
counselor and governor: wherefore let us flee to the Throne of Grace, and
beseech the God of Grace, that he will cause his saving Grace to guide our
Reason, that our Reason may rule our tongues, that Cursing may be cashered,
Swearing suppressed: that (by Gods Spirit) our lips may be opened, that with
our mouths his Name may bepraysed: that Gods holy Name may be glorified, and
our sinful souls eternally saved, through the merits of our great and blessed
Redeemer Jesus christ, To whom with the Father and the blessed Spirit, be all
Honor, Power, Majesty, Glory, Dominion, and Thanksgiving, ascribed and
rendered (as is due) of men and Angels, both now and for evermore.

Amen, Amen.
JOHN TAILOR.

Printed at London by Eliz. Allde for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold at his
shop upon London Bridge.


