THE LIFE AND DEATH of the most blessed among women, the Virgin MARY Mother of
our LORD JESUS. With the Murder of the Infants in Bethlehem, Judas his
Treason, and the Confession of the good Theife and the bad.



Printed at London by G. E. and are to be sold at Christ-church gate. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND truly virtuous Lady, the Noble Patroness of good
endeavors, MARY Countess of Buckingham.
Right Honorable Madam:
AS the Graces, the Virtues, the Senses, and the Muses, are emblemed, or
alluded to your noble sex, and as all these have ample residence in your worthy
disposition: To who^ then but to your self, being a Lady in goodness complete,
should I commit the patronage of the memory of the great Lady of Ladies, Mother
to the high and mighty Lord of Lords? And though I (a Tailor) have not
apparelled her in such garments of elocution and ornated style, as befits the
glory and eminency of the least part of her Excellency, yet I beseech your
Honor to accept her for her own worth, and her Sons worthiness: which Son
of hers, by his own merits, and the powerful mercy of his Father, I heartily
implore to give your Honor a participation of his gracious Mothers eternal
felicity.

Your Honors, in all humble service to be commanded. JOHN TAILOR.


The Argument, and cause of this Poem.
BEing lately in Antwerpe, it was my fortune to ouerlooke an old printed Book
in prose, which I have turned into Verse, of the life, death and burial of our
blessed Lady: wherein I read many things worthy of observation, and many things
frivolous and impertinent; out of the which I have (like a Be) sucked the
sacred honey of the best authorities of Scriptures, and Fathers which I best
credited, and I have left the poison of Antichristianisme to those where I
found it (whose stomachs can better digest it,) I put it to the Press,
presuming it shall be accepted of pious Protestants and charitable Catholics;
as for lukewarm Neutralists that are neither hot nor cold, they do offend my
appetite, and therefore up with them. The schismatic Separatist, I have many
times discoursed with him, and though he be but a Botcher or a Button-maker,
and at the most, a lump of opinionated ignorance, yet he will seem to wring
the Scriptures to his opinions, and presume to know more of the mysteries of
Religion, then any of our Reverend learned Bishops and Doctors.

I know this work will be vnrelished in the pestiferous pallates of the
dogmaticall Amsterdammatists; but I do, must, and will acknowledge a most
reverend honor and regard unto the sacred memory of this blessed virgin Lady,
Mother of our Lord and Redeemer Jesus; and in my thoughts she shall ever have
superlatiue respect above all Angels, Principalities, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists or Saints whatsoever, under the blessed Trinity; yet
(mistake me not) as there is a difference betwixt the Immortal Creator, and a
mortal creature, so (whilst I have warrant sufficient from God himself, to
invoke his Name only) I will not give man, Saint, or Angel any honor that
may be derogatory to his eternal Majesty.

As amongst Women she was blessed above all, being above all full of Grace, so
amongst Saints I believe she is supreme in Glory: and it is an infallible
truth, that as the Romanists do dishonor her much by their superstitious
honorable seeming attributes; so on the other part, it is hellish and odious
to God and good men, either to forget her, or (which is worse) to remember her
with impure thoughts, or unbeseeming speech for the excellency of so divine a
Creature. I confess my self the meanest of men, and most unworthy of all to
write of her that was the best of Women, but my hope is, that Charity will
cover my faults, and accept of my good meaning, especially having endeavored
and striuen to do my best: So wishing all hearts to give this holy Virgin such
honor as may be pleasing to God; which is, that all should pattern their
lives to her life's example, in lowliness and humility, and then they shall be
exalted where she is in Glory, with eternity.

John Tailor.
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF THE most blessed amongst all Women, the Virgin Mary the
Mother of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
BEfore the Fire, Air, Water,
Earth were framed;
Sun, Moon, or any thing unnamed or named;
God was, who nere shall end, nor nere began,
To whom all ages and all time's a spanne:
By whose appointment each thing fades or grows,
And whose eternal knowledge all things knows.
When Adams sin plucked down supernall ire,
And Justice judged him to eternal fire:
Then Mercy did the execution stay,
And the great price of man's great debt did pay.
And as a woman tempted man to vice,
For which they both were thrust from Paradise:
So from a woman was a Saviors birth,
That purchased Man a heaven for loss of earth:
Our blessed Redeemers mother, that blessed she,
Before the world (by God) ordained to be
A chosen vessel, fittest of all other,
To be the Son of Gods most gracious mother.
She is the theme that does my Muse inuit,
Unworthy of such worthiness to write.
I will no prayers not inuocations frame,
For intercession to this heavenly Dame:
Nor to her name one fruitless word shall run,
To be my Mediatresse to her Son;
But to the eternal Trinity alone,
I Will sing, I Will sigh, I Will invoke and moan.
I prize no creatures glory at that rate,
The great Creators praise t'extenuate.
But to The Almighty, ( ancient of all days,)
Be all dominion, honor, laud and praise.
I write the blessed conception, birth, and life,
Of this beloved Mother, Virgin, Wife:
The joys, the griefs, the death and burial place
Of her most glorious, gracious, full of grace.
Her father Ioachim a virtuous man,
Had long lived childlesse with his wife S. Anne,
And both of them did zealously intend,
If God did ever son or daughter send,
That they to him would dedicate it solely
To be his servant and to live most holy:
God heard and granted freely their request,
And gave them Mary (of that sex the best.)
At three years age, she to the Temple went,
And there eleven years in devotion spent:
At the end of fourteen years it came to pass,
This virgin unto Joseph spoused was:
Then after four months time was past and gone,
The Almighty sent from his tribunal throne,
His great Ambassador, which did unfold
The greatest embassage ever yet was told,
Hayle MARY full of heavenly grace (quoth he)
The (high omnipotent) Lord is with thee,
Blessed amongst women (by Gods gracious dombe)
And blessed be the fruit of thy blessed womb.
The Angels presence, and the words he said,
This sacred undefiled Maid dismaide,
Amazed, mused what this message meant,
And wherefore God this messenger had sent.
Fear not (said Gabriel) MARY (most renownd)
Thou with thy gracious God have favor found,
For lo, thou shall conceive and bear a Son,
(By whom redemption and saluation's won)
And thou his (saving) name shall JESUS call,
Because heel'e come to save his people all.
She humbly, mildly heavens high Nuntius hears,
But yet to be resolved of doubts and fears,
How can these things (quoth she) accomplished be,
When no man has knowledge had with me?
The Holy Ghost (the Angel then replide)
Shall come upon thee (and thy God and guide)
The power of the most High shall shadow thee,
That holy thing that of thee borne shall be,
Shall truly called be the Son of God,
By whom sin, death, and hell, shall down be trod.
Then MARY to these speeches did accord,
And said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord.
Be it to me according to thy will,
I am thine own obedient servant still.
This being said, she tuned her Angel tongue,
My soul does magnify the Lord, (she sung)
My spirit, and all my faculties, and voice,
In God my Savior solely does rejoice:
For though man's sins provoke his grievous wrath,
His humble handmaid he remembered has.
For now behold from this time henceforth shall
All generations me right blessed call:
He that is mighty me has magnifide,
And holy is his name: his mercies bide
On them that fear him ( to provoke his rage)
Throughout the spacious world, from age to age.
With his strong arm he has showed strength and batterd,
The proud and their imaginations scatterd.
He has put down the mighty from their seat,
The meek and humble he exaulted great,
To fill the hungry he is provident,
When as the rich away are empty sent:
His mercies promised Abraham and his seed.
He has remembered, and help Isreal's need.
This Song she sung with heart and holy spright,
To laud her Makers mercy and his might:
And the like song, sung with so sweet a strain
Was never, nor shall ever be sung again.
When Mary by the Angels speech perceived
How old Elizabeth a child conceived,
To see her straight her pious mind was bent,
And to Jerusalem in three days she went.
And as the Virgin (comne from Nazareth)
Talked with her kinswoman Elizabeth,
John Baptist, then unnamed an unborn boy,
Did in his mothers belly leap with joy:
Both Christ and John unborn, yet John knew there
His great Redeemer and his God was near.
When Joseph his pure wife with child espide,
And knew he never her accompanide,
His heart was sad, he knew not what to say,
But in suspect would put her quite away.
Then from the high Almighty Lord supreme,
An Angel came to Joseph in a Dream,
And said; Fear not with Mary to abide,
For that which in her blessed womb does recide,
Is by the Holy Ghost in wonder done,
For of thy Wife there shall be borne a Son,
From him alone Redemption all begins,
And he shall save his people from their sins.
This being said, the Angel past away,
And Joseph with his Wife and Maid did stay:
Then he and she with speed prepared them,
To go to David's City Bethelem,
Through winters weather, frost, and wind and snow
Four weary days in travel they bestow.
But when to Bethlem they approached were
Small friendship and less welcome they found there:
No Chamber, nor no fire to warm them at,
For harbor only they a stable gat:
The Inn was full of more respected guests,
Of Drunkards, Swearers, and of Godless beasts,
Those all had rooms whilst Glory and all Grace,
(But amongst beasts) could have no lodging place*
There (by protection of The Almighty's wings)
Was borne the Lord of Lords and King of Kings,
Our God with us, our great Emanuel,
Our Jesus, and our vanquisher of hell.
There in a Cratch a Jewel was brought forth,
More the^ ten thousand thousand worlds in worth,
There did the Humane nature and Divine,
The Godhead with the Manhood both combine:
There was this Maiden Mother brought to bed,
Where Oxen, Kine and Horses lodged and fed;
There this bright Queen of Queens with heavenly joy,
Did hug her Lord, her life, her God, her Boy.
Her Son, her Savior, her immortal bliss,
Her sole Redeemer, She might rock and kiss.
Oh blessed Lady, of all Ladies blessed:
Blessed for ever, for thy sacred breast
Fed him that all the famisht souls did feed,
Of the lost sheep of Israells forlorn seed.
A Stable being Heaven and Earths great Court.
When forty days were ended in that sort,
This Virgin Mother, and this Maiden Bride,
(All pure) yet by the Law was purifide.
Old Simeon being in the Temple than,
He saw the Son of God, and Son of Man.
He in his aged arms the Babe embraced,
And ioying in his heart he so was graced,
He with these words wished that his life might cease
Lord let thy Servant now depart in peace,
Mine eyes have seens thy great Salvation,
My love, my Jesus, my Redemption,
Unto the Gentiles everlasting light,
To Israel the glory and the might.
Hope, Faith, and zeal, truth, constancy and love,
To sing this song did good old Simeon move.
Then turning to our Lady most divine,
Thy Son (said he) shall once stand for a sign,
And he shall be the cause that many shall*
By faith or unbelief arise or fall.
He shall be raild upon without desert,
And then shall sorrows sword pierce through thy heart*
As Jesus fame grew daily more and more,
The Tyrant Herod it amazed sore,
The Sages said, borne was great Iudaes King,
Which did usurping Herod^ conscience sting:
For Herod was an Id^mean base,
Not of the Kings of Iudahs royal Race;
And hearing one of David's true borne Line
Was borne, he feared his State he should resign:
And well he knew he kept the Jews in awe,
With slavish fear not love against right and law.
For'tis most true: "A Prince that is feared of many,
Must many fear, and scarce be loved of any."
Herod beleaguered with doubts, fears and woes,
That Jesus should him of his Crown dispose,
He chaf't and vexed, and almost grew stark mad,
To usurpation he did murder add:
An Edict sprung from his hell hatched brain,
Commanding all male Infants should be slain,
Of two years old and under through the Land,
Supposing Jesus could not escape his hand.
But God so Joseph down an Angel sent,
Commanding him by flight he should prevent
The Murderers malice, and to Egypt fly,
To save our Savior from his tyranny.
Our blessed Lady with a careful flight,
Her blessed Babe away did bear by night;
Whilst Bethelem with bloody villains swarms,
That murdered Infants in their Mothers arms:
Some slaughtered in their Cradles, some in bed,
Some at the Dugg, some newly borne struck dead,
Some sweetly fast asleep, some smiles awake,
All butchered for their Lord and Saviors sake:
Their woeful Mothers madly here and there,
Ran rending of their cheeks, their eyes, and hair,
The Tyrant they with execrations cursed,
And in despair, to desperate Acts out-burst:
Some all in fury end their woeful lives
By banefull poison, halters, or by knives:
And some to sorrow were so fast combind,
They wept, and wept, and wept themselves stark blind:
And being blind, (to lengthen out their mones)
They peic'd their sorrows out with sighs and groans.
Thus with vnceasing grief in many a Mother,
Tears, sighs and groans, did one succeed the other.
But till the tyrant Herod's days were done,
The Virgin staid in Egypt with her son.
Then black to Nazareth they returned again.
When twelve years age our Savior did attain,
Her Son, her self, her husband, all of them
Together traueld to Jerusalem;
The Virgin there much sorrow did endure,
The most pure mother lost her Child more pure,
Three days with heavy hearts, with care and thought
Their best beloved they diligently sought.
But when she found her Lord she held most dear,
Joy banished grief, and love exiled fear.
There in the Temple Jesus did confute
The greatest Hebrew Doctors in dispute.
But Doctors all are dunces in this case,
To parley with the eternal Son of Grace:
The Immortal mighty Wisdom and the Word
Can make all humane sapience mere absurd.
Soon after this (as ancient writers say)
God took the Virgins virgin-spouse away,
Good Joseph di'de and went to th'heauenly rest,
Blessed by The Almighty's mercy amongst the blessed.
Thus Mary was of her Good Man bereft,
A Widow, Maiden, Mother being left,
In holy contemplation she did spend
Her life, for such a life as never shall end.
Search but the Scriptures as our Savior bid,
There shall you find the wonders that he did:
As first how he (by his high power divine)
At Canaa turned water into wine:
How he did heal the blind, deaf, dumb and lame:
How with his word he winds and seas did tame:
How he from men possessed, fiends dispossessed:
How he to all that came gave ease and rest:
How with two fishes, and five loaves of bread,
He fed five thousand: how he raised the dead:
How all things that he ever did or taught,
Past, and surpast all that ere taught or wrought:
And by these miracles, he sought each way
To draw souls to him, too long gone astray,
At last approacht the full prefixed time,
That Gods blessed Son must die for man's cursed crime,
Then Jesus to Jerusalem did go,
And left his mother full of grief and woe,
Oh woe of woes, and grief surpassing grief,
To see her Savior captived as a thief:
Her love (beyond all loves) her Lord, her all,
Into the hands of sinful slaves to fall.
If but a mother have a wicked son,
That has to all disordered orders run,
As treasons, rapes, blasphemings, murder, theft,
And by the law must be of life bereft;
Yet though he suffer justly by desert,
His suffering surely wounds his mothers heart.
Suppose a woman has a virtuous child,
Religious, honest, and by nature mild,
And he must be to execution brought,
For some great fault he never did nor thought,
And she behold him when to death he is put,
Then sure tormenting grief her heart must cut.
These griefs are all as nothing unto this,
Of this blessed mother of Eternal bliss:
Her gracious Son that never did amiss,
His graceless servant, with a Judas kiss,
Betrayed him unto misbeleeuing slaves,
Where he was led away with bills and staves.
To Annas, Caiphas, Pilat, and to those,
That to the immortal God were mortal foes.
Ah Judas could thou make so base account
Of him, whose worth does heaven and earth surmount?
Did thou esteem of ^0 paltry pence,
More then the life of the Eternal Prince?
O monstrous blindness, that for so small gain
Souldst endless bliss to buy perpetual pain.
Is It possible damned avarice could compel
Thee sell heavens kingdom for the sincke of hell?
Our father Adam unto all our woes,
Did for an Apple blessed Eden lose:
And Esau borne a Lord, yet like a slave
His birthright for a mess of pottage gave:
And poor Ghehezi telling of a lie,
His covetousness gained his leprosy.
And though the text their deeds do disalow,
Yet they made better matches far then thou.
I do not here impute this deed of shame
On Judas, because Judas was his name:
For of that name there have been men of might,
Who the great battles of the Lord did fight;
And others more. But sure this impure blot
Sticks to him, as he is named Iskarryott;
For in an Anagram Iskarryott is
By letters transposition, traitor kis.
ISKARRYOTT Anagramma TRAITOR KIS.

Kiss Traitor, kiss with an intent to kill,
And cry all hail, when thou do mean al ill;
And for thy fault no more shall Judas be
A name of treason and foul Infamy,
But all that fault I Will on Iskarryot throw,
Because the Anagram explanes it so.
Iskarryot, for a bribe, and with a kiss,
betrayed his Master, the blessed King of bliss;
And after (but too late) with conscience wounded,
Amazed, and in his senses quite confounded,
With crying woe, woe, woe on woe on me,
I have betrayed my Master for a fee,
Oh I have sinned, sinned past compare,
And want of grace and faith, plucks on despair*
Oh too-too late it is to call for grace!
What shall I do? where is some secret place,
That I might shield me from the wrath of God?
I have deserved his everlasting rod.
Then farewell grace, and faith, and hope and love,
You are the gifts of the great God above,
You only on the elect attendants be;
Despair, hell, horror, terror is for me,
My heinous sin is of such force and might
'Twill empt the exchequer of Gods mercy quite:
And therefore for his mercy I Will not call;
But to my just deserved perdition fall.
I still most graceless, have all grace withstood,
And now I have betraide the guiltless blood.
My Lord and Master I have sold for pelf,
This having said, despairing hanged himself.
There we leave him, and now must be expressed
Something of her, from whom I have digrest.
The Virgins heart with thousand griefs was nipt,
To see her Savior flouted, hated, whipped,
Despitefulnesse beyond despite was used,
And with abuse, past all abuse abused:
His apprehension grieved her heart full sore,
His cruel scourges grieved her ten times more,
and when his blessed head with thorns was crowned
Then floods of grief on grief, her soul did wou^d,
But then redoubled was her grief and fear,
When to his death his Cross she saw him bear,
And lastly (but alas not least nor last)
When he upon the tree was nailed fast,
With bitter tears, and deep heart-wounding groans,
With sobs, and sighs, this maiden Mother mones,
What tongue or pen can her great grief unfold
When Christ said, Woman now thy Son behold?
That voice (like Ice in June) more cold and chill*
Did dangerously wound, and almost kill:
Then (as old Simeon prophesied before)
The sword of sorrow through her heart did gore,
And if 'twere possible all women's woes,
One woman could within her breast enclose,
They were but puffes, sparks, moale-hils, drops of rain
To whirl-winds, meteors, kingdoms or the main,
Unto the woes, griefs, sorrows, sighs and tears,
Sobs, gronings, terrors, and a world of fears,
Which did beset this Virgin on each side,
When as her Son, her Lord and Savior di'de.
Thus he, to whom compared, all things are dross,
Humbled himself to death, even to the Cross:
He that said Let there be, and there was light,
He that made all things with his mighty might,
He by whom all things have their life and breath,
He humbled himself unto the death;
Unto the death of the cursed cross: this he,
This he, this he of he is did stoop for me:
For me this welspring of my souls relief,
Did suffer death, on either hand a Theife,
The one of them had run a theeuing race,
Robbed God of glory and himself of grace;
He wanted lively faith to apprehend
To end his life, for life that ne'ere shall end:
With faithless doubts his mind is armed stiff,
And does revile our Savior with an If,
If that thou be the Son of God (quoth he)
Come from the Cross, and save thy self and me:
The other Theife, armed with a saving faith
Unto his fellow turned, and thus he says:
Thou guilty wretch, this man is free and clear
From any crime for which he suffers here:
We have offended, we have injured many,
But this man yet did never wrong to any*
We justly are condemned, he false accused*
He has all wrong, all right to us is used,
He Is innocent, so are not thou and I;
We by the law are justly judged to die:
Thus the good theife even at his latest cast
Contrary to a theife spoke truth at last:
And looking on our Savior faithfully,
(Whilst Christ beheld him with a gracious eye)
These blessed words were his prayers total sum,
O Lord when thou shall to thy kingdom come
Remember me. Our Savior answered then
(A doctrine to confute despairing men)
Thou (who by lively faith laist hold on me)
This day in Paradise with me shall be.
Thus as this Theifes life was by theft supplied,
So now he stole Heavens Kingdom when he died.
And I do wish all Christians to agree,
Not'liue as ill, but dye as well as he:
Presumptious sins are no way here excused,
For here but one was saved, and one refused:
Despair for sins, has here no rule or ground,
For as here is one was lost, so one was found,
To teach us not to sin with wilful pleasure,
And put repentance off, to our last leisure:
To show us (though we lived like Jews and Turks)
Yet Gods great mercy is above his works.
To warn us not' presume, or to despair,
Here Is good example in this theiuing pair.
These seas of care (with zealous fortitude)
This Virgin pas'd amongst the multitude.
(Oh gracious pattern of a sex so bad)
Oh the supernall patience that she had,
Her zeal, her constancy, her truth, her love,
The very best of women her does prove.
Maids, wives, and mothers, all conform your lives
To hers, the best of women, maids, or wives.
But as her Sons death made her woes abound,
His Resurrection all grief did confound:
She saw him vanquished and in glorious,
And after saw him Victor most victorious:
She saw him in contempt to lose his breath,
And after that she saw him conquer death:
She saw him (blessed) a cursed death to dye,
And after saw him rise triumphantly:
Thus she that sorrowed most had comfort most,
Joy doubly did return, for gladness lost.
And as before her torments tyrannized,
Her joy could after not be equaliz'd;
Her Sons (all wondered) resurrection,
Her Saviors glorious ascension,
And last the holy Ghost from heaven sent down,
These mighty mercies all her joys did crown.
Suppose a man that were exceeding poor
Had got a thousand tons of golden ore,
How would his heart be lifted up with mirth,
At this great mass of treasure (most part earth)
But to be robbed of all in's height of glory,
Would not this lucklesse man be much more sorry
Then ever he was glad? for in the mind,
Grief more then joy does most abiding find.
But then suppose that after all this loss,
The gold is well refined from the dross,
And as the poor man does his loss complain,
His wealth (more pure) should be restored again.
Amid'st his passions (in this great relief)
I doubt not but his joy would conquer grief.
Even so our blessed Lady having lost
Her joy, her Jewel she esteemed most,
Her all in all, the heaven and earths whole treasure,
Her gracious heart was grieved out of measure,
But when she found in him triumphant state,
No tongue or pen her joy could then relate:
She lost him poor and bare, and dead, and cold,
She found him rich, most glorious to behold:
She lost him when upon his back was hurld,
The burden of the sins of all the world:
She lost him mortal, and immortal found him,
for crown of thorns, a crown of glory crowned him.
Thus all her griefs, her loss, her cares and pain,
Returned with joys inestimable gain.
But now a true relation I will make
How this blessed Virgin did the world forsake,
It Is probable, that as our Savior bid
Saint John to take her home, that so he did,
And it may be supposed she did abide
With him, and in his house until she di'de.
John did out live The Apostles every one,
For when Domitian held th'Emperiall throne,
To The I Will of Pathmos he was banished then,
And there the Revelation he did pen,
But whilst John ar Jerusalem did stay,
God took the blessed Virgins life away,
For after Christ's ascension it appears,
She on the earth suruiued fifteen years,
Full sixty three in all she did endure,
A sad, glad pilgrimage, a life most pure:
At sixty three years age, her life did fade,
Her soul (most gracious) was most glorious made
Where with her Son, her Savior, her Lord God,
She everlastingly has her abode,
In such fruition of immortal glory,
Which cannot be discrib'd in mortal story:
There mounted (meek) she sits in Majesty,
Exalted there is her humility,
There she that was adorned full of Grace*
Beholds her Maker and Redeemers face.
And there is she amongst all blessed spirits)
(By imputation of our Saviors merits)
She there shall ever and for ever sing
Eternal praise unto The Eternal King.
When she had paid the debt that all must pay,
When from her corpse her soul was past away:
To Getsemany, with lamenting cheer,
Her sacred body on the beer they bear.
There in the earth a Jewel was interd,
That was before all earthly wights preferred,
That holy wife, that mother, that pure maid,
At Getsemany in her grave was laid.
Lenuoy.
This work deserves the work of better wit,
But I (like Pilate) say, What Is writ is writ:
If it be liked: poor artles I am glad,
And Charity I hope will mend what is bad.
I know my self the meanest amongst men,
The most vnlearned'st that ere handled pen:
But as it is into the world I send it,
And therefore pray commend it, or come mend it*
FINIS.

