A BRIEF REMEMBRANCE OF ALL THE ENGLISH MONARCHS,

From the Normans Conquest, until this present.

BY JOHN TAILOR

LONDON:

Printed by George Eld, for Henry Gosson. 1618.

WILLIAM THE FIRST, Surnamed the CONQVEROVR: KING OF ENGLAND, And DVKE OF
NORMANDY.
William 7 D: of Normandy. at the age of 38 years Conquered England, Was
Crouned at Westminster the 25 of December. 1667 Reigned 20 Years 10 months.
26. dais. died at St. garuis in Norm the 9 of September buried at Caen in
Normandy.


William Conqueror.
BY bloody battles, Conquest, and by Fate,
Fair Englands Crown and Kingdom I surprised:
I topsie-turuy turned the English State,
And Laws and Customs new and strange devised.
And where I vanquished, there I tyrannized,
In stead of peoples love, enforcing fear:
Extorting Tolls I daily exercised,
And Tributes, greater then this Land could bear.
Besides, (the Normans fame the more to rear)
The English I forbad the English tongue,
French Schools of Grammar I ordained here,
And' against this Nation added wrong to wrong.
At last my Crown, Sword, Scepter, Conquest brave
I left, I lost, scarce found an earthly Grave.
WILLIAM THE SECOND, Surnamed RUFUS: KING OF ENGLAND, And DVKE OF NORMANDY.
William Rufus was Crowned at Westminster the 26. of September 1087. being 21
years of age. He reigned 12 years 11. months 18. days. was killed with an
arrow in new forest the 2 of Aug: 1160. was buried at winchester


William Rufus.
WHat my triumphant Father wan, I held,
I pill'd and poll'd this Kingdom more then he.
Great Tributes from my people I compeld:
No place in Church, or Commonwealth was free,
But always those that would give most to me
Obtained their purpose being wrong or right.
The Clergy I enforced to agree
To sell Church-plate and Challices outright,
Until at last (by the Almighties might)
My Kingly power and force was forcelesse made,
My glorious pomp that seemed t'eclips men's sight,
Did vanish by a glance, by chance, and fade:
For hunting in New forest (void of fear)
A Subject slew me, shooting at a Dear.
HENRY THE FIRST, Surnamed BEAVCLERK: KING OF ENGLAND, And DVKE OF NORMANDY.
Henry the 1, Beuclarck, borne at selbye in york shire Was crouned at the age
of 30 years the ^^ of August. he Reigned 35. Years 4. months Died in the
forest of Lions. in the 65. year of age 1135. buried in Redding abbey


Henry I.
MY Father and my Brother Kings, both gone,
With acclamations Royal I was crowned:
And having gained the Scepter and the Throne,
I with the name of Beauclerk was renowned:
The English Laws long lost, I did refound,
False weights and measures I corrected true.
The power of Wales in fight I did confound,
And Normandy my valor did subdue.
Yet I unmindful whence these glories grew,
My eldest Brother Robert did surprise,
Detained him, and usurped his Royal due,
And most vnnat'rally plucked out his eyes,
Kings live like Gods, but yet like men they dye,
All must pay Natures due, and so did I.
STEPHEN KING OF ENGLAND, And DVKE OF NORMANDY.
King Stephen son to Stephen Earl of Blois: and of Adela daughter to William
Conqueror: began his reign the 2d. of December, 1135. he reigned 18 years, 11
months, and 18 days, died at the age of 49 years, and lies buried at
Feversham.


K. Stephen.
BY wrested Titles and usurping claim,
Through storms and tempests of tumultuous wars,
The Crown, (my fairest mark and fouleft aim)
I won and wore, beleaguerd round with iars.
The English, Scots, and Normans all prepares
Their powers exposing to oppose my powers,
Whilst this Land laden and or'ewhelm'd with cares
Endures, whilst war, woe, want, and death deuoures,
But as years, months, weeks, days, decline by hours,
Hours into minutes, minutes into naught:
My painful pomp decaid like fading flowers
And unto naught was my Ambition brought.
Thus is the state of transitory things,
There Is nothing can be permanent with Kings.
HENRY THE SECOND, KING OF ENGLAND, DVKE OF NORMANDY, Guyen and Aquitaine, etc.
Henry ye 2. surnamed plantagenett. Reigned 34 Years 9 months and 2 days. He
dyed the 6 of July 1189. in the 61 Year of his age was buried at fonteuerard in
normandy.


Henry 2.
TO th'Empresse Maud I was undoubted heir,
And in her Right my title being just,
By Justice I obtained the Regal Chair.
Fair Rosamond I soyled with foul lust,
For which Heavens Justice (hating deeds unjust)
Stirred up my wife and Sons to be my foes:
Who sought to lay my Glory in the dust,
And he m'd me round with cruel wars and woes.
They poysned my sweet beauteous tainted Rose,
By Isabels device my furious Queen:
My very bowels against me did oppose:
Such fruit has lust, such force has jealous spleen.
My cursed crosses made me curse my birth,
With care I lived, reigned, dyed, and turned to earth.
RICHARD THE FIRST, Surnamed CVER DE LION. KING OF ENGLAND, DVKE OF NORMANDY,
Guyen and Aquitaine, etc.
King Richard surnamed Cordelyon. Was 43 Years old when he had Raigued 9 Years
9 months and 22 days was wounded and died the 6 day of april 1199. Was
buried at fonteuerard


Richard I.
THrough my Creators mercy and his might,
Jerusalem I conquered and set free
False misbeleeuing ewes, and Turkish spite
From Jury force perforce I forced to flee.
The Realm of Cipresse was subdude by me.
Sicillia trembled a: my prowess bold.
King Tancred bought his peace, and did agree,
And paid me threescore ounces of fine gold,
Whilst I abroad won honors manifold.
Aspiring John (my Brother) vexed my Realm.
In Austria I was taken, and laid in hold:
Thus floods of grief each way me ouer-whelme.
At last I home returned, my Ransom paid,
My earthly glory in a Grave was laid.
JOHN KING OF ENGLAND, DVKE OF NORMANDY, Guyen and Aquitaine: LORD OF IRELAND,
etc.
King John, surnamed without land Reigned 17 Years and 7 months died 19 day
of october, 1216. Was buried at worcester in the 51 Year of his age


K. John.
ROmes mighty miterd Metropolitan
I did oppose, and was by him deposed:
He turned his cursed blessings to his ban,
And caused me round to be with cares enclosed.
The English and the Normans me oppos'de,
And Lewis of France my Kingdom did molest,
Whilst I to all these miseries exposed,
Consumed my Kingly days in restless rest.
At last the Pope was pleased, and I reblest;
Peace was obtained, proclaimed I re-inthroan'd.
Thus was my reign with woes oppressed and pressed,
Blessed cursed, friends, foes, divided and atton'd.
And after seauenteene years were gone and past,
At Swinstead poysned, there I drank my last.
HENRY THE THIRD, KING OF ENGLAND, Lord of IRELAND, DVKE OF NORMANDY, Guyen
and Aquitaine, etc.
King Henry the 3. Was Crouned at the age of 9 Years the 28 october 1216 he
Reigned 56 Years and 20 days, dyed the 16 of november 1272 tyeth buried at
Westminster.


Henry 3.
IN toil and trouble, midst contentious broils,
I seized the Scepter of this famous Land:
Then being greatly wasted with the spoils
Which Lewis had made with his French furious band
But I with Peers and people bravely mand,
Repeld, repulst, expulst insulting foes.
My Barons did my Sovereignty withstand,
And wrapped themselves and me in wars and woes:
But in each battle none but I did lose,
I lost my Subjects lives on every side:
(From Civil wars no better gayning grows)
Friends, foes, my people, all, that fought or dyed.
My gains was less, my pleasure was my pain.
These were the triumphs of my troublous Reign.
EDWARD THE FIRST, KING OF ENGLAND, Lord of IRELAND, Duke of AQVITAINE, etc.
Eduard the 1. borne at westmin was Crowned at westmi: At the age of 33 years.
the 18 of September. the 2. year of his reign 1274 He reigned 34 Years 6.
months and 14 dais. he died at burgh upon the sands. lies buried at
westminster.


Edward Long-shankes.
MY Victories, my Valor, and my strength,
My Actions, and my neuer-conquer'd name,
Were spread throghout the world in breadth and length
By mortal deeds, I wan immortal Fame.
Rebellious Wales I finally did tame,
And made them Vassalls to my Princely Son:
Ientred Scotland fierce with Sword and Flame,
And almost all that Kingdom ouerrun.
Still where I fought, triumphantly I won,
Through Blood and Death my Glory I obtained:
But in the end when all my acts were done,
A Sepulcher was all the gain I gained.
For though great Kings contend for earthly sway,
Death binds them to the peace, and parts the fray.
EDWARD THE SECOND, KING OF ENGLAND, Lord of IRELAND, Duke of AQVITAINE, etc.
King Edward the 2. surnamed Carnaruen was crouned at westminster at the 22.
year of his age the 24. of febru: 1308. he Reigned 19 year. 6 months Was
deposed the 25 of Ianiwarius 1326. he was slain: in the castle of barkley in
the 43 year of his age.


Edward 2.
Soon after was my fathers Corpse interred,
Whilst Fate and Fortune did on me attend:
And to the Royal Throne I was preferred,
With Aue Casar every knee did bend,
But all these fickle joys, did fading end,
Pierce Gaueston, to thee my love combinde:
My friendship to thee scarce left me a friend,
But made my Queen, Peers, People, all unkind,
I tortured, both in body and in mind
Was vanquished by the Scots at Bannocks Bourne:
And I enforced by flight some safety find,
Yet taken by my Wife at my return,
A Red-hot spit my Bowels through did gore,
Such misery, no Slave endured more.
EDWARD THE THIRD, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, etc.
Eduard the 3. borne at winsor. was Crowned at westminster the 2. of feb: 1327.
being 15. Years old Reigned 50. years 4 months 24 dais. Dyed the 21 of June
1377 lies buired in west:.


Edward 3.
IN Peace and War, my Stars auspitious stood,
False Fortune steadfast held her wavering Wheel;
I did revenge my Fathers butche'rd blood,
I forced France my furious force to feel:
I Warred on Scotland with triumphing Steel,
Afflicting them with slaughtcring Sword and Fire:
That Kingdom then divided needs mustreele,
Betwixt the Bruces and the Balliols ire.
Thus daily still my glory mounted higher,
With black Prince Edward my victorious Son,
Unto the top of Honor we aspire,
By manly, Princely, worthy actions done.
But all my Triumphs, fortunes, strength, and force,
Age brought to death, and death turned to a Coarse.
RICHARD THE SECOND, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE: LORD OF IRELAND, etc.
RICHARD the 2. borne at Bordeaux Son to Edward Prince of Wales. begann his
Reign the 21 of June Ano: Dni: 1377. he Raiged 22. years, was Deposed: and
died the 14. of February 1399. First buried at Langley in Hartfordshire. and
afterward at Westmi^ster.


Richard 2.
A Sunshine morn, precedes a showry day,
A Calm at Sea often times fore-runnes a Storm:
All is not gold that soemes so glistring gay:
Foul Vice is fairest features Canker-worme,
So I that was of blood, descent and form,
The perfect image of a royal stock,
Vnseason'd young a duice did me deforme,
Split all my Hopes against Despaires black rock,
My Regal name and power was made a mock,
My Subjects madly in Rebellion rose,
Mischief on mischief all in troops did flock,
Opposed, deposed, exposed, enclosed in woes,
With wavering fortunes, troublously I reigned,
Slain by soul murder, peace and rest I gaind.
HENRY THE FOVRTH KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE: LORD OF IRELAND, etc.
HENRY the 4. borne at Bollingbroke in the County of Lincoln, began^ his
Reign the 26. of September. 1^^ Reigned 13. years and 6. months and died in
Ano: D: 1413. Of the age of 46. years, buried at Canterbury


Henry 4.
FRom right (wrong-doing) Richard I did wrest
His Crown mis-guided, but on me mis-plac'd:
Uncivil Civil Wars my Realm molest,
And English men did England spoil and wast.
The Sire the Son, the Son the Father chased,
Undutiful, unkind, unnatural,
Both York and Lancaster were raised and rac'd,
As Conquest did to either Faction fall.
But still I gripped the Scepter and the Ball,
And what by wrong I won, by might I wore:
For Prince of Wales I did my Son install,
But as my Martial Fame grew more and more,
By fatal Fate my vital thread was cut,
And all my Greatness in a Grave was put.
HENRY THE FIFTH, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE: LORD OF IRELAND, etc.
Henry the 5. bagan his Reign. the 20. of March. Was Crouned At Westminster.
the 9 of April. 1413. He Reigned 9 Years. 2 months. died in the castle of
Boys nere paris the 13 of August. 1422. buried at Westminster.


Henry 5.
FRom my Lancastrian Sire succesiuely,
I Englands glorious golden Garland got:
I temperd Justice with mild clemency,
Much blood I shed, yet bloodshed loved not.
Time my Sepulcher and my bones may rot,
But I i am can never end my endless fame.
OF liuion cannot my brave acts out blot,
Or make Forgetfulness forget my name.
I played all France at Tennise such a Game,
With roaring Rackets, bandyed Bals and Foyles:
And what I played for, still I won the same,
Triumphantly transporting home the spoils.
But in the end grim Death my life affail'd,
And as I lived I died, beloved, bewayl'd.
HENRY THE SIXTH, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE: LORD OF IRELAND, etc.
Henry the 6 of the age of 8 months Began his Reign, Tte. 1. of September.
1422. Crowned at Westminster the 6 of November 1429 Afterward Crowned at Paris
7 September 1431 Reigned 38 years 6 months 4 days Buried at Winsore.


Henry 6.
GReat Englands Mars (my Father) being dead,
I, not of years, or year; but eight months old:
The Diadem was placed upon my head,
In royal Robes the Scepter I did hold:
But as The Almighty's works are manifold,
Too high for man's conceit to comprehend:
In his eternal Register enrold
My Birth, my troublous Life and tragic End.
Against me the house of York their force did bend,
And Peers and People weltred in their gore:
My Crown and Kingdom they from me did read,
Which I, my Sire, and Grandsire kept and wore.
Twice was I crowned, vncrown'd, often blessed, often crossed,
And lastly, murdered, life and kingdom lost.
EDWARD THE FOVRTH, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, etc.
Edward the 4 being 18 years Old. began his Reign the 4 of march 1460 he
was crowned 6 of June he Reigned 22 years 1 month 8 days and lies buried in
Winsor.


Edward 4.
I Yorkes great heir (by fell domesticke War)
Inthroned was, vn-King'd, and reinthroan'd:
Subiecting quite the House of Lancaster,
Whilst woeful England ouerburthen'd, groaned:
Old Sonlesse Sires and Childlesse Mothers moan'd:
These bloody broils had lasted threescore years,
And till the time we were in peace attoan'd,
It wasted fourscore of the Royal Peers:
But age and time all earthly things outweares,
Through terrors, horrors, mischief and debate,
By trust, by treason, by hopes, doubts and fears,
I got, I kept, I left and lost the State.
Thus as disposing heavens do smile or frown,
So Cares or Comforts wait upon a Crown.
EDWARD THE FIFTH, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, etc.
Edward the 5 being 13 years of age came at london to be crouned the 4 of may
1483. Was deposed of his Croune by his onnaturall onkel the protecter, last
his lyff in the tower his burial is onknowen.


Edward 5.
IF birth, if beauty, innocence and youth,
Could make a Tyrant feel one spark of grace,
My crooked Uncle had been moved to ruth,
Beholding of my pittie-pleading face.
But what auailes to spring from royal Race?
What surety is in beauty, strength, or wit?
What is command, might, eminence and place,
When treason lurkes where Majesty does sit?
My hapless self had true false proof of it:
Nipt in my bud and blasted in my bloome:
Deprived of life by murder, most unfit,
And for three Kingdoms could not have one Tomb.
Thus Treason all my glory ouer-top't,
And e're the Fruit could spring, the Tree was lop't
RICHARD THE THIRD, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE: LORD OF IRELAND, etc.
Richard the 3. king of England began his Reign the 22. of June 1483. he
Reigned 2 Years 2. months he was slain at bosworth by Henry earl of
Richmond. And lies buried at lecester.


Richard 3.
AMbition's like unto a quenchlesse thirst.
Ambition Angels threw from Heaven to Hell,
Ambition (that infernal Hag) accursed,
Ambitiously made me aspire, rebel:
Ambition, that damned Necromanticke Spell,
Made me clime proud, with shame to tumble down.
By bloody murder I did all expel,
Whose right, or might, debard me from the Crown,
My smiles, my gifts, my favors, or my frown,
Were feigned, corrupt, vile flattry, death and spite,
By cruel Tyranny I gat renown,
Till Heavens just Judge me justly did requite.
By blood I won, by blood I lost the Throne:
Detested lived; died loved, bewailed of none.
HENRY THE SEVENTH, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE: LORD OF IRELAND, etc.
Henry the 7. began his Reign the 22. of June 1485. And was Crowned at
Westminster the 30 of october He Reigned 25. Years. and 8. months. and died
the 22. of April. lies buried at Westminster.


Henry 7.
I Was the Man (by Gods high grace assigned)
That for this restless Kingdom purchas't Rest:
I York and Lancaster in one combinde,
That sundred, had each other long oppressed.
My strength and policy The Almighty blessed
With good success, from first unto the last:
And high Jehovah turned to the best,
A world of perils which my youth over past.
The white and red Rose I conjoined fast
In sacred Marriages Conjugal band:
I Traytorstam'd, and treason stood aghast
At me; strong guarded by my Makers hand.
In glory and magnificence I Reigned,
And fame, love and a tomb was all I gainde.
HENRY THE EIGHT, KING OF ENGLAND, France and Ireland, Defender of the FAITH,
etc.
Henry the 8 Was borne at Grenwich Entered his Reign being 18 years of age the
22 of April 1509. Was Crouned at Westminster the 25. of June following. He
Reigned 37. years and 9 months died the 28. of June. buried at Winsor.


Henry 8.
TO both the Royal Houses I was Heir;
I made but one of long contending twain:
This Realm divided drooping in despair,
I did rebinde in my auspicious Reign.
I banished Romish Usurpation vain.
In France I Bullen, Turwin, Turney wan:
The Style of Faiths Defender I did gain.
Six wives I had, three An's, two Kates, one Jane.
In my expenses Royal, beyond measure,
Striving in Noble Actions to exceed;
Accounting Honor as my greatest Treasure:
Yet various fancies did my frailty feed,
I made and marred, I did, and I undid,
Till all my Greatness in a Grave was hid.
EDWARD THE SIXTH, KING OF ENGLAND, France and Ireland, Defender of the FAITH,
etc.
Edward borne at Hamton Court at the age of 9 years began his reign the 31 of
Janu 1546. Crowned at Westminster: the 20 of februa: following, he reigned 6 years, 5
months died the 6 of Julie buried at westminster


Edward 6.
I Seemed in wisdom aged in my youth,
A Princely pattern; I reformed the time:
With zeal and courage I maintained Gods truth,
And Christian faith against Antichristian crime.
My Father did begin; I, in my prime,
Both Baal and Beliall from this Kingdom drove,
With concords true harmonious heavenly chime
I caused be said and sung Gods truth and love.
From virtue unto virtue still I strove,
I lived beloved both of God and men:
My soul unto her Maker soared above,
My earthly part returned to earth again.
Thus Death, my fair proceedings did prevent,
And Peers and People did my loss lament.
MARY QVEENE OF ENGLAND, France and Freland, Defender of the FAITH, etc.
Maria nata Grenouici ii febru: 1505. Incipit regnare. 6. Iuli: 1553. Regnauit
5 annos et 4 mensis. Obyt annos nata 45. et 9. mensis


Queen Mary.
NO sooner I possessed the Royal Throne,
But true Religion straight was dispossessed:
Bad Counsel caused Rome, Spain, and I, as one,
To persecute, to martyr, and molest
All that the unstained Truth of God professed:
All such as dared oppugn the powerful Pope,
With grievous Tortures were oppressed and pressed,
With Axes, Fire, and Faggot, and the Rope.
Scarce any Land beneath the heavenly Cope,
Afflicted was, as I caused this to be:
And when my fortunes were in highest hope,
Death at the five years end arrested me.
No Bale would serve, I could command no aid,
But I in prison in my Grave was laid.
ELIZABETH QVEENE OF ENGLAND, France and Freland, Defender of the FAITH, etc.
The most excellent Princes Elizabeth. Queen of England, France, and Ireland.
Defendor of the Faith etc. She reigned 44 years, died the 24, of March, 1602
aged 69, 6 months: and lies buried at Westminster Compton Holland excudit



Queen Elizabeth.
THe griefs, the fears, the terrors and the toiles,
The sleights, tricks, snares, that for my life were laid;
Popes prisons, poisons, pistols, bloody broils,
All these encompast me (poor harmless Maid)
But I still trusting in my Makers aid,
Was still defended by his power divine:
My Glory and my Greatness was displaid
As far as Sun and Moon did ever shine.
Gods mingled service I did re-refine
From Romish rubbish, and from humane dross.
I yearly made the pride of Spain decline:
France and all Belgin I saved from loss.
I was Arts pattern, t'Armes I was a Patron;
I lived and died a Queen, a Maid, a Matron.
JAMES, Of that name THE FIRST, And First MONARCH of the whole Island of GREAT
BRITAIN
Uniting under one, and the same his most Glorious Crown, the Kingdoms of
ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND:

Gods immediate VICEGERENT, Supreme HEAD of all Persons:

And Defender of the true, ancient, Christian Faith in these his Empire and
Dominions.

Whom God long preserve. The right high and most mighty Monarch JAMES by the
grace of God King of Great Britain France and Ireland etc Defendor of the
faith


King James.
WEre all the flattry of the world in me,
(Great King of Hearts and Arts, Great Britains King
Yet all that flattry could not flatter thee:
Or add to thy renown the smallest thing.
My Muse (with truth and freedom) dares to sing,
Thou art a Monarch loved of God and men.
Two famous Kingdoms thou to one did bring,
And gave lost Britains name, her name again.
Thou causedst Doctors with their learned pen,
The sacred Bible newly to translate.
Thy Wisdom found the damned powderd Den,
That Hell had hatched to ouer-throw thy state.
And all the world thy Motto must allow,
The Peacemakers are blessed; and so art thou.
CHARLES PRINCE OF WALES, etc.
The most Illustrious Prince Charles Prince of Great Britain and Ireland,
Duke of Cornwall, York, and Albany. Earl of Chester, and Knight of the most noble
order of the Garter etc.


Prince Charles.
ILlustrious Offspring, of most glorious Stems,
Our happy hope, our Royal CHARLES the great,
Successiue Heir to four Rich Diadems,
With gifts of Grace, and Learning high repleate.
For thee The Almighty's aid I do entreat,
To guide and prosper thy proceedings still,
That long thou may survive a Prince complete,
To guard the Good, and to subvert the Ill.
And when (by Gods determined boundless will)
Thy gracious Father shall Immortal be,
Then let thy Fame (like his) the world full fill,
That thou may joy in us, and we in thee.
And all true Britains pray to God above,
To match thy life and fortune with their love.
FINIS.

