THE NIPPING OR SNIPPING OF ABUSES:

OR The woolgathering of Wit.

With The Muses Tailor, brought from Parnassus by land, with a pair of Oars

Wherein Are above a hundred several Garments of diverse fashions, made by
Nature, without the help of Art, and A Proclamation from Hell in the Devils
name, concerning the propogation, and excessive use of Tobacco.

By JOHN TAILOR.

Judge not, befere thou all do ouer-looke, And then if Nothing please thee,
burn the Book.

LONDON. Printed by Ed: Griffin for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Pide-Bull near Saint Austens-gate. 1614.

To the Sacred Majesty of King JAMES.
To thee I dare not Dedicate my book,
Yet humbly, high my low invention Ames,
That with thy Gracious view (dread royal JAMES)
Thou will be pleased my lines to ouer-looke.
A candle lights, when Phoebus has forsook
To guilde the day with universal flames:
And glim'ring glances of the humed Thames
Aspects, and objects to the sight have struck.
So mighty Sovereign, and most Learned King,
When sweet Arions Harp, Amphions Lute,
Are silent sleeping in their Cases mute:
Vouchsafe to hear thy Scullers Muse to singe;
And let Pans Pipe, obtain a little grace,
When Great Appolloes Harp is out of place.
Your Majesty's Humble Servant, and only water Poet. JOHN TAILOR.

A Skeltonicall salutation to those that know how to read, and not mar the
sense with hacking or mis-construction.
THou true understander, my invention does wander with the quill of a Gander,
to shield me from slander, to thy good protection, I yield in subjection, my
poor imperfection, with friendly correction, and as thou do like me, or
stroke me or strike me, Reprove me or prove me, or move me, or love me, or
quite me, or spite me, friend me, or mend me, or else not offend me: If in
ought that is written thy humors are bitten, seem not to espy it, and none will
descry it. But if thou do kick, the spur sure will prick, and if thou do
fling, the waspe then will sting. My verses are made, to ride every Jade, but
they are forbidden, of Iades to be ridden, they shall not be snaffeled, nor
braued nor bafflled, weart thou George with thy Naggon, that fought'st with the
dragon, or were you great Po^pey, my verse should be thumpe ye, if you like a
Iauel against me dare cavil. I do not entend, it as now to commend it, or yet
to defend it. But to thee I do send it, to like it, or mend it, and when thou
have end it, applaud it or rend it. My wits I could bristle, for a better
Epistle, but yet at this time, this Skeltonicall Rhyme, I send to thy veiw,
because it is new, So Reader adue.

I thine, if thou mine, JOHN TAILOR.

To the Author and his book.
To the superlatiue Water-Poet John Tailor.
NO Water-man, or Sculler art thou none,
Nor need thou ever taste of Hellicon:
They all mistake thee Jack, full well I know,
Thy Heaven bred brain could never stoop so low:
For unto me, thou plainly do appear
The lofty Plannet of the watery Sphere:
So that Apollo he himself can tell,
Thy influence gives water to his well.
Thy true friend Ia: Moraye.

To the Castalian Water-writer, Splende and dignoscar.
A Dial set upon an eminent place,
If clouds do interuall Appolloes face:
Is but a figured shape: whereby we know
No article of Time, which it does owe:
Unto our expectations, yet we see
The tractes by which Times should distinguished be:
In paralelled punctual, ciphered lines,
Which by a shadow, when the fair sun shines,
Explaines the hours: So if the Son of men
Thy Glorious Patron, deem to bless thy pen
With his fair light, Thy Muse so young so fair,
(So well proportioned in conceits so rare:
And Natural strains, and style, and every part,
That Nature therein does exceed all Art,)
Will then as with Enthusiasme inspired
Print legends by the world to be admired.
Thine James Ratray.

Praecomium Iohannis Tailor.
WHat elementall sperms, begot a spark
Of such conceited influence: bearing the mark
Of such digestion, in his well knit rimes,
As if that Maro rebaptized our times,
With well proportioned judgment? this thy note,
Distinction knows not from a grauer cote.
Oh where are you, styled by the happy names
Of loves sole heirs: sleeps your immortal flames,
In their original dullness see a good?
Borne in the vein of far inferior blood.
Tailor, I have took measure of thy pains,
Discharge my bill with love, and there is my gains.
Thine in the best of friendship. Robert Anton.

To his honest friend John Tailor, Poeta Nascitur.
I Often (with other men) have wondered why
Horace should write an Art of Poetry:
Since all men know, a Poets borne a Poet,
And no man's borne an Artist: all men know it:
And knowing this, I wonder who should scorn
A Poet without Art, that so was borne.
Who thinks thy name, or watery education,
Is to thy verses any derogation,
Is far deceived in both, for all men kno,
Tailors are makers, Poets all are so.
Nor is it thy education thee abuses.
T'as brought thee up a Tailor for the Muses.
I could Apollogize, but thou have don't
If Poets borne have glory, thou have will not:
Thou have described the several signs of Heaven,
Wherein the suns whole Progress is made even.
Thy Epigrams; and Anagrams of late
Are Philomels sweet notes, let Parrats prate.
I dare compare thy Genius with some men
That vaunt in Tempe's well to have dipped their pen:
For (truly) they do falsely steal translations,
And speak in our tongue things of other Nations.
Thy Oars and Sculls has far out rowed their fames
For thou have rowed from Hellicon, to Thames.
Let them vpbraide thee with a Scullers name,
And with that title think to obscure thy fame:
They cannot Jack for Mariners at seas
Take pains, whilst passengers do sit at ease.
Thy own true labor tugs thy verse a shore,
Though fools in each man's boat will have an Oar.
Thine, whether thou will or no. Sa: Jones.

To my friend by land and by water John Tailor.
THese leaves kind John are not to wrap up drams,
That do contain thy witty Epigrams,
Let worser Poems serve for such abuse,
Whilst thine shall be referude for better use.
And let each Critic cavil what he can,
It Is rarely written of a Water-man.
Thy friend assured Rob: Branthwaite.

To the Muses Tailor, or the Pegafian Sculler.
ONe Envy says the art merely natural,
Another when it does on foam Art fall:
In reading thee, believes it not thine own,
Neither detracts thee, for the gift is known
That's called a Poets, to come with his birth,
But if this Envy could make less thy worth,
The second ads to it, by confessing art
In that we know thine: Thus where every part
Of Envy is examind it is the end,
Of all that do dispraise thee to commend.
Thy hearty friend. Sa: Call.

To his friend John Tailor.
YOu that read Tailors verse, commend the same,
If you have wit, or else subscribe your Name.
Thy friend I. P. Musophily.

To my good friend and fellow, John Tailor.
ON land, thy water works, with more praise floates
Then Standgate castle, or Thames flaming boats:
More fitter for the press (pulled from thy oar)
Then many which may brag of learning store.
If Coriat, or his Crew thy worth do blemmish
The care is taken all, Incumbe Remis.
Hold on thy way, though others first shall plie me,
Thou Art my first man, though last I chance to spy thee.
Thy true friend Cornwallis Blague.

To the Pegasian Tailor.
Lo here the Tailor of Parnassus spring
Whose offall shreads, do prove quaint well made verses,
Whose pen dismissed; strait does the bottles bring:
From Bacchus fuming pipes, to fill Tower Teirces.
Who Sculd the Muses bravely over the flood,
And since that time has for a Poet stood.
Thine Edmund Blague.

To the humidious Poet, and my very friend John Tailor.
THe Poets old, (with much head breaking pain)
Did learn of others to compose a verse,
But John, thy studdy, never broke thy brain:
Yet can in meeter many Acts rehearse.
And when thy hand does tug the heavy oar,
Thou can speak verses, never spoke before.
Naught comes amiss, for now thou take delight
In bitter Satyrs to explain thy mind:
Then tragic like, describst a bloody fight,
And straight all merry art to mirth inclinde:
Of all thou makst a harmony sometimes
To please the inclination of the times.
Then spite of each calumnions critticks collar,
No Sculler ever came so near a scholar.
Thine as thou would wish, Samuel King.

In Laudem Authoris.
WEll might thou wonder Tailor that I praise
Thy home bred Muse, since in these crittick days
It is a Maxim, that who er'e is known,
To give to others worth, leaves himself none:
Did not I see how much adultrous art
Paints out the face of poesy for the mart:
Of outside stages; who can from's loose pen,
Shake ink at whores, and country gentlemen:
Can make a soldier utter treason, curse,
And Ladies whine, speak as new come from nurse.
Who can with this, and an opinion'd fame,
A hungry pention purchase, wears the Name
Of Poet; when his idle pate has naught
To speak his art, but that it is dearly bought.
(And yet cheap too) should we but weigh the pain,
And self felt guilt, of his translating vein.
When I on both look, by Apollo's fire
I laugh at him, and thee I do admire.
Thou ow'st thine own begettings, which by thee
Are made, not fashiond, such should Poets be.
Such were the ancient Bards, and Druids songs
Who used their own language, their own tongues:
Where Nature, unto me seems Art to pass
As much as Diamonds do a painted glass:
For if who best translates a Poet were
We might have more then one borne in a year.
And I have lived an age, and nere saw two,
So much unbought, vnborow'd, yet could show
As I have read from thee, what would thou more
There Is many wears the Bays, deserves thy oar.
Thy friend Robert Daborne.

To his friend John Tailor.
Go friend, let loase thy lines, and measure out
The length and breadth of vice, it was a doubt:
Thou only were for a man's Tailor sit,
When thou did through thy measures, wast thy wit
On wit-lesse Coriat, but from henceforth
The Laurel Synod shall allow thy worth:
With more addicions, for all may see
Thou likewise may a woman's Tailor be.
Thou can with Satyrs their straight bodies wring,
And loose their skirts again with sonnetting,
Go on, and from me take a kind, good speed,
With this prouiso unto those shall read.
Let there no Botcher that yet wants his trade
Dive to find fault with that a Tailor made.
Will: Rowley.

To his dear friend Master John Tailor.
ME thinks I see the Sculler in his boat,
With goodly motion glide along fair Thames,
And with a charming and bewrehing noate,
So sweet delightful tunes and ditties frames:
As greatest Lordings and the nicest Dames,
That with attentive care, did hear thy lays
Of force should yield due merit to thy praise.
Worth to all Watermen, strain forth thy voice
To prove so pleasing in the worlds proud eye,
As eyes, and ears, and hearts may all rejoice:
To see, hear, muse, upon the melody.
In contemplation of thy harmony,
Let Thames fair banckes thy worth and praises ring
While I thy worth, and praise, beyond seasing
Tho. Gent.

To the Water-Poet, John Tailor.
HOnest John Tailor though I know it no grace,
To thee, or me, for writing in this place,
Yet know I that the multitudes of friends
Will thee protect, from vile malignant minds:
The rather cause what ever thou have shows
Is no one man's invention but thine own.
Malicious minded men will thee despraise;
Envy debases all, her self to raise.
Then rest content, whilst to thy greater fame,
Both Art, and Nature shrine to raise thy name.
Thine ever as thou know R: Cadner.

To honest Jack Tailor.
FRiend Tailor, thou have here this glory won,
Tha'st made a coat Urania may put on.
I do applau'd thy quick ingenious spirit,
And may thy fortune counteruaile thy merit:
Which if it do (thy worth I will not flatter,
Thou never more shall toil upon the water.
Thine as the rest of thy friends William Bubb.

To his loving friend John Tailor.
Beloved friends; words mend not much the matter,
Nor morre the market of thy natural wit:
They are but Pyes, and like to Pyes do chatter
That fault thy act, and so would bemish it.
For what is Art but imitation
Ty'de unto rules, as such and such have taught?
And what those rules, but approbation
Of that which Nature first, in others wrought?
From Nature then it was they took their light,
The Proto-Poets all, and sung their Rhymes:
And why shall we deny our age like right
When Nature is the same with former Tynees?
No, no, but since she sends forth fair rays
In thy borne-Muse, wear thou with all her Bays.
Fr: Conniers.

To my friend John Tailor.
IF Homers verse (in Greek) did merit praise,
If Naso in the Lattin won the Bays,
If Maro among the Romans did exell,
If Tasso in the Tuscan tongue wrote well,
Then Tailor I conclude that thou have don
In English, what immortal Baies has won.
Thy friend John Tap.

Tho: Bretnor in commendation of the Author.
THat none are Artists but Academiques,
Twere vain to think and idle to maintain:
Since Nature's free and tide to no such tricks:
As fostred are among the learned train:
The homely Pesant and the country Kerne
Have often better wits then those that learn.
And for thy self there is no Poet writes
With words, or figures more adornd with Art.
Thy lines are stuffed with learned Epithites:
Such sweet conceits thy pleasing Muse does dart,
That thou seem wrapped into the highest airs,
When thou but speak of celestial Spheres.
Then cease not Tailor, garments more to shape,
Of this proiection or diuiner matter,
Lets have another suite of finest drape:
And bury not thy talent in the water.
That element's cold, but thou art all on fire:
Go on, go on, and we will still admire.
Thine Tho: Bretnor.

To my honest friend John Tailor.
THy Tailors sheares foul vices wings has clipped,
The seames of impious dealings are vnript:
So Art-like thou these captoius times have quipt,
As if in Hellicon thy pen were dipped,
All those who against thy worth are Envious lipt,
Thy sharp Satyrick Muse has nipt and snipt:
And to conclude thy'nuention is not chipt,
Or stolen or borowd, begd, or basely gript.
Then Tailor thy conceits are truly sowde,
And Sculler (on my word) it was well rowde.
Thine to my best power Enoch Lynde.

To him I love, yet never knew.
TO praise thee without knowledge, were dispraise:
I know thy Wit: in that, thy self I raise.
Thy full fetcht-strokes so wafts me over the Strand,
Of deep Conceit; as bids me understands,
That never Tailor shapt (for such small price)
A Robe so covert, which uncouers Vice.
Thy true friend John Handson..

In Landem Authoris.
MOst commonly one Tailor will dispraise,
Another workmanship, envying always
At him that's better then himself reputed,
Though he himself be but a botcher bruted:
So might it well be said of me (my friend)
Should I not to thy work some few lines lend,
Which to make probable this sentence tends,
Who not commends, he surely discommendeth:
In my illiterate censure these thy rimes,
Deserve applause even in these worst of times:
When wit is only worthy held in those,
On whom smooth flattery vain praise bestows.
But I not minding with thy worth to flatter,
Do know thy wit to good too toil by water.
Rob: Tailor.

To my friend John Tailor.
THis work of thine, thou have compilde so well,
It merits better wits thy worth to tell.
Thine Maximilian Waad.

To my kind friend JOHN TAILOR.
Fie Momus cries, what frantic fit has firde.
The Pelting Sculler thus to play the Poet,
As if he were with Homers spirit inspir'de.
Cease Critticke, cease, and I will let thee know it.
The honest Sculler seeking for a fare,
Did meet the Muses in an eu'ning late:
And finding them disposed to take the air;
Such sollace gave them with his Rusticke prate,
As there in guerdon of his homebred sport,
It was decreed by all the Sisters nine
He should receive (since other means was short)
A brimfull bowl of Heliconian Wine.
Since when from him, such sweet conceits does flow,
As merits all the praise thou can bestow.
Again,
John Tailor here I gladly would commend thee,
And wish my note exceeded Ela's strain,
Or that my Verse could equali Virgils vain,
Which might from Momus carping brood defend thee.
Yet as I can I will this Reader tell,
I know no Sculler ever writ so well.
Thy friend, Richard Leigh.

To my true friend John Tailor
AMongst the best that Britain now does bear,
Graced by Apollo, and the Nimphs divine,
Swollen with the Raptures of their great Ingine,
I think that few, or none, to thee comes near.
They want the tru-true tutch stone of the ear,
Besides thy makings all are merely thine,
Thou stealst no Chore, not Scene, nor page, nor line,
If they do so, their works can witness bear.
Then justly Jack, I do thee most esteem,
Nor art thou always ignorant of Art,
For Nature, so in thee does play her part,
As prodigal, not lib'rall she does seem.
Whilst thou her Champion, to thy greater grace
Make Art to Nature even in Art give place.
Thine as I live, John Moraye.

The Authors thanks to all those that have written in his Commendations.
RIght worthy, and my well-beloved friends,
My love and service shall be all your debtors:
A Beggars thanks is all the best Amends,
And in that payment you shall all be getters.
For words are cheap, and this my Book affoords
Your own, with double intrest words for words.
Yours, I. T.

To all in general on whose names I have Anagrammatized.
MAiesticke Sol whose eye Eclipsing Rays,
Shine with admired splendour over this land:
And all you Mercuries, of Mars his band,
Whose words and swords your temples crowns with baies.
Your pardons grant me if I have transgrest,
If you forgive, I Will deal with all the rest.
Ever at Command in all humble service, John Tailor

The Authors description of a Poet and Poesy, with an Apollogie in defense of
Natural English Poetry.
SHall Beggars diue into the Acts of Kings?
Shall Nature speak of supernat'rall things,
Shall Egles flights atempted be by Gnatts?
Shall mighty Whales be portraied out by Sprate:
These things I know impossible to be,
And it is as impossible for me.
That am a beggar in these Kingly acts,
Which from the Heavens true Poetry extracts.
A supernat'rall fool, by Nature I
That never knew this high borne mystery,
A worthless gnat, I know my self more weak,
Yet of the Princely Egle dare to speak:
A silly sprat the Ocean seeks to sound,
To seek this Whale, though seeking he be drowned:
Then to proceed: a Poets Art I know,
Is not compact of earthly things below:
Nor is of any base substantial mettle,
That in the worlds rotundity does settle:
But it is immortal, and it has proceeding,
From whence diuinest souls have all their breeding.
It is a blessing heaven has sent to men,
By men it is diuulged with their pen:
And by that propogation it is known,
And over all the world dispersed and thrown:
In verbal elocution so refinde,
That it to Virtue animates man's minds
The blessed singer of blessed Israel,
In this rare Art, he rarely did exell,
He sweetly Poetyz'd in Heavenly verses,
Such lines which aye eternity rehearses:
What Reverend rate, and glorious great esteem,
Augustus Caesar did a Poet deem:
Admired Virgils life does plainly show
That all the world a Poets worth may know:
But leaving Isreal's King, and Roman Caesar,
Let Us seek in England, English Poets treasure,
Sir Phillip Sidney, his times Mars and Muse,
That word, and sword so worthily could use,
That spite of death his Glory liu's, always
For Conquests, and for Poesy crowned with bays:
What famous men liu's in this age of ours
As if the Sisters nine had left their bowres,
With more post have then expeditious wings
They here have found the Helliconian springs.
We of our mighty Monarch JAMES may boast,
Who in this heavenly Art exceeds the most:
Where men may see the Muses wisdom well,
When such a Glorious house they chose to dwell:
The Preacher whose instructions does afford
The souls dear food, the everliving word:
If Poets skill be banished from his brain,
His preaching (sometimes) will be but too plain:
Twixt Poetry and best Divinity
There is such near, and dear affinity.
As it were propinquity of brothers blood,
That without tone, the other's not so good:
The man that takes in hand brave verse to write,
And in Divinity has no insight,
He may perhaps make smoothe, and Art-like Rimes,
To please the humors of these idle times:
But name of Poet he shall never merit,
Though writing them he waste his very spirit:
They therefore much mistake that seem to say,
How every one that writes a paltry play:
A sottish Sonnet in the praise of love,
A song or iegge, that fools to laughter move,
In praise or dispraise, in defame or fame,
Deserves the honor of a Poets name:
I further say, and further will maintain
That he that has true Po'sie in his brain,
Will not profane so high and heavenly skill,
To glory, or be prow'd of writing ill:
But if his Muse do stoop to such deiection,
It Is but to show the world her sins infection:
A Poets ire sometimes may be inflamed:
To make foul Vices brazen face ashamed.
And then his Epigrames and Satirs whip
Will make basegald unruly Iades to skip:
In frost they say it is good, bad blood be nipt,
And I have seen Abuses whipped and stripped,
In such rare fashion, that the wincing age,
Has kicked and flung, with uncontrolled rage.
Oh worthy Withers I shall love thee ever,
And often may thou do thy best indeuer,
That still thy works and thee may live together
Contending with thy name, and never wither.
But further to proceed in my pretense
Of Natr'all English Poetries defense:
For Lawreat Sidney, and our gracious James,
Have plunged bin in Arts admired streams:
And all the learned Poets of our days,
Have Arts great aid to win still living bays.
All whom I do confess such worthy men,
That I unworthy am with ink and pen
To carry after them. But since my haps
Have bin so happy as to get some scaps:
By Nature given me from the Muses table,
I Will put them to the best use I am able:
I have read Tasso, Virgill, Homer, Ovid,
Josephus, Plutark, whence I have aproued,
And found such observations as are fit,
With plenitude to fraught a barren wit.
And let a man of any nation be,
These Authors reading, makes his judgment see
Some rules that may his ignorance refine,
And such predominance it has with mine.
No bladder blown ambition puff's my Muse,
An English Poets writings to excuse:
Nor that I any rule of art condem,
Which is Dame Natures ornamentall Iem:
But these poor lines I wrote (my wits best pelf)
Defending that which can defend it self.
Know then vnnat'ral English Mungril Monster,
Thy wandering judgment does too much misconster:
When thou affirm'st thy Native Contry-man,
To make true verse no art or knowledge can:
Cease, cease to do this glorious kingdom wrong,
To make her speech inferior to each tongue:
Show not thy self more brutish then a beast,
Base is that bird that files her homeborne neast:
In what strange tongue did Virgils Muse commerce?
What language wast that Ovid wrote his verse?
Thou say it was Latin, why I say so too,
In no tongue else they any thing could do:
They Nat'rally did learn it from their mother,
And must speak Lattin, that could speak no other:
The Grecian blinded Bard did much compile,
And never used no foreigne far-fetcht style:
But as he was a Greek, his verse was Greek,
In other tongues (alas) he was to seek,
Du Bartas heavenly all admired Muse,
No unknown Language ever vs'de to use:
But as he was a Frenchman, so his lines
In natitue French with fame most glorious shines.
And in the English tongue it is fitly stated,
By siluer-tongued Siluester translated.
So well, so wisely, and so rarely done,
That he by it immortal fame has won.
Then as Great Maro, and renowned Naso,
Brave Homer, Petrarke, sweet Italian Tasso:
And numbers more, past numbering to be numberd,
Whose rare inventions never were incumberd,
With our outlandish chip chop gibrish gabling,
To fill men's ears with unacquainted babbling:
Why may not then an Englishman. I pray,
In his own language write as erst did they,
Yet must we suit our phrases to their shapes,
And in their imitations be their Apes.
Whilst Muses haunt the fruitful forked hill,
The world shall reverence their unmatched skill.
And for invention, fiction, method, measure,
From them must Poets seek to seek that treasure.
But yet I think a man may use that tongue
His Country uses, and do them no wrong.
Then I whose Artlesse studies are but weak,
Who never could, nor will but English speak,
Do here maintain, if words be rightly placed,
A Poets skill, with no tongue more is graced.
It runs so smooth, so sweetly it does flow,
From it such heavenly harmony does grow,
That it the understanders senses moves
With admiration, to express their loves.
No Music under heaven is more divine,
Then is a well-writte, and a well-read line.
But when a witless self conceited Rooke,
A good invention dares to ouerlooke:
How pitteous then man's best of wit is martyred,
In barbrous manner tottered torn and quartered.
So mingle mangled, and so hack't and hewd,
So seuraily be scuruide and bemewde.
Then this detracting dutty dunghill drudge,
Although he understand not, yet will judge.
Thus famous Poesy must abide the doom
Of every muddy minded rascal Groom.
Thus rarest Artists are continual stung
By every prating, stinking lump of dung.
For what cause then should I so much repine,
When best of writers that ere wrote a line
Are subject to the censure of the worst,
Who will their follies vent, or else they burst.
I have at idle times some Pamphlets writ,
(The fruitless issue of a natural wit)
And cause I am no Scholar, some envy me,
With foul and false calumnious words belie me:
With brazen fronts, and flinty hard belief
Affirming or suspecting me a thief:
And that my sterrile Muse so dry is milch'd,
That what I write, is borrowed, begged, or filch,d.
Because my name is Tailor, they suppose
My best inventions all from stealing grows:
As though there were no difference to be made
Betwixt the name of Tailor, and the Trade.
Of all strange weapons, I have least of skill
To manage or to wield a Tailors bill.
I cannot Item it for silk and facing,
For cutting, edging, stiffning, and for lacing:
For bumbast, stitching, binding, and for buckram,
For cotton, baies, for canuas and for lockram.
All these I know, but know not how to use them,
Let trading Tailors therefore still abuse them.
My skil's as good to write, to sweat, or row,
As any Tailors is to steal or sow.
In end, my pulsiue brain no Art affoords,
To mint, or stamp, or forge new coined words.
But all my tongue can speak, or pen can write
Was spoke and writ before I could endite.
Yet let me be of my best hopes bereft,
If what I ever writ I got by thest:
Or by base symony, or bribes, or gifts
Or begd, or borrowd it by sharking shifts.
I know I never any thing have done,
But what may from a weak invention run.
Give me the man whose wit will undertake
A substance of a shadow for to make:
Of nothing something, (with Arts great aid)
With Nature only all his Muse arraide.
That solid matter from his brain can squees,
Whilst some Iame Artists wits are drawn to the leeze.
By teaching Parrots prate and prattle can,
And taught an Ape will imitate a man:
And Banks his horse showed tricks, taught with much labor
So did the hare that played upon the tabor.
Shall man, I pray, so witless be besotted?
Shall men (like beasts) no wisdom be allotted,
(Without great study) with instinct of Nature,
Why then were man the worst and basest creature?
But men are made the other creatures Kings,
Because superior wisdom from them springs.
And therefore Momus unto thee again
That do suspect the issue of my brain
Are but my bastards, now my Muse does fly,
And in thy throat gives thy suspect the lie.
And to the trial dares thee when thou dare
Accounting thee a coward if thou spar'st.
I have a little wit, and brain, and spleen,
And gall, and memory, and mirth and teene,
And passions, and affections of the mind,
As other Mortals use to be enclinde.
And having all this, wherefore should men doubt
My wit should be so Cripled with the Gout,
That it must have assistance to compile,
Like a lame dog, that is limping ore a style.
No, no, thou Zoylus, thou detracting else,
Though thou art insufficient in thy self:
And have thy wit and studies in reuersion,
Cast not on me that scandalous aspersion.
I hate such belladmongring riming slaves,
Such iygging rascals, such audacious knaves.
The bane of learning, the abuse of Arts,
The scumme of Naturs worst defective parts:
The scorn of scholars, poison of rewards,
Regardlesse vassalles of true worths regard,
The shame of time the canker of deserts,
The dearth of liberal and heroicke hearts.
That like so many bandogs snatle and snatch,
And all is their own they can from others ca^th.
That lick the scraps of Scholars wits (like dogs)
(A Proverb old) draffs good enough for hogs.
Purloining, line by line, and piece by piece,
And from each place they read, will filch a fleece.
Me thinks my Muse should peecemeale tear these roages
More base and vile then tattered Irish broages.
Clawkissing raskals, flattering Parasites,
Sworn vices vassalles, virtues opposites.
It Is you dambde curres have murderd liberal minds,
And made best Poets worse esteemed then hindes.
But wherefore do I take a Scholars part,
That have no grounds or Axioms of Art:
That am in Poesy an artlesse creature,
That have no learning but the book of Nature:
No Academicall Poetike strains,
But homespunne medley of my mottley brains.
The reason I a Scholars wants bewail,
And why against base litter'd whelps I rail,
Is this, that they long time should time bestow
In painful study, secret Arts to know,
And after live in want, contempt and scorn,
By every dunghill peasant ouerborne.
Abused, rejected, doggedly disgraced,
Despised ragged, lousy, and out faced:
Whilst Bagpipe-poets stuf with others wind,
Are graced for wit, they have from them purloinde.
Now in mine own defense once more I Will say,
Their too rash judgments to much runs astray,
That, cause my name is Tailor I do theeue it,
I hope their wisdoms will no more believe it.
Nor let my want of learning be the cause,
I should be bitten with black enuies jaws:
For whosoere by nature is not a Poet
By rules of Art he never well can show it.
Ther'is many a wealthy heir long time at School,
Does spend much study, and comes home a fool.
A Poet needs must be a Poet borne,
Or else his Art procures his greater scorn.
For why? if Art alone made men excel,
Me thinks Tom Coriat should write exlent well:
But he was borne be like in some cross year,
When learning was good cheap, but wit was dear.
Then to conclude, as I before began,
Though naught by Schollership or Art I can
Yet (if my stock by nature were more bare)
I scorn to utter stolen or borrowed ware:
And therefore Reader now I tell thee plain,
If thou incredilous do still remain.
If yea or nay these reasons do persuade thee,
I leave thee and thy faith to him that made thee.
To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
Anagramma. James Stuart MUSES TARRY AY.
GReat Sovereign as thy sacred Royal breast
Is by the Muses whole and sole possessed:
So do I know, Rich, precious, peerless Iem,
In witting unto thee, I write to them.
The Muses tarry at thy name, why so?
Because they have no further for to go.
To the high and mighty Prince, Charles Stuart.
Anagramma Calls true hearts.
Brave Prince, thy Name, thy fame, thy self and all,
With love and service, all true hearts does call:
So Roially indude with Princely parts,
Thy Real virtues always, calls true heart,
To Anna Queen of Great Britain.
THese backward, and these forward lines I send
To your right Royal, high Maiesticke hand:
And like the guilty prisoner I attend
Your censure, wherein bliss or bale does stand.
If I condemned be, I cannot grudge,
For never Poet had a iuster Judge.
These lines are to be read, the same backward as they are forward.
Deer Maddam Reed
Deem if I meed.
Loves laborinth, with the description of the seven Plannets.
I Trauel'd through a wilderness of late,
A shadie, dark unhaunted desert grove:
Whereas a wretch explained his piteous state,
Whose mones the Tigers unto Ruthe would move:
Yet though he was a man cast down by Fate:
Full manly with his miseries he strove,
And dared false Fortune, to her utmost worst,
And er'e he meant to bend, would bravely burst.
Yet swelling grief, so much over charged his heart,
In scalding sighs, he needs must vent his woe,
Where groans, and tears, and sighs all bear a part:
As partners in their masters ouerthroe:
Yet spite of grief, he laughed to scorn his smart,
And midst his deapth of care, demeaned him so,
As if sweet concord, bore the greatest sway,
And snarling discord was enforced t'obay.
Thou Saint (quoth he) I whilome did adore,
Think not thy youthful feature still can last,
In winters age, thou shall in vain deplore
That thou on me such coy disdain did cast:
Then, then remember old said sawes of yore:
Time was, Time is, but then thy Time is past.
And in the end, thy bitter torments be,
Because that causeless, thou torment^^^^^ me.
Oh you immortal, high Imperious powers,
Have you in your resistlesse ^^^^^es decreed
To blast with spite and scorn my pleasant hou'res:
To starve my hopes, and my despair to feed,
Once more let me attain those sunshine showers:
Whereby my withered joys, again may breed.
If Gods no comfort to my cares apply,
My comfort is, I know the way to die.
With wits destracted here I make my will,
I do bequeath to Saturn, all my sadness,
When Mellancholy first my heart did fill
My senses turn from soberness to madness:
Since Saturn, thou wast Author of my ill,
To give me grief, and take away my gladness.
Malignant Plannet, what thou gave to me
I give again, as good a gift to thee.
I do surrender back to thundering Jove,
All state, which erst my glory did adorn:
My frothy pomp, and my ambitious love:
To thee false Jupiter I back return,
All Iouiall thoghts that first my heart did move,
In thy Maiestick brain was bred and borne:
Which by thy inspiration, caused my wrack,
And therefore unto thee, I give it back.
To Mars I give my rough robustious rage,
My anger, fury, and my scarlet wrath:
Man-slaughtring murder is thy only page,
Which to thy bloody guidance I bequeath.
Thy servants all, from death should have their wage,
For they are executioners for death,
Great Mars, all fury, wrath, and rage of mine
I freely offer to thy Goarye shrine.
All seeing Sol, thy bright reflecting eye
Did first with Poets Art inspire my brains:
It Is thou that me so much did dignifie,
To rap my soul with sweet Poetike strains,
And unto thee again before I die
I give again, a Poets gainelesse gains.
Though wit and art are blessings most divine
Yet here, their iemmes, amongst a heard of swine.
To thee false goddess, loves adultrous Queen
My most inconstant thoughts I do surrender:
For thou alone, alone have ever been
True lovers bane, yet seem loves defender,
And were thy bastard blind, as fools do ween:
So right he had not split my heart so tender.
Fond Vulcans bride, thou turnest my joy to pain
Which unto thee I render back again.
To Mercury, I give my sharking shifts,
My two fold false equiuocating tricks:
All cunning sleights, and close deceiving drifts:
Which to decitfull wrong my humor pricks:
All my Buzeaka's, my Decoyes, and lifts:
No birdlime henceforth to my fingers sticks.
My thoughts, my words, my actions, that are bad
To thee I give, for them from thee I had.
And last, and low'st of all these Plannets seven
My wau'ring thoughts, I give to Luna' es guiding:
My senseless brains, of wit and sense bereauen
My steadfast change, and my most certain sliding.
All various alterations under heaven
All that is mine, ore moving, or abiding,
My woes, my joys, my mourning, and my mirth
I give to thee, from whence they had their birth.
Thus he against the higher powers contends
And threats, and bans, and beats his care crazd breast,
The birds harmonious music to him lends
Which adds no rest, unto his restless rest:
Yea every thing in loving sort attends:
All senceable, and senseless do their best.
With helpless helps do help to moan his moan
And her he loves, Remains unkind alone.
At last he rose from out the place he lay,
And frantikely ran woodlie through the wood:
The scratching brambles, in his wailes way
Entreats him stay, but in a harebraind mood
He fled, till weary he at last did stay,
To rest him, where a ragged rock there stood,
With resolution to despair and die
Whilst Echo to his mones, did thus reply.
Echo.
May humane mischiefs be compared with mine? mine.
Thine babbling Echo, would thy tongue told true: rue.
I rue that I alone must weep and pine pine.
I pine for her, from whom my cares ensue. sue.
I sue, I serve a marble hearted fair air.
And air is all the fruit of fruitless love: love.
Lou's hope is past, then welcome black despair despair.
Shall there despair my causeless curse remove move.
Oh whither shall I move, to joy or pain pain.
Must pain be my reward for pain for aye aye.
Aye must my torment feed her scornful vein vain.
To ease my grief, will she say yea or nay, nay.
Nay, then from love and all his laws I fly fly.
I fly, I search, I seek the way to die. die.
Thus brabling against all things he hears or sees
Impatient as his froward fortunes wrongs.
No sensu'all object with his sense agrees.
All pleasures his displeasure more prolongs:
At length he carues upon the thick barked trees
These under written sad lamenting songs.
And as my weak invention understood
His farewell thus, was grau'd upon the wood.
Sonnet.
LIke a decrepit wretch, deformed and lame
My verse approaches to my dearest Dame
Whose dire disdain, makes my laments her game,
Whose scornful eyes adds fuel to my flame.
But whether she, or I, are most too blame
I for attempting to exalt her fame
With fruitless Sonnets; which my wit did frame:
Or she whose peircing looks my heart ore' came.
Her feature can both men and monsters tame
The gods, and fiends, adore and dread her name,
Whose matchless form does Citherea shame,
Whose cruel heart remains still the same.
And in a word, I strive against the stream
My state' is to low, and hers is too supreme.
Then since so scornful is her high disdain.
Since all my love is but bestowed in vain,
Curb fancy then, with true discretions Reine,
Let reason cure my tor-tormenting pain.
Suppose I should at last, my suit attain,
And then sit down and count my losing gain:
My harvest would be tares in sheed of grain.
Then i will no longer vex my vexed brain
To seek her love, who joys when I complain:
No longer I, loves vassell will remain,
I Will be no more of Cupids witless train,
Whose partial blindness has so many slain.
Proud Dame, whose breast my love did erst refrain
Despite loves laws I Will be no more thy swain.
Thus like a man, whose answer (...) ^erest him,
I found him mad with love, and so I left him.
Plutoes Proclamation concerning his Infernal pleasure for the Propagation of
Tobacco
TRue News and strange my Muse intends to write,
From horrid concaues of eternal night:
Whereas a damned Parliment of Devils,
Enacted laws to fill the world with evils.
Black Pluto sundry proclamations sends
Through Barathrum, and summons all the fiends,
To know how they on earth had spent their times,
And how they had beclog'd the world with crimes.
First spoke an ancient Devil ycleaped Pride,
Who said he wandered had, both far and wide,
Dispersing his Ambitious poisnous bane,
As far as Luna does both wax or wane.
Next summond was, a rakehell furgound curre,
Called Avarice, (whose rotten haulking murre)
Was like to choke him ere he could declare
How he had souls possessed with moneys care.
That so they fill their Coffers to the brim,
All Is one, let sweet salvation sink or swim.
The third that to the Parliament came in
Was murder, all inroab'de in scarlet sin,
Who told great Limboes monarch he had done
Such deeds, as thousand souls to hell has won.
The fourth that entered to this damned Jury,
Was sweet sin Leachery, a smugfac'd fury:
Said that the world should his great pains approve,
Where universal lust is counted love.
The fifth was an ilshap'd decrepit Crone
Called Envy, all consumed to skin and bone:
And she declared what labor he had spent
To Honors, and to Virtues detriment.
Then sixth, did Burst-gut Gluttony appear,
Whose sole delight is all in belly cheer:
Who told how he men's greedy minds did serve
To cram their bodies, whilst their souls did sterue.
The seventh was Sloth, an ugly loathsome wretch,
Who being called, did gape, and yawne, and stretch:
I have (quoth he) done as your highness wil'd,
I all the world with Idleness have filled,
In lazy Creatures members I do lurk,
That thousands will be hanged, before the'ile work.
Then Pluto said, these ills, you have done well,
In propagation of our kingdom, Hell:
But yet there is one thing which I will effect,
Which too long has been buried with neglect;
And this it is, in Rich America,
In India, and black Barbaria.
Whereas the peoples superstion show
Thei're mine, because no other God they know,
In those misguided lands I caus'de to breed
A foul contagious, stinking Manbane weed:
Which they (poor fools) with diligence do gather
To sacrifice to me that am their Father:
Where every one a Furies shape assumes,
Befog'd and clouded with my hel-hatch'd fumes.
But these black Nations that adore my name,
I Will leave in pleasure: and my mischiefs frame
Against those who by the name of Christians go,
Whose Author was my final overthrow.
And therefore straight diuulge our great commands,
That presently throughout all Christian lands,
Tobacco be dispersed, that they may be
As Moors and Pagans are, all like to me.
That from the Palace to the paltry nooke,
Like hell in Imitation all may look.
In vice let Christians, pass both Jews and Turks,
And let them outpasse Christians in good works.
Let every Cobbler with his durty fist,
Take pride to be a black Tobaconist:
Let Idiot Coxcombes, sweat it is ex'lent gear,
And with a whiffe their reputations rear.
Let every Idle adle-pated gull
With stinking sweet Tobacco stuff his skull.
Let Don fantastic smoke his vastie gorge.
Let rich and poor, let honest men and knaves,
Be smoked and stunke unto their timelesse graves.
Thus is our last irreuocable will,
Which though it dam not man, I know twill kill.
And therefore strait, to every Christian Nation
Diuulge, and publish, this our Proclamation.
A Proclamation or approbation, from the King of execration, to every Nation,
for Tobacoes propagation.
WHereas we have been credibly Informed (by our true and never failing
Intelligencers, as the souls of Usurers, Broakers, Knights of the Post,
Panders, Baudes, and such like, our well-beloved sons and daughters, by
graceless adoption) that the Herb, ( alias weed) ycleaped Tobaco, (alias)
Trinidado, alias, Petun, alias, Necocianu^, (a long time has been in
continual use and motion, amongst the Sunburnt, tanskind Indians, Barbarians
and the rest of our black guard inhabiting in America; which has been greatly
to our contentment to see our execrable servants on the earth, to come so near
our infernal Tartarian sulphorous contagious stink, with their terestriall
imitations: we therefore with the full consent of our three Estates, namely
our Lords spiritual of our own synagogue, as twelve Turkish Muftyes 66. Popes
and sundry other Cardinals etc. Prelates our four trusty friends. Besides our
Temporal Lords, as Heliogabalus, Nero, Sardanapalus, with many more, and our
Comminalty or vassals, whereof the chief, we hold to be Guido Faux, Francis
Rauillae, and all such as were Naturalized into the line of Judas or
Achitophell. We with these estates before said do (by the Authority of this
present Parliament) straightly charge and command that all devils, demydeuills,
feinds, furies, hagges, witches, ghosts, goblins, spirits, elues, fayries, or
any other subject or subjects, to our infernal monarchy, by what name or title
soever they be called, that they and every of them do forthwith upon the
sight hereof, dispearse themselves amongst the Christians (the utter enemies of
our mighty Monarchy) and there by inspirations of witchcrafts, spells,
exorcismes, coniurations, incantations, or any other of our Magical devises,
do their best endeavors to possess them with the love of Tobaco, make old men
doat over it, and young men admire it, make the rich smoke away their wealth
in it, make the laborer in one hour in the Eauening puff away his whole days
work, let the decayed banquerupt be always my trusty factor to divulge it,
be they never so base let them be acounted Noble that use it, and be they
never so noble, let them be thought base that refuse it: let Play Houses,
Drinking-schooles, Tauerns, Alehouses, Bawdy-houses, be continually haunted
with the contaminous vapors of it, nay (if it be possible) bring it into their
Churches, and there choke up their Preachers, (my only and my hateful
enemies.)

And whereas the Indians, and other far remored barbarous Nations were the
first that used it, we do straightly further charge and command, that you and
every of you, do dissuade them from the excessive use of it, and let those
Nations that are our continual opposites in manners and Religion be fully
possessed with an immoderate desire of it like Horsleeches, the more they drink
the more let them thirst, let it be a trade to practice the whiffe, the
snuff, the gulpe, the euaporating or retention. Do this withal expedition as
you expect the fruition, of our fatherly execrable Malleuolent mallediction.

Given at our Palace at Gehenna etc.
THis Proclamation was no sooner done,
But thousand furies to and fro did run,
TO acomplish what their Master Pluto spoke
And fully fill the world with stink and smoke:
And now the man that's o'ne of feeling rest,
By reason of his age whose teeth has left
The vasty Cauerne of his mumping cud,
Must have Tobaco to revive his blood:
The glistring Gallant, or the gallant Gull.
The ieering pander, and the hackney Trull.
The Roysting Rascal, and the swearing Slave,
The Hostler, Tapster, all in general crave
To be a foggy, misty, smoaky jury
Upon this vpstart newfound Indian fury.
Great Captain Graceless, storms, protests, and swears,
Heel have the rascal Poet by the ears,
And beat him, as a man would beat a dog,
That dares once speak against this precious fogge.
It is the jewel that he most respects
It is the gemme of joy his heart affects:
It is the thing his soul does most adore,
To live and love Tobaco, and a whore:
He Will cram his brains with fumes of Indian grass,
And grow as fat with it as an English Ass.
Some say Tobaco will men's days prolong,
To whom I answer, they are in the wrong.
And sure my conscience gives me not the lie
I think twill make men rotten ere they die.
Old Adam lived nine hundred thirty year,
Yet nere drank none, as I could read or hear:
And some men now lives ninety years and past,
Who never drank Tobaco, first nor last.
Then since at first it came, from faithless Moors
(And since it is now more common far then whores)
I see no reason any Christian Nation
Should follow them, in deuilish imitation:
So farewell pipe, and pudding, snuff and smoke
My Muse thinks fit to leave, before she choke:
Certain verses written in the Barbarian tongue, dropped out of a Negroes
pocket, which I thought good to insert, because they tend to the honor of
Tobaco.
VAprosh fogh stinkquash flauorumques fie fominoshte
Spitterspawlimon, loatherso^ hem halkish spewriboshte
Mistrum fog smoakrash, choakerumques olifa trish trash
Dam durticum belchum, contagioshte vomitroshe:
Whifferum, puff gulpum, allisnuff huff fleaminon odish,
Rewmito contaminosh diabollish dungish odorish:
To the Right Hon: Lord. WILLIAM Earl of Pembrooke. WILLIAM HERBET Annagrama.
my Heart will bear.
RIght Noble Lord, whose breast does bear a heart
Which is a Patron unto Arms and Art:
In spite of Envy, still thy fame shines clear
For none but honored thoughts thy heart will bear.
Satyr.
WHen I but think, the days we wander in,
How most part of the world do live by sin:
How finely Satan showed his cunning skill,
That one man gets his goods, from others ill.
Does not the Lawiers live like mighty Lords,
On braules, on iarres, contentions and discords,
When if men (as they should) would but agree,
A Term would scarcely yield a Lawyers fee?
Let usurers brag of conscience what they can,
They live like devils, upon the bane of man:
The racking landlord gets his ill got store,
By railing rents, which make his tennants poor:
Clap shoulder serieants get the devil and all
By begg'ring and by bringing men in thrall.
Like gentlemen, the Iaylors spend their lives
By keeping men in fetters, bonds and gyues:
The vintner and the vict'lar get most gains
From daily drunkards, and distemperd brains:
From whence do Justice Clerks get most they have,
But from the whore, the theife, the bawd, the knave?
In what consists the hangmans greatest hope
But hope of great employment for the rope?
The very blew-coate beadles get their trash,
By whips and rods, and the fine firking lash.
But leaving these, note but how Corporations
From others vices, get their reputations:
The vpstart velvet silken fatten gull,
His own purse empts to fill the Mercers full:
When for his birth, or wit more fit agrees,
A breech of leather, and a coat of freese.
The Tailor is a gentleman transformed
For his inuenting fashions new deformed,
And those that make the Verdingales and bodies,
Get most the have from idle witless nodies.
The Tires, the Periwigs, and the Rebatoes,
Are made t'adorne Ilshap'd Inamoratoes.
Yea all the world is fallen to such a madness,
That each man gets his goods from others badnesse.
The Chirurgian and Physician get their stocks,
From Goutes, from Feauers, Botches, Piles, and Pockes:
With others pain, they most of all are pleased,
And best are eased: when others are diseased.
As Sextons live by dead, and not by quick,
So they live with the sound, but by the sick.
Thus each man lives by other men's amiss,
And one man's meat, another poison is.
To the Right honorable John, Lord Viscount Haddington, John Ramsey
Anagramma I AIM HONERS.
THrice worthy Lord, whose virtues do proclaim,
How Honors noble mark is still thy Aim,
To attain the which thou holdst thy hand so steedy.
That thy deesrts have won the prize already.
To the Honorable Kinght, Sir David Moraye.
Anagramma You are admired.
WIth wisdom and with virtue so inspired,
That spite of Enuies teeth, you are Admired.
To King JAMES.
Anagramma James Stuart Arm at Jesus.
Upon the Powder Treason the fifth of November.
THis day old Demon, and the damned Crew,
Our King and Kingdom in the air had tossed:
But that our God their devilish practice crossed,
And on their treacherous heads the mischief threw.
No Pagan, Tartar, Turk or faithless Jew,
Or hels black Monarch with his hateful host:
Since first amongst them Treason was ingrost,
No plot like that from their invention flew.
But when they thought powderblast, a breath
Should all this Island into totters tear:
The Almighty's mercy freed us from that fear,
And paid the Traitors with infamous death.
For which, let King, and all true Subjects sing
Continual praise unto Heavens gracious King.
To the Noble Gentleman Mr. John Moraye Gentleman of his Majesty's Honorable
Bedchamber.
Anagramma I aim Honor.
INdustrious Loialty does daily tell
Thou Aymest at honor, and thou leuel'st well,
And with thy trusty service shoot'st so right,
That in the end thou sure wilt hit the white.
Twelve Sonnets upon the Suns entering into the 12. Celestial Signs.
The 10. of March, the Sun enters into Aries, or the sign of the Ram March
10. Aries.
DIurnall Titans all reviving Carre,
Through all the heaucus his progress now he takes:
And now his glistering Rays he does vnbarre,
And what his absence mard, his presence makes:
Now he begins dame Tellus face to parch,
With blustering Boreas and with Eurus breath,
Thick clouds of dust in March, through air does march
And Plants dead seeming Re-reuiues from death.
Now at the heauy-headed horned Ram,
AEous, AEthon, Phlegon, and Pyrois,
On sweet Ambrosya sweetly feed and cram,
And drinking Nectars gods carowsing juice,
Thus yearly, one and thirty days at least,
In Aries, Titan daines to be a guest.
To the Noble Gentleman and my approved good friend Sr. James Moray Knight.
James Muraye
Anagramma I am Aye Sure.
THe worst of fortune thou can well endure,
Thy Anagram includes, thu Aye art sure.
The 11. of April he comes into Taurus, or the Sign of the Bull. Taurus.
HIperion Now Is removed unto the Bull,
And seems all hid in Mists and watery bowres:
Till woolsacke seeming clouds are bursting full,
And then he glides the Air with golden showers.
He shines, he hides, he smiles and then he lowers,
Now glorious glowing, and straight darkened dim:
He Is now obscured and now his beams out-powres,
As skies are clear, or thicketwixt us and him.
Thus all the April, at bopecpe he plays,
Incircling daily the Rotundious sphere.
And at the Bull he hides his glistring rays,
Till air is purgde of clouds, and skies are clear.
Then he the headstrong Taurus soon forsakes,
And to his Summer progress haste he makes.
To the Right worshipful the Recorder of London, and Serieant to the Kings
Majesty's: Sir HENRY MONTAGVE
Anagramma Governs Many.
AMongst a Million there is hardly Any,
That like your self so well does govern Many.
The 12. of May the Sun enters into Gemini, or the Twins. Gemini, May.
NOw bright faced Sminthus, with fair Flora meets,
Adorning her with Natures best attire:
Trees, plants, herbs, flowers, and odoriferous sweets,
With Birds all chaunting in their fethered quire.
Now country Tom and Tyb have their desire,
And roll and tumble freely on the grass,
The Milke-maide gets a green gown for her hire,
And all in sport the time away do pass.
The bird, the beast, the lusty Iad, the less
Do sing, do friske, do clip, do coll, do kiss:
Not thinking how the time must be, or was,
But making pleasant vfe of time as it is.
Till Sminthus leaves his lodging at the twins,
And to a hotter race his course begins.
To my approved good friend Mr. Robert Branthwayte.
Anagramma. You Bear a heart true bent.
LEt fortune smile or frown you are content,
At all Assaies you bear a heart true bent.
The 12. of June the Sun enters into Cancer or the Crabbe. Cancer. June.
OF Fall the Innes where Sol does use to lie,
With crabbed Cancer none may make compare:
It is the highest in the lofty sky,
All other signs to it Inferior are.
When Sol is once ascended and come there,
He scaldes and scorches with his heavenly heat:
Makes fields of grass, and flowery meadows bare,
And though the Idleworke not yet they sweat.
Thus like an all-commanding Lord he swaies,
High mounted in his chief solstician pride:
For when in Cancer he immures his rays,
Unto the height his glories amplifide.
And when he goes from thence, he does begin
By shorter Iournies to attain his Inn.
To my especial friend Master SAMVELL CALVERTA.
Anagramma. Virtue Calmes All.
THe flesh, the world, the devil, and all entice,
Yet still thy honest virtue calmes all vice.
The thirteenth of July the sun enters into Leo, or the Lion. Leo, July.
THe worlds eye daz'ler in his fiery race,
Does at the Lion lodge his untamed steeds:
And now the ripening year begins apace
To show Dame Tellus, procreatiue seeds.
For as from man, man's generation breeds,
So by manuring of our Grandam Earth,
Are brought forth fruits, and flowers, and herbs, and weeds
To shield ungrateful man from pining dearth.
The dogged dog days now with heat does swealt,
And now is the season, of th'vnseasn'd air:
When burning feauers make the patient melt,
Whose heat the Doctors hardly can repair:
For why these currish days are fatal still,
And where they chance to byte, they use to kill.
To the Right worshipful Sir John Swinarton, late Lord Mayor of London. JOHN
SVVIN'ARTONE.
Anagramma. Waits in honnour.
THe man that Nobly serves, with wisdoms skill
And good direction, waits in honor still.
The foureteenth of August the sun enters into Virgo. Or the Virgin. Virgo.
August.
Unhappy Phaetons, splendidious Sire
Left amorous bussing beauteous Glim^ns lips,
And all inspired with Loves celestial fires
His Globe surrounding steeds a maine he whips:
And to the Virgin Virgo down does glide,
Where for she entertained him to his pleasure.
He his Exchequer coffers opens wide,
And fills the world with haruests wished for treasure:
Now country hindes unto their tools betake
The forke, the rake, the sith, the hook, the cart,
And all a general expedition make,
Till Nature be left naked by their art.
At last the Virgin when these things are done,
Till that time twelve mouth leaves her love the sun.
To the worthy Gentleman Master SAMVEL DANIEL.
Anagramma. Jesus Amend all.
HOw ever my poor lines are understood
Yet I am sure thy Anagram is good.
The thirteenth of September the sun enters into Libra, Or the Balance.
Libra. September.
THe Great all-seeing burning eye of day,
In Libraes Balance restless comes to rest,
Where equally his way he seems to way:
And day, and night with equal hours are dressed:
By these just soales, true justice is expressed,
Which does to times and places render right
Where wealth insults not, nor the poor oppressed,
But all is even poyzed, like the day and night.
And now this lamp of light does here alight
Making this Sign, his Equinoctial Inn,
Whilst fruitful trees are ouer-laden quite:
(Too great a gracious guerdon for man's sin)
And as in March he began to do us grace,
So to the Antipodes he now gins show her face.
To the divine Poet and my worthy friend Mr. IOSHVAH SYLLVESTER.
Anagramma. Thuss he serus loyaly.
THUs he serves loialy, in place of trust,
And therefore well deserves a master just.
The foureteenth of October the sun enters into Scorpio. Scorpio. October.
ILlustrious Phoebus now declines amain,
His golden head within the Scorpion dwells,
Now boystrous blasts of wind, and showers of rain
Of raging winters nigh approach foretells
From trees sharp Autumn, all the leaes expells
For Phoebus now has left his pleasant Innes,
Now Merchants Bacchus blood, both buy and sells
And Michalls Term, laws harvest now begins
Where many losers are, and few that winnes:
For law may well be called contentions whip,
When for a scratch, a cuffe, for points or pins:
Will witless gets his neighbor on the hippe.
Then tone the the other unto law will urge,
And up they come to give their purse a purge.
To the Noble Gentleman, and my much honored friend, Robert Caluert Esquire,
of Mount Caluert in Ireland.
HAd I as many seu'rall mouths as fame,
I could not ever honor thy good Name:
Did Maroe's Muse my weak invention move,
I should want Art to express engaged love.
Yet hope persuades me, as these lines you reed
You Will take my good endeavor for a deed:
Although I know to write I am unfit
In Words, in Muse, in Method, and in Wit.
The eleventh of November, the sun enters into Sagittarius, Or the Archer.
Sagittarius; November.
THus Luna's brother lower does descend,
And at the Archer rests his radient waine,
Now winters bitter blasting storms contend
TO assault our hemispheare, with might and maine.
The fields and trees disrobed all again,
Stark naked stripped of herbs, of flowers, of fruits,
And now the Lord, the Lowne, the Sir, the Swain
Against the freeze, of freeze make winter suites.
Now chirping birds are all turned tonguelesse mutes,
And Sheapheard swains to sheephouse drives their sheep.
Hot controversies now are in disputes
At Westminster, where such a coil they keep;
Where man, does man within the law be toss,
Till some go crosselesse home by woodcocks cross.
To the honorable Gentleman Master William Ramsaye, one his of Majesty's
Bedchamber. WILLIAM RAMSAYE.
Anagramma. I am always merry.
YOur Name does with your Anagram agree,
And Heavens confirm my wish acomplisht be,
That you in Noble Actions never be weary,
But as your Name Includes be Always merry.
The eleventh of December, the sun enters into Capricorn, Or the Goat.
Capricornus. December.
APollo has atain'd his lowest seat,
And now the shortness of his race is such,
That though his Glory for a time be great:
He gives his sister Cynthia twice as much.
Now is the welcomst time of all the year,
Now die the oxen and the fatted hogs,
Now merry Christmas fills the world with cheer,
And chimnies smoke with burning logge, on logs.
He that's a mizer all the year beside
Will revel now, and for no cost will spare,
A pox hang sorrow, let the world go slide:
Lets eat and drink, and cast away all care.
Thus when Apollo's at the horned Goat,
He makes all Christendom with mirth to floate.
To the Noble Gentleman my especial good friends Sir William Moray, Lord of
Aberca^ny. WILLIAM MORAY.
Anagramma. I Amm Royal Will.
LEt all the world to changing be enclinde,
Yet you will allwaies bear A Royal mind.
The tenth of January the sun enters into Aquarius, Or the sign of the
Waterbearer. Aquarius. January.
THe Glorious Great Extinguisher of Night
Immures his bright translucent golden head,
And from his Radient seem he does alight.
To rest his steeds in cold Aquarius bed.
Now hory frost, has Tellus sat or'espread,
And chilling numnesse whets the shauing air,
All vegitable creatures now seem dead
Like curelesse cures past and repast repair:
Frigidius Ianus twofold frozen face
Turns moist Aquarius into congealed ice:
Though by the fires warm side the pot have place:
Of winters wrath it needs must know the price.
At last days burning torch, again takes horse,
And into wetter weather makes his course.
To the Noble Gentleman Master Robert Hay, one of the Gentlemen of his
Majesty's honorable bedchamber.
RIght worthy Sir, if ought that I have writ
Were worth your reading, twere some sign of wit.
I have a few friends, and amongst the rest
You being one, the best will judge the best.
The ninth of February, the sun enters into Pisces, Or the sign of the two
fishes. Pisces. February.
NOw snow, and rain, and hayle, and slauering fleet,
(The Delphean God has sucked from sea and land.
With exhalations) on the earth they greet:
Powered down by Iris liberal hand,
If foul faced February keep (...) touch.
He makes the toyling Plowmans proverb right;
By night, by day, by little and by much,
It fills the ditch, with either black or white
And as the hard co^^^^^ed butting Ram
At setting forth was Tytans dayntiest dish:
So to conclude his feasting with a mess of fish.
And long in Pisces he does not remain,
But leaves the fish, and falls to flesh again.
To the Honorable Sir Thomas Ridgewaye Knight Barronet, Treasurer at Wars in
Ireland, etc. Thomas Ridgewaye. Anagramma. God Arms thy way. Again, Age is
made worthy.
THough sin and Hell work mortals to betraie,
Yet against their malice still, God Arms thy way.
when life and lands, and all away must fade,
By Noble actions, Age is worthy made.
Certain Sonnets made in the form of AEquiuoques: on the destruction of Troy.
WHen Hellen was for Priams son a mate.
From Greece bereaft, by Paris and his Band:
Which caused the Greeks, the Trojan minds amate,
Some cursed the boy; and other some they band
The strumpet Queen, which brought the burning brand,
That Illion firde, and wracked old Priams Race:
And on their Names long living shame did brand,
(For headstrong lust runs an unbounded Race.)
This beauteous piece, whose features radient blase,
Made Menelaus horne-mad war to wage:
And set all Troy in a combustious blase,
Whose ten years triumphs scarce was worth their wage.
For all their Conquests, and their battring Rams,
Their leaders, most returned, with heads like Rams.
To the noble Gentleman Sir Oliver Saint-Iohn.
Anagramma Hearts Ioyn in love.
THy loyal service to thy King, does prove,
That to thy Country thy Heart Ioyns in love.
WIth raging madness and with fury fell,
Great Diomed, and Ajax left their Tents,
And in the throat of death, to blows they fell,
To make more work for plasters, and for tents.
With blood imbruing all the Phrigian Clime,
Whilst men like Autumn leaves drop dying down:
Where some through blood, and wounds to honor clime
And some their mangled lims bestrowes the down:
Whilst Paris, with his Hellen in his Arms
Embraces her about the wastfull waste:
Saw many a Gallant Knight in burnisht Arms,
Who from their Tents made haste to make more waste:
Who to their Tents did nere return again,
Thus wars makes gain a loss, and loss a gain.
To the noble Gentleman, Sir EDWARD BLAINEYE Knight, Governor of Monnaahan in
the North of Ireland. EDWARD BLAYNEY
Anagramma Live and Abide ever.
THy trusty service has so often been tried,
For which thy fame, live ever and Abide.
HAd Priams Queen in Cradle slain her Son
The lust full Paris (hapless boy) I mean:
Then Illions Towers might still have brau'd the Sun:
His death to save their lives had been the mean.
Unlucky luck, when, Juno, Venus, Pallas
Did crave his censure upon Ida Mount:
Whence sprung the cause that Troy and Priams Palace
Were burnt, which erst the skies did seem to mount.
Had he been drowned, or strangled with a cord,
He had not robbed Oenon of her heart:
Or had he di'de, ere Hellen did accord
With him, to h^^d her husband like a Heart.
But Troy it is thy fate, this knave and Baggage,
Confounds thy state, and fires thy bag, and baggage.
To the worthy Gentleman, Sir HENRY FOLIOT Governor of Balishannon in the
North of Ireland. HENRYE FOLIOTT.
Anagramma. Honor Fit lie.
THy Honor Fitly to thy worth is fit,
It Honors thee, and thou do honor it.
TRoyes fruitful Queen did many Children bare,
So brave, heroike, and so slout a Crew:
Who all in noble actions did accrue,
When age had made their Parents balde and bare,
They made their daintlesse courage to appear,
Amidst the throngs of danger and debate:
Where wars remorselesse stroke killed many a Peer,
Whilst swords, not words, their counsels did debate:
But blood on blood, their fury could not sat,
For fierce Achilles did brave Hector gore:
To guerdon which, the Grecian in his gore
Did wallow, whilst the Trojans laughing sat.
Thus did Achilles bid the world adiewe
For Hectors death, Revenge did claim a due.
To the Right worshipful and worthy Gentleman, Sir Simon Weaston of Litchfield
in the County of Stafford Knight. SIMON WESTON.
Anagramma Mowntes Sion.
MOwnts Sion figures that surmounting place,
Where virtue's Mownt unto the throne of grace.
TEn weary years these bloody broils did last,
Until the Greeks had formed a wooden steed:
Which they on Priam would bestow at last,
(When force preuailes not, falsehood stands in steed.)
False Simon (who so well could forge a lie,
Whose traitrous eyes shead many a treacherous tear)
Knew well that in the horses womb did lie
The wolves that Troy did all in pieces tear.
Polyxena, Achilles dear bought dear
Was hew'de in gobbets on her lovers grave:
King, Queen, and Troy, for Hellen paid too dear,
All felt the Grecian Rage, both young and grave.
To Kings, and Commons, death's alike, all one,
Except AEneas who escaped alone.
To the truly virtuous Lady, MARIE WESTON wife to Sir Simon Weston Knight.
MARIE WESTON.
Anagramma. I Won Me a Rest.
WHere true borne worth's Innated in the breast,
There always goodness winnes Eternal rest.
Certain Sonnets: variously composed upon diverse subjects.
Sonnet. 1. True Nobility.
GReat is the glory of the Noble mind
Where life and death, are equal in respect:
If fates be good or bad, unkind or kind,
Not proud in freedom, nor in thrall deiect;
With courage scorning fortunes worst effect,
And spitting in foul Enuies cankred face.
True honor thus does baser thoughts subject
Esteeming life a slave, that serves disgrace.
Foul abject thoughts, become the mind that is base,
That deemes there is no better life then this,
Or after death does fear a worser place,
Where guilt is paid the guerdon of Amiss.
But let swollen envy swell until she burst,
The Noble mind defies her to her worst.
To the Noble Gentleman, Sir ROBERT RIDGEVVAY Knight, son and Heir to Sir
Thomas Ridgeway Knight Barronet. ROBERT RIDGEVVAYE.
Anagramma. I Regard, obey virtue.
THough Thousands vainly pass their time away,
Time I Regard, and Virtue I obey.
LO thus the burden of Adultrous guilt,
I showring vengeance, Troy and Trojans saw:
No Age, no sex, no beauty, Gold or guilt
Withstood, foretold Cassandraes saced saw.
She often said, false Hellens beauties blast
Should be the cause the mighty Grecian pow're,
Their names, and fames, with infamy should blast,
And how the Gods on them would vengeance pow're.
But poor Cassandra, prophesied in vain,
She clamorous cries, (as it were) to senseless Rocks.
The youths of Troy, in merry scornful vein.
Securely slept, whilst lust the cradle rocks.
Till bloody burning Indignation came,
And all their mirth with mourning overcame.
To the worthy and virtuous Lady, the Lady Elizabeth Ridgeway, wife to Sir
Rob. Ridgewaye. ELIZABETH RIDGEVVAYE.
Anagramma. I bide, Agree with Zeal.
THe Subjects of the Almighties Commonweal,
They all in one Abide, Agree with zeal.
Sonnet. 2. Envy and Honor.
COuld Envy die, if Honor were deceast,
She could not live, for Honor's Enuies food:
She lives by sucking of the Noble blood,
And scales the lofty top of Fames high Creast.
Base thoughts compacted in the Abject breast,
The Meager Monster does nor harm, nor good:
But like the wane, or wax, of ebb or flood,
She shunnes as what her gorge does most detest;
Where heaven bred honor in the Noble mind,
From out the Cauerns of the breast proceeds:
There helborne Envy shows her hellish kind,
And Vulturlike upon their actions feeds,
But heeres the ode, that Honors tree shall groe,
When Enuies rotten stumpe shall burn in woe.
To the noble Knight, Sir Francis Willoughby, son and heir to Sir Perciuall
Willoughby, Knight of Wollerton in the County of Nottinghame. FRANCIS
WILLOVGHBYE.
Anagramma. Lou Will Banishe Grief.
SAd sorrow may assault men, like a thief,
But spite of Envy (love will Banish Grief.)
Sonnet. 3. Beauties luster.
DEw drinking Phoebus hid his golden head,
Balm-breathing Zepherus lay close immured:
The silly Lambs and Kyds, lay all as dead
Skies, earth and seas, all solace had abiur'd.
Poor men, and beasts, to toylesome taskes inured
In drooping manner spent the drowsy day:
All but the Owl, whose safety night assured,
She gladly cuts the air with whooting lay.
When lo the blossom of my blooming May
From out her Cooche maiestickly does rise:
Then Tytan does his radient beams display.
And clouds are vanished from the vaulty skies.
Sweet Zephirs gales reuiueth beasts and men,
Madg Howlet scuds unto her neast again.
To the Virtuous Lady, and wife to Sir Francis Willoughby Knight. CASSANDRAE
WILLOVGHBYE.
Anagramma. Wish Grace Above All ends.
THe power of Heaven to me such favor sends
That I wish Grace Above all other ends.
Sonnet. 4. Hope and Despair.
Domestic broils my tortured heart inuades
Twixt wau'ring Hope, and desperate black Despair:
To prosecute my suit the one persuades,
The other frustrates all my hopes with cares
Hope sets me on, infer's she is fairest fair,
How deire disdain does dwell in fowlest Cells,
And fell despair, calls beauty Enuies heir:
Which torments me more then ten thousand hels.
Lo thus my former hope, despair expels
Midst which extremes what is best for me to do:
In open arms, despair against me rebels,
Hope traytor-like gives free consent thereto.
And till these traitors twain consume my city
I restless rest, to rest upon her pity.
To the Right worshipful Master George Caluert Esquire, one of the Clerks of
his Majesty's privy Connsell. GEORG CALVERT.
Anagramma. Grace got rule.
Wit, Wisdom, Learning, Virtue, all agree
That in thy breast their Mansiion house shall be.
Sonnet. 5. Three blind Commanders.
Blind fortune, sightlesse love, and eyelesse death
Like Great Triumue'rs swayes this earthly room,
Man's actions, affections, and very breath:
Are in subjection to their fatal doom.
There Is nothing past, or present, or to come
That in their purblinde power is not comprizd,
From crown, to cart, from cradle to the toome
All are by them defamde, or eternizde:
Why should we then esteem this doting life
(That's in the guideance of such blindfold rule)
Whose chiefest peace, is a continual strife
Whose gaudy pompes the pack, and man the Mule,
Which lives long day, he bears, as he is able,
Til deaths black night, does make the grave his stable?
To the worthy Gentleman Captain Arthur Basset in Ireland. ARTHVR BASSET.
Anagramma. Be as true hearts.
True virtue mixed with valor, Arms with Arts
And all Innate in thee, be as true hearts.
Sonnet. 6. Another of the praise of music.
It Was Music fetched Euridice from hell,
And raped grim Pluto with harmonious strains:
Renowned Orpheus did with Music quell
The fiends, and ease the tortured of their pains.
The Dolphin did account it wondrous gains
To hear Arion play as he did ride:
Gods, feinds, fish, fowls, and sheapherds on the plains
Melodious Music still has magnifide:
And ancient records plainly do decide,
How brave Orlando Palatine of France,
When he was raging mad for Meadors bride
Sweet Music cured his crazed wits mischance.
For Musicks only fit for Heavens high quire,
Which though men cannot praise enough, admire.
To the worshipful Master Francis Ansleye of Dublinne in Ireland Esquire.
FRANCIS ANSLEYE.
Anagramma. Life's Cares Vaynn.
HE that to Life Eternal will Attain
Must ever here esteem, this, Life's Cares Vainn.
Sonnet. 7. The Map of Misery.
LIke to the stone that's cast in deepest wave,
That rests not till the bottom it has sound,
So I (a wretch) inthrald in sorrows cave,
With woe and desperations fetters bound:
The captive slave imprisoned under ground
Doom'b, there by fates to expire his woeful days:
With care orewhelm'd, with grief and sorrow drowned,
Makes mournful monings, and lamenting lays,
Accusing, and accursing fortunes plays,
Whose withered Autumn leauelesse leaves his tree,
And banning death for his to long delays,
Remains the only poor despised he.
If such a one as this, the world confine,
His mischiefs are a sport, compard with mine.
To the Right worshipful and worthy Gentleman Master Henry Cooley of Carbye in
the County of Kiluare, in Ireland.
RIght worthy Sir, I pray the powers above,
To make thy fortunes equal to my love.
To the Noble and virtuous Lady, the Lady Cecillia Ridgeway, wife to the
honorable Knight Sir Thomas Ridgeway Knight Barronet.
MOre happy, and more worthy scarce is any
Wife to a worthy mother unto many:
Whose actions shows, they from a stock did spring,
Which taught them serve their heaven and earthly King.
Sonnet. 8. In praise of music.
NO Poet crowned with everliving bays
(Though Art like floods should from his knowledge flow)
He could not write enough in Musicks praise:
To which both man and Angels love do owe
If my bare knowledge ten times more did know,
And had ingrost all art from Pernas hill:
If all the Muses should their skils bestow
On me to amplify my barren skill:
I might attempt in show of my good will,
In Musicks praise some idle lines to write:
But wanting judgment and my accent ill,
I still should be unworthy to indite.
And run my wit on ground, like ship on shealfe
For Musicks praise consists in it self.
To the worthy Gentleman, and my very good friend, Master John Blencowe, of
Greies Inn. Anagramma. Noble in each woe.
LEt fortune when she dares but prove thy foe,
In spite of fate, the art Noble in each woe.
A Cataplasmicall Satyr, composed and compacted of sundry simples, as salt,
vinegar, wormwood, and a little gall, very profitable to cure the imposlumes
of vice.
A Savage rough haird Satyr, needs no guide,
Where Is no way, from the way he cannot slide:
Then have amongst you, through the brakes and bries,
From those who to the Ceders top aspires
Unto the lowest shrub, or branch of broom,
That has his breeding from earths teeming woombe.
And now I talk of broom, of shrubs and ceadars
Me thinks a world of trees are now my leaders:
To prosecute this travel of my pen,
And make comparison twixt trees and men,
The Ceadars, and the high cloud kissing Pynes,
Fecundious olives, and the crooked Vynes:
The Elm, the Ash, the Oak, the Masty Beeche,
The Pear, the Aple, and the rug gownd Peache:
And many more, for it would tedious be
To name each fruitful and unfruitful tree.
But to proceed, to show how men, and trees
In birth, in breed, in life, and death agrees:
In their beginnings they have all one birth,
Both have their natural being from the earth,
And heavens high hand, (where he does please to bless
Makes trees, or men, or fruitful, or fruitless.
In sundry uses trees do serve man's turn
To build, to adorn, to feed, or else to burn.
Thus is man's state in all degrees like theirs,
Some are got up to the top of honors stayres,
Securely sleeping on opinions pillow,
Yet as unfruitful, as the fruitless willow.
And fill up rooms, (like worthless trees in woods)
Whose goodness all consists in ill got goods:
He like the Cedar makes a goodly show,
But no good fruit will from his greatness grow
Until he die, and from his goods depart,
And then gives all away, despite his heart.
Then must his friends, with mourning cloth be clad
With insides merry, and with outsides sad:
What though by daily grinding of the poor
By bribry and extortion got his store:
Yet at his death he gowns some four score men,
And it is no doubt he was a good man then?
Though in his life he thousands has undone
To make wealth to his cursed coffers run:
If at his burial groats a piece be given,
I Will warrant you his souls in hell, or heaven:
And for this doale perhaps the beggars strives
That in the throng seventeen do lose their lives:
Let no man tax me here with writing lies
For what is writ I saw with mine own eyes.
Thus men like barren trees are feld and lopt,
And in the fire to burn are quickly popt:
Some man perhaps whilst he on earth does live,
Part of his vain superfluous wealth will give:
To build of Almshouses some twelve or ten,
Or more or less, to harbor aged men:
Yet this may nothing be to that proportion,
Of wealth which he has gotten by extortion.
What is it for man (his greedy mind to serve)
To be the cause that thousands die and sterue:
And in the end, like a vain glorious thief,
Will give some ten or twelve a poor relief?
Like robbers on the way, that take a purse,
And give the poor a mite to escape Gods curse.
But know this thou, whose goods are badly gotten,
When thou art in thy grave consumed and rotten,
Thine heir (perhaps) will feast with his sweet punke,
And Dice, and Drabe, and every day be drunk,
Carowsing Indian Trinidado smoke,
Whilst thou with Sulphurous flames art like to choke.
Se, se yond gallant in the Cloke-bagge breech,
He Is nothing but a trunk crammed full of speech:
He Will swear as if against heaven he wars would wage,
And meant to pluck down Phoebus in his rage:
When let a man but try him, he is all oaths,
And odious lies, wrapped in unpaid for clothes.
And this Lad is a Roaring boy forsooth.
An exlent morsel for the hangmans tooth.
He carelessly consumes his golden pelf,
In getting which his Father damnde himself.
Whose soul, (perhaps) in quenchlesse fire does broile,
Whilst on the earth his son keeps level coile.
It Is strange to Church what numbers daily flock
To drink the spring of the eternal Rock:
The great soul saving, Satan slaying word,
Against sin, death, hell, the alconquering sacred sword,
Where high Iehouahs Trumpeters sound forth
From East to West, from South unto the North:
(For through all lands their Embasseyes are borne,
And never does again in vain return:)
Which either is of life to life the savor,
Or death to death, exilde from Gods sweet favor:
Which bliss or bane their's many daily hears,
Who leave their hearts at home, and bring their ears,
And least their reckelesse heads, the word should smother,
As soon as't enters the one, it is out at the other.
For let a Preacher preach until he sweats,
Denouncing heavens great wrath in thundering threats
Against sin and sinners: Against high hearted pride,
Against murder which has often for vengeance cride,
Or envy, leachery, Avarice, or swearing,
Or any other vice they will give the hearing,
And say the Preacher wondrous pains did take,
And did a very learned Sermon make:
But what good Reformation hence proceeds,
Are Mountain words, and little Mole hill deeds.
Tell Vsrers they are banished from Gods hill,
Yet they will continue in extortion still.
Tell the proud Courtier, that he is but earth,
He Will over the poor insult and brag of birth.
Expostulate the great Almighties Ire,
And tell the murdrer, hell shall be his hire,
Yet e're hele pocket up the least disgrace,
His enemies guts shall be his Rapiers case.
Tell daily drunkards hell shall be their lot,
Thei'le knock and call to have the the other pot.
Tell Panders, Bawdes, knaves, and adulteous whores
How they in hell must pay their cursed scores.
Tell Mizer chuffes who charity do banish,
How they from heaven, eternally must vanish.
Tell all in general of their lives amiss,
And tell them that hels bottomless Abyss
Must be their portions if they not repent,
Till true repentance heavens just wrath prevent.
Yet when the Preacher all he can has told,
Souls unto sin are daily bought and sold.
The Mizer with his leachery of Chinke,
On earth will give his dropsy soul to drink,
And though the word beat on his Anuile heart,
From Usury and Extortion he will not part,
The piebald Gallant to the Church will come
To hear his souls saluations total sum.
Yet his high pride is in such hauty dotage,
Forgets he is sprung from a poor country Cotage.
The murdrer hears how reprobated Caine
Was cursed of God, that had his brother slain,
Yet when he is from the Church, forgets it all,
And stabs a man for taking of the wall.
Should I through all men's seu'rall actions run,
I know my business never would be done.
The rich man hates the poor man, and the poor
Does euuie against the rich man for his store.
Thus is the blessed souls everliving bread,
In bounteous measure all the earth or'espread:
Some on the high way fall and takes no root,
But is of no esteem trod under foot:
Some falls on stones, and some alights on thorns,
Devoured with fowls, or choked with scoffs or scorns.
Some little portion falls in fruitful ground,
Th'encrease of which is to be seldom found.
For let men weigh their good deeds with their bad,
For thousand ils, one good will scarce be had.
And yet no doubt but God in store does keep
His near dear children, his best flock of sheep.
For though unto the world they are not known,
Yet it is sufficient God does know his own.
For though Elias thought himself was all
That had not offered sacrifice to Ball:
Jehovah answered him, seven thousand more,
In Israel, did this Idol not Adore.
But who so much in this vile life are hated,
As those which to salvation are created.
For let a man resraine to drabe or dice,
Out fie upon him then, he is too precise.
Let him forbear to lie, to swear, or banne,
O hang him rascal, he is a Puritan.
And sure I think the Devil by that false name
Has added thousands souls unto his flame.
Some man ere he will be called a Puritan
Will turn a damned Machiauilian,
A Libertine, Papist, or else what not,
To keep his name from so impure a blot.
I speak not this regarding their estate,
Who from our Church themselves do separate,
For good indifferent Ceremonius rites,
And against our Churches government backbites.
Nor do I praise the loving Sisters love,
Who often makes the Brethren's spirits move,
And if twere lawful (they would gladly kno)
To dress their meat the Sabbath day or no.
And wherefore now the Churchmen of these days,
Ride too and fro, to preach so many ways,
When Christ to his Apostles gave in charge
That they should seek and teach all nations large,
The way, that in his Laws they might abide,
Christ bade them go, he bade them not to ride.
These Idle questionists, these scismatickes,
I hold no better then rank heretics:
But this I think not well, when honest hearts
Shall have this impure name without deserts.
How then can my comparing be gainstood,
For men are like to trees, some bad, some good.
But tarry Satyr, thou too fast do trot,
There is one thing more I had almost forgot,
And this is it, of Alehouses, and Innes,
Wine Merchants, Vintners, Brewers, who much winnes
By others losing, I say more or less
Who sail of hufcap lick or do profess,
Should never be to any office called.
Or in no place of Justice be instalde:
The reason is they gain by men's excess
Of deuilish quafting and damb'd drunkenness.
For why, should men be moderate in their drink.
Much Beer, and bottle Ale should stand and stink:
And Mounseir Claret, and sweet Signeor Sack
Would sour and turn unto the Merchants wrack?
The Vintners then within their sellers deep
Such coniuring at midnight would not keep.
This swinish sin has man of sense bereauen,
To bandy balls of blasphemy against heaven.
It is the way, the door, the porch, the gate,
All other vices enter in thereat.
A drunken man in rage will stab his brother,
He Will Cuckold his own father, whore his mother,
Revile and curse, swear, and speak dangerous treason,
And when he is sober, hangs for it by the weason.
How then should men a reformation give,
To mend those crimes, that by those Crimes do live.
The Patriarch Noah first did plant the Vine,
And first did feel the powerful force of wine.
And righteous Lot, by wine deprived of wit,
Foul Incest with his daughter did commit.
And Holophernes drunken lay in bed
Whilst strong faith'd, weak armed Judith cut of's head.
Great Alexander out his Fauchion drew
And being drunk, his best friend Clitus slew.
If every hair upon the heads of men
Were quils, and every quill were made a pen:
Were Earth to paper turned; and Seas to Ink
And all the world were writers, yet I think,
They could not write the mischifes done by drink.
And such a custom men has taken therein,
That to be drunk, is scarce accounted sin,
But houest recreariue meriment
The time is termed that is in tippling spent.
A Merchants ship is richly fraught, ariues
And for thanksgiving that so well he thriues,
He makes a feast, and store of money spends,
Inuites his kinsfolk, creditors, and friends:
Where storms, and Rocks, and Pirates, are forgot,
And triumphs made to Bacchus, and the Pot.
A Rich man's wife's delivered of a boy,
And all the household must be drunk for joy.
The prisoner that is condemned to die and hang,
And by reprieue has escaped that bitter pang,
Will presently his old acquaintance call,
And ere he gives God thanks to drinking fall.
Why drunkards common are, as lies, or stealing,
And sober men are scarce, like honest dealing.
When men do meet, the second word that is spoke,
Is where is good liquour, and a pipe of smoke.
The laboring man that for his hire does serve,
Let Landlord tarry, wife and children sterue
With not a bit of bread within the house,
Yet he will sit on the Alebench and carows.
Thus like an Inundation drink does drown
The Rich, the Poor, the Courtier, and the Clown.
Since then to be a drunkard, is to be
The sincke of Incest, and Sodomitry,
Of Treason, swearing, fighting, beg'ry, murder,
And diverse more, I then will go no further:
But here my Satyrs stinging whip i will waste
In lashing dropsy drunkards out of taste.
How then can it be possible that such
Who sell Wine, Beer, or Ale, do gain so much,
Should punish drunkards, as the Law commands,
In whose vain spending, their most gaining stands.
It were all one as if a Mercer did
To wear Silk, Velvet, Cloth of Gold forbid.
And Victlers may as wisely punish those
From whom their daily drinks, great gettings grows.
I would have all old drunkards to consent
To put a Bill up to the Parliament:
That those by quaffing that have spent their wealth,
Consumed their times, their memory, their health,
And by excessive spending now are bare,
That Merchants, Brewers, Vintners, should prepare
Some Hospitals to keep them in their age,
And cloth, and feed them, from fierce famines rage,
For every one whose hard unlucky lots,
Has been to be undone by empting pots,
I hold it fit that those the pots that filde,
Should contribute those Almeshouses to build.
Yet one objection would this bill debar,
Too many drunkards there already are;
And rather then this law would bate their store,
I feare'twould make them twice as many more.
For why, to drink most men would be too bold,
Because they would have pentions being old.
And men (of purpose to this vice would fall,
To be true beads-men to this hospital.
Then let it be as it already is,
But yet I hold it not to be amiss)
Those Drinkesellers, from office to exclude
And so for that my Satyr does conclude.
I could rippe up a Catologue of things,
Which thousand thousands to damnation flings,
But all my pains at last would be but idle.
It is not man, can men's Affections bridle.
Sin cannot be put down with ink and paper,
No more then Sol is lightened with a Taper.
To the right Worshipful and my ever good friend, Sr. ROVVLAND COSTON Knight.
TO Read, to like, to laugh, I send you this,
Desiring pardon where their's ought amiss.
When Graner matters trouble not your head,
With former favor let my lines be read.
To my very good Friends Master Alexander Glouer, Mr. John Rowdon, and Mr. John
Burges.
THough Rich Pecunia (that all states commands)
In Numbers numberless runs through your hands:
Yet this I know, it never moves the mind
From goodness, that to goodness is inclinde.
And though it makes most men dishonest prove,
It cannot make your honest minds remove.
Then as your kindness unto me assures
Your love, so I remain for ever yours.
To Mistress Rose. Anagramma SORE.
SOund Rose, though Sore thy Anagram does mean,
Mistake it not, it means no sore unclean:
But it Alludes unto the lofty sky
In which thy virtue shall both Sore and slye.
To my approved good friend Mr. ROBARTE CVDDNER.
Anagramma: Record and be true.
MY thoughts Record, and their account is true,
I scarce have better friends alive then you.
A nest of Epigrams.
Fortune. 1.
It Is Fortunes glory to keep Poets poor,
And cram weak witted Idiots with her store:
And it is concluded in the wisest schools
The blinded drab, shall ever favor fools.
Epigram 2. Love.
Love is a dying life, a living death.
A vapor, shadow, buble, and a breath:
An idle babble, and a paltry toy,
Whose greatest Patron is a blinded boy:
But pardon love, my judgment is unjust,
For what I spoke of love, I meant of lust.
Epigram 3. Death.
THose that escape fortune, and the extremes of love,
Unto their longest homes, by death are drove:
Where Caesar's, Kaesars, Subjects, Abiects must
Be all alike, consumed to dirt and dust:
Death ends all our cares, or cares encreace
It sends us unto lasting pain, or peace.
Epigram 4. Fame.
When Fortune, Love and Death their tasks have done
Fame makes our lives through many ages run:
For be our living actions, good or ill
Fame keeps a record of our doings still,
By Fame Great Julius Caesar ever lives;
And Fame, infamous life to Nero gives.
Epigram 5. Time.
ALL making, marring, never turning Time
To all that is, is period, and is prime:
Time wears out Fortune, Love, and Death and Fame
And makes the world forget there proper name.
There Is nothing that so long on earth can last,
But in conclusion Time will lay it wast.
Epigram. 6. Kame, kathee.
MY Muse has vowed, revenge shall have her swindge
To catch a Parrot in the Woodcocks sprindge.
Epigram 7. Solus.
THe land yields many Poets, were I gone
The water sure (I durst be sworn) had none.
Epigram 8. Self conceit.
SOme Poets are, whose high pitch lofty strains
Are past the reach of every vulgar wight:
To understand which twill amaze weak brains,
So mystical, sophistical they write:
No marvel others understand them not,
For they scarce understand themselves, I wot,
Epigram 9. A couple.
ONe read my book, and said it wanted wit,
I wonder if he meant himself, or it:
Or both: if both, two fools were met I troe
That wanted wit, and every fool does so.
Epigram 10. Bacchus and Apollo.
THe thigh-borne bastard of the thrundring Jove
(When men's inventions, are of wit most hollow)
He with his spiteful juice their sprites does move,
Unto to harmonious music of Apollo:
And in a word, I would have al men know it,
He must drink wine, that means to be a Poet.
Epigram 11. Of translation.
I Understand or know no foraigne tongue,
But their translations I do much admire:
Much art, much pains, much study does belong,
And (at the least) regard should be their hyre.
But yet I would the French had held together
And kept their pox, and not translate them hither.
Epigram 12. Natures counterfeite.
WHen Adam was in Paradise first placed,
And with the rule of mortal things was graced,
Then roses, pinkes and fragrant gilliflowers,
Adornd and decked forth Edens blessed bowres:
But now each Gill wears flowers, each Punck has pinks,
And roses garnish Gallants shoes me thinks:
When rugged Winter, robs fairy Floraes treasure,
Puncks can have pinks and roses at their pleasure.
Epigram 13. The devil take bribery.
A Man atach't for murdring of a man
Unto the for-man of his lury sent,
Two score angels, begging what he can,
He would his conscience strain, law to prevent:
That his offenses Judge, might judge no further
But make man slaughter of his wilful murder:
The verduict was manslaughter to the Judge,
The Judge demanded how it could be so?
The for-man said his conscience much did grudge:
But forty angels did persuade him no,
Well quoth the Judge this case shall murder be,
If half those angels, not appear to me.
Thus when the law men to confusion drives,
The godless angels will preserve their lives.
Epigram 14. The devil is a knave.
I Shell dislikes the surplusse and the cope,
And calls them idle vestments of the Pope:
And mistress Maude would go to Church full feign
But that the corner cap makes her refrain:
And Madam Idle is offended deep,
The Preacher speaks so loud, she cannot sleep:
Lo thus the devil sowes contentious seed,
Whence sects, and schisms, and heresies do breed.
Epigram 15. Kissing goes by favor.
BEmbus the Burgomaster lives in pain
With the Sciatica, and the Cathar.
Rich Grundo of the dropsy does complain,
And with the Gowte these mizers troubled are.
If Tinkers, Cobblers, Botchers be infected
With Bembus Lamenesse, or with Grundoes Gowte:
Like pocky fellows they must be rejected,
And as infectious rascals be kept out,
And not come near where wholesome people flocks,
Thus rich men's sicknesses, are poor men's pocks.
Epigram 16. Dear, no Venison.
PRecilla always calls her husband Dear,
Belike she bought him at too dear a rate,
Or else to make the case more plain appear,
Like to a Dear she has adorned his pate;
If it be so god Vulcan send her luck
That she may live to make her Dear a Buck.
Epigram 17. Euerything is pretty when it is little.
THere is a saying old, (but not so witty)
That when a thing is little, it is pretty:
This doting age of ours it finely fits
Where many men thought wise, have pretty wies.
Epigram 18. ^^^e^ne somewhat.
ONe asked me, what my Melancholy means,
I answered it was because I wanted means:
He asked what I did by my answer mean,
I told him still my means were too too mean.
He offered me to lend me pounds a score,
I answered him I was to much in score.
He finding me in this cross answ'ring vain,
Left me in want to wish for wealth in vain.
Epigram 19. Faith without works.
AMmongst the pure reformed Amsterdamers,
(Those faithful friday feasting capon crammers)
Only in them (they say) true faith does lurk:
But it is a lazy faith, twill do no work.
O should it work, there is many thousand fears,
It Would set the world together by the ears.
Epigram 20. Partiallity.
STrato the Gallant reeles along the street,
His adle head's too heavy for his feet:
What though he swear and swagger spurn and kick,
Yet men will say the Gentleman is sick?
And that twere good to learn where he does dwell,
And help him home because he is not well.
Strait staggers by a Porter, or a Carman
As bumsie as a fox'd flapdragon German:
And though the Gentleman's disease and theirs,
Are parted only with a pair of sheares:
Yet they are drunken knaves and must to the stocks,
And there endure a world of flouts and mocks.
Thus when brave Strato's wits with wine are shrunk,
The same disease will make a beggar drunk.
Epigram 21. A keeper of honesty.
DEliro should of honesty be full,
And store of wisdom surely is within him.
What though he dally with a painted trull:
And she to folly daily seems to win him,
Yet in him sure is honesty good store,
He vtters but his knauerie with a whore?
For he that spends too free, shall surely want,
Whilst he that spares will live in wealthy state:
So wit and honesty, with such are scant,
Who part with it at every idle rate:
But men must needs have honesty and wit,
That like Deliro never utter it.
Epigram 22. All Is one, but on's not all.
TO wonder and admire is all one thing,
If as Sinonymies the words be took,
But if a double meaning from them spring:
For double sense your Judgment then must look.
As once a man all soild with dirt and mire
Fell down, and wondered not, but did admire.
Epigram 23. Mistress fine bones.
FIne Rarnell wonderfully likes her choice
In having got a husband so complete,
Whose shape and mind does wholly her rejoice:
At bed, board, and abroad, he is always neat:
Neat can he talk, and feed, and neatly tread,
Neat are his feet, but most neat is his head.
Epigram 24. A supposed Construction.
MAry and Mare, Anagramatiz'd
The one is Army, and the other Arm
In both their names is danger Moraliz'd
And both alike, does sometimes good, or harm
Mare's the sea and Mare's Arme's a river
And Marye's Armye's all for whatl'ye give her.
Epigram 25. Death is a Iuggler.
A Rich man sick would needs go make his will
And in the same he does command and will
One hundred pound unto his man called Will,
Because he always served him with good will:
But al these wills, did prove to Will but vain,
His master lives and has his health again.
Epigram 26. Mistress Grace only by name.
GRace graceless, why art thou ungracious Grace,
Why do thou run so lewdely in the race?
The cause wherefore thy goodness is so scant
Is cause, what most thou have, thou most do want.
Epigram 27. Prudence.
It Is strange that Prudence should be wild and rude,
Whose very name does Modesty include:
The reason is, for ought that I can see,
Her name and nature does not well agree.
Epigram 28. Mercy.
MY Mercy hates me, what is the cause I pray,
It Is cause I have no money, she does say.
O cruel Mercy now I plainly see
Without a see no mercy comes from thee.
Yet in conclusion, every idle gull
Perceiues Mercy is unmerciful.
Epigram 29. Faith.
O Faith thou always unbelieving art,
Faith in thy name, and faithless in thy heart.
Thou credidst all, but what is true and good,
In virtue rude, in vice well understood.
Epigram 30. Upon my self.
MY self I liken to an vntun'de Viol,
For Like a Viol I am in a Case;
And who so of my fortunes makes a trial
Shall (like to me) be strung and tuned base.
And Treables Troubles he shall never want,
But here is the Periode of my mischiefs All,
Though Base and Trebles, fortune did me grant
And Means, but yet alas they are too small.
Yet to make up the Munck and I must look
The Tenor in the cursed Counter book.
Epigram 31. A Rope for Parrat.
WHy does the Parrat cry a Rope, a rope,
Because he is cagde in prison out of hope.
Why does the Parrat call a Boat, a Boat?
It is the humor of his idle note.
O pretty Pall, take heed, beware the Cat,
(Let Watermen alone, no more of that.)
Since I so idly heard the Parrat talk,
In his own language, I say, walk knave walk.
Epigram 32 Constants.
INconstant Constants albewitching feature,
Has made fair Constance an inconstant Creature,
Her Godmother was very much to blame,
To give Inconstancy a constant name.
But was a woman nam'de her so contrary,
And women's tongues and hearts do ever vary.
Epigram 33 Upon the burning of the Globe.
ASpiring Phaeton with pride inspirde,
Misguiding Phoebus Carre, the world the firde:
But Ovid did with fiction serve his turn,
And I in action saw the Globe to burn.
Epigram 34. Late Repentance.
A Greedy wretch did on the Scriptures look,
And found recorded in that Sacred book,
How such a man with God should sure prevail
Who clad the naked, and visit those in Iaile.
And then he found how he had long mistak'd,
And oftentimes had made the clothed naked:
In steed of visiting the oppressed in mones,
He had consumed them to the very bones.
Yet one day he at leisure would Repent,
But sudden death Repentance did prevent.
Epigram 35. Not so strange as true.
THe stately Stagge when he his horns has shed,
In sullen sadness he deplores his loss:
But when a wife cornutes her husbands head,
His gains in horns he holds an extreme Cross.
The Stagge by loasing does his loss complain,
The man by gaining does lament his gain.
Thus whether horns be either lost or found,
They both the loser and the winner wound.
Epigram 36. A Wordmonger.
Man's Vnderstanding's so obnubilate,
That when thereon I do excogitate,
Intrinsicall and querimonious pains,
Does puluerise the concaue of my brains,
That I could wish man were vnfabricate,
His faults he does so much exaggerate.
Epigram 37. Plain dunstable.
YOur words pass my capatchity, good zur,
But ich to prove need never to go vur:
Cha known men live in honest exclamation,
Who now God wot, lives in a worser fashion.
The poor man grumbles at the rich man's store,
And rich men daily do express the poor.
Epigram 38. Reason.
Know thou a Traitor, plotting damned Treason,
Reveal him, it is both loialty and Reason.
Know thou a thief will steal at any season,
To shun his company thou have good reason,
See thou a villain hang up by the weason,
He hangs by reason, that he wanted reason.
Good men are scarce, and honest men are geason,
To love them therefore it is both right and reason,
Mere I could say, but all is not worth two peason,
And therefore to conclude I hold it reason.
Epigram 39. Out of the pan into the fire.
TOm senseless, to the death does hate a play:
But yet heel play the drunkard every day,
He railes at plays, and yet does ten times worse,
He Will dice, he will bowl, he will whore, he will swear, he will curse,
When for one two pence (if this humor please)
He might go see a play, and escape all these:
But it is man's use in these pestiferous times
To hate the least, and love the greatest crimes.
Epigram 40. A Poets similitude.
A Poet Rightly may be termed fit
An abstract, or Epitomy of wit:
Or like a Lute that others pleasures breed,
Is fret and strung, their curious ears to feed,
That scornefully distaste it, yet it is known
It makes the hearers sport, but in self none.
A Poet's like a taper, burnt by night
That wastes it self, in giving others light.
A Poet's the most fool beneath the skies,
He spends his wits in making Idiots wise,
Who when they should their thankfulness return
They pay him with disdain, contempt and scorn.
A Puritan is like, a Poets purse,
For both do hate the cross (what cross is worse?)
Epigram 41. Macanas Epitaph.
Here lies the Steward of the Poets God,
Who whilst on earth his loved life abod,
Apollo's Daughters, and the heirs of Jove
His memorable bounty did approve:
His life, was life to Poets, and his Death
Bereaved the Muses of celestial breath.
Had Phoebus fired him from the lofty skies,
That Phaenix like another might arise
From our his odoriff'rus sacred embers,
Whose loved lives loss, poor Poetry remembers.
This line is the same backward, as it is forward, and I will give any man five
shillings a piece for as many as they can make in English.

Lewd did I live and evil I did dwell.

An Apology for Watermen.
Dedicated to Master Richard WARNER the Master of his Majesty's Barge, and to
the rest of the Masters and Assistants of the Company.
SVch imputations, and such daily wrongs
Are laid on Watermen, by Envious tongues.
To clear the which, if I should silent be
It Were baseness, and stupidity in me.
Nor do I purpose now with ink and pen,
To write of them, as they are watermen,
But this I speak, defending their vocation
From slanders false, and idle imputation.
Yet should I only of the men but speak
I could the top of Enuies Coxcombe break.
For I would have all men to understand
A Waterman's a man by Sea or Land.
And on the land and sea, can service do
To serve his King, as well as other two:
He Will guard his Country both on seas and shore
And what (a Gods name) can a man do more.
Like double men they well can play indeed
The Soldiers, and the Sailers for a need.
If they did yearly use to scour the Maine,
As erst they did, in wars twixt us and Spain,
I then to speak, would boldly seem to dare
One Sailer with two Soldiers should compare.
But now sweet peace their skill at Sea so duls,
That many are more sit to use their sculs
Then for the sea, for why! the want of use
Is Arts confusion, and best skils abuse.
And not to be too partial in my words,
I think no Company more knaves affoords:
And this must be the reason, because far
Above all Companies their numbers are:
And where the multitude of men most is,
By consequence there must be most amiss.
And sure of honest men it has as many,
As any other Company has any.
Though not of wealth they have super fluous store,
Contents is a Kingdom, and they seek no more.
Of Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, men shall find
Men that to loose babauiour are inclinde.
Of Goldsmiths, Silkemen, Clothworkers, and Skinners,
When they are at the best they all are sinners.
And drunken rascalles are of every Trade,
Should I name all, I over the boots should wade?
If Watermen be only knaves alone,
Let all that is faultlesse cast at them a stone.
Some may reply to my Apology:
How they in plying are unmannerly,
And one from the other, hale, and pull, and tear,
And raise, and braule, and curse, and banne, and swear.
In this i will not defend them with excuses,
I always did, and do hate those abuses.
The honest use, of this true trade I sing,
And not the abuses that from thence do spring.
And sure no Company has Laws more strict,
Then Watermen, which weekly they inflict
Upon offenders, who are made pay duly
Their fines, or imprisoned, cause they plide unruly.
They keep no shops, nor sell deceitful wares,
But like to Pilgrims travel for their fares,
And they must ask the question where they go.
If men will go by water yea or no
Which being spoke aright, the fault's not such,
But any Tradesman (sure) will do as much.
The Mercer as ye pass along the way
Will ask what do you lack, come near I pray.
The Draper whose warm ware does clad the back,
Will be so bold as ask ye what do you lack.
The Goldsmith midst his silver and his gold
To ask you, what do you lack he will be bold.
Through Birchin lane, who ever often goes,
Says, Watermen are honest men to those,
And if your Coat be torn, before you go,
Of every rent, with rending thei'le make two.
This being granted, as none can deny,
Most Trades as well as Watermen do plye,
If in their plying they do chance to jar,
They do but like the Lawyers at the Bar.
Who plead as if they meant by the'ares to fall,
And when the Court does rise, to friendship fall.
So Watermen, that for a fare contends
The fare once gone, the Watermen are friends.
And this I know, and therefore dare maintain,
That he that truly labors and takes pain,
May with a better Conscience sleep in bed,
Then he that is with ill got thousands sped.
So well I like it, and such love I owe
Unto it, that I Will fall again to Row:
Twill keep my health from falling to decay,
Get money, and chase Idleness away.
I Am sure it for Antiqnity has stood,
Since the worlds drowning universal flood,
And howsoever now it rise or fall.
The Boat in Noah's Del(...)
And though our wits, be like our purses bare,
With any Company we will make compare
To write a Verse, provided that they be
No better skild in Schollership then we.
And then come one, come thousands, nay, come all,
And for a wager well to Versing fall.
My unwilling farewell to POETRY.
ADue thou two topt Cloud surmounting Mount,
Adue thou sacred sweet Pegasean fount,
Adue you rarest Sisters, three times three,
Take all in general this farewell of me.
Full low (alas) lies good Mecaenas head,
And Bounty from the mizer world is fled.
I find the Thames can yield me more (by proof)
Then can the Well made with the Horses hoose:
Then since it is so that Poets must be poor
(For any thing I know) I Will verse no more,
And therefore to Conclude, let all men know
I Will cease to write, and fall again to Rome.
Epilogue to those that knows what they have read, and how to censure.
TO you whose ears and eyes have heard and seen
This little pamphlet, an^^^ an judge between
That which is good, or tol'rable, or ill,
If I with Artlesse Nature wanting skill
Have writ but ought, that may your thoughts content.
My Muse has then accomplished her intent.
Your favors can preserve me, but your frowns
My poor inventions in oblivion drownes.
With tolerable friendship let me crave
You will not seek to spill, what you may save.
But for the wrimouth'd Crittick that has read
That mewes, and puh's and shakes h^^^^^^inelesse head:
And says my education or my sta^^^
Does make my verse esteemed at lower rate,
To such a one this answer I do send
And bid him mend before he discommend,
His Envy unto me, will favors prove,
The hatred of a fool breeds wise men's love.
My Muse is iocund that her labors merits
To be malign'd and scornd by Envious spirits:
Thus humbly I cra^e ^^rd^^^^^^the best,
Which being gaind, Sir reverence for the rest.
FINIS.

