Epithalamium UPON THE ALL-DESIRED NVPTIALS of FREDERIKE the fifth, Prince
Palatine of Rhene, chief Elector, Duke of Bauier, and Arch-Sewer to the Roman
EMPIRE. AND ELIZABETH, The only daughter of JAMES, by the grace of God, King
of great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the FAITH, etc.

Written by AUGUSTINE TAILOR.

Illi poena datur, qui semper amat, nec amatur. LONDON, Printed for Samuel
Rand, and are to be sold by Edward Merchant, at his shop in Paul's Churchyard,
over against the Cross. 1613.

TO THE HONO^ GENTLEMAN, SIR Thomas Gerrard of Brinne, Knight Barronet, and one
of his Majesty's Justices for the County of Lancaster, AUGUSTINE TAILOR
wishes all prosperity in Happiness.
Worthy Sir,
WHEN all the excellent admired wits of this so capable Age, in the spring of
thick furnitur'd inventions, bestow pains to give my Patrons a perfect
blazon, I willing to thrust my dutiful love into the Press, longing to see
the shape of affection in Print; Credo vt est dementia, Seeing so many swelling
Muses, and of such apprehension, that read theirs and mine next together, and
you will say, my ill work makes their good labors to appear better then
(indeed) they are. Vt sementem feceris, ita and metes: Apply not that Rule to
me, but right worthy Sir, of what I offer willingly, vouch to accept
courteously, as a Monument of my love, which time has borne to the generous
family of the Gerrards, and my affection to your worthy self. Knowing you to
come from the best worth of that Aierie, and one of his Majesty's respected,
grace my ill-tempered Muse: and having so worthy a refuge, you shall hereafter
see it start out of Cinders (vnus dies non sat estad parandam eruditionem) and
live an age that ere-while waxt old with a Summers day. Vouch to allow of this,
till time present you with some greater token of my love: I commit your
deserving worthiness to wished continuance.

Yours in love and duty, AUGUSTINE TAILOR

Volenti nihil est grave.
Facile est imperare volenti.
O Would to God I had the Sun-hatch't wing,
A quill so worth to tell of banqueting:
Mine is so partcht in cinders of my wants,
Desert craves Vowels, Art gives Consonants.
One sense is sleeping, and that sense is muffled,
This sense is studying, that and all are ruffled:
Amazed, wakened, called, incomposed,
Moved, affected, gathered, indisclosed.
The perfect blazon true fame shall support,
Will tell how far my Art is here too short:
Were I but seated on the Muses mountain,
To quaffe my quart of that ripe dropping fountain,
Where Tully once won that immortal praise,
From that Parnassus fetched his Roman phrase:
Under that Helicon my Muse should sing,
Not altogether praise of Englands King,
But in my notes Fames whispering breath should bleed,
Deserving praises to his worthy seed.
You now must think I felt my wit but poor,
I napt an hour, and meant to write no more.
Now apparitions, now good, and then bad,
I Will tell thee England of a dream I had.
Suppose I sat upon the Cliffes of Dover,
(From flowery Kent) the Ocean to look over.
When in a morning old Aurora's hue
Had clad the heavens in their ancient blew.
Night went so fast, and day appeared so plain,
The eyes diseased of the Northern waine:
Artipholax bluster'd in his muffled bed,
Pale Luna to the Western confines fled;
White teames of mist ran stealing down the rivers,
Eclipsed mansions now were crazed in shiuers,
My greedy slumber showed my eyes, me thought
Strange novelties that cheerful day had brought.
The first I gazed at, seemed a rock of stone,
Which Sea-gods (sometime) used to sit upon,
Incompast round with seas on every side,
Framed like a seat, cast by the surly tide;
Whereon the fairest Lady was reposed,
That ever Nature whilome had disclosed,
Crowned in all glory, made so fine and denty,
I saw one beauty, and in that one plenty.
If ever eye was summond to a feast,
My eyes were feasted, and my feast was best:
I thought Marpessa in that princely Chair
Had there reposed her self to take the air,
And sadly suited in a solemn cheer,
Did mean to stay her Lord and Lover there.
And Idas slow, in needy speed dispatching,
He yet was absent, and she yet was watching.
O how I cursed him, (angry at delay)
Hard-hearted man to be so long away.
The day waxt elder, and the morn showed cleerer,
The heavens pitiful, sent the Sun to cheer her.
Phoebus appeared, clothed in his fairest array,
As if prepared to suite a glorious day.
His radiant splendors scatter in the skies,
Her fair perfections sparkle in mine eyes.
I was opinionate the world was done,
I thought the Gods had sent another Sun.
Then it was so, by vcnturing, I came
Some paces nearer to this princely Dame.
When I perceived she was a mortal creature,
Composed in the perfect'st mould of Nature,
And in her hand she held a little frame,
With this device erected in her name.
DELPHEBA.
A branch in March, that died to live in April.
Motto. Mors emit vitam.

Life weeps for death, death crowns a new life blessed;
Thus, friends weep most, to know their friends at rest.
In this fair creature seated thus alone,
A thousand beauties were combined in one:
Her golden Tresses hanged vncurl'd and ruffl'd,
In a rich Night-gowne she was sadly muffl'd.
O had I seen her suited in those rays,
Which Courtly custom observes now-a-dayes,
I eould have teld ye nearer her great merit,
But ignorance must now a part inherit.
Your thoughts must censure, she was more the^ fair,
(And being more, I cannot more declare)
And fit to add a glory to the sky,
A mate (indeed) for majesty to buy,
Crowned with all graces, and to name in general,
One beauty matchless, and in that one several.
O had you seen her, how all beauties moved her,
You would have praised her, if you had not loved her.
Thus long I viewed her, ravished more and more,
I turned my eyes to glance upon the shore,
Where I espied a stranger sadly standing,
Waiting for shipping, as men do for landing.
Upon Delphebaes seat his eyes were gazing,
I saw a scutchion by the suns bright blazing;
Telling his name, and over that was planted
A fair devise which no perfection wanted.
TORBINIVS.
A male Confessor to a female Priest.
Motto Palam, voluntate.

Great men are often actors of oppression,
And she is the cause that I must make confession.
His eyes gazed at Delpheba as before,
(So ship-wrackt seamen use to do at shore)
Afflicted, troubled, feared, and tormented,
Distempered, blubbered, sad, and discontented,
Complaining, sorrowing, wishing, nothing gaining,
Sighing, bewailing, craving, not obtaining,
Seeking for passage to Delphebas resting,
Vowing, affecting, calling, and protesting,
Unto the Powers Divine he plants prefers,
He had but one life and that was hers.
To rail on Nature then he does begin,
That she (unkind) ordained him not to swim:
To break his passions Phoebus looked more cheerely,
And smiled as if he loved a lover dearly,
And half resolved to let Torbinius pass,
From him to her, he shows a bridge of glass:
Composd in all parts pleasant to behold,
Framed by Divine Art, wonders manifold,
Appeared to gaze on, yet it seemed so brittle,
The passage dangerous and the safety little;
But love so forward in his own attempts,
And mixes sour harms with frail sweet contents,
Determines now, as men for women would do,
To win his love, or try what venturing could do;
Enters the bridge with this rash resolution,
To die for love, confirms the old conclusion,
And his boiled humor in this sort does cherish,
To pass the bridge, or in the midst to perish:
And being distant from the sandy side,
Some measured paces, Neptune sends the tide,
And summons fenny subjects to new broils,
Collecting surges to maintain new spoils.
The houering winds tumbled from Eolus womb,
And in the Ocean began to dig their Tomb.
The Titan Esterne gates, perculliz'd, pale,
Er'st calmes, now storms, for gusts a bitter gale.
Nereus warned the Sea-gods to these wars,
And ruled as General in these vpstart iarres.
Torbinius being on the bridge of glass,
Looked down and saw the impatient billows pass,
And with his dull ears, hard the deaf winds mu^ble,
And with his dim eyes saw the surges tumble.
One wave did caper, and that billow wondered,
This surge was angry, and that tempest thundered,
Aspiring, threatening death, or future ill,
Shaping, presenting accidents to kill.
A hurrying mist comes sudden stealing in,
Nor he, nor she, saw neither her nor him:
In this strange temper passionately distracted,
Torbinius now a sour part sadly acted;
And all his griefs sprung, as it seemed to me,
From the sick confines of perplexity.
A thicke-lin'd mist continued 'tweene them two,
(Love wrapped in wrinkles knows no work to do.)
Thus Fortune makes, and thus mad Forune marres,
Love is still Soldier at such civil wars.
Sighing, lamenting, these bad broils to be in,
That he should dye, and not his Lady see him,
When only for her sake he ventured thus,
(Love sees no dangers that seem timorus.)
Torbinius.
Then to himself (I thought) he did reply,
And said; How lucklesse and accursed am I,
Covered with fortunes foul dissembling fame,
To dye for her that knows not who I am?
Oh might I dye my Ladies face before,
I would say Fortune were a noble Whore,
In her fair sight to end Torbinius date,
O then my death were not unfortunate,
Then she might justly say; here ended he,
That lived, and loved, and died to honor me:
But Gods, and Seas, and Winds, contemn my plaints,
And their harsh Language trippes on Consonants:
Then thus resolved, succeed what ill can prove,
And if I dye, I dye for her I love.
I left him thus, and turned my greedy eyes
Upon the rock where fair Delpheba lies,
Who now in black appeared to me all covered,
About the which sad Melancholy houer'd.
Then to Delpheba there (me thought) resorted,
Nymphs and Sea-gods, by their love transported,
To comfort her that seemed so much lamenting,
And know the sad cause of her discontenting.
Delpheba.
To whom she answered, I have lost a friend,
Which winged Fame can nere too much commend.
O would to God I could Olimpus raise,
And there set Trophies to his endless praise:
And for his death, I chose this place to moan,
"The tears are truest that are shed alone."
A dying life weeps for a living death,
A tale unseemly for a true friends breath.
And as it is, it may be something better,
Fortune's a strumpet, and she is my debtor,
Promising best, when she performed the worst:
Things that sound harshli'st, I have had those first.
The Gods and Nymphs began to tune their throtes,
To keep a consort with her cheerelesse notes.
In this Diapason deep, sad harmony,
Dull senses strive for sorrows victory,
Chimes iterating on this blacke-mouth'd dinne;
I then perceived Torbinius coming in,
Seeing Delpheba in such passions suited,
In mourning weeds such ill cheer prosecuted,
Attires himself in sorrows for her sake,
Torbinius.
The Counter-tennor of her part to take.
Unto the fairest my service I commend,
It Is only thou my love did apprehend,
All dangers past compared to this prize,
Seems like a dark way to a Paradize.
And on all dangers what is he would not venture,
Those all being past, might to thy presence enter?
And am I happy to be comne thus near thee?
And art thou kind? or can my coming cheer thee?
I Will wear what thou wears, what thou loves I Will keep
I Will laugh when thou smiles, when thou sighs I Will weep.
What most shall grieve thee, it shall most torment me,
What best shall please thee, that shall best content me.
If Natures pride be but so kind as fair,
All storms are past, I do not care for Care.
I love thee now when sad laments increase,
To have thy love when passions turn to peace.
Expecting Summer when cold March is past,
I Will wait ten months to have a May at last.
I Will reap no Harvest but where thou have sown,
My love in thy love shall exceed thy own.
And but in thee, no hope, no hap, no health,
And but in thee no will, no wish, no wealth.
For what thou mournes, I wail, thy part I take;
Now blessed be all women for thy sake.
In thee I love, in thee I only live,
It Is I that begges, and it is thou can give.
Nor do I crave thee more then may beseem thee,
Thou art my best hap, and I most esteem thee.
Make me a servant at thy sacred shrine;
This life is that life, let that life be mine.
What good, what ill, what life, what all to thee,
That good, that ill, that life, that all to me.
Comforts attend thee, all good hap befriend thee,
Duties commend thee, wished power defend thee.
Make me thy servant, smile on my request,
Delphebaes Scholar I am now professed.
At Lunaes full the skies seem in their state,
At Princes birthes the earth looks fortunate.
The one decays when in her chiefest prime,
The other dies when in his hopeful'st time.
My tears are falling for a friend that loved me,
He Is dead, he is gone, and thus his death has moved me
His death is living, and my life is dying,
My life is creeping, and his death is flying.
My loss, his gain: his wealth my woe comprised,
Are two contraries strangely exerciz'd.
My plaints and tears, and sorrows, still augmented,
Complaining, blubbered, lasting more tormented.
Much pitty'd cheerenesse, much lamented neernesse,
Vnharbor'd, fearelesse, unfrequented neerenesse,
Desolate, distressed, frustrate, vn-respected,
Incommitate, oppressed, complicate, neglected:
And of all these ills there is but one mother,
Pale Death, leaves our life this gift, and no other.
The earth and Mortals must submit their Powers,
To serve a Will above this will of ours.
Of what earth can do I may justly vaunt,
What heavens will have I must needly grant.
O death, o death, thy spoils I cannot mend,
Yet I Will perform the duty of a friend:
Some friends live yet, it is you appears to me
Will be associate in my misery.
You, you, Torbinius, for your great desert,
Shall have the best place in my conquered heart:
My love, shall your love pay with wished reward,
And with Delpheba be in best regard:
Expecting sorrows will be sooner past,
And joy (though long) yet will be here at last:
The skies look cheerly, that e're-while lok't strangly,
The seas are smiling that but now were angry,
I think the Gods (together) have decreed
To change our muffled melancholy weed,
And for our late lamented Funerals,
Now to erect contented Nuptials;
In pledge of love I greet thee with a kiss,
I owe thee more, suppose, by giving this.
Now let me crave you to decide this thought
And be not partial; which of these two ought
To be lamented more? her tears are sown,
For her friends harvest that pale death has mowne:
His tears are spent for her calamities,
That seems a mother of sad miseries.
She weeps for him that never can do better,
He weeps for her that yet is natures debtor:
Then rightly scanned if judgment rightly do,
'Twill say her tears, no wise work takes them too:
Whether she weep for friend sake, or her own,
It Is yet a question, and it is not known,
If for her own sake (I must needs be plain)
She thought by his life to reap future gain;
This wailing no man rightly can commend,
For thus she proves a very unkind friend.
If she lament for his sake, wise men says,
She shows th'imbecillity of her faith.
And by that weakness it appears to me
She thinks her self in better case then he:
She ought not t'weepe that he has run so fast,
But at her slow pace that must go at last.
But now (me-thinkes) Delphebas wondrous wise,
To make a Summer of her Winters eyes:
All friendly duties are discharged duly,
Old Natures love is paid by wisdom truly.
The Sun, and Air, and houering Winds do mutter,
Conceiving more joy, then dumb sense can utter:
The Sea-gods whisper iump in all opinions,
To order peace through their vntil'd Dominions,
And took their leave, all Tempests now are gone,
Torbinius and Delpheba now alone,
They joined hands and then (me thought) did pass
Back to the shore where great attending was,
And being landed dangers all bereft them,
My dream was ended and in joy I left them.
Ex aspectis nascitur amor.
When Lordly Phoebus left his Esterne I Will,
And with his splendour that Titanian smile,
Came like a Prince from th'orientall gate,
So richly suited in his robes of State.
The chearelesse earth shook off her dewy tresses,
And from dark curtains now her shades digresses.
I looked about me, Dover was not near me,
That now contents me, which but then did fear me.
I then perceived 'twas on the bancke of Thames,
That I retained th'inuention of my dreams:
And as the pleasant River fast did glide,
With prattling murmur by the Kentish side,
I laid me down near to a Willow root,
Whose branches far had ouer-growne the foot;
The searching Sun not in a day obtained,
To see the stock whereby she was maintained.
'Twas public known a fairer tree then this,
Never neighbored near the banks of Thamesis.
I there reposed upon this dewy brimme.
And, as I thought, the Tide came stealing in.
Thames that e're while gazed upon Phoebus prime,
Turned now again to watch for his decline:
Night went, day came, all joys on tiptoes shiuer,
A snow white Swanne came playing up the River:
Ruffling his plumes and in such joy did swim,
You would have sworn the Tide much fauor'd him.
His so fair breast dinted the furrowing Isis,
Who says he saw a worthier bird then this is?
Both Kent and Essex gathered near to see,
Where the first landing of this Swanne might be:
Fair Middle-sex pulled down her mask and Fan,
To see the Tide bring in this stranger Swan.
O how it joyed me to hear music greet him
In several tunes, and other Swannes did meet him;
Their Princely salutations sure were such,
As London never saw of mirth so much.
Now, in the end, where this fair Swan took landing,
Let none decide but those of understanding.
Quisque potest rebus succurrere, nemo diebus.
To Frederick. Omnia fert tempus.
When thou (great Prince) from Rhenus native clime
(Richer then Tagus, fair as Florentine,)
Pulled up thy Ensigns, clad thy rattling Sails,
The wind, thy vyage, and the Tide preuailes,
To bring thee to our Eastern tumbling Thames,
The Ocean's message to great Britains JAMES:
And may that hour in happy times to come
Be called thy landing in Elysium:
Happy thy birth, more fortunate thy life,
Prosperous thy voyage, virtuous thy wife:
Virtue, Virginity, Honor, Natures pride,
Thou art her Husband, and She is thy Bride,
And consecrated shall that day be thought:
The hour and Isis that thee hither brought,
Shall be erected in great Fames Register,
And thy reward is proved a Princes Sister.
Fame cannot choose but impe her pinioned wing,
And in loud Music for thy welcome sing:
Feast thee, attend thee, and in more esteem
Then Cleopatra the Egiptian Queen
Feasted Mark Anthony, nor can thou say,
Thou came in Autumn, it was rather May;
Only crosses of lamented Funerals,
Chanced in the Frontiers of thy Nuptials.
Vxor bona, optima possessio.
O worthy FREDERIKE, it was Lordly done,
That thou thy self in person hither come.
It shows thy mind is Noble, and indeed,
Sprung from the airie where true Eagles breed.
Eagles in Cages, are but Kings in Towers,
And but enjoy the name of Princely powers.
Kings are earths Gods, and Gods lived not at home,
But had a mind in foreign Climes to rome.
It Is registered not many Ages since,
Solon of Athens was to choose a Prince:
Being demanded how he meant to know,
A man well worthy of a Crown (or no)
Answered: If this choice be to me assig'nd,
I Will choose a Prince, and only by the mind:
If inward Noble, I heard wise men tell,
He Is worth a Crown, and 'twill seem passing well.
By this I noted, how thou truly merits
The perfect beauty that thou now inherits,
And sure she thinks thee a right worthy Prince,
That would thy travels (for her sake) convince.
If all that trauel'd might enjoy like store,
The lame would run, that scarce could go before.
Who would not travel, and to them owe duties,
When each eye finds perfections in their beauties?
Live long, great Prince, and be thy chosen prize
A fair terrestrial happy Paradize.
To Germany.
In time hereafter, yet remember Them,
How once she welcomed a young Prince of Rhene.
Amicos nouos parans, ne obliuiscaris veterum.
Virtus in se habet omnia bona.
To Elizab.
Fair Princess, virtuous; what to good belongs
Thou art the mother to, Applause so throngs,
To Attend on thee, and amongst the rest my part,
It is thy merits makes my love and Art,
Vprear'd on tiptoes, and yet would aspire
To give thee what is due, and my desire,
Tells but thy name, and it is all I can,
Those do no more, that profess what I am:
Nor can, nor need, for all remembers
That thou art only that Elizabeth,
Which foreign Echoes in loud notes does ring,
To be the daughter of great Britains King.
Nor is it I that labors in thy praise,
I know thy name's thy Trumpet, and can raise
It self to'th' height of honor; why I write
To tell my duty, and this Epithet,
Is stuffed full of Affection: what if poor?
The gifts are great when giuers have no more:
And should indeed be thought our Alexander,
Macedo's son: the Eastern great Commander,
Was named in Cottages by th'low'st degree;
Then of a Miller: o good God said he,
There Is not a Miller now but knows my name,
Meaning indeed Report adds life to Fame;
Fame's like the Sun, and not disdaines to view
Both Courts and Cottages, neither does rue
Of their great courtesies: mark well each seat,
And great men proud, makes them unseemly great.
A woman silent, great by birth before,
So richly dressed, Fame shapeth more and more.
Eliza, England truly boasts of thee
To be the Treasurer of each Treasury,
That ever graced a woman: must we leave thee?
I Will now trust Fortune; for it did not deceive me.
I ever thought so fair a flower as this,
Should grace some other place then Thamesis.
And yet fair Princess, virtuous I mean,
Remember Thames when thou art set on Rhene.
How gladly thundered she loud Epithets,
Professed peales, all to her Nuptial Rites?
Did she not summon gazers to thy Revels,
And what was knotty, with her tide she leuels?
Dis-gorged Canons fire in several shapes,
Enemies suffer when true Christians scapes.
Meteors in the air, she did her own self choke,
All London thought Thames would dissolve to smoke,
And all the Revels this fair Flood did make,
Worthy Eliza, was but for thy sake.
When thou wast married, she by chance heard tell,
And did but this because she loves thee well.
At thy depart, she will follow thee and weep,
And then she will turn thy worthy stock to seek,
And finding them, she will leave her sobbing moan,
Only she will each day see where thou have gone.
Well may she boast she was of able power,
To grace fair Rhenus with an English flower.
And when these two meet in great Oceans,
Thei'l know each other by their native Swans.
So by this marriage, Echo understands,
'Twill make acquainted both the Seas and Lands.
A happy time, a good world may it be,
After young Frederike came to match with thee.
O noted hour, blessed be the God above,
Thou but leaves England to enjoy thy love;
And for thy absence Britain in a mends
Has gained great store of true Christian friends.
Live, live, fair Princess, may thy seed, thy fame,
In cinders, ashes keep alive thy name.
Foelicitas est voluptas, quam paenitudo nulla sequitur.
Creator per creaturas cognoscendus.
Heu, some will say when they have lost a friend
And make his funeral, e're they see his end;
A number now are buried in conceit
When they are (indeed) not sick, yet tears will wait.
There is a death in absence some suppose,
Who thinks there is? for I am none of those:
Is England loath to loose so fair a creature
As art thy self Eliza? o, Dame Nature
Cast thee not in her mould of best perfection,
Ever to live a Virgin, heavens direction
Smiled at thy birth and meant to make a mother,
That when thou dies thou may leave such another.
Virginity dies a Traitor, her possessions
Like traitors Earldomes make such large digressions
They leave no Heirs at all, by this I see
A Virgin cannot leave posterity.
To Elizab.
As thou art honored for a Virgins life,
Thou still shall live, because a happy wife.
I heard it said, the first time Nestor smiled,
Was when he saw a woman great with child;
And being asked why he smiled (and blessed her,)
Said he, the next age will remember Nestor.
And thou fair Princess in the age to come,
Shall live by Fame when Natures life has done:
And death has truly paid her Fame to time
Shall build their blazons to the seed of thine.
Fama velox est, crescitque eundo.
To the Reader.
Love, like, leave, look at other ripe inventions:
And see how far mine differs from the rest:
My dull conceit conceiues some apprehensions,
These are indifferent, those are of the best.
Their's good, mine worser, good may worser smother,
The best appears best, when it is by the worst:
How can that be? yes; set by either other,
And that which looks best men will choose that first.
Mine Is poorly suited, yet my Patrons name's
So seated in the forehead of my Verse,
'Twill move the Reader to bestow some pains,
And iterate that which I do rehearse:
And when thou finds my Poems barely dressed,
Smile to thy self (and say) he did his best.
Augustine Tailor.

Vbi timor, ibi pudor.
Laus in prima sonat, virtus in fine coronat.
FAme's yet an Infant, Eccho's of report,
Now impes her pinions, and in scattering sort
Applauds what good's in acting, general praise
Crowns the beginning, and the end to raise,
Virtue's about to give a Laurel wreath
To worthy Frederike and Elizabeth:
When Time the merits of your time has gathered,
You shall appear young, when your time is withered.
Praemia victorum pendent a fine laborum.
FINIS.

