A Living Sadness, In Duty consecrated to the Immortal memory of our late
Deceased albe-loued Sovereign Lord, The Peereles Paragon of Princes, JAMES,
King of great Britain, France and Ireland.

Who departed this Life at his Manor of Theobalds, on Sunday last, the 27. of
March, 1625.

London Printed by E. All-de for H. Gosson.



TO THE MOST HIGH AND PVISSANT PRINCE, CHARLES by the Grace of God, the first
of that Name, and second Monarch of the whole Island of Great BRITAIN:
His undoubted Royalties being united under one and the same his most glorious
Crown, the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland;

Gods Immediate Vicegerent; Supreme head of all Persons, and Defender of the
true, ancient Christian Faith, in these his Empires and Dominions.

MOst Mighty Monarch of this mourning Land,
Upon the Knees of my submissiue mind:
I beg Acceptance at your Royal hand,
That my Lamenting Muse may favor find.
My Gracious Master was so good, so kind,
So just, so much-beloued near and far:
Which generally did Love, and Duty bind
From all, and from me in particular.
But as your Majesty undoubted are
The Heir unto his Virtues and his Crown:
I pray, that whether HEAVEN send Peace or War
You likewise may inherit his Renown.
And as Death struck his Earthly Glory down,
Left you in Majesty, and mourning Chief:
Yet through the World apparently it is known
Your Sorrow is an universal Grief.
Let this recomfort then your Princely heart,
That in this Duty, all men bears a part.
Your Majesty's most humble and obedient Subject and Servant: JOHN TAILOR.

YOU Gushing Torrents of my Tearedrown'd eyes,
Sad Partners of my hearts Calamities.
Tempesteous Sighs, like winds in Prison Pent:
Which (wanting vent) my grieved soul has Rent,
Deep wounding Groans (Companions of unrest)
Thronges from the Bottom of my Care-Craz'd Breast,
You three, Continual fellows of my mones
(My Brinish Tears, Sad sighs, and Pondrous Groans)
I do entreat you never to depart
But be the true Assistants of my heart,
In this Great Sorrow, (that my Trembling Quill
Describes) which, does our land with mourning fill.
Ah Death! could naught thy hunger satisfy,
But thou must Glut thy self with Majesty?
Could nothing thy Insatiate thirst Restrain,
But Royal Blood of our Dread Sovereign?
In this thy spite exceedes, beyond all Bounds,
And at one Blow, 3. kingdoms filld'st with wounds.
When thou that fatal deadly stroke did strike,
Then (Death) thou playd'st the Tyrant-Catholicke.
Our griefs are Universal, and the Sum
Cast up, the blow does wound all Christendom.
But wherefore (Death) do I on thee Exclaim?
Thou came in the Eternal Kings Great name,
For as, no mortal Power can thee prevent,
So thou do never, Come, but thou art sent.
And now thou came upon unwelcome wings,
To our best King, from the blessed King of Kings,
To Summon him to change his Earthly Throne,
For an Immortal, and a Heavenly one.
(When men unthankful, for a good Received,
It Is Just that of that good they be bereaved)
His Government, both God and Men did please,
Except such spirits as might complain of Ease,
Repining Passions wearied with much Rest,
The want to be Molested, might Molest.
Such men think Peace a Torment, and no Trouble
Is worse then Trouble, though it should come double.
I speak of such, as with our peace were Cloyed,
Though War I think, might well have bin Employed.
True Britains, wish just wars to Entertain,
(I mean no Aid for Spinola, or Spain)
But Time and Troubles would not suffer it,
Nor Gods Apointment would the same permit.
He is Inscrutable in all his ways,
And at his pleasure humbles, and will raise,
For Patience, is a virtue he Regards,
And in the End, with victory Rewards.
But whither has my Mournful Muse digrest?
From my beloved Sovereign Lord deceast:
Who was to us, and we to him, Even Thus,
To bad for him, and he, to good for us.
For good men in their Deaths, It Is understood
They leave the bad, and go unto the Good.
This was the cause, why God did take from hence,
This most Religious, Learned, Gracious Prince,
This Parragon of Kings, this Matchless Mirror,
This Faiths defending Antichristian Terror,
This Royal al-beloued King of Hearts,
This Pattern, and this Patron of good Arts,
This cabinet of mercy, Temperance,
Prudence, and Justice, that does man advance.
This Magazine of Pious Clemency,
This fountain of true Liberality,
This mind, where virtue daily did increase,
This Peace-full Servant to the God of Peace.
This second great Apollo, from whose Rays,
Poor Poetry did win Immortal Baies,
From whence the sacred Sisters, Treble Trine
Had life and motion, Influence divine,
These virtues did adorn his Diadem,
And God, in taking him, has taken them.
Of all which Blessings, (we must needs confess)
We are deprived for our unworthiness.
A good man's never mist till he be gone,
And then most vain and fruitless is our moan,
But as Heavens favors, down to us descended:
So if our thankfulness had but Ascended,
Had we made Conscience of our ways to sin,
So soon of him, we not deprived had bin.
Then let us not lament his loss so much,
But for our own unworthiness was such.
So from the unthankful Jews, God in his wrath
Took good Josias, by unlooked for death.
And for our sins, our ignorance must know,
We have procured, and felt this cureles blow.
And Christendom, I fear in losing him,
Is much dismembered, and has lost a limme.
As by the fruit the tree may be expressed,
His works declared, his learning manifest.
Whereby his wisdom wan this great renown,
That second Solomon wore Britains crown.
His pen restrained the strong, relieved the weak,
And graciously he could write, do and speak.
He had more force and vigor in his words,
Then neigh'bring Princes could have in their swords.
France, Denmark, Poland, Sweden, Germany,
Spain, Sauoy, Italy, and Muscouie,
Bohemia, and the fruitful Palatine,
The Swisses, Grisons, and the Veltoline,
As far as ever Sol, or Luna shined
Beyond the Western, or the Eastern Jude.
His counsel, and his favors were required,
Approved, Beloved, Applauded, and Admired:
When round about, the Nations far and near,
With cruel bloody wars infested were;
When Mars with sword and fire, in furious rage,
Spoiled and consumed, not sparing Sex or age;
Whilst mothers (with great grief) were childles made,
And Son against Sire opposed with trenchant blade:
When brother against brother, kin against kin,
Through death and danger did destruction win.
When Murders merciless, and beastly Rapes,
Theft, Famine (Miseries in sundry shapes)
While Mischiefs thus great Kingdoms ouerwhelme,
Our prudent Steeresman held great Britains Helm,
Conducting so this mighty Ship of State,
That strangers enuide, and admired thereat.
When blessed Peace, with terror and affright
Was in amazed and distracted flight
By bloody War, and in continual Chase,
Cours'd like a fearful Hare, from place to place:
Not daring any where to show her Head,
She (happily) into this Kingdom fled.
Whom Royal JAMES did freely entertain,
And graciously did keep Her all his Reign.
Whilst other Lands (that for her absence mourn)
With sighs and tears do wish her back return.
They find in loosing Her, they lost a bliss,
A hundred Towns in France can witness this,
Where Wars compulsion, or else composition
Did force Obedience, Bondage, or Submission.
Fields lay untilled, and fruitful Land lay wast,
And this was scarcely yet full three years past.
Where these uncivil civil Wars destroyed
Princes, Lords, Captains, men of Note employed,
One hundred sixty seven, in number all,
And Common people did past number fall.
These wretches (wearied with these homebred Iarres)
Love Peace, for being beaten sore with Wars.
Nor do I here inueigh against just Arms,
But against unjust, vnaturall Alarmes.
Just Wars are made, to make unjust Wars cease,
And in this sort Wars are the means of Peace.
In all which unmoyles, Brutaine was at rest,
No thund^ing Cannons did our Peace molest.
No chu^^^^^ Drum, no Rapes, no slaught^ing wounds;
No Trumpets clangor to the Battle sounds:
But every Subject here enjoyed his own,
And did securely Reap what they had Sown.
Each man beneath his Fig Tree, and his Vine
In Peace with plenty did both Suppe and Dine.
O GOD how much thy Goodness does or'eflow,
Thou have not dealt with other Nations so!
And all these blessings which from Heaven did spring,
Were by our Sovereigns wisdoms managing.
Gods Steward, both in Office, and in Name,
And his account was evermore his aim:
The thought from out his mind did seldom slip,
That once he must give up his Steward-shippe.
His Anger written on weak water was,
His P^tience and his Love were grau'd in Brass:
His Fury like a wandering Star soon gone,
His Clemency was like a fixed one.
So that as many loved him whilst he lived,
More then so many by his Death are grieved.
The hand of Heaven was only his support,
And blessed him in the Nobles of his Court,
To whom his Bounty was expressed so Royal,
That he these twenty years found none disloyal;
But as bright Jewels of his Diadem,
They faithfully served him, he honored them.
And as in life, they were on him relying,
So many of them vshered him in dying.
Richmands and Linox Duke, first led the way,
N^xt Dorsets spirit forsook her house of Clay.
Then Linox Duke again, Duke L^dwicks Brother
Was third, and good Southampton fourth another.
Lord Wri^thsly next, Southamptons Noble Son,
The race of his mortality did run.
Next did old Charles, true honored Nottingham
(The Brooche and honor of his House and Name)
Brave Belfast next, his vital thr^ed was spunne,
And last the Noble Marquess Hambleton.
These in the compass of one year went hence,
And lead the way to their beloved Prince.
And our deceased Sovereign quickly went,
To change Earths Pomp, for glory permanent.
Like Phoebus in his Course h'aroase and ran
His Reign in March both ended and began.
And as if he had bin a Star that is fixed
His Rise and Set were but two days betwixt,
And once in two and twenty years it is proved,
That the most fixed Stars are something moved,
But in his end, his Constancy we find
He had no mutable or wavering mind:
For that Religion which his tongue and pen
Did still defend with God, maintain with men:
That Faith which in his Life he did express,
He in his Death did constantly profess;
His Treasure and his Jewels, they were such,
As I think Englands Kings had never so much.
And still to men of honor and desert,
His Coffers were as open as his heart.
Peace, Patience, Justice, Mercy, Piety;
These were his Jewels in variety:
His Treasure always was his Subjects Love,
Which they still gave him, as the effects did prove:
Which like to Earths contributary streams,
Paid homage to their Sovereign Ocean, James:
He knew, that Princes Treasure to be best,
That's laid up in the loyal Subjects breast;
And only 'twas the Riches of the mind,
To which he couetously was inclinde.
Thus was he blessed in Person, blessed in State,
Blessed in his first, and in his Latter date:
Blessed in his education, blessed in's learning,
Blessed in his Wisdom, Good and Ill discerning,
Blessed in his Marriage, and in his royal Race,
But blessed most of all in Gods high Grace.
He did his God deuoutely serve and fear,
He loved him, and his love he held most dear:
He honored and obayde him faithfully;
He in his favor lived, and so did dye:
His duty unto God he knew the way
And means, to make his Subjects him obey:
He knew that if he served his God, that then
He should be served, and feared, and loved of Men:
And that if he Gods Statutes did respect,
That Men would fear his Statutes to neglect.
Thus his Obedience upward, did bring down
Obedience to his Person, and his Crown.
He did advance the good, suppressed the bad,
Relieved the poor, and comforted the sad:
The widow, and the orphant fatherless,
He often has supplied in their distress,
For why, to rich and poor, to great and small,
He was a common Father unto all.
His affability and Princely parts,
Made him a mighty Conqueror of Hearts:
Offenders whom the law of life depriues,
His Mercy pardoned, and preserved their lives,
To prisoners, and poor captives misery,
He was a Magazine of charity,
For losses that by sea, or fire did come,
He has bestowed many a liberal sum.
Besides, for Churches, it most plain appears,
That more has bin repaired in twenty years
(In honor of our God, and Saviors name)
Then in an hundred years before he came.
Our ancient famous Universities,
Divine, and Humane learnings Nurseries:
Such dewes of Grace, as the Almighties will,
Was pleased (through those Limbecks) to distill.
Which (spite of Romish rage, or Satan's hate)
Has caused the glorious gospel propogate:
Our (light of learning) JAMES, did still protect them,
And as a nursing Father did affect them.
Thus was He, for our souls, and bodies health,
Defender of both Church and Commonwealth.
For Ireland, he has much reduced that nation,
Churches with Land endowed, caused much pla^tation.
Whereby Ciuility is planted there,
The Kings Obedience, and the Almigties Fear.
These Deeds this worthy godly Prince has done,
For which he has perpetual praises won.
Ah! what a gracious Man of God was this?
Mercy and Justice did each other kiss;
His Affability whilst he did live,
Did make all Men themselves to him to give.
Thus lived Great JAMES, and thus Great JAMES did dye,
And dying thus does live Eternally.
With Honor he did live, and Life forsook,
With Patience like a Lamb his Death he took:
And leaving Kingly cares, and Princely pain,
He now inherits an Immortal Reign:
For royal grieved, perplexed Majesty,
He has a Crown of perpetuity:
For miserable Pomp that's transitory,
He is advanced to everlasting glory.
And as he loved, and lived, and did in Peace,
So he in Peace did quietly decease:
So let him rest in that most blessed condition,
That's subject to no change or intermission;
Whilst we his Servants, of him thus bereft,
With grieved and perplexed hearts are left;
But God in mercy looking on our grief,
Before he gave the wound, ordained relief:
Though duteous Sorrow bids us not forget
This cloud of Death, wherein our Sun did set,
His Sons resplendent Majesty did rise,
Loadstone, and Loadstarre to our hearts and eyes:
He cheeres our drooping spirits, he frees our fears
And (like the Sun) dryes up our dewie Tears.
All those his servants that lamenting Grieve
King Charles his Grace and favor does Relieve:
But as they served his Father, so he will
Be their most loving Lord and Sovereign still,
As they were first to their Master living (being dead)
They are relieved, and recomforted.
Thus Charity does in succession run,
A Pious Father leaves a Godly Son:
Which Son his Kingly Government shall pass
His Kingdoms Father, as his Father was.
For though Great James interred in earth does lie
Great Charles his breast intombes his memory,
And here is our comforts midst our discontents
He Is seasoned with his Fathers Documents.
And as the Almighty was his shield and spear,
Protecting him from danger every where:
From most unnatural foul Conspiracy,
From Powder plots, and hellish Treachery,
Whilst he both lived and did, beloved, Renound,
And Treason did it self, it self confound,
So I inuoke the Eternal Providence
To be to Charles a Buckler and defense,
Supported only by the Power Divine
As long as Sun or Moon or Stars shall shine.
To all that have Read this Poem.
I Boast not, but his Majesty that is dead
Was many times well pleased my lines to read:
And every line word, syllable and letter
Were (by his reading) graced and made better,
And howsoever they were good, or ill
His Bounty showed, he did accept them still;
He was so good and gracious unto me,
That I the vilest wretch on earth should be
If, for his sake I had not writ this verse
My last poor duty, to his Royal Hearse,
Two causes made me this sad Poem write,
The first, my humble duty did inuit,
The last to shun that vice which does include
All other vices, foul ingratitude.
FINIS.

