THE PENNYLES PILGRIMAGE, OR The Money-lesse perambulation, of JOHN TAILOR,
Alias the Kings Majesty's Water-Poet.

HOW HE TRAVAILED ON FOOT from London to Edenborough in Scotland, not carrying
any Money to or fro, neither Begging, Borrowing, or Asking Meat, drink or
Lodging.

With his Description of his Entertainment in all places of his Journey, and a
true Report of the unmatchable Hunting in the Brea of Mar and Badenoch in
Scotland.

With other Observations, some serious and worthy of Memory, and some merry and
not hurtful to be Remembered.

Lastly that (which is Rare in a Trauailer) all is true.

LONDON Printed by Edw: All de, at the charges of the Author. 1618.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE, AND RIGHT Honorable Lord, GEORGE Marquess of Buckingham,
Viscount VILLEIRS, Baron of Whaddon, Justice in Air of all his Majesty's
Forests, Parkes, and Chases beyond Trout, Master of the Horse to his Majesty,
and one of the Gentlemen of his Highness Royal Bedchamber, Knight of the
most Noble order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council of both the Kingdoms of England and Scotland.
RIght Honorable, and worthy honored Lord, as in my Travails, I was
Entertained, welcomed, and relieved by many Honorable Lords, Worshipful
Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, and others, both in England, and Scotland. So now
your Lordships Inclination has incited, or invited my poor Muse to shelter
herself under the shadow of your Honorable Patronage, not that there is any
worth at all in my sterill invention, but in all Humility I acknowledge that
it is only your Lordships acceptance, that is able to make this nothing,
something, and withal engage me ever.

Your Honors, in all observance: JOHN TAILOR.

To all my loving Adventurers, by what name or title so ever, my general
salutation.
REader, these Travails of mine into Scotland, were not undertaken, neither in
imitation, or emulation of any man, but only devised by my self, on purpose
to make trial of my friends, both in this Kingdom of England, and that of
Scotland, and because I would be an eye witness of diverse things which I had
heard of that Country; and whereas many shallow-brain'd Critickes, do lay an
aspersion on me, that I was set on by others, or that I did undergo this
project, either in malice, or mockage of Master Benjamin Ionson, I vow by the
faith of a Christian, that their imaginations are all wide, for he is a
Gentleman, to whom I am so much obliged for many undeserved courtesies that I
have received from him, and from others by his favor, that I durst never to be
so impudent or ungrateful, as either to suffer any man's persuasions, or mine
own instigation, to incite me, to make so bad a requital, for so much
goodness formerly received; so much for that, and now Reader, if you expect

That I should write of Cities scituations,
Or that of Countries I should make relations:
Of brooks, crooks, nooks; of rivers, boorns and rills,
Of mountains, fountains, Castles, Towers and hills,
Of Shieres, and Pieres, and memorable things,
Of lives and deaths of great commanding Kings:
I touch not those, they not belong to me,
But if such things as these you long to see,
Lay down my Book, and but vouchsafe to reed
The learned Camden, or laborious Speed.
And so God speed you and me, whilst I rest yours in all thankfulness: JOHN
TAILOR.

TAILORS PENNILESSE PILGRIMAGE.
LIst Lordings, list (if you have lust to list)
I write not here a tale of had I wist:
But you shall hear of travels, and relations,
Descriptions of strange (yet English) fashions.
And he that not believes what here is writ,
Let him (as I have done) make proof of it.
The year of grace, accounted (as I ween)
One thousand, twice three hundred and eighteen,
And to relate all things in order duly,
'Twas Tuesday last; the fourteenth day of July,
Saint Revels day, the Almanacke will tell ye
The sign in Virgo was, or near the belly:
The Moon full three days old, the wind full South;
At these times I began this trick of youth.
I speak not of the Tide; for understand,
My legs I made my Oars, and rowed by land,
Though in the morning I began to go,
Good fellows trooping, flocked me so,
That make what have I could, the Sun was set,
E're from the gates of London I could get.
At last I took my latest leave, thus late
At the Bell Inn, that is extra Aldersgate.
There stood a horse that my prouant should carry,
From that place to the end of my fegarie,
My Horse, no Horse, or Mare, but guelded Nagge,
That with good understanding bore my bag:
And of good carriage he himself did show,
These things are ex'lent in a beast, you know.
There, in my Knapsack, (to pay hungers fees)
I had good Bacon, Biscuit, Neates-tongue, Cheese,
With Roses, Barbaries, of each Conserues,
And Mithridate, that vigrous health preserues;
And I entreat you take these words for no-lyes,
I had good Aqua vita, Rosa so-lies:
With sweet Ambrosia, (the Gods own drink)
Most ex'lent geere for mortals, as I think.
Besides, I had both vinegar and oil,
That could a daring saucy stomach foil.
This foresaid Tuesday night 'twixt eight and nine,
Well rigged and ballac'd, both with Beer and Wine,
I stumbling forward, thus my iaunt begun,
And went that night as far as Islington.
There did I find, ( I dare affirm it bold)
A Maydenhead of twenty five years old,
But surely it was painted, like a whore,
And for a sign, or wonder, hanged at' door,
Which show, a Maidenhead, that is kept so long,
May be hanged up, and yet sustain no wrong.
There did my loving friendly Host begin
To entertain me freely to his Inn:
And there my friends, and good associates,
Each one to mirth himself accommodates.
At Well head both for welcome, and for cheer,
Having a good New tonne, of good stale Beer:
There did we Trundle down health, after health
(Which oftentimes impaires both health and wealth.)
Till every one had filled his mortal Trunk,
And only Nobody was three parts drunk.
The morrow next, Wednesday Saint Swithins day,
From ancient Islington I took my way.
At Hollywell I was enforced carrowse,
Ale high, and mighty, at the Blinde-mans house.
But there is a help to make amends for all,
That though the Ale be great, the Pots be small.
At High-gate hill to a strange house I went,
And saw the people were to eating bent,
I neither Borrowed, Craved, Asked, Begged or Bought,
But most laborious with my teeth I wrought.
I did not this cause meat or drink was scant,
But I did practice thus before my want;
Like to a Tilter that would win the prize,
Before the day he will often exercise.
So I began to put in ure, at first
These principles against hunger, and against thirst,
Close to the Gate, their dwelt a worthy man,
That well could take his whiffe, and quaffe his Can,
Right Robin Good Fellow, but humors evil
Do call him Robin Pluto, or the Devil.
But finding him a Devil, freely hearted,
With friendly farewels I took leave and parted.
And as along I did my Journey take,
I drank at Broomes-well, for pure fashions sake.
Two miles I traveled then, without a bayte,
The Sarazens head at Whetstone entering straight,
I found an Host, might lead an Host of men,
Exceeding Fat, yet named Lean, and Few,
And though we make small reckoning of him here,
He Is known to be a very Great man there.
There I took leave, of all my Company,
Bade all farewell, yet spoke to Nobody.
Good Reader think not strange, what I compile,
For Nobody was with me all this while.
And Nobody did drink, and wink, and scinke,
And on occasion freely spend his Chinke.
If any one desire to know the man,
Walk, stumble, Trundle, but in Barbican.
There Is as good Beer and Ale as ever twang'd,
And in that street kind Nobody is hanged,
But leaving him, unto his matchless fame,
I to St. Albanes in the Evening came,
Where Mr. Tailor, at the Sarazens head,
Vnask'd (unpaid for) me both lodged and sed.
The Tapsters, Hostlers, Chamberlaines, and all,
Saved me a labor, that I need not call,
The Iugges were filled and filled, the cups went round,
And in a word great kindness there I found,
For which both to my Cosen, and his men,
I Will still be thankful in word, deed, and pen.
Till Thursday morning there I made my stay,
And then I went plain Dunstable highway.
My very heart with drought me thought did shrink,
I went twelve miles, and no one bad me drink.
Which made me call to mind, that instant time,
That Drunkenness was a most sinful crime.
When Puddle-hill I footed down, and past
A mile from thence I found a Hedge at last.
There stroke we sail, our Bacon, Cheese and Bread
We drew like Fiddlers, and like Farmers fed,
And whilst 2. hours we there did take out ease,
My Nagge made shift to mump green Pulse and Pease.
Thus we our hungry stomachs did supply,
And drank the water of a Brook hard by.
A way t'ward Hockley in the hole, we make,
When straight a Horsman did me ouer-take,
Who knew me, and would saine have given me Coin,
I said my Bonds did me from Coin inioyne.
I thanked and prayed him to put up his Chinke,
And willingly I wished it drowned in drink.
Away Rode he, but like an honest man,
I found at Hockley standing at the Swan,
A formal Tapster, with a Judge and glass,
Who did Arest me, I most willing was
To try the Action, and straight put in bale,
My fees were paid before, with sixe-pence Ale.
To quitt this kindness, I most willing am
The man that paid for all, his name is Dam
At the green Dragon, against Grayes-Iune gate,
He lives in good Repute, and honest state.
I forward went in this my Roauing race,
To Stony Stratford I toward night did pace,
My mind was fixed through the Town to pass,
To find some Lodging in the Hay or Grass,
But at the Queens Arms from the window there,
A comfortable voice I chaunc'd to hear,
Call Tailor, Tailor and be hanged come hither,
I looked for small entreaty and went thither,
There were some friends, which I was glad to see,
Who knew my Journey; lodged, and boorded me.
On Friday morn, as I would take my way,
My friendly Host entreated me to stay,
Because it Rained he told me I should have,
Meat, Drink, and Horse-meate and not pay or crave.
I thanked him, and for's love remain his debtor,
But if I live, I will requite him better.
(From Stony Stratford, the way hard with stones)
Did founder me, and vex me to the bones,
In blustering weather, both for wind and Rain,
Through Tocetter I trotted, with much pain,
Two miles from thence, we satt us down and dynde,
Well Bulwark'd by a hedge, from rain and wind.
We having fed, away incontinent,
With weary pace toward Dauentry we went,
Four miles short of it, one o're-tooke me there,
And told me he would leave a Judge of Beer,
At Dauentry at the Horse-shoe, for my use,
I thought it no good manners to refuse,
But thanked him, for his kind unasked gift,
Whilst I was lame as scarce a leg could lift,
Came ilmping after to that stony Town,
Whose hard streets, made me almost halt tight down.
There had my friend performed the words he said,
And at the door a Judge of liquor staide
The folks were all informed, before I came,
How, and wherefore my Journey I did frame,
Which caused mine Hostess from her door come out,
(having a great Wart Rampant on her snowt.)
The Tapsters, Hostlers, one another call,
The Chamberlaines with admiration all,
Were filled with wonder, more then wonderful,
As if some Monster sent from the Mogull,
Some Elephant from Affricke, I had been,
Or some strange beast from the Amazonian Queen.
As Buzards, Widgions, Woodcocks, and such foul,
Do gaze and wonder at the broad-fac'd Owl,
So did these brainlesse Asses, all-amaz'd,
With admirable Non sense talked and gazed.
They knew my state, (although not told by me,)
That I could scarcely go, they all did see,
They drank of my Beer, that to me was given,
But gave me not a drop, to make all eeuen.
And that which in my mind was most amiss,
My Hostess she stood by and saw all this,
Had she but said, come near the house my friend,
For this day here shall be your Iourneys end,
Then had she done, the thing which she did not,
And I in kinder words had paid the shot.
I do entreat my friends, (as I have some)
If they to Dauentry do chance to come,
That they will balke that Inn; or if by chance,
Or accident into that house they glaunce,
Kind Gentlemen, as they by you reap profit,
My hostess Care of me, pray tell her of it.
Yet do not neither, Lodge there when you will,
You for your money shall be welcome still.
From thence that night, although my bones were sore,
I made a shift to hobble seau'n miles more:
The way to Dunchurch, foul with dirt and mire,
Able, I think, both man and horse to tire.
On Dunsmore Heath, a hedge does there enclose
Grounds, on the right hand, there I did repose.
Wits whetstone, want, there made us quickly learn,
With knives to cut down Rushes, and green Fearne,
Of which we made a field-bed in the field,
Which fleepe, and rest, and much content did yield.
There with my mother Earth, I thought it fit
To lodge, and yet no Incest did commit:
My bed was Curtain'd with good wholesome airs,
And being weary, I went up no stayres:
The sky my Canopy, bright Pheabe shinde,
Sweet bawling Zephirus breathed gentle wind,
In heavens Star Chamber I did lodge that night,
Ten thousand Stars, me to my bed did light;
There baracadoed with a bank lay we
Below the lofty branches of a tree,
There my bed-fellowes and companions were,
My Man, my Horse, a Bull, four Cowes, two Steer:
But yet for all this most confused rowt,
We had no bed-staues, yet we fell not out,
Thus Nature, like an ancient free Vpholster,
Did furnish us with bedstead, bed, and bolster;
And the kind skies, (for which high Heaven be thanked,
Allowed us a large Covering and a Blanket:
Aurora's face began light our lodging dark.
We arose and mounted, with the mounting Lark,
Through plashes, puddles, thick, thin, wet and dry,
I trauail'd to the City Couentry.
There Master Doctor Holland caused me stay
The day of Saturn, and the Sabbath day.
Most friendly welcome, he did me afford,
I was so entertained at bed and board,
Which as I dare not brag how much it was,
I dare not be ingrate and let it pass,
But with thanks many I remember it
(In stead of his good deeds) in words and writ,
He used me like his son, more then a friend,
And he on Monday his commends did send
To Newhall, where a Gentleman did dwell,
Who by his name is hight Sacheuerell.
The Tuesday Iulyes one and twenteth day,
I to the City Lichfield took my way,
At Sutton Coffill with some friends I met,
And much ado I had from thence to get,
There I was almost put unto my trumps,
My Horses shoes were worn as thin as pumps;
But noble Vulcan, a mad smuggy Smith,
All reparations me did furnish with.
The shoes were well removed, my Palfrey shod,
And he referred the payment unto God.
I found a friend, when I to Lichfield came,
A Ioyner, and John Piddock is his name,
He made me welcome, for he knew my iaunt,
And he did furnish me with good prouant:
He offered me some money, I refused it,
And so I took my leave, with thanks excused it.
That Wednesday I a weary way did pass,
Rain, wind, stones, dirt, and dabling dewie grass,
With here and there a pelting scattered village,
Which yielded me no charity, or pillage:
For all the day, nor yet the night that followed,
One drop of drink I Am sure my gullet swallowed.
At night I came t'a stony Town called Stone,
Where I knew none, nor was I known of none:
I therefore through the streets held on my pace,
Some two miles farther to some resting place:
At last I spide a meddow newly mowde,
The Hay was rotten, the ground half o're-flowde:
We made a breach, and entered horse and man,
There our pauillion, we to pitch began,
Which we erected with green Broom and Hay
T'expell the cold, and keep the rain away;
The sky all muffled in a cloud began lowre,
And presently there sell a mighty shower,
Which without intermission down did power,
From ten at night, until the mornings four.
We all that time close in our Couch did lie,
Which being well compacted, kept us dry.
The worst was, we did neither sup nor sleep,
And so a temperate diet we did keep.
The morning all enroab'd in drisling fogges,
We being as ready as we had been dogs:
We need not stand upon long ready making,
But gaping, stretching, and our ears well shaking:
And for I found my Host and Hostess kind,
I like a true man left my sheets behind.
That Thursday morn, my weary course I framed,
Unto a Town that is Newcastle named,
(Not that Newcastle standing upon Tine)
But this Towns situation does confine
Near Cheshiere, in the famous County Stafford,
And for their love, I owe them not a straw for it;
But now my versing Muse craves some repose,
And whilst she sleeps I Will spowt a little prose.
In this Town of Newcastle, I ouertooke an Hostler, and I asked him what the
next town was called, that was in my way toward Lancaster, he holding the end
of a riding rod in his mouth, as if it had been a Fluit, piped me this
answer, and said, Talk on the hill; I asked him again what he said, Talk
on the hill: I demanded the third time, and the third time he answered me as
he did before, Talk on the hill. I began to grow chollericke, and asked him
why he could not talk, or tell me my way as well there, as on the hill; at
last I was resolved, that the next Town was four miles off me, and the name
of it was, Talk on the hill. I had not travailed above two miles farther: but
my last nights supper (which was as much as nothing) my mind being informed of
it by my stomach. I made a virtue of necessity, and went to breakfast in the
sun: I have sared better at three suns many a time before now, in
Aldersgate street, Creeplegate, and new Fishstreete; but here is the odds, at
those Suns they will come upon a man with a Tavern bill, as sharp cutting
as a Tailors bill of Items: A Watch-mans blil, or a Welch-hooke falls not
half so heavy upon a man; besides, most of the Vintners have the law in their
own hands, and have all their Actions, Cases, Bills of Debt, and such
Reckonings tried at their own Bars; from whence there is no appeal. But
leaving these impertinencies, in the material Sunne-shiee, we eat a
substantial Dinner, and like miserable Guestes we did budget up the
Reuersions.

And now with sleep, my Muse has eased her brain.
I Will turn my style from prose, to verse again.
That which we could not have, we freely spared,
And wanting drink, most soberly we fared.
We had great store of foul (but 'twas foul way)
And kindly every step entreates me stay,
The clammy clay sometimes my heels would trip,
One foot went forward, the other back would slip.
This weary day, when I had almost past,
I came unto Sir Vrian Legh's at last,
At Adlington, near Macksfield he does dwell,
Beloved, respected, and reputed well.
Through his great love, my stay with him was fixed,
From Thursday night, till noone on Monday next,
At his own table I did daily eat,
Whereat may be supposed, did want no meat,
He would have given me Gold or Silver either,
But I with many thanks, received neither.
And thus much without flattery I dare swear,
He is a Knight beloved far and near.
First he is beloved of his God above,
(which love, he loves to keep, beyond all love)
Next with a Wife and Children he is blessed,
Each having Gods fear planted in their breast.
With fair Demaines, Reuennue of good Lands,
He Is fairly blessed by the Almighties hands,
And as he is happy in these outward things,
So from his inward mind, continual springes
Fruits of Devotion, deeds of Piety,
Good hospitable works of Charity,
Just in his Actions, Constant in his word,
And one that won his honor with his sword.
He Is no Carranto, Capr'ing, Carpet Knight,
But he knows when, and how to speak or fight.
I cannot flatter him, say what I can,
He Is every way a complete Gentleman.
I write not this, for what he did to me,
But what mine ears, and eyes did hear and see,
Nor do I pen this to enlarge his fame,
But to make others Imitate the same.
For like a Trumpet were I pleased to blow,
I would his worthy worth more amply show,
But I already fear have been too bold,
And crave his pardon, me excusd to hold.
Thanks to his Sons and servants every one,
Both males and females all, excepting none.
To bear a letter he did me require,
Near Manchester, unto a good Esquire:
His kinsman Edmond Prestwitch, he ordained,
That I at Manchester was Entertained
Two nights, and one day, ere we thence could pass,
For Men and Horse, Roast, boiled, and Oats, and Grass:
This Gentleman, not only gave me harbor,
But in the morning sent to me his Barber,
Who lau'd, and shau'd me, still I spard my purse,
Yet sure he left me many a hair the worse.
But in conclusion, when his work was ended,
His Glass informd, my face was much amended.
And for the kindness he to me did show,
God grant his Customers beards faster grow,
That though the time of year be dear or cheap,
From fruitful faces he may mow and reap.
Then came a Smith, with Shoes, and Tooth and Nail,
He searched my Horse hooues, mending what did fail,
Yet this I note, my Nagge, through stones and dirt,
Did shift shoes twice, ere I did shift one shirt:
Can these kind things be in oblivion hid?
No, Mr. Prestwitch, this and much more did,
His friendship did command, and freely gave
All before writ, and more then I durst crave.
But leaving him a little, I must tell,
How men of Manchester, did use me well,
Their loves they on the tenter-hookes did rack,
Roast, Boyld, Baked, too too much, White, Claret, Sack,
Nothing they thought too heavy or too hot,
Can followed Can, and Pot succeeded Pot,
That what they could do, all they thought too little,
Striving in love the Traveler to whittle.
We went unto the house of one John Pinners,
(A man that lives amongst a crew of Sinners)
And there Eight several sorts of Ale we had,
All able to make one stark drunk or mad.
But I with courage bravely flinched not,
And gave the Town leave to discharge the shot.
We had at one time set upon the Table,
Good Ale of Hisope, 'twas no Esope Fable:
Then had we Ale of Sage, and Ale of Malt,
And Ale of Worme-wood, that can make one halt,
With Ale of Rosemary, and Bettony,
And two Ales more, or else I needs must lie.
But to conclude this drinking A lie tale,
We had a sort of Ale, called Scuruy Ale.
Thus all these men, at their own charge and cost,
Did strive whose love might be expressed most.
And farther to declare their boundless loves,
They saw I wanted, and they gave me Gloves,
In deed, and very deed, their loves were such,
That in their praise I cannot write too much;
They merit more then I have here compiled,
I Lodged at the Eagle and the Child,
Whereas my Hostess, (a good Ancient woman)
Did entertain me with respect, not common.
She caused my Linen, Shirts, and Bands be washed,
And on my way she caused me be refresht,
She gave me twelve Silk points, she gave me Baken,
Which by me much refused, at last was taken,
In troath she proved a mother unto me,
For which, I evermore will thankful be.
But when to mind these kindnesses I call,
Kind Mr. Prestwitch Author is of all,
And yet Sr. Vrian Leigh's good Commendation
Was the maine ground of this my Recreation.
From both of them; there what I had, I had,
Or else my entertainment had bin bad.
O all you worthy men of Manchester,
True bred bloods of the County Lancaster)
When I forget what you to me have done,
Then let me headlong to confusion run.
To Noble Mr. Prestwach I must give
Thanks, upon thanks, as long as I do live,
His love was such, I never can pay the score,
He far surpassed all that went before,
A horse and man he sent, with boundless bounty,
To bring me quite through Lancasters large County.
Which I well know is Fifty miles at large,
And he defrayed all the Cost and charge.
This unlooked pleasure, was to me such pleasure,
That I can never express my thanks with measure.
So Mistress Saracoale, Hostess kind,
And Manchester with thanks I left behind.
The Wednesday being Iulyes twenty nine,
My Journey I to Preston did Confine,
All the day long it rayned but one shower,
Which from the Morning to the Ene'n did power,
And I, before to Preston I could get,
Was sowsd, and pickeld both with Rain and sweat.
But there I was supplied, with fire and food,
And any thing I wanted, sweet and good.
There, at the Hind, kind Mr. Hind mine Host,
Kept a good table, Baked and boyld, and Roast,
There Wedensday, Thursday, Friday I did stay,
And hardly got from thence on Saturday.
Unto my Lodging often did repair,
Kind Mr. Thomas Banister, the Mayor,
Who is of worship, and of good Respect,
And in his Charge discreet and circumspect.
For I protest to God I never saw,
A Town more wisely Governed by the Law.
They told me when my Sovereign there was last,
That one man's rashness, seemed to give distaste*
It grieved them all, but when at last they found,
His Majesty was pleased, their joys were crowned,
He knew the fairest Garden has some weeds,
He did accept their kind intents, for deedess
One man there was, that with his zeal too hot.
And furious have, himself much over* shot.
But what man is so foolish, that desires
To get good Fruit, from thistles, thorns and briars?
Thus much I thought good to demonstrate here,
Because I saw how much they grieved were.
That any way, the least part of offense,
Should make them seem offensive to their Prince.
Thus three nights was I staide and lodged in Preston,
And saw nothing ridiculous to jest on,
Much cost and charge the Mayor upon me spent,
And on my way two miles, with me he went,
There (by good chance) I did more friendship get,
The under Shriefe of Lancashire, we met,
A Gentleman that loved, and knew me well,
And one whose bounteous mind does bear the bell.
There, as if I had been a noted thief,
The Mayor delivered me unto the Shriefe.
The Shriefes authority did much prevail,
He sent me unto one that kept the Iayle.
Thus I perambulating, poor John Tailor,
Was given from Mayor to Shriefe, from Shriefe to Iaylor,
The Iaylor kept an Inn, good beds, good cheer,
Where paying nothing, I found nothing dear.
For the under Shriefe kind Master Couill named,
(A man for housekeeping renowned and famed)
Did cause the Town of Lancaster afford
Me welcome, as if I had been a Lord.
And it is reported, that for daily bounty,
His mate can scarce be found in all that County.
Th'extreames of mizer, or of prodigal
He shunnes, and lives discreet and liberal,
His wives mind, and his own are one, so fixed,
That Argos eyes could see no odds betwixt,
And sure the difference, (if there difference be)
Is who shall do most good, or he, or she.
Poor folks reports, that for releeuing them,
He and his wife, are each of them a Iem;
At th'Inne, and at his house two nights I staide,
And what was to be paid, I know he paid;
If nothing of their kindness I had wrote,
Ungrateful me the world might justly note:
Had I declared all I did hear and see,
For a great flatt'rer then I deemed should be,
He and his wife, and modest daughter Besse,
With Earth and Heavens felicity, God bless.
Two days a man of his at his command,
Did guide me to the midst of Westmerland,
And my Conductor, with a liberal fist
To keep me moist, scarce any Alehouse mist.
The fourth of August (weary, halt, and lame)
We in the dark, t a Town called Sebder came,
There Master Borrowd, my kind honest Host,
Upon me did bestow unasked cost.
The next day I held on my journey still,
Six miles unto a place called Carling hill,
Where Master Edmond Branthwaite does recide,
Who made me welcome, with my man and guide.
Our entertainment, and our fare was such,
It might have satisfied our betters much;
Yet all too little was, his kind heart thought,
And five miles on my way himself me brought,
At Orton he, I, and my man did dine
With Master Corney, a good true Divine,
And surely Master Branthwait's well beloved,
His firm integrity is much approved:
His good effects, does make him still affected
Of God and good men, (with regard) respected.
He sent his man with me, over Dale and Down,
Who lodged, and borded me at Peereth Town,
And such good cheer, and bedding there I had,
That nothing, (but my weary self) was bad;
There a fresh man, (I know not for whose sake)
With me a journey would to Carlisle make;
But from that City, about two miles wide
Good Sir John Dalston lodged me and my guide.
Of all the Gentlemen in England bounds,
His house is nearest to the Scottish grounds,
And Fame proclaims him, far and near, aloud,
He Is free from being covetous, or proud:
His son Sir George, most affable, and kind,
His fathers image, both in form and mind:
On Saturday to Carlisle both did ride,
Where (by their loves and leaves) I did abide,
Where of good entertainment I found store,
From one that was the Mayor the year before,
His name is Master Adam Robinson,
I the last English friendship with him won.
He (gratis) found a guide to bring me thorough, My thanks to Sir John and S.
George Dalstone, with Sir Hen: Gurwin

From Carlisle to the City Edinborough:
This was a help, that was a help alone,
Of all my helps inferior unto none.
Fight miles from Carlisle runs a little River,
Which Englands bounds, Over Eskl waded.
from Scotlands grounds does sever.
Without Horse, Bridge, or Boat I over did get
On foot, I went yet scarce my shoes did wet.
I being come to this long looked for land,
Did mark, remarke, note, renote, viewd and scand:
And I saw nothing that could change my will,
But that I thought my self in England still.
The Kingdoms are so nearly joined and fixed,
There scarcely went a pair of Sheares betwixt;
There I saw sky above, and earth below,
And as in England, there the Sun did show:
The hills with Sheep repleate, The before named Knights had given money to my
Guile of wc he left some part at every Ale-hoose.
with Corn the dale,
And many a cottage yielded good Scotch Ale;
This County (Avandale) in former times,
Was the cursed climate of rebellious crimes:
For Cumberland and it, both Kingdoms borders,
Were ever ordered, by their own disorders,
Such sha king, shifting, cutting throats, and thieuing,
Each taking pleasure, in the others grieuing;
And many times he that had wealth to night,
Was by the morrow morning beggerd quite:
To many years this pell-mell fury lasted,
That all these borders were quite spoiled and wasted,
Confusion, hurly-burly reigned and reueld,
The Churches with the lowly ground were leueld;
All memorable monuments defaced,
All places of defense o'rethrowne and rac'd.
That who so then did in the borders dwell,
Lived little happier then those in hell.
But since the all-disposing God of heaven,
Has these two Kingdoms to one Monarch given,
Blessed peace, and plenty on them both has showered
Exile, and hanging has the thieves deuowr'd,
That now each subject may securely sleep,
His Sheep, and neat, the black the white does keep,
For now those Crowns are both in one combinde
Those former borders, that each one confinde,
Appears to me (as I do understand)
To be almost the Center of the land,
This was a blessed heaven expounded riddle,
To thrust great Kingdoms skirts into the middle.
Long may the isntrumental cause survive
From him and his, succession still derive
True heirs unto his virtues, and his throane,
That these two Kingdoms ever may be one.
This County of all Scotland is most poor,
By reason of the outrages before,
Yet mighty store of Corn I saw there grow,
And as good grass as ever man did mow:
And as that day I twenty miles did pass,
I saw eleven hundred Neat at grass,
By which may be coniectur'd at the least,
That there was sustenance for man and beast.
And in the Kingdom I have truly scand,
There Is many worser parts, are better mand,
For in the time that theeuing was in ure,
The Gentles fled to places more secure.
And left the poorer sort, to abide the pain,
Whilst they could never find time to turn again.
That Shire of Gentlemen is scarce and dainty,
Yet there is relief in great abundance plenty,
Twixt it and England, little odds I see,
They eat, and live, and strong and able be,
So much in Verse, and now I Will change my style,
And seriously I Will write in Prose a while.
To the purpose then; my first nights Lodging in Scotland was at a place called
Mophot, which they say is thirty miles from Carlisle, but I suppose them to be
longer then forty of such miles as are betwixt London and S. Albanes, (but
indeed the Scots do allow almost as large measure of their miles, as they do
of their drink, for an English Gallon either of Ale or Wine, is but their
quart, and one Scottish mile now and then may well stand for a mile and a half
or two English) but howsoever short or long, I found that days journey the
weariest that ever I footed; and at night being come to the Town, I found good
ordinary Country entertainment; my fare, and my lodging was sweet and good,
and might have served a far better man then my self, although my self have
had many times better: but this is to be noted, that though it Rained not all
the day, yet it was my fortune to be well wet twice, for I waded over a great
River called Eske in the morning, somewhat more then 4. miles distance from
Carlisle in England, and at night within two miles of my lodging, I was feign to
wade over the River of Annan in Scotland, from which River the County of
Annandale has it is name. And whilst I waded on foot, my man was mounted on
horseback, like the George without the Dragon. But the next morning, I arose
and left Mophot behind me, and that day I travailed twenty one miles to a sorry
Village called Blithe, but I was blithe my self to come to any place of
harbor or succor, for since I was borne, I never was so weary, or so near
being dead with extreme travel; I was founderd and refounderd of all four,
and for my better comfort, I came so late, that I must lodge without door all
night, or else in a poor house where the good wife lay in Childbed, her
husband being from home, her own servant Maid being her nurse. A Creature
naturally compacted and artificially adorned with incomparable homelines; but
as things were I must either take or leave, and necessity made me enter, where
we gat Eggs and Ale by measure and by tale. At last to bed I went, my man
lying on the floor by me, where in the night there were Pigeons did very
bountifully mute in his face: the day being no sooner come, and I having but
fifteen miles to Ederborough, mounted upon my ten toes, and began first to
hobble, and after to Amble, and so being warm, I fell to pace by degrees; all
the way passing through a most plentiful, and fertile Country for Corn and
Cattle: and about two of the clock in the afternoon that Wednesday, being the
thirteenth of August, and the day of Clare the Virgin (the Sign being in
Virgo) the Moon four days old, the wind at, West, I came to take rest, at
the wished, long expected, Ancient famous City of Edenborough, which I entered
like pierce penilesse, altogether monyles, but I thank God not friendlesse;
for being there, for the time of my stay I might borrow, (if any man would
lend) spend if I could get, beg if I had the impudence, and steal if I durst
adventure the price of a hanging, but my purpose was to house my horse, and to
suffer him and my Apparel to Lie in durance, or Lauender in stead of Litter,
till such time, as I could meet with some valiant friend that would
desperately disburse.

Walking thus down the street, (my body being tired with Travel, and my mind
attyred with moody, muddy, Moore-ditch melancholy) my Contemplation did
devoutly pray, that I might meet one or other to prey upon, being willing to
take any slender acquaintance of any man whatsoever, viewing, and circumuiewing
every man's face I met, as if I meant to draw his picture, but all my
acquaintance was Non est inuentus, (pardon me Reader, that Latin is none of
mine own, I swear by Priscians Pericranion, an oath which I have ignorantly
broken many times.) At last I resolved, that the next Gentleman that I met
withal, should be acquaintance whether he would or no, and presently fixing
mine eyes upon a Gentleman-like object, I looked on him as if I would suruay
something through him, and make him my perspectiue: and he much musing at my
gazing, and I much gazing at his musing, at last he crossed the way and made
toward me, and then I made down the street from him, leaving him to encounter
with my man who came after me leading my Horse, whom he thus Accosted. My
friend (quoth he) does yonder Gentleman, (meaning me) know me that he looks
so wistly on me; truly Sr. said my man I think not, but my Mr. is a stranger
come from London, and would gladly meet with some acquaintance to direct him
where he may have lodging and horse-meate: presently the Gentleman, (being of a
generous disposition) ouer-tooke me with unexpected and undeserved courtesy,
brought me to a lodging, and caused my Horse to be put into his own Stable,
whilst we discoursing over a pint of Spanish. I related as much English to him
as made him lend me Ten shillings, (his name was Mr. John Maxwell) which money
I am sure was the first that I handled after I came from out the walls of
London: but having rested two hours and refreshed my self, the Gentleman and
I walked to see the City, and the Castle, which as my poor unable and
unworthy pen can, I will truly discribe.

The Castle on a lofty Rock is so strongly grounded, bounded, and founded,
that by force of man it can never be confounded; the Foundation and Walls are
vnpenetrable, the Rampires Impregnable, the Bulwarks Invincible, no way but
one to it is or can be possible to be made passable. In a word, I have seen
many Straights and Fortresses, in Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, and
England, but they must all give place to this unconquered Castle both for
strength and Situation.

Amongst the many memorable things which I was showed there, I noted
especially a Great piece of Ordinance of Iron, it is not for battery, but it
will serve to defend a breach, or to toss balls of wilde-fire against any
that should assail or assault the Castle; it lies now dismounted. And it is so
great within, that it was told me that a Child was once gotten there, but I
to make trial crept into it, lying on my back, and I am sure there was Room
enough and spare for a greater then my self.

So leaving the Castle, as it is both defenciue against any opposition, and
magnificke for Lodging and Receite, I descend lower to the City, wherein I
observed the fairest and goodliest Street that ever mine eyes beheld, for I did
never see or hear of a street of that length, (which is half an English mile
from the Castle to a fair Port which they call the Neather-bow) and from that
Port the street which they call the Kenny-hate is one quarter of a mile more:
down to the Kings Palace called Holy-rood-House, The buildings on each side
of the way being all of squared stone, five, six, and seven Stories high, and
many by Lanes and Closes on each side of the way, wherein are Gentlemen's
houses, much fairer then the buildings in the high street, for in the
High Street the Merchants and Tradesmen do dwell, but the Gentlemen's mansions
and goodliest Houses are obscurely founded in the aforesaid Lanes: the Walls
are eight or ten Foot thick, exceeding strong, not built for a day, a week,
or a month, or a year; but from Antiquity to Posterity, for many Ages; There
I found entertainment beyond my expectation or merit, and there is Fish,
Flesh, Bread and Fruit, in such variety, that I think I may offencelesse call
it superfluity, or sacietie. The worst was, that Wine and Ale was so scarce,
and the people there such Mizers of it, that every night before I went to bed,
if any man had asked me a Civil question, all the wit in my head could not
have made him a Sober answer.

I was at his Majesty's Palace, a Stately and princely seat, wherein I saw a
sumptuous Chapel most richly adorned, with all apurtenances belonging to so
sacred a place, or so Royal an owner. In the inner Court, I saw the Kings
Arms cunningly carved in stone, and fixed over a door aloft on the wall, the
red Lion being the Crest, over which was written this inscription in Latin,
Nobis haec inuicta miserunt, 105. proaui.
I enquired what the English of it was? it was told me as follows, which I
thought worthy to be recorded. 106. Forefathers has left this to us
unconquered.
This is a worthy and a memorable Motto, and I think few Kingdoms or none in
the world can truly write the like, that notwithstanding so many inroades*
incursions, attempts, assaults, civil wars, and foreign hostilities,
bloody battles, and mighty foughten fields, that maugre the strength and
policy of enemies, that Royal Crown and Scepter has from one hundred and
seven descents, keep still unconquered, and by the power of the King of Kings
(through the grace of the Prince of peace) is now left peacefully to our
peaceful King, whom long in blessed peace, the God of peace defend and govern.

But once more, a word or two of Edinborough, although I have scarcely given it
that due which belongs unto it, for their lofty and stately buildings, and for
their fair and spacious street, yet my mind persuades me that they in former
ages that first founded that City, did not so well in that they built it in so
discommodious a place; for the Sea, and all nauigable Rivers, being the chief
means for the enriching of Towns and Cities, by the reason of Traffic with
foreign Nations, with exportation, transportation, and receite of variety of
Marchantdizing; so this City had it been built but one mile lower on the Sea
side, I doubt not but it had long before this been comparable to many a one of
our greatest Towns and Cities in Europe, both for spaciousness of bounds,
Port, state, and riches. It is said that King James the fifth (of famous
memory) did graciously offer to purchase for them, and to bestow upon them
freely, certain low and pleasant grounds a mile from them on the Sea shore,
with these conditions, that they should pull down their City, and build it in
that more commodious place, but the Citizens refused it: and so now it is like
(for me) to stand where it does, for I doubt such another proffer of remoueall
will not be presented to them, till two days after the Fair.

Now have with you for Leeth, whereto I no sooner came, but I was well
entertained by Mr. Barnard Lindsay, one of the Grooms of his Majesty's
Bedchamber, he knew my estate was not guilty, because I brought no guilt with
me (more then my sins, and they would not pass for current there) he
therefore did replenish the vaustity of my empty purse, and discharged a piece
at me with two bullets of gold, each being in value worth eleven shillings
white money: and I was credibly informed that within the compass of one year,
there was shipped away from that only Port of Leeth, fourscore thousand Boles
of Wheat, Oats, and Barley, into Spain, France, and other foreign parts,
and every Bole contains the measure of four English bushels, so that from
Leeth only has been transported three hundred and twenty thousand bushels of
Corn; besides some has been shipped away from St. Andrews, from Dundee,
Aberdeene, Disert, Kirkady, Kinghorne, Burnt-Iland, Dunbar, and other portable
Towns, which makes me to wonder that a Kingdom so populous as it is, should
nevertheless sell so much bread corn beyond the Seas, and yet to have more
then sufficient for themselves.

So I having viewed the Haven and Town of Leeth, took a passage Boat to see
the new wondrous Well, to which many a one that is not well, comes far and
near in hope to be made well: indeed I did hear that it had done much good,
and that it has a rare operation to expel or kill diverse maladies; as to
provoke appetite, to help much for the avoiding of the gravel in the bladder,
to cure sore eyes, and old ulcers, with many other virtues which it has, but
I (through the mercy of God having no need of it, did make no great
inquisition what it had done, but for nouelty I drank of it, and I found the
taste to be more pleasant then any other water, sweet almost as milk, yet as
clear as cristall, and I did observe that though a man did drink a quart, a
pottell, or as much as his belly could contain, yet it never offended or lay
heavy upon the stomach, no more then if one had drank but a pint or a small
quantity.

I went two miles from it to a town called Burnt-Iland, where I found many of
my especial good friends, as M. Robert Hay, one of the Grooms of his
Majesty's Bedchamber, Master David Drummond, one of his Gentlemen Pentioners*
Master James Acmooty, one of the Grooms of the Privy Chamber, Captain
M^rray, Sir Henry Witherington Knight, Captain Tyrie, and diverse others* and
there Master Hay, Master Drummond, and the good old Captain Murray, did very
bountifully furnish me with gold for my expenses, but I being at dinner with
those aforesaid Gentlemen, as we were discoursing, there befell a strange
accident, which I think worth the relating.

I know not upon what occasion they began to talk of being at Sea in former
times, and I (amongst the rest) said I was at the taking of Cales, whereto an
English Gentleman replied, that he was the next good voyage after at the
Islands: I answered him that I was there also. He demanded in what Ship I was? I
told him in the Rainebowe of the Queens, why (quoth he) do you not know
me? I was in the same Ship, and my name is Witherington.

Sir, said I, I do remember the name well, but by reason that it is near two
and twenty years since I saw you, I may well forget the knowledge of you:
well, said he, if you were in that Ship, I pray you tell me some remarkable
token that happened in the voyage: whereupon I told him two or three tokens
which he did know to be true. Nay then said I, I will tell you another which
(perhaps) you have not forgotten; as our Ship and the rest of the fleet did
ride at Anchor at the I Will of Flores (one of the Isles of the Azores) there were
some fourteen men and boys of our Ship, that for nouelty would go a shore,
and see what fruit the I land did bear, and what entertainment it would yield
us: so being landed, we went up and down and could find nothing but stones,
heath and moss, and we expected Oranges, Limonds, Figs, Muske-millions, and
Potatoes: in the mean space the wind did blow so stiff, and the Sea was so
extreme rough, that our Ship-boate could not come to the land to fetch us, for
fear she should be beaten in pieces against the rocks; this continued five
days, so that we were all almost famished for want of food: but at last ( I
squandring up and down) by the providence of God I happened into a Cave or
poor habitation, where I found fifteen loaves of bread, each of the quantity
of a penny loaf in England, I having a valiant stomach of the age of almost
120. hours breeding, fell too, and eat two loaves and never said grace: and
as I was about to make a Horse-loafe of the third loaf, I did put 12. of them
into my breeches, and my sleeves, and so went mumbling out of the Cave, leaning
my back against a tree, when upon the sudden a Gentleman came to me and
said, friend what are you eating, bread quoth I, for Gods sake said he give
me some, with that I put my hand into my breech, (being my best pantrey) and I
gave him a Loaf, which he received with many thanks, and said that if ever
he could requite it he would.

I had no sooner told this tale but Sr. Henry Witherington did acknowledge
himself to be the man that I had given the Loaf unto 22. years before,
where I found the Proverb true that men have more privilege then mountains
in meeting.

In what great measure, he did requite so small a courtesy, I will relate in
this following discourse in my Return through Northumberland: So leaving my
man at the town of Burnt Island, I told him, I would but go to Sterling, and
see the Castle there, and withal to see my honorable friends the Earl of
Mar, and Sir William Murray Knight, Lord of Abercarny, and that I would
return within two days at the most: But it fell out quite contrary; for it
was five and thirty days before I could get back again out of these
Noble-mens company. The whole progress of my travel with them, and the cause
of my stay, I cannot with gratefulness omit; and thus it was.

A worthy Gentleman, named Master John Fenton, did bring me on my way six
miles, to Dumfermling, where I was well entertained, and lodged at Master John
Gibb his house, one of the Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber, and I think
the oldest Servant the King has: withal I was well entertained there by
Master Crighton at his own house, who went with me, and showed me the
Queens Palace; (a delicate and a princely Mansion) withal I saw the ruins of
an ancient and stately built Abbey, with fair Gardens, Orchards, and Meadows
belonging to the palace: all which with fair and goodly Revenues, by the
suppression of the Abbey, were annexed to the Crown. There also I saw a very
fair Church, which though it be now very large and spacious, yet it has in
former times been much larger. But I taking my leave of Dumfermling, would
needs go and see the truly noble Knight Sir George Bruce, at a Town called
the Cooras: there he made me right welcome, both with variety of fare, and
discourse; and after all, he commanded three of his men to direct me to see
his most admirable Cole-mines; which (if man can or could work wonders) is a
wonder: for my self neither in any travels that I have been in, nor any
History that I have read, or any Discourse that I have heard, did never see,
read, or hear of any work of man that might parallel or be equivalent with
this vnfellowed and unmatchable work: and though all I can say of it, cannot
describe it according to the worthiness of his vigilant industry, that was
both the occasion, Inuentor, and Maintainer of it: yet rather then the memory
of so rare an Enterprise, and so accomplished a profit to the Commonwealth
shall be raked and smothered in the dust of oblivion, I will give a little
touch at the description of it, although I amongst Writers, am like he that
worst may, holds the candle.

The Mine has two ways into it, the one by sea and the other by land; but a
man may go into it by land, and return the same way if he please, and so he
may enter into it by sea, and by Sea he may come forth of it: but I for
varieties sake went in by Sea, and out by Land. Now men may object, how can a
man go into a Mine, the entrance of it being in the Sea, but that the Sea will
follow him and so drown the Mine. To which objection thus I answer, That at a
low water, the Sea being ebd away, and a great part of the sand bare; upon this
same sand (being mixed with rocks and cragges) did the Master of this great
work build a round circular frame of stone, very thick, strong, and joined
together with glutinous or bitunous matter, so high withal* that the Sea at
the highest flood, or the greatest rage of storm or tempest, can neither
dissolve the stones so well compacted in the building, or yet ouerflowe the
height of it. Within this round frame, (at all adventures) he did set workmen
to dig with Mattockes, Pickaxes, and other instruments fit for such
purposes. They did dig more then forty foot downeright, into and through a
Rock. At last they found that which they expected, which was Sea-cole, they
following the vein of the Mine, did dig forward still: So that in the space
of eight and twenty, or nine and twenty years they have dug more then an
English mile under the Sea, that when men are at work below, an hundred of
the greatest Ships in Britain may sail over their ^^^ads. Besides, the Mine
is most artificially cut like an Arch or a Vault all that great length, with
many nookes and bywayes in it: and it is so made, that a man may walk upright
in the most places, both in and out. Many poor people are there set on work,
which otherwise through the want of employment would perish. But when I had
seen the Mine, and was come forth of it again; after my thanks given to Sir
George Bruce, I told him, that if the plotters of the Powder Treason in
England had seen this Mine, that they (perhaps) would have attempted to have
left the Parliament House, and have undermined the Thames, and so to have
blown up the Barges and Wherries, wherein the King, and all the Estates of our
Kingdom were. Moreover, I said that I could afford to turn Tapster at
London: so that I had but one quarter of a mile of his Mine to make me a
Celler, to keep Beer and Bottle-ale in. But leaving these Iestes in Prose, I
will relate a few Verses that I made merrily of this Mine.

I That have wasted Months, Weeks, Days and Hours
In viewing Kingdoms, Countries, Towns and Towers,
Without all measure, measuring many paces,
And with my pen describing sundry places,
With few additions of my own deuizing,
(Because I have a smacke of Coriatizing.)
Our Mandeuill, Primaleon, Don Quixot,
Great Amadis, or Huon traueld not
As I have done, or been where I have been,
Or heard and seen, what I have heard and seen;
Nor Britains Odcomb ( Zanye brave Vlissis)
In all his ambling saw the like as this is.
I was in (would I could describe it well)
A dark, light, pleasant, profitable hell,
And as by water I was wafted in,
I thought that I in Charons Boat had bin:
But being at the entrance landed thus,
Three men there (in the stead of Cerberus)
Conuaid me in, in each ones hand a light
To guide us in that vault of endless night.
There young and old with glim'ring candles burning,
Dig, delue, and labor, turning and returning,
Some in a hole with baskets and with baggs,
Resembling furies, and infernal haggs:
There one like Tantall feeding, and there one,
Lake Sisiphus he rowles the restless stone.
Yet all I saw was pleasure mixed with profit,
Which proved it to be no tormenting Tophet;
For in this honest, worthy, harmless hell,
There never did any damned Devil dwell:
And th'owner of it gains by it more true glory,
Then Rome does by fantastic Purgatory.
A long mile thus I past, down, down, steep steep,
In deepenesse far more deep, then Neptunes deep,
Whilst over my head (in fourefould stories hye)
Was Earth, and Sea, and Air, and Sun, and Sky:
That had I dyed in that Cimerian room.
Four Elements had covered ore my tomb:
Thus farther then the bottom did I go,
(And many Englishmen have not done so;)
Where mounting Porposes, and mountain Whales,
And Regiments of fish with finnes and Scales,
Twixt me and Heaven did freely glide and slide,
And where great Ships may at an Anchor ride:
Thus in by sea and out by land I past,
And took my leave of good Sir George at last.
The Sea at certain places does leake, or soake into the Mine, which by the
industry of Sir George Bruce, is all conveyed to one well near the land; where
he has a devise like a horsemill that with three horses and a great chain of
Iron, going downward many fadomes, with thirty six buckets fastened to the
chain, of the which eighteen goes down still to be filled, and eighteen
ascends up to be emptied, which do empty themselves (without any man's labor)
into a trough that conueyes the water into the Sea again; by which means he
saues his Mine which otherwise would be destroyed with the Sea, beside he does
make every week ninety or an hundred Tuns of salt, which does serve part of
Scotland, some he sends into England, and very much into Germany: all which
shows the painful industry with Gods blessings to such worthy endeauours: I
must with many thanks remember his courtesy to me, and lastly, how he sent
his man to guide me ten miles on the way to Sterling, where by the way I saw
the outside of a fair and stately house called Allaway, belonging to the Earl
of Mar, which by reason that his Honor was not there, I past by and went to
Sterling, where I was entertained and lodged at one Mr. John Archibalds, where
all my want was that I wanted room to contain half the good cheer that I
might have had there; he had me into the Castle, which in few words I do
compare to Windsor for situation, much more then Windsor in strength, and
somewhat less in greatness; yet I dare affirm, that his Majesty has not such
another hall to any house that he has neither in England nor Scotland, except
Westminster Hall which is now no dwelling Hall for a Prince being long since
metamorphosed into a house for the Law and the profits.

This goodly Hall was built by King James the fourth, that married King Henry
the eights sister and after was slain at Flodden field; but it surpasses all
the halls for dwelling houses that ever I saw, for length, breadth, height and
strength of building, the Castle is built upon a rock very lofty, and much
beyond Edenborough Castle in state and magnificence, and not much inferior to
it in strength, the rooms of it are lofty, with carved works on the seelings,
the doors of each room being so high that a man may ride upright on
horseback into any chamber or lodging. There is also a goodly fair Chapel,
with Cellers, Stables, and all other necessary Offices, all very stately and
besitting the Majesty of a King.

From Sterling I rode to Saint Iohnston, a fine Town it is, but it is much
decayed, by reason of the want of his Majesty's yearly coming to lodge there.
There I lodged one night at an Inn, the Goodman of the house his name being
Patrick Pettcarne, where my entertainment was with good cheer, good drink,
good lodging, all too good to a bad weary guest. Mine Host told me that the
Earl of Mar and Sir William Murray of Abercarny were gone to the great
hunting to the Brea of Mar; but if I made have I might perhaps find them at
a Town called Breekin, or Breechin, two and thirty miles from Saint John's
Stone, whereupon I took a guide to Breekin the next day, but before I came, my
Lord was gone from thence four days.

Then I took another guide, which brought me such strange ways over
mountains and rocks, that I think my horse never went the like; and I am
sure I never saw any ways that might fellow them. I did go through a Country
called Glaneske, where passing by the side of a hill, so steep as is the ridge
of a house, where the way was rocky, and not above a yard broad in some places,
so fearful and horrid it was to look down into the bottom, for if either
horse or man had slipped, he had fallen (without recovery) a good mile
downright; but I thank God, at night I came to a lodging in the Lard of
Eggells Land, where I lay at an Irish house, the folks not being able to
speak scarce any English, but I supped and went to bed, where I had not lain
long but I was enforced to rise, I was so stung with Irish Musketaes, a
Creature that has six legs, and lives like a monster altogether upon man's
flesh, they do inhabit and breed in most sluttish houses, and this house was
none of the cleanliest, the beast is much like a louse in England, both in
shape and nature; in a word they were to me the A. and the Z. the Prologue and
the Epilogue, the first and the last that I had in all my trauells from
Edenborough; and had not this highland Irish house helped me at a pinch, I
should have sworn that all Scotland had not been so kind as to have bestowed
a Louse upon me: but with a shift that I had, I shifted off my Caniballs, and
was never more troubled with them.

The next day I traveled over an exceeding high mountain, called mount
Skeene, where I found the valley very warm before I went up it; but when I
came to the top of it, my teeth began to dance in my head with cold, like
Virginal iackes; and withal, a most familiar mist embraced me round, that I
could not see thrice my length any way: withal, it yielded so friendly a deaw,
that it did moysten through all my clothes: Where the old Proverb of a
Scottish Miste was verified, in wetting me to the skin. Up and down, I
think this hill is six miles, the way so uneven, stony, and full of bogges,
quagmires, and long heath, that a dog with three legs will outrunne a horse
with four: for do what we could, we were four hours before we could pass
it.

Thus with extreme travel, ascending and descending, mounting and alighting,
I came at night to the place where I would be, in the Brea of Mar, which is a
large County, all composed of such mountains, that Shooters Hill, Gads Hill,
Highgate Hill, Hampsted hill, Birdlip hill, or Maluerne hills, are but Mole*
hills in comparison, or like a Liver, or a Gizard under a Capons wing, in
respect of the altitude of their tops, or perpendicularitie of their
bottomes. There I saw Mount Benawne, with a furred mist upon his snowie head in
stead of a nightcap: (for you must understand, that the oldest man alive never
saw but the snow was on the top of diverse of those hills, both in Summer, as
well as in Winter.) There did I find the truly Noble and Right Honorable
Lords, John Erskin Earl of Mar, James Stuart Earl of Murray, George Gordon
Earl of Engye, son and heir to the Marquess of Huntley, James Erskin,
Earl of Bughan, and John Lord Erskin, son and heir to the Earl of Mar,
and their Countesses, with my much honored, and my best assured and approved
friend, Sir William Murray Knight, of Abercarnye, and hundred of others
Knights, Esquires, and their followers; all and every man in general in one
habit, as if Licurgus had been there and made Laws of Equality: For once in
the year, which is the whole month of August, and sometimes part of
September; many of the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom (for their
pleasure) do come into these high-land Countries to hunt, where they do all
conform themselves to the habit of the high-land men, who for the most part
speak nothing but Irish; and in former time were those people which were
called the Redshankes: Their habit is shoes with but one sole apiece;
stockings (which they call short hose) made of a warm stuff of diverse
colors, which they call Tartane: as for breeches, many of them, nor their
forefathers never wore any, but a ierkin of the same stuff that their hose is
of, their garters being bands or wreathes of hay or straw, with a plead about
their shoulders, which is a mantle of diverse colors, much finer and lighter
stuff then their hose, with blew flat caps on their heads, a handkerchiefe
knit with two knots about their necks: and thus are they attyred. Now their
weapons are long bows, and forked arrows, Swords and Targets, Harquebusses,
Muskets, Durks and Loquhabor Axes. With these Arms I found many of them armed
for the hunting. As for their Attire, any man of what degree soever that comes
amongst them, must not disdain to wear it: for if they do, then they will
disdain to hunt, or willingly to bring in their dogs: but if men be kind
unto them, and be in their habit; then are they conquered with kindness, and
the sport will be plentiful. This was the reason that I found so many Noblemen
and Gentlemen in those shapes. But to proceed to the Hunting.

My good Lord of Mar having put me into that shape, I rode with him from his
house, where I saw the ruins of an old Castle, called the Castle of
Kindroghit. It was built by King Malcolm Canmore (for a hunting horse) who
reigned in Scotland when Edward the Confessor, Harold, and Norman William
reigned in England: I speak of it, because it was the last house that I saw in
those parts; for I was the space of twelve days after, before I saw either
house, corn field, or habitation for any creature, but Dear, wild Horses,
Wolves, and such like Creatures, which made me doubt that I should never have
seen a house again.

Thus the first day we traueld 8. miles, where there were small cottages built
on purpose to lodge in, which they call Lonquhards, I thank my good Lord
Erskin, he commanded that I should always be lodged in his lodging, the
Kitchen being always on the side of a bank, many Kettles and Pots boiling,
and many spits turning and winding, with great variety of cheer: as Venison
baked, sodden, roast, and stu'de Beef, Mutton, Goats, Kid, Hares, fresh
Salmon, Pigeons, Hens, Capons, Chickins, Partridge, Moorecoots, Heathcocks,
Caperkellies and Termagants; good Ale, Sack, White and Claret, Tent (or
Allegant) with most potent Aqua vitae.

All these and more then these we had continually, in superfluous abundance,
caught by Faulconers, Foulers, and Fishers, and brought by my Lords tenants and
purueyers to victual our Camp, which consisted of fourteen or fifteen
hundred men and horses; the manner of the hunting is this. Five or six hundred
men do rise early in the morning, and they do disperse themselves diverse
ways, and 7.8. or 10. miles compass they do bring or chase in the Dear in
many herds, (two, three, or four hundred in a heard) to such or such a place
as the Noblemen shall appoint them; then when day is come, the Lords and
Gentlemen of their Companies, do ride or go to the said places, sometimes
wading up to the middles through bournes and rivers: and then they being come
to the place, do lie down on the ground, till those foresaid Scouts which are
called the Tinckhell do bring down the Dear: But as the Proverb says of a
bad Cook, so these Tinkhell men do lick their own fingers; for besides their
bows and arrows which they carry with them, we can hear now and then a
harguebuse or a musket go off, which they do seldom discharge in vain:
Then after we had stayed three hours or thereabouts, we might perceive the
Dear appear on the hills round about us, (their heads making a show like a
wood) which being followed close by the Tinkhell, are chased down into the
valley where we lay; then all the valley on each side being waylaid with a
hundred couple of strong Irish Greyhounds, they are let loose as occasion
serves upon the heard of Dear, that with Dogs, Gunnes, Arrows, Durks and
Daggers, in the space of two hours fourscore fat Dear were slain, which
after are disposed of some one way and some another, twenty or thirty miles,
and more then enough left for us to make merry withal at our Rendeuouze. I
liked the sport so well, that I made these two Sonnets following.

WHy should I wast Invention to endite,
Ouidian fictions, or Olympian games?
My misty Muse enlightened with more light,
To a more noble pitch her aim She frames.
I must relate to my great Master JAMES,
The Calydonian anuall peaceful war;
How noble minds do eternize their fames
By martial meeting in the Brea of Mar:
How thousand gallant Spirits come near and far,
With Swords and Targets, Arrows, Bows and Gunnes,
That all the Troop to men of judgment, are
The God of Wars great never conquered Sons.
The Sport is Manly, yet none bleed but Beasts,
And last, the Victors on the Vanquished feasts.
IF Sport like this can on the Mountains be,
Where Phoebus flames can never melt the Snow:
Then let who lift delight in Vales below,
Skie-kissing Mountain pleasures are for me:
What brauer object can man's eyesight see,
Then Noble, Worshipful, and worthy wights,
As if they were prepared for sundry fights,
Yet all in sweet society agree:
Through Heather, Moss, amongst frogs, and bogs, and fogs,
Among craggy cliffes, and thunder battered hills,
Hares, Hindes, Buckes, Rees are chased by Man and Dogs,
Where two hours Hunting fourscore fat Dear killes.
Low lands, your Sports are low as is your Seat,
The High-land Games and Minds, are high and great.
Being come to our lodgings, there was such Baking, Boiling, Rosting, and
Stewing, as if Cook Ruffian had been there to have scalded the Devil in his
feathers: and after supper a fire of fur wood as high as an indifferent
May Pole: for I assure you, that the Earl of Mar will give any man that is
his friend, for thanks, as many Fur trees (that are as good as any ships
mastes in England) as are worth (if they were in any place near the Thames, or
any other portable River) the best Earldom in England or Scotland either: For
I dare affirm he has as many growing there, as would serve for mastes (from
this time to the end of the world) for all the Ships, Carackes, Hoyes,
Galleyes, Boats, Drumlers, Barks, and Water-craftes, that are now, or can be
in the world these forty years.

This sounds like a lie to an unbeliever; but I and many thousands do know
that I speak within the compass of truth: for indeed (the more is the pity)
they do grow so far from any passage of water, and withal in such rockie
Mountains, that no way to convey them is possible to be passable either with
Boat, Horse, or Cart.

Thus having spent certain days in Hunting in the Brea of Mar, we went to
the next County called Bagenoch, belonging to the Earl of Engye, where having
such sport and entertainment as we formerly had; after four or five days
pastime, we took leave of hunting for that year; and took our journey
toward a strong house of the Earls, called Ruthen in Bagenoch, where my Lord
of Engye and his noble Countess (being daughter to the Earl of Argile) did
give us most noble welcome three days.

From thence we went to a place called Ballo Castle, a fair and stately
house; a worthy Gentleman being the owner of it, called the Lard of Grant;
his wife being a Gentlewoman honorably descended, being sister to the right
Honorable Earl of Atholl, and to Sir Patricke Murray Knight; she being both
inwardly and outwardly plentifully adorned with the gifts of Grace and Nature:
so that our cheer was more then sufficient; and yet much less then they could
afford us. There stayed there four days, four Earls, one Lord, diverse
Knights and Gentlemen, and their servants, footmen and horses; and every meal
four long Tables furnished with all varieties: Our first and second course
being threescore Dishes at one board; and after that always a Banquet: and
there if I had not forsworn wine till I came to Edinbrough, I think I had
there drank my last.

The fifth day with much ado we gate from thence to Tarnaway, a goodly house
of the Earl of Murrayes, ^^here that right Honorable Lord and his Lady did
welcome us four days more. There was good cheer in all variety, with
somewhat more then plenty for advantage: for indeed the County of Murray is
the most pleasantess, and plentifullest Country in all Scotland; being plain
land, that a Coach may be driven more then four and thirty miles one way in
it, all along by the Seacoast.

From thence I went to Elgen in Murray, an ancient City, where there stood a
fair and beautiful Church with three steeples, the walls of it and the
steeples all yet standing; but the Roof, Windows, and many Marble Monuments
and Toombes of honorable and worthy personages all broken and defaced: this
was done in the time when ruin bare rule, and Knox knocked down Churches.

From Elgen we went to the B. of Murray his house which is called Spinye, or
Spinaye. A reverend Gentleman he is, of the noble name of Dowglasse, where we
were very well welcomed, as befitted the honor of himself and his guests.

From thence we departed to the Lord Marquess of Huntleyes, to a sumptuous
house of his, named the Bogg of Geethe, where our entertainment was like
himself, free, bountiful and honorable. There (after two days stay) with
much entreatie and earnest suite, I gate leave of the Lords to depart toward
Edinbrough: the Noble Marquess, the Earls of Mar, Murray, Engie, Bughan, and
the Lord Erskin; all these, I thank them, gave me gold to defray my charges in
my journey.

So after five and thirty days hunting and travel, I returning, past by
another stately mansion of the Lord Marquesses, called Stroboggy, and so over
Carny mount to Breekin, where a wench that was borne deaf and dumb came into
my chamber at midnight (I being asleep) and she opening the bed, would
feign have lodged with me: But had I been a Sardanapalus, or a Heliogobalus,
I think that either the great travel over the Mountains had tamed me; or if
not, her beauty could never have moved me. The best parts of her were, that
her breath was as sweet as sugar-carrion, being very well shouldered beneath
the waste; and as my Hostess told me the next morning, that she had changed
her Maidenhead for the price of a Bastard not long before. But howsoever, she
made such a hideous noise, that I started out of my sleep, and thought that
the Devil had been there: but I no sooner knew who it was, but I arose, and
thrust my dumb beast out of my chamber; and for want of a lock or a latch, I
staked up my door with a great chair.

Thus having escaped one of the seven deadly sins at Breekin, I departed from
thence to a Town called Forfard; and from thence to Dundee, and so to
Kinghorne, Burnt Island, and so to Edinbrough, where I stayed eight days, to
recover my self of falls and bruises which I received in my travel in the
high-land mountainous Hunting. Great welcome I had showed me all my stay at
Edinbrough, by many worthy Gentlemen, namely, old Master George Todrigg,
Master Henry Leuingston, Master James Henderson, Master John Maxwell, and a
number of others, who suffered me to want no wine or good cheer, as may be
imagined.

Now the day before I came from Edinbrough, I went to Leeth, where I found my
long approved and assured good friend Master Benjamin Johnson, at one Master
John Stuarts house: I thank him for his great kindness toward me: for at my
taking leave of him, he gave me a piece of gold of two and twenty shillings
to drink his health in England. And withal, willed me to remember his kind
commendations to all his friends: So with a friendly farewell, I left him, as
well, as I hope never to see him in a worse estate: for he is amongst
Noblemen and Gentlemen that knows his true worth, and their own honors,
where with much respective love he is worthily entertained.

So leaving Leeth, I returned to Edinbrough, and within the port or gate,
called the Netherbowe, I discharged my pockets of all the money I had: and as I
came pennilesse within the walls of that City at my first coming thither; so
now at my departing from thence, I came monesse out of it again; having in my
company to convey me out, certain Gentlemen, amongst the which was Master
James Acherson, Lord of Gasford, a Gentleman that brought me to his house,
where with great entertainment he and his good wife did welcome me.

On the morrow he sent one of his men to bring me to a place, called Adam, to
Master John Acmootye his house, one of the Grooms of his Majesty's
Bedchamber; where with him, and his two brethren, Master Alexander, and Master
James Acmootye, I found both Cheer and Welcome not inferior to any that I had
had in any former place.

Amongst our viands that we had there, I must not forget the Sole and Goose, a
most delicate Foul, which breeds in great abundance in a little Rock called
the Basse, which stands two miles into the Sea. It is very good flesh, but it
is eaten in the form as we eat Oysters, standing at a side-boord, a little
before dinner, unsanctified without grace; and after it is eaten, it must be
well liquored with two or three good rowses of Sherrie or Canarie sack. The
Lord or Owner of the Basse does profit at the least two hundred pound yearly
by those Geese; the Basse it self being of a great height, and near three
quarters of a mile in campasse, all fully replenished with Wildfowle, having
but one small entrance into it, with a house, a garden, and a Chapel in it;
and on the top of it a Well of pure fresh water.

From Adam Mr. John and Mr. James Acmootye went to the Town of Dunbarr with
me, where ten Scottish pintes of wine were consumed and brought to nothing
for a farewell: there at Master James Baylies house I took leave, and Master
James Acmootye coming for England, said, that if I would ride with him, that
neither I nor my horse should want betwixt that place and London. Now I having
no money or means for travel, began at once to examine my manners, and my
want: at last my want persuaded my manners to accept of this worthy Gentleman's
undeserved courtesy. So that night he brought me to a place called Cober
spath, where we lodged at an Inn, the like of which I dare say, is not in any
of his Majesty's Dominions. And for to show my thankfulness to Master William
Arnet and his wife, the owners thereof, I must a little explain their
bonntifull entertainment of guests, which is this:

Suppose ten, fifteen, or twenty men and horses come to lodge at their
house, the men shall have flesh, tame and wild-fowle, fish, with all variety
of good cheer, good lodging, and welcome; and the horses shall want neither
hay or prouender: and in the morning at their departure the reckoning is just
nothing. This is this worthy Gentleman's use, his chief delight being only to
give strangers entertainment gratis: And I am sure, that in Scotland beyond
Edinbrough* I have been at houses like Castles for building; the Master of the
house his Beauer being his blew Bonnet, one that will wear no other shirts,
but of the Flax that grows in his own ground; and of his wives, daughters,
or servants spinning; that has his Stockings, Hose, and Ierkin of the Wool of
his own sheep backs; that never (by his pride of Apparel) caused Mercer,
Draper, Silke-man, Embroyderer, or Haberdasher to break and turn bankerupt:
and yet this plain home-spunne fellow keeps and maintains thirty, forty,
fifty servants, or perhaps more, every day releeuing three or fourscore poor
people at his gate; and besides all this, can give Noble entertainment for
four or five days together to five or six Earls and Lords, besides Knights,
Gentlemen and their followers, if they be three or four hundred men and horse
of them, where they shall not only feed but feast, and not feast but banquet,
this is a man that desires to know nothing so much as his duty to God and his
King whose greatest cares are to practice the works of Piety, Charity, and
Hospitality: he never studies the consuming Art of fashionlesse fashions, he
never tries his strength to bear four or five hundred Acres on his back at
once, his legs are always at liberty, not being fettered with golden
garters, and manacled with artificial Roses, whose weight (sometime) is the
last Relliques of some decayed Lordship: Many of these worthy housekeepers
there are in Scotland, amongst some of them I was entertained; from whence I
did truly gather these aforesaid observations.

So leaving Coberspath we rode to Barwicke, where the worthy old Soldier and
ancient Knight, Sir William Bowyer, made me welcome; but contrary to his will,
we lodged at an Inn, where Mr. James Acmooty paid all charges: but at Barwicke
there was a grievous chance happened, which I think not fit the relation to be
omitted.

In the River of Tweed, which runs by Barwicke are taken by Fishermen that
dwell there, infinite numbers of fresh Salmons, so that many households and
families are relieved by the profit of that Fishing; but (how long since I know
not) there was an order that no man or boy whatsoever should Fish upon a
Sunday: This order continued long amongst them, till some eight or nine weeks
before Michaelmas last, on a Sunday, the Salmons played in such great abundance
in the River, that some of the Fishermen (contrary to Gods law and their own
order) took boats and nets and Fished, and caught near three hundred
Salmons; but from that time until Michaelmas day that I was there which was
nine weeks, and heard the report of it, and saw the poor peoples miserable
lamentations, they had not seen one Salmon in the River; and some of them were
in despair that they should never see any more there; affirming it to be God,
Judgment upon them for the profanation of the Saboth.

The thirtieth of September we rode from Barwicke to Belford, from Belford to
Anwick the next day from Anwick to Newcastle, where I found the noble Knight,
Sir Henry Witherington; who, because I would have no gold nor silver, gave me
a bay Mare, in requital of a loaf of bread that I had given him two and
twenty years before, at the lland of Flores, of the which I have spoken
before. I ouertooke at Newcastle a great many of my worthy friends, which were
all coming for London, namely, Master Robert Hay, and Master David Drummond,
where I was well welcomed at Master Nicholas Tempests house. From Newcastle I
rode with those Gentlemen to Durham, to Darington, to Northallerton, and to
Topeliffe in Yorkshire, where I took my leave of them, and would needs try my
pennilesse fortunes by my self, and see the City of York, where I was lodged
at my Right Worshipful good friends, Master Doctor Hudson one of his
Majesty's Chaplains, who went with me, and showed me the goodly Minster Church
there, and the most admirable, rare-wrought, vnfellowed Chapter house.

From York I rode to Doncaster, where my horses were well fed at the Bear,
but my self found out the honorable Knight, Sir Robert Anstruther at his
father in laws, the truly noble Sir Robert Swifts house, he being then high
Sheriff of Yorkshire, where with their good Ladies, and the right Honorable
the Lord Sanquhar, I was stayed two nights and one day, Sir Robert Anstruther
(I thank him) not only paying for my two horses meat, but at my departure,
he gave me a Letter to Newarke upon Trent, twenty eight miles in my way,
where Mr. George Atkinson mine host made me as welcome as if I had been a
French Lord, and what was to be paid, as I called for nothing, I paid as much;
and left the reckoning with many thanks to Sir Robert Anstruther.

So leaving Newarke, with another Gentleman that ouertooke me, we came at
night to Stamford, to the sign of the Virginity (or the Maydenhead) where I
delivered a Letter from the Lord Sanquhar; which caused Master Bates and his
wife, being the Master and Mistress of the house, to make me and the
Gentleman that was with me great cheer for nothing.

From Stamford the next day we rode to Huntington, where we lodged at the
Post-masters house, at the sign of the Crown; his name is Riggs. He was
informed who I was, and wherefore I undertook this my pennilesse Progress:
wherefore he came up into our chamber, and supped with us, and very bountifully
called for three quarts of Wine and Sugar, and four lugges of Beer. He did
drink and begin Healths like a Horse-leech, and swallowed down his cups
without feeling, as if he had had the dropsy, or nine pound of Sponge in his
maw. In a word, as he is a Post, he drank post, striving and calling by
all means to make the Reckoning great, or to make us men of great reckoning.
But in his payment he was tired like a Jade, leaving the Gentleman that was
with me to discharge the terrible Shot, or else one of my horses must have
lain in pawn for his superfluous calling, and unmannerly intrusion.

But leaving him, I left Huntington, and rode on the Sunday to Packeridge,
where Master Holland at the Faulkon, (mine old acquaintance) and my loving and
ancient Host gave me, my friend, my man, and our horses excellent good
cheer, and welcome, and I paid him with, Not a penie of money.

The next day I came to London, and obscurely coming within Moore-gate, I went
to a house and borrowed money: And so I stole back again to Islington, to the
sign of the Mayden-head, staying till Wednesday that my friends came to meet
me, who knew no other, but that Wednesday was my first coming: where with
all love I was entertained with much good cheer: and after Supper we had a
play of the life and death of Guy of Warwick, played by the Right Honorable
the Earl of Darbie his men. And so on the Thursday morning being the
fifteenth of October, I came home to my house in London.

THE EPILOGVE TO all my Adventurers and others.
THus did I neither spend, or beg, or ask,
By any course, direct, or indirectly:
But in each tittle I performed my task,
According to my bill most circumspectly.
I vow to God I have done SCOTLAND wrong,
(And (justly) against me it may bring an Action)
I have not giuen't that right which does belong,
For which I am half guilty of detraction:
Yet had I wrote all things that there I saw,
Misiudging censures would suppose I flatter,
And so my name I should in question draw,
Where Asses bray, and prattling Pies do chatter:
Yet (armed with truth) I publish with my Pen,
That there the Almighty does his blessings heap,
In such abundant food for Beasts and Men;
That I never saw more plenty or more cheap:
Thus what mine eyes did see, I do believe;
And what I do believe I know is true:
And what is true unto your hands I give,
That what I give may be believed of you.
But as for him that says I lie or dote,
I do return, and turn the Lie in's throat.
Thus Gentlemen, amongst you take my ware,
You share my thanks, and I your moneys share.
Yours in all observance and gratefulness, ever to be commanded. JOHN TAILOR.

FINIS.

