THE FEAREFVLL SVMMER: OR LONDONS CALAMITY, the countries courtesy, and both
their misery.

By JOHN TAILOR.

OXFORD, Printed by John Lichfield and William Turner, Printers to the famous
University. Anno Dom. 1625.

TO THE TRVLY GENEROUS AND NOBLE Knight, Sir JOHN MILLISSENT, one of the
Gentlemen Pensioners to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
TO whom should I these sorrows reco^mend,
But unto you, the Cities noble friend:
I know, you are much grieved with their Grief,
And would adventure life for their relief,
To you therefore these lines I dedicate,
Wherein their sorrows partly I relate,
I humbly crave acceptance at your hand,
And rest
Your servant ever to command, JOHN TAILOR

To the Printer.
MY conceit is, that these are very lamentable verses, and will greiue many
the reading, they so express death to life and make mortality immortal; I wish
that as many as can make use of such pitiful lines had copies, the rest may
want them: Here and there a verse may occasion a tear, then the Author is a
true water-Poet indeed, but else where, there wants not an hand-kercheife to
dry that tear: So is the whole work a (...) and deserves an approbation at
least from

Io. TAILOR.
OR. COLL.
THE PRAEFACE.
IN this lamentable Time of general Calamity, our heinous sins provoking
Gods just Indignation, this heavy visitation and mortality; I being atendant
upon the Queens Marie at Hampton Court and from thence within 2 miles of
Oxford with her Barge (with much grief and remorse) did see and hear the
miserable and cold entertainment of many Londoners, which, for their
preservation fled and retired themselves from the City into the Country.
Whence I noted the peoples Charity, and great amendment, for they had given
over one of the 7 deadly sins, which was Coueteusnesse, and in many places
were so far out of love with a Citizens money, that they abhorred and hated
either to touch or receive it; entertaining them with bitter wormwood welcome,
(which Herb was in more request amongst many of them, then any of the
heavenly Graces or Cardinal Virtues) yet the herb of Grace was in much
estimation, although the name of it was a document that they had occasion to
Rue the time; I farther perceived that they were so far from beleiuing or
crediting any man, that they would or durst not trust their own noses, but
were doubtful that that sense would conspire with the Plague to murder them,
wherefore (like cunning Mariners, or mole-catchers,) they would craftily in
their streets and highwaies fetch the wind of any man, although they were
over shoes and boots, and sometimes tumbled into a ditch for their labors.
This was the time when a man with a nightcap at noone, would have frighted a
whole Parish out of their wits, when to call for Aquauitae (though it had been
but to make a drench for a sick horse was enough to have his house shut up.
When Lord have mercy upon us, made many of them tremble more then God Refuse,
Renounce, Confound, or Damn. When a man travailing in the habit of a Cityzen,
was a mere bulbegger; when for a man to say, that he came from Hell would
yield him better welcome, without money, then a man would give to his own
father and mother that came from London. In this time of man's great misery and
small mercy, I took my pen in hand and wrote this ensueing discourse, I have
(as near as I could) suited it, sadly according to the nature of the subject.
And truly, because that the bare and naked truth was so clear and ample, that
I needed not to stuff it out with frivolous fables or fantastical fictions;
with my soul, I thankfully acknowledge Gods great mercy extended toward me
(one of the most wretched and wicked) in that so many thousands of better life
and conversation have fallen on my right hand and on my left, and round about
me; yet has his gracious protection been my guard, for the which in my
gratitude to my God, and to avoid the sin of idleness, I have written what
those that can may read.

THE FEAREFVLL SVMMER: OR LONDONS CALAMITY.
THe Patience and long- suffering of our God,
Keeps close his Quiver, and restraines his Rod,
And though our crying Crimes to Heaven do cry
For vengeance, on accursed Mortality;
Yea though we merit mischiefs manifold,
Blessed Mercy does the hand of Justice hold.
But when that Eye that sees all things most clear,
Expects our fruits of Faith, from year to year,
Allows us painful Pastors, who bestow
Great care and toil, to make us fruitful grow,
And daily does in those weak Vessels send
The dew of Heaven, in hope we will amend;
Yet (at the last) he does perceive and see
That we unfruitful and most barren be,
Which makes his dreadful Indignation frown,
And (as accursed fig trees) cut us down.
Thus Mercy (mocked) plucks Justice on our heads,
And grievous Plagues our Kingdom over spreads:
Then let us to our God make quick returning,
With true contrition, fasting, and with mourning;
The Word is God, and God has spoke the Word,
If we repent, he will put up his sword.
He Is greiu'd in punishing, He Is slow to Ire,
And HE a sinners death does not desire.
If our Compunction our Amendment show,
Our purple sins He Will make as white as snow,
If we lament, our God is merciful,
Our scarlet crimes he will make as white as wool,
Fair London that did late abound in bliss,
And wast our Kingdoms great Metropolis.
`Tis thou that art dejected low in state,
Disconsolate, and almost desolate,
The hand of Heaven that only did protect thee)
Thou have prouok'd most justly to correct thee,
And for thy pride of Heart and deeds unjust,
He lays thy Pomp and Glory in the dust.
Thou that wast late the Queen of Cities named,
Throughout the world admired, renowned, and famed;
Thou that had all things at command and will,
To whom all England was a Handmaide still:
For raiment, fuel, fish, foul, beasts, for food,
For fruits, for all our Kingdom counted good,
Both near and far remote, all did agree
To bring their best of blessings unto thee.
Thus in conceit, thou seem'dst to rule the Fates,
Whilst peace and plenty flourished in thy Gates,
Could I relieve thy miseries as well
As part I can thy woes and sorrows tell,
Then should my Cares be eased with thy Relief,
And all my study, how to end thy grief.
Thou that were late rich, both in friends and wealth,
Magnificent in state, strong in thy health,
As chiefest Mistress of our country prized,
Now chiefly in the country are despised.
The name of London now both far and near,
Strikes all the Towns and Villages with fear,
And to be thought a Londoner is worse
Then one that breaks a house, or takes a Purse.
He that will filch and steal, now is the Time
No Justice dares examine him, his crime
Let him but say that he from London came,
So full of Fear and Terror is that name,
The Constable his charge will soon forsake,
And no man dares his mittimus to make.
Thus Citizens, plagued for the City sins,
Poor entertainment in the Country winnes.
Some fear the City, and fly thence amain,
And those are of the Country feared again,
Who'gainst the^ bar their windows and their doors,
More the^ they would against Turks, or Jews, or Moors.
I think if very Spaniards had come there,
Their welcome had been better, and their cheer.
Whilst Hay-cock lodging, with hard slender fare,
Welcome like dogs unto a Church they are.
Fear makes them with the Anabaptists join,
For if an Hostess do receive their coin,
She in a dish of water, or a paile,
Will new baptize it, least it something aile.
Thus many a Citizen well stored with Gold,
Is glad to lie upon his mother molde,
His bed the map of his mortality,
His curtains clouds, and Heaven his Canopie
The russet plow-swaine, and the Leathren Hind,
Through fear is grown unmannerly, unkind:
And in his house (to harbor) he will prefer
An Infidel before a Londoner:
Milke-maides and Farmers wives are grown so nice,
They think 2 Citizen 2 Cockatrice,
And country Dances, are waxed so coy and brisk,
They shun him as they will shun a Basiliske,
For every one the sight of him would fly
All feareing he would kill them with his eye.
Ah woeful London I thy grief bewail,
And if my sighs and prayers may but prevail;
I humbly beg of God that he will be pleased
In Jesus Christ, his wrath may be appeased,
With holding his dread Judgments from above
And once more, graspe thee in his arms of love.
In Mercy all our wickedness remit
For who can give thee thanks within the pit.
Strange was the change in less then 3 months space
In joye, in woe, in grace, and in disgrace:
A healthful April, a diseased June
And dangerous Iulie, brings all out of tune.
That city whose rare objects pleased the eyes
With much content and more varieties,
She that was late delightful to the ears
With melodye Harmonious, like the Spheres:
She that had all things that might please her taste
That was by Skies, or Earth, or Seas embraced,
All odoures, and perfumes to please the sent,
And all she felt did give her touch content,
Her Cinque port senses, richly fed and cloyed
With blessings bountiful, which she enjoyed.
Now 3 months change has filled it full with fear
As if no Solace ever had been there.
What do the eyes see there but greiued sights
Of sick, oppressed, and distressed wights:
Houses shut up, some dying, and some dead,
Some (all amazed) flying and some fled.
Streets thinly manned with wretches every day
Which have no power to flee, or means to stay,
Dead Coarses carried, and recarried still,
Whilst fifty Corpses scarce one grave does fill.
With LORD HAVE MERCY UPON US, on the door
Which (though the words be good) does greiue men sore.
And over the dore-postes fixed a cross of red
Be tokening, that there Death some blood has shed.
Some with Gods marks or tokens, do epsy
Those Marks or Tokens, show them they must die,
Some with their Carbuncles, and sores new burst
Are fed with hope they have escaped the worst,
Thus passes all the week, till Thursdaies Bill,
Shows us what thousands Death that week did kill.
That fatal Bill, does like a razor cut
The dead, the living in a maze does put,
And he that has a Christian heart: I know,
Is greiu'd, and wounded with the deadly blow,
These are the objects of the Eye, now hear
And mark the mournful music of the Ear.
There do the brazen Iron toung'd loud bells
(Deaths clamorous rauisick) Ring continual knells,
Some lofty in their notes, some sadly towling.
Whilst fatal dogs, make a most dismal howling,
Some frantic raueing, some with anguish crying,
Some singing, praying, groneing, and some dying,
The healthful grieuing, and the sickly groaning,
All in a mournful diapason moaning.
Here, Parents for their Childrens loss Lament
There, Childrens grief for parents life that spent.
Here, Sister mournes for sister, Kin for Kin
As one grief ends, another does begin,
There one lies languishing, with slender fare
Small comfort, less attendance, and least care,
With none but Death and he to tugge together
Until his corpse and soul part each from either,
In one house one, or two, or three does fall,
And in another Death plays sweep-stake all.
Thus universal sorrowful complaining
Is all the music now in London reigning,
Thus is her comfort sad Calamity,
And all her Melody is Malady.
These are the objects of the eyes and ears
Most woeful sights, and sounds of greiues and fears.
Tasteing.
The curious taste that whilome did delight
With cost and care to please the Apetite
What she was wont to hate, she does adore
And what is high prized, she held despised before.
The drugs, the drenches, and unto othsome drinks,
Fear gives a sweetness to all several stinks,
And for supposed Antidotes, each Palate
Of most contagious weeds will make a Sallate.
And any of the simplest Mountebankes
May cheat them (as they will) of Coin and thanks,
With scraped powder of a shoeing horn
Which they will believe is of an Unicorn.
Angelicoes, distasteful root is gnawed
And herb of Grace most Ruefully is chaw'd.
Garlic offends neither taste, nor smell,
Fear and opinion makes it relish well
Whilst Beazar stone, and mighty Methridate,
To all degrees are great in estimate,
And Triacles power is wounderously expressed,
And Dragon Water in most high request.
These against the Plague are good preservatives
But the best cordial is t'amend our lives,
Sinn's the maine cause, and we must first begin
To cease our greifes, by ceasing of our sin.
I do believe that God has given in store
Good medicines to cure, or ease each sore,
But first remove the cause of the disease,
And then (no doubt but) the effect will cease.
Our sins the Cause, remove our sins from hence,
And God will soon remove the Pestilence.
Then every medicine (to our consolation)
Shall have his power, his force, his operation:
And till that time, Experiments are not
But Paper walls, against a Canon shot.
On many a post I see Quack saluers Bills
Like Fencers Challenges, to show their skills:
As if they were such masters of defense
That they dare combat with the Pestilence;
Meet with the plague in any deadly fray,
And brag to bear the victory away.
But if their patients patiently believe them,
They Will cure the^ (without fail) of what they give the^;
What though ten thousand by their drenches perish
They made them purposely themselves to cherish,
Their Art is a mere Artlesse kind of lying
To pick their lyueing out of others dying.
This sharp inuectiue no way seems to touch
The learned Physician, whom I honor much,
The Paracelsians and Galennists
The Philosophical grave Herbalists,
These I admire and reverence, for in those
God does dame Natures secrets fast enclose,
Which they distribute, as occasions serve
Health to reserve, and health decai'd conserve.
It Is against such Rat-catchers I bend my pen
Which do mechanically murder men,
Whose promises of cure, (like lying knaves)
Does beggar men or send them to their graves.
Smelling.
Now London for the sense of feeling next,
Thou in thy feeling cheifely art perplexed:
Thy heart feels sorrow, and thy body anguish
Thou in thy feeling feel'st thy force to languish,
Thou feel'st much woe, and much calamity
And many millions feel thy misery:
Thou feel'st the fearful Plague, the Flix and Fever
Which many a soul does from the body fever.
And I beseech God for our Saviors merit
To let thee feel, the Comfort of his Spirit.
Feeling.
Last for the solace of the smell, or sent;
Some in contagious rooms are closely pen't,
Whereas corrupted Air they take, and give
Till time ends, or lends liberty to live.
One with a piece of tasseld well tarr'd Rope
Does with that no segay keep himself in hope;
Another does a wispe of wormwood pull
And with great Judgment crams his nostrils full:
A third takes of his socks from's sweating feet,
And makes them his perfume along the street.
Whilst Billets Bonefire like, and faggots dry
Are burnt in the streets, the Air to purify.
Thou great Almighty, give them time and space,
And purify them with thy heavenly Grace,
Make their repentance Incence, whose sweet savor
May mount unto thy throne, and gain thy favor.
Thus every sense, that should the heart delight
Are ministers, and organs to affright,
The Citizens do from the City run,
The countries fears, the citizens do shun:
Both fear the Plague, but neither fears one jot
Their evil ways which has the plague be got,
This is the way this sickness to prevent
Fear to offend, more then the punishment.
All trades are dead, or almost our of breath
But such as live by sickness, or by death,
The Mercers, Grocers, Silk-men, Goldsmiths, Drapers,
Are out of season, like noone burning Tapers,
All functions fail almost, through want of buyers
And every art and mystery turn Dyers,
The very Watermen give over plying
Their rowing trade does fail, they fall to dying.
Some men there are, that rise by others falls
Prophetic Augurists in vrinal is,
Those are right watermen, and row so well
They either land their fares in Heaven or Hell.
But this much (Reader) you must understand
They commonly are paid before they land.
Next unto him the Apothecarie thriues
By Physic bills, and his preservatives;
Worm eaten Sextons, mighty gains do win,
And nasty Grauemakers, great commings in
And Coffin makers, are well paid their rent
For many a woeful wooden tenement.
The Searchers of each corpse good gainers be,
The Bearers have a profitable fee,
And last, the Dog-killers great gain aboundes
For Brayning bawling currs, and foysting hounds.
These are the grave trades, that do get and save
Whose gravity brings many to their grave.
Thus greiued London, filled with mones and groans
Is like a Golgotha, of dead men's bones:
The field where death his bloody fray does fight
And kills eight hundred in a day and night.
Fair houses, that were late exceeding dear,
At fifty or an hundred pounds a year,
The Landlords are so pitiful of late
They Will let them, at a quarter of the rate.
So he that is a mighty moneyed man
Let him but thither make what have he can,
Let him disburse his gold and silver heap
And purchase London it is exceeding cheap.
But if he tarry but one half year more
I hope 'twill be as dear as 'twas before.
A Country cottage, that but lately went
At 4 marks, or at three pounds yearly rent
A Citizen, whose mere necessity
Does force him now into the country fly,
Is glad to hire 2 Chambers of a Carter
And pray and pay with thanks five pounds 2 quarter.
Then here is the alteration of this year
The Cities cheapnes makes the Country dear.
Besides another mischeife is, I see
A man dares not be sick although he be:
Let him complain but of the stone or gout
The plague has struck him, presently they doubt,
My self has bin perplexed now and then
With the wind Colic, years above thrice ten,
Within the country I durst not repeat
Although my pangs, and gripes, and pains were great.
For to be sick of any kind of grief
Would make a man worse welcome then a thief,
To be drunk sick, which er'st did credit win
Was feared infectious, and held worse then sin.
This made me, and many more beside,
Their greifes to smother, and their pains to hide,
To tell a merry tale with visage glad,
When as the Colic almost made me mad.
Thus mere dissembling, many practiced then,
And midst of pain, seemed pleasant amongst men,
For why, the smallest sigh or groan, or shreike
Would make a man his meat and lodging seek.
This was the wretched Londoners hard case
Most hardly welcome into any place,
Whilst Country people, where soever they went
Would stop their noses to avoid their sent,
When as the case did often most plain appear
'Twas only they themselves, that stunke with fear.
Nature was dead, (or from the country run)
A Father durst not entertain his son,
The Mother sees her daughter, and does fear her
Commands her, on her blessing, not come near her,
Affinity, nor any kind of kin,
Or ancient freindship could true welcome win,
The Children scarcely would their Parents know
Or (if they did) but slender duty show:
Thus fear made nature, most unnatural,
Duty undutiful, or very small,
No freindship, or else cold and miserable
And generally all uncharitable.
Nor London letters little better sped
They would not be received (much less be read)
But cast into the fire and burnt with speed
As if they had bin Heretics indeed.
And late I saw, upon a Sabbath day
Some Citizens at Church, prepared to pray:
But (as they had bin excommunicate)
The good Church wardens thrust them out the gate.
Another country virtue I Will repeat
The peoples charity was grown so great
That whatsoever Londoner did die,
In Church or Churchyard should not buried lie,
Thus were they scorned, despised, banished,
Excluded from the Church, alive, and dead,
Alive, their bodies could no harbor have,
And dead, not be allowed a Christian Grave:
Thus was the countries kindness cold, and small,
No house, no Church, no Christian burial.
Oh thou that on the winged winds do fit
And see our misery, remedy it,
Although we have deserved thy vengeance hott
Yet in thy fury (Lord) consume us not.
But in thy mercies sheath thy slaying sword
Deliver us, according to thy word,
Shut up thy Quiver, stay tay angry tod
That all the world may know thou art our God,
Oh open wide the gate of thy compassion
Assure our souls that thou art our Salvation.
Then all our thoughts, and words and works, we will frame
To magnify thy great and glorious name.
The ways of God are intricate, no doubt
Unsearchable, and pass man's finding out,
He at his pleasure works wondrous things
And in his hand does hold the hearts of kings,
And for the love, which to our King he bears,
By sickness he our sinful country cleares,
That he may be a patron, and a guide
Unto a people purged and purified.
This by a president is manifest
When famous late Elizabeth deceast,
Before our gracious James put on the crown
Gods hand did cut superfluous branches down.
Not that they then that were of life bereft
Were greater sinners then the number lest,
But that the Plague should then the kingdom clear
The good to comfort, and the bad to fear.
That as a good king, God did us assure,
So he should have a Nation purged and pure.
And now that Royal James intombed lies
And that our gracious Charles his room supplies,
As He did for his Father formerly
A sinful nation cleanse and purify.
So God, for him these things to pass does bring,
And mends the subjects for so good a King
Upon whose Throne may peace and plenty rest,
And he and his Eternally be blessed.
AMEN.
Against Swearing.
THere is no sin that ever the Devil invented for the abuse of God, and the
perdition of man, but the Authors and Actors of it may frame some frivolous or
impertinent excuse; for examples, our first parents in Paradise did
disobediently offend, in hope thereby to gain further knowledge, and to be
like God. Cain slew his brother, and had some poor excuse for the fratricide
and murder, because he saw that Abell and his offering was in better
acceptance. Samson was overcome by Dalilah, but he had lewd lust, or lustful
love to entice him; David had not committed the two crying sins of Adultery and
murder, had not the beauty of Bethsheba bin his insuaring object; Achitophel
had not bin a Traitor to the Lord's Anointed, and a wicked counselor to
Absalom, but the expectation of raising his estate was his motive. Ahab had not
put Nabaoth to death unjustly, but that he knew it the nearest way to be
possessour of his Vineyard. Achan's theft, Gehazies lie, Manasses cruelty and
Idolatry, Peter's denying, and Judas his betraying of our Savior had all some
color of Excuse, but a swearer is worse then all these, for he has no
starring hole, or by way that can make him appear guiltless either before God
or men; Remember this all you that make swearing the glory of your speech, the
damnable grounds of your earthly society, the accursed Garb of your (misnamed)
Gentleman like carriage; Remember that God does hear and see, and can, and
will revenge, and for this inexcusable crime (especially) the wrath of the
Almighty is showred and powered upon us.

THou that these lines do either hear or read,
Consider with thy self, and take good heed.
Read them, and let them never be forgot,
They do concern thy soul, then slight them not.
The James.
Friends of hell believe there is a God,
And fear and tremble at his angry Rod:
They do confess his glorious Excellence,
And his Almighty powers Omnipotence.
But Man his choicest and his chiefest Creature,
Is so rebellious against God and Nature,
That he against Heaven dare both blaspheme and swear,
And (worse then Fiends) they not believe or fear:
So that the Earth does breed, feed, and retain
Worse Monsters then there does in Hell remain.
If men believed the word that God has spoke,
They would believe that word should nere be broke.
In His enacted Law Exodus 20.
is one Decree,
That all who take his Name in vain, shall be
Accounted guilty, and his fearful wrath
Will hold them worthy of eternal death.
Again it is said; Let the Leviticus 24.
Blasphemor dye,
Let him be stoned for his Blasphemy:
And evil tongues, who dare to curse adventer,
Shall into Heavens 1 Cor. 6. 10.
blessedness not enter.
And Christ (when on the Earth he lived here)
Forbade us that at Matthew. 5.
all we should not swear.
And in the eleventh of Deuteronomy again,
We are commanded not to swear in vain.
The God himself complains that men blaspheme him, Esaias 52. 5. The names of
blasphemy is writ upon the 10 heads of Antichrist, Apre. 13.1. Cursing is
forbidden by the Apostle, when he says Bless, Isoy, and curse net, Romans 12.
14. Our Savior commands us to bless them that curle us, Matthew. 5. 44.
Bless them that curse you, and pray for them which hurt you, Luke 6. 28.
Accustom not thy mouth to woaring, for in it are many falls, neither take up
for a custom the naming of the holy One, for thou shall not be unpunished for
such things, Esclesiasticus 23. 9. The Plague shall never go forth from the
house of the swearer Idem.
Heathen to blaspheme their gods abhorred,
Yet Christians wilfully blaspheme the Lord.
Who ever to revile the Gods were known,
In Rome, were from the Rock Tarpetus thrown.
The Egyptians Law was, he should lose his head.
Amongst Seythians life and goods were forfeited.
These grievous punishments did Pagans use
Against all them that did their Gods abuse.
King Donald's Law in Scotland's not forgot,
Who burn them through the lips with irons hot.
And when King Edmund here had Regal State,
All Swearers he did excommunicate.
And Philip King of France (a Prince renowned)
Ordained that all Blasphemers should be drowned,
The Emperor Max milian did decree,
That all vain Sweaters should beheaded be.
The Earl of Flanders, Philip did ordain,
Their loss of life and goods that swore in vain.
Saint Lewis the King of France enacted there,
That for the first time any one did swear,
Into Imprisonment one month was cast,
And stand within the Pillory at last.
But if the second time again they swore,
One with an iron hot their tongues did bore.
And who the third time in that fault did flip;
Were likewise boared through the vnder-lip.
For the fourth time most grievous pains belongs,
He caused to be cut off their lips and tongues.
Henry the fifth of England, that good King,
His Court to such conformity did bring.
That every Duke should sorry shillings pay
For every Oath he swore, without delay.
Each Baron twenty, Knights or 'Squires offense
Paid ^enn^^ and every Yeoman twenty pence.
The Boys and Pages all were whipped most fine,
That durst abuse the Majesty divine.
Thus Pagan Princes with sharp laws withstood
Profauing of their Gods, Whose swears falsely, calls the God of Truth to
witness a lie. Who so swears as he thinks may be deceived. Who so swears
irreverently, dishonors God. Who so swears deceitfully, abuses Christian
fidelity. Who so swears idly, abuses the credit of a faithful oath. Who so
swears accustomably, God will plague him.
of stone, or wood.
And Christian Kings and Rulers formerly,
Have most severely punished blasphemy.
And shall a Heathen, or an Infidel,
That knows no joys of Heaven, or pains of Hell,
More reverence to his deuillish Idols show,
Then we do to the true God, whom we know?
If we remembered well but what we were,
And what we are, we would not dare to swear.
Poor trunks of earth filled with uncertain breath,
By nature heirs to everlasting death:
Most miserable wretches, most ingrate
Against God, that did elect us, and create,
Redeemed, conseru'd, preserved, and sactifi'd,
And gives us hope we shall be glorified.
H'hath given us being life, sense, reason, wit,
Wealth, and all things his Providence thinks fit:
And for requital, we (quite void of grace)
Curse, swear, and do blaspheme him to his face.
Oh the supernall patience of our God,
That bears with Man (a sin polluted clod)
When half such treasons against an earthly King
Would many a Traitor to confusion bring!
Suppose a man should take a Whelp and breed him,
And stroke him, and make much of him and feed him,
How will that curre love him beyond all other,
Never for saking him to serve another.
But if he should most disobediently,
Into his Masters face or throat to fly,
^Elfred an english Earl, conspiring to put our K. Adolstanes eyes at
Winchester, forsware the treason in Saint Peter's Church at Rome and fell down
dead presently. Earl Godwin murdered Prince Alfred brother to king Edward
Confessor, and being at dinner, the King charged him with the murder, then
Godwin swore by bread, and prayed it might choke him if he were guilty, and
immediately it choked him in the place his lands also sunk into the sea, and
are called Godwinsands. K. Stephen forsware himself to King Henry I, and lived
in continual trouble, and dyed in perplexity, of mind Edward brake his oath
made at York, that he came not with intent to cease the Kingdom, and b^eaking
that oath was punished with a troublesome reign, his brethren and children all
(except one murdered and not any of his issue reigned after him Roger
Mortimer, a great Peer of th^s land, for breaking his oath to King Edward the
2. was most ignominio^sly hanged bowelld and quartered M. Fox in his Book of
Martyrs declares of one Richard Long of Calice that forsware himself to accuse
one Smith for eating flesh in Lent, after which oath Long went presently and
drowned himself. One Grimwood at Hiteham in Suffolks, forsware himself and
his bowels burst out. One widow Barnes for the like sin cost herself out of
her window in Cornhill and brake her neck. Anns Anetis forsware herself in
Woodstrees for six pound of Towe, desiring God she might links down, which
fearfully happened. One Lea in Sunne-alloy without Bishopsgate forswere himself,
and after ripped out his guts.
Sure every man that lives upon the ground
Would say a hanging's fit for such a hound.
And worser then so many dogs are they,
That against their God with oaths do bark and bray,
And if repentance do not mercy win,
They Will hang in Hell like Hell Hounds for that sin.
Of all black crimes from Belzebubs damned treasure,
This swearing sin no profit yields, or pleasure:
Nor gains the swearer here but earths vexation,
With change of his salvation for damnation.
It is a sin that yields us no excuse
(For what excuse can be for Gods abuse?)
And though our other faults by death do end,
Yet Blasphemy does after death extend,
For to the damned in Hell this curse is given,
They for their pains blasphemed the God of Heaven.
Examples on the earth have many been,
As late in sundry places has been seen.
At Mautna two brave Russians in their game,
Swore and blasphemed our blessed Saviors name,
Where God just judgment (full of fear and dread)
Causd both their eyes to drop from out their head.
In Rome, a child but 5 years old that swore,
Was snatch up by the Devil, and seen no more.
And at Ragouse, a Mariner did swear
As if he would Gods name in sunder tear;
When falling ouer-boord, was drowned and tossed,
And nothing but his tongue was only lost.
Remember this you sinful sons of men
Think how that Christ redeemed you from Hells den:
His mercy he has given in magnitude,
Requite him not with vile ingratitude.
He made the Ear and Eye, and hears and sees
The swearers execrable oaths and lies.
The God head of the Father they contemn:
Against the Sons Redemption the blaspheme:
The Holy Spirit grievously they grieve,
And headlong into Hell themselves they drive
I^ is in vain for mortal men to think,
Gods Justice is a sleep, although it wink:
Or that his arm is shortened in these times,
That he cannot reach home to punish crimes.
Oh think not so, it is but the Devils illusion,
To draw us desperately to our confusion.
Some say that it is their anger makes them swear
And oaths are out before they are aware,
But being crossed with losses, and perplexed
They think no harm, but swear as being vexed:
And some there are that swear for complement,
Make aothes their grace, and speeches ornament,
Their sweet Rhetorical fine eloquence,
Their reputations only excellence.
Their valor, whom the Devil does inflame
To Abuse their Makers and Redeemers name.
Think but on this you that do God forget,
Your poor excuses cannot pay this debt:
Remember that our sinful souls d^d cost
A price too great, to be by swearing lost
And blessed was our last good Parliament,
Who made an act for swearers punishment,
And blessed shall be each Magistrates good name,
That carefully do execute the same.
Those that are zealous for Gods glory here,
(No doubt) in heaven shall have true glory there,
Which that we may have, humbly I implore
Of Him that rules and reigns for ouermore,
The Eternal Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
Before whose Throne blessed Saints and Angels sings,
All power, praise, glory, majesty, thanksgiving,
Ascribed be to him that is ever living.
FINIS.
My farewell to the famous University of Oxford.
I Thank God, that Ingratitude being the worst of evils, it does not reign in
me, although it may knock at the door of my estate, yet (I trust) I never
shall harbor it; This renowned Seminary and City, allowed me free and generous
entertainment for some certain weeks in these dangerous and contagious times:
and although the hand of the Almighty did in some sprinkling and merciful
measure, awaken the security of some in that City, yet was, and is his Grace
so abundantly extended toward it, that there did not dye in the City and
Suburbs being 13 Parishes, above 7 of the Pestilence in one week all this
dangerous year; in which is much to be commended the care and diligence of the
Grave and right Worship Mr Vicechancellour, with Mr Mayor, and the rest of his
worthy brethren, who neglected or omitted no means, that providence and
Charity could use for the preservation of the healthy, and the comfort of the
sick; this I being a witness of, in the way of thankfulness thought fit to
express: assuring them in general, that they shall never want the prayers and
best wishes of him that will be ever at their service

JOHN TAILOR


