SELFE-SATISFACTION Occasionally taught the Citizens in the Lecture At St.
Magnes near London Bridge.

By FRANCIS TAILOR, M. of A. and Pastor of Clapham.

LONDON. Printed by John Norton, for Robert Bird, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Bible, in St. Laurence-Lane. 1633.

ERRATA.
p. 8. from the duty of piety, from the duties. p. 12. root of Apostcy,
Apostasy. p. 14. covered with a bate, a bait. p. 31. plays it the midst, in
the midst. Nothing cannot secure, can secure. p. 37. marg. Shaddac, Shaddai, lo
dac, ol dai. p. 43. marg. ta perton. peri ton pragmat on. Is. Ib. p. 45. that
gives a good, he gives.

TO THE FRVITFVLL VINE, AND pleasant Olive plants the Lady Hester Pie, Wife to
the Right Worshipful, Sir Walter Pie, Atturny of the Court of Wards, and her
Children, Captain Crispe, Mr. Samuel Crispe, Mr. Tobias Crispe, and their
wives, Mris. Elizabeth Charnocke, and her Husband.
IT is a most firm demonstration of Gods excellency that although all
creatures depend on him, yet is there such a Sea of goodness in God, that is
never dried up. No one creature, not the greatest is able to uphold it self.
God is every way sufficient of himself and could give himself full
satisfaction, if their never had been a world. The happiest of the creatures
is he that comes nearest to God. He that can subsist (if he be put to it)
without any creatures help, and depends soly on the Creator. This excellent
condition can none attain unto, but he that has, and knows he has a
special interest in God. So fleeting are all worldly contentments, that
nothing can be firm that is built upon them: the times in which we live are
the last days: the Churches full of wars, blood and troubles: our sins
have deserved that the clouds of affliction should cross the Seas to follow
us. Psalm. 61.2.
Happy is he therefore that is set upon a rock higher then himself. Happy is
he that can say, and say feelingly, Psalm. 56.11.
In God have I put my trust, I will not be afraid what man can do unto me.
Happy is he that finds an Arc at home that can hide him when the waters are
far above the highest mountains. Genesis 7.19, 20.
Happy can he never assuredly be that falls short of this, and settles his rest
on any thing under the Sun. He must come to Salomons experimental
conclusion, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. The subject of these pains is
so much the more worthy acceptance, because it is a ladder that leads to the
happiest and surest condition. If in the handling I fall short of other men's
expectation, I shall be glad to see other men handle it more exactly. To my
self it is some comfort, I have written that which has stayed me in many, and
through Gods grace may stay me in any trials. You and yours Madam have I chosen
for the Patrons of this work, in regard of that ancient acquaintance that has
been between us: Your Family has left me as many tokens of your love as I
have Children. That short space which I lived in the City how much I was
indebted to you, I forbear to speak, and desire rather to speak to God to
requite it. And since I have received much comfort, and many kind
encouragements and remembrance from your and their ourtesie. I have not seen a
Family in the City to my best remembrance which God has so plentifully watered
with spiritual and temporal showers of blessings in the Root and in all the
Branches. Your house and posterity are a remarkable example of Gods promise of
benediction and multiplication to them that fear him. Psalm. 128.
If this labor may be pleasing and profitable to you, I shall hope it will be
so to others. So I leave it as a perpetual token of my neuer-dying affection
to your Family, wishing you, what the Title offers you, Selfe-satisfaction.
Less I cannot wish you, more I need not. Let it suffice then that I rest,

Yours in all Christian observance Francis Tailor.
Clapham, Aug. 27. 1633.
Selfe-Satisfaction.
PROVE. 14.14. The Backslider in heart shall be satisfied with his own ways,
and a good man from himself.


Dearly Beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the consideration of the
uncertainty of all worldly comforts may force every one of us to seek for
satisfaction from himself. The fleeting of the best of outward contentments
may make him look for his best contentment within. The Text tells us of a
double satisfaction: a bad one, and a good one. The former fills the owner with
a world of miseries; the latter possesses the enioyer with a heaven of
contenttednesse.

Proverbs have no coherence. It is as superfluous to give a connection to
Proverbs as to put them into rhyme. Both detract from the majesty of the
Proverbs, which are golden and compendious sentences, that give satisfaction
themselves, and contain a world of good matter in few words within themselves,
and without depending one upon another. And because they have no coherence to
illustrate them, they have the more need of careful exposition. A great help
for their exposition, is their opposition. For though they cleave not one to
another, yet the parts in many of them are one opposite to another, and
contraries placed one by another illustrate each other. Beauty is never so
beautiful, as when deformity stands in opposition to it.

Therefore the wise God placed in the Elements contrary qualities. He made
heat predominant in one Element, cold in another; dryness in one, moisture in
another. Therefore does he deprive his best servants of many singular mercies,
that they may the better understand the worth of them by the want of them. The
opposition then will help us in the exposition of this Proverb.

Yet must you not imagine that this opposition of the parts takes any thing
away from the truth of either part, because the opposition is in diverse
subjects. To say Solomon did fall to idolatry, and Solomon did not fall to
idolatry, cannot be both true. The one detracts from the verity of the other.
But to say Solomon did fall to idolatry, and David did not fall to idolatry,
are both true, for we speak of diverse subjects differing in their courses. The
one is so far from detracting from the truth of the other, that it rather
illustrates the same. Salomons fall makes David's constancy the more admirable,
and David's constancy makes Salomons fall the more discommendable. Thus shall we
the better understand the good satisfaction that a godly man has from
himself, when we first conceive the sorry satisfaction that a wicked man
finds from his own ways. But before I come to the logical opposition of the
parts, give me leave to spend some time in the grammatical exposition of the
words; for exposition is the ground of observation, and observation is the
ground of application.

The backslider. The Hebrew is word for word, He that is turned back. Sug.
part praet, auersus.
It points out unto us the prouocations of the world, whereby men are turned
away from the service of God. He that is turned back, finds some thing to
turn him, besides the crookedness of his own disposition.

In heart. This word shows us the internal original of all backsliding,
which is the heart. In vain were all the prouocations of the world, if the
heart stood it out. But when the heart once faints, then is the whole man soon
turned backward.

Shall be satisfied. This seems an hard phrase: men are satisfied with good
things, not with evil. Meton: effecti.
It must then be understood by a figure of the effect for the cause. He shall
be satisfied, that is, he shall be filled, for fullness is the cause of
satisfaction. An evil man shall be as full of misery as a good man is of
contentedness when he is satisfied with it.

With his own ways. His ways here intended are not the footsteps of his
body, but the actions of his life. Metaphora.
It is usual in Scripture to compare the course of man unto a walk. Blessed
are the undefiled in the way. Psalm. 119.1.
Bad actions are also compared to bad and filthy ways, Blessed is the man that
walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners.
Psalm 1.1,
The intent of the similitude is to show our strangeness by our birth, our
restlesnes in our life, and our progress to our death. Our birth is the
entrance into our pilgrimage, the beginning of our journey. Our life is our
travail, a restless and weary course. Our death is the end of our journey: it
brings us to our everlasting home. There is a double home. Good men have a good
home: this was the dwelling of the Corinthians, We have an house eternal in
the Heavens. Bad men have a bad home: 2 Cor. 5.1.
that is the habitation of traiterous Judas, who left his Apostleship to go to
his own place. Acts 1.25.
His ways then are his actions: but not all his actions, only his wicked
actions: for God does oftentimes reward evil men for moral good actions, and
not plague them. 1 Kings. 21.29. 2 Kings. 10.30 Synecdoche gener is.
So Ahab puts off the plague by his humiliation. So Iehu by slaying the
worshippers of Baal settles the Kingdom on his posterity to the fourth
generation. The actions then of the backslider that trouble him are his sinful
actions. Neither is it his sinful actions that do disquiet him, but his
troubles and miseries that follow upon his sins. He is not weary of sinning,
but of being miserable; or at least he is no further weary of sin, then as it
brings misery upon him. Meton. consae.
So then his ways are his actions, his actions are his sinful actions, his
sinful actions are the miseries that follow upon them, and these are they that
perpetually vex him.

And a good man from himself. These words are diversely read, because of the
want of the Verb, the double Preposition, Min and Gnal.
and the diverse significations of them. The vulgar Latin reads it thus: And a
good man shall be over him. That is to say For his backsliding God will make
him a slave to him that is good. Trimellius, the French Bible, and the Geneua
English Bible thus, But a good man shall depart from him. That is, a good man
foreseeing or seeing the miseries, that follow the sinful courses of a
backslider, will avoid his company. The latter translation reads it far
better, And a good man shall be satisfied from himself. The safest way of
addition where a word is wanting, is to supply it out of the former part of the
sentence. Seeing then the beginning of the verse speaks of an evil man's
satisfaction from his evil ways, the conelusion must needs speak of a good
man's satisfaction from himself. The Hebrew phrase is from with himself, that
is, from those things that are within him; or, that God has bestowed upon him.
So S. Paul, Not I, 1 Cor. 15.10.
but the grace of God which was with me. Meaning the grace which God had
bestowed upon him: And it is worth your noting that the wise man does not say,
The backslider shall be satisfied from his own ways, and a good man from
his: least any man should imagine, that a good man merits his satisfaction, as
a bad man does his vexation. Neither does the Hebrew phrase say, From himself,
barely, but from with himself, that is from those graces that GOD has given
him: least any man should maintain the full and free power of man's will, as if
a good man's satisfaction came as orginally from himself, as a bad man's
vexation comes from the corruption of his own will. Thus it teaches us to
attribute the beginning of an evil man's misery to his own backsliding, and
the beginning of a good man's satisfaction to Gods grace and bounty. Who this
good man is that receives satisfaction from Gods grace within him, I need not
stand to unfold, the opposition in the text shows it plainly: It is he that
is no backeslider, but keeps him close to Gods Commandments.

The sum then of all is this, He that is by the prouocations of the world
drawn away from that service, that he owes to Almighty God, shall bring so
many troubles upon himself, that he shall be weary of his life. But he that
walks conscionably in that way, that God has appointed him to walk in, shall
be so enriched with the graces of Gods Spirit, that he shall be able to give
satisfaction to himself, though he be forsaken by all the world.

God has two sorts of children, and he has two portions for them, both set
out in the words of the text. Some are rebellious children, nourished by God,
but rebelling against him. Their portion is misery flowing from their own
sins. Others are obedient children not fashioning themselves according to the
lusts of ignorant men: 1 Pet. 1.14.
and their portion is satisfaction arising from the grace of God within them.
The portion of backsliding children commends to our careful considerations
these

Four particulars.

1. The Person. in the first word. The backslider. 2. The prouocations
external. in the phrase. He that is turned back. 3. The original internal.
in the next word. In heart. 4. The patrimony. in the last words. Shall be
filled with his own ways.
For the first.

That there are backsliders is a needless thing for me to prove. The person.
Scripture and experience of all ages prove it to my hand. My labor must be
to show who they are, from the particular kind of Apostacies. A backslider is
he that falls away either from that good course he has taken, or at least from
that good course he ought to take. Romans 3.12. 2 Pet. 2.21.
The latter is a turning out of the right way. The former is a returning to a
wrong way. Romans 3.9.
The one is natural and common to all both Jews and Gentiles. It is the
estate we are borne in: it is the estate they live and dye in, that know not
the Gospel or the way of salvation by Christ alone. The other is voluntary, 2
Pet 2, 20,
not a condition put upon us by our parents, but chosen by our selves. The one
is a failing in our duty, the other is a falling from our profession. I let
pass the natural defection, because it is not that which Solomon here aims
at, preaching to the backsliding Jews, not to the wandering Gentiles. Neither
is it needful for me to speak of, that speak to such as are believing
Christians, not unbelieving heathen by profession. We profess a double duty:
the one to God, comprehended in the precepts of the first Table: the other to
man, contained in the Commandments of the second. The profession of a double
duty, makes us subject to a double apostasy. The first is a falling from the
duty of piety. The second is a falling from moral honesty. Our falling from
duties of piety is either a public, or a private defection. The public
apostasy is the falling from the profession of the true Religion to Idolatry
and false worships: this apostasy the Israelits were much subject unto: They
turned back and dealt unfaithfully like their fathers: Psalm. 78 57.58.
they were turned aside like a deceirfull Bow. For they provoked him to anger
with their high places: and moved him to jealousy with their graven images.
Thus dealt they with God under their Judges: they served him in their misery,
but when their Judges were dead, they returned to idolatry. And when the Lord
raised them up Judges, Judge 2.18.19.
then the Lord was with the Judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their
enemies all the days of the Judge (for it repented the Lord because of their
groanings by reason of them that oppressed and vexed them.) And it came to
pass when the Judge was dead, that they returned and corrupted themselves more
then their fathers, in following other Gods to serve them, and to bow down to
them: they ceased not from their own doings, nor from their stubborn way. Thus
dealt they with God, under their Kings: when their Kings were good, they served
God, and when they were evil, they served Idols. Such are they that after so
great light by the preaching of the Gospel, turn to antichrist, renounce the
true Religion and fall to popery. Such are they that being taken by the enemies
of the Christian name turn Turks, that they may not turn slaves. They
venture their souls to save their bodies, forsake their God to procure their
quietness. Their offense is so much the greater, because they not only leave
Christ, but cleave to Antichrist. They not only forsake God, but serve Satan
against God. These are traiterous soldiers, that content not themselves to
fail their Captain in the heat of the battle, but fight against him openly
under the color of his known Adversary. They not only weaken Gods part what
lies in them, by their Apostasy; but also strengthen the adverse part by their
contrary profession.

The private defection is a falling from the practice of those private duties
men have formerly performed to the LORD of Hoasts. Such are they that have
been careful of praying Morning and Evening in their Families, and daily in
their closets. But afterward neglect all private Prayers, and like bad husbands
wast their own private stock, and look to live upon the public charge.
Such are they that have been zealous for the glory of GOD, but are grown
remiss, and care not how God be dishonored. Such are they that have with
patience borne all troubles, as coming from God: but now murmr at the least
calamity, as if it came from the Devil that hated them, and not from God that
loved them. These are like to rotten Apples, that when they begin to putrify
grow worse and worse, till they be good for nothing.

The second fall is from moral honesty, when men have been careful to live
justly in the world for a time, and afterward deceive the expectation of the
times, and prove deceitful themselves. Ye have many that have been
wonderful just servants, that prove most unjust masters: When they were
servants they dealt truly, for the gain was their masters; now they are
masters they deal falsely, for the gain is their own. Some children are very
quiet in their younger years, and the delight of their parents, who in their
elder years prove most troublesome, and perpetual vexations to them that with
most tenderness have bred them. Absolon and Adoniiah were David's joy, when
they were children, and David's annoyances when they were men. Some have been
famous for deeds of charity in the strongth of their years, that in their
dote-age have been strangely miserable, as if they had taken no care for the
world, when they were likely to live long in it, and take care for nothing else
but the world when they were likely to go soon out of it. These are they that
have set God and the world at defiance; they neither regard to keep a good
conscience toward God, nor a good name before men: they have made shippewracke
of faythfulnesse toward men, and of a good conscience before God.

Let us now come to the second point, What may make these men to slide back?
External prouocations to Apostasy.
Surely, the manifold prouocations of the world. That they may the better be
avoided, they may be ranked into these particulars. First, the troubles of the
world. Man has a strange passion called fear, that will smell out danger
before it come, and oftentimes before it be intended. All his care now is to
prevent this trouble: whether it be by good means or bad, his wisdom will
not forecast, because it aims at nothing, but freedom from imminent danger.
Man's nature is very tender: it seeks to turn away all manner of hardness.
Peter espies a cloud coming, he must needs deny his Master, Mat. 26.35.70.
or bear trouble with him: his stout heart that before would dye with him
rather then deny him, now will deny him that it may not dye with him. Many a
man plays abroad with the Be, and gathers honey in the summer of prosperity,
that hides his head within his hiue in the winter of adversity. Judge 7.3.^
If God like Gideon should make a proolamation of a war, and send back every
one whose heart fails him, he must be contented with ten thou sand, and let
twenty two thousand go back again to live in peace.

Secondly, the profits of the world drive many back from their former
forwardness. Desire is a strong passion. It is like a River with a violent
current: no banks can keep it in. If it once fasten upon riches, it cannot
easily be pulled off. Demas keeps S. Paul company a while, 2 Timothy 4.10.
but in the end forsakes him for the love of this present world. Religion
looks at another world, her prayers, her plots all look that way. Covetousness
looks at this world, her devices aim at nothing but at riches. Matthew. 26.15.
Judas follows Christ a while, but afterward for desire of gain leaves him,
nay betrays him. Riches are the thorns that choke the seed, Luke 8.14.
so that it comes not to perfection. They must forsake God that serve Mammon,
Math. 6.24.
for it is impossible to please both. And no wonder if that be the root of
Apostey, which is the root of all evil: even the love of money, which while
some coueted after, they have erred from the faith, 1 Timothy 6.10.
and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.

Thirdly, the delights of the world are the sweet singing Sirens, that draw
many back to their utter overthrow. These work upon the affection of joy or
delight. A pleasing affection, but never satisfied, it never says enough: Genesis
19.26.
the sweet content that Lots wife had in the idle pleasures of Sodom commands
her affection: and her affection commands her eyes to look back once more to
behold the place she so well loved. Unthankful she shows her self to God that
freede her preferring the imaginations of her own pleasures before the
Commandment of God, and stands as a monument to posterity, a pillar of Salt.
These are bewitching temptations and forcible prouocations: it is far more
pleasing to man's nature to live at ease abounding in pleasures, then to carke
and care laboring for riches. Both withdraw from Gods service, but that is
most dangerous which withdrawes with most contentment to the mind of man.

Fourthly, evil counsails of others draw many back from their professions of
piety and equity. This is the mischief of bad kindred. This is the
discommodity of bad neyghbourhood. This is the fruit of evil acquaintance.
All men desire to have their friends like to themselves; all men wish naturally
to be as like them whom they love, as they can. Hence it is that bad counsel
is easily given, and easily taken. The ones tongue is the fire, the others
heart is the fuel, that eafily bursts out into a flame. Numb. 25.18.
Thus the Midianites vex the Israelites with their wiles: they first use them
courteously, draw them into their acquaintance, so persuade them both to
corporal and spiritual fornication. Thus many sweet dispositions have been
undone: and they that might by good advice have been turned to the praise of
GOD, have been made iarring instruments of loud impieties. Bad Masters, evil
Tutours, hollow-hearted Guardians, have ruined many young men's pliable
dispositions with their patrimonies. Nettles in a Garden grow not a lone, but
produce a multitude of other stinging weeds, as bad as themselves. Pharisees
compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte, Math. 23.15.
and make him the child of the Devil twofolde more then themselves.

Fifthly, evil example is the bane of many: Man is of a sociable disposition;
he loves not to walk alone, but to go where others go before him. Thus
evil Rulers undo the poor people by their example, and Ancestors seduce
their posterity. It is the pillar of the popish religion; our fathers lived and
dyed in this religion, and so will we. Evil counsels seduce much, but evil
examples much more the likeness of our nature and natural corruption makes one
man over forward to imitate another. Ill words are like a hook covered with a
bate, that deceiues one fish among many. Ill examples are like nets that take
far more then they let go. What we see other men do, that we think we may
do; and their boldness in sin and freedom from punishment duls the edge of
Gods threatenings in the mouths of his Ministers, and of his curses red in the
Law, because we see no punishment light upon them: therefore do we persuade
our selves, that we shall escape punishment as well as they, if we sin as
deeply as they do. Peter dissembles but a little, and the other Jews
dissemble with him: Gal. 2.13.
and no marvel, for Barnabas himself makes one, and takes part with Peter in
the same dissimulation. What will bad men do? how easily will they imitate one
another in bad ways, when good men are so prone to do it? And thus much for
the prouocations, that lead men backward, that may avoid them.

The third point considerable is the internal original of backsliding, The
internal original of backesliding.
which is the heart. The backslider in heart. The prouocations of the world may
persuade, but they cannot prevail, unless the heart be first tainted: the
body will never turn back unless the heart yield first: therefore God
requires all the heart for his service, Deuteronomy. 10.12.
for he knows well, that when the heart begins to faint, the body will not
long stand it out. God requires a perpetual remembrance of him in the heart as
a preservative against disobedience in the life: Deuteronomy. 8.11.
beware thou forget not the Lord thy God in not keeping his Commandments, and
Statutes and his judgments, which I command thee this day. The woman deuoures
the sweetness of the forbidden fruit in her heart, before she taste of it with
her mouth. Genesis 3.6.
When the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant
to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit
thereof, and did eat. The heart is the receptacle of all evil counsels that
tend unto defection: whatsoever the eye or ear let in, the heart takes it into
consideration: there is the Council table, where the understanding, the will,
and all the affections consult and conclude, what shall be brought into action,
the beginning of all evil actions is there, there is the shop in which are
forged all evil words and wicked deeds before they be set forth to sale in the
life. So does our blessed Savior testify, Out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, Math. 15.19.
false witness, blasphemies. Though the occasion of backsliding be from the
world, yet the true original is of our selves. Our Creator who loves what he
has created, persecates no man, but him that first persecutes himself. God
departs from no man, that does not first depart from God, as S. Augustine
truly teaches. A nulle recedit Deus, nisi prius ipse ab eo recedat Aug. de
salut docum. c. 54.
And Fulgentius treading in the steps of Augustine, God, says he, would not
have destroyed evil men in judgment, if they had not first perished through
their own iniquities. Backsliding then from the chiefest good to the meanest
good, this is proper to the sinner, and his volunt ary evil by which the
unjust man, destroys himself. And because God is not the author of this
evil, Digne homini qui se perdidis peccato, redditur in tormentis aeterna
perditio. Fulg de praed. ad Mon. lib. ^.
but the perverse man; therefore eternal destruction is justly rendered to that
man in porments, who has first undone himself by his wickedness. There
needs now no further search for the true beginning of defection from
profession of piety. It is not to be imputed to Gods permission, nor to the
worlds provocation, but the first beginning of the act of defection is in man's
wavering inclination. Satan should tempt in vain, and the world provoke to no
purpose, if man's heart did not yield to the temptations of the one, and the
prouocations of the other. And so much for the internal original of apostasy.

The fourth thing is the patrimony of the backslider. He shall be filled with
his own ways. Backesliders patrimony.
he will be sure to bring sorrow enough upon his own head. Solomon was here
no false Prophet, for he confirmed it afterward by his own woeful
experience; he fell to idolatry but for a time, but he wrought himself misery
so long as he lived. 1 Kings 11.14.23.26.
First, Hadad the Edomite disturbes the peaceable government of Solomon. Next,
Rezon the son of Eliada of Damascus. Lastly, Jeroboam the son of Nebat
lifts up his hand against him. Asa King of Judah to prevent the plots of
Baasha, 2 Chronicles. 16.2 7.12 13.
King of Israel commits sacrilege, robs God and the Kingdom to have Gold and
Silver to send to Benhadad the King of Syria to relieve him: he trusts not in
God, but trusts in Benhadad, God lays a plague upon him, that Benhadad cannot
heal, that makes him sleep with his fathers, a disease in his feet. We have
spoken of Kings, let us now speak of Kingdoms. The Kingdom of Israel falls to
idolatry, they will not come to Jerusalem, least they should return to the
house of David: they set up calves in Dan, (...). 1.3.
in Bethel. They have gone a whoring from their God. They shall no longer dwell
in the Lords land, but they shall eat unclean things in Assyria. They
forsook their God, and the Assyrians carry them out of their land. The Jews
transgress after all the abominations of the heathen, 2 Chronicles. 36 14, 16, 17.
and pollute the house of the Lord. They despise Gods Words, and misuse his
Prophets. Therefore God destroys their City, and sends them into Babylon to
captivity. They that drink poison may please their palate but they drink
their own death. They that go back from Gods service run forward to their
own overthrow. Defection in the conscience is like dust in the eye: it makes
it foul, it makes it unserviceable, it makes it painful. The remembrances of
backslidings are like skarres left when wounds are cured; they trouble the
owner with the sight of them. The heathen man knew well the stinging force of a
troubled conscience. The greatest punishment, Maxima peccantium est paena
peccasse. Nec illum saelus, licet illud fortuna. exoruet muneri^ bussuis, licet
tueatur ac vindicot Impunitum est, quoniam sceleris in scelere supplicium est
Senec. epist. 97.
says he, of sinners, is that they have sinned. Neither is any sin
unpunished, although fortune adorn it with rewards, although it defend and
maintain it, because the punishment of wickedness is within it self. Their
greatest enemy need wish backsliders no greater punishments, then their own
ways written in their own consciences. Many losses and crosses also do
Apostatas bring upon themselves. Sometimes God turns their wealth unto
poverty: sometimes he takes away their children, or makes them greater crosses
to them, then if he took them quite away from them, for a cross child is
worse then a lost child: the one is a temperary, the other a perpetual
vexation. 2 Samuel 12.10.
David goes back but a little way, but the sword never departs from his house
for it.

Absolon troubles him while he lives, and grieves him when he dies. Adoniiah
will be King in spite of him, when his father grows old. Add unto this the
infamy, that wicked men bring upon themselves. Thus Tamar foretells Ammon of the
discredit, that would follow upon his incestuous violence, I whither shall I
cause my shame to go? 2 Samuel 13, 13
and as for thee, thou shall be as one of the fools in Israel. So men by their
folly make themselves justly a table-talke to others, and their very name to be
abhorred. And not their name alone, while they are alive, but they make their
memorial also to stink when themselves are dead and gone. It is added in
Scripture as a perpetual monument of Ieroboams backsliding, 1 Kings 16.29.
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. God records the
backslidings of ungodly men in Scripture to the worlds-end, Math. 10.4.
to their perpetual disgrace. Judas treason is recorded, and he himself not
often named without that infamous addition, Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed
him. The greatest Princes whose facts no man durst censure while they lived,
are by mean Historians chronicled for all posterity, and their blemishes
written with a pen of iron for all the world to peruse. The proudest Popes
that have made Emperors to kiss their feet, and turned Kingdoms topsituruy,
have their sorceries, their strumpets; their bastards upon record to make
their savor stink in the eyes of all men.

Disgrace then attends upon defection, and never fails it. Eccles. 10.1.
Dead Flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking
savor: so does a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom and
honor. If the book of Ecclesiastes be as it is thought to be, Salomons
recantation after his fall to idolatry; no doubt he found this dead fly at
home, and was a strange example of his own precept. The world had not such a
pattern, all things considered: a man so famous for wisdom fall to so foul
idolatry as Solomon did: the wisest of men seduced by a company of foolish
women. No doubt Solomon knew what he writ, and labored under the loss of his
own reputation, and writ this for a warning to others out of his own woeful
experience.

Lastly, defection brings eternal perdition of soul and body. Heb. 10.39.
We are not of them who draw back to perdition, but of them that believe to
the saving of the soul. There are no doubt thousand thousands in hell, who are
more then filled with their own ways, and with the remediless, yet
insupportable troubles, that their own backeslidings have brought upon them.
Who if they might live to undo what they have done, would be patterns to
others to avoid Apostasy. Yet so incredulous are we that live, that we
neither believe these miseries will come upon us, though threatened in GODS
Word: Luke 16.31.
neither would we repent, if one should arise from the dead, that had tasted
of those woeful torments.

And no wonder if backsliders bring so many miseries upon themselves, when they
provoke so many heavy enemies against them. God himself is become their enemy
from whose service they are slidden. God I say, Deus a quo euerti, cadere in
quem connerti, resurgerin quo mantre, consistere est Aug. Soli. c. 1.
turning from whom is falling, returning to whom is rising, tarying in whom is
standing, as Augustine soundly informs us. If there be no safety to them that
are hated of Kings, within their dominions, what safety can there be to those
whom God hates, in all the world? How can they expect a quiet conscience, or
safety in their states, that have GOD for their adversary? He will raise up
men to be our enemies if we be his, and to cross us if we cross him.
Solomon was a wise, a rich, and a most potent Prince; yet when he forsakes God,
GOD rayseth him up such enemies, as all Salomons wisdom and power could not
pull down. Jeroboam and his posterity forsake Gods service, and set up golden
calves in Dan and Bethel. 1 Kings 15.29.
God raised up Baasha to smite all the house of Jeroboam, who leaves him not
one breathing. Baasha and his son continue in Ieroboams evil courses, and
GOD sets against him Zimri, 1 Kings 16.11.
who slayes all his house, with his kinsfolks and friends, and leaves him not
one to piss against the wall. Omri and Ahab his sons for all this take no
warning, 2 Kings. 10.1.
but add to the former, other idolatries: God pulls him down by Iehu, who
slew all his great men and his kinsfolks, and his Priests, until he left him
none remaining. So hard a thing is it for man to stand upright without standing
to God.

If men be to favorable, God has worser instruments to plague us withal: all
the devils are at his command, and are no other then Gods executioners, whom he
uses in the severity of his wrath. They will be sure to strike home, for they
plague us not for obedience to God, nor for love of justice, nor yet for gain
or profit, which is the loadstone of most executioners, but for hatred of us,
for envy at our felicity, and seek to bring us to their unspeakable, and
unpardonable misery. No doubt, but they will be severe, that seek nothing but
the eternal destruction of our souls and bodies. Lastly, all the creatures
fail them that fail God. Nay they do not only fail them, but exercise all
their force to hurt and to annoy them. They deny them that service they were
created to do them, and proclaim open wars against them, that have been
openly disobedient against their GOD. Pharaoh the great King of Egypt, and the
great oppressor of Israel had enough to do, and more then he could do to
defend, not his people, but his own royal person from Lice, Frogs, Boyles,
Scabbes, Flies, and such like vermin. His soldiers could not expel them out
of his Country, nor his Guard keep them out of the bedchamber of their King.
There is no mercy to be found with these enemies, they hurt and spoil all
where they come. They have no reason, and therefore will be persuaded to show
no favor. Thus you see what miseries backsliders bring upon themselves: now
let us come to the application.

The great danger of backsliders, For examination.
and the miseries they bring upon themselves, drive us to an examination of our
own condition. We are not igno-what service we owe to God, let us sift our
own souls and try how well we have performed it. We know what professions
we have made in Baptism, let us see how we have been answerable to our
professions. We see, and others have seen how forward we have been in Gods
service, let us examine our present zeal whether it be correspondent to the
former. If the world have had a good opinion of us for equity and charity, let
us take heed that no cause be given by us to diminish their good opinion. In
matters of lesser weight, carelessness is more tolerable; but in things of this
consequence it is not to be endured. One maine cause why many Citizens decay
in their estates, is because they look not well to their books: they know not
what they owe to others: they know not what others owe to them; they are worse
then naught before they be aware. So is it with evil men, they are gone far
backward, because they daily look not into themselves, nor observe not, how
they grow, upward or downward. The wounded man is loath to search his wound,
the pain makes him unwilling to diue into it, and so it grows incurable. The
backslider is not willing to ponder upon his own courses, least the beginning
of his life condemn the end of it. He goes to hell, because he will not see
that he is going thither.

Secondly, For consolation.
after examination the conclusion will appear. If we find our selves
acquitted in the judgment of our own consciences from backesliding, we may
have much comfort in our ways. It is no mean encouragement to goodness to find
some progress upon examination. He that plants an Orchyard, takes a singular
contentment to see every Tree, how it grows and how it bears fruit one year
more then another. The diligent citizen who in the end of the year, when
others are idle, casts up his own estate, and finds some increase of profit
arising from his trading, his heart is joyful within him. Every man's
conscience is his judge. It must consider of the talents that GOD has given
him to trade withal. If it find a good increase, it gives him that
commendation within, that God will one day give him before men and Angels.
Well done good and faithful servant, Math, 25.21.
thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over much:
enter thou in to the joy of thy Lord. Such a man may call in his friends and
neighbors to rejoice with him, Luke 15.8.9.
as the Woman did, who had found her piece of silver that was lost. When Philip
had been called by Christ, how triumphantly does he boast to Nathaniel, We
have found him of whom Moses in the Law, Ioh. 1.45.
and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth the Son of Joseph. So may he
triumph who upon just examination finds, that he has made some good progress
in the ways of godliness.

Thirdly For caution.
else will it end in discomfort. We had need to be cautious that we may stand
it out for time to come. We must not be lifted up, that we have stood it out
so long, but be watchful, that we may hold out unto the end. He that has
escaped one great storm at Sea, must not be secure though, till he come unto
the haven. Another storm may endanger him that has escaped a former. Many are
the prouocations of the world. If it prevail not one way, it will try another.
If the aduersityes of the world will not discourage us, it will try, whither
the pleasures or profits of it will work us. It becomes us carefully to take
heed of all these but especially to be wary, that while we are busy with the
world abroad, we be not betryed by our own flesh within. In a besieged City
it is not unusual, while the besiged resist an assault made at one side of the
Town for some false traitor to let in the enemy on the other side and toruine
the City. So while we think our selves safe against the allurements of the
world, we are often betrayed by the corruption of our own flesh. They are
fools that work themselves troubles: yet whence come all our troubles, but
from our own backeslidings, and whence come our defections, but from our
carelessness? We have a vigilant enemy, who neglects no occasion of advantage,
let us be as watchful for our own preservation, least God being provoked by
our negligence give us over to our spiritual enemy to be ruined. A breach is
not healed at that cost it might be prevented. Though there may be a recovery,
yet some skarres of infamy and infirmity will be remaining.

Fourthly, For consternation.
That they are backsliders. Their own ways will be their own overthrow:
there is no need of great Politicians to over reach them with some subtle
devise to the overthrow of their honors, lives, or estates: they themselves
will lay snares for themselves, and dig pitts with their own wickedness to
bury their fortunes in, with themselves. There needs no great and mighty men
whose hatred and power may bring down backesliders, they fall with their own
weight. We have corrupted our selves internally by our defection, and internal
corruption works external destruction. A rotten Apple needs not be crushed,
the inward putrefaction will bring it to nothing though no hand touch it. A
wounded body needs no Sword to kill it, nor no poison to destroy it, it has
that within, that will bring it to the grave. A decayed House needs not be
pulled down by the hands of worke-men, it will fall of it self for want of
reparation. An high Empire ouergrowne in term and territories, needs no
outward foes to put an end to it. Civil wars and home bred vexations settled
in the veins of it, will lay it low enough. So is it with Apostataes. There
needs no foreign art, nor force to undo them, they daily further their final
overthrow. How ever it go with them in this world, their own consciences can
tell them, it will never go well with them in the world to come. Go to now,
ye backsliders, weep and houle for the miseries, that shall come upon you.
James 5.1.


Fifthly, For reuocation.
It is not good to ride too far out of the way. It will ask the more labor
to come in again. We do not terrify men with their evil conditions to vex
them, but to draw them out of it. Let us consider from whom we are slidden: it
is from GOD, to whom if we do not return, we can never expect safety in any
other. He will destroy us for failing him: others cannot save us for cleaving
to them. It is sufficient that others seek our overthrow, let us not seek our
own. While we live in this world, we have liberty to return to God, and
opportunity to seek the Kingdom of God. But if we slide away more and more
from God in this world, we can have no access to God in another world. The
traveler that knows he is out of the way, needs no great persuasions to go
in again. The sick man that knows his disease to be dangerous, wants not
many arguments to urge him to be studious of his own recovery. If we were as
sensible of spiritual errors and diseases, as we are of temporal, small
Rhetoric would serve to draw us back from our backslidings. Our estate is
naught now, but it is like to be much worse hereafter, and which is no small
addition to our misery, we know not how soon we shall be most miserable:
there may be but a minute between us and death; there cannot be above a
minute more between death and hell. How long then will you run on toward
your own damnation? Return, return to Gods favor, least ye perish in his
anger. Remember whence ye are fallen and repent before the candlestick of
your life be removed, and ye left in perpetual darkness. Revel. 2.5.


Sixthly, For reclamation.
but a needful deed of charity when we have recalled our selves, to reclaim
others. At least to endeavor to reclaim them, for the success is to be
expected from God. We see the danger of defection: they see it not: the sight
of it makes us to return to God, let us strive to make others to see their
misery too that they also may return from their backslidings. They that have
been cured of the Gout or Stone are no niggards of their knowledge, but
easily communicate the same unto others. It is our blessed Saviors command to
S. Peter, Luke 22.32.
that when he should find himself converted, he should strengthen his
brethren. It is David's promise, Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, Psa.
51.12.13
and uphold me with thy free spirit. Then will I teach transgressors thy way,
and sinners shall be converted unto thee. Christianity teaches us to live in
a communion of spiritual and temporal comforts and counsels. Which
communion requires not only that we be liberal to them that want bodily
means, but also to advise for the best such as want spiritual directions. If
we have erred and recalled our selves, let us not think all the work done.
We are a Body: the hand has not done his own part in pulling a thorn out of
it self. it must pull it out of the foot also. Heaven is not prepared for us
alone, we must endeavor to lead others thither with us.

And thus much for the first part of the Text, the portion of backsliders. The
portion of obedient children follows in the conclusion of the Text.

And a good man shall be satisfied from those things that are within himself.
Good men have matter enough within their own souls to give satisfaction to
themselves in the greatest dangers that can befall them. Hence come those
admirable boastings of David, Psalm 16.8.
I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my right hand, I
shall not be moved. Though his own strength might fail him, yet he knew God,
could not. The Lord is my light and my salvation, Psalm. 27.1.
whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be
afraid? His own store might fail him in a famine, though he had a kingdom:
his own art might disapoynt him, though he were wiser then his enemies, if the
pestilence came. As the silly sheep then thinks himself safe under the
shepherds protection, when the wolf lays for him, so does he under Gods, in
greatest perils. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. Psalm 23.1.4
Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me. And least
it might be thought to be his case alone, he ioynes others with him that fear
God. Psam 46.1, 2, 3
God is our refuge and strength: a very present help in trouble. Therefore
will we not fear though the Earth be removed: and though the Mountains be
carried into the midst of the Sea. Though the waters thereof roar and be
troubled, though the Mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Selah. A very
high strain indeed, and worthy of a Musical note of Elevation. Hence come S.
Paul's triumphs. He knew he had enough within him to uphold him, what ever
outwardly happened in the world. I am persuaded that neither death, nor life,
nor Angels, nor Principalities, Romans 8 38.39.
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord. An Apostolical height! yet such a pitch as may be
attained by private Christians, whom S. Paul ioynes with himself in the body
of this triumph. Many are the gifts and graces that God has enriched a good
man's soul withal. Among those many, diverse there are that are given him to
give satisfaction to his own soul, though I deny not, but sundry other
internal indowments are bestowed on him to enable him to honor God, and to do
good to men by his actions, while the earth affords him a dwelling place, and
till heaven be ready to receive him. God deals with him as a father with his
tender child, whom he bestows great breeding upon to his no little cost,
partly to make his life profitable to others, and partly to make it comfortable
to himself. Thus God furnishes his Children with abundance of graces, that
they themselves may have cause to bless God for such as give satisfaction to
their own souls; and others, for such as bring profit and benefit to them.
Let us now view the particulars, and bring into a list such graces as shine
inwardly and enable Gods servant to satisfy himself. Means of self
satisfaction.
The first jewel that God bestows upon the soul of a good man, is peace of
conscience. I put it in the first place, because it yields most comfort. Peace
of conscience,
This can satisfy a man inwardly whatsoever befalls him outwardly in the world.
His conscience being naturally unsettled has led him through all the conditions
that every man passed through in this world. He looks back to the state of
Creation. He viewes it as a state of innocence, and a condition of felicity.
But (says the conscience) what is that to thee? Adam was innocent and happy:
but by his fall he has made thee sinful and miserable. There is as little
comfort in thinking of lost happiness, as in a staruing man ruminating upon his
lost Gold and perishing. It doubles the grief in our selves to think we have
been happy in our first parents. Seeking rest in the state of Creation and
finding none, at length his thoughts fasten upon the estate of corruption. The
former was a good, but is a lost condition. The latter is a bad one, better
lost then found, yet easily found but not easily lost. This is his natural
condition. This makes him hang down his head with heaviness. At length a
third condition offers it self unto his consideration, a state of
reconciliation to GOD by the blood of Christ. His conscience cannot deny he
has sinned, but God in the Gospel offers him pardon for all his sins in
Christ. This Offer he has applied to himself by a true faith. Now the
plaster applied has healed the wound. His transgressions are removed from
him, Psalm. 103.12
as far as the East is from the West. His conscience now is at peace within
him. His soul is joyful. It is secured from the wrath of GOD: what need it
fear the wrath of men? He finds peace from Heaven: he fears not wars on
Earth. Romans 5.1.3.
Thus being justified by faith he has peace with GOD through our Lord Jesus
Christ. And this peace makes him to glory in tribulation. Psa. 91.1.5.6
Now does he dwell in the secret place of the most high, and therefore shall
abide under the shadow of the Almighty. Now plagues and dangers are not so
terrible to him as before, because he knows none can hurt him whom God loves
and protects. A ship at Sea plays it the midst of storms, there are no trees
to shelter it, no anchores can hold it. Nothing cannot can secure it that is
without it; all the safety it has is from within. If it be well balanced it
may escape. So is it with the ship of man's conscience. When GODS wrath smites
upon it like a storm, and the world blows upon it like a tempest, no honors
can quiet it, no tiches can pacify it. If any thing keep it from sinking, it
must be the inward peace of a good conscience: this assures him of Gods love,
and that gives him satisfaction. The soul was made according to Gods Image:
nothing then can satisfy it, but God himself; according to whose Image it was
created. Take a seal and join it to wax, the stamp or image that is left in
the wax, cannot be filled but with the same seal again. Neither can Gods
Image in man be fully satisfied but by the fruition of God himself. Man's
nature, (says S. Augustine) although it be mutable, yet it may obtain
blessedness by cleaving unto the highest God, who is the only unchangeable
good. To make it happy, it must have satisfaction for all the defects of it.
Aug. de ciu. Dei lib. 12. cap. 1.
Now all the world is not sufficient to satisfy the necessities of the soul,
God only can do it. The same Father in his Confessions, presses the end of
man's creation, to show what only can give him satisfaction. Thou have made us
(says he) O Lord, Fecisti nos ad te; et inquietu^ est cor nostrum donec
requiescat in te. Aug. Coufess. l. 1. c. 1.
for thee, and our heart is restless, till it rest in thee. This was Cyprians
counsel to Donatus to seek for satisfaction not from the world without him,
but from his own conscience within him. There is but one pleasing and sure
tranquillity: one solid, firm, and perpetual security, if a man withdraw
himself from the tempests of this disquieting world being surely settled in a
safe haven, and lift up his eyes from earth to heaven, and being admitted to
Gods favor, and in his mind now nearest to his God, glories to find within his
own conscience whatsoever others deem high or great among worldly
commodities. Nihil appetere tam, nihil desiderare de saeculo potest, qui
saeculo mayor est. Cypr. ep. 2.
He can now covet nothing, he needs desire nothing of the world, who is already
greater then the world. Now as he need desire nothing that the world has, who
is at peace with God, so need he fear nothing that the world can do against
him, for God can supply him with what the world denies him, and can protect him
against what the world threatens him with. Thus is he by Gods favor in
despite of all the world able to give satisfaction to himself. The legacy
that our Savior left unto his Disciples was peace. Ioh. 14.27. Non pax
temporis quia exponendierant mul it is tributationibus sed pax pectoris et
paxaeternitatis prima in praesenti, secunda infuturo. Lud. vita. Christi part.
2. cap. 77. fig. 6.
Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. What that peace was, let
Ludolphus declare, Not peaceable times in this life, but a peaceable heart
leading to eternal life. As when the mind is troubled with the sense of Gods
anger, all the world cannot pacify it: gold and silver please no more then
strawes: friends are but miserable comforters: we languish inwardly
notwithstanding a world of outward comforts: so when the conscience is pacified
with the sweet persuasion of Gods favor, all the tribulations of the world
cannot daunt that heart, but like the Be it can come abroad and taste the
commodities of summer, and feed it self with the honey it has gathered
biding within the hiue, when the winter storms with her tempests. By this
means he enioyes the benefits of all outward comforts, and can fustaine
himself with his inward peace in the midst of all outward crosses.

The second favor wherewith God graces a good man's soul to enable him to
satisfy himself is the testimony of Gods Spirit. Testimony of Gods Spirit.
This confirms and assures us of the former peace with God. It breeds also
unspeakable joy in the apprehension of Gods favor. That rejoicing we have in
tribulations in hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.2.3.5.
proceed from the holy Ghost which is given us. The sum of the testimony of
Gods spirit within us is to persuade us fully of Gods love and favor to us in
Christ. So S. Paul instructs us. It is the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry,
Abba, Father. Romans 8.15.16
The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children
of God. Now what better news can the Spirit of God bring to us, then the
tidings of Gods favor. David preferres it before his being. Psalm. 63.3.
Thy loving kindness is better then life. This testimony internal of Gods
favor to the soul is able to sustain a man against all outward force and
malice. They that have store of food and raiment, of weapons, of munition,
being lodged in a strong hold, fear not the enemy without, though he be very
powerful. No more need a good man fear troubles. He that has store of gold
and silver within his coffers, cares not though he want brass or leaden money.
So he that is warranted by Gods Spirit, that God affects him, need not care
much though he want health, or wealth, or other worldly comforts. Thus Gods
Spirit dwelling in him, makes him able to satisfy himself, howeuer it go
with others.

A third blessing that helps the servant of God, to uphold himself, Memory.
is his memory. This is the chest of the soul, wherein she looks up all her
treasures. It is the retentiue faculty of the mind, wherein the instructions it
has formerly read or heard, are registered. The understanding without this is
like a prodigal, it receives many rents, but spends all. Or like the weak
stomach that takes food, but is not nourished by it, because it cannot hold it
to feed upon it. S. Augustine compares the memory to a barn, wherein things
seen are laid up for future provision. Thou see something (says he) and
perceiuest it with thine eyes, Aug. in euang. Ioh. Tract. 23.
and commendest it to thy memory: and that which thou have committed to thy
memory is there laid up within in a secret place, as it were in a barn: as it
were in a treasury: as it were in a certain closet, or inward garden. The
memory then is much beneficial to the settling and satisfying of a good man's
mind: means of further comfort may be kept from him. The Scriptures and
creatures may be denied to his eyes: sermons and friends maybe kept from his
ears: but what is lodged in his memory, can never be taken from him by the
malice of persecutors: there may he read in the darkest dungeon, without a
candle. Two things there are that may stagger the satisfaction of a good man in
time of trouble. The one is the doubting of Gods power to deliver him, in
regard of the greatness of his afflictions. The other is the questioning of
Gods will, because of the greatness of his sins. The memory helps to give
satisfaction to both these doubts. To the first, it answers by precedents.
Memoria animae nostrae quasi columna est; notae huic in scriptae, bonorum
exempla. Greg. Nyss. Tract. 2. in
The memory (according to Gregory Nyssen) is the pillar of the soul: the
memorials written in it, are the examples of good men. So the godly Jews
persuade themselves, that God can do wonders for them, because he has done
them for their fathers. O God, say they, we have heard with our ears, and our
fathers have told us, what works thou did in their days, in the time of
old. Psalm. cap. 4. Psalm 44.1.2
How thou did drive out the heathen with thy hand and plantedst them; Psalm.
119.58
how thou did afflict the people and cast them out. So David cheares up
himself, and rouzes up his spirits, I remembered thy judgments of old, O Lord,
and have comforted my self. Thus the good man's memory tells him, what God has
done for others, and his reason informs him, that he can do as much for him.
If he should be tempted to doubt of what God has done for others, yet he
cannot doubt of such great acts as God has done for himself. Thus David arms
himself against the Giant, The Lord that has delivered me out of the pawe of
the Lion, 1. Sam. 17.37
and out of the pawe of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this
Philistine. Thus S. Paul strengthens himself from his Asian deliverance, 2
Cor. 1.10
God delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver us, in whom we trust,
that he will yet deliver us. Thus he persuades himself strongly of Gods power
to free him from other inconveniences by reason of his Roman deliverance. I
was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. And the Lord will deliver me from
every evil work, 2 Timothy 4.17.18
and will preserve me unto his heavenly Kngdome. So the goodmans memory assists
him against all doubting of GODS power. To the second doubt it answers by
promises. Gods will is known by his Word. What he has promised to do that
he will do. Thus the memory lodging Gods several promises of spiritual and
temporal comforts in the closet of the soul, leaves no occasion to doubt Gods
will. This makes David in his sorrows put God in mind of his promise although
God never forget it. This comforts him in his greatest sorrows, that God has
promised him deliverance. Psalm. 119.49.50
Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope.
This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy word has quickened me.

The fourth means to settle the godly man's quietness of mind is contentation,
Contentation.
whereby he can satisfy himself in any condition. This attends upon godliness,
as the shadow waits upon the shining sun. For this we have S. Paul's warrant,
Godliness with contentment, is great gain, or rather, 1 Timothy 6.6
with it is self sufficiency. For S. Paul's meaning was not to inform us, that
godliness was great gain, if a man could get contentednes joined with it, but
rather to show us, that godliness brings sufficient of it self to give
satisfaction to the godly man, although he want many outward comforts. Godliness
then brings contentednes with it, or at least sufficient to give contentment,
if her store be well viewed: for so much the Greek word imports. Sufficientia
su^.
The Syriacke translation confirms this interpretation, which gives this brief
paraphrase of the words. For our gain is great, which is the fear of God,
with the use of our sufficiency: Cum vsu sufficientiae nostrae.
As much as to say, Godliness brings enough with it to satisfy us, if we know
how to use that store it has attending upon it, and bestows upon us. This made
David prefer the righteous man's poverty before the wicked man's plenty. A little
that the righteous man has, is better then the riches of many wicked. Psalm
37.1^
For the godly man is contented with a little: the wicked man is not satisfied
with abundance. This reason may be gathered from Solomon, David's understanding
son, Prou. 15.16
Better is little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure and trouble
there with. A good man is satisfied with a little, for he enioyes it with
quietness of mind. A wicked man is not satisfied with a great deal, because he
has many cares and troubles with it. A good man is content with little on
earth, because he looks for abundance: in heaven. A wicked man is not content
with abundance here, because he looks for little hereafter. Religion may well
bring satisfaction to a good man, because it brings him to God the Fountain of
all goodness. Psalm 16.5.
The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, says the Psalmist. God perswads
Abraham to take care for nothing but to walk before him in vprightnes: and
adds this, I am the Lord all-sufficient: that is, I have sufficient, I will
provide for thee, Genes. 17.^ Shaddac. asher lo dac. cui est sufficientia.
care thou only for my service. Piety then that brings a man to have an
intrest in God, shows him that what is wanting in him shall be supplied by
God, who has enough to supply the wants of all the creatures. Now he that will
not be content with God himself, how should he be satisfied if he had all the
world, all the store whereof falls infinitely short of Gods? So then when the
whole world cannot give satisfaction to a covetous man, a little contents a
good man: because he knows he has enough in God. Though another man has
more knowledge then he, yet is he contented, because God has communicated
enough to him to make him know Christ and the way to the Kingdom of Heaven.
Though many have more wealth, yet he rests satisfied with less, considering
that he has Gods favor with it, which many of them want. He wisely
forecasts the conueniences that attend upon his smaller portion, and the
inconveniences that accompany their greater possessions. They have many cares
that cannot be avoided, for many crosses and losses accompany great and rich
employments. He is freed from those cares to serve God quietly with a little.
They are subject to many disorders: he wants fuel to maintain the fire of
lust. They have a great account to give unto God, at the day of judgment of
the employment of their ten talents: he has a lighter reckoning for his five.
These thoughts give him contentation, and contentation gives him
selfe-satisfaction.

The fifth gift of God that furthers this selfe-satisfaction in a good man,
Temperance.
is Temperance. Among other virtues that adorn the soul of man, this is none
of the least. And it is much material to selfe-satisfaction: for nature is
contented with a little, and temperance teaches a man to abstain from
superfluities, and content himself with that that nature can be content
withal. S. Paul had well learned this lesson, philip. 4.11.12
I have learned in what soever state I am, therewith to be content. I know
both how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every where and in all things
I am instructed, both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to
suffer need. The goodman remembers the world is but an Inn: he must be
temperate, that his money may hold out to his iournyes end. He shall exceed
when he comes home. Thus his frugality and temperance gives him some
satisfaction, because it makes that content him which will not satisfy an
intemperate appetite. This makes him not greedy of worldly wealth, because a
little will serve his turn. He strives to be as S. Augustine says he
should be, It becomes not a Christian (says he) to gape greedily after this
worlds gain, to whom a Kingdom is promised in Heaven: but by abstinence to
live as becomes the servant of such a Lord Aug. de Tempser. 248.
that he may live in joy with his Lord for ever. This temperance is increased
in Gods Servant by consideration of the fleeting of all worldly comforts, and
the durablenes of spiritual treasures, which makes him the more sparring in
the use of the one, and more plentiful in exercising the other. This Illa
dives est, quae in Deo dives est, illa locuples est quae locuples in Christo
est: bona illa sunt, quae sunt spiritualia, diuina, caelestia, quae nos ad Deum
ducant quae nobiscum apud Deum perpetua possessione permaneant. Caeterum
quaecumque terrenas unt in seculo accepta, et hic cum seculo remansura tam
contemni debent; quam mundus ipse contemnitur, cuius pompis et delicijs iam
renunciauimus. Cypr. de disc. et hab. virg.
Cyprian very well knew, and that made him to use thse arguments to persuade
virgins to moderation in their apparel: She is rich (says he) that is rich
in God: She is wealthy that is wealthy in Christ: those are true riches which
are spiritual, Divine, and heavenly, which lead us to God, which remain with
us in perpetual possession in the presence of God. But whatsoever earthly
things we have received in the world, and must leave here with the world must
as easily be contemned as the world it self is contemned, whose pompes and
delights we have already renounced. This temperance when Gods servant has by
these reasons settled in himself, it equals his mind to his means when it
cannot bring his means to his mind. It makes him well contented with what he
has, when he cannot have what he rather would have. De laelitia et
tristitianascitur temperantia, cuius est tristitia causae. laelitia fructus,
Temperata laetitia nihil aliud quam temperantia est Ber. par. et var. sermon. 6.
S. Bernard informs us, That temperance is bred of cheerfulness and
heaviness; the cause of it is heaviness, the fruit is cheerfulness. So that
Temperance is nothing else but a well tempered cheerfulness. The godly man's
temperance purges his heart, and so teaches him the right and moderate use of
all Gods creatures in his body. So that as a good stomach turns the hardest
meat into nourishment, whereas a weak one turns the choice of meats into
diseases, so the temperate heart feeds the body with the hardest estate,
whereas the intemperate man ruins his soul and body with his wealth. Bernard
on that place in the 90. Psalm, Thou shall tread upon the Aspe and the
Basiliske, and shall trample under feet the Lion and the Dragon glosses thus.
The Lion will roar, who will not be afraid? If there shall be found any such,
he shall be styled a valiant man. But when the Lion is frustrate of his
purpose, there is a Dragon hidden in the sand, that by his poisoned breath he
may taint the soul, breathing into it, as it were, the concupisence of earthly
things. Who, think thou, shall escape his deceits? no man surely, but a wise
man. But peradventure while thou art afraid to come down to these lures,
somebody vrges thee with trouble, and lo forthwith the Aspe is present. For he
thinks he has gotten a convenient time for himself. Who will not be
exasperated by this Ape? Quis non exas. perabitur ab aspide ista.
Surely the temperate and moderate man, who knows how to abound and how to
suffer penury. I suppose that upon this occasion, the ill flattering wicked eye
will endeavor to bewitch thee. Who will turn away his eye? Truly the just
man will, who not only will not himself take the glory which is Gods, but
will not so much as receive it, Ber. in ps. 90 ser. 14.
when it is offered him by another. The temperate man then auoyds all these
different snares, and so gives satisfaction to himself. I will conclude this
means with S. Augustines exclamation, and commendation of temperance. O magna
et admirabilis absti^^ntiae virtus, per quam non solum animarum salus, agitur,
sed etiam corporum sanitaspossidetur. Aug. ad frat. in eremo Ser 31.
O great and admirable virtue of abstinence, whereby not only the safety of the
soul is preserved, but also the health of the body is possessed. And what can
a man require more to be able to give satisfaction to himself then safety of
soul with health of body?

The sixth means whereby a good man is enabled to give satisfaction to
himself, is Patience. It is a companion of Godliness. Patience.
which foole-hardy men bring upon themselves by their peevish hastiness. The
firmenes of patience, says Bernard, is a staff, Ber. sent.
whereby the rage of Wolves is kept off. Yet let the servant of GOD be as
patient as he can, he cannot turn away all troubles from himself. Patience
therefore stands him in good stead also when troubles are come upon him. It
makes him owner of his own soul. Luke 21.19.
In your patience possess ye your souls, faith our blessed Savior. Upon
which words of his, ^ustos omnium virlutum patientia est, in qua animas, quae
cor pus possident, pes sidemus, cum i^ sas animas ad patiendum ratione regimus.
Vnde Beda: Sic conditi mirabiliter sumus, vt, ratio animam, et anima possideat
corpus. Ius vero animae a corporis possessione praepeditur si non prius anima
aratione possidetur. Lud. de vit. Christi. part. 2. cap. 39. not. 9, 10
Ludolphus thus dilates, Patience is the keeper of all virtues, by which we do
possess our souls, which do possess our bodies when we do by reason
dispose our own souls to suffering. But he that is impatient, possesses not
his own soul because he cannot restrain the fury and anger of his own
heart. Whereupon Bid says, We are so wonderfully framed, that reason ought to
possess the soul, and the soul the body. But the right of the soul is
hindered from the possession of the body, if the soul be not first possessed by
reason. The Lord therefore has showed us, that patience is the keeper of our
condition, because it has taught us, how to possess our own selves. Those
things then which are troublesome to wicked men, are not so to a good man,
because his patience makes heavy burdens, light. To this end he considers of
many things to make him patient. He ruminates upon the original of all
afflictions, and remembers that they come from heaven. He endures them
patiently, because he would be loath to be found a fighter against God. He
resolves with David, Psalm 39.9.
I will be dumb, and not open my mouth, because thou did it O Lord. He
proceeds in his meditations to the progress of all troubles: Psalm 32.6.
Oportet paetienter ferri, quod non potest feslinanter auferri. Aug. de Temp.
Ser. 223. Vtrumque es mihi Domine Jesus, et speculum patiendi, et prae^nium
patien. eis. Trabe me post te, libenter te sequor, libenti^^ fruor.
remembers that they are called waters, and therefore will have their tide,
neither will they ebb, till they have done flowing. He agrees with Augustine,
that we ought to bear that with patience, which cannot be taken away in haste.
He looks back to the most famous pattern of patience, that ever man's eyes
beheld in man, and cries out with Bernard, Thou art to me, O Lord JESUS, both
a mirror of patience, and a reward, when I am patient. Draw me after thee, I
will follow thee willingly, and enjoy thee more willingly. Si sic bonus er
Domine sequentious te, qualis futurus es assequentibus te? Ber. in Cant. Ser.
47. Paena, de aduersis mundi ille senit, cuiet laetitia et gloriae omnis in
mundo est. Ille maeree et deflet, si sibi male sit in seculo, cui been non
potest esse post seculum. Caeterum nullus ijs dolor est de incursatione malorum
praesentium, quibus fiducia est futurorum bonrum. Cypr. ad. Demetr s. 15. Romans
8.18. 2. Cor. 4.17. Epict. Ench. c. 79.
O Lord if thou be thus good unto them that follow thee, how good will thou be
unto them that overtake thee? He looks forward to the heavenly end of all
worldly troubles, and concludes with Cyprian, He feels it a punishment to be
crossed in the world all whose joy and glory is in the world. He mornes and
laments, that it goes ill with him in this life, with whom it cannot go well
after this life. But they grieve not for the invasion of present evils, that
have a confident expectation of future happiness. Thus S. Paul teaches his
Romans, I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory, which shall be revealed in us. Thus he instructs
his Corinthians, Our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. So then our good man
collects that far more certainly from Scripture, which the heathen man
collected from nature, Tyrants may kill me indeed, but they cannot hurt me. He
sees that temporal evils may stand with his eternal good. Yea he sees they
are not evil in themselves simply, but rather in men's estimation. So could the
natural, or rather moral Philosopher say, Men are troubled not with the
things that befall them, On ta pragmata, alla ta perton pragmaton dog. mata. 1^.
but with those opinions which they have of the things. For example. Death is
not evil, else would it have appeared so to Socrates also: but our opinion of
death is that which makes it evil. Hence it is that a good man endures sickness
and death quietly which much perplexeth a wicked man. So Cyprian labors to
persuade the Gentiles that crosses appeared far otherwise to the Christians
then to them; because there was an infinite difference in the bearing of them,
Think ye that we bear adversity equally with you, when ye see that the same
crosses are not borne alike by us and you? ^ypr. ad Demet. s. 16.
Thus patience furthers selfe-satisfaction by turning away many crosses and
making others easier to be endured.

The seventh help that a good man has to help to satisfy himself withal,
Innocence.
is his innocence, which though it be not complete in action, yet it is in
intention. And it is a great comfort in all crosses. A good man is oftentimes
crossed by them, of whom he has deserved no hurt but rather much good. Hence
arises a world of inward comfort in outward crosses. Heerewith David comforts
himself before the Lord against the slanders invented by Saul's followers,
believed by Saul himself, and very costly to David, Psalm 7.3.4.5.
O Lord my God, says he, if I have done this, if there be any iniquity in my
hands; If I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me: (yea I have
delivered him that without cause is mine enemy.) Let the enemy persecute my
soul, and take it, yea, let him tread down my life upon the Earth, and lay
mine honor in the dust: Heerewith Job comforts himself against the
unkindness of his friends, GOD forbid that I should justify you: Job. 27.5.6.
till I dye I will not remove my integrity from me. My righteousness I hold
fast and will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.
And else where, Job. 31.35.36.37.
If mine adversary had written a Book, Surely I would take it upon my
shoulder, and bind it as a Crown to me. I would declare unto him the number
of my steps, as a Prince would I go near unto him Yea in sicknesses and
afflictions that come from God, innocence is a great comfort, witness Hezekias
prayer in his great sickness near unto death, I beseech thee, O Lord,
remember now how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart,
2 Kings 20.3.
and have done that which is good in thy sight. Sin is the very sting of
afflictions. He, says Chrysologus, Qui innoc entiae creditum seruat
paenitentiae non soluit vsuram Chrysol. ser. 167. Clem. Alex. strom. 1.6.
that keeps the debt of inocency, needs not pay the use of penitency. It is a
sign of peace within, when a man slights afflictions without. Witness Clemens
Alexandrinus, It is the glorifying of a boasting soul indeed, but yet it comes
from a good conscience to be able to discourse against those troubles that come
upon us. Innocence is a testimony to our consciencs, that our afflictions are
not punishments inflicted upon us by GOD for our sins, but trialls of our
patience tending to our greater glory. Thus the good man comforts himself from
his innocence both against mortal men, and also before the immortal God.

The last grace of GOD that gives a good man to enable him to satisfy
himself, is Hope. Hope.
This satisfies the soul of a good man for the present, because it persuades
him upon good ground that it will go better with him hereafter. So that,
although now it be not so well with him as he could wish, yet because he
knows it will be better, he rests satisfied. S. Augustine compares hope unto
an Egg, For hope, says he, has not yet attained the thing it self. And an
Egg is something: but it is not yet a chicken. Beasts then bring forth young
ones: but Birds bring forth only hope of young ones. Aug. ^e ver. Dom ser. 29.
The hope then of a good man is somewhat, and has some ability to give him
satisfaction for the present, though it be not so much nor cannot so well
satisfy as the glory he hopes for hereafter. It is a morsel to stay a good
man's stomach, till the feast of the Lambs marriage be ready, where he shall
be fully satisfied. Peradventure it goes not well with him now, but it will
go well with him one day, and this thought vpholds him. Thus loving Jonathan
comforts dejected David, Fear not, for the hand of Saul my father shall not
find thee, and thou shall be King over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee;
and that also Saul my father knows. 1 Samuel 23.17.
So the good man knows, and his adversaries are not altogether ignorant, that
heaven is prepared for him, and therewithal he satisfies himself. A young
Prince brought up under tutours and disciplined by meaner men then himself,
yet rests satisfied, because he lives in expectation of a Kingdom. So do Gods
Princes being exercised by wicked men look up to heaven, and quiet themselves.
Moses lost his honors in Egypt and his pleasures to suffer afflictions with
the Israelits, Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches, Heb. 11.26.
then the treasurs in Egypt: for he had respect to the recompense of the
reward. There is a hope of worldly preferments, which oftentimes brings shame,
because men hope for that they never attain. Romans 5.2.5.
But this hope of the glory of God, following justification, makes not
ashamed, for such persons never miss of that they hope for. Thus many strings
has a good man to his bow, and every one helps to further his
selfe-satisfaction. If a threesold cable cannot be easily broken, how shall an
eightfold? So many graces of Gods Spirit linked together in one soul cannot
but make it able to satisfy it self, if need be, without help of others.
For each of these has his several force, and therefore as being joined
together they are the stronger, so each one putting forth his own vigor, what
cannot be done by one, is done by another. As the Physician ioynes many things
in one potion, that what one thing cannot help, another may, so God ioynes
many graces in a good man's soul, that where one grace cannot give him
satisfaction for the present, another may. There is not any truth of GOD so
undeniable, but many things may be, yea many things have been by erroneous
spirits objected against it. So this truth of GOD so honorable to God and so
comfortable to man has not wanted many engines to batter it, yet it will stand
invincible.

First, David was feign to send to Nabal for food for himself and his men and
was shamefully denied. 1. Sam. 25.4. etc.
So Lazarus was forced to beg of the Richman the crummes that fell from his
Table and was cruelly starued by his denial. Luke. 16.21.
A man would think that Nabal were better able to give himself satisfaction
then David, and the Rich-man then Lazarus. How can this stand with self
satisfaction?

I answer, a good man may be without many outward comforts, but yet he has
an internal contentation, David have none of Naballs victuals, yet he and his
men shall be provided for. If Lazarus dye for lack of the Rich-mans crummes,
yet he dies contentedly, and is by Angels conuayed to eternal happiness.
There be many things which a good man has not, but there is nothing which he
wants. For he that is well contented with what he has, Dives a Dinus, quia vt
Deus nihil indigere videtur. Varro de ling. Lat. lib. 4. Locuples est, qui
paupertati suae aptus est, et paruo se diuitem fecit Sen. ep. 108.
cannot be said to want any thing that he has not. A Rich-man therefore that
has enough for all uses, is called in Latin Dives from Diuus, a God, because
like to God, he seems to stand in need of nothing. Let Seneca the heathen man
tell how a poor man may be rich, and a man of a mean estate wealthy. He is
wealthy whose mind is fitted to his poverty, and who has made himself rich
having but small possessions. If a heathen man could thus teach a poor man,
how to make himself rich, much more may the Scriptures inform him. Who counts
the Apostles of our Lord and Savior poor, though they had forsaken all and
followed Christ, when he sees how rich they were in faith and miracles, but
especially in sweet contentment? Let S. Paul speak for the rest, Hos meden,
echon^es c^i pania cat^chontes. 2 Cor. 6.10.
and say what the Apostles were, as having nothing, and yet possessing all
things. Shall we count the Angels and blessed Spirits in heaven poor, because
they have no meat nor drink, nor apparel? The Saints had more apparel,
when they were on earth, and more food, yet they were much poorer, then they
are now in heaven where they have none. But to mount up to the example of
examples, who can deny God himself to be rich? For every beast of the Forest
is his, Psame 50.10.
and the cattle upon a thousand hills. All men receive all their treasures
from him, yet he himself heapeth up no gold nor silver. A good man then that
is most like God of all his creatures, somewhat resembles his Majesty in this,
that he can be rich, although he lay up no money. His internal contentment
makes him wealthy, although external things flow not in so plentifully to him
as unto others.

Secondly, it may be objected,

We deny not,

No marvel then if at some time the Devil do beguile him, and urge him so
that he show forth his imperfections to the world, and his discontent unto his
neighbors. But yet we say though the troubled channel of his own
imperfections clog his heart for a time, yet is there pure water of Gods grace
therein sufficient to give him satisfaction without going to other men's rivers,
if he do but recollect his own forces: he has matter enough to satisfy him
within him, although his troubled spirit cannot discern for the present how to
use it. A while after when his passion is as an ague fit vanished away, then
can he by meditation recall his wandering thoughts, bring them into order and
settle them by the help of his patience and innocence and other forenamed
virtues lodged in his own breast by the finger of God. So then for all this
bullet, the fort of selfe-satisfaction cannot be pierced.

Thirdly,

For answer hereunto, passage the more comfortable. His creatures he has
afforded him both for aliment for his natural life, and props to uphold his
faith for the comfort of his soul. If he want Gods creatures for the upholding
of his natural life, he knows that either God will uphold him without these,
for Man lives not by bread alone, Math. 4.4.
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God: Or else God will
take him to his heavenly Kingdom, where he shall need none of these. If he be
denied the Sacraments, he knows that God can save him without them so he have
true faith in Christ. He knows Gods covenant is good though no seal be set to
it. It is not in Gods covenant as it is in men's. Seals are not set to for
fear of any unfaithfulness in God that promises, but because of the weakness
of our faith in giving credit to Gods promises. The good man then well weighing
Gods power and Gods promise can uphold himself in the want of bodily food and
Sacraments.

Lastly, it is objected, 1 Timothy 2.2.
Therefore S. Paul teaches us to pray, For Kings, and for all that are in
authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. Moreover a good man cannot live well without Ministers to instruct him
in Gods will. To this end God has appointed Pastors and Teachers for the
building up the Saints till we come to perfection of knowledge in Christ, that
we may not be carried about with every wind of doctrine. ^phe 4.11, 12, 13, 14.
Without these political and ecclesiastical helps a good man cannot subsist.
How can this stand with selfe-satisfaction? garden that they may be ready for
service when ill savors or spiritual distempers shall oppress the soul. Now
are we to come to shut up all with application.

First, For comfore.
It tells him he has attained to the best condition in the world. There can be
no better state, then for a man to be filled with grace from above, that he be
able in time of need to uphold, nay to satisfy himself without the help of
any other creature. Nay that he be able to stand his own ground and to make
good his own condition in despite of the subtilty of all crafty politicians,
and the power and malice of all worldly tyrants. Nay in despite of all
creatures and which are the most powerful of all creatures, and most
malicious, of the gates of hell. He is a member of the Church which is built
upon the rock, Math. 16.18.
and therefore the gates of hell cannot prevail against him. When he sees
troubles spirituallor corporal approach unto him, then let him look inward,
and gather together the forces of his soul, and then may he boldly look
dangers in the face, and not fear to overcome them: Thus David oppressed with
many enemies comforts himself against them, and lies down quietly without
fear of them, I laid me down and slept, Psalm 35, 6.
I awaked for the Lord sustained me. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of
people, that have set themselves against me round about. So is the servant of
God by Gods goodness made as it were a little God upon earth, Cultum tantum Deo
deberi dicimus, qui verus est Deus, facitque suos cultores Deos. Aug. de ciu,
Dei. l. 10. c^a.
able through Gods grace to stand of himself against all oppositions, and to
satisfy himself in all occurrents. O happy condition, and most happy man that
has attained to it.

Secondly, For direction.
Let him not hunt for felicity abroad in the world, which he may find at home
within his own walls. Who would not beg him for a fool that having a
fountain of his own at hand, would run to other men's to seek for water? So
vain a thing is it for a man to seek for satisfaction from the wealth or
honors of the world abroad which he might find much more comfortably, and
infallibly from his own conscience within doors. For when all the wealth of
the world cannot satisfy the mind, peace of conscience can. Let other men
seek with all eagernes for worldly commodities, and place their sole
satisfaction in them. David will place it in Gods favor. With the light of thy
countenance Thou have put gladness in my heart more then in the time, Psalm 4.7.
that their corn and their wine increased. Show thou thy self a good man by
thy contentednes, when thou want outward comforts and riches in the world.
Look upon the wide sea, behold how every day it sends forth plenty of waters
into all the rivers about it, and daily takes them back again, yet is the sea
never dry, neither does it ever want water. Go thou and do likewise. Show thy
self as well satisfied when floods of wealth are flowed from thee, as when
springs of riches run unto thee. So shall thou be to the world a proof of the
text, and an example of selfe-satisfaction.

Thirdly, For information.
and how great a mischief the want of goodness is: their conscience is unquiet
perhaps. All the world cannot give them satisfaction who might receive it from
their own consciences, if they were good and feared God. Perhaps their
conscience is quiet for the present. So may the sea be for a time, but every
little wind will move it and suddenly make it rage. The wicked are like the
troubled Sea, Esaias 57.20.21
when it cannot rest whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace
says my God, to the wicked. So miserable is the condition of a wicked man,
that he has no assurance of quietness, nor no solid satisfaction in
unquietness of mind. They that want goodness are no where assured to remain
quiet, much less are they able to give satisfaction to themselves for this is
a good man's privilege, and a wicked man has no share in it. So the want of
goodness both lays a man open to a world of mischiefs, and also depriues him
of all means of selfe-satisfaction.

Lastly For provocation.
to stir up every one with all his might to seek after goodness. This is
the only way to selfe-satisfaction. A wicked man when his goods are lost,
raues and rages, as if he had lost all his happiness. A goodman quiets himself
with holy Job, Job. 1.21.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb: and naked shall I return thither: the
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. A
wicked man when his body is sick, and he disquieted with pain, and in fear
of death, quakes for fear of hell torments. A goodman concluds with S. Paul, 2
Cor. 5.1.
We know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were disolued, we have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. A
wicked man when his friends forsake him, So the words are in the Hebrew. He
means that Christ will plead for him to God the Father. Job. 16.20.21.
cries out against the perfidiousnesse of this age and the vnfaithfullnesse of
the world. A good man looks up unto God in Christ as Job did before him,
saying, My friends are my scorners: but mine eye powers out tears unto God.
And he will plead for man with God, and the Sun of man for his friend. A
wicked man when wars rage and the trumpets sound in his ears, and the sword
glitters in his eyes, finds his heart dead within him like Naballs. 1 Samuel
24.37. Psalm 46.1.2.
A good man resolves with David, God is my refuge and strength: a very present
help in trouble. Therefore will I not fear, though the earth be removed: and
though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea. Behold a man able
to stand of himself, when Mountains are moved, and to give himself
satisfaction, when the stable earth is fleeting. A good man is like a die,
throw it which way you will, it is always square: so is a good man ever the
same in his maine and general carriage, how ever for the present he may be
daunted at some sudden accident unlooked for in the world. Stu^tus vt luna
mutatur: sapiens vt, sol. In sole et f^ruor et splendour stabilis in luna solus
splendour, atque is ommino ^muta^ilis et incertus qui nunquam in eodem statu
permaneat. Ber de Beata. Mar.
The fool, says Bernard, is changeable like the Moon: but the wise man is
constant like the Sun. In the Sun there is both heat and brightness constant,
in the Moon only brightness, and that altogether mutable and uncertain, as
never remaining in any condition. In all the creatures God has placed somewhat
to prove them to be his: somewhat to resemble him and somewhat above the power
of any creature to infuse, that it might appear to be Gods workmanship:
especially in a good man God has placed selfe-satisfaction, whereby he is
most like his Creator, and which none could put into him but God, that God
might have all the glory of it. To conclude, goodness and selfe-satisfaction,
holiness and happiness go together. Revel. 20:6. Inde beatus vnde bonus Aug. ep.
121.
Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection. On which
words S. Augustine shortly and sweetly comments, He is therefore happy, because
he is good. would thou then be safe? Get goodness that thou may have
selfe-satisfaction in this world, and thou shall be sure of eternal happiness
in the world to come.

Which God grant every one of us, through Jesus Christ, our Savior, Amen.
FINIS.

