Bull, Bear, and Horse, Cut, Curtaile, and Longtaile.

With Tales, and Tales of Bulls, Clenches, and Flashes.

Is also here and there a touch of our Beare-Garden-sport; with the second part
of the Merry conceits of Wit and Mirth.

Together with the Names of all the Bulls and Bears.

LONDON, Printed by M. Parsons, for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold at his
shop on London Bridge. 1638.

This Dedication is directed, to his well-Affected and much Respected, his
often Approved, and truly beloved, Mr. Thomas Godfrey, Keeper of the Game for
Bears, Bulls, and Dogs.
KInd friend, I am sure you can defend me from being bitten with your Bears,
though not from being back-bitten by Envy; you can stave me, and save me, from
the Goring of your Bulls, but there are too many herds of other Horned Beasts
to But at my Inventions, and toss my harmless meaning, as their empty
Judgments, and Witless fancies are inclined; howsoever I am resolved to love
you, and not to Respect them I am glad that you can say that an excessive time
of charge is past with you, and I hope for better days and times. I have
touched here and there merrily upon the Game, but so far from offense, that I
do expect that it will be pleasing both to the Wise, and to the Indifferent
Readers. And me thinks very fools should not be angry with it, for I have
thrust in a great many Bables to please them to If any thing do seem
distastefull in it, my Comfort is, that a Wise man will not set his Wit to
mine, and be offended but if a Fool be angry, then I will not set my Wit to
his, and take exceptions. And thus with my best wishes to you and yours, I
remain a poor friend to you and yours,

John Tailor.

Bull, Bear, and Horse, Cuts, Curtols, and Longtailes.
COncerning Bulls, sure no man is so Dull,
Orignorant but that he knows a Bull:
There are more sorts of Bulls then Bears by ods,
For lupiter, (the chief of Heathen gods)
Into a Bull, was pleased himself to Shape,
When on Europa he committed Rape:
And to a Bull, he turned his form divine
When he (on Ceres) got fair Proserpine.
Taurus (the Bull) is if you wisely Note
A Sign Caelestiall for the Neck and Throat,
If any doubt of it, let them but go
And buy an Almanacke, he will find it so.
Pasipha Queen of Creet, (a Royal Trull)
Was monstrously enamored of a Bull:
'Twixt whom the Monster Minotaure was got,
As in th eighth Book of Ovid it was wrote.
But sure the stories truth is better framed,
That says there was a man there ( Taurus named)
Who was beloved of the lustful Queen,
And had with her too often familiar been.
It Is said Semir amiss (King Ninus Mother)
Did love a Bull, which is as true as 'tother,
When as Just Minos, ( Creets victorious King)
The Megarans did to's subjection bring,
For which to Jove a feast he solemnized,
Wherein a hundred Bulls were sacrificed.
The Brazen Bull of Ph^llaris the Tyrant,
Was such a Beast, as made the World admire on it,
In which men Roasted, were to death Tormented,
And he first suffered in it that it Invented.
There dwells a man at Rome, that Bulls can make,
To make seduced Kings, and Kingdoms Quake,
Which Bulls (though Lead) (O wondrous to behold
Are quickly Metamorphos'd into Gold.
There Is the Philosophers Admired Jemme,
(That long sought Jewel, worth a Diadem)
That hard, hard stone, which many men have sought
And all they found, they found themselves worth naught;
The Castle Angello, does it Immure
And there turns drossy Lead, to Gold most pure.
There are Bulbeggers, which fright Children much,
There are Bull Taverns, that men's Wits will tutch;
And further (for the Bulls Renown and fame)
We had an ex'lent Hangman of that name.
Suppose a man's matched with a beauteous Wife,
Who with an ugly Dwarf defiles her life,
To please her husband, she can fiddle, faddle,
Whilst oftentimes a Monkey fits his Saddle,
A man may say, that he most basely is
Bull'd with an Vrchin, through his Wifes Amiss.
And now of late a Bull's a Common Creature,
For men (with nonsense) do speak Bull's by Nature,
From East to West, from North unto the South,
Bull's are produced each hour, by Word of Mouth.
Which every day are brought unto the Printer,
Faster then Mother Puddings made her Winter.
To the decay of many a Tallow Taper,
And the consuming many a Reame of Paper,
Soft Malt does make sweet Fire, the Proverb says,
Or else the Bull says so, you see which ways.
If men would use to Leap before they Look,
Bulls should not thus be thrust in many a Book,
For though Care may be Killed with any Cat,
You are not sure the Fire is in the Fat,
Fools feign (say they) do often make fair Words,
Yet some may Catch the Bush some beat the Birds.
But Better comes the seldom, I desire
For My Kill set the Peck of Malt on fire.
This any man may to him self apply
That When the Larks fall, we may catch the sky.
But if my Judgment do me not deceive
I do esteem it better lack then leave.
Though Brawne and Bacon breeds from Bores and Hoggs,
Yet hungry Puddings Will eat dirty Dogs.
And sure a man had better bide away,
Then come to late, A Fair after the Day.
If such a one speed well, it is as rare,
As it is To catch a Taber with a Hare.
Which is as certain as blind Fortunes Wheel,
Or hold fast Like a wet Tail by the Eele.
Let every man a true decorum keep,
Because it is ill, A waking Dog to sleep.
And it is a Proverb throughout Christendom,
That never One day was not built in Rome.
If great men give me nothing, I say plain,
I Will hurl as much as that at them again.
He that sticks down a Goose, and steals a Feather,
Does (by that match) not save, or profit neither.
Along Corn for short harvest men may see,
Like tedious woeing for a scornful she.
It Is folly for a man to fall at strife
With Women, who has nine Cats like a life;
For when the Gray-Horse is the better Mare,
A Blind man may be taken with a Hare.
Spet in your hold, take better hands I say,
We may be here to Morrow, and gone to day.
The man that angry is without amends,
It Is fit ( without a canse he be made friends:)
For though men know their Cattle by their marks
The greatest men are not the wisest Clerks.
I purpose no man's credit to defame,
But He that is balfe hanged, bath no good name.
Though all these Rimes are scarcely worth a Token
The Water to the Pott goes till it is broken.
Who cuts their fingers must abide them bleed.
And when Geese preach, then let thr Fox take heed.
It Is hard to make me think, or late, or soon,
That ever Green Cheese was made of the Moon.
Nor is it fit (as I do understand)
To put a mad Sword in a naked man's hand.
A man may be a Drunkard or a Leacher,
And yet mend as the Bolt does mend the Fletcher.
Or as the sour Ale mends the Summer, so
A man (mistook) may make his friend, his foe.
For all this, it is not fitting to be book'd,
How once old Lincoln ore the Devil looked.
The Ancient Proverb still does stand in force,
Some better may look one then steal a Horse.
It may be some will not these lines allow,
But then they take a wrong Ear by the Sow.
T was never yet a question in the Law,
To stumble at a Block, leap ore a straw.
But any man of simple wit may find,
That all this Corn has shaken down no Wind.
He that will wrangle for an Egg that's Addle,
Although he lose the Horse, may win the Saddle.
And thus my Muse, most lowly elevated,
These English Proverbs has to Bulls tranflated.
More worthy, and Remarkable observations of the Bull.
AS is before Repeated in my lines,
Taurus (the Bull)' among the Celestial Signs;
So Taurus is a Mountain, whose high Top
Does seem to scale the Skies, and underprop
The Bull that is stellified; That Hill does Bound
All Asia on the North, about it round
Is many a Kingdom and large Continent,
Which shows the Bull is mighty in extent.
A Bull's a Beast of State and Reputation,
For he that eats Bull Beef, (by approbation)
With eating such strong meat, I do assure ye
'T will puff him up, and make him swell with fury.
If any man will but himself examine,
Heel find a Bull, a Buckler against famine,
A Bull's a happy Creature, whence proceeds
Most of the food, whereon most people feeds:
He, and his sweet hearts (most beloved Kine)
Yields thousands where with all to suppe and dine.
The Calves, (his sons and daughters) plenteously
With young and tender Veale, our wants supply.
And from the Bull'd Cow, (in perpetual motion)
Milk flows amongst us daily like a Ocean,
Sweet Cream, and Cockney Curds they yield each day,
And (for the poor) Whig, Buttermilk and Whay,
Cheese Raw, or Toasted, or to Bait Mouse-traps,
And Butter, to anoint the Flemmings Chaps,
The Milk-Pans do allow, like bounteous Pooles,
Means to make Cheese-cakes, Custards, Flawns, and Fools,
And at the Milk-pale, I have seen and heard
Good Sullabubs, have been both made and mard.
It is the Bull's Conjunction with the Cow
(With blessed increase) that does these things allow.
Without the Bull we should be so unstor'd,
The Kingdom could not yield a Posset Curd.
Know then by this (good Reader) what a Bull is,
And he that will not know it, but a Gull is.
The One (the Bulls strong Eunuch son) is Chief
Of Mortal meats, (man-feeding vigorous Beef)
And who so will amongst the Butchers seek
In London, and in Westminster each week,
With those two Cities Bounds, and Liberties,
With Country Butchers, and the great supplies
That Market folks do to those parts Impart
(The Load of many a Horse, and many a Cart)
The Beeves thus slain, and eaten would appear
Above 3000, each week through the year.
Chines, Surloyns, Flanks, Clods, Legs, does fill us full,
Brisket and Marrow-bones comes from the Bull;
A Neats-tongue dried is dear, a Dish of State,
At Stilliard any man may know the Rate. I unumerable are the people and
families that live by the Bull, and the Bulls offspring.

With many more things which I Will not Recite,
'T would trouble men to Read, and I to write.
Thus do the Butchers Thrive, the Grasiers Gain,
The Cooks and Victualers, do their states maintain,
Sowse-wives grow plump and fat, and it is because
Their sale is quick for Muggets Paunches, Mawes,
Tripes, Reads, Neatsfeet, Cowheels, and Chitterlings,
Whilst many thousands feed on Bag-puddings.
Note but how well the Cheese-mongers do live,
And what a useful gainful Trade they drive:
Yet in their shops there is true Justice found
The poor man's peney, and the rich man's pound
Shall have true, weightaccordiag to proportion,
Without conivence, falsehood, or extortion.
Were there no Bulls, Chandlers were beggerd quite
Nor could they sell our darkness any light
At any price of Reason, then our Guise
Were soon to go to Bed, and late to Rise.
Thus is the Bull, and the Bulls Breed descected
In Flesh and Entrales; now my Quil's erected
(In what is writ before I have not Lyde)
And now I Will siourish ore the Horns and Hyde.
The Tanners wealth increases day and Night,
'Till at the last his Son is dubbed a Knight:
And Daughters should be (could they purchase pride)
With Portions, and proportions Ladyfi'de.
The Currier also needs not Curry favor,
For though his Trade smell, somethidg has some savor.
Nor would men be so mad as to prefer
Their sons bound prentise to a Shoemaker;
But that their future hopes do them persuade,
It is no Barefooted and Bootlesse Trade.
Nor will it ever lack, or live in scorn,
'Till all our children without feet are borne;
For (more then any Trade) he will sing and play,
Whilst every Monday is his Holiday.
And when a Shoemaker falls to decay,
He Will be a Cobbler new, and mend that way:
But there is a monstrous Trade, of late sprung forth,
Does spoil more Leather then their skins are worth,
The best Hydes they devour, and Gurmundize,
Which makes the worst in price too high to Rise;
With them the World does bravely run on Wheels,
Whilst poor men pinch and pay, quite out at heels.
But hold, what vessel have I set a Broach,
What is muse got jolting in a Coach?
Out with a vengeance, walk on foot I p^
And to the Bull again direct your way.
Now for the excellent Admired Horn
More profitable then the Unicorne.
For Hoopes, for Spectacles, for Combs to dress yo^
(Which when they come so near your heads, pray
And it is a Bull I have heard often said (bless you)
Reach me the Iron Shooing Horn good Maid.
And when the Hunted Stag bids life farewell,
The Huntsmans Horn does bravely Ring his Knell,
Which was the Bull-calves, or the Buls-horns once
Before the Gelder reft him of his stones.
Thus from the Bull, and the Bulls Breed you see,
A world of people still maintained be;
He finds flesh, Boots, Shoes, Lights, and stands in stead
And great importance to afford us Bread.
The Bulls dear son (the Ox) with daily toil,
Wears out himself with plowing and turmoyle,
And all to find us bread, and when he dies,
His Flesh, Hyde, Horns and all, our wants supplies.
So much for Bulls now in particular,
For our Beare-Garden Bull, a Bull of war,
A stout, a valiant, and a Head-strong-Beast,
Which did not fight this 18 Months at least;
A Beast of mighty policy and power,
That at his Dog foes will look Grim, and Lower,
He Will knit the Brow with terror, in such sort,
That when he chafes most, then he makes most sport;
At push of Pike, he with his head will play,
And with his feet spurn injuries away;
He Will turn and wind as nimble as an Eele,
And kick, and skornes abuses with his Heel;
He Will fling and throw, he will bravely toss and turn,
He Will hurl and heave, and dangerously spurn,
Note but his valor, when he is at the stake,
How he prepares himself the Dog to take:
His f^eet fixed fast, disdaining once to stir,
His wary eye upon the angry Cur.
Whilst politickly with his Head he weaves,
And with advantage up his foe he heaves,
With such a force, that often with the fall
He Is dead, or lamed, or has no power to sprawle.
Thus has our Bull fought in his own defense,
And purchased (for his Master (Crowns and pence.
And for that purpose may do so again,
(I wish I had the knowledge to know when)
For since the time a Bull a Dog could toss,
Our Beare-Garden had never such a loss:
But lets not lay the fault upon the Times,
But let us blame our selves, and cease our Crimes.
Bulls, Mistakes, Clenches, Long and short Tales.
A Tale of a Bull that was bought instead of a Cow.
IT was well known to many ancient people to this day, that in the City of
Gloucester, without the South Gate, in the Parish of Saint Ewins, (where my
self was borne) there dwelt a Schoolmaster, who was called Master Green, to
whom I with many more went to School, for some small learning beyond the
Horn-Booke; This Master Green did love new milk so well, that because he
would be sure to have it new, he would buy a Cow of his own, and to that
purpose went to the Beast Market, but by the way having met with some friends,
and a Cup or two of Sack, it had so wrought in the old man's pate, that when he
came to the Beast-market, his eyes so dazzled and doated on a fair Bull, that
he supposed his Cod to be a goodly Cowes Vdder; so he (neither naming Cow or
Bull) demanded the price of the Beast, till at the last the Bull was bought and
sold, and driven home to a stable of Master Greenes, who being glad of his good
bargain, told his wife of it; and when the Evening milking time was come,
Master Green, with his Wife and Maid, went to the Stable, where the Wench
kneeling down to milk, and taking the Bull by the Cod, she said she could
find never a Teate, whereat the man and woman were amazed; and the Bull (for
his own ease) instead of milk, pist in the Paile, for the which Master Green
was ever mocked and flouted, and my self (with my Fellow Scholars) to show our
acute forwardness in Rhyme, and out of the thallownesse of our deep
judgments, composed this poetical Enco nium.

Our Master Green, was overseene,
In buying of a Bull;
For when the Maid, did mean to milk,
He pist the Paile half full- probatum.
Our Schoolmaster did take these Verses so kindly, that having found out the
grave Authors of them; he (to express, or declare his love to Poetry) gave us
such speedy, present, and yet backward sure payment, that we danced at it, and
were so merry, that our cheeks ran down with water.

Another Tale of a Town Bull.
A Parson of a Country Village (for the increase of Town Calves) kept a lusty
Bull, which served for the use of the whole Parish; which Bull, was fallen so
poor and lean, that his bones might have been almost told as they were ready
to start out of his skin, and the cold Winter being come, the miserable Parson
put the Bull to graze on the bare ground in in the Churchyard, (for there was
little or no Grass) and there was also a Horse of the Parsons as lean as the
Bull, which fed (or fasted) in the said Churchyard. These poor Beasts being
almost starved with hunger and cold, and the hardness of their Masters heart,
it fortuned that in a very darkenight, there arose a very violent Tempest of
wind and rain, so that the Bull for succor and shelter from the weather, went
into the Church porch, and there lay down and dyed with cold and famine. The
Horse likewise (having the like purpose to get out of the storm) went to the
Church Porch, and by reason it was so dark, he stumbled over the dead Bull,
and ran his head against the Church door, which was so old and broken that
with the force of the Horses fall, it flew open and let the Horse into the
Church, who recovering his legs, and walking up and down, musing where he was,
at the last he came to the Bell Ropes, which the Country people that used to
Ring, had (for the ease of their hands) made wispes, or wads of Hay fast round
about the handfasts or handles of the Ropes; the which Hay, the Horse smelling
out, he being hungry, laid lips to, and pulled so hard at the Hay, that the
Rope gave warning to the Bell, and the Bell to the Clapper, that it Rang now
and then a stroke or twain, which the Parson hearing, he marvelled much what
the matter should be, or who should jangle the Bells so confusedly at that time
of the night, in the mean space the Horse goes from Rope to Rope, (as he could
find them in the dark) which caused every Bell to toll in an untuned Diapason:
At last the Parson arose, and called up the Clerk, and some neighbors, and
lighted their Lanthornes (which were the lighter and the heavier for their
Candles) so they came amazedly and fearfully to the Churchyard, and there they
found the Bull dead in the Churchporch, and the Horse in the Bell-frey ringing
his Knell. Although there be no impossibility in this Tale, yet I am not
guilty of the belief of it, nor am I bound to prove it.

Bulls with short Tales.
A Taxation, or levy, or payment was laid upon a Country Village, for the
repairing or mending of a bad highway, against the which collection the people
grumbled and murmured very much; So that one of the most grave and wise of he
Parish, said to the Officers that gathered the money, I tell you friends, if
these kind of Bursements and elections be laid thus tollerably upon us; 'its
enough to make folks mad, and rise in devotion.

A Bull.
A Fellow going from London toward Rumford in Essex, before he came at Ilford,
(some what near the highway) he saw the carcases of three murderers hanged in
Chains, and at his return home being demanded what news he had brought out
of the country; Truly (quoth he) I have no great news to tell you, but I saw
a rare sight, which was, I saw three men hanged in Iibblets.

A clear sighted Bull.
ONe met a man in the street, taking acquaintance of him thus, Sir, I am a
stranger, and am mistaken in you, for you are not the Gentleman that I took
you for, but I pray you pardon me, for I am sure I have seen you by sight.

Mistakes.
SOme neighbors being at hot contention, for a matter of little or nothing:
the business was brought before a Justice, who said unto them, My good
neighbors, I do wish you to agree, for the proverb says truly, The Law is
costly; therefore I would have you to put the Controversy to me, and I will
set all differences even betwixt you; Truly Sir, said one, I do humbly thank
your worship, the matter concerns my wife, and I put her Case to your Worship
withal my heart; in truth quoth another, I am contented, I am willing to
defer the matter to your Worships discredit.

A Bull of authority.
A Major of a Country Town, being sat with the rest of his Brethren, in the
Towne-house began to make a grave Oration, beginning as follows. Brethren,
friends, and neighbors, I am in good hope that our proceedings will be to a
good purpose, because we are so happily and lovingly separated together amongst
our selves.

A she Bull.
A Young She Citizen borne, was newly married, having never in her life been a
Traveller further then she could hear the sound of Bow-Bell. Her Husband (on a
time) went with her into the Country a Ayring, whereas they were going through
a meddow, there was a Tree, upon one of the Boughs whereof a Mole-catcher had
hanged up many Moles or Wants which he had taken, which the young woman
espying, she called to her husband, saying, O what a sollitary life it is to
live in the City, where no such fine things do grow as are here in the
Country, for look you Husb and here is a Black-pudding Tree.

A Roguish Flash.
A Poor man was going to the Market (on a Saturday) to buy Beef, he having a
Roguish boy to his son, the boy asked him whether he was going; he answered,
I am going to the Butchers. O father (said the boy) the Butchers are crafty
fellows, and if you take not heed, they will cousin you, therefore I advise you
to take the Dog with you, for two heads are better then one.

A Flash.
A Neat Gentleman, with an Ash color, or Silver colored pair of silk
Stockings, going hastily through the gate that leads into the Palace at
Westminster, suddenly, a woman (or maid) did chance to cast out a dish or pot
of newmade warm water, some tale whereof lighted in the Gentleman's shoes, and
withal besparkled his silk Stockings; at which, very angerly he said, Thou
filthy base sluttish Queen, Can thou not see, but throw thy stinking piss
into my shoes and hose? To whom she answered, Sir, I am sorry that I have done
you any wrong, but yet you have done me a great deal more injury then I have
done to you, for I would have you know, that I am no such Slut as you called
me, neither do I keep piss till it stinkes, but I always throw it away fresh
and fresh as I make it.

A Bull.
TWo Gentlemen passing up the River of Thames, with a pair of Oars from
London Bridge toward Westminster, one of the Gentlemen did take somewhat in
distaste, that one of the Watermen had either said or done to him; the Waterman
did entreat him not to be angry, and said, he did mean no harm, and was sorry
that a Gentleman should be angry for nothing; but the more the one did entreat,
the more furious the other was, insomuch that he said to the Waterman, Sir,
hold your prating, for I vow as I am a Gentleman, if I do rise and come to
thee, I will knock thy head and the wall together.

A Clench.
AN old man had sat tippling so long at the Alehouse, that he had almost
gotten a Loaf out of the Brewers Basket, and having an unhappy Boy to his
son, who came for him to get him home, to whom the old man said, Sir Boy
have a care of me, and lead me well, for my head is very light; to whom the Boy
answered, Father, it is long of your eyes that your head is light, for if they
were out, your head would be in the dark.

A Bull.
A Gentleman riding in the Country, attended with one Servingman, they met a
fellow that was a stride upon a Cow, the Servingman said, Master behold,
yonder is a strange sight. What is it said the Gentleman? why sir (said his
man) look you sir, there is one Rides on Horseback upon a Cow; that is a great
Bull, said the Gentleman; nay sir, said his man, it is no Bull, I know it is a
Cow by his Teats.

A Mistake.
ONe that was a Good Fellow upon the Score so far, that many black posts did
proclaim his credit in sundry Taverns, Ale houses, and Tobacco shops, Chalk
was the Ink, to remember what Ch^n^e he owed for his Drink. It happened, that
his brain being intoxicated with late tippling in a frosty Winters night, and
his way being over a little Close from the Alehouse to his own house, he
perceiving the Grass all milke-white with the hoary frost; at which sight he
merrily said to one that went with him, Now I see that all the world is
Chalked, and my Scores will never be seen for me to pay them.

A Bull.
TWo men in a hot Summer Evening, stripped themselves out of their Clothes, to
swim or wash themselves in the Thames, or some other Brook or River; and
having (as they thought) staid overlong in the water, one of them said, Let us
now go a Shore, and put on our clothes, for it is time to go home. The other
answered, do you go on shore first, I will but unlose a point, and come to you
presently.

A short Bull.
ONe said, that the best Bull-dog that ever he saw play at the Bear, was a
Brended Bitch.

A City Bull.
TWo Citizens, having been making merry in Middlesex, came riding homewards
through a Village called Acton (which is six miles from London) and perceiving
a fair house, with the doors and windows shut, one of them said, it was
great pity that such a handsome building should want an inhabitant; to whom
the other answered, you say true brother, it is pity, but if I had this house
in London, it should not stand empty here.

A Curtoll Bull.
ONe said that he was so sows'd and dashed with a shower of Rain, that he had
never a dry thread wet about him.

A pretty Bull.
ONe was persuaded to go into the water and wash himself, he answered that it
was dangerous, and that he did never mean to go into any River, or other
water, before he had first learned to swim perfectly.

A Mistake.
A Man departed from his house, and dwelling privately, without taking leave of
any body, and traveled, so that it was not known to any what was become of
him, at last there was a supposition that he was killed in a quarrel by a mad
fellow that behaved himself so well, that few honest folks loved him. This
fellow was apprehended, and arraigned at the Assizes for suspicion of the fact,
and by some strong presumptions appeared so guilty, that he was thought fit to
be hanged, and after a years imprisonment, he went abroad now and then (with
the leave of the Iaylor) where by chance he met the man that was supposed to be
slain by him; whereupon the prisoner got his liberty: who coming among his
old Consorts, he said, My Masters, I have endured a great deal of trouble
about killing of a Rascal, and nothing grieves me so much, as that I met the
Rogue sixteen months after in Aylsbury Market.

A Bull.
ONe said that the High Sheriff of Yorkshire did entertain the Judges in a
brave and commendable fashion, with one hundred and twenty men, all in one
saire Livery of Gray Marble.

Of a Friar.
A Preaching Friar once reprooved his Auditors for sleeping at his Sermons, but
yet (said he) I pray you do not refrain coming to Church though you do
sleep, for God Almighty may chance to take some of you napping.

Of a Saylor and his Wife.
A Saylor was absent on a Voyage three years, in the mean space his Wife had
a Boy, twenty months old, to entertain him withal at his return: the Saylor
said, Wife, whose child is this: marry husband (quoth she) it is mine, and God
sent it me in your absence. To which the man replied, I will keep this child,
because God sent him, but if God send me any more on that fashion, he shall
keep them himself.

A witty Tale of a new married man.
A Young fellow being newly married, having been from home, came suddenly into
his house, and found his Wife at foul play with another man: the poor young
Cuckold ran presently and told his wives father all the business, who replied
thus; Son, I married her mother, and I tell thee plain that thy wife seems
to be her daughter in conditions as well as feature, for I have taken her
mother many times in that manner, and no warning would serve her, till in the
end age made her leave it, and so will thy wife do when she is old and past it.

A Tale of three Gossips, that would know, Whereabouts a Cuckolds horns do
grow.
THree Gossips in a Tavern, chatting over a Pint of Sherry, said one of them, I
muse whereabouts a Cuckolds horns grow; quoth the second, I think they do grow
in the pole, or nape of the neck; verily, quoth the third, I do think it to be
true, for my Husbands bands are always worn out behind.

Of a Whore.
ONe called a Whore lazy jade, content your self, quoth another, as lazy as
she seems, she is able to carry a man quick to the Devil.

Of Cuckolds.
A Company of neighbors that dwelt all in a row, in one side of a street; one
of them said, Let us be merry, for it is reported that we are all Cuckolds that
dwell on our side of the street (except one) one of the women sat musing, to
whom her husband said; (wife) what all a mort, why art thou so sad? no, quoth
she, I am not sad, but I am studying which of our neighbors it is that is not
a Cuckold.

A Clench.
A Gentleman being in a house of iniquity, or Cousin-German to a Bawdy house,
the room being very dark, he called alowd for a light Huswife; to whom a
Wench made answer, I come Incontinent.

He calls for light, she under stood him right,
For she was vanity which made her light:
She said she would incontinent attend,
To make her Continent, she needs to mend.
A Mistake.
TWo Maids (or servants) dwelling in a house together, the one of them having
occasion to use a Steel, smoothing Iron, or some such kind of Laundry
Instrument, and having sought it, and not finding it, said to her fellow, thou
do mislay every thing in the house, and art so busy a baggage that thou
can let nothing stand; to which the other answered, and you are so way ward
and teasty, that a little thing troubles you, and puts you in a great anger.

A Gentlewomans answer to a Captain.
IN a time of Peace, a Captain being in company, where after dinner there was
dancing, with whom a Gentlewoman was desirous to dance, the Captain said, he
was made to fight, and not to dance: to whom she answered, that it were good
that he were oil'd and hanged up in an Armory, till there were occasion to use
him.

Of a Huffing Gallant
ONe asked a Huffing Gallant, why he had not a Looking-glass in his Chamber,
he answered, he durst not, because he was often angry, and then he looked so
terribly, that he was fearful to look upon himself.

Of a fellow that was whipped.
THere was a fellow that (not for his goodness) was whipped at a Cartstayle; and
in his execution he drew backward, to whom a Gentleman (in pity) said, Fellow,
do not draw back, but press forward, and thy execution and pains will be the
sooner past and done; to whom the Rogue answered, It is my turn now, when thou
art whipped, do thou go as thou will, and now I will go as I please.

Believe it if you list.
ONe said, that he had travaild so far that he had laid his hand upon the
hole where the wind came forth: a second said, that he had bin at the farthest
edge of the world, and driven a nail quite through it: the third replied, that
he had been further, for he was then on the other side of the world, and
clencht that nail.

Of a Pope.
THere was a Pope, who being dead, it is said that he came to heaven gate and
knocked; Saint Peter (being within the Gate) asked who was there: The Pope
answered, Brother, it is I, I am the last Pope deceased; Saint Peter said, if
thou be the Pope, why do thou knock, thou having the Keys, may unlocke
the gate and enter? The Pope replied, saying, that his predecessors had the
Keys, but since their time the Wards were altered.

A Tale betwixt a Miser and a poor Man.
A Rich Miser, being reviled by a poor man, whom he had oppressed; the rich
man said, Thou Dog, leave thy barking: the poor man answered, that he had one
quality of a good dog, which was, to bark when he saw a Thief.

An unhappy answer of a Boy to his father playing at Dice.
A Man being deeply in play at Dice, having lost much money, his son (a little
lad) being by him, wept; quoth the father, Boy, why do thou weep? the Boy
answered, that he had read that Alexander the Great, wept when he heard that
his ^her (King Philip) had conquered many Cities, Towns, and Territories,
fearing that he would leave him nothing to win; and I weep the contrary way
(quoth the boy) for I fear that my Father will leave me nothing to lose.

Of one that oppressed the Poor.
AN Oppressor having feld all the trees in a Forest, which for a long time had
been the relief of many poor people, said, that it was as good as a Comedy to
him to see the trees fall; to whom a poor man said, I hope, as thou make a
Comedy of our miseries, that three of those trees may be reserved to finish a
Tragedy for thee and thy children.

Of one that forgot his old acquaintance.
ONe lamented his friends hard fortune, that being raised to a place of honor,
was grown senseless, forgetting all his old familiar acquaintance, and so far
from knowing any man, that he knew not himself.

Of Instruments and Engines.
THe Plough surpasses the Pike, the Harrow excels the Halbert, the Coulter
exceeds the Cuttleax, the Goad (...) better then the Gunne; for the one
(...)are the Instruments of life and profit, and the other are the Engines of
death, and all kinds of calamities.

Either shame, or hunger.
A Poor man is in two extremes: first, if he ask, he dies with shame;
secondly, if he ask not, he dies with hunger.

An Officers excuse.
ONe being in Office, was reproved for negligence; his excuse was, that it was
his best policy to be idle: for if he should do ill, he should displease God,
and if he should do well, he should offend men: (...) whom one answered, you
ought to do ^our duty, for in well doing you shall ^^ease God, and in ill
doing you shall ^lease men.

How women take pleasure to be sued unto.
Women take great pleasure to be to be sued to, though they never mean to
grant.

Of Suites in Law.
ONe said that Suitors in Law were mortal, and their sure immortal and that
there is more profit in a quick denial, then in a long dispatch.

Of Rome.
A Traveller was talking what a good City Rome was, to whom one of the company
said, that all Rome was not Italy for we had too much Rome in England.

Irish wood an enemy to Caterpillars.
A Country Fellow came into Westminster Hall, where one told him that the
roof of it was made of Irish wood, and that the nature of it was such, that no
Spider would come near it, and he said (further) that in Ireland, no Toad,
Snake, or Caterpiller can live, but that the Earth, or the Trees will destroy
them: Ah (quoth the Country man) I wish with all my heart that the Benches,
Bars and Flooring were all made of such earth and wood, and that all Coaches,
Barges, and Wherries, were made of Irish Oak, that all our English
Caterpillars might be destroyed.

Thomas Coriat's complaint of John Tailor.
MAster Thomas Coriat (on a time) complained against me to King James, desiring
His Majesty that he would cause some heavy punishment to be inflicted upon
me, for abusing him in writing (as he said I had) to whom the King replide,
that when the Lords of His Honorable Privy Council had leisure, and nothing
else to do, then they should hear and determine the differences betwixt Master
Coriat the Scholar, and John Tailor the Sculler: which answer of the King was
very acceptable to Master Coriat. Whereupon I made this following Petition to
the King.

TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of John Tailor, your Majesty's poor Water-Poet.
Shows,
MOst mighty Monarch of this famous I Will,
(Upon the knees of my submissive mind)
I beg thou will be graciously inclined,
To read these lines my rusticke Pen compile:
Know (Royal Sir ( Tom Coriat works the wile,
Your high displeasure on my head to bring;
And well I wot, the sot, his words can file,
In hope my fortunes headlong down to fling.
The King, whose Wisdom through the world did ring,
Did hear the cause of two offending Harlots;
So, I beseech thee (Great) great Britains King,
To do the like for two contending Varlots.
A brace of Knaves your Majesty implores,
To hear their suites as Solomon heard Whores,
A Ribble-Rabble of Gossips.
THe space of a fortnight from the Bear-baiting, two hours and a half from
the Windmill, about four of the Clock in the forenoone, a little after
supper in the morning, between old mother Maudlin, of the Parish of Idiots,
Plaintiff, of the one party, and Gossip Gitlian, of Gossips Hall, in the
Parish of Twattlebourgh, of the other party, Defendant. A mauer in Controversy
depending of issues, whereupon it was constulted by the right reverend Matron,
Madam Isabel, that Katharine should go no more a Maying with Susan in the cool
of the Evening before sunrising, whereupon Lister took the matter snuff, and
swore by the cross of Audr^ Bugle-bow that Ione should jogge to (...) house to
borrow her poking stick: upon this Philiday starts up very jeparately, and
commands Marget to make haste to Rache(...) house, and borrow a dozen of left
handed spoones: now old Sibill all this while sat mumping like a Gib-Cat, and
on the sudden she starts up, and thrusts Charity out of doors, to take up her
lodging where she could get it; Doll being much offended to see Marget invited
to Prec^^^aes wedding, by no means could suffer Abigaile to break her fa^t
before she got Victuals; presently Bettrice whispers Cicily in the care foftly,
that all the company heard it, and bad her tell Alice, that unless she took
heed, the pot would run over, and the fat lie in the fire; at this Mary clapped
her hands together, and entreats Blanch to tell her Cozen Edith, how she
should say that Luce should say, that Elizabeth should do the thihg she wots
of. Amy hearing all this with a judicial understanding capacity, at last tells
Parnell, that her daughter Rebecka was gone to lie at her Aunt Christians house
in Shooing-horne Alley. Now in the heat of all this business, Barbara tells
Frances how there is good Ale at the Labour-in-vaine: the matter being brought
to this pass, Winifrid says that her goddaughter Grace, is newly brought,
(God bless the child) and that Constance the Comfit-makers wife, at the sign
of the Spiders leg, must be Gossip; out alas says Temperance, what have I
forgot, I should have been an hour agone at Prudences the Laundresse, to have
taken measure of a pair of Cuffes for her Maid Dorcas: Now to conclude the
business, Martha protests that she will never trust Thomasin again while she
lives, because she promised to meet her at Pimlico, and bring her neighbor
Bethya with her, and came not. Nevertheless Faith went to mother RedCaps, and
by the way metwith Joyce, who very kindly batled her penny with her at a fat Pig.
Well quoth Sara, all this wind shakes no corn, and I should have bin a
starching Mistress Mercies Lawne Apron, and like a good Huswife I am prating
here. Neighbors and friends, quoth Arbella, seeing the matter draws toward
so good a conclusion, let us even have the the other Pint before we go; truly says
Jane, the motion is not to be misliked, what say you Gossip Vrsula truly says
Ellin, I would go with you with all my heart, but I promised to meet Lydya at a
Lector that we might take a neighbourly nap together. Upon this rose a hurly
burly, that the whole assembly dispersed themselves diverse ways, some one way,
some another, and in conclusion, the business was all wisely ended as it was
begun.

A Bear.
Bear and forbear, I now speak of the Bear,
And therefore (Reader) give, or lend an Ear.
FIrst therefore, in much briefness I am rendering
Where, and how Bears have breeding and engendring,
Some are Ossean, some are Callidonian,
Some Aeremanthian Bears, and some Aemonian,
Some rugged Russians, some Sunburned Numidians, Amphibians)
And lastly, the white swimming Bears,
Some do affirm a Bear to be a creature,
Whelp'd like a lump, with neither shape or feature,
Until the Damme does lick it into fashion,
And makes the lamp a Bear in transformation.
As Tailors with their precious wisdoms Tallants,
Do lick, and Metamorphose Gulls to Gallantt.
Whereby a fashion often is shaped (by chance)
Out of an ill-bread lump of ignorance.
But for the Bear he keeps his shape most constant,
The Tailor (and his creatures) change each instant,
The Bear keeps still, the fashion he brought hither,
The gallant Gull's inconstant, like Weather.
A Beare's a temperate Beast, most free from riot,
A prudent Schoolmaster, of sparing diet,
He Will live four months from every kind of meat,
By sucking of his left foot, like a Teat.
Which is an abstinence that does require,
More then the fast of a Carthusisian Friar,
No Capuchin, or immured Anchorite,
Did never (so much) curb his Appetite.
And as Bears suffer hunger, I am sure,
No beast created, does more cold endure:
When fridged Boreas blustering blasts do blow,
Midst Rocks, of hoary Ice, and hills of Snow,
The worst of Winters sharp extremity,
The hardy Bear, abides most constantly.
And in hot Afric, and the Libian Coast,
Where Phoebus flames does seem the world to Roast:
Where Negro Moors, are dride and blackly did,
That heat (excessive) there the Bear does bide.
So that with hunger, heat, and pinching cold,
The Bears extremities are manifold.
Being grown unto Maturity and strength,
And having hither past the seas, at length,
At Beare-Garden, (a sweet Ro^untious Golledge)
He Is taught the Rudiments of Art and knowledge.
There does he learn to dance, and (gravely grumbling)
To fight and to be Active (bravely tumbling)
To practice wards, and postures, to and fro,
To guard himself, and to offend his foe;
Upon his hind feet, Tipto stiff to stand,
And cuffe a Dog off with his foot-like hand;
And afterward (for recreations sake)
Practice to run the Ring about the stake.
Whilst showts, and Mastives mouths do fill the sky
That sure Acteon never had such a cry.
Thus Bears do please the hearing and the sight,
And sure their sent will any man invite:
For whosoer'e spends most, shall find this favor,
That by the Bears and Dogs, he is made a savor.
And as a Commonwealth, (often by Ill-willers;)
Is vexed by prowling knaves, and Caterpillars,
So is a Bear (which is a quiet Beast)
By Curres and Mungrels, oftentimes oppressed.
And tide to what he does he is bound to see,
The best and worst of all their cruelty.
And for men's moneys, what shift ere they make for it,
What ere is laid or paid, the Beare's at stake for it.
Though he be hardly drawn to it, against his will,
He Is bound to see and bear, and bide much ill;
Besides the baiting of a Bear is rare,
Unlike the baiting of a Horse or Mare:
The Horse has Provender, and Hey for Bait,
And does in peace and quiet eat his meat;
When as the Bear, is Tugged, Lugg'd, Bit and Beaten
And eats no Bait, but likely to be Eaten.
A Bear is like a Watchman by his coat,
He wears a Rugge-Gowne always (if you note,)
And (like a Watchman) often a Bear will be
As mannerly, and watch as well as he.
And as a grumbling Officer may wear
A Collor and a Chain, so does a Bear.
It Is writ by Authors (Philosophical)
How that a Bear is useful, Physical,
For Agues, and hot Fevers, take his hair,
His Grease (or Lard) will aching Limbs repair:
His Marrow strengthens, (if you do anoint)
Shrunk Sinews, Nerves, or an enfeebled joint,
The oil boiled from his feet will operate
The Gowtes tormenting much to mitigate,
And when man's in consumption, like to pine,
The Bears pith's good, that grows amidst his Chine.
A Bears skin Tanned in the hair, is for a bed
Better then Blanquet, Rugg, or Coverled.
A Bears Teeth, Painters in high price do hold,
To make them Instruments to gild with gold,
And for his Furre it is such ex'lent stuff,
That Many a Lady wears it in a Muffe;
Dry a Bears Liver, and to Powder beat it,
And let a Maid of forty five years eat it;
Although a thousand false Knaves would deceive her
Yet she shall keep her Maidenhead for ever.
Thus having showed of Bears their sundry breeding
Their forms, their admirable sparing feeding:
Their patience, courage, temperance, sortitude,
And many virtues that have them endu'd,
For fear I should men's patience much offend,
I Will give one short touch more and make an end.
Then for the further honor of the Bears,
They (with the stars) are mounted in their Spears:
There Vrsa Major in the firmament,
Is stellifide, a glorious ornament,
And there, the little Bear, (a star more finer)
Is called Artophilax, or Vrsa Minor,
And who so reads the second part of Ovid,
There shall they find (what here is writ) approved.
Now once again, pray lend your eyes and ears,
I Will write of baiting of the Bulls and Bears.
It is a Game so ancient, that I wot
Records can scarce show when we usde it not.
Except now, in these sad infectious times,
That heavens just hand does plague us for our crimes,
The Game is by authority suppressed:
And Bears, and Bulls, and Dogs, have too much rest,
Through want of baiting grown to such a strain,
(Hard to be tamed, or brought in frame again)
Almost all mad for want of exercise,
Filling the Air with roaring and with cries,
That those who near the Bear-Garden are dwelling
Do hear such bellowing bawling, yawling, yelling,
As if Hell were broake loose, or (truth to speak)
The Devils at football were or Barley-breake.
There Is three courageous Bulls, as ever played,
Twenty good Bears, as er'e to stake was taid,
And seventy Mastives of such Breed and Races,
That from fierce Lions will not turn their faces;
A male and female Ape (kind Jacke and Jugge)
Who with sweet complement do kiss and hug,
And lastly there is Jacke an Apes his Horse,
A Beast of fiery fortitude and force.
As for the Game I boldly dare relate,
It Is not for Boys, or fools effeminate,
For whoso'ere comes thither, most and least,
May see and learn some courage from a Beast:
And it is not only a base Rabble Crew,
That thither comes, It may be proved true,
That to the Beare-Garden comes now and than,
Some Gamesters worth ten thousand pounds a man.
For rough behavior that is no great disgrace,
There Is more hors-play used at each dear hors-race,
More heads, or legs, or necks, are broake each day,
At Cards, Dice, Tables, Bowls, or foot-ball-play.
The Game has been maintained, and will, we hope
Be so again (now favor gives it scope)
For Kings, for Princes, for Ambassadors,
Both for our Countreym^n, and foreigners.
Which has been held, a Royalty and Game,
And (though eclipsed) will be again the same.
But now (to make an end) must be explained,
How it the name of Paris-Garden gan'd:
The name of it was from a Royal Boy,
(Brave Illions firebrand, wrack and sack of Troy)
Paris (King Priams son) a sucking child,
Was thrown away into the woods so wild,
There that young Prince was cast to live or perish,
And there a Bear with suck, the babe did cherish;
And as a rare memorial of the same,
From Paris, Paris-Garden has the name.
Those that will not believe it, let them go
To France, in Paris, they may find it so,
Or if not there, let them look narrowly,
In Matthew Paris famous History.
And that we have obtained again the Game,
Our Paris-Garden Flag proclaims the same.
Our Bears, and Bulls, and Dogs, in former state,
The streets of London do perambulate,
And honest sport, and lawful merriment,
Shall thrice a week be showed, to give content.
Here follows the Names of the Bulls and Bears at the BeareGarden now.
The Bulls are,
1 Goldilocks. 2 Emperor. 3 Dash. 4 Iugler.
The Bears are,
1 Ned of Canterbury. 2 George of Cambridge. 3 Don John. 4 Ben Hunt. 5 Nan
Styles. 6 Beef of Ipswich. 7 Robin Hood. 8 Blind Robin. 9 Judith of Cambridge.
10 Besse Hill. 11 Kate of Kent. 12 Rose of Bedlam. 13 Nan Talbot. 14 Mall
Cutpurse. 15 Nell of Holland. two white Bears.
16 Mad Besse 17 Will Tookey
18 Besse Runner. 19 Tom Dogged.
If any will have one of these, or some, Or all, let them to our Beare-Garden
come: These beasts are for their service bound, and (...) And there their
pleasures may be satisfide.

Upon the goodness of a worthiness of Horses, with a merry touch of the
Beare-Garden Palfrey, or Jacke-an-Apes his Horse.
MY Muse is Mounted 'twixt the soaring wings
Of Pegasus, who bravely flies and flings
Through air, through clouds, through sunshine, and descries
Each earthly Regions Rare Varieties.
The numbers infinite, of sundry creatures,
Their strange diversity in forms and Natures,
And as in gliding flight, I swiftly soar
Over Sunburned Afric, and the Libian shore,
There (with much pleasure) I did cast mine eye
Upon the well-made Horse of Barbary,
And crossing over the Mediterran Maine,
I saw the prauncing Jennet of proud Spain,
straight the Iberian fume of Aristippus,
^url'd us to Greece, and there I viewed their Hippos.
Then back over Italy amain we flew,
Whereas their fierce Cavallo I did view,
In Naples I the Courser brave espide,
Thence, we over Almaine, and low Belgia glide,
There my Muse saw the bounding Palfrey Prance^,
From thence my winged horse bore me over France
There foaming fiery hot the gallant Gaul,
Did dance Corantoes with his Frenth Chevall.
Then over Hibernia, we took speedy flight,
And there the Irish Hobby pleased my sight,
Then my Pegasian wings began to flag,
I viewed the English Steed, and Scottish Nag.
And as the heat of blood my Bcast inflames
He kicked and threw me headlong into Pegasus cast me off his back, and I sell
into the Thames, which was the cause I served an apprentiship to be a Waterman.
Thames,
And as I fell, his hoof bestowed a wince,
Upon my pate, and there is the mark ere since.
The gentle River at my fall did grieve,
Set me on land safe, gave me means to live:
And Pegasus inspired me with his heel,
That ever since an itching vain I feel,
Of sprightfull Poesy, though not so well,
As men may say I therein do excel.
But I can do (as many more have done)
Bring Reames of Paper to confusion.
Nor does my Muse rejoice in merriments,
Drawn from wits sorded obsceane excrements;
I Will curb her in, from meddling with the State,
Or libelling against men unfortunate,
I mean to keep my ears upon my head,
And on men's miseries I scorn to tread.
I have observed no proud man ever yet,
Did any thing but ruin, and hatred get;
I know obedience, and humility,
Is best with all beloved tranquillity,
I know the laws guard me from mischiefs Jaws,
Which laws I love, and those that made those laws
Nor shall my lines (for things indifferent)
In Church or Commonwealth er'e make a rent.
Thus Pegasus did to Pernassus soar,
And on the Thames I got a healthful Oar,
Which ofttimes I have used, and will again,
Mean time I Will use the vigor of my brain,
As Homer writ the wars of Mice and Frogs,
So I (his Ape) do write of Bears and Dogs:
Of Bulls, and Bulls begot by word of mouth
Of Horses, and some Tales of age and youth,
And now my Muse again begins to mount,
The Horses excellency to recount,
You famous Palfreyes of the flaming Sun,
(That scorned the management of Phaeton)
Who with the heat of Sol's bright Axelltree
Caused all this under world on fire to be;
(I know the moral meaning of the same,
Is, man should not beyond true reason aim.)
Let Ecus, Phlegon, Aethon, and Piruis,
Apolloes golden Teame Assist my Muse,
But it is no matter, keep your daily course,
Without your aid my wit is nere the worse;
Whilst you are reeking with celestial sweat
I, of Terrestrial Horses mean to treat.
A Horse (of all the Beasts beneath the sky)
Is best, and most for man's commodity:
His exact making gives the eye delight,
A body brave, lined with a noble sprite,
And though he knew no reason, or a mind,
Yet unto man he is tractably inclined,
In dangerous war, the Horse the brunt does carry,
Where every Rider seems a Sagitary,
In peace, a Horse for state, for Tilt or Tourney,
For quick dispatch, or ease in any journey,
For pleasure, carriage, and for husbandry,
The Horse does furnish our necessity.
The poorest Horse that is, or ever was,
Does much more service then the golden Ass,
That's decked with borrowed trappings, yet such beasts,
Advance audaciously their brainlesse Crests,
Near where the Princely Lion does resort,
And there in pride and sensual lust do snort,
Yet can they not out strip all beasts so far,
But Wisdoms eye perceives them what they are.
The hunting Horse is of good use for pleasure.
The Sumpter Horse does understand the treasure.
The Mill-horse has an endless journey (round)
The Pack-horse overladen measures ground,
The Mare and Gelding servesour business well,
Whilst (for poor Hackneyes) England is a Hell.
And what is a Horses gain for all his pain,
But bread, grass, hay, oats, or such kind of Grain, tyres.
That is the summum bonum, he desires,
Through want of which there is many a good Horse
I have seen Gallants (three parts drunk almost)
The had usage of unconscionable riders to horses
Ride, as they meant to see the Devil in post,
And when they to their journies end have come,
Their horses mucky wet, with sweat and foame,
The Riders fall unto their drinking vain,
The Ostler walks the Horse a turn or twain,
Their jaws tide up unto the empty Rack,
The whilst their Riders smoke, and swallow sack,
Quaffes, capers, sings a Katch, a round, or Ditty,
And leaves the Horse unto the Hostlers pity,
And so the jades of meat do get such store,
As Lazarus once had at the Gluttons door.
Thus many a good Horse proves a jade indeed
Being over rid, and want whereon to feed,
All those that to a beast bears such a mind,
I wish them all so served in their kind.
There Is many ways, men's barbarous cruelty,
Does cause diseases multiplicity
To be in Horses, and the damned Trade
To sell a Botch'd sophisticated jade,
In Much cheeting in Smithfield, in buying and selling Horses.
Smithfield is in practice twice a week,
He that believes me not, let him go seek.
There shall he see the ambler made to trot,
The lame and founderd, lusty, (being hot)
The trotter shall be forced with ease to amble,
And through the horsemarket shall be such scamble
With galloping, and trotting, ambling, pacing,
Most odious swearing, lying, and out-facing,
Such dawbing horses griefs with counterfeiting,
That he is a cunning buyer scapes their cheating.
In ancient times, horses much fame did gain,
Which Poets and Historians do maintain:
Besides the swist skie-scalding Pegasus,
Great Alexander had Bucephalus,
Reinoldo had his Bayard, and there are,
Names given to horses, both in peace and war.
But leaving stately horses, it is found Upon the Bearegarden Horse.

The Bear-garden is circular, or rovnd,
Where Iack-an-Apes his horse does swiftly run
His circuit, like the horses of the Snn.
And quick as lightning, his will trace and track,
Making that endless round his Zodiac,
Which Jack (his Rider) bravely rides a straddle,
And in his hot Careere perfumes the saddle;
He Is active, and he is passive in his pace,
And sprung from ancient and approved race,
His grandsires grandsire, was begot perforce,
Between the Nightmare, and the Trojan Horse,
That female Horse of Sinon, in whose womb
A hundred well-arm'd mad Colts had their room,
Which being foald, spoild Troy, with sword and flame,
and from that Jade, our jade descent does claim,
For (as his parents often have done before)
He alvvayes keeps a jadish trick in store.
FINIS.

