Skimmington, and her Husband.


Diverse Crabtree Lectures.

Expressing the several Languages that shrews read to their Husbands, either
at morning, Noone, or Night.

With a pleasant Relation of Shrewes Monday, and Shrewes Tuesday, and why they
were so called.

Also a Lecture between a Peddler and his wife in the Canting Language.

With a new trick to tame a Shrew.

Printed at London by I. Oaks, for John Sweeting, and are to be sold at his
shop in Cornehill near Pope's Head Ally at the sign of the Crown. 1639.

Mary Make-peace, of the Manor of Allwell, in Northamptonshire, to all the
Sisters of her Female Society, Health, Hearts-ease, and Happiness.
Sweet Sisters,
ANd fellow Spinsters, (for the weakest of us is no worse, and the best no
better) it is the Character under which all our Sex is comprehended; I
lovingly salute you all hoping you are in as good health of body, and in quiet
of mind, as I was at the writing hereof: These are further to let you
understand, that it is come to my hearing; how by the course carriage of some
amongst our Sex; others, whose modesties are no way guilty of the like
misdemeanour, are not privately bated, but (even in Print) publicly branded:
and by such who consider not, that as there was a Maechael Helena, so there was
a Matron-like Hecuba; and as a loose Lais, so a loyal Lucrese. Nor that we
might as well retort upon them, that as there was an Hercules, so there was an
Herostratus; and as a Salemon, so a Sinon.

But all this is to little or no purpose: you know my name is Mary Make-peace,
and have always studied to make peace betwixt both Sexes: Then, though they
rail at us, let not us revile them: for patience must prove our best
preservative: For as the Grammar rule learnedly instructs us: Foemineo generi
tri^^untur -- propria quae maribus: which is, as I interpret it: Though the
Feminine gender be troublesome, let us seek to please proper men, least they
bring us down upon our Maribones: which done, we shall prevent all prejudice
and divert all disasters.

I confess there is Tabitha Turbulent, of a terrible tongue; and Frank
Froward, who though she be given more to pouting than to prating, yet neither
of them I hold to be necessary: Betrisse Bould-face does all things without
blushing: And Ellen Ever-heard makes too much noise amongst her neighbors: And
of the like quality and condition are Parnell Prate a pace, and Rachell Rail
at him: Vrsula Vpsefreeze is condemned to for her uncivil carriage; as proov'd
to be no better than a pot companion: As for Hannah Hit him home, and Ioaene
Iowle him well, they are valued in the rank of Vixens, and will be loud by no
allowance: these hnmours I like not.

Marry again, (for that's our women's constant phrase, when we bury our
husbands) There are on the contrary side, Grace grieve him not, a simple and
good soul: Kate Kisse-well no cunning, but a conniving creature: Luce
Lye-close no wanton, but a willing wench: Dorothy Doe-little not to be caveld
at, because so called: for you know the Proverb, so said, so done, and little
said soon amended: and for Sisly Sweet-lips my sister, and Margery Quiet my
Cousen-german: if all the rest were of their simplicity, and modesty, men
shonld not have such reason to cavell at us, nor we such cause to complain of
them. Alas, why should not Ivory teeth bridle intemperate tongues? and soft
lips conceal fullen hearts? or why should a fair face be the betrayer of
hidden faults? of all these things, as a Sister of your society, I thought good
to advise you.

Given at our Manor of ALL-VVELL. MARY MAKE-PEACE

The Table.
OF Shrewes Monday, and shrewes Tuesday, and why they are so called. p. 1 A
Lecture of an Apothecaries wife to her husband, who was chosen Seavenger in his
parish. p. 10 A Lecture of a Barbers wife to her husband. p. 21. A Lecture of a
Serieant, or Catchpoles wife to her husband. p. 26 A Lecture of a Country
Sadlers wife to her husband. p. 32 A Lecture of an Horse-coursers wife to her
husband. p. 37 A Lecture of a Taylers wife to her husband. p. 47 A Lecture of a
Poets wife to her Husband. p. 59 A Lecture of a Farriers wife to her Husband,
and a neighbor a Glasiers wife coming to mediate the matter, fall both a
railing. p. 66 Item, for the Farriers diet, which he had always from his wife.
p. 36 A Lecture of a Butchers wife to her husband. p. 89 A Lecture of a
shooe-makers wife to her husband. p. 96 A Lecture of a Bakers wife to her
husband. p. 102 A Lecture of an Inne-keepers wife to her husband. p. 109 A
Lecture of a Tobacco man's wife to her husband. A Lecture of a Locke-smiths wife
to her husband. p. 128 Skimmingtons Lecture to her Husband, which is the errand
sold. p. 132 A Lecture of a discreet and modest wife to her husband, who was an
Aldermans Deputy. p. 150 A Lecture of an Informers wife to her husband. p. 162
A Lect. of a Country man's wife, that was a gentleman's Baily. p. 169 A Lecture
of a Brokers wife to her Husband. p. 177 A Lecture between a peddler and his
wife, in the Canting phrase. p. 188 A discourse between two maids concerning
their sweet-hearts. p. 196 A new way to tame a shrew. p. 210
A Crab-tree Lecture.
Of shrewes Monday, and Shrewes Tuesday, and why they were so called.
THey are much mistaken who call these two days, in the beginning of the first
week of Lent, Shrove-Munday and Shrove-Tuesday, for we have no word either
from the old British, Danish, or Saxon Tongue, neither from any other
intermixed language significant to that purpose, proper to the days, or
suiting with the time. But if the Reader desire to be instructed in the truth
from the Original. Know that the words are mis-written, and mis-sounded, and
mistaken, for they should be read and voyc'd Shrewes-Munday, and
Shrewes-Tuesday; and the reason why they ought to be so, I have been
instructed thus.

It is by ancient Custom held to be the only season for Collops and Eggs,
Fritters, and Pancakes: and as in the City, so both in the Court and Country:
But the accident following, which I am now to relate, first happened in the
Country.

Of a Farmers Wife.
AN honest plain simple Farmer, on this leading day of the week, coming
hungry from the Plough, found his Wife busily making Pancakes for him and his
family: The good man being at that time more humorous than needed, began to
be very capcious at every thing, taking unjust exceptions at the coursenesse of
the flower, the taste of the Suite, the thickness of the Batter, and the like.
At which the good woman, though she smothered it outwardly, yet vexing
inwardly to be so crossed and troubled in her business, as knowing he was
better experienced in the Plough, than the Pan, and to eat Pancakes better
than to make them, entreated him to sit down and be patient, and she would
presently show him a new trick for his Learning.

The simple Novice desirous of novelty, began more calmly to listen to her,
and asked her what it was? who readily answered again: Sweet Husband you see
this Pancake I am now turning: mark it well: now take this platter in your
hand, and go into the yard, bending with your Back against the door, looking
straight forward, not stirring from where I shall place you, and when it is
ready, I will toss it from the fire out of the top of the Chimney, and it
shall fall directly into your dish, and be ready at the watchword when I
shall say Now.

The silly man thinking she had spoke seriously was soon persuaded, and kept
his place (with his face from the door) stil^ looking upwards toward the
top of the Chimney when it would first fly out, and after fall: when she
having given the watchword, came suddenly behind him, and with the pan and
all clapped the Pancake upon his head, with a blow which had almost struck him
down: and to excuse her self, said thus; O Husband, if your block head had
not been in the way, the Pan-cake that light upon your pate had fallen into the
dish: and I fearing what is now fallen out, thought to have caught it in the
pan, if you had faild in the platter.

At which words the husband rubbing his Brows, well basted with the fat of the
Pan, said unto her; Now a mischief take thee for an arrant Shrew: this will
make me think on this Shrewes Monday (for thy sake) whilst I live: and from
thence, it is thought, the day had its first denomination. And without question
upon the like accident done by some cursed Shrew or other came the next day
following to be called Shrewes Tuesday, and so weeping Wednesday, terrible
Thursday, frowning Friday, and sullen Saturday, especially when her husband
denies her to go amongst her Gossips on Sunday.

Hence comes it also that if any one has crossed another in a business, or done
him a bad Office, which mny prove to his damage or hinderance, the phrase that
is still most in custom, is to say, that such, or such a man, did purpose, or
has done me a shrewd turn.

And now follows several Shrewes Lectures to their Husbands, and in their
several professions: First of an Apothecaries wife to her Husband, because he
deals in Simples, and has taken upon him the Office of a Scavenger.

A Lecture of an Apothecacaries wife to her Husband, who is chosen a Scavenger
in his Parish.
NOW Good Man Simpleton, we shall have you grow so proud now you have got an
office, that you think none is good enough to be your fellow: I had thought
your own employment in your profession had been trouble enough to you, and
not to have sought for an Office, and made friends for it likewise: Now I see
you are troubled with the Simples, you had not need to go a simpling every
year as you do, God knows you have so little wit already: I would you would
go the next time and get some Compounds to furnish your seife with, and to
concoct your Brains, for you have now but a shallow wit, and are glad to wear
a Satin Cappe to keep that in too: you had need keep home, and learn to know
something more in your profession, than what is already printed in books. When
any one of your acquaintance is not well, and desires your advice, then you can
prescribe them nothing but a little Stybium; then when another comes, Stybium;
this is all you can do, only a little Stybium. Go, thou art a stupefied
Ass, and knows better how to purge thy Patients money out of his pocket, than
to remove any disease from his body: you will come to them, and ask them how
they do, this is all, and bid them be of comfort, when there is a great deal
of danger, and pretend to feel their pulse, when your mind is to filtch their
purse. I would there were a means how to have your Brains taken out, and
braid in a Mortar, that they may be a little better compounded, for as they
be, thou will never be able to discharge thy brave Office, ass thou calst it,
of a Scavenger, for thou can not cast up any account, nor reckon up any sum
above twenty shillings; I hope thou will lose by it, and ever after be jeered
for thy folly; you imagine your self a brave fellow, do you not, because you
are met by some who knows you, with a money bag in the one hand, and a Roll
of the parishioners names in the other: you think your self not a little
graced to be called to this preferment, because you would be taken notice of
in the Parish: and now you have got a great many of Titles by your Office, the
better to honor your person withal, and these are some of them, which your
memory cannot bear: first you are Duke of the Dung-Cart, then Earl of the
Channel, Lord of the Soil, Vicount Rubbish, Commander of the Sea-coale Ashes,
and Master of the Dunghill, a goodly company are they not: It is no marvel
indeed you must make you a new suite of Apparel to perform this Office in,
and to go up and down the street and from door to door, to gather your
money in, as if you were to beg an Alms; and go twice or thrice before you
can be paid your due: you had better never had served this base stinking
office, and have given so much money out of your purse, because you loose so
much time, and likewise is in danger of every raskally knave or promouters
complaint to one Justice or other, if a little dirt be left, unless you give
them a Fee, as you often have done to hold their tongues; or else you will be
clapped by the heels a day and a night, and this is all the good you will get
by your great Office.

Husb. I prithee good wife have patience, it is but a little while longer; I
have served it hitherto with commendations and I hope I shall come off with
credit, though it be a little time lost and money spent, I will get it up
again, for that is the first Office that every man must serve, and so by
degrees come higher and higher, and at length to be Churchwarden, and then let
me alone to help my self, for all my loss of time and expense of money; I
will then beg hard for the poor, but charity begins at home; it is but when I
receive money from the others that collect it, be a little close fisted, or
hold it between my fingers with the palm of my hand down-wards, and make as
though I had a louse in my neck, and shrug a little of one side, and then of
the other, and so thrust it down into my neck where I have a list of cloth
about my waste that it cannot fall down or drop out: let me alone, I will be
cunning enough for them I will warrant you, and though thou count me but a
shallow brained, and simple fellow, because I am an Apothecarie and use
simples; yet thou shall know I am not such an idiot or fool to loose all and
be laughed at too, but I will make some body pay for it; and so good wife do
not any way disparage me in my profession or judgment any more to any of my
patients; and though some of our own trade call me at their pleasures and say
I look like an Ass, yet I am not one, let those term me foolish and simple,
if I fall into any of their hands to take Physic. I think those are the
greatest simplisians that use Physic most, and so I hope good wife I have
given you satisfaction for this time, desiring you to have patience, in saying
little, and doing no more, and in so doing, we shall remain always friends
and lovers.

A Lecture of a Barbars wise to her Husband.
O Thou base Shaver, who wilt not suffer an hair to grow amiss in another,
when thou thy self live out of all order; thou that pellest and polest the
Commons, and boastest that a King must be bare to thee, when thou art forced to
stand, when every Beggar sits that comes under thy fingers: thou think thy
self a trim fellow, and can trim thy self every day in the week; when,
upon thine own knowledge, I cannot be trimmed once in a fortnight: nay, and am
glad of that too, if I could tell how to come by it: but what can be expected
from such a scrape-scull as thy self; who art no better than a Nitty, nay, a
very lousie fellow, who though thou never repentest thy self of thine own
sins, make every man that sits in thy Chair, to put on white Linen, and
do penance: For thou have (I dare swear in my conscience) more base-sonnes in
private, than Basins hanging at thy door in public: Nay, let the quietest
men in the Parish (I might say the Churchwardens themselves) come to be
trimmed at thy shop, thou keepst such a bawling in their ears, that (if the
Bell-man be abroad) the whole street rings on it: but when any business of
import comes, then thou art still out of the way. Where were thou, you Rogue,
when the Queen your Nurse was to be shaven? you must be at Sea (a pox take
you) I was glad to play the Barber in your absence, and to use the Razor my
self, and for my slovenly work to make the world talk of me: You must leave
a poor bashful boy at home, and taught him only to barbe the beard, and
correct the hairs of the chinne; but when that work came to be done, he was
as far to seek, as thou were to be found, and that was far enough I
warrant you: I was glad to use the aid and counsel of two or three of my best
Gossips, and when she was shaven, because the cock was dry, we were forced to
carry her to the pumpe and wash her, and there had been a goodly sight if
your rogue-ship had been there to have seen it; you went to sea with a goodly
hair of your head, and now you are come home again as bald as a birds-arse,
and what excuse have you for this? when any man taxes thee of it, thou biddest
them every night look to the sweeping of thy shop, and there went the hair
away, and is this a sufficient answer for thee thou pole-davies?

A Sergeant or Catchpoles wife to her husband.
A Sergeant? I would I had married with a Syrreverance, when I matched with
thee; what can thou do without thy Yeoman, and if he stand not to thee,
(which is seldom) what art thou then varlet? thou art the Blood-hound, and he
is the Beagle, to set, and watch, and follow, and lie lurking in secret corners
to catch poor men as they go about their business when they least think of
it; and then thou will hail them like a dog through the street, if they will
not give thee what money thou would have; thou dealest in so many of other
men's cases abroad, that thou can say little or nothing to thine own (though it
lie never so open) at home, a catch pole, a cutpurse, nay a very caterpillar of
the common wealth, teaching bankrupt freemen to sing a counter-tenor in
woodstreet and the Poultry, and practisest pricksong in the Suburbs amongst thy
Roisters and pole-cats; I confess thou art a shoulder clapper, but thou
seldom clappestwhere thou should clap, thou pestilent pill-garlicke, you
are called an officer (with a vengeance) I pray you what good office have you
ever done me, unless to keep me above stairs, whilst you lodge others in the
hole, and that is a courtesy with a curse to you; thou pratest to me of the
paper house, I had as live thou had kissed me where I sat on Saturday, for to
thee the cheeks with eyes, and the blind cheeks are all one, and so thou art
all one, and I think wilt never be otherwise; you will be called a young man
too, you old rogue, but I pray you when shall I see any of your youthful
tricks? not in have I warrant you; you will be sure to take an order for that;
and if I should die to morrow, you know where to have your second wife the next
day after: the same Bell that tolls to my burial, will ring out to you second
bridalls: But now I think upon it, I Will spit in my hand and take better hold,
to put your nastie worship out of your conceit, and to set wiseakers your
whoores nose besides the cushion: nay it shall go hard but I will be before
hand with you both: thou broughtest home a prisoner to me last week, a young
Grocer that had newly set up for himself, and left him in charge with me, till
thou wentest abroad to talk with his creditors; I confess I kept him there
close prisoner, and a good guest he was for the time, for he discharged the
whole house, and over and above he paid me soundly; since whose departure I
have not been very well at ease, and for his sake when I am sick; let me
have Sinnamon enough, and Ginger enough, and Sugar, Nutmeg, and Cloves enough;
but I shall never more for his sake endure any Mace in my Cawdle

A Country Sadlers wise to her husband.
When I married with a Sadler, I would I had married with a Sow-gelder, nay in
my conscience I think I should have had the better match of the two, for so
many years I have been thy wife, and yet this Wiseaker could never find the
wit to set the saddle on the right horse: now my pity on thee thou poor
patch-pannell, yet for all thy pitcherie and patcherie thou never think of
mending the patch thou should most mind, thou think to curb me, and
snaffle me, to bridle me, and to feed me with a bit and a knock, but I
wonder when I shall find a good stirre-up come from thee: all thy care is to
see other folks jades made fine, neat, and handsome, whilst thine own beast
at home can neither be combed, rubbed, nor curried, so that for want of good
dressing she is ready to fall into the disease of the scratch, which makes me
ready to scorn thee with my heels; for thou art never like to come so near as
my heart: It is an old proverb and a true, who goes worse shod than the
Shoomakers wife; and I may say by experience, who uses the saddle less than
he that owes it; but I could serve thee in thy kind, and show thee a trick for
thy learning, for where thou keep thy own saddle-tree bare, I know how, and
where to have it covered with plush and velvet, and yet thou neither the
wealthier nor the wiser; this I can do, and this I will do, if thou shortly
do not mend thy manners: but thou usest to serve me, as thou do thy best
customers, when thou should stuff their faddles with good Mercha^table
hair, thou bobst them off with the coursest hey bought in Smithfield for
nine-pence a trusse, but that is a thing that I do not stand so much upon
neither; what care I how thou cheatest abroad, so thou would be careful to
give the devil his due at home; nay bootlesse it is to chafe, or vex, or
fret, or fume, it is all to no purpose; nor trouble me in my tale, till my
lecture be read at large, for my tongue shall walk till my breath fail, and
after some little pause I shall be ready to begin again; nor do I purpose to
give over till mine hour be full out; nay never offer to stop thine ears, but
if thou will needs be stopping, stop where thou should stop, for thou shall
never stop my mouth whilst thine eyes are open.

A Lecture of an Horse-coursers wife to her Husband.
IT is a Custom amongst all men and their wives, though they never agree so
well, yet at some time or other their slow fires will grow into combustion, and
as the fuel is added of either side so to grow to a great incendiary; and so it
happened betwixt this couple: An old Horse-courser (betwixt whom and a knave,
there is as little difference, as betwixt him that I named last and a Broker)
married a young wife, (a pretty modest slut she was) and had spleen in her,
(as ill women have) but never showed it, and like a flint had concealed fire,
but till he with his steel struck too hard upon it, there never appeared any
sparkle; but when the Tinder once takes, you may light a Candle for any
merchants Lantern, to show all the street over: and so it fared with these,
for he having tempted her beyond all patience, her breast swelling till she
had almost burst her lace, she fell into these Terms. An Horse-courser, an
hang-dogge, for Hangman is too good a name for thee, who would ride more
Gills than thou do Jades: (for an honest wife is too good for thee, or any of
thy generation) thou for thy cheating in horses better deservest to be burnt
in Smithfield than any women for poisoning her Husband: but the Devil shall
poison thee before I will: for none of all your spurre-galling Rascals shall
make an holy day for me: But I perceive such saddlenos'd, and saddle-backt
Rascals, set them but (like a beggar) and they care not how they ride to the
Devil. Thou go from Hostry to Hostry, but it will be long enough before
thou will set up thy Nagge in my Stable, thou wall-ey'd wickedness: A Rogue of
thy years and have not sowed all thy wild Oats yet? before I will lead this
life with thee longer I will eat hey with an horse, you base blinkin-soppe: nay
more, if every man had his right, and the Devil his due, thou art worthy to
be hanged in the very halter that thou leadest thine horse in.

Gladly he would have interrupted her, and began to say something to small
purpose: but the Jacke was woond up, and down it must, and therefore not to be
meddled with till it was ready to be woond up again: For she had vowed to Do
out her Do; and that she would see done, and therefore pursued her discourse in
this manner.

Do you begin to kick like your gald horse already? Nay, I thought I should
set you beside your stirrops. Thou have more mystery in thee than a
Mountebanke, and more tricks than a Jugler, and passest more lame and poor
commodities, broken winded Iades, than either of them with their hy-passe and
re-passe. Have thou not brought an old mare into the Market, (on my knowledge)
above fifteen, and laid thy hand upon her head, and sworn to thy Chapman she
has been under five? (equivocating, and meaning your five fingers) and what
was this better than cheating? nay, when thou have sworn a nagge to be sound
of wind and limb, (and yet I never knew thee to be so of either) when thy
Customer has took him out to ride him for a trial, and found him to halt
down right, have thou out-fac't him, that he had no other fault, but that he
took him when his feet were asleep: and what was this better than
Conicatching? Thou art a very cruel hearted fellow, to beat and belabour thy
horses every hour in the day with a broome-staffe about their sides, to make
your Customers believe they are full of mettle, when it is for fear of thy
Cudgel they stir and move about: thou have such base tricks in thee, that my
conscience will not suffer thee any longer to reign in thy roguery: Nay more,
thou keep thy hackny Whoors: They stand at the bottle, (of Sack and
Clarret) but I am tide up to rack and Manger, and none but a Mangy fellow
would offer to use his wife so: Nay, I have put Breeze under your Tail, I
think I have netled you, my tongue has but ambled all this while, or at least
gone an easy Trot; but spur me on a little further, and put it into a false
Gallop, and then come upon me the best of you all, Cut or Long Tail: Thou
shall not sinde that my Tongue will tire within a Mile of the Town, nor my
self neither if I were well tried. But for mine own part (as thy Conscience
can witness) I am neither well litter'd, nor well provender'd, nor well
breathed, nor well rubbed, nor well curried, nor indeed well any thing'd. Thou
keep thy market without the railes? thou ride thy horses in Cuckolds pound?
have I wrung you in the withers? have I rubbed you on the gald back? have I in
the stead of an handkerchiefe, given you a drench for your glanders? Now fie
upon thee for a rank Rider, thou shall find in me from henceforth there
shall be more in it than to get up and ride.

A Taylers wife to her husband.
MOst sure my father was frantic, and my mother mad, and both of them out of
their wits, to match me to such a Mopus: I was in hope they had married me to a
man, but they have thrust me on a Tailor, of which three of the best, can
scarce make a good on: he talks of nothing but his yard, and his yard, and is
not able to afford his wife London measure; whilst thou sit crosse-legg'd
upon thy board, like a Hare on a poulterers stall, I am feign to lie crossing
mine arms in my bed, I wish thou would eat less bread, and take more
drink, and then there were some hope that in time thou would learn to wind
up thy bottom: when he thinks to do his best, it is but so so, and he cannot
go through stitch with any thing; I thought I should not have met with so
simple a seaming mate, or so purblind a Coxecombe that cannot see in the dark
to find the eye of his own needle which any other could do blind foulded: if
any one see thy back they may know by thy feet and thy legs that thou art a
Tailor, a Hare and a Tailor does much agree, thou sit on thy shopboord
crosse-legged, so does a Hare lie crosse-legged on a poulterers stall; do you
remember that a Nobleman gave you a cast suite, and you like a proud rascal
went and put it on, and marched to the Court to see the mask, and forgetting
your self, put your hand in your pocket to pull out your handkerchiefe to wipe
your face, and then came out with it your thimble, your button-moulds, and your
bodkin; was not this a bold trick of thee thou lousie nitty Tailor: the
proverb is very true of you, Tailor like, poor, proud, and beggarly, not
worth my Grandames groat: you go like Gentlemen into Knights hou-houses, which
are your customers, and then you return like watchmen, with your bills in your
hands; There is many a Sadler and Body-maker beholding to you, for you furnish
them with the finest cloth and taffata to make their saddles and their bodies
with, which you steal out of a customers garment, and when you are asked if any
cloth or stuff be left, then you will swear, and lie, and protest you could
hardly make it serve, and that you had not an inch left in the world, no not so
much as to lap about your finger; then they believe you, when you have it in
your hell, or in your cutting house which devoures more such remnants then ever
Wood the great eater of Kent did penny loaves all his life time: and how many
yards of silver lace have you nimed and kept back by your stretching and
pulling of it, to the spoiling of many a good garment; nor do you allow me any
thing to wear but what you filtch and steal off other folks garments; the
other day I did but desire to have a new lace to put upon an old peticoat which
has been twice in Trig-lane, and thou would not buy it me, nor should I have
any thing unless I would accept of that small remnant, as you called it of six
or eight yards of lace, which you cozened our Sextons wife the other of: you
pay the rent of the house by this unlawful means, and unless you let me have
a new gown, my conscience will not suffer me to conceal this your knaverie,
but I will reveal it, and have it put in print to the view of all men: you
have now a suite on your back, the other now is at pawn, and lies in
lavender, and though some think it to be all alike behind as it is before, but
it is not so, for there is nothing but Canvas behind, and only buttered
before to make your neighbors believe you are a brave fellow.

Hus. This it is for me to reveal the secrets of my trade to my wife.


Wif. It is no great matter, you are a haire-braind fellow, and a jealous
coxecombe: I must not forsooth speak to a Customer, or to one of my Lodgers,
but presently your blood is up, and hold up the fist, and look on me, as the
Devil looked over Lincoln, and use me at your pleasure when they are gone;
but if you continue this course of rough dealing with me, and will not let me
have my will, I will make you ashamed of it: I will say nothing else; you may
imagine: for if men use their wives as they should do, it is the cause of
preserving many a smooth brow, which otherwise would prove rough and rugged, by
their unkind dealing with them: and what you get of me by your ill words and
usage of me, you shall put in you eye, and see never the worse.


Thou busiest thy self in gathering other men's rents, and if I have but a stich
in my side thou know not how to take it up: Thou a workman, thou a very
botcher; and such I shall ever hold thee to be: Besides, an ungratfull fellow
thou art; for though thy Customers pay thee well, yet thou will not stick to
sit on their skirts; and wilt strive to have other men's hose well lined, but
can afford no stuffing to thine own breeches: and when I look but under
thy Shop-boor'd; me thinks it is a very hell to live with thee, and Purgatory
is a very Paradise unto it; and yet with thy snippery and snappery thou
think to go shear away with all. Thou art every day basting and basting, and
yet can afford me no roast-meate all the week long: I am sure thou will not
allow thy servants their bellies full, but pinch them of their victuals; and
that is one thing that makes so many Taylers to be Thieves: one Egg must
serve two Prentises for their dinner, and thou make them eat it with the
point of their needles, because they should not eat too greedily to choke
themselves. Thou hittest me in the teeth, that thou will go to sea and leave
me: but I know thou have not the heart, good man Hop-kennell: for I know (upon
mine own knowledge) that there are no shreds of Manhood in thee: and as she
was thus taunting him, a Customer came in by chance, who interrupted her, and
the Clock withal struck just eleven; and so she ended her Lecture.

A Poets Wife to her Husband.
Well, I will be short howsoever sweet; and as thou tel'st other men of their
faults, so I will not stick to tell thee of thine own errors. Thou an Artist?
thou an Ass; a very pen-goose of Pernassus, and thinking thy self to be a
minion, art no better than a mere mockery to the Muses: For I prithee what
have thou got either by Helicon, or Hipocrene? scarce good Clothes to thy
back, whilst thou studiest to uncloake other men's knaveries; laboring to make
thy Lines go in even feet, and can not maintain thy Legs in good Boots:
and if your Loggerhead shall get a Laurel, what then? can your Muse feed you
with Mutton? or can you buy your self Beef with the leaves of a Bay Tree? can
your Rhyme make you feed on Rabbets? your Canzonets on Capons? or your Poetry
on Partridge? I must confess on Wood-cockes they may, if you could find a
spring to catch them. You get nothing now a days but by flattery and
dissembling, only Wine and Tobacco, by keeping some young Novice company in
humouring him, by telling some strange stories, and idle fables, and then at
night come home drunk that you are not able to stand, with such a red face,
that if your eyes were Matches, they would set your nose on fire: thou a Poet?
thou a Pot-head: your invention is never ripe, but when you have been a
potting and a piping, and then you have but a flash; for you have not a brain
to keep your conceit; it is dead as soon as it is thought upon: thy Poetry
has made me almost mad. I pray you what has your pen purchased? or your
Goosequill got you? or to what preferment has it raised you? unless to be the
Printers Packe-horse, the Stationers Iournyman, and the Players Drudge: I the
Players, who have the wit to keep you poor, that they themselves may pranke
it in Plush: For who in these days can know a Poets wife from a Pedlers, or
such Iacks from Gentlemen? who like Hogs feed upon Akhornes, and never cast
up their eyes to look toward the Boughs from whence they fall. I have found
it by observation, and so have others, that the first stop to beggerie, is to
write to the Stage. I speak not of all, but of you poor Poets, who have made
them your Idols, who ought rather to have fallen down and worshiped you, who
have put Oracles into their mouths, who would eat the bread out of yours.
Nay, do not vex to be Catechized in that, of which I have heard thee so often
(and not without just cause) complain: Further she was proceeding, when one
of her Neighbors called upon her to go along with her to the Christning of a
Neighbors Child; so that she was for that time forced to break off on the
sudden: At which her Husband was glad to be rid of her clamor; and I not
forry, for in her ending so suddenly, she has saved me some labor.

A Lecture of a Farriers Wife to her Husband, and a Glasiers Wife, coming to
mediate the matter betwixt them.
A Farrier having angered his wife in crossing her untoward humor, she fell
foul upon him by no allowance, and began with him as follows.

Thou an Horseleich? thou an Hobbyhorse, and have more diseases upon thee than
any Jade that comes to be drencht at thy Forge: for thou have the Web in thy
eyes, the Glanders in thy nose, the Staggers in thy head, and the Botts in thy
belly: thou art troubled moreover with the rotten Couch in thy Longs, the
Spring-halt in thy hippes, the Spary in thy legs, the Scratches in thy heels,
and indeed art nothing but rottenness, and diseases all over; and what
comfort has a likely woman, as I am, to lie with one all the night grunting
like an Hog, groaning like an Horse, coughing like a sheep, and spitting and
spawling like one that is sweated on the Pox (God bless us:) then thou criest
out, O the Gout in my Toes, O the Sciatica in my Thighs; insomuch, that Bedlam
is a better place to sleep in, than our Bed: she was now but in her Prologue,
when in comes their next neighbor, being a Glasiers wife, who had overheard
all that had past, and persuaded her to be patient, saying. Nay good Neighbor,
I am very sorry to see you in this passion, I see something has disquieted
you, I pray you forbear and be a little moderate in your language to your
Husband, it does not become a women to be thus brawling in the open street,
and disgracing of her Husband, it will be a means for him never to have a care
of you, but rather to neglect his calling: you had better persuade him by fair
means; and not thus by foul; for men are men, and they will not be contrould,
and especially in the open shop, where all passengers to see you, and take
notice of it: tell him of his faults between your selves when you are abed
together, then he will give you the better hearing, and feeling in the cause,
which this way will never do, but make him more in a rage, and e'ne careless
of his business; and she said, that her husband was an honest quiet man, and
well thought of by all his neighbors, and she did not well to use him in such
unreverend terms: and was proceeding further, where the Farriers wife quickly
and sharply cut her off, after this manner, unreverently.

Far. Wife. Marry Syrreverence, goodly Gossip: I pray you Mistress Gill Flurts
how came you by that goodly word? with my finger in your mouth, and a toy at
the end of it: Do you come from an Alehouse bench, from amongst the rest of
your talking Gossips to tell me what I have to do; get you home, and counsel
your own husband, and meddle not with mine: you have been too late in his
company, have you not? that is it which makes you take his part: go, you are a
saucy Gossip, and a Gill-flurt, I know what I have to do with mine own
Husband, I will not now come to learn of you: I hope the carriage of my self
is well known both in the City and in the Parish, how I have behaved my self:
go out of my doors, you are a base prating Gossip.


Glass. Wife. Gossip in your face; I am none of your Gossip, though I am one of
your neighbors; yet I do scorn to be counted your companion: an honest woman
should show her self to be so, and not to revile their Husbands in such vile
speeches, enough to make a man run quite mad.

A woman's rule should be in such a fashion,
Only to guide her household, and her passion.
And her obedience never out of season,
So long as either Husband lasts, or reason.
Ill fares the hapless family that shows
A Cock that is silent, and a Hen that crows.
I know not which live more unnatural lives,
Obedient Husbands, or commanding Wives.

Far. Wif. How now, do you come with your Ballad Rhyme to tell me what I have
to do, and how to behave my self to my husband, and in my own house? get you
home and wash your dishes, and meddle with your own Husband: I would scorn to
have done as you did, when you went to have your other Husband buried, you went
with an Onion in your Handkerchiefe, to make your eyes look read, and to cause
you to weep, as if you had been very sorry for his loss; when indeed you did
but counterfeit, and make the world believe how you loved him, because you
would have another husband the sooner, and when you had seen him laid in his
grave, then when you came home, you could have your Sack and Sugar, with other
good cheer, faying, come, we women must live by the quick, and not by the
dead.


Glass. Wife. Come, come, you may be ashamed to do as you do; I would scorn
to make my Husband stand in awe of me, as a child does of a rod, that if
perchance he be three or four hours abroad a drinking in company, and come
home a little disguised, then you fall about his ears, and rail at him, that
it is a shame you should be endured; and if he were not a very patient man he
would not abide the life that he does at your hands, but swaddle your sides;
poor man he is glad to hide himself many times in the house of Office, till
your rage be over; and one time, to ease his stomach, he was glad to put his
head in the hole, because you should not hear him ease his stomach, and then
could not get his head out again, but brought the seat about his neck, like a
ruff band. Come, this is not the part of a good wife to discover her husbands
follyes in such a public manner as you do: it rather hardens their hearts,
and makes them a great deal the worse Husbands, and causes them never to have
a mind to return home, when once they are abroad, or have staid a little too
long: this makes them ill Husbands if any thing does.

Therefore whether it be better or worse,
You must be ruled by him that bears the purse.

Far. Wife. You are still up with your Rhyme; get you home, and teach your
Grandam to suck Eggs; I will not be taught by you, Gossip Pinte-pot: begone
I say, or I will wash your face, now your tongue is so hot. Who taught you, I
wonder, to meddle betwixt the bark and the tree? the skin and the flesh, the
man and the wife? When the other replied, now Flirt in thy face, and Gossip in
thy guts: I hold my self as good a woman as thy self at all times, and as
honest as the skin betwixt thy brows, if not honester.


Honester, Madam Malipert (said the other) and whence Mistress Odious came you
by these comparisons? Have thou took the Glasier, thy Husbands trade out of his
hand, and art come hither to pick Quarrels? she replied again: now Odious in
thy throat, and there let it lie till I take it out again. Thou calst me
Madam Malipert, but I am sure thou art Pru prate a pace, and so thou were ever
since I first knew thee: and where thou twitst me with my Husbands Trade: I
cannot but with Pain speak it, a Glasier is as good a man as a Farrier (no
dispraise to thine husband) every month in the year, every week in the month,
every day in the week, and every hour in the day: and with that she began
to be out of breath, which gave the Smithes wife liberty to say. Well I ever
took thee to be a bold Bettris: and I thee for a sconlding Queen, says the
other, as well as she could bring it out: and so from words they fell to
blows; insomuch, that the honest Farrier was glad to step betwixt them,
thinking to part them: by which occasion his wife seeing she could not come at
the other to have her will, she falls about her Husbands ears, and he again at
her, and hard it was to judge betwixt them who was likely to have the better:
In which Interim the Glasiers wife ran to call the Constable, and brought
him, desiring him, least there should be manslaughter, or woman-slaughter
committed, to command them to keep the Kings Peace, and to part them: but he,
out of his great wisdom, made answer: no not I by any means, nor any one for
me: Cursed be he that parts man and wife: and therefore let them fight on and
spare not: so that what the Constable would not do weariness did: but how the
business was after reconcield, when I understand more, you shall hear further.

The poor Farrier lived this life seven years together; and to please her
oftentimes he was forced to lose many a heat at the Anvill to to come at her
call to kiss and humor her: and still being used to this kind of language,
it bred in him that custom that he could well endure it: sometimes, only to
ease himself, and his mind, complaining to some of his friends over a cup of
Beer, telling them, how in stead of Lord and Master, she called him Rogue and
Rafcall, and was never at quiet with her at bed or board; only when she was
abroad or asleep: and for staying now a little longer than I promised her,
said he, I dare warrant you, my good neighbor, when I come home I shall have a
dish of maundring Broth, thickened with a few small Reasons, kept hot upon a
chafingdish and coals, so that when I come in, I shall be constrained to sup
it up scoulding hot.

Neighb. In good troth neighbor you have your hands full: and I will give you
the best counsel I can: you must have patience, and endure it; for if you
should take any violent course against her, she then would make your head full,
as you have now your hands full. For now, as you confess, you being forewarned
of her doings, therefore ought to be fore armed.

The Farriers Diet which he used to expect from his Wife when he used to come
home late.
TWelve sorts of Cates my wife provides,
And bates me not a dish,
Four Flesh, four Fruit,
The other four of Fish.
For the first course, she serves me in,
Four birds that dainty are;
The first a Quale, the next a Rale,
A Bitterne, and a Jar.
My appetite being cloid with these,
With fish she makes it sharp,
She serves me next a Pout, Ill-pies,
A Gudgeon, and a Carpe.
The third course with fruit she served in,
Welfitted for the season,
I am sure a Medler, Hartichoake,
A Crab and a small reason.
What Smith is he has such a wife,
And on her does not doat,
Has every day delicious fare,
And costs him not a groat.
Upon my word and credit my good neighbor, and an honest farrier as thou art,
I had rather be at some three-peny Ordinary, than at this feast of variety:
and amongst all this choice of Cheer, I do marvel you had no Souse, nor
Lamb, nor Lout, nor Goose, nor Woodcocke, bitter Almonds, nor choke Pears.
Therefore to say no more; as a sick man is cured of his disease in time by
virtue of a medicine, so a patient man is remedied of his tormentor in time by
death of his wife.

A Butchers Wife to her Husband.
AN honest Butcher gently admonishing his Wife, that she neglected the looking
to her Shop, and every day went to a Lecture, by which he was much hindered,
and (for ought he could see) she little profited: the woman impatient to be so
taken up before she was down, made him answer as follows: Lectures forsooth;
and I pray you do my Lectures trouble you? if they have not done yet, they
shall more hereafter: here is a coil with a greasy companion indeed, with
whom any wise woman (but such a fool as I) would be loath to father fingers:
here is a stir with Lectures? most sure I am, I can be no sooner in the
Church, but you will be in the Devils Chapel. What need I look to thy
slaughterhouse, when I go everyday where I see finne knocked down like an
Ox, and the throat of iniquity cut like a Calfe; whilst thou, and thy
Iourny-men stay at home, and lie on thy shop-boord like so many stinking
livers. You are a wicked Creature, you cosen your Customers by your false
weights, and blow up your meat to make it look fair, and do not kill it
according to the Statute; and for me to be an eyewitness my conscience will
not suffer me: therefore leave questioning of me where I have been; but thou will never leave prating till thy head be furnished as well as thine Hydes,
there is a bone for you to pick: But it will be long enough before thou will
tickle my hyde, I warrant thee: at which last words the Butcher being somewhat
gored, he answered betwixt jest and earnest, and said; I know not wife what
you mean by the harnising of my head, but of one thing I am sure, when I in
the Spring ride abroad to buy ware, you can furnish your self in Lent with
pricks to serve you all the year after: at which she bit her lip, not her
tongue, for that she kept still in motion, and replied: well,
goodmangander-goose, some of my Gossips shall Catechize you for this, and He
make your best Joints pay for it; we will neither spare Neck, Shoulder, Breast,
Leg, nor Loyne; there are no stakes to be saved by us, take my word for
that: nay you great Calfe; your Sheep eye shall vex to see it, and we will
make you be glad to lick your lips after our Lambs-wooll: we will teach you to
be so hoggish to an Heiser of the first horn, you Cowbooby, to hit me in the
teeth with making of Pricks? hit me with them where I should be hit, you foul
Ox: But I see they talk most of Robbin-Hood, that seldomest shoot in his
Bow: But for that trick alone (though it go against my stomach) I Will mar
that which comes next to my making, and thou shall have the mends in thine own
hand, like a Groutheaded booby as thou art: and so she slung away in a heat
and left him: and he all the while sought about for his Knife, thinking to
have done her a mischief, but it was in his mouth, and he could not find it.

A Shoo-makers wife to her husband.
A Shoemaker one of the Gentle Craft happpened to have a Shrew to his wife:
but that is Hoc commune malum, and who can help it: (says Gammer Morris) and
no man can tell where his shoe wrings him, but he that wears it: now this
woman would wrangle and weep, scould and cry, and yet be as bitter as the best
of them: for her humor was to put finger in the eye, and say, well Husband,
well: who answered her again: I wife, so I have heard many a woman begin
well, that have ended ill: There was string enough for her to harp on, who
proceeding, said; I, I, it is my end that thou look for, and do wish an
ill end to come to me, but I am not gone yet; it is now but Al-hollow tide,
and I hope to eat some Christmas Pie with thee: look then to thine own
taching ends, for it is not thy hogs Brisles that can fright me to my grave
for all this; no nor for thy All that thou can do. A woman had as good to
have an husband of Clouts. I would I had married with a Cobbler, he would have
been still on the mending hand, but thou art every day worse and worse: but it
is as little boot for me to tell thee of it, as for thee to shoe the goose;
But it is the custom of all thy trade, to use your poor souls thus: and
there is a neighbor of thine at the next door, there is neither barrel of you
better herring: you take no more pity to see a woman weep, than to see a
Goose go barefoot: but for mine own part, though thou keep me in my
Corkes, I do not mean so soon to turn up my heels, nor to be so quickly
underlaid: Thou shall not find that Atropos sheares and thy cutting knife are
all one: Most sure I am, thou would take more pleasure to cut my throat, than
thine own thread: when I matched with thee, I might have married with one, whom
thou art no more like than an Apple is like to an Oyster; he was a proper man
indeed: But I see the properer man the worse luck, and so I find it to my
cost: for he had a clean Leg, and a handsome Foot; but thou have neither, a
very shamble-shinne, and have a foot of the slovings Last: But I hope that
will not last always, which if I thought, there is scarce any way that I would
find to tread in, unless the gate that leads to thy grave. Thou can vaumpe
old Boots, but when will thou vaumpe me, and make me new and fresh again?
nay, thou have thy tricks and turne-overs, but I hope thou shall not turne-over
me in haste: nay, thou art none of the Hastings, but slow enough, where thou
should be sure: thou have an high mind, and an high Insteppe, and still art
in an ambition to wax and wax higher and greater; but I shall never find it
whilst I have an hole in my skin, thou leathern'd skin Rascal. More she
would have said, but she wept out the rest, and so went away and left him.

A Bakers Wife to her husband.
THou as honest a man as lives by bread? thou as arrant a thief as steals in
a Barn; thou art no better than a knave in grain; indeed thou art as course
as thy Bran, and I the flower of thy garden; and what am I the more minded for
all this, thou hutch backed fellow? who for thy unkindnesse to me, deservedst to
be duckt in St. Clements Well. The honest man desired her to be patient, and
to hold her peace, lest she should make too loud a noise, and so trouble the
neighbors: she presently made him answer: what do thou think I will be
mealy-mouthed as thou art? and have ever been since I first knew thee: no, I Will
see thee first weighed in thine own scales, and so thou shall go to the
Devil for measure; for like thy bread, thou will be found many grains too
light. When thou art told of thy base cheating and false weights, then thou
look like an Image made of Rye-Dow; me-thinkes the slave looks as if he
were dow-bak't, and as pale as the ashes which his Malkin sweepes out of his
Oven, where the good wife would never have sought her daughter, but that she
had been there before her self: But thou have a desire to proclaim thine
own destiny, and soundest an Horn ever before thou art ready to set in: but
thou art not of every man's mind (and I commend thee for it) for there is many
a one that wears an horn, and is loath to blow it. You wear a cappe and long
hair, and you tell folks that asks you why you wear your hair so long, it
is because the mould of your head was not well closed at first by the midwife;
when indeed it is, that none should perceive that you have lost your ears in
the Pillary, for cousening, and making light bread. And now good man Baker what
can thou bolt out of me for all this? My greatest comfort is, that there is
no great fear of thy interfearing; for thy crooked knees meet so close, and
thy skew legs are so distant one from another, that it is unpossible that
thou should ever gall thine Ankles, and yet thou oftener reachest them than
thou rubbest my Shinnes: and if I should now offer to play at In and In, we
should the next day see you upon the Pillery look out. But thou think to
keep me like a Mouse in thy Binne, but if thou hopest for any such thing, thou will find thy Cake to be but Dowe; for howsoever thou make the Paste, leave
me alone to take order to lay the Leven, and to make the Proverb good; Who
eats worse Bread than the Baker? What does this gravel you? But why do I
trouble my self to an unsifted, and therefore an unsanctified man: Alas, my
anger lasts no longer than one of his Bakers Bakings; and therefore for the
present I Will give over. I am afraid I have been somewhat too tedious in the
former, and therefore I will strive to be more briefer in the following; and
therefore to contract a long circumstance into a less compass, more succinct
and compendious receive them thus: and I thus pursue my discourse.

A Lecture of an Inne-keepers Wife to her Husband: with a Tale of an
Inne-keeper and his wife.
Why husband, are you not ashamed to be so idle and sit in that manner, with
your hands in your bosom, and the house full of guess, it being term time,
you may be ashamed of it, if you had any honesty in you, but you have none; you
keep a company of cheating base knaves about you, to cosen your guess: the
Tapster for nicking and frothing his Jugges, and his Cans; your Chamberlain
for overreaching your guess in their reckonings; your lazy Ostler for having
a hole in the Manger, that when horses have their Oats they fall through into
a convenient place; and keeping of false measures; and you your self knows of
all this, and yet wink at it, saying, come, all trades must live; and so there
is nothing but cousening of all sides.

Husb. Wife you are very hot, I do think you want an Hostler to walk you;
you have bin a Gossiping, and have taken a Cup too much, which makes you talk
thus; do you mean to undo me, and your self too: if you continue on this
course of railing, what will your guess think? we shall by this means lose
all our Customers, and make me work in the end.


Wife. Let it work, and work again, like Ginger in a Sowes Arse, I care not,
I have enough for one; shift that shift can, I will not be questioned, and hit
in the teeth with my Gossips, and the wine I have drank at any time.


The Inne-keepers Song.
He that marries a scold, a Scold,
He has most cause to be merry;
For when she is in her fits,
He may cherish his wits
With a cup of old Canary.
Now follows the Tale.

A lusty Inne-keepers Wife, and an handsome Hostess, ready to give her guests
welcome at all seasons: at the time of taking in of Hey, having a young able
fellow to his Ostler, the good man of the Inn could not keep his wife out of
the Heyloft: at which he growing somewhat jealous, (and not altogether without
cause) demanded of her the reason why she was more of late delighted in the
treading of the Hey than before she had; and withal what she did make there?
for the Hey was trodden already: who laying aside her wonted scoulding for the
present, and made him this smiling answer: What an ignorant Coxe-combe Husband,
are you grown of late? What I pray you should a young man, and a young woman
do, when they are together in an Hey-loft? Which doubtful answer put him into
a worse quandary, than if she had entered directly with him into a quarrel.

Of a Tobacco man's wife to her Husband.
A Tobacco woman was wont to borrow from her neighbor the Apothecary, the name
of Glister Pipe, and tell him he took his Tobacco the wrong way, for he should
rather take it at his tail than at his mouth, for it was the best medicine for
the Wind-cholick, and compared him to a smoky fellow, and the next degree to a
Chimney-sweeper' and complained of him that though she all the day long kept
her self sweet and clean, yet he came home every night with a foul and
stinking Pipe: which he not able, or at least not willing to endure, called her
durty flut, and said she neither knew her manners nor duty; to which she
replied, no manners with a mischief, and duty in the Devils name; you
Owley-Glasse, before next June, I Will teach you to light your Tobacco with
nothing but Juniper. And had not a Customer then come in, she had been more
large in her Lecture.

A Pewterers wife and a Poulterers wife, prating of their Husbands over a Pint
of Wine.
TWo Gossiping women the one wife to a Pewterer, the other a Poulterer, meeting
in the market began to renew old acquaintance, and after many an how do you?
they agreed to join their half pints a piece and to go over to the next
Tavern, where being set in a private room, and calling for a pint of
Muskadell and a roll, the one began as follows, and I pray you sister (for
so we called, when we were maidservants in an house together) how does your good
man and you agree? For mine own part, I was not at the first so mad to be
married, as I find now leisure to repent it: in troth replied the other, and I
find my case and yours to be much about one, good husbands are thick fowne,
but they come up but thin, and there is show of a great harvest when there is
but little corn, and that I have found to my cost; for (said the Pewterers wife
if I were to marry again twenty times over, I would never have an hammerman
whilst I lived, nor I (said the other) a Poulterer, he is one of the most
slovinglist fellows, and deals so much in foul, that I can make him keep
nothing clean about him, nay when he should come to bed to me, me thinks he
smells like his stale poultry, and what woman of fashion (for you know sister I
was a choice piece when you knew me first) is able to endure it, there she
paused, and then the other began, and said, and you know I might have had
matches, and good ones too, before I met with this Dromedary to live in a
Pewterers house, where there is such rapping and knocking early and late, one
had better dwell in Crooked-lane or amongst the Brasiers in Loath-bery; nay it
loathes my very stomach to think on it, and the rather when I find by proof,
that these who deal altogether in metal, have no metal at all in them; for
he has been this two years and upward, to beat out a boy, or hammer out a
girl and cannot: troth my poultry ware is even cookt with the same sauce
(says the other:) but I pray you what words of Art have you for him when he
angers you: who answered, because he is somewhat purblind, sometimes I call
him Owl, and Booby, and now and then saucer-ey'd slave and platter-fac'd
rascal, ask him if the great baby means still to be fed with spoone meat,
and the like, nay I never greatly studdy for his words, I cut his livery out of
the next cloth that comes to hand: and I (says the Poulterers wife) follow
the same course to an heir, there goes but a bare pair of sheeres betwixt
them: to give him his style, I need go no further then his stall; for if he
vex me, I call him Goose, and Widging, and Dotrell, and Woodcock, (no other
then he brings with him) nay if he moves me much (as that which angereth him
most) I call him Capon; but said the other, never Cock of the game I warrant
you; to which was replied, no I will see him in the pit first, which word may
carry a double meaning: at which the drawer came in and asked them what do you
lack? when both spoke at once and said, either of us a good husband: the drawer
made answer, if you have not good husbands, I would you had such as you like
good Gentlewomen; God a mercy honest drawer, for that word I will drink to
thee, and thou shall pledge me in a fresh cup of wine, come draw another pint
of the same Sack as you did before; nay said the Pewterers wife, let us not
outrunne the Constable, for I protest I have not above three pence in my purse:
it is no matter said the Poulterers wife, hang money it is not that I stand
upon, the next customer that comes shall pay for this pint: I sister, said the
Pewterers wife you have money at will, but I can get none, unless I save it
when I go to market, or at such times when my husband is foxed, that I borrow
a shilling or two out of his pocket that he does not once think of, for by my
troth, he will not give me a penny extra ordinary to drink a pint of wine
with a friend, nor have I any way to get any money but what I have told you,
nor do I stir out of doors from one weeks end to the other, unless to
market and so back again: in troth said the Poulterers wife I will not be
mewed up like a hawke, for I will both have money at my command, and go abroad
when I please, and never give an account where I have been; I marry said the
Pewterers wife you spend the week merrily: I must confess I do, said the
Poulterers wife, did you never here the merry saying of good old women; and
how they spend the week about: no indeed said the Pewterers wife; then I will
tell you, said the Poulterers wife how; thus you must spend the week, and
every day in the week.

You know that Monday is Sundays brother.

Tuesday is such another.

Wednsday you must go to Church and pray.

Thursday is half holi-day.

On Friday it is too late to begin to spin.

Then Saturday is half holi-day again.

Well said sister, I commend thee for thy wit, here is to thee one cup of Sack
the more for this merry saying: I come good sister, and drink it off, it will
make you have a light heart and a merry countenance, and kind hearted to your
husband: and so they called for a reckoning, paid, and for that time parted.

A Lock-smiths wife to her husband.
A Lock-smith a sturdie blunt fellow, and yet one that had not the trick to
tame a shrew, and yet was as jealous over her as any could be (over his wife)
that was tied to wear none but yellow stockings; and she one way as perverse
as he the other peevish, would ordinarily call him Vulcan, Cyclops and the
like, persuading him he halted though he did not, nay would not spare then to
abuse him when he was most busy at the Forge, and tell him he was as teastie
as his Tongs, headed like his hammer, his cheeks blown up like his bellows,
and if he touched her, that his fingers pincht like his pinsers; nay that there
was but one degree remoov'd, (that was the Collier,) betwixt him and the
Devil: which he with great impatience enduring, lest scoulding and began to
school her as follows: wife it is not your tongue but your tail that I
fear; women ought to keep an hatch before the door, to have their breasts
bard, their hearts locked, and every suspicious place bolted; who had not the
patience to hear him any further, but interrupted him and said, and what of
all this goodman snickup, that cannot set the door upon the right hinges; here
is a coil with your bars, your bolts, and your locks, I know none of all
these locks thou speak of, but every Tapster and Ostler, has as good a key,
as the best Smith of you all to open.

The Smiths advice to his neighbors.
He that has a good wife, make much on her,
Carry her to the Alehouse and bestow nothing on her,
If she has any money take it all from her,
And if she has none, fling her upon the fire and burn her.
Skimmingtons Lecture to her husband which is the errand scold.
What not a word this morning, are you all alike, drunk and sober, cannot you
speak, or have you lost your tongue, you may be ashamed, had you any grace in
you at all, to be such a common drunkard, a pisse-pot, a beast, nay worse then
a beast, for they can tell when they have sufficient, but thou can not tell;
every day foxed and at night brought home by a watchman; and the next morning
you are then a little crop-sick, and then to cure your squeezy stomach, you
get a hair with the same dog, you know what I mean you drunken sot, a cup of
the same wine burnt or muld that you drank raw over night, this you call
Physic and say it is good and wholesome once a month, and this is your course
of life, from one weeks end to the other. As I am a sinner I am ashamed of thee
thou art such a noted Tavern hunter; and such a nasty beast thou make thy
self, that I even loath thee every time I see thee in that pickle; fie upon
thee I could spit upon thee if it were not for shame, and speech of people; by
this fire that burns I will make thee ashamed and declare thy base actions and
course of life to all companies wheresoever; I come or go: thou art bewitched
to the Tavern, and to such base company that have no regard or care of their
wives and family at home.

Husb. Good wife forbear your violent and raging speeches, I confess I am in
a fault, but it shall be so no more; I am sorry for it, I will take a new
course with my self and forsake all ill company, and forswear drinking any
wine, if you will be but patient for this time I will amend all; I pray speak
no more at this time good wife.


Wife. I scorn to be a good wife to such a perpetual drunkard, that is
drunk ordinarily twice a a day, and never comes home, unless it be to
sleep, and then out again, and be drunk within two or three hours after,
as bad as you were before: I would you had but a looking-glass to see how you
look now you have been a foxing; or that you would remember what anticke and
apish tricks you play, when you are in this case: you are never kind to me,
but when you are fudled, and then you can cogge and dissemble with me, to have
your own will or what you want: when your head aches the next morning, or a
fart wring you by the breeceh, then pray hold my head dear wife: then you are
sick, and must have a Posset made you; but instead of a Posset, I will provide
you a Crab-tree Cudgel; and if that will not do any good of you, I then will
have a Rope and Butter, that if one slip, the other may hold; it is an ease
matter for to Lam-baste your drunken hide when you cannot stand; then I will
domineere over you; for I see there is no other way, but by force to make you
leave this vein of drinking drunk; therefore I will have no longer patience,
nor talk much to spend my spirits: But I will do more: Come sirrah, tell me
first in what company you were in yesterday, from nine of the Clock in the
morning, till twelve at night. Then secondly, tell me what Tavern you were
at. Then thirdly what Wine you drank. Then lastly, what it cost you all the
day in expenses; and what you had to eat, for it is impossible you could be
all that while at a Tavern, and eat nothing.


Hush. Nay by my troth wife, I cannot call to mind all these several
circumstances: some I can give you account of; some I cannot, nor will not.


Wife. You cannot, nor you will not. Nay now you drunken slave, I have taken
you upon the advantage, I will now try whether you or I shall be master: I
will not now be satisfied with any reason; nor no words shall prevail, but now
blows shall: how do you like that tell me: nay now a little of the other
side, that the one side may not mock the other.


Come Sirrah, you are a Drunkard, and spend all your money
And when you come home you call me your honey.
But all shall not serve thee, for have at thy pate,
My Ladle of the Crab-tree, shall teach thee to cogge and to prate.
Husband.
O good wife forbear, I will be very ample,
And to all ill husbands I Will prove an example
Wife.
Well do, and see you do so, and you shall see, I
We Will never her after cause you to kneel and to cry.
This she spoke to her maidservant, out of his hearing.
Ah, hah, have I got the master now? I will hold it, while I have it, and
brag and tell my other neighbors wives of it, that they may do the like to
their Husbands, as I have done to my white-liver'd, faint-hearted husband,
gramarcy, this stout heart of mine: and I do thank the Fates that they
decreed he should have no courage in him at this time that I took him to
task: for had he but offered to have made resistance, or strove with me, he
might have very easily wrung this Crab-tree Ladle out of my hands, and have
basted me with it, as I have done him: I see it is good sometimes to put on a
bold face, and a resolute courage, though in a desperate and doubtful action:
For who would have imagined that I should be the conqueror, had they seen thy
Master and my self stand together: now the Proverb is very true; the gray
mare is the better horse; for indeed I was very angry, and full of wrath, and
wrath is commendable, when the occasion is just, as it was now on my side; for
we little women are soon hot, and our hearts are near our mouths, and
speak our minds, and do our does, and then we have done; for anger is no
infirmity, nor is it to be held a capital Crime: but for a woman to persevere
in her anger, that is an infirmity, and subject to the censure of the Law. This
Act of mine may prove advantageous to me, and may work much upon my Husbands
thoughts, and him make somewhat better, then ever he was since his mother bound
his head: for he finds now at the first what he shall trust to always, if
he once cross me in my intentions: it is a notable good thing, and worth
your observation, Hussy, to know how to provide a remedy for a calamity, I
should never have rid thy Master from that course of ill-husbandry, but by
this means: and I must still threaten him, and keep him in awe; for that body
which is accustomed to patience, or to his kind of usage, will never forsake
any place for pain or travile whatsoever. I have heard many men say, that a
woman and a Spannell, the more thy are beaten, the better they will love their
Masters: I have now tried conclusions, and have once crossed that Proverb; and
will try whether my husband will love me the better yea or no: and now I Will
persuade him, that the more a man is beaten, and a Wall-nut-tree, the better
and larger fruit may be expected from the one, and the more obedience and
love from the other: for do but hang a dog in a Crabbe-tree, and he will
never love verjuce after: so let every woman fall upon her husband, not only
in bare railing words, but do it in action, and say it on to the purpose, he
will ever after be afraid of coming home so late drunk, I will warrant you: a
woman that has such a husband, ought rather to be a Shrew than a sheep: for
when they find that a woman is of a mild disposition, and will not talk to
them, and tell them of their faults roundly, they do but make Asses and
Coxecombes of them, and laugh at them behind their backs, and brag to their
companions, that they can persuade their wives to any thing; and tell them a
tale of a Tub, and make them believe any thing as they say to be true:
Therefore judge you now, Hussy, whether I do not deserve praise for this days
work yea or no.

On Skimmingtons love to her Neighbors.
Skimmington with more than a common love,
Her neighbors ease, and honor does promote:
By common fame this case we plainly prove.
For often he rides, that else would go on foot.
A discreet and modest wives directions to her husband, who was an Aldermans
Deputy, and a Common-counsellman, for keeping ill company.
Dear and loving husband, I have long time beheld your uncivil carriage, and
past it over with modesty and silence: when the wine has got possession of the
chiefest part of man, I mean the brain, that then you are not your own
keeper, nor have power neither of your words or actions; I know very well, that
you are a man, that (when you are not intoxicated) is sensible and
understanding enough in many worldly affairs, and know how to behave your
self in all companies whatsoever: you have a good voluable tongue of your
own, and can tell how to order or arbitrate any difference or matter of
consequence when you are requested thereto; but when you are in this vein of
drinking, you are not then the same man for sobriety that the whole City and
parish where you dwell takes you to be: you know your own discretion, but you
do not know your own indiscretion: for words without good effects, is like a
great water which drowneth the people, and does it self no profit; so you that
will punish others for being drunk, and make them pay a Fee to the poor, are
in like case not to be borne withal: for he that passes measure in
drinking; is no more master of his own thoughts, or of his tongue; and without
shame he speaks of all dishonest things, and such as are unseemely: and in
this case a man becomes a Child: it is a thing of exceeding great difficulty,
for a man to conceal and hide his own ignorance: but much more difficult it
is for a man to conceal any thing when he has drunk well: you must not be
too forward to speak in the Vestry when you have bin a drinking store of wine,
for then you lispe, and clip the Kings English; for at that time every man
takes notice of your weakness, for then you make that little member your
tongue the discoverer of your own folly; for when you have spoken, the words
that you have uttered and delivered, are no longer yours, but those that
observe them; nor are they left to your construction and meaning, though you
think no harm, but to their interpretation that hear them: Good speeches are
the image of the mind; therefore the temperance of the tongue and silence
ought to be great, and men ought to use and employ their ears oftener than
their tongues: therefore my good husband, observe but this, that it is not good
to be too prompt and forwards in speaking, unless you be called to it: my
reason is, because many words and much speech, is an apparent sign of folly;
for neither words nor wind will fill a Bushel. I have observed it diverse
times, and I have much mused, that when you have drunk a cup of strong Beer in
the morning next your heart, that you have shaked your head, and made a sour
face: when you have had it in your stomach; you have said that it made you
heart-burn'd, and it is nothing else but your drinking of Wine that does so
inflame your stomach, that if you do drink any other cooler liquor, then it
qualifies the former heat, and washes and cleanses the slime from off your
stomach, which makes it as it were raw and hear-burning, so that nothing will
agree with your stomach, but wine; and I have noted it, that it meals you are
sick, and cannot digest your meat, unless you drink some wine every meal,
and this is nothing but custom and ill Company that has brought this desire
of drinking wine upon you. At any time when you are in this case, you have no
power of your self, but the wine makes you its slave and servant, to do, and
work what it lists in your brain: it may perchance so intoxicate your senses,
that you may receive such an injury, or do such an accident, that you may
repent for it all the days of your life: when you have drunk so much what
good does it you? it makes you incapable of any thing, unless of quarrelling,
and gaming; and too much Wine does provoke lust, and when that abounds, then
some ill act of incontinencie follows; for there is nothing in man more able
to make him lose his humanity with more facility, than by his tongue, and too
much Wine: Wine is the Ratsbane of our land, and I am fully persuaded that more
dye by surfeits of Wine, than by the sword, or any other disease: where have
there been more hurts and injuries done, than by Wine? for that is the chief
cause and ground of all desperate attempts and quarrels, for when the Wine is
in, the wit is out: for the excess of Wine brings forth three sorts of
Grapes, the first of pleasure, the second of drunkenesse, and the third of
sorrow: One thing more, my sweete-heart, and I have done; you know I never
twitted you in the teeth, as some women do, the next day, for your being late
abroad; and come home so, that you have not been able to help your self; and
have forgotten the next morning when you have been recovered, to pay the
tribute you own to me by Wedlock: I have been content and said nothing, and
put up al with silence, for silence is a gift without danger or peril: but
indeed husband, I must ingeniously confess, I have paid it with thinking: I
have read, that it is a rare virtue to know how, and when to be silent: I
never repented me to have held my tongue, but I have oftentimes bin sorry that
I have spoken: just like as narrow mouthed vessels which are longest in
filling, keep their liquor the better: so are women's tongues that are slow in
talking, get the most credit and commendations: for all, or most men know, that
empty vessels make the greatest sound: so they that have the emptiest Scull,
and the least wit, are the greatest bablers.

A Lecture of an Informers wife to her Husband.
SIrrah, you are a very Rascal, I will set you out to the full, I will make all
thy friends ashamed of thee: I will give them to understand, that they may know
as well as my self, when thou have money, and when thou have none: for you know
you have but two Cloaks, one of Stuff, the other of Cloth, and when you have
one at home, or on your back, the other is commonly at pawn at the Brokers:
thou have no money, but what thou gettest by shirking and rooking when men are
drunk; or else thou keep stakes while men are at some game or other, and
then the whilst they are at their sport thou runnest quite away: when thou do
wear thy stuff Cloak in winter, or on a rainy day, then may thy companions
know thou have no money, nor can redeem thy cloth Cloak: then in the Summer
time, when thou do wear thy Cloth Cloak, it is the very same case with
thee; in Dock, out Nettle; while one is at home, the other is in Lavender in
Longlane. Thou might have been ashamed to have left thy honest Trade and
profession of being a Tailer, only to live idly, and walk up and down
streets and turn knave for a groat a day: I will imblazon you name for you;
you are an Ass, a Shirke, a Rooke, a Decoy, a Buffoon, a white Liver'd slave:
You can talk and domineere at home when you are in your Cups, like a Lion, but
abroad amongst your companions you seem to be as meek as a Lamb: but
indeed you are a mere Sheep head, or rather a Rams head in a Wolfes Skin:
a fly youth, a jeering double-lookt companion: thy Father was an Animal, and
thy mother some lazy droane, and thou thy self must needs be of Brocklyes
Breed, better to hang than to feed; when you come home, you sit before me
like Hum Drum, or like the Cat in the Cupboord; and when you are abroad, and
almost drunk, then you begin to show your mad tricks; then no ground will
hold you, leaping over Tables and stools, or any thing that is in your way,
but I hope you will one day break your neck; and if you do so, y faith I will
then have my own will, and go to bed Mistress, and rise again Master; the
next husband that I have shall find it so I Will warrant him: And when thou go
to be buried, I will not shed a tear for thee, thou have so hardened my heart
against thee now in thy life time: I do think in my conscience, my heart is
grown so hard as thy forehead; and I think I have shed so many tears by thy
means, that I can weep no more, unless I get a good sharp Onion in my
handkerchiefe, and so force some tears from me for fashion sake: And then I
will hire some poor conditioned Poet or other to make an Epitaph on thee, as
they have done on some of thy fellows which are dead already, as thou may
plainly see and read.

On an Informer who dyed for want of employment.
On Monday morning he with sorrow died,
Because on Sunday no abuse he spied:
For though he often took bribes death none would take,
Now here he lies, ready to stink at the stake.
Let Tapsters rejoice, and sing merry Catches,
For the Informer here is in a dead sleep laid:
What of all that, both good and bad have matches,
Though he be gone there is more left of his trade:
It was but a money matter, so it is still,
Twelve pence a quarter, use what pots you will.
A Lecture of a Countrymans wife, who was a Gentleman's Baily in the Country.
SIrrah, I do know something of you, that now I will tell, and make known to
the whole Country, seeing you have so angered me, and will not let me have my
will, I will not forbear to speak that, which shall make you loose your Office
of a Baily, and make you be whipped through the Town at a horse Tail: you
understand me, sirrah, you Rascal, do you not? Now you stand as though Butter
would not melt in your Mouth, and give never a word: I will so nettle you, that
you had better wished you had lain at Nettle-bed all night: do you remember
how you rise in a Summer morning before day peep, on purpose to intise your
neighbors hogs into your liberty, by carrying a few Beans or Pease in your
hat, and but letting the poor creatures smell on them, they presently follow
you into your liberty; and then you pound them, and by this means you get your
fees, and make your self rich.

Husb. I prithee good Wife hold thy peace, and thou shall have any thing that
thou have a desire unto; name it, and here is money to pay for it.


Wife. Sirrah, it is now too late, you shall not think to make me hold my
tongue; I care not for your proffers now: I will make the whole town
acquainted with your knavery: I will set you out in your colors; for you live
by bribery and extortion, not doing your Office as you ought, and according to
the oath you have took, but live by rooking, and cheating, and couzning of
poor people.


Husb. I prithee good Doll hold thy peace, thou have too much tongue; sure thou
were borne in a Mill, thy tongue is so loud and shrill: I did hear before we
were married that thou would prove a scold, and that you had ever a shrewes
tongue in your mouth, but I would never believe it, but now I find it too true.


Wife. Marry, a woman had need to have two tongues that has such a husband as
I have, that grumbles and mumbles at every penny I lay out upon my self: one
tongue is too little to let you know how you use me and likewise to tell you
of the other side of your base conditions; for you abuse the whole Country, and
the Gentleman you serve: you heard I was a shrew, I had better be so than
mealy-mouthed, for then you would make a right fool of me, a mere Ass, and
bear all the burden, while you go up and down from Alehouse to Alehouse,
to defraud your Master of his Wesses and Straies, and put up the money in your
own Pocket: but I will say no more to you, but I Will go and tell the Major of
the Town, and he shall call you in question, and I will bear witness against
thee my self.


Husb. When I was a Batchellour I only looked to my horse and my saddle:

But now I am a marriman, I have got a scould, a child, and a Cradle.

Oh, that I were unmarryed again: some men get good wives, and money to boot,
but I neither got money, nor yet a good wife, only discord and dissension, and
in stead of Lord and Master she calls me rogue and Rascal: therefore I must
be content, and bear my cross patiently; knowing that it is better for me,
and all men else, to overcome a cross wife by prudence than by force. And
therefore let no man when he seeks for a wife, ask, What has she, but what
is she; for virtue and quietness is wealth enough, and better than riches and
greatness: for an inequality of birth or riches, does often cause strife and
dissension.


A Brokers wife to her Husband.
OVt tho unconscionable villain, as I am an honest woman: there is not such
another Jew in the City of Malta; thirty in the hundred will not serve your
unsatiable covetous desire, but you must take threescore at the least, and
swear you can hardly live on it. The name of Broker was well given to you: for
you were Broak before you set up; and Curs for biting so hard, ever since you
set up: Now you scorn to be called Brokers, but you must have a new name
given you with a Murraine to you: you must now be called Fibbers, and one that
deals in wholesale: You take no pawnes you say, when all thy living is by
extortion, and nothing else but by taking pledges and pawnes, I will make it
good thou art a Broker, though thou may term thy self what thou please:
thou wast first an Adamite, thou know what I mean, A gentleman Tailor; then
by chance you eat a Spider, and flew up with Iacksons hens, and not worth a
groat; and now you have got a few clothes which came out of rogue Lane, that
dropped out of the hang-mans wardrobe, that what with selling, and lending upon
pawnes, you now get the Devil and all; I will discover your villainy, you
drunken Ass you: I will make you stay at home, or else I will know why I
shall not: You lie upon the lurch to buy stolen goods, and receive them into
your house at midnight, and then bid not half the worth of them; and if you
cannot get them at your own rate or price, you will make the party believe you
will send for the Constable, and apprehend him for suspicion of Felony; and
thus by shirking and cheating you get your estate; and if you get the commodity
of them at your own rate, then you will make much of them, and will let them
out at your back door, that they may not be seen. Thou art a slave of the
world, and I will have thee tossed in a Blanket; a mere Caterpiller of the earth:
If thou take a gown of any value to pawn, thou will be sure to geld it
before it go away from thee: If it be a Satin Peticoate laid with silver or
gold lace, thou will pick the Spangles from off it, or else steal a breadth,
or at the least half a breadth out of it; and if it be questioned, then thou will forswear it, and lie abominable; therefore I think thou art a limb of
some evil spirit, or else the Devil got thee in spite, and brought thee up
in shame ever since; thou have such dissembling Tricks in thee, no man has the
like, I think, that lives. Thy pedigree I have heard of, thy Grandfather was a
Rat-catcher, and thy grandmother was a poor old woman that cried Small-coale a
penny a pecke up and down the street: and I do think thy mother was some
oister-wife, and thy father a Chimnie sweeper, thou have such base conditions
in thee; thou art a scoundrell, beetell-browd, and a ramme-headed fellow: there
is a bob for your sirrah.

Husb. Good wife forbear now, and speak no more at this time; you see I give
yon leave to say any thing; come, let thee and I be friends, let me kiss thee.


Wife. And are you grown so kind just now? if you must needs kiss, take me
about the middle and kiss the heaviest end; for you shall kiss no where else;
when you are drunk then any body you meet with is as good as your wife, then
you care not whom you kiss and embrace: Sirrah, I hear you are a Mutton
monger, and run after laced Mutton; but I hope all your knavery one day will
be discovered, though now you dance in a net: if you do not use me better,
and as a man should use his wife, I will have you indicted at the Sessions for
receiving of stolen goods: or else for some of your other base tricks, I will
make you look through a two inch board on a Market day.


Husb. I prithee Sweet heart speak softly, let me have no more of these words;
you may touch me so far, as to call my life in question; you ought not to
reveal your husbands secrets in any case, especially those of such weight as
this is: If I have bin in any fault, I will labor to amend it, and it shall be
no more so.


Wif. Live and learn then, and at last be hanged, and forget all; you say now
that you will do no more of these base actions, but to morrow I shall have you
in the same condition again: drunk all day at the Tavern, and then come home
like a hog all be mired with dirt; and so what you get one way basely, you
spend the other way as scurvily: for money gotten as you get it, never will
thrive.


The husbands wish.
Bedlam, God bless thee,
Thou wa^ts naught but wit,
Which being got, from whipping thou art quit.
As for thee Bridewell,
I cannot much dispraise thee,
For thou feedest the hungry,
And do firke the lazy.
And for thee Newgate, I can not much complain
For once a month thou ridst men out of pain.
But from a wicked woman's tongue, God defend me,
To Bedlam, Newgate, Bridewell rather send me.
For there in time Wit,
Work, or Law sets free,
But from a woman's malice, neither wit, work, nor
Law gives liberty.
A Lecture between a Peddler and his wife, as they walked on the high way.
1. Wife. Husband, what money have thou in thy Purse?


2. Husb. Wife, I have but a shilling, two groats, and three farthings, and a
good stock too.


3. Wife. You had twenty five shillings Husband, what a Devil is become of it?


4. Husb. O wife I Will tell


A Cove and a Mort Whidling together as they budged upon the Pad.
1. Cove. MOrt, what lower have thou in thy Bung?


2. Cove. I have a board, two stagges, a Make, and onejon, and a rum stock too.


3. Cove. You had twenty five board Cove, what a Ruffin is budged with it?


4. Cove. O Mort, I whid to thee: I went to the Alehouse, and there I spent all
my money amongst good fellows, and pretty wenches. But how shall we save this,
and get more?


5. Wife. I Will tell thee thou shallow-braind fellow, thou must beg at Farmers
doors for Bread and Cheese, or a Cup of small Beer, or a Hens egg, and
speak boldly for it: and lie in some Barn upon straw all night, and go away
early in the morning: And rather then want Meat, or Drink, steals Hens,
Duckes, Geese, or Capons: And if you see to thee: I budged to the bowsing Ken,
and there I bowsed all my lower amongst the Bean Coves, and Doxes: But how
shall we save this, and get more?


5. Mort. I Will tell thee queere Cove, thou must maund at the Gigger for Pannum
and Casum, or a cheat of queere bowse, or Kacklen Cheat, and whid rumpsie; and
then lib in the Strummel, all the darkmans, and budge a beak in the light man's:
and rather then want Rum-peck, or Bean boose, mill the Cacklers, coy the
Quack, or Duds: and if you tower any sheets lie upon the hedge, steal them and
run away: If thou want money, then go to the next market or fair, and there
pick a Pocke, or cheat some Countryman; and then go to the Alehouse, and
drink merrily and jovially: But husband be sure you save me some money when
you are at the Alehouse.


Husb. But do you hear wife: what if I should be taken in stealing of
Hens, Ducks, Geese, or Capons, or Clothes, or picking a Pocket, and so be
carried to prison: wife what shall I then say?


any states lie upon the Crack, mill them, and budge a beak: And if thou want
lower, budge to the next Vile, and there nip a Bung, or cloy a Culley; then
budge to the bowsing Ken, and boose rumsie and beanely: but Cove be sure thou
tip me some Lower, when you budge back from the Ken.

6. Cove. But sto Mort: what if I should be Cloyed in the milling of Cacklers,
Quacklers, or Duds, or nipping a Bung, and so be cloyed, and budged to the
Naskin: Mort what shall I whid then?


7. Wife. Peace husband, peace, if you be carried to prison, I will go to our
companions, and speak to them for some money to release thee out of prison: and
then we will go to the next City, where we may steal safely.


8. Husb. Oh thou art a good wife, and speak bravely: I will venture an
hanging before I will want money, meat, or good drink, or clothes for my Wife
and Children: I care not for any Constable or Beadle; nor do I fear the
whipping post.


7. Mort. Sto Cove, if thou budge to the Naskin, I will bing to the Coves and
the Morts, and whid to them for Lower, that thou may budge out of the Naskin:
and then budge into the Rum-vile, where the Coves and the Morts do not tower
us: and there we may cloy brinsy.


8. Cove. As thou art a Bean Mort, and whids rumpsie, I will venture a
training, or a noosing, 'ere I will want Lower, peckage, bean bowse, or duds
for my Morts, and my Kinchins. I do not fear any Harmanbeck, or Pug, nor do I
care for Cly the Ierke.


Of two young Virgins talking of their Sweet-hearts and Sueters.
Two pretty young toward Girls, newly come into their Teenes, not Sisters, but
Neighbors Children, and of acquaintance from their Cradles, and no doubt but
the forwardest Children their Father had: being one day invited (with their
Parents) to a Feast: Dinner being done, and the Guests being severally
employed, either in discourse or other exercise of game or drinking, they two
retired themselves from the rest into the Garden, and choosing out a private
(but pleasant) walk, they began their discourse as follows:

1. Maid. And I pray you how old are you? Lord, how are you grown of late since
the last Quarter! Do you wear no Corkes, nor no Polonie-heeles? why you show
as if you walked upon chippeenes, nay, you grow not only tall, but proper
withal, so that methinks it is high time you looked after an Husband. The
second made answer, Ill weeds grow apace, and for Husbands we may look long
enough after them, ere they will cast an eye upon us, I mean any that are
worth the having. But what a fool am I to speak us, in the Plural number,
that for ought I see, shall be forced to continue in the Singular whilst I
live. Indeed said the other, Ego and tu are more frequent than Nos and Vos
amongst us Virgins: we may say, A lack the while, for we both know what is
wanting; for what do we all this while but loose time, which might be better
employed (I wis) than to dream of shadows, and never know what the substance
means: it will be long enough ere our Parents will provide for us, therefore
methinks it is time at these years that we look out for our selves. She
replied, and truly Sister I am of your mind; but I pray you, had you never
any Suitors yet? Suitors (answered she) O yes, but simple ones, Heaven knows:
There comes to me last day a dapper Tailer, and would feign have been doing;
he would have took measure of me before there was stuff to make me a gown;
a pretty little Hopper me thumb it was, but I quickly gave him his answer,
having vowed to make choice of a Man, or never to marry. And then there was a
sweet Youth, a Comfetmaker, that came to court me with a paper of
Sugarplummes, but him I could not relish because of his rotten Teeth. And for a
Scrivener, there shall never any Indentures be drawn betwixt him and me drunk
nor sober, for in all his Leases (if you have observed it) where you shall once
read Always provided, you shall find at the least twenty times
Notwithstanding: Nor I an Haberdasher of small wares said the other; I will
have one that deals by wholesale, or none.

Another of my Sweethearts came to me the other day, and said, Sweet Mistress,
one word in your ear: Nay said I, speak it openly, I am not afraid of what
you can say: no good sweetheart said he, let me tell it you privately; then I
gave him the hearing, because I hoped the sooner to be rid of the fools
company: and what was it, but he told me, he would tell me such a Tale in my
ear that would do me good at the heart, and what was it, but of an old
passage between Venus and Adonis, and that was all he did: only he presented
me with a Copy of Verses, and many Letters of Complements in writing, which I
took on purpose to laugh at, and withal he entreated me to accept of them,
for they were of his own invention. And when I had perused them, I remembered
that I had read them in Print, for he stole them out of diverse books of
Complements on my knowledge, thinking thereby that I should account him witty,
and the sooner to get my love: but I sent him away with such a flout, that I
think he will scarce come again this Week: for in troth if ever I marry, I Will
have a proper man, and one that I can fancy well, or else I will never consent
to wed. In Troth Sister, said the other, I would I had never any one that did
ask me the question; I do think I was borne under an evil or melancholy
Planet, every one can get sweetehearts but I: I am now sixteen years old, it
cost me a Groat to the Knave the Clarke for searching the Book; for my Father
told me that I was but fifteen years old, but I found it that I was above
sixteen years, in troth I cannot lie any longer alone. I do so bite the
sheets, and toss up and down in the bed like a Cat when she is pinched by
the tail. I have heard that in former times the Roman Law was, that they did
allow that a Man might marry at eighteen, and a Maid at twelve years of age,
I would it were in use with us in our Country: But men now a days are grown
fainthearted, and dare not presume to ask the question, but let Maids alone
till we pine, and wrong our selves, and make our moanes, for women are not
perfect without men, though men are without women.

Quest. But sister, pray tell me, what think you of a Grocer? An. That as
Hogs are frank't with Pease and Akornes, so he would fat me up with Figs
and Raisons.

Qu. What think you of a Fishmonger? A. That of the contrary he would make me
as lean as Lent, and look all the year after with a Good Fridayface. Qu.
What of a Goldsmith? An. The Gold I like well, but for the Smith, I care not if
he were packt amongst the other mettall-men.

Q. What then of a Jeweller? An. Ey marry now you speak to some purpose, for
plain dealing is a Jewel, howsoever many a one that uses it, may die a
beggar. Q. What of an Upholster? A. That his Wife, though she fare hard, shall
be sure to lie soft, and if she be wise, she will find how to feather her Nest
I warrant her.

Qu. What think you of a Draper? An. As of an honest conscionable man, for
they allow to every Yard the overplus of London measure. Q. What of a
Silke-man? An. As of a Silke-worme; if his Wife prove too fine for his finger,
he may say, he has spunne a fair thread, and so he turn Butterfly, and she
Spinster. Q. What of a Merchant? An. Of Eele-skinnes do you mean? Q. No, I
mean the noble Trade of the Merchant adventurers. An. When he goes a wooing,
God send him good shipping, and that his Vessel leake not betwixt Wind and
Water. Qu. And what think you of a Clarke? An. How, of a Church? Qu. No, nor of
a Chapel. A. Then I guess your meaning; I would not have a Clarke of the
Chancery, because he might trouble my conscience; nor a Clarke of the Arches,
for he would rather make my will, than give me my will: nor a Clarke of the
Check-her, for he would be always crossing me: but if any, a Clarke of the
peaces Clarke, a Clarke of the Rolls, or of the Pipe-office. At this the
Guests came into the Garden, and they were forced to break off their discourse.

A new trick to tame a Shrew.
TWo nigh neighbors, that had been long brothers in affliction, as being
sick of one disease, had many times made complaints the one to the other (but
all in vain) of the churlish and crabbish disposition of their wives, what
Shrewes they were, and themselves were made no better than Subjects to the
Smock: but at the length, one of them having the better Spirit, vowed to
himself that he would never give over the combat, until he had got the
Conquest; and so indeed it happened. After which, spying his friend and
neighbor in the fields a far off, he cried unto him aloud, Victory, victory:
the other not knowing what he meant by it, drew near unto him, and demanded
of him the reason of that joyful acclamation? who told him, that after many
dangerous conflicts, at length he was Conqueror: and Bold-face his wife, was
compeld to cease all claim to the breeches: which his friend would not believe,
till having faced it out with some small Oaths: who when he had both heard,
and believed him, he was desirous to know all the Circumstance: then he
proceeded thus.

Coming home somewhat late according to my custom, my minion began to
mander; to which I said but little at first; but note what followed after. When
presuming on my wonted patience, the Hen (forsooth began to Cackle, and I set
out a throat to crow; and loud I was indeed, and she got no advantage on me
that way: and not knowing whether I was in jest, or earnest, she scornfully
smild upon me, and called me old Coxecombe: to which I answered; Most surely if I
have a Comb on my head, I have Spurs on my heels; and still as she spurd me
a question, I kicked her an answer.

I like the beginning well (says his neighbor) but the end tries all things:
But I pray you tell me; did you not learn this at a play? Who replied, a
play? I scorn it; what I have done, I found out by my own practice, and am
able of my self to set out a Grammar with rules to prove, that the Gray mare
is no more the better horse.

Well, when she began to rail, I fell to rage, insomuch, that any wise man
would have thought us both mad; and then she said I was drunk; but she after
found by proof, that what I did was in sober sadness; and as she skreekt
out, so still she scratcht behind, where I am sure it itch't not, for I had
applied too much Arsmart already. Then I bade her come to bed, who no sooner
said she would not, but I swore she should not, and withal locked her out of
the Chamber, and there she lay all a cold frosty night on the bare boords; I
having before pricked her posteriours, that she had as good to have lain upon
Thorns.

Then said his neighbor: but how could you have the heart to use her so
hardly? The heart (quoth he) marry hang her Brocke; being over shoes, I cared
not to be over Boots; and once wet to the Ankles, to wade up to the Chin: Up I
got in the Morning, she lay along in my way grunting and groaning; when I
making as if I had stumbled at a block, gave her a sound spurnne upon the
Buttocks, and never cried her mercy: O my what do you called, said she. What
ailes Mistress Miniver, quoth I. I am sick and would have a Posser, said she.
A Posset with a pox to you, said I; you would have a Cawdle made of Calves
Eggs, would you not? Up you lazybones, we shall have you fall into the
scurvy, and then there is no cure for you but a Cudgel.

Next she called her maid to fetch her some hot water: then I stepped down, and
finding a Kettle-full seething on the fire, filled a Bowl, and brought it up to
her making her believe it was warm for her stomach, and if she would not
drink it off, I would power it down her bosom: That done, I bid her get
down the stairs, or I would set her down with her head first, and her heels
after.

But (said the other) had she the patience to endure it? Who answered, yes,
patience perforce: such as debtors have, to be hurried to prison, or thieves
to be drawn to the Gallows: I had never begun the work, but that I meant
to go through stich with it; that morning I turned away her madness, and then
she was no more a Mistress, which I knew vexed her not a little, and that which
most angered her, seemed but to please me: For I vowed, since she would be a
Devil she should be her own drudge: yes, and though his Damme said against
it.

Said his neighbor, said she nothing all this while? had I used my wife so,
all the street should have wrung, as the bells of it, for I am most sure she
has as loud a Clapper. To which he answered, what should any thing be spoke,
where nothing would be heard? and that she knew well enough; for I had drowned
her Cannon with my Thunder: But she bent her Brows, Glouted with her eyes,
first bit her lips, and then her Tongue; sometimes offered her foot, and
then her sist, but durst fall foul with neither; If she had, I threatened to
bind her hand and foot and so leave her. Then I locked up her Gowns, least she
should gadde abroad to complain to her Gossips; and the Devil a Cloth did I
leave to put about her neck, but a Dish-clout. Sometimes I set her to spinne,
till she thought the world run upon wheels, and made her say within her
self, (as she has since confessed) I have spun a fair thread, have I not? I
made her wash till she was glad to wring her hands, and rub the Pewter and
Brass till not a skellet escaped a scouting. Then I would find fault with every
thing, and be pleased with nothing: nor could she sweep so clean, but I
would find a sluts corner: nay, I left her not so much rule, as over the
roast, and the weapons that I awed her with, were the spit and the Jackeline;
insomuch, that she began at the length to be a little more plyant and
tractable, and began to change her perverse obstinacy, into a kind of
peevish obedience; for she would turn her frown into a sour smile, and in the
stead of a double, express a doubtful duty, (syrreveverence) in a kind of a
jeering and mockng courtesy.

By my faith, said his Neighbor, I should be glad of so much, and be very
thankful too; but I can compass no such matter, unless I meant to buy it
with strokes: No (said the Shrew-tamer) but I would be a man or a Mouse; a
Caesar aut nullus: this was no submission to give me satisfaction; but I
pursued it further: for what good would the knee without the heart have done
me? But I followed the scent whilst it was hot. She could not come at a shoe
to her foot, nor a hat to her head, nor a band to her neck, nor a Coat to
her back; so that she was in a perplexity to be ever kept in Prison, which she
fearing, was at length content to do any thing; and if I commanded her to
light her Candles at the wrong end: and till then I could never truly cry
victory, and boast of the Conquest. But first I must tell you, I suffered no
sleep to come near her eyes; which I learnt first of a Falkner, for Hawks
are tamed by watching only, and that will make any Haggard come to hand: and
she at this time comes as gently to the fist, as any Falcon of them all, and
may at this time be called a Tassell gentle.

Now a blessing on thine heart said his Neighbor: This is an Art you have
found out, worth all the seven liberal Sciences; and would you but keep a
school, and profess the teaching of it, clappe but your Bills upon posts, and
I make no doubt, but you will quickly have Customers out of all Countries: and
so for that time they parted.

Certain signs to know a Shrew by.
Take heed of a sour Less, whose wrinkles in her forehead comes near her
eyebrows; for the most part she is sullen, and upon my life will prove right
at straight.

Take heed of a Hawks eye, a sharp nose, and an eye that is black and
waterish, for they are true blew.

Take heed of a Bottle-nose, one whose nose turns up again like a
Shooing-horne: for if she do not after eighteen months tell you your own,
then blame me for ever after for an ignorant married man.

Take heed of one, who has a long white hand; for she will do no huswifry,
for fear she should spoil her fine fingers.

I am of Diogines opinion for marriage; that young men may not marry yet, old
men not at all: for I do wish I had never married, nor been given in
marriage: And for advice you may as well blindefold your self, and then choose,
as to have your eyesight and be deceived, for the proof of the pudding is in
the eating.

FINIS:
Tzijn siercke beenen die weelde draaghen konne.



