A DOG OF WAR.



A DOG OF WAR.



A Dog of War, OR, The Travels of Drunkard, the famous Curre of the Round-
Woolstaple in Westminster.

His Services in the Netherlands, and lately in France, with his home Return.

By John Tailor.

The Argument and contents of this Discourse is in the next Page or Leaf.

Printed by I Perse I, for O perse O, and and perse and, and are to be sold at
the Sign of the AE dipthong.

The Argument.
AN honest, well-knowing and well-knowne Soldier, (whose name for some Reasons
I conceal) dwelt lately in Westminster), in the round Woolstaple, he was a
man only for Action, but such Action as Loyalty did always justify, either
for his Prince, Country, or their Dear and near Friends or Allies; in such
noble designs He would and did often with courage, and good Aprouement employ
himself in the Low Countries, having always with him a little black Dog,
whom he called Drunkard; which Curre would (by no means) ever forsake or
leave him. But lately in these French Wars, the Dog being in the Isle of
RHEA, where his Master (valiantly fighting) was unfortunately slain, whose
death was grieved for by as many as knew him; and as the Corpse lay dead, the
poor loving Masterlesse Dog would not forsake it, until an English Soldier
pulld off his Masters Coat, whom the Dog followed to a Boat, by which means
he came back to Westminster, where he now remains. Upon whose fidelity, (for
the love I owed his deseased Master) I have writ these following lines, to
express my Adiction to the Proverb, Love me and love my Hound; I have a little
rubbed our Gull-gallant Roarers over the Coxcombes, and withal I have not
forgotten our nose-wise Prescisians: If the Dog Drunkard do a little snap at
them, I hold it their wisest way to be silent and put it up, but if they will
be maundring, let them expect what follows.

To the Reader.
REader, if you expect from hence,
For overplus of Wit or Sense,
I deal with no such Traffic:
Heroicks and Iambiks I,
My Buskinde Muse has laid them by,
Pray be content with Saphicke.
Durunkard the Dog my Patron is,
And he does love me well for this,
Whose love I take for Guerdon;
And he is a Dog of Mars, his Train.
Who has seen men and Horses slain,
The like was never heard on.
A Dog of War.
STand clear my masters ware your shinns,
For now to Bark my Muse Begins,
It Is of a Dog I write now:
Yet let me tell you for excuse,
That Muse or Dog, or Dog or Muse,
Have no intent to Bite now.
In doggrell Rimes my Lines are writ,
As for a Dog I thought it fit.
And fitting Best his Carkas,
Had I been silent as a Stoic,
Or had I writ in Verse Heroic,
Then had I been a Stark Ass.
Old Homer wrote of Froggs and Mice,
And Rablaies wrote of Nitts and Lice,
And Virgil of A Fly,
One wrote the Treatise of the Fox
Another praisd the Frenchmans Pox
Whose praise was but a Lie.
Great Alexander had a Horse,
A famous Beast of mighty force
Y cleap'd Bucephalus:
He was a stout and sturdy Steed,
And of an ex'lent Race and Breed,
But that concerns not us.
I list not write the babble praise
Of Apes, or Owls, or Popinjaies.
Or of the Catt Grimmalkin,
But of a true and trusty Dog,
Who well could faune, but never cogg,
His praise my Pen must walk in.
And Drunkard he is falsely named,
For with that Vice he never was blamed,
For he loves not god Bacchus:
The Kitchen he esteem more dear,
Then Cellers full of Wine or Beer,
Which oftentimes does wrack us.
He is no Mastiffe, huge of lim,
Or Waterspaniell, that can swim,
Nor Bloudhound or no Setter:
No Bobtayle Tyke, or Trundle rail,
Nor can he Partridge spring or Quail,
But yet he is much better.
No Daynty Ladies fifting Hound,
That liue's upon our Britain Ground
No Mungrell Cur or Shogh:
Should Litters, or whole Kennells dare
With honest Drunkard to compare,
My pen writes, marry fough.
The Otter Hound, the Fox Hound, nor
The swift foot Gray hound cared he for,
Nor Cerberus Hells Bandog;
His service proves them Curres and Tikes,
And his renown a terror strikes.
In Water dog and Land dog;
Against brave Buquoy, or stout Dampiere,
He durst have barked withouten fear
Or against the hot Count Tylly:
At Bergin Laguer and Bredha,
Against the Noble Spinola,
He showed himself not silly.
He served his Master at commands,
In the most warlike Netherlands,
In Holland, Zealand, Brabant,
He to him still was true and just,
And if his fare were but a Crust,
He patiently would knab on it.
He durst to have stood stern Ajax frown,
When wise Ulysses talked him down,
In grave Diebus illis,
When he by cunning prating won
The Armor, from fierce Tellamon,
That longed to Achilles:
Brave Drunkard, often on Gods dear ground,
Took such poor lodging as he found,
In Town, Field, Camp or Cottage,
His Bed but cold, his diet thin,
He often in that poor case was in,
To want both Meat and Pottage.
Two rows of Teeth for Arms he bore,
Which in his mouth he always wore,
Which served to fight and feed to:
His grumbling for his Drum did pass,
And barking (loud) his Ordnance was,
Which helped in time of need to.
His Tail his Ensign he did make,
Which he would often display, and shake,
Fast in his Poope vpreared:
His Powder hot, but somewhat danke,
His Shot in (sent) most dangerous rank,
Which sometimes made him feared:
Thus has he long served near and far,
Well known to be A Dog of War,
Though he never shot with Musket;
Yet Cannons roar, or Culuerings,
That whizzing through the VVelk in sings,
He slighted as a Pusse Cat
For Guns nor Drums, nor Trumpets clang,
Nor hunger, cold, nor many a pang,
Could make him leave his Master:
In joy, and in adversity
In plenty, and in poverty,
He often was a Taster.
Thus served he on the Belgia Coast,
Yet nere was heard to brag or boast,
Of services don by him:
He is no Pharisey to blow
A Trumpet, his good deeds to show,
It Is pity to belly him.
At last he home returned in peace,
Till wars, and iarrs, and scarrs increase
Twixt us, and France, in malice:
Away went he and crossed the Sea,
With His Master, to the Isle of Rhea,
A good way beyond Callice.
He was so true, so good, so kind,
He scorned to stay at home behind,
And leave his Master frustrate;
For which, could I like Ovid write,
Or else like Virgill could endite,
I would his praise illustrate.
I wish my hands could never stir,
But I do love a thankful Curre
More then a Man ungrateful:
And this poor Dogs fidelity,
May make a thankles Knave descry
How much that vice is hateful.
For why? of all the faults of Men,
Which they have got from Hells black den,
Ingratitude the worst is:
For treasons, murders, incests, rapes,
Nor any sin in any shapes,
So bad, nor so accursed is.
I hope I shall no anger gain,
If I do write a word or twain,
How this Dog was distressed:
His Master being wounded dead,
Shot, cut, and slashed, from heel to head,
Think how he was opressed.
To lose him that he loved most,
And be upon a foreign Coast,
Where no man would Releive him:
He licked his Masters wounds in love,
And from his Carkas would not move,
Although the fight did grieve him.
By chance a Soldier passing by,
That did his Masters Coat espy.
And quick away he took it;
But Drunkard followed to a Boat,
To have again his Masters Coat,
Such theft he could not brook it.
So after all his woe and wrack,
To Westminster he was brought back,
A poor half starued Creature;
And in remembrance of his cares,
Upon his back he closely wears
A Mourning Coat by nature.
Live Drunkard, sober Drunkard live,
I know thou no offense wilt give,
Thou art a harmeles dumb thing;
And for thy love I Will freely grant,
Rather then thou should ever want,
Each day to give thee something.
For thou have got a good report,
Of which there is many a Dog comes short,
And very few Men gain it;
Though they all dangers bravely bide,
And watch, fast, fight, run, go and ride,
Yet hardly they Attain it.
Some like Dominicall Letters go,
In Scarlet from the top to toe,
Whose vallour's talk and smooke all.
Who make, (God sink'em) their discourse,
Refuse, Renounce, or Dam, that is worse,
I wish a halter Choke all.
Yet all their talk is Bastinado,
Strong Armado Hot Scalado,
Smoking Trinidado.
Of Canuasado, Pallizado,
Of the secret Ambuscado,
Boasting with Brauado.
If Swearing could but make a Man,
Then each of these is one that can
With Oaths, an Army scatter:
If Oaths could conquer Fort, or Hold,
Then I presume these Gallants could
With Braggs, a Castle batter.
Let such but think on Drunkards fame,
And note therewith their merits blame,
How both are universal;
Then would such Coxcombs blush to see
They by a Dog outstrip'd should be,
Whose praise is worth rehersall.
The times now full of danger are,
And we are round ingadg'd in war,
Our Foes would feign distress us:
Yet many a stubborn mizer knave,
Will give no Coin his Throat to save,
If he were stored like Cressus.
These hidebound Varlets, worse then Turks,
Top full with Faith, but no Good works,
A crew of fond Precise-men;
In factions, and in emulation,
Caterpillars of a Nation,
Whom few esteem for wise men.
But leaving such to mend, or end:
Back to the Dog my Verse does bend,
Whose worth, the subject mine is:
Though thou a dogs life here do lead,
Let not a dogs death strike thee dead,
And make thy fatal Finis.
Thou shall be Stellifide by me,
I Will make the Dog Star wait on thee,
And in his room I Will seat thee:
When Soll does in his Progress swindge,
And in the Dog-daies hotly sindge,
He shall not over heat thee.
So honest Drunkard now adue,
Thy praise no longer I Will pursue,
But still my love is to thee:
And when thy life is gone and spent,
These Lines shall be thy Monument,
And shall much service do thee.
I loved thy Master, so did all
That ever knew him, great and small,
And he did well deserve it:
For he was honest, valient, good,
And one that manhood understood,
And did till death preserve it.
For whose sake, I Will his Dog prefer,
And at the Dog at Westminster
Shall Drunkard be a Bencher;
Where I will set a work his chapps,
Not with bare bones, or broken scapps,
But Victuals from my Trencher.
All those my Lines that Ill digest,
Or madly do my meaning wrest,
In malice, or derision:
Kind Drunkard, preethee bite them all,
And make them reele from wall to wall,
With Wine, or Maults incision.
I know when foes did fight or parle,
Thou valiantly would grin and snarle,
Against an Army adverse;
Which made me bold, with rustic Pen
Stray here and there, and back again,
To blaze thy fame in mad Verse.
It was no Auaritious scope,
Or flattry, or the windy hope
Of any fee, or stipend:
For none, nor yet for all of these,
But only my poor self to please,
This mighty Volume I Penned.
ANNO.
This Storie's writ the day and year,
That Seacoales were exceeding dear.
THus the old Proverb is fulfilled, A Dog shall have his day: And this Dog
has not out lived his Reputation, but (to the perpetual renown of himself,
and good example of his own begotten Puppies) he has his bright day of Fame
perspicuously shining.

I read in Anthony Gueuaroa his Golden Epistles, that the Great Alexander
buried his Horse; that the Emperor Augustus made a stately Monument for his
Parrot: and that Heliogabalus did embaulmne and intombe his Sparrow. Happy were
those Creatures in dying before their Masters: I could with all my heart have
been glad that Drunkards fortune had been the like, upon the condition that I
had paid for his Burial.

But to speak a little of the nature of Beasts, and of the service and
fidelity of Dogs toward their Masters: Quintus Curtius writes, that the
Elephant whereon Porus the Indian King road in the Battle against Alexander,
when the King was beaten down to the ground, that the Elephant drew his Master
with his Trunk out of the danger of the Fight, and so saved him.

A Groom of the Chamber to French King Francis the first, was murdered in the
Forest of Fountein Belleau, but the said Groom had a Dog, who afterward (in
the presence of the King and all the Court) did tear the Murderer in pieces.

Amongst the Watermen at the Blackfriars, there lately was a little Bitch that
Whelped or Litter'd in the Lane under a bench, the Men perceived that she had
more Puppies then she could sustain, did take three of them and cast them into
the Thames, (the water being high) but the next day, when the water was ebd
away, the Bitch went down the stairs, and found her three drowned Puppies,
when presently she dig'd a deep pit in the ground, and drew them into it one
after an other, and then scraped the gravel upon them and so hid them.

I could produce and relate many of these examples and accidents, but they are
so frequent and familiar, that almost every man has either known or heard of
the like: But chiefly for the Dog, he is in request above all Beasts, and
by and from Dogs our Separatists and Amsterdamians, and our Precise dispisers
of all honest and laudable Recreations may see their errors; For of all the
Creatures, there are most diversity in the shapes and forms of Dogs; of all
which, there are but two sorts that are useful for Man's profit, which two are
the Mastiffe, and the little Curre, Whippet, or House-dogge; all the rest are
for pleasure and recreation; so likewise is the Mastiffe for Bear and Bull:
But the Water-spaniell, Land-spaniell, Greyhound, Fox-hound, Buck-hound,
Blood-hound, Otter-hound, Setter, Tumbler, with Shough and Dainty, my Ladies
delicate Fisting hound; all these are for pleasure, by which we may perceive
that Man is allowed lawful and honest recreation, or else these Dogs had
never bin made for such uses.

But many pretty rediculous aspersions are cast upon Dogs, so that it would
make a Dog laugh to hear and understand them: As I have heard a Man say, I
am as hot as a Dog, or, as cold as a Dog; I sweat like a Dog, (when
indeed a Dog never sweates,) as drunk as a Dog, he swore like a Dog: and
one told a Man once, That his Wife was not to be believed, for she wonld lie
like a Dog; marry (quoth the other) I would give twelve pence to see that
trick, for I have seen a Dog to lie with his Nose in his Tail.

FINIS.

